==PAGE:1==
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using
Neural Networks
Master Thesis
Written by Michał Kossakowski
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Michał Kossakowski
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Image generated by DALLE from OpenAI, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and machine
learning.
Michał Kossakowski - s220393
Signature
Date
ii
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) into signal
processing has the potential to revolutionize the field of radiation detectors, particularly
in high-resolution, position-sensitive applications such as the 3D Cadmium Zinc Telluride
(CZT) drift strip detector developed at DTU Space primarily used in space exploration
and medical imaging (3D Molecular Breast Imaging). This MSc thesis investigates the
application of Neural Network (NN) architectures to enhance the computational aspects
of this detector, aiming to improve the accuracy and adaptability of signal processing.
The research explores the development of NN models to predict the interaction positions of
radiation within the 3D CZT drift strip detector. A method was devised to train, validate,
and evaluate these models using synthetic data before applying them to real-world data.
The study addresses key questions: whether NNs can outperform existing methods in
predicting initial interaction positions and how their performance compares to traditional
approaches.
The project successfully developed and evaluated a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) archi-
tecture that, in several aspects, matched and even surpassed the performance of existing
algorithms. The NN models benefited significantly from data augmentation techniques,
particularly through the introduction of randomized synthetic electronic noise, which en-
hanced the accuracy of predicted interaction positions. Despite some limitations, including
challenges with the theoretical model and the need for more comprehensive datasets, the
NN models demonstrated potential for improving the positioning resolution, especially in
the x-dimension of the detector.
Overall, this thesis presents a novel approach to data processing and analysis for 3D
radiation detectors, paving the way for further advancements in AI-driven signal processing
in both space research, healthcare and security.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to both DTU Compute and DTU Space for collaborating on this project
and enabling the fusion of knowledge and expertise, laying the foundation for fascinating
research and breakthrough work. Thank you to DTU for providing access to the High-
Performance Computing (HPC) cluster services used for training neural network models,
and to DTU Space for granting access to the Detector Lab and sharing data.
I am thankful for the support of my supervisor, Søren Haudberg, who inspired me to ex-
plore and helped me navigate this initially vast project. His words, ”Don’t stop generating
data,” will forever remain in my mind; they saved my progress countless times. Thanks
to Georgios Arvanitidis for encouraging me to acknowledge my work more often. Thank
you, Alejandro, for your support, engagement, and great ideas during the second half of
this project.
I would also like to acknowledge the tremendous support, time, and resources shared by
the team at DTU Space.
Special thanks to Irfan Kuvvetli, whose support, skill, and
wisdom are unmatched, and Selina Owe-Howalt, a brilliant and caring teacher who was
always there when I needed her. The amount of work put into the development of radiation
detectors at DTU Space must also be mentioned. Thanks to all the other Master’s students
for sharing your projects at the DTU Space Detector Lab.
A special thanks to my family and friends, both in Denmark and Poland, who supported
me every step of the way.
iv
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
ADAM
Adaptive Moment Estimation
ADC
Analog to Digital Converter
CZT
Cadmium Zinc Telluride
DOI
Depth of Interaction
eV
Electron Volt
FWHM
Full Width at Half Maximum
keV
kiloelectron Volts
MeV
Megaelectron Volts
ML
Machine Learning
MLP
Multi-Layer Perceptron
NN
Neural Network
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
High-Energy Radiation Detection Theory
3
2.1
X- and gamma-ray radiation interaction with matter . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Radiation detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
The 3D CZT Drift Strip Detector
7
3.1
Detector design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Event types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Position resolution determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Data
15
4.1
The theoretical model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Synthetic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Experimental data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Neural Network Development
21
5.1
Why Nerual Networks?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
MLP model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Development method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Evaluation
29
6.1
Synthetic data performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Exeprimental data performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7
Discussions
41
7.1
Limitations of the theoretical model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Dataset size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3
Synthetic noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.4
Accumulation of predicitons near cathodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.5
On-the-fly-analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8
Conclusions
43
9
Future Work
45
Bibliography
47
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) into signal pro-
cessing represents a transformative approach in the field of radiation detectors. Traditional
signal processing techniques often rely on predefined mathematical models and algorithms,
which can be limited in their ability to handle the complexity and variability of real-world
data, particularly in high-resolution, position-sensitive detectors like the 3D CZT detector.
Neural Networks, a subset of AI, offer a powerful alternative by automatically learning
patterns and relationships directly from data without the need for explicit programming
of rules. This ability to model complex, non-linear interactions makes Neural Networks
particularly well-suited for processing the intricate signals produced by advanced radiation
detectors.
At DTU Space, a three-dimensional (3D), high-resolution, position-sensitive Cadmium
Zinc Telluride (CZT) detector for high-energy astronomy has been developed. Primarily
designed for space exploration, this detector aims to fill a gap in sensitivity within the
medium-energy X-ray and gamma-ray range, specifically in the order of megaelectron
volts (MeV). This gap in sensitivity is often referred to as “the MeV gap” within the
“MeV domain.”
Research at DTU Space has also shown that the detector is a prime
candidate for 3D Molecular Breast Imaging (MBI) [1] in healthcare. However, further
development is required to achieve a higher Technology Readiness Level, particularly in
the computational domain [2]. The most recent developments have produced the largest
detector prototype, measuring 40x5x40 mm, with spatial resolutions of less than 0.6 mm in
both the x- and z-axis [3]. Despite these advancements, all currently developed detector
types fall short in data processing capabilities and require further enhancement. This
MSc project seeks to investigate the potential of applying artificial intelligence frameworks
to the computational aspects of the detector by researching, implementing, and testing
applicable machine learning techniques, specifically neural network architectures.
By applying Neural Network architectures to the signal processing modules of radiation
detectors, this research aims to explore ways to significantly enhance their performance
in terms of accuracy, speed, and adaptability. The ultimate goal is to develop AI-driven
models that not only surpass existing methods but also open new possibilities for the use
of radiation detectors in both space exploration and medical imaging, thereby pushing the
boundaries of current technology.
1.1
Hypothesis
The aim of this project is to propose a method for developing NN models that predict the
positions of interactions of radiation with matter inside the 3D CZT drift strip detector.
To achieve this, a method was proposed to train, validate, and evaluate the NN models
using synthetic data, and then apply them to real data. The following research questions
are addressed:
1. Can a Neural Network outperform existing methods in predicting initial interaction
positions?
2. What is the difference in performance between Neural Networks and existing meth-
ods?
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:13==
2
High-Energy Radiation Detection Theory
This project focuses on high-energy radiation detectors which are an integral part of so-
phisticated scientific instruments, both in space and on Earth. Spaceborne applications
include telescopes for exploring the vast universe through observation of high-energy radi-
ation emitted by various celestial phenomena. In terrestrial applications, these detectors
are embedded in everyday systems, playing a pivotal role in medical diagnostic imaging
systems such as computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET) or
in airport security systems to enhance the detection and inspection of luggage.
Understanding how high-energy radiation can be captured, measured, and analyzed is
essential for processing the information once it is obtained. This chapter provides an in-
troduction to the physics behind X- and gamma-ray radiation detection and measurement.
2.1
X- and gamma-ray radiation interaction with matter
To understand how high-energy radiation can be detected it is vital to understand how it
interacts with matter. There are four main interactions that can occur:
• Elastic scattering,
• Photoelectric absorption (low energy range),
• Compton scattering (medium energy range),
• Pair production (high energy range)
Elastic scattering occurs when a photon is redirected by matter with no energy transfer,
only the direction of the photon is affected. Hence, the energy of this interaction is not
detectable. The remaining three interaction types deposit energy and are important for
measurements and detection. The probability of each interaction type occurring depends
on the material properties (the atomic number) and the energy of the radiation [4]. Pho-
toelectric absorption and Compton scattering interactions are dominant in, respectively,
the low and medium energy range. Pair production is most probable at high energies
(>1.022 MeV). Since the radiation used in this project is from the low to medium energy
range, pair production will not be described further in this report. Below, only the most
dominant events in this project will be described in detail.
2.1.1
Photoelectric absorption
In the lower energy range, the dominating type of interaction is photoelectric absorption.
When a photon stumbles upon an electron in an atom it transfers all of its energy and
creates a photoelectron which is ejected from the bound shell of the atom (Figure 2.1).
This leaves a vacancy in the bound shell and creates an ionized atom. The energy of the
photoelectron, Ee−, is what is left from the photon energy, hν (h is Planck’s constant and
ν is the photon frequency), once it is used to break free the electron from its bound, Eb.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the photoelectric absorption event [2].
2.1.2
Compton scattering
Compton scattering interactions are dominant in the medium energy range. They occur
when a photon interacts with an electron and transfers a fraction of its energy. The electron
is then recoiled and the photon is scattered by an angle θ (Figure 2.2. The scattering angle
of the photon depends on the amount of energy that is transferred to the electron and can
take values between 0 to 180 degrees. The following two boundary cases exist:
• θ ≃0◦: the photon is scattered at an angle close to 0◦and a minimal amount of
energy is transferred to the electron. The scattered photon has roughly the same
energy as the incident photon,
• θ = 180◦: the photon is scattered back to its origin and maximum energy is trans-
ferred to the electron.
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the Compton scattering event [2].
The Compton scattering process can be employed as an imaging method in the Compton
camera device.
By analyzing the energies and positions of the detected photons and
electrons, the camera can reconstruct the original positions of radiation (mostly gamma)
sources. This is one of the possible applications of 3D CZT drift strip detectors.
2.2
Radiation detection
There are multiple ways radiation can interact with matter and modern technology strives
to develop the most eﬀicient methods of capturing as much information as possible. X- and
gamma-rays interact most commonly with electrons and, thus, semiconductor materials are
a great choice as the absorber material since they have many electrons which can interact
with incident photons. The question is, firstly, how can we know when an interaction
happens and, secondly, how to measure the energy?
As an example, let us assume a simple case. The semiconductor material is surrounded
on both sides by planar electrodes, as presented on Figure 2.3. The electrodes are appro-
priately biased to create an electric field (cathodes are biased negatively and anodes are
4
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:15==
grounded). When an electron is freed inside the material it will follow the electric field
lines towards the anode, pushed away by the negative charge of the cathode.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of a simple semiconductor detector. Interactions between photons
and electrons generate electron-hole pairs. Electrons drift towards the anode and holes -
towards the cathode. [2].
The way the electron will move inside the material depends on the electrodes and their
weighting potentials. The weighting potentials are merely mathematical tools used for
calculating an induced charge on the electrodes. Figure 2.4 presents two types of electrodes
and their effect on the weighting potentials. The distribution of the weighting potential
will have an effect on the induced charge and the signal shape formed.
Figure 2.4: Illustration of two different electrode types: planar (1a) and pixelated (2a),
and their effect on the distribution of the weighting potentials (1b and 2b) [2].
The induced charge on the electrodes is what allows for determining the movement, posi-
tion and energy of a charge inside the semiconductor material.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
5
==PAGE:16==
6
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:17==
3
The 3D CZT Drift Strip Detector
At DTU Space, the Detector Lab have been working on detector technology for use in MeV
(hard X- and soft gamma-ray) telescopes addressing the challenges in this domain. The
3D CZT (Cadmium, Zinc and Tellurium) drift strip technology is capable of determining
the interaction positions of photons with matter in 3D and measuring the energy spectrum
of the incoming photons (radiation).
3.1
Detector design
The CZT drift strip detector prototype developed at DTU Space Detector Lab involves
a specific electrode configuration and design that leverage the properties of the CZT
compound and allow interaction position determination in 3D. Originally developed by
Kuvvetli [5], the design has undergone some modifications including a size increase from
20x5x20 mm to 40x5x40 mm, which allows it to now capture many more photons and,
hence, increase the recovered information.
A conceptual diagram of the design of the
detector is presented in Figure 3.1 including the electrode configuration and applied voltage
biases.
Figure 3.1: Schematic of the 3D CZT drift strip detector [2].
The specific electrode configuration includes 20 cathodes, 24 anodes and 25 drift strips (69
electrodes in total). Cathodes are the wider, negatively biased electrodes on one side of the
detector. On the opposite side, anodes at ground potential are positioned perpendicularly
to the cathodes with drift strip sections in between. The negatively biased drift strips
direct the electric fields towards the anodes creating a funnel-like effect.
Negatively-
charged electrons will, therefore, drift towards the anodes. However, in some cases ie.
when an interaction occurs very close to a drift strip, the generated electron may not
make it to the anode and may be captured by a drift strip.
Each electrode acts like a sensor and can detect a charge inside of the CZT crystal. The
charge induces a signal on all electrodes and when it moves its path can be monitored
by observing the signals themselves. The next section describes these signals and their
formation.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
7
==PAGE:18==
3.2
Signals
A signal, more specifically a pulse, is formed between the time of interaction of a photon
with an electron and the time the electron is collected at the anode. When a photon enters
the material of the detector it has a 4% chance of hitting an electron. When it does, the
electron is freed from the atom in the process of ionization given enough energy from the
photon. The free electron starts to drift towards the closest anode located in the center of
the drift cell in which the interaction occurred 3.2. At the same time a hole is generated
in the place of the freed electron and starts to move in the opposite direction towards
the cathode, but with a much lower mobility and will be trapped not long after. We will
ignore hole movement at this point as its contribution to the induced signals is practically
insignificant.
Figure 3.2: A simulated path (trace) of an electron and hole.
The charge moves within a drift cell which is the space right over an anode contained
within two drift strip sections. The drift cell boundaries are an abstract surface dividing
the detector volume into cells over each anode.
An example of signals formed for an
interaction event is presented on Figure 3.3. The signals are grouped by the electrode
type: anodes, cathodes and drift strip sections also called drifts.
Figure 3.3: An example of signals formed for a single-site event.
Anodes have compact weighting potentials due to their small size which is characterized
by a slow rise in the signal in the main part of the charge drift until shortly before collection,
8
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:19==
when the signal rises drastically.
Cathodes on the other hand are much wider and have a much more linear distribution
of weighting potentials in the majority of the detector volume which is characterized by
an almost instantaneous signal rise.
Drift strips are combined in sections which, like the cathodes, are much wider than
the anodes and, therefore, have a less compact weighting potential distribution which is
characterized by an early signal rise.
As the charge moves away from the drift strips
towards collection at the anode the drift strips experience a decrease in signal strength.
In practice, all 3 drift strips in each section are grouped together and a combined signal
is measured.
Figure 3.4: Distribution of weighting potentials in the 40x5x40 mm 3D CZT drift strip
detector [6].
The way the signal is formed is related to the distribution of weighting potentials of each
electrode. When the charge drifts and passes through the weighting potentials a signal is
induced on all electrodes accordingly. The weighting potential distributions for cathodes
(C3-C12), anodes (A2-A16) and drift strips (D3-D16) are illustrated in Figure 3.4.
The next section describes the different events that can occur in the detector material and
how they can be distinguished by the various signal formations.
3.3
Event types
The shape of the pulse or signals is dependent on the detector design (ie. the distribution
of weighting potentials) and the type of interaction of radiation with matter taking place.
There 4 most common event types are described in this section based on the definitions
presented by Selina Owe [2]. This project focuses only on the first presented event type,
namely, the single site event also known as a single-interaction single-cell event.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
9
==PAGE:20==
The single site event is when an incoming photon interacts with the electrons in the
material in a single site creating a local charge cloud (multiple free electrons in close
vicinity). The charge cloud is contained within one cell. This event may be caused by two
possible interactions:
• Photoelectric absorption - a photon interacts with an electron depositing its entire
energy (Figure 3.5 (a)),
• Compton scattering - a photon interacts with an electron depositing only a part of
its energy and the rest of the energy is scattered as radiation leaving the detector
(Figure 3.5 (b)).
Figure 3.5: Single-site event. Illustrated photon-electron interactions (left) and the formed
signal shapes (right), a modified version of Selina Owe’s original figure [2].
The two interactions are illustrated in Figure 3.5. The signals formed for this type of
event are plotted to the right of the illustrations in the same figure.
In this project, only such single site events are considered. Meaning that both the synthetic
and experimental data only contain these types of events. The synthetic data naturally
contains only such events as the theoretical model does not include any other types.
Experimental data, on the other hand, had to be pre-processed and filtered.
The single cell multiple event is when two or more interactions occur within a single
cell. This can only take place through one or more Compton scattering interactions. The
scattered photon can interact with another electron creating a new interaction event. After
multiple interactions the following may happen:
• The photon deposits all of its energy through photoelectric absorption (Figure 3.6
(a)),
• The photon is scattered and leaves the detector material (Figure 3.6 (b)).
The multiple interactions can be observed on the formed signals. A specific ”staircase”
shape is visible on the collecting anode’s signal. Multiple charge clouds at different dis-
tances are sensed by the anode which experiences an increase in signal at different times,
one for each charge cloud. The cathodes on the other hand will experience a decrease in
the slope after the collection of a charge cloud. The drift strips also sense the movement
of multiple charge clouds which result in a convoluted signal. Illustrations of interactions
leading to this event type with the related signals are presented in Figure 3.6.
10
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.6: Single cell multiple event. Illustrated photon-electron interactions (left) and
the formed signal shapes (right), a modified version of Selina Owe’s original figure [2].
Multiple cell events are when interactions occur in multiple drift cells. This can only
happen with one or more Compton scattering interactions followed by:
• Photoelectric absorption (Figure 3.7 (a)),
• The photon scattering out of the detector (Figure 3.7 (b)).
Figure 3.7: Multiple cell event.
Illustrated photon-electron interactions (left) and the
formed signal shapes (right), a modified version of Selina Owe’s original figure [2].
One or more anodes collect a drifting charge and, therefore, more than one pulses are
registered for the anodes. The illustrated interactions and formed signals are presented in
Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.8: Electrode signal shapes for a cosmic ray event.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
11
==PAGE:22==
The last identifiable event is the cosmic ray, which is distinguished by the havoc which
it wreaks when it passes through the detector material. This occurs when high-energy
massive particles pass through the material and continuously ”bleed-off” energy along
their trajectory. In effect, they interact countless times depositing massive amounts of
energy (several MeV) activating several anodes, as presented in Figure 3.8.
3.4
Signal processing
The signal processing module of the detector system is responsible for tasks such as:
• Event classification,
• Interaction position prediction in 3D,
• Energy estimation.
The event classification tasks are performed by a sorting algorithm which analyses the
registered pulses and labels them with the appropriate event type. The interaction position
prediction in 3D is performed by the offline positioning algorithms which are described
below.
Energy estimation is performed using algorithms which also analyse the pulse
heights, however they are not described in this report as energy estimation is not part of
this project.
It is important to note that the signal processing module includes additional methods
for pre-processing the signals ie. smoothing, filtering, current computation etc. which de
facto all together make the data processing computationally demanding.
3.4.1
3D positioning algorithms
This project focuses on the interaction position prediction in 3D, hence the offline posi-
tioning algorithms used for determining interaction positions in 3D are described in detail.
The algorithms were originally developed and presented by Budtz-Jørgensen and Kuvvetli
[7] and later updated by Benjamin Hauptmann [3]. ”Offline” puts an emphasis on the
operational capabilities of these algorithms which do not operate on live-feed data due to
the aforementioned demands for pre-processing.
x-position algorithm
The x-position is determined by using the signals from the anodes and nearby drift strips.
The anode signals are used to determine a general position by finding the collecting anode
(anode with the highest pulse height) and the drift strip signals are used for a finer
adjustment after computing the amplitudes of their negative gradients. Overall, the x-
position algorithm is defined as follows:
x = Pan · F ·
!
nc + ADR −ADL
ADR + ADL
"
(3.1)
where ADL and ADR are the amplitudes of the negative gradients of the left (DL) and
right (DR) drift strips neighbouring the collecting anode, nc is the number of the collecting
anode, Pan = 1.6 is the anode pitch and F is an adjustable, unit-less scaling factor used
to calibrate the x-position algorithm to a specific detector [2].
y-position algorithm
The y-position is calculated using the depth-of-interaction (DOI) method [2] together with
a windowed cathode amplitudes technique [8]. The ratio between the sum of the 9 nearest
cathodes’ pulse heights and the collecting anode’s pulse height is scaled to the thickness
of the detector and gives the y-position of the interaction, as follows:
12
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:23==
y =
#ci+4
n=ci−4 ·Cn
Am
· dCZT
(3.2)
where Am is the pulse-height of the collecting anode, Cn is the pulse-height of the nth
cathode and ci is the number of the cathode nearest to the interaction location. Finally,
dCZT = 5 mm is the thickness of the detector.
z-position algorithm
The z-position is found using a center of gravity method [2]. The windowed cathode pulse
heights are used for the calculation, as follows:
z =
#ci+4
n=ci−4 ·n · Cn
#ci+4
n=ci−4 ·Cn
· Pca −Pca
2
(3.3)
where Pca = 2 mm is the cathode pitch and ci is the number of the cathode closest to the
interaction location.
3.5
Position resolution determination
Radiation detectors need to be characterized in terms of their performance to enable proper
development, comparisons, and the selection of the right detector for a specific application.
There are many characteristics that describe a detector’s performance. However, in this
project, the focus is on positioning resolution.
When a detector measures a specific value, such as the position of a monochromatic source,
the spread in the actual measurement can be expressed by the Full Width at Half Maximum
(FWHM). It is a commonly used statistical measure for characterizing the resolution of
detectors [9, 7]. FWHM represents the width of the measurement distribution at half the
height of the measurement peak, as illustrated in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Definition of the FWHM measure to determine the position resolution of the
detector (edited) [2].
For a distribution following a Guassian shape the FWHM can be defined as:
FWHM = 2
√
2 ln 2σ ≈2.35σ
(3.4)
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
13
==PAGE:24==
where σ is the standard deviation.
Determining the FWHM is a step towards understanding how well the characterized de-
tector can differentiate between two positions. FWHM answers the question: given two
distributions of predicted positions, how close can the distributions be for the detector to
still be able to differentiate between them?
In this project, the FWHM measure is used to determine the position resolution of both
the x and z dimensions of the detector based on experimental measurements.
14
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:25==
4
Data
This chapter introduces the data used for training and evaluating the developed NN mod-
els. Two types of data were used in this project, made available by DTU Space:
• Synthetic data - generated using an advanced theoretical model of the latest 40x5x40
mm detector prototype,
• Experimental (real) data - obtained from lab experiments with a 3D CZT drift strip
detector prototype performed at the DTU Space Detector Lab.
In both cases the data contains time series observations. The following section introduces
the theoretical model and how it was used to generate synthetic data. Subsequent sections
describe the two types of data in detail.
4.1
The theoretical model
The theoretical single point charge CZT detector model, also referred to as the simulator,
was developed at DTU Space and is based on the most up-to-date theoretical model of
the current detector design. It was used to generate synthetic data for training.
The model calculates the movement of a single point charge using simulated electric fields
and weighting potentials of all electrodes. It computes the electron-hole pair movement
and the induced signal on every electrode mimicking the output of an actual detector.
The theoretical model is limited to only a single-point charge which does not represent
the entire phenomenon of a charge cloud, but is considered an acceptable simplification.
As described in chapter 3, the drift path of an electron as well as the formed signals can
be computed using the distribution of the weighting and electric potentials in the entire
volume of the detector material. The theoretical model uses a discretized version of their
distribution computed in a physics simulation software called COMSOL. The discretized
distributions extracted from COMSOL were stored in separate .txt files. The parameters
that form the input for the model are:
• The simulated electric potential and weighting potentials for all electrodes stored in
.txt files:
e3d - electrical potential,
aw3d, cw3d, dw3d - weighting potentials for anodes, cathodes and drift strips
respectively,
• The initial position of the electron-hole pair (x, y, z),
• The sample time (Ts),
• The number of samples (sampleLength),
• The start time of the event (startSample),
• The electron mobility (µe) and lifetime (τe).
The initial position defines the location where a photon interacted with an electron, allow-
ing it to be free from the atom. Given the sampleLength and the startSample parameters
the model computes sampleLength −startSample steps of the electron and hole drift.
An interpolation step is performed to compute a more exact next position of the charge.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
15
==PAGE:26==
The electron mobility and lifetime parameters are related to the physics of the electron
movement inside the CZT material and define how mobile the electron is and how quick
it may be trapped, not reaching the anode - this is a rare case.
The model calculates the induced signals on all electrodes for each step between startSample
until sampleLength is reached. All signal values for all steps before startSample are set
to 0. The induced signals are stored in an array of size (sampleLength × 69), as there are
sampleLength samples and 69 electrodes. Since the theoretical model does not take into
account energy which would be deposited in a real interaction the maximum signal value
is 1.
A modified version of the algorithm behind the model was used to sequentially generate
induced signals given a list of initial positions. This modification allowed to create large
datasets of simulated events.
As mentioned before the theoretical model is limited to a single-point charge. What this
entails is that it only models single-site events with photoelectric absorption. There can
be two possible outcomes of a single-point charge drift: (1) the point charge is collected
by the anode or (2) the point charge is collected by a drift strip.
4.2
Synthetic data
Large datasets of synthetic data were created for the purpose of training NN models.
As introduced in the previous section, the theoretical model’s algorithm was modified to
perform calculations for a list of initial positions sequentially. Therefore, the synthetic
data was generated by running the theoretical model for a list of initial positions.
4.2.1
Datasets
The synthetic data was used for training and evaluation purposes of the NN models.
Hence, appropriate datasets were created. The structure of these datasets are strongly
connected to the modelling task of the NNs and were developed in parallel to the NN
models through an iterative training-testing-evaluation process. Two large datasets were
created distinguished by the covered detector volume. The first dataset was generated
soon into the the development process and was mainly used for prototyping. The second
dataset extended the possible interaction positions thereby also increasing the complexity
of the data.
Drift cell dataset v1
The first major dataset was created using interaction positions sampled uniformly at ran-
dom from only the inner drift cells, as presented on Figure 4.1. Drift cells containing
anodes A1 and A24 (near the edges of the detector) were not included. Furthermore,
the z-positions were limited to within 1 mm of the boundary of the detector. The lower
limit for the y-positions was 1 mm to exclude positions too close to the anode, which were
highly likely to result in the drift strip collecting the charge.
Furthermore, each drift cell was further limited to contain only those positions within 0.4
mm of the cell boundary. Areas around the boundaries are not representative of the actual
physics in the real detector.
16
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.1: Distribution of 10 000 initial interaction positions in the XY plane used to
generate the first version of the drift cell dataset.
Drift cell dataset v2 (extended)
A second generation dataset was created once the initial prototyping stages gave promising
results. In the same way as the first version, the initial interaction positions were limited
to be inside drift cells not closer than 0.4 mm to the cell boundary. All positions were
sampled, again, uniformly at random. The dataset was extended to include x-positions
from the two drift cells near the edges containing anodes A1 and A24, all z-positions within
0.1 mm from the detector edge and y-positions from 0.5 mm up until 4.9 mm, as shown
on Figure 4.2. The 0.1 mm distance from the edges of the detector volume guaranteed
that no events occurred on the edge which is not physically possible.
Figure 4.2: Distribution of 10 000 initial interaction positions in the XY plane used to
generate the second version of the drift cell dataset. New positions are highlighted in
green.
The reason for not including y-positions closer then 0.5 mm to the bottom of the detector
was to avoid introducing too many drift strip collections.
4.3
Experimental data
The future application of the NN models will be on a chip connected to the physical de-
tector millions of miles away in space. Therefore, a way of testing and verifying the NN
models on real data needed to be included. The DTU Space Detector Lab has already per-
formed lab measurements with the latest detector prototype for which the NNs were being
developed. A specific type of illumination was chosen, namely a slit beam illumination.
Originally used for performance assessment of CZT drift strip detectors applied in 3D
Molecular Breast Imaging (MBI) [1], the slit beam measurements were also developed and
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
17
==PAGE:28==
performed for the new larger detector prototypes by Benjamin Hauptmann [3]. The slit
beam experiments utilize a collimated (focused) to a 0.2 mm wide beam of light from a
heavy-activity source of radiation. In this project, the measurements performed with a
137Cs source which emits radiation at 661.6 keV were used. The detector collects photons
from this beam for around 30 mins before the position of the beam is changed. The beam
positions are set to cover the entire surface of the detector with a 0.5 mm step. The
detector is moved along one of its axes for over 80 steps to cover its entire surface. These
scans were performed along the x- and z-axis of the detector as shown in Figure 4.3. The
lab setup was not yet configured for a y-axis scan, hence they are not included in this
project.
Figure 4.3: Illustration of scan directions for the slit beam measurements performed for
the x- and z-axis [8]. The x-scan moves the beam along the cathodes and the z-scan -
along the anodes.
Real 3D CZT drift strip detectors come with their own set of material properties which
influence the way a charge moves inside. Not only that, but also the power supply and
electronic read-out systems impact the signal formation registered from the electrodes.
Therefore, it is important to characterize the detector and system used for acquiring real
data for a more accurate neural network model development and precise performance
assessment. Table 4.1 presents the values of the detector and system parameters which
impact the shape of the signals and are specific to detector and measurement setup.
Electron
mobility µe
[mm2/Vs]
Electron
lifetime τe [s]
Sampling
time [ns]
Sample
length
Trigger
delay
x-scan
7 · 104
3 · 10−5
8
380
190
z-scan
7 · 104
3 · 10−5
8
360
180
Table 4.1: Values of chosen detector and measurement system parameters.
The mobility-lifetime parameters were provided by DTU Space. Sampling time, sample
length and trigger delay are all set by the user when making a measurement. The first of
those parameters determines the time between every sample of the induced charge on the
connected electrodes. Sample length is the total number of samples for a registered signal.
The trigger delay determines the number of registered samples before the collection of a
18
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:29==
charge on the anode. It is usually set as the middle point of the sample length.
4.3.1
Signal pre-processing
The collected data had to be filtered and normalized in order to evaluate NN models
trained on the simplified synthetic data. The experimental data was stored in .dat files,
one for each beam position. The files contain banks of data with thousands of registered
events. A script was provided from DTU Space Detector Lab which included algorithms
for loading raw data, sorting by event type and methods for visualising the registered
signals. The following steps were performed on each data file:
Removing inactive channels: Since the lab system collects data for every channel
input even the inactive ones (the ones not connected to an electrode on the detector),
a mask with channel identifiers had to be applied to the raw data to only use active
channels.
Filtering event types: Applying the sorting algorithms the data was sorted into
event types and all event types were removed except for the single-site events,
Filtering Compton scattering events: After only single-site events remained,
the data was further filtered to contain only Compton scattering events. This was
performed by making sure that the pulse heights did not exceed 550 [ADC channels]
or 550 [keV].
Energy normalization: The signals had to be normalized in terms of energy as
the theoretical model did not include energy. This was performed by dividing all
signal values by the energy level of the radiation source, that is 662 keV.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:31==
5
Neural Network Development
This chapter presents the core part of the project - the research. From understanding why
and how Neural Networks can be applied in a radiation detectors, prototyping a simple
MLP, hyperparameter selection and tuning, through to increasing the complexity of the
model architecture and training data to reach new performance levels.
5.1
Why Nerual Networks?
The 3D CZT drift strip detector gathers massive amounts of data in a very short amount
of time and requires algorithms to process that data into meaningful information. There
are also high demands for energy eﬀiciency in space missions were the detector will mainly
operate. Given these two aspects an eﬀicient, fast and compact way of processing the
data needs to be developed so to make space missions more feasible, creating more oppor-
tunities to capture radiation from across the universe. More eﬀicient and accurate data
processing methods would also make the detector an even better candidate for ground-
based measurements ie. in healthcare or security, where human safety is of the up-most
importance.
Neural Networks are an extremely powerful approach to both classification and regression
tasks [10]. Since the main task of the detector is to predict 3D positions there are several
advantages to using NN models instead of more traditional signal processing algorithms
and they are closely related to the application (in space and healthcare). The advantages
of NN models are described below grouped by relevant aspects:
• Space eﬀiciency - in terms of space usage, NN models can perform complex opera-
tions in much less space than traditional approaches. They would allow to perform
online analyses of detected radiation making the detector a good candidate for space
missions and medical imaging.
• Constant time - there is a constant processing time for every input in a NN model.
It is reliable in the time domain, meaning that no matter what input is received the
NN model will always give an output in a determined time-frame.
• Complexity and accuracy - the physics behind the detector is complex and requires
a thorough study to develop accurate algorithms. The algorithms only include a
small part of the physics happening in the detector and as a result have limited
performance.
NN models have shown their ability to learn complex patterns in
the data and make predictions with very high accuracy. These models could also
become experts on the data not only improving the accuracy of the detector, but
also potentially being applied to verify its material properties.
• No need for data management - this is connected to space usage, but from another
perspective. In the future NN models can be used on live data to process the incom-
ing signals, thereby, bypassing the need for data storage and handling of registered
signals.
Overall, given the need for eﬀicient computation, Neural Network models are well suited
for tasks with high performance demands and tight resource constraints. A simplified
Neural Network like a feedforward neural network (a Multi-Layer Perceptron, MLP) or a
shallow CNN or RNN could be effective while being computationally less intensive.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
21
==PAGE:32==
5.2
MLP model
Due to its straightforward design, low energy consumption in shallower configurations and
as a universal approximator [11], the MLP was selected as the initial NN model archi-
tecture. It is crucial to first accurately define the modeling task. The model’s objective
is to map time-series data (signals) acquired from the detector to the three-dimensional
positions of photon-electron interactions occurring within the detector. Given that the sig-
nals have a predetermined length, denoted as sampleLength, each sample can be used to
define the dimensions of the MLP’s input layer. The output layer will consist of three neu-
rons, corresponding to the three spatial coordinates. Through this architecture, the MLP
can effectively map the signal samples to the 3D positions of the interaction events. The
subsequent sections will discuss the specific design choices made for the MLP architecture.
5.2.1
Design
Most of the design choices were made by experimenting with different network parame-
ters and training hyperparameters while gradually adding more complexity to the data.
However, some design aspects remained the same throughout the development period for
example the input and output features.
Input features
As described in chapter 4, the time-series data are signals from 69 electrodes, all of the
same length, namely sampleLength. In order for the MLP to learn a proper mapping
the time-series data has to be transformed into an appropriate shape so that the MLP
can take all of the signal information as input. Since the arrangement of the input can
be arbitrary, as long as the structure is maintained throughout the learning process and
applied during inference, it was chosen to be a flattened signals matrix.
Just like transforming a 2D image into a vector, the same is done with the signals matrix.
The first row fills the first 69 elements of the vector, the second row fills the next 69
elements and so on. The final size of the input feature space is 69 · sampleLength. The
drawback of using an MLP in this scenario is that the model requires a finite, fixed
number of input features. Therefore, either a new model must be trained for every possible
sampleLength value which is not feasible given that the values range from 300 to 1000 or
the signals must be appropriately modified through cropping to match the input size of
the model.
In practice, the experimental data only came with two different sampleLength values: 360
for the x-scan and 380 for the z-scan. Therefore, a model for a sampleLength of 360 was
trained and the signals from z-scan measurements were cropped.
Output features
The output features are 3D coordinates of the position of interaction between an incoming
photon and an electron. Thus, the output feature space consists of 3 real values, namely
the x, y and z coordinate.
To avoid predictions out of scope, the target values were limited to the actual dimensions
of the detector. In practice, a Tanh function was applied to the output layer restricting
the possible values to be in the range (-1, 1). The values where then scaled to match the
actual range of each dimension.
This design not only limited the NN to predict only the logical x, y and z values, it also
aided in faster convergence.
22
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:33==
Loss function
Due to the regressive nature of the problem, the loss function which was chosen to be
optimized was the squared L2 norm, also called the mean-squared error (MSE). The
squared L2 norm is a good choice for simulated data, where there is little risk of outliers
or noise. The loss can be computed as follows:
MSE = 1
N
N
$
i=1
(ˆyi −yi)2
(5.1)
where N is the number of observations, ˆyi and yi are the predicted and target values for
observation i.
Optimizer and learning rate
The optimizer of the loss function was chosen to be the Adaptive Moment Estimation
algorithm (ADAM). Initial testing of different optimizers showed that ADAM was best
suited for the data with a learning rate of 3 · 10−5. The learning rate was constantly
modified and updated as the data and NN models became more complex. Overall, after
introducing changes to the data or model the learning rate was updated by training mul-
tiple models with different values and choosing the value which produced a model with
the lowest generalization error.
Activation function
Initially, the MLP had only one layer with a standard Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
activation function. It was at this point that different activation functions were tested
with the hyperbolic tangent (Tanh) and Sigmoid activation functions having the best
overall results. Tanh computes derivatives in a larger range than the Sigmoid function,
therefore, it makes larger updates to the network’s weights and biases, resulting in faster
learning. Ultimately, the Tanh activation function was chosen.
Model complexity
Initial training performed on smaller subsets of the drift cell dataset v1 showed that single-
layer MLPs with a ReLU activation function could not capture the patterns in the data
very well, even with a smaller training set size (around 1000 interactions). The models were
trained on a sample length of 1000. Their validation loss was too large for an acceptable
performance, as shown on Figure 5.1. The lowest validation loss of 0.79 mm2 was achieved
by a model with 25 hidden units after 300 epochs of training. In order to consider the
models as performing well, they must reach a validation loss lower than 0.25 mm2, which
gives individual prediction errors at around 0.5 mm. This requirement was set based on
the resolution for the positioning algorithms operating on real data, which is on average
0.5 mm.
The complexity of the model had to be increased. In the meantime, different activation
functions were tested resulting in the Tanh function being used after every layer from this
point allowing to reach a lower loss sooner.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.1: Validation MSE loss for single-layer models with different number of hidden
units.
A second hidden layer was added to the model and different number of hidden units were
tested. The number of hidden units for the hidden layer before the output was set to the
number of hidden units in the best-performing single-layer model, that is 25 units. Figure
5.2 shows not only that 2-layer models perform better, but also signifies that increasing the
complexity with another layer will lead to overfitting (see validation curve for model with
1000 units) and more unstable learning, since the validation loss became more unstable
with more hidden units. The 2-layer model with 50 hidden units was able to achieve the
lowest validation loss value of 2 · 10−4.
Figure 5.2: Validation MSE loss for 2-layer models with different number of hidden units
in the first hidden layer.
A MLP with 2 hidden layers, 50 hidden units in the first hidden layer and 25 units in the
second, was chosen as complex enough (over 20 thousand trainable parameters) to learn
the patterns in the data with an acceptable loss.
24
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:35==
5.3
Development method
Analysing the training and validation curves allows to monitor the optimization procedure
and shows how the NN model is learning the data. However, given the nature of the task
the model has to be developed with both synthetic data and real data in order to be able
to explore its generalization capabilities in the real world.
The development process was iterative and can be summarized into 5 main steps, as
follows:
1. Generate synthetic data for training,
2. Train a model on the synthetic data,
3. Verify the model’s training process,
4. Verify the model on both synthetic and real data,
5. Analyse and assess the model’s performance and include key findings in earlier steps
(iterate).
All NN models were trained on datasets with synthetic data presented in chapter 4. An
80:10:10 split was used for the datasets, that is 80% of the events were used for training,
10% for validation and 10% for evaluation.
The models were trained using the High-
Performance Computing (HPC) cluster at DTU.
The main focus was on the data and making sure that the synthetic data represents the real
data appropriately. Key findings and their implementation into the development pipeline
are presented in the subsections below.
5.3.1
Collection time correction
The theoretical model sets the start time for all events to be startSample, what this
entails is that no charge movement or signals are modelled before that time step and all
signal values are set to 0. In real data, however, the start time differs for every event.
When an event occurs a trigger is activated upon collection of the charge in the detector
and registers as many samples before the activation as is defined by the trigger delay
parameter. This means that the collection time will always be the same sample for every
event. This caused the NN models to learn very well to ignore all samples before the start
time, as they all had the same value of 0.
A method of shifting the signals in the theoretical model was introduced. The collection
time was computed as the maximum value of the derivative of the collecting anode’s
signal - which is the maximum value of the current. The induced signals for an event were
all shifted by the difference between the collection time and the start time, so that the
collection time matched the trigger delay of the experimental data. The NN model was
able now to learn the correct signal formation.
5.3.2
Synthetic electronic signal noise
When the overfitting to zeroed signal values before the start time was noticed it gave a
suggestion that maybe the NN models struggle to capture certain general patterns and
focus too much on irrelevant details detrimentally influencing generalization on real data.
This led to the inspection of electronic noise. The idea was to help the NN learn how
to process noise inherently present in the signals measured by the read-out system of
the detector setup. This observation led to using augmentation techniques and introduce
random synthetic electronic noise into the signals from the training dataset. Synthetic
experimental noise is a common technique used in methods using synthetic data, quite
popular in physics-related problems [12, 13].
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
25
==PAGE:36==
In order for the NN to become resilient to noise and focus on learning the underlying
shapes of the signals, the noise was introduced during training by adding a random value
to each sample of all signals for every event. The noise values were sampled randomly
from a distribution which followed the distribution of real electronic noise. Introducing the
electronic noise as random values which were resampled every time an event was drawn
from the dataset during training, allowed the NN to focus on the unerlying shapes and
patterns rather than specific details in the synthetic data.
One of the x-scans was used to measure the standard deviation of the first 10% of samples
of all signals for all events to define the average noise level for all electrodes. This value
was then used to augment the signals from the simulator during training. The standard
deviation value was energy-normalised to match the value range of the synthetic signals.
Figure 5.3: Synthetic signals without (top) and with (bottom) added noise. The noise
level was measured on experimental data with a value of σ = 0.0066 (energy-normalised).
The results after introducing random synthetic electronic noise during training allowed
the NN models to improve their performance on real data profoundly as shown on Figure
5.4. The higher and narrower the peak the better.
26
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.4: 2D histograms of predicted x-positions for one of the x-scan steps for a model
trained on noiseless signals (left) and with added noise (right).
5.3.3
Synthetic data complexity and resolution
Once the NN models were able to perform reasonably well on experimental data, intro-
ducing new interaction positions in the detector volume into the synthetic datasets was
explored. The impact of lacking data on certain interaction positions was evident quite
early on. Version 1 of the drift cell dataset did not cover initial positions in drift cells over
anode A1 and A24 which led to unexpected predictions for those regions.
Further on, impact of the synthetic data resolution was explored with two different sizes
of the 2nd generation drift cell dataset: 10000 and 50000 events. More initial position
interactions increased the resolution of the dataset in terms of events per mm3.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
27
==PAGE:38==
28
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:39==
6
Evaluation
Due to the nature of the method, the NN models were evaluated on both synthetic data and
experimental data. It is important to understand how the NN model learns from synthetic
data and how it applies that knowledge when working with experimental data.
This
understanding is useful not only for finding the optimal NN model architecture, training
method, and hyperparameters, but also for developing a dataset that is representative of
real-world cases (even approximations of those events) and that covers enough events for
the network to generalize well.
This chapter will cover the following:
• Synthetic data performance,
• Experimental data performance,
• Position resolution analysis.
6.1
Synthetic data performance
The NN models are trained on synthetic data, which is known to not cover all events.
However, it is possible to develop a model that will be able to approximate well, even with
incomplete data. Determining what is actually necessary for the model to train effectively
is one of the questions this project aims to answer.
The supervised learning approach on the synthetic data allows for the comparison of the
NN models’ predictions to actual truth values. As mentioned in the previous chapter, the
datasets were split into training, validation, and evaluation subsets. The evaluation subset
was not used during training to optimize or tune the model, and therefore, it provides an
unbiased performance estimate.
6.1.1
Residuals analysis
The first models were trained on the initial version of the drift cell dataset. In short,
only well-studied, single-site events were included in this dataset. The missing interaction
positions over anode A1 and A24 indicated the necessity of including them during training,
as revealed by evaluating the initial model prototypes on real data. Consequently, the
second version of the drift cell dataset was used for the majority of the development.
During evaluation, the residuals were computed as the difference between the predicted
and the true values, as follows:
r = ^y −y
(6.1)
where r is the vector of residuals, ^y is the vector of predicted values and y is the vector of
true values [14].
Overall, the developed NN models capture the data very well, and the majority of the
error is contained within ±0.05 mm, with only a few outliers, as shown in Figure ??. The
residuals are larger for the x- and z-positions. The visible gaps in the data are due to
training on limited drift cell datasets. It is uncertain at this point how the model will
perform on real data for interaction positions in regions not seen by the NN.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.1: Residuals for the evaluation dataset for a NN model trained for more than
20,000 epochs on the drift cell dataset v2 with 50,000 events and synthetic noise.
All three coordinate residuals show an underlying distribution that may be associated with
several factors. Firstly, the developed models use a Tanh activation function applied to
the output. This encourages the model to predict values within the ranges of the detector
volume but can introduce larger errors near the boundaries of those ranges. This may
be the case for both the y- and z-coordinates. Secondly, the design of the detector and
the distribution of weighting potentials, which form the signals, may also affect the errors.
The y-position values exhibit higher errors near the top of the detector, around y = 5 mm,
where the weighting potentials of the cathodes are much more densely distributed. The
signal shapes for cathodes can be drastically different for initial positions in their close
vicinity. Another observation can be made for the z-position, which has higher errors
closer to the detector edges. This may be caused by a decrease in information (i.e., the
distribution of cathode signals becomes more asymmetric) as one gets closer to the edge
of the detector, which may cause the NN to learn those areas with lower accuracy. Lastly,
overfitting to the training data may cause the NN model to learn patterns that are not
generalizable, which can affect the model’s ability to generalize.
In summary, even with the limited events taken from the more studied areas of the detector,
the learning task poses some challenges.
While the training hyperparameters and the
complexity of the models can be tuned to better fit the data, the observation remains the
same: these areas are less trivial to model. No extensive fine-tuning of hyperparameters
was performed for the developed prototype models; they were merely adjusted for better
training and validation results. All prototypes contributed to studying how they work
and observing how they should be developed to capture the most important aspects of the
data.
6.1.2
Generalization error
The ability of a model to generalize well is crucial, especially, when the signals are syn-
thetic. In this case, there is a risk of the model learning patterns specific to the synthetic
data which are not transferable to real data. The chosen models were evaluated on the
evaluation datasets which consist of 10% of events from the appropriate datasets. The
metric used for measuring the generalization error was the Mean Squared Error (MSE),
which was also used as the loss function during training. Overall, the developed NN mod-
els were capable of achieving a generalization error of 0.0003 mm2 for models trained on
the second version drift cell dataset.
30
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:41==
6.2
Exeprimental data performance
The performance assessment on real data was performed using processed x- and z-scan
data presented in Chapter 4. The predicted initial interaction positions were obtained
for both the developed NN models and the current positioning algorithms used at DTU
Space. A script was created to sequentially process each scan step, compute the FWHM
and generate plots and visualisation. An example of predictions made by a NN model
plotted as 2D histograms for chosen x- and z-scan data is presented in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Scan steps visualised as 2D histograms of predicted initial interaction positions
for a NN model: x-axis scan (left) and z-axis scan (right).
6.2.1
Position determination
Experimental data is challenging to analyse in terms of position determination because
of the lack of ground truths (or targets). It is not possible to compare the predictions
to any target values and, therefore, using such metrics as MSE or RMSE is infeasible.
Other means of analysis had to be chosen in order to capture the essence and details of
the performance of NN models. In this section, methods such as 2D histograms, will be
used to assess the position determination capabilities of NN models.
x-position determination
Analysing x-scan data provides an insight into how the NN models predict events occurring
across the x-dimension. 3 different beam positions were chosen for analysis distinguished
by the specific area of the detector they were directed at. One beam position was chosen
to cover the center of a drift cell (just over an anode) and the other two positions were
located over two different drift strip sections. The chosen positions cover the following
cases:
• Beam over anode - NN models are trained on events in these areas and a good
performance is expected,
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.3: 2D histograms of the predicted positions by a NN (top) and positioning
algorithms (bottom) for x-scan beam position over anode A15 with marked drift cell and
cathode boundaries.
32
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:43==
• Beam over drift strips - the incomplete training data in these areas may result in
unexpected prediction behaviour.
For the beam over anode position, NN models are expected to give a good performance
as the training data covers these areas in majority. As seen on Figure 6.3, the NN model
predicts the positions of interactions to be within drift cell over anode A15, just like the
positioning algorithms.
Further inspection reveals the differences between the two methods.
Firstly, the NN
model includes interaction positions along the entire z-dimension, whereas the positioning
algorithms struggle to capture positions close to the detector edges, specifically at the outer
cathodes C1 and C20. This is a limitation of the positioning algorithms, which require
cathode signals on both sides of the interaction position for high-accuracy predictions. This
limitation is not evident in the NN model predictions for experimental data. Secondly, the
NN exhibits a concentration of predictions around y = 5 mm, near the cathodes, which
is observable along the entire z-dimension. Cathode C4 is known to be faulty due to an
impairment, which is reflected in the positioning algorithms’ predictions — there is a lack
of predictions around y = 5 mm for cathode C4. The absence of a major concentration
of predictions around that cathode at y = 5 mm for the NN model could indicate that
the issue is due to an offset in y-position predictions close to the cathodes.
Since a
Tanh activation function is applied to the output, it could lead to an accumulation of
predictions. Lastly, the NN models do not exhibit a wider spread for x-positions when the
y-value decreases, unlike the positioning algorithms.
Figure 6.4: Histograms of the x-position predictions made by a NN for 3 subsequent slit
beam positions over anode A15. Drift cell boundaries are marked with a grey dashed line.
The distribution of predictions around anode A15 for three different beam positions are
presented in Figure 6.4. Noticeably the total count of predictions near the boundaries is
smaller than near the center of the drift cell. This is caused by the event type filtering
performed on the experimental data since less single-site events occur near the boundaries.
This is also why a higher count can be observed towards the middle of the drift cell.
z-position determination
The neural network can produce a narrow line of predictions signifying a potentially good
performance and high z-position resolution, as shown on Figure 6.5. However, training
the models on limited drift cell events has its effects on the x-position prediction. The
predictions follow a pattern very similar to the pattern visible in the synthetic datasets
used for training.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.5: 2D histograms of the predicted interaction positions by a NN (top) and posi-
tioning algorithms (bottom) for x-scan beam position over cathode C16 with marked drift
cell and cathode boundaries.
34
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:45==
As seen in Figure 6.5 the x-position predictions for the NN model appear to be gathered
into groups inside drift cells. This can caused by two factors which could contribute to
the observed effect simultaneously:
• Lack of training data near drift cell boundaries - the NN model does not learn how to
predict interaction positions near the drift cell boundaries and, hence, can introduce
an error with a potential bias towards the center of the drift cells,
• Less single-site events on drift cell boundaries - less events means less predicted inter-
action positions in those regions which may amplify the effect of missing interaction
positions.
The positioning algorithms also experience a similar pattern, but on a much lower scale,
suggesting that the main cause of this pattern in NN predictions is due to the holes in
the training data. Overall, the positioning algorithms produce a continuous distribution
of predictions across the x-dimension. The predictions are not as tightly spread out in
the z-dimension as the NN predictions signifying a worse z-position prediction resolution.
However, there are noticeable missing interaction events near the cathode (near y = 5mm).
This has been documented as an effect of a faulty cathode, in which case the interaction
positions in this region may not be accurately sensed. This indicates that either the NN
may be predicting y-positions inaccurately or overcoming a faulty cathode to still be able
to predict interaction events in this more problematic region. It is hard to tell at this
point without a more deeper analysis of the NN model and a deeper study of the physics
in the detector.
Both methods do not predict many interactions near the anodes which may be caused by
filtering out drift strip collection events. Drift strip collections are much more likely to
occur for smaller y values. Hence, there are less interactions near the anodes in the filtered
experimental data.
6.2.2
Position resolution
As introduced in chapter 3, the detector’s performance is most commonly assessed by its
3D positioning resolution measured by the FWHM. In this section, the performance of
the different NN models is evaluated by comparing the FWHM calculated using equation
3.4 for both x- and z-positions, using x- and z-scans respectively. Only x- and z-position
resolution could be analyzed as the lab system was not equipped with the proper tools
to perform a y-scan measurement. Chosen NN models were compared with the current
positioning algorithms.
More specifically, two different NN models were chosen for analysis distinguished by their
training method. Both models were trained on the second version of the drift cell dataset.
The CZTNet v4-2 model was trained on a dataset of 10k events in total for 50k epochs
and the CZTNet v5-2 model used the same dataset, but with 40k more events and was
trained for 20k epochs due to time constraints on the HPC cluster.
Algorithms
CZTNet v4-2
CZTNet v5-2
x-position resolution [mm]
0.6
0.61
0.66
z-position resolution [mm]
0.73
0.88
0.88
Table 6.1: x- and z-position resolution computed as the average FWHM for x- and z-scan
data respectively.
The position resolutions presented in Table 6.1 were computed as the average FWHM
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
35
==PAGE:46==
values for the x- and z-scan data. Each beam position was processed individually. A
Gaussian fit was applied to the distribution of predicted x- or z-position values, and the
FWHM was measured accordingly. The average values represent the overall resolution for
each dimension. Notably, the x-position consistently exhibits a higher resolution compared
to the z-position. Neural networks demonstrate the potential to match current positioning
algorithms, with a resolution of 0.61 mm for the x-position in the best case. However, the
NNs show inferior performance in the z-position, with resolutions of 0.88 mm for both NN
models compared to 0.73 mm for the positioning algorithms. Both methods indicate that
achieving higher resolution for the z-position is more challenging.
The following subsections provide a detailed analysis of the individual FWHM values for
both the x- and z-position.
x-position resolution
The x-position resolution was determined by analysing the x-scan data of the detector
prototype. The results across the entire x-dimension are presented in Figure 6.6. Only
beam positions between 1 mm and 39 mm along the x-axis were included.
Figure 6.6: Distribution of FWHM measured for every slit beam position of the x-scan
for different NN models and positioning algorithms.
The FWHM varies from 0.3 to just above 2 mm for the best performing NN model,
while the FWHM for the positioning algorithms varies from 0.4 to almost 1.25 mm. This
indicates that the NN models can surpass current positioning algorithms, but experience
a much worse resolution in certain areas of the detector.
Figure 6.7: Distributions of predictions for the positioning algorithms, CZTNet v4-2 and
CZTNet v5-2 for the slit beam positioned at x = 4mm.
36
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:47==
The peaks in FWHM values for all 3 methods generally appear for the same beam positions
and it has been found that these positions are above drift cell boundaries. Taking a closer
look at the Gaussian fits for predictions when the slit beam is on the 4 mm mark, in Figure
6.7, shows how they are affected over a drift cell boundary.
Sharing predictions between two neighboring drift cells increases the FWHM measurement
for the two NN models. The histogram for CZTNet v4-2 uses larger bins, which prevents
the Gaussian function from fitting to the peak on the left. If smaller bins were used, the
Gaussian fit would likely result in a lower FWHM value, potentially giving the impression
of higher resolution. This has only been observed for this beam position. It is highly likely
that all extreme FWHM values are caused by shared predictions between drift cells.
Although it is observed that the total count of events is lower near drift cell boundaries
due to event type filtering performed on the experimental data, the NN models give very
different distributions compared to the positioning algorithms. This suggests that training
on events only within drift cells discourages the models to predict interactions near the
boundaries.
Moving the slit beam to the left about 0.5 mm it is possible to observe how the predictions
are distributed when more events occur around the middle of a drift cell, as seen on
Figure 6.8. The predictions are not shared anymore, they form a good fit for a Gaussian
distribution and have a much higher total count of events. The predictions of both NN
models are slightly shifted towards the middle further suggesting the bias introduced be
the limited drift cell interactions.
Figure 6.8: Distributions of predictions for the positioning algorithms, CZTNet v4-2 and
CZTNet v5-2 for the slit beam positioned at x = 3.5mm.
z-position resolution
The z-position resolution was determined by analysing z-scan data, in the same way as
for the x-position resolution. The values of the FWHM calculated for all z-scan steps are
plotted in Figure 6.9. Only beam positions from between 1 mm to 39.5 mm were used.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.9: Z-axis position resolution evaluated for the positioning algorithms and different
NN models from the slit beam z-axis scan.
The positioning algorithms maintain a resolution between 0.42 mm to just over 1 mm.
The FWHM values are generally consistent across the z-axis with higher values around
the center of the detector and towards the edges. Especially for the NN models both ends
of the z-axis show a decrease in resolution which is very likely the effect of higher errors
on synthetic data in those areas. The worse resolution in the center is an effect of a higher
leakage current and electronic noise of a cathode in that area [8]. The NN models on the
other hand have a generally worse resolution across the entire z-axis with individual areas
experiencing an increased resolution. However, all methods seem to be following a similar
trend with higher resolution around 30-35 mm on the z-axis.
Taking a detailed view into the middle of the detector we can plot the Gaussian fits on
the distribution of predictions. Overall, there are little to no differences in the predictions
with a slightly better performance for the CZTNet v5-2 model. The NN models do not
exhibit the same recurring pattern which the positioning algorithms experience due to
their design.
Figure 6.10: Distributions of predictions for the positioning algorithms, CZTNet v4-2 and
CZTNet v5-2 for the slit beam positioned at z = 20mm.
As the slit beam moves towards the center of the cathode, around z = 20.5mm, the
positioning algorithms start to perform better and surpass the NN models in terms of
resolution. Their predictions form a much more narrow peak as seen on Figure
38
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.11: Distributions of predictions for the positioning algorithms, CZTNet v4-2 and
CZTNet v5-2 for the slit beam positioned at z = 20.5mm.
The two models have some slight differences in terms of the height of the peak and its
spread. The peak is slightly lower and has a wider spread for CZTNet v4-2 which can be
caused by training for more epochs on less data which could cause the model to overfit to
the synthetic training data.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
39
==PAGE:50==
40
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:51==
7
Discussions
This chapter discusses chosen aspects of the development and evaluation method for NN
models applied in this project.
7.1
Limitations of the theoretical model
Firstly, the datasets are already fundamentally limited due to the limitations of the the-
oretical model. The NN can only learn the interaction events which are modelled and,
thus, are bound to the capabilities of the theoretical model. The current NN models are
limited to single-site events only.
The inclusion of a charge cloud and, thereby, more
interaction events would bring the synthetic data closer to being more representative of
the full spectrum of interactions occurring in the real detector. In the future multiple-cell
events should to be included in the theoretical model to improve resolution near drift cell
boundaries.
7.2
Dataset size
Secondly, training datasets with fewer events led to overfitting. This was observed in the
training and validation curves on models trained on the v2 drift cell datasets for different
total interaction counts as seen on Figure 7.1.
CZTNet v5-2 models were trained on
around 50k interactions and CZTNet v4-2 models were trained on only 10k.
Figure 7.1: Training and validation curves for two models trained on the same dataset
with different total event counts and training times.
There needs to be a balance between the dataset size and the number of epochs for training.
Generally, datasets with a higher event count per mm3 will help increase generalization,
while training for much longer time on smaller datasets may result in overfitting. However,
the difference in performance on real data was not very significant for the two models
evaluated in the previous chapter.
7.3
Synthetic noise
We have observed that the addition of randomised synthetic noise during training has a
big impact on the performance of NN models on real data. In reality, a distinction has to
be made between three different noise levels coming from the different types of electrodes.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
41
==PAGE:52==
Each electrode type has an uncorrelated noise level, with drift strips and cathodes having
higher noise levels [3].
The different noise levels can actually affect the distinguishability between events given the
value of noise being too high for the NN to recognise any signals. This has been addressed
in the current data processing implementation with positioning algorithms through the
application of filters ie. the Savitzky–Golay filter which has been used to filter raw signals
[8].
The addition of synthetic noise has increased the performance of the NN and it could be
beneficial to further analyse the impact of noise on the performance of NN models. For
example, one might apply different noise levels to individual electrode types. This could
be also used as fine-tuning a model to perform better on a specific detector setup.
7.4
Accumulation of predicitons near cathodes
During the evaluation stage a noticeable accumulation of predictions was observed near
the cathodes for y = 5mm. Using a model which limits the output to be in the range of
the detector dimensions with a Tanh function could introduce errors. However, a much
more plausible statement is that the signals formed near the cathodes, due to the more
dense distribution of weighting potentials, are much more variable and different than in
the major center part of the detector volume. The y-position was observed to have a
higher error near the cathodes also for synthetic data hinting that this may be the case.
Due to the convoluted nature of this problem it would be vital to analyse how NN models
with a linear output layer and if introducing a higher event rate near the cathodes would
improve the prediction error of the NN for y near 5 mm.
7.5
On-the-fly-analysis
A new on-the-fly-analysis method has been recently developed at DTU Space Detector
Lab to process registered events on-line [15]. Current data analysis software can calculate
the necessary data products (3D positions etc.) at a rate of around 1200 events per second
[3]. The NN models developed in this project are capable of achieving much higher rates.
42
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusions
In summary, this work explores a new data processing and analysis method utilizing a NN
architecture for predicting 3D interaction positions of radiation with matter and devises
a methodology for developing these models.
Given access to a theoretical model a method was devised using synthetic data to learn
patterns that could be transferred to real data. The limitations of the theoretical model
made it challenging and limited the capabilities of the NN models. Hence, the experimental
data had to be filtered to only contain single-site events without Compton scattering. Two
large datasets were generated which covering most drift cells (version 1) and all drift cells
(version 2). The interaction positions near drift cell boundaries were not sampled as they
incompletely modelled events occurring in those regions.
An MLP architecture was chosen for initial experimentation and showed promising results
matching and, in certain areas, surpassing the performance of current algorithms. The
Adam optimizer together with a low learning rate (3·10−5) and Tanh activation functions
in the hidden layers and the output layer gave stable and fast convergence which allowed
the models to be trained more frequently and include more data. Ultimately, a MLP with
2 hidden layers and 50, 25 hidden units gave the best training results and generalization
error.
Data augmentation played a huge role in aiding the MLP models to generalize well to real
data. Through the addition of randomized synthetic electronic noise, which was measured
on real data the model was able to achieve a significantly more accurate distribution of
predicted interaction positions. Although the noise level was measured as the average
value for all signals not taking into account the different levels of noise per electrode type
the performance was considered to be good enough not to explore the noise further for
now.
Comparing two NN models trained on different dataset sizes showed how the number
of events covering the detector volume affects overfitting, training time and performance
on real data. In general, more events led to less overfitting and with increased training
time the models show a potential for improvement of the positioning resolution for both
dimensions.
Overall, the NN models are able to match the positioning resolution of current algorithms,
but struggle in certain areas which have been identified as problematic given the limitations
of the theoretical model and lower event count.
The x-position resolution was overall
higher than the z-position for both methods - NNs and algorithms, which shows that the
z-position is more challenging to predict accurately.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:55==
9
Future Work
This work proposes a method for developing suﬀicient NN models and lists key findings
on the architecture design choices and data requirements. However, the developed models
still require some work and research. A list of noted areas for further research is presented
below:
• Further development of the theoretical model: Introduce more event types so that
the NN models can be evaluated on a more accurate, unfiltered experimental dataset.
This includes expanding from single-point charges to charge clouds.
• Data augmentation research: Introduce more variability to the data to improve
model performance,
– Electronic noise: Investigate the impact of different noise levels on the perfor-
mance of NN modes on real data may prove essential for further improvement
in 3D position resolution,
– Collection time: The timing of when the read-out system is triggered to register
a signal can vary, depending on the specific read-out device.
Studying this
variability could lead to further improvements in prediction accuracy.
– Mobility-lifetime: Introducing variability in material parameters will make sig-
nal shapes more diverse, allowing the NN model to generalize better to signals
from different types of detectors. However, developing a model for a specific
detector may require the opposite approach, i.e., a more precise determination
of mobility-lifetime parameters to match synthetic and real data more closely.
• Pruning and quantization: A study on model pruning and quantization techniques to
reduce model size and increase inference speed will be useful for future applications
of detectors and NN models in space missions.
• Over- and under-sampling: Research the interaction position resolution in the syn-
thetic data.
Is adding more events sampled randomly across the entire detector
volume effective or do some areas require a more finer sampling than others ie. near
the anodes and cathodes where the weighting potentials are more densely distributed,
• Input feature segmentation: Segment the input features into electrode signals and
include shallow layers for each electrode signal separately. This approach may en-
hance the network’s ability to differentiate between signals and learn a more robust
mapping.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
45
==PAGE:56==
46
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
SRH Owe et al. “Evaluation of CZT Drift Strip Detectors for Use in 3-D Molecular
Breast Imaging”. In: IEEE Transactions on Radiation and Plasma Medical Sciences
7.2 (2022), pp. 113–123.
[2]
Selina Howalt Owe. “Development of 3D Imaging Detectors for High Energy Astron-
omy Instrumentation”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, DTU Space,
2024.
[3]
Benjamin Nobre Hauptmann. “Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the
3D MBI Detector Modules”. MA thesis. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of
Denmark, DTU Space, 2024.
[4]
Nuclear Power. Interaction of Gamma Radiation with Matter. Accessed: 30 July 2024.
url: https://www.nuclear-power.com/nuclear-power/reactor-physics/interaction-
radiation-matter/interaction-gamma-radiation-matter/.
[5]
İrfan Kuvvetli et al. “A 3D CZT high resolution detector for x-and gamma-ray as-
tronomy”. In: High energy, optical, and infrared detectors for astronomy VI. Vol. 9154.
SPIE. 2014, pp. 272–281.
[6]
Evangelos Istatiadis. “Developing Advanced Theoretical Detector Model Frame-
works with Experimental Verification for the 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors”.
MA thesis. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of Denmark, DTU Space, 2024.
[7]
Carl Budtz-Jørgensen and Irfan Kuvvetli. “New position algorithms for the 3-D CZT
drift detector”. In: IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 64.6 (2017), pp. 1611–
1618.
[8]
Benjamin N. Hauptmann et al. “Performance Evaluation of New Large Area 3D
CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors”. In: CdTe and CdZnTe Materials. Ed. by Kris Iniewski.
Unpublished work by Irfan Kuvvetli et al. Springer Nature, Sept. 2024. Chap. Ad-
vancements in CdZnTe Detectors with the Drift Strip Method.
[9]
Irfan Kuvvetli et al. “CZT drift strip detectors for high energy astrophysics”. In: Nu-
clear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spec-
trometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 624.2 (2010), pp. 486–491.
[10]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. “Introduction to machine learn-
ing and data mining”. In: Lecture notes of the course of the same name given at
DTU (Technical University of Denmark) (2016).
[11]
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. “Multilayer feedforward
networks are universal approximators”. In: Neural networks 2.5 (1989), pp. 359–366.
[12]
Eric N Minor et al. “End-to-end machine learning for experimental physics: Using
simulated data to train a neural network for object detection in video microscopy”.
In: Soft Matter 16.7 (2020), pp. 1751–1759.
[13]
Shengyu Chen et al. “Physics-guided machine learning from simulated data with
different physical parameters”. In: Knowledge and Information Systems 65.8 (2023),
pp. 3223–3250.
[14]
David Forsyth. Applied machine learning. Springer, 2019.
[15]
Lasse L. S. Berthelsen. Developing a near real-time radiation detector signal analysis
for the 3D MBI Detector Modules. Supervisor: Irfan Kuvvetli. 2024.
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
47
==PAGE:58==
48
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
==PAGE:59==
Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors using Neural Networks
49
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
