==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Masters of Computer Science & Engineering
Advanced Network Service Offloading with
Programmable Network Devices
Dagfinnur Ari Normann - s212961
Kári Sveinsson - s212434
Kongens Lyngby, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Prof. Lars Dittmann
Co-supervisors: Mingyuan Zang & Christian Madsen
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As networks rapidly expand, traditional services face significant challenges in main-
taining optimal performance levels. These challenges are further exacerbated by the
persistent threat of Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks. Recent advance-
ments in Programmable Network Devices (PND) have the potential to offer solutions
to these challenges, particularly in critical areas such as security. This thesis explores
the optimal utilization of these advanced devices to enhance service performance.
Based on strategies outlined in related research, this study explores novel approaches
for detecting TCP SYN-ACK DDoS attacks, focusing on leveraging Programming
Protocol-independent Packet Processors (P4) operations to overcome limitations in
traditional detection methods. We trained five different Machine Learning (ML) mod-
els for detecting a TCP SYN-ACK flood attack. Each prediction of the models was
placed in majority voting, where each model had different accuracy on their own (25%
to 99%), but with the combination of them due to majority voting, we managed to
reach 100% accuracy of TCP SYN-ACK flood detection, with no false positive or
false negative.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
Kongens Lyngby, 15th July 2024
Dagfinnur Ari Normann
Kári Sveinsson
Project period:
15.01.2024 - 15.07.2024
ECTS:
35
Educational degree:
M.Sc.
Field:
Computer Science and Engineering
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, we are grateful for the opportunity to receive our education at DTU. We
appreciate all the opportunities and knowledge DTU has provided us during our stud-
ies. We are incredibly grateful for each other’s support and work ethics throughout
the conduction of this thesis. We want to thank Prof. Lars Dittmann for providing
us with this project, and Mingyuan Zang and Christian Madsen for their expertise in
the field of cybersecurity. Their invaluable help was greatly appreciated when it was
dearly needed.
A special mention goes to our families for supporting us throughout our educational
journey. We are especially grateful for our wives. Thank you for believing in us,
for your support, patience, and the unconditional care you provided throughout our
work on this thesis.
– We salute you.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
DDoS
Distributed Denial-of-Service
DoS
Denial of Service
IoT
Internet of thing
P4
Programming Protocol-independent Packet Processors
DNS
Domain Name System
NIC
Network Interface Card
PND
Programmable Network Devices
RL
Reinforcement learning
SDN
Software Defined Networking
SVM
Support vector machine
XGBoost Extreme Gradient Boosting
RF
Random Forest
LR
Logistic Regression
KNN
K-Nearest Neighbor
ML
Machine Learning
SIEM
Security Information And Event Management
IoC
Indicators of Compromise
API
Application Programming Interface
PCap
Packet Capture
CSV
Comma Separated Value
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
List of Figures
xi
List of Tables
xii
1 Introduction
1
1.1
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
P4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
P4Runtime
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2 Literature Review
9
3 Problem Description
11
3.1
Knowledge Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3.1
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Justification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4 Methodology
15
4.1
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.1
The P4 Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.2
Python-based Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.3
P4Runtime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Development Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.2.1
Initial Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Feature Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Model Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4.1
Filtering TCP Packets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5 Evaluation
29
5.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Traﬀic Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Evaluation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.6
Model Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.6.1
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.6.2
Resource Utilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6 Discussion
37
7 Conclusions
39
Appendices
41
Appendix A Figures
Appendix B Psudocodes
Bibliography
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
4.1
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Packet Flow Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Caption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Block plot of labels for our dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Standardized block plot of labels for our dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
Standardized with no outliers block plot of labels for our dataset . . . . .
24
4.7
Correlation Matrix | Selected Features Acknowledged . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.8
Confusion Matrices for all models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1
Model Accuracy Over Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Throughtput of the server while normal traﬀic vs. DDoS is happening . .
34
6.1
Comparison of the overall score of our machine learning models to KitNET 38
==PAGE:14==
List of Tables
5.1
Prediction score per model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Evaluation of DDoS Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Performance of the CPU idling and under stress
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The rapid growth of internet connectivity and increased online services have made
network security a critical concern for organizations and individuals. One of the most
disruptive forms of cyber-attacks is the DDoS attack, which aims to render network
resources unavailable by overwhelming them with malicious traﬀic [1]. The increasing
frequency and sophistication of DDoS attacks pose significant challenges to conven-
tional security measures, necessitating the development of advanced detection and
mitigation strategies [1].
Traditional network monitoring relies on sampled flow measurements, which provide
coarse-grained metrics but lack fidelity unless sampled at high rates.
To address
this, research in data streaming and sketching algorithms has emerged, offering ap-
proximate estimates of statistical properties of data streams using sub-linear space.
However, these approaches often require more generality and specialized algorithms
for specific metrics, limiting their practical adoption. Alternative minimalist monitor-
ing approaches, such as flow sampling and sample-and-hold, have shown comparable
accuracy to sketching but lack analytical grounding [2,3].
DDoS attacks have gained significant attention recently as many vulnerable Internet
of thing (IoT) devices are connected online. These vulnerable devices threaten both
network and web infrastructures around the world. There has been a dramatic in-
crease in the scale of DDoS attacks, some getting public headlines [4]. Using a large-
scale botnet, a DDoS attack can quickly reach a couple of terabits per second (Tbps)
peak volumes [5]. Defending against DDoS attacks presents challenges due to their
varied nature and impacts. Software Defined Networking (SDN)-based solutions offer
flexibility, focusing on protecting network infrastructure, while others prioritize end-
point protection. However, these approaches often introduce overhead and latency
due to bottlenecks between the control and data plane communication pipelines [6].
Recent advancements in data plane programmability offer promising solutions for ef-
ficient and effective defense mechanisms. However, challenges must still be addressed
in achieving scalability, accuracy, and timeliness without introducing excessive over-
head or latency.
The P4 programming language emerged as a response to the pressing need for a more
streamlined and adaptable approach to programming network devices. Traditional
methods often involve grappling with the intricacies of low-level languages like C or
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
assembly, which bring forth challenges such as complexity and proneness to errors [7].
P4 tackles these issues head-on by introducing a high-level language that shields de-
velopers from the hardware details, allowing them to concentrate solely on defining
network behavior [8]. One of the key attractions of P4 lies in its protocol indepen-
dence, which enables it to seamlessly program the data plane of various network
devices like switches, routers, Network Interface Card (NIC), and filters [9]. This ver-
satility empowers developers to construct custom packet processing pipelines tailored
to their specific needs, thereby reinforcing the flexibility and eﬀiciency of network
programming endeavors [10].
This thesis explores an innovative DDoS detection and mitigation approach us-
ing P4 and ML techniques. By leveraging P4 and P4Runtime, we achieve flexible
and dynamic control over network behavior, enabling the implementation of custom
DDoS detection logic within the network infrastructure. Additionally, our research
incorporates ML models, which have proven effective in identifying complex patterns
within large datasets, to enhance detection capabilities [11]. By training our models
on standardized network traﬀic features, we may accurately distinguish between le-
gitimate and malicious traﬀic by focusing on specific types of threats while producing
minimal overhead performance.
The primary objectives of this research are to design, implement, and evaluate a
DDoS detection and mitigation system that leverages the strengths of P4, P4Runtime,
and ML.
Seeing if P4 can, with the combination of ML models, be utilized for
cybersecurity prevention regarding DDoS attacks? The system is tested against TCP-
SYN Flood attacks, a common DDoS attack, to assess its effectiveness and robustness.
The subsequent chapters of this thesis are organized as follows:
• Chapter 2: Literature Review summarizes related work and identifies gaps
this research aims to fill.
• Chapter 3: Problem Description outlines the research problem, motivation,
and justification for the chosen approach.
• Chapter 4: Methodology details the system architecture, development pro-
cess, and implementation steps.
• Chapter 5: Evaluation presents the methods and metrics used to assess the
system’s performance and the results.
• Chapter 6: Discussion discusses the implications of the findings, potential
limitations, and comparison to other framework
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
3
• Chapter 7: Conclusions summarizes the key contributions and suggests di-
rections for future research.
1.1
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
DDoS attacks are malicious attempts to disrupt the regular traﬀic of a targeted
network, server, or service by overwhelming it with a large volume of traﬀic from
multiple sources. Unlike Denial of Service (DoS) attacks originating from a single
source, DDoS attacks utilize multiple compromised devices that form a botnet to
generate and amplify traﬀic [12].
DDoS attacks employ various techniques, including Application Layer Attacks, Re-
source Exhaustion Attacks, and Volumetric Attacks. Application Layer Attacks ex-
ploit an application’s vulnerabilities, making it unstable and inaccessible to legitimate
users [1]. These attacks are challenging to detect as they mimic legitimate user behav-
ior. Resource Exhaustion Attacks aim to deplete hardware resources such as memory,
CPU, or storage [1]. They exploit protocol vulnerabilities to render servers unavail-
able. Volumetric Attacks saturate the victim’s communication links by generating
massive traﬀic, making the system unavailable to legitimate users [1,12].
The motivations behind these attacks are varied and can include financial gain, polit-
ical motives, or seeking a competitive advantage [13]. These attacks can range from
simple disruptions of services to more complex strategies involving espionage and
cyber warfare [14]. Botnets and compromised device networks are often the driving
force behind DDoS attacks. These devices, including IoT devices, smartphones, and
computers, are recruited into botnets without the owners’ knowledge [14].
Cybersecurity hygiene plays a crucial role in preventing the formation of botnets, as
attackers must bypass multiple layers of defense to exploit critical information [14].
IoT devices, in particular, have become a significant concern due to their increasing
prevalence and connectivity, making them attractive targets for botnet formation [13].
Real-time detection and mitigation strategies cannot be exaggerated when minimizing
the impact of DDoS attacks on targeted systems [13]. Monitoring network activity
using a Security Information And Event Management (SIEM) system is valuable for
gathering data on such attacks. These systems leverage and contribute to community-
sourced lists of Indicators of Compromise (IoC) to identify past and recent attack
attempts, whether successful or not. This enhances transparency in detecting inter-
actions with potential command and control servers [15].
Effective real-time incident response relies on rule-based event correlation.
SIEM
systems are crucial in alerting administrators to potential threats and automatically
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
deploying responses to block malicious activity and sever connections when a threat
is detected [15]. In parallel, network routers commonly utilize IoC lists from threat
detection vendors to proactively block traﬀic from known malicious IP addresses [16].
This method relies on static threat intelligence data and does not incorporate on-
device ML capabilities to analyze regular network traﬀic and detect anomalies that
deviate from traditional patterns.
Leveraging programmable network elements presents an innovative approach to ad-
dress the challenges of real-time responsiveness and enhance threat detection capabil-
ities. The P4 programming language emerges as a robust solution, empowering direct
and dynamic analysis and processing of network traﬀic within programmable switches
for immediate threat detection and mitigation [10]. Integration of P4 with MLmodels
enhances network adaptability, enabling automatic updates of packet processing rules
in response to anomalies indicative of DDoS attacks. This integrated approach signifi-
cantly boosts network resilience by swiftly identifying and mitigating evolving attack
patterns. Unlike static IoC lists, which are periodically updated from third-party
sources, risking an overlook for emerging zero-day threats, a P4 solution enhanced
with ML ensures agile and effective DDoS attack detection and mitigation [10,17].
In contrast to conventional methods, our approach harnesses the programmability
inherent in P4 to directly detect and mitigate DDoS threats in real-time. By deploy-
ing P4 on programmable switches, our solution eliminates reliance on static IoC lists
and enhances the capability to analyze and respond to evolving attack vectors dy-
namically [16–18]. The flexibility of P4 enables rapid adaptation to emerging threats
by hindering latency, typically associated with traditional packet processing methods.
This capability ensures eﬀicient and timely mitigation of DDoS attacks, thereby for-
tifying overall network resilience against cyber threats [17,18].
DDoS attacks employ various techniques, each with its method of operation and im-
pact on the targeted system.
Botnets typically work by overwhelming legitimate
online services to the point where the service cannot handle the volume of activity,
effectively taking it offline for the duration of the attack [12].
Some examples of DDoS techniques include the Slowloris attack, which targets the
application layer, and the TCP-SYN Flood, a resource exhaustion attack [19], and
Volumetric attacks, that may exploit the Domain Name System (DNS) functionality
to overwhelm the target with traﬀic. These techniques showcase the complexity and
diversity of DDoS attacks, posing a significant challenge to cybersecurity profession-
als [12].
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Machine Learning
5
1.2
Machine Learning
In recent years, ML has emerged as a powerful tool in network security, offering novel
approaches to detect and mitigate threats such as DDoS attacks [20–22]. Traditional
rule-based systems often struggle with the dynamic and evolving nature of cyber
threats, necessitating the adoption of more adaptive and intelligent solutions [11,20].
ML algorithms can analyze vast network traﬀic data to identify patterns and anoma-
lies indicative of malicious activities [22]. Supervised learning techniques, where mod-
els are trained on labeled benign and malicious traﬀic datasets, have shown significant
promise in correctly classifying and predicting DDoS attacks [20,22]. These models
can detect subtle deviations from normal behavior that may precede an attack, en-
abling proactive defense measures [20,23].
Unsupervised learning approaches, such as clustering and anomaly detection, are par-
ticularly valuable in scenarios where labeled data is scarce or unavailable [24, 25].
These methods can uncover previously unknown attack patterns and adapt to new
threats without explicit guidance. For instance, clustering algorithms can group simi-
lar network flows together, helping to distinguish between regular traﬀic clusters and
potential attack traﬀic clusters [24,25].
Reinforcement learning (RL), another facet of ML, offers the potential for developing
autonomous defense mechanisms [26]. By continuously interacting with the network
environment, RL agents can learn optimal real-time strategies for mitigating DDoS
attacks. These agents can adjust their defense tactics dynamically based on the evolv-
ing attack landscape, providing a robust and adaptive security solution [27].
Despite the promise of ML in enhancing network security, several challenges remain.
The quality and diversity of training data significantly impact the performance of ML
models. Ensuring the availability of comprehensive and representative datasets is cru-
cial for building effective detection systems [24,25]. Additionally, the interpretability
of ML models is a critical consideration, as network administrators need to under-
stand the reasoning behind the model’s decisions to trust and effectively utilize these
tools [28, 29]. Integrating ML-based solutions into existing network infrastructures
poses practical challenges. These systems must operate in real time, processing high
volumes of traﬀic data with minimal latency. Balancing the computational demands
of ML algorithms with the need for timely responses is essential for their successful
deployment [28].
ML offers significant potential in transforming network security by providing adap-
tive, intelligent, and scalable solutions for detecting and mitigating DDoS attacks.
However, realizing this potential requires addressing challenges related to data qual-
ity, model interpretability, and practical integration into network environments.
==PAGE:20==
6
1 Introduction
1.3
P4
The P4 programming language is a high-level language specifically crafted for con-
trolling packet-processing devices, such as network switches. To meet contemporary
network infrastructures’ increasing complexity and flexibility demands, P4 offers a
transformative approach to network programming [10].
The primary objective behind creating P4 was to empower network operators to de-
fine how their network devices process packets, independent of the underlying hard-
ware specifics required. Traditionally, network devices were programmed using fixed-
function hardware with specific protocols embedded in their design. This approach
posed significant challenges for adapting to new protocols or customizing packet pro-
cessing behaviors without substantial hardware modifications [10].
P4 seeks to overhaul this methodology by providing a platform-independent language
that enables users to define packet-processing pipelines in a high-level, protocol-
agnostic manner [10, 30]. Consequently, network operators can specify how packets
are processed and forwarded through the network without being constrained by the
limitations of fixed-function hardware or predefined protocols [10].
P4’s unique selling points, such as its protocol independence and high-level abstrac-
tion, make it highly suitable for modern network environments. Its protocol indepen-
dence allows users to describe packet-processing logic without specifying the protocols
involved, a crucial flexibility in today’s rapidly evolving network landscape. With P4,
network operators can quickly adapt their packet-processing pipelines to accommo-
date these changes without requiring new hardware or extensive reprogramming [7,10].
Another significant feature of P4 is its ability to provide a high-level abstraction for
packet processing. This abstraction simplifies the programming model for network
engineers, making it easier to develop, test, and deploy new packet-processing func-
tions. By abstracting the underlying hardware details, P4 allows engineers to focus
on the logic and behavior of packet processing rather than the specifics of the hard-
ware implementation [7, 10, 31]. This approach speeds up the development process
and enhances the maintainability and portability of packet-processing programs.
P4 also promotes innovation in network design by enabling customizable and pro-
grammable data planes [7, 31]. In traditional networks, the data plane—the part of
the network responsible for forwarding packets based on predefined rules—was often
rigid and inflexible. With the coming of P4, network operators can now define cus-
tom data plane behaviors tailored to their needs. This programmability opens up
new possibilities for optimizing network performance, implementing advanced secu-
rity measures, and supporting novel applications and services. [32]
==PAGE:21==
1.4 P4Runtime
7
The P4 language consists of several core components that facilitate the definition
of packet-processing pipelines. These components include parsers, match-action ta-
bles, and control flow blocks [7]. Parsers extract relevant fields from incoming packets,
while match-action tables determine the actions based on key-match lookups. Control
flow blocks orchestrate the overall packet-processing logic, specifying the sequence of
operations on each packet. Other terminology phrases worth mentioning are ”ingress”
and ”outgress”, for incoming and outgoing traﬀic, respectively [7].
P4’s rich ecosystem includes various tools and frameworks that provide significant
advantages.
These include P4 compilers, simulators, and debugging tools, which
streamline the development process and facilitate the testing and troubleshooting of
P4 programs [7,31]. Additionally, several open-source projects and community initia-
tives contribute to the ongoing evolution and adoption of P4, fostering collaboration
and knowledge sharing among network professionals [33].
In conclusion, the P4 programming language represents a significant advancement
in network programming.
P4 empowers network engineers and operators to de-
sign flexible and customizable network behaviors by providing a high-level, protocol-
independent language for defining packet-processing pipelines. Its ability to abstract
hardware details, promote innovation, and adapt to various targets makes it an invalu-
able tool for modern network infrastructures. As the networking landscape continues
to evolve, P4 is poised to play a crucial role in shaping the future of packet processing
and network design [7,10].
1.4
P4Runtime
P4Runtime is an open-source protocol that enables dynamic control of the data plane
by the control plane, enhancing network programmability and flexibility [31]. It allows
real-time configuration of P4-programmable devices, facilitating adaptive network
management [10,31].
Key features include stateful packet processing, which enables complex behav-
iors like load balancing and security enforcement [34], and support for custom pro-
tocols, benefiting rapidly changing environments such as data centers [35].
Like-
wise, P4Runtime allows for enhancements in incident response by using custom se-
curity policies directly in the data plane, providing robust defense against cyber
threats [31,35].
Challenges include ensuring device interoperability and managing stateful opera-
tions with high performance and low latency [34,35].
==PAGE:22==
8
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The introduction of the P4 language denotes a significant advancement in network pro-
gramming and monitoring methodologies [10]. As a high-level language, P4 enables
flexible and programmable packet processing, emphasizing three key components: re-
configurability, protocol independence, and target device independence. P4’s adapt-
ability to changing network requirements, decoupling from specific protocols, and
compatibility with various network devices reflect a transformative approach to net-
work management and monitoring.
Recent advancements in P4 represent a significant evolution in network monitoring,
outperforming traditional methods like OpenSketch [2]. While OpenSketch improved
traﬀic measurement via software-defined techniques, P4 offers tailored, eﬀicient solu-
tions with granular control over packet processing. This flexibility integrates seam-
lessly with existing network infrastructures, enabling customized device behavior with-
out delving into low-level hardware complexities.
Building on P4’s advancements, ”Tracking Normalized Network Traﬀic Entropy to
Detect DDoS Attacks in P4” [36] introduces an innovative DDoS detection approach.
Addressing P4’s limitations in arithmetic operations, this work presents two strategies
for estimating flow cardinality and normalized traﬀic entropy using only P4-supported
functions, ensuring low relative error. The proposed detection method relies on vari-
ations in normalized traﬀic entropy, achieving comparable or superior accuracy to
state-of-the-art solutions, all executed within the data plane.
In the realm of DDoS attack detection and mitigation, ”Euclid: A Fully In-Network,
P4-Based Approach for Real-Time DDoS Attack Detection and Mitigation” [37]
presents significant advancements. Euclid is a fine-grained, low-footprint, low-delay
traﬀic analysis mechanism that utilizes P4 for real-time detection and mitigation of
DDoS attacks. By combining information-theoretic and statistical analyses, Euclid
effectively classifies packets as legitimate or malicious, allowing for the enforcement
of policies that prevent disruptive attack traﬀic. Results show that Euclid achieves
high detection accuracy and low delay, identifying most attack packets while impact-
ing less than 1% of legitimate traﬀic [37]. The authors also suggest integrating ML
to further enhance detection capabilities, presenting a promising avenue for future
research.
The success of Euclid and similar P4-based solutions highlights P4’s potential to
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Literature Review
bolster network resilience against security threats. By offering granular control over
packet processing and dynamic customization of measurement tasks, P4 paves the
way for developing robust services aimed at detecting and mitigating DDoS attacks.
The UnivMon framework offers an end-to-end view for network monitoring, where
data plane nodes run monitoring primitives and the control plane assigns monitoring
tasks. Three main requirements guide UnivMon’s design: fidelity across various ap-
plications without prior metric knowledge, a unified monitoring abstraction, and fea-
sible hardware implementation. To meet these requirements, the data plane employs
universal sketching primitives that ensure accuracy without prior metric knowledge.
Meanwhile, the control plane simplifies estimation algorithms and generates monitor-
ing manifests for each router. These manifests allocate universal sketches based on
network topology and hardware constraints [38].
Recent research has underscored the integration of ML techniques in network secu-
rity [17, 22]. These approaches utilize supervised, unsupervised, and RL [25–27] to
strengthen DDoS detection and mitigation. By training models on network traﬀic fea-
tures, ML algorithms can discern patterns indicative of malicious activities, providing
a proactive defense against evolving threats [11,20]. Supervised learning has proven
effective in classifying and predicting DDoS attacks by utilizing labeled datasets of
benign and malicious traﬀic [20,22]. These models detect subtle deviations from nor-
mal behavior that may indicate an impending attack, facilitating timely defensive
measures [20, 23]. In contrast, unsupervised learning techniques, such as clustering
and anomaly detection, are particularly valuable in scenarios where labeled data is
limited. These methods can uncover previously unknown attack patterns, enabling
adaptation to new threats, with clustering algorithms effectively differentiating be-
tween normal and potentially malicious traﬀic flows [24,25].
This thesis project presents our proposed system that integrates supervised ML
models with P4, employing standard model training practices. Subsequent chapters
will delve deeper into enhancing programmable network technologies to detect TCP
SYN flood attacks effectively. The focal point of our efforts will be employing super-
vised learning techniques, aiming to enhance DDoS detection by accurately identifying
patterns associated with these particular attacks.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Problem Description
In today’s digital landscape, DDoS attacks present an escalating threat, particularly
with the proliferation of vulnerable IoT devices.
Traditional network monitoring
techniques, which typically rely on sampled flow measures (aggregated representations
of network traﬀic), fall short in delivering accurate DDoS detection and mitigation.
Although advancements in data streaming (continuous flow of data that allows real-
time analysis) and sketching algorithms (compact data structures used to summarize
large datasets), these methods are often specialized and lack the adaptability required
for widespread practical implementation.
3.1
Knowledge Gap
Despite progress in data streaming and sketching algorithms, such as those utilized
by OpenSketch, these methodologies are limited by their dependence on specific, tai-
lored algorithms for measuring various metrics [2]. Furthermore, while flexible, SDN
(Software-Defined Networking) solutions frequently introduce overhead and latency
due to the necessary communication between control and data planes [6].
The introduction of the P4 programming language marks a significant develop-
ment in overcoming these limitations. P4 facilitates high-level, protocol-independent,
and target-independent programming of the data plane, enhancing flexibility and eﬀi-
ciency in packet processing [8,10]. Research, including ”Tracking Normalized Network
Traﬀic Entropy to Detect DDoS Attacks in P4” [36] and ”Euclid: A Fully In-Network,
P4-Based Approach for Real-Time DDoS Attack Detection and Mitigation” [37], has
showcased the potential of P4 for DDoS detection. However, these studies primarily
concentrate on data plane operations and do not fully exploit the benefits of integrat-
ing P4 with ML techniques for improved detection and mitigation.
3.2
Motivation
The threat of DDoS attacks poses significant risks to network stability and security.
Our project aims to combine a P4 program with a ML-based Python controller to
strengthen our defense against attacks in a virtual switch environment.
==PAGE:26==
12
3 Problem Description
By merging the high-performance, protocol-independent packet processing capabili-
ties of P4 with the predictive prowess of ML, we aim to create a network security
solution that is both dynamic and adaptive. This approach addresses several critical
challenges that plague traditional security mechanisms:
• Scalability: When the traﬀic is typically calm but suddenly experiences a surge
in packet flows, the system must be equipped with scalable solutions to handle
deviations from the standard patterns.
• Accuracy: We enhance DDoS attack detection precision by training machine
learning models on selected features from extensive datasets. We aim to achieve
more satisfactory detection rates by focusing solely on detecting TCP-SYN
Flood Attacks.
• Adaptability: Our models demonstrate adaptability by training and devel-
oping the models to detect and mitigate attack patterns on interfaces rather
than on namespaces or IPs. This ensures that new members associated with an
interface on the switch are protected against TCP SYN flood attacks, even if
they have not been previously encountered. This approach provides robust and
flexible protection, adapting to the dynamic nature of network environments.
The P4 program forms the core of our system’s packet processing capabilities,
performing initial packet analysis and enforcing rules derived from the insights pro-
vided by the Python controller.
This collaborative approach ensures the network
can quickly adapt to counter emerging DDoS threats and enhance overall network
resilience.
3.3
Implementation
Our implementation integrates the P4 programming language with a Python-based
controller to detect and mitigate malicious traﬀic, specifically targeting DDoS attacks.
This system operates within a virtual switch environment and leverages the following
core components:
• P4 Program: This program defines the behavior of the virtual switch, includ-
ing parsing, processing, and de-parsing of packets. It allows for defining custom
packet processing rules, providing adequate control over network traﬀic.
• Python Controller: The controller manages real-time traﬀic analysis using
the P4Runtime protocol. It employs ML models to detect DDoS attacks and
dynamically update the switch’s behavior to mitigate identified threats. The
core integrated functionalities include:
– Packet Sniﬀing and Callback: Capturing packets on a specified network
interface and processing them to extract features for analysis.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Implementation
13
– Machine Learning Detection: Utilizing pre-trained models to predict
whether a flow is part of a DDoS attack based on selected packet features.
– Dynamic Rule Application: Writing rules to construct the P4 program-
ming plane to block traﬀic from identified malicious sources, mitigating the
attack.
• Machine Learning Training Script: This script is responsible for processing
traﬀic data, selecting suitable features, and training ML models to distinguish
between benign and malicious traﬀic. Our models will be trained on packet
captures from past real-life scenarios. Our models aim to improve the accuracy
of past prejudices’ and the responsiveness in mitigating the predicted attacks.
Once trained, the Python controller will utilize the models for real-time detec-
tion of DDoS attacks where the majority rules.
3.3.1
Models
For TCP-SYN flood attack detection, the choice of models and the features selected
for their training are equally important to the task they are trying to predict. Our
chosen models for TCP-SYN Flood, DDoS detections were: Random Forest (RF),
Logistic Regression (LR), Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), Support vector
machine (SVM), and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN). Understanding why a particular
model is chosen for a specific task and recognizing the benefits of selecting the appro-
priate features for training is invaluable in ML practices. This knowledge enhances
the models’ performance and eﬀiciency, as they are designed with a clear objective in
mind before being trained on specific patterns and logic.
Detecting TCP SYN flood attacks presents a unique challenge in cybersecurity
because it is hard to distinguish between legitimate and malicious traﬀic. The models
selected for this task – LR, RF, XGBoost, KNN, and SVM – each offer a distinct
advantages in addressing this challenge:
• Logistic Regression: As a linear model, LR provides a foundational approach
to classification.
Its strength lies in its interpretability, allowing for a clear
understanding of the relationship between features.
• Random Forest: as an ensemble learning technique that addresses classifi-
cation and regression problems.
It constructs multiple decision trees during
training and combines their outcomes by taking a majority vote from each tree.
This approach enhances accuracy and mitigates over-fitting that can occur with
a single decision tree. As the number of trees increases, the risk of over-fitting
decreases while accuracy improves.
• XGBoost: XGBoost is an advanced implementation of gradient boosting known
for its speed and performance. It builds trees sequentially, with each new tree
correcting errors made by the previous ones. XGBoost’s ability to handle sparse
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Problem Description
data and perform feature selection makes it highly effective for detecting subtle
DDoS attack patterns.
• SVM: Support Vector Machine is a robust classification algorithm that excels
with high-dimensional data. It identifies the hyperplane that best separates
different classes by maximizing the margin between them. SVM is particularly
effective in scenarios with clear margins of separation. Our SVM model uti-
lizes the radial basis function (RBF) kernel, incorporating the ”kernel trick” to
perform non-linear classification eﬀiciently.
• KNN: K-Nearest Neighbors is a non-parametric model that classifies instances
based on the majority class among its k-nearest neighbors. KNN is simple and
effective for small datasets, relying on the premise that similar instances exist
in close proximity. However, its performance can degrade with large datasets
and high-dimensional spaces.
3.4
Justification
Integrating P4 and ML in our project provides a novel DDoS detection and mitigation
approach that addresses the shortcomings identified in the literature review 2. Unlike
previous studies focusing solely on data plane operations [36, 37], our solution com-
bines programmable packet processing and adaptive, data-driven analysis strengths.
This dual approach enhances the system’s ability to detect and respond to DDoS
attacks more accurately and eﬀiciently.
By bridging the gap between the flexible packet processing capabilities of P4 and the
predictive power of ML, our project aims to offer a scalable and accurate solution
to the ongoing challenges in network security. This integration ensures that traﬀic
deviating from its norm can be handled effectively to protect infrastructures against
sophisticated DDoS attacks, thus advancing resilient and adaptive network security
practices.
The TCP-SYN DDoS attack, characterized by an overwhelming number of SYN re-
quests, is a critical cyber threat that disrupts network services by exhausting server
resources. Concentrating on TCP-SYN DDoS traﬀic, we aim to implement an adapt-
able and scalable environment and develop accurate models to detect and mitigate
this specific type of DDoS attack.
By training on a diverse sampled dataset and
fine-tuning our ML algorithms, we aim to improve their ability to identify TCP-SYN
Flood attacks amidst regular network traﬀic. This targeted approach allows us to
contribute to developing robust cybersecurity solutions capable of protecting against
some of the most prevalent and disruptive network threats.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
This chapter details our design, development, and deployment of an integrated sys-
tem that merges SDN with ML to detect and mitigate DDoS attacks. The system
leverages the P4 language’s programmability to define intricate packet processing
behaviors within network devices. Unlike traditional networking models where the
switch dictates its capabilities, P4 allows us to specify exactly what actions the switch
should perform, such as parsing headers, matching specific fields, and executing de-
fined actions. This ”top-down” control enables precise and flexible network manage-
ment. Our system’s functionalities are augmented by a Python-based controller that
conducts real-time analysis of network flows using advanced machine-learning mod-
els. The solution was developed and deployed on a Raspberry Pi 4 equipped with
the P4PI image [39], chosen for its cost-effectiveness and flexibility. The statistical
analysis and tests were conducted on the same device to ensure the accuracy of our
computations.
4.1
System Architecture
The system’s architecture revolves around two core components: the P4 program and
the Python-based controller. The P4 program, deployed on networking switches, is
responsible for packet parsing and processing. It employs programmable data plane
capabilities to enforce dynamic traﬀic management rules, directly influencing packet
flow based on the controller’s instructions. The Python controller is responsible for
real-time network traﬀic analysis from the P4 program at the other end of the switch.
It uses ML models to detect and mitigate potentially malicious traﬀic. It employs
ML models, trained using Packet Capture (PCap)s from historical, real-world, and
lab-controlled simulated DDoS attacks to identify potential threats. Upon detection
of an attack, the controller computes the necessary action and communicates with
the P4 program to update its packet processing rules, thereby mitigating the attack
with minimal latency. This division of responsibilities allows for eﬀicient DDoS attack
detection and mitigation, with the Python controller focusing on the threat analysis
and the decision-making and the P4 program executing the packet handling and
rule enforcement. This joint relationship between the components facilitates robust,
flexible, dynamic network management and mitigating security threats.
==PAGE:30==
16
4 Methodology
Incoming traﬀic targeting a public IP within the switch environment is processed
simultaneously by the data and control planes. The control plane monitors incoming
traﬀic using a network sniffer and predicts the nature of individual packet flows,
determining whether they might be malicious.
This prediction is achieved using
an ensemble of five pre-trained ML models, with the majority vote determining the
outcome. If a packet flow is predicted to be malicious, the source IP address of the
external device is added to the blocklist table. Consequently, future packets from this
source IP are automatically denied, blocking traﬀic. The blocklist table is constructed
as a match-key action table, where a match of the source IP triggers a drop action,
while non-matching keys result in a default action called No Action, allowing traﬀic
to flow. This table type is a hit-miss action table within the P4 community [7]. The
control plane, compact with the P4Runtime utility, handles remote procedure calls to
update the blocklist table, which is defined and read by the data plane for incoming
traﬀic on runtime. For more details about the core logic of the data plane and control
plane, refer to Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, respectively, and see Figure 4.1 for an
illustration of the overall system architecture.
Figure 4.1. System Architecture
The architecture was developed, tested, and structured around two virtual inter-
faces rather than a predefined network topology. During development, ingress and
egress were maintained using either of the interfaces defined at the startup of the
P4 program. This strategy allowed for replaying PCap files towards the interface
==PAGE:31==
4.1 System Architecture
17
responsible for ingress traﬀic and listening on the egress traﬀic interface to verify
the effectiveness of the blocklist architecture. We avoid relying on a predefined net-
work topology by treating incoming traﬀic towards a local IP associated with the
interface. This approach allows us to assign future IP addresses or namespaces to
the integrated interfaces for DDoS mitigation. For detailed information about each
component within the architecture, please refer to the subsequent subsections.
4.1.1
The P4 Program
The core of our system’s packet processing and flow capabilities is the P4 program.
It performs initial packet analysis, parses incoming traﬀic packets, and enforces rules
derived from insights provided by the Python controller on each emerging packet flow.
This integration allows for real-time adjustments in network behavior, facilitating
prompt responses to potential DDoS threats.
The P4 program, functioning as the data plane, enables dynamic adaptation to
real-time network conditions through coordination with the control plane. Our de-
tection mechanism utilizes this capability by using shared resources between the data
and control planes.
P4’s domain-specific language is optimized for network data forwarding, permit-
ting the reconfiguration of parsing and processing tasks regardless of the underlying
hardware. This allows our system to be integrated and adapted to other hardware
that supports P4.
4.1.2
Python-based Controller
The Python-based controller serves as the core component of the intelligent traﬀic
analysis system. It utilizes requisite libraries to facilitate data manipulation, model
prediction, and evaluation.
The controller is purposefully crafted with scalability,
employing concurrent processing techniques to effectively handle and analyze sub-
stantial volumes of network data. Its modular architecture allows for the seamless
integration of diverse ML models, including XGBoost, RF, and SVM, enabling the
system to adapt to varied network traﬀic and attack patterns based on the model’s
knowledge. The controller’s ability to dynamically load and apply these models based
on real-time data analysis is imperative for promptly detecting and mitigating DDoS
attacks.
Furthermore, the controller incorporates a feature-extracting approach by statisti-
cally measuring the network packets flowing through the switch by transforming raw
network packets into a structured format suitable for ML analysis. The controller can
accurately identify anomalous behavior indicative of DDoS attacks by selecting key
features such as packet length, protocol type, flow duration, and number of packets.
The controller integrates a real-time packet sniﬀing and processing mechanism to en-
hance the system’s responsiveness to evolving threats. Utilizing the scapy library, it
captures packets from the network interface, extracts relevant features, and submits
==PAGE:32==
18
4 Methodology
them to ML models for classification. Upon identifying a DDoS attack, the controller
communicates with the P4 switch via P4Runtime, instructing it to implement or
update packet processing rules to mitigate the attack. This coordinated approach,
facilitated by the p4runtime_lib library, allows the Python-based controller and the
P4 switch to dynamically adjust network behavior in real-time, thereby improving
the system’s defense against DDoS threats.
4.1.3
P4Runtime
P4Runtime is a protocol incorporated with APIs that provide a mechanism to con-
trol and manage P4-programmable devices at runtime. It is designed to be used in
conjunction with P4 to enable dynamic, real-time control over the behavior of net-
work devices without requiring recompilation or redeployment of the entire network
configuration. The key features of P4Runtime include:
• Device Independence: P4Runtime abstracts the underlying hardware, allow-
ing network operators to control different types of devices using a consistent
API, regardless of the hardware vendor or model.
• Dynamic Updates: P4Runtime enables real-time updates to the forwarding
behavior of network devices, allowing operators to modify packet processing
rules and policies dynamically based on current network conditions and require-
ments.
• Extensibility: The protocol supports extensions and customizations, making
it adaptable to evolving network standards and emerging technologies.
• Control-Plane Integration: P4Runtime can be integrated with various control-
plane frameworks, facilitating seamless coordination between the control and
data planes for enhanced network management and automation.
P4Runtime plays a crucial role in our system as it provides an interrelationship be-
tween the controller and the P4 program, allowing them to communicate to the same
resources for different reasons at runtime. Thus, it enables more flexible, responsive,
and programmable network infrastructures.
To meet the required eﬀiciency standards for our model’s detection rates, we
needed to balance the training dataset. This involved ensuring an equal distribution
between normal and malicious traﬀic.
Upon detecting a potential DDoS attack, the controller promptly communicates with
the P4 program to dynamically update the packet processing rules. This interaction is
facilitated through a well-defined API that allows for real-time adjustments based on
the insights provided by the ML models. By leveraging P4’s programmable nature,
the system can implement sophisticated traﬀic management and DDoS mitigation
strategies with minimal latency.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Development Phase
19
The methodology outlined in this section ensures that the system can respond to
current threats and adapt to evolving challenges in network security. This adaptability
is crucial in maintaining the resilience of network infrastructures against the ever-
changing landscape of cyber threats.
Figure 4.2. Packet Flow Diagram
4.2
Development Phase
During the project’s development phase, we optimized our setup for functionality and
accessibility. The core component is a Raspberry Pi Model 4, which operates using
an OS image known as P4PI [39]. This operating system provides a potent basis for
our development tasks. With its quad-core processor and ample RAM, the Raspberry
==PAGE:34==
20
4 Methodology
Pi Model 4 handles the computational demands of our project, ensuring smooth and
reliable performance.
4.2.1
Initial Setup
We initiated the development of the switch environment, and since we were delv-
ing into the unknown, we had yet to work with P4 before.
The guidelines from
p4lang [7, 31] were utilized to its fullest. We began with working on a tutorial pro-
gram called calc.p4. We tweaked it to our liking to get familiar with how network
packets passing through the environment could be manipulated. Another tutorial
that our P4 program is heavily based on is called firewall.p4.
We utilize the
”bloom filter” introduced within that tutorial to count packets from individual IP
addresses and, subsequently, the subnet packets to which the individual IP belongs.
This idea sprung up as we initially focused our setting toward a rate-limiting func-
tionality. The rate limiter proved to be a success. However, the rates were predefined
and ”hardcoded” without any logic whatsoever and had nothing to do with utilizing
the Python controller to enhance the flow, i.e., it was not dynamic. Thus, we shifted
our focus toward ML and model training to identify malformed traﬀic patterns and
set the rate-limiting idea on hold.
4.3
Feature Selection
Feature selection, a crucial preprocessing step, is not a random process but a result of
deep expertise in the field of ML [40]. Identifying the right features is the cornerstone
for models to discern patterns accurately. In our context, these models are tailored
to classify traﬀic metadata flowing through network switches, relying on their feature
values.
The primary goal of feature selection is to optimize model performance and prevent
overfitting. This process instills confidence in the model’s ability to generalize to new
data. Overfitting, the bane of model performance, occurs when a model learns the
noise in the training data rather than the intended patterns. By carefully selecting
features, we ensure that the model uses only the most informative aspects of the data,
significantly improving its performance and reliability. Therefore, selecting features
and avoiding overfitting are critical to building reliable and effective ML models. They
contribute to the model’s ability to generalize, make accurate predictions, and provide
valuable insights for decision-making.
For the training of the ML models to have accuracy and not be unbalanced, the data
set needs to have as close to a 50/50 distribution of malicious traﬀic as normal. Figure
4.3 shows the normal and malicious traﬀic distribution for our training.
Normal
having 52.3% and malicious having 47.7% respectively.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Feature Selection
21
Figure 4.3. Caption
Now, let us delve into the standardization of our dataset, its crucial role, and
its impact on ML models. Standardization is a vital preprocessing technique that
involves centering the distribution around the mean and scaling it based on the stan-
dard deviation. Figure 4.4 illustrates the data distribution over the features before
any standardization has occurred.
We aimed to prevent skewed distributions, adversely affecting the model’s perfor-
mance. By centering the distribution around the mean and scaling it based on the
standard deviation, standardization diminishes the effect of outliers, making the data
more robust and less sensitive to extreme values. The standardized distribution can
be seen in Figure 4.5.
Standardization allows for the direct comparison of model coeﬀicients.
When
features are standardized to the same scale, their coeﬀicients become directly compa-
rable. This is particularly useful in models like linear regression, where the magnitude
of coeﬀicients can provide insights into the importance of different features It helps
prevent bias from features with larger values, ensuring that all features contribute
equally to the model. Standardization improves model convergence, accuracy, and
overall performance by bringing features to a similar scale.
From these crucial steps for normalizing the dataset, we chose the following set of
features for the model to train on:
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Methodology
Figure 4.4. Block plot of labels for our dataset
• tcp.seq
• tcp.dstport
• tcp.srcport
• tcp.ack_raw
• tcp.flags.ack
• tcp.flags
• tcp.connection.syn
• tcp.ack
• tcp.len
• tcp.connection.rst
This selected feature set is designed to capture the most relevant aspects of the
network traﬀic we are interested in, ensuring that the model can make accurate classi-
fications. Each feature contributes uniquely to the model’s ability to understand and
predict patterns in the traﬀic metadata. For instance, tcp.seq and tcp.ack are cru-
cial for tracking the state of TCP connections, while tcp.dstport and tcp.srcport
provide context about the communication endpoints. Also, by including features such
as tcp.flags.ack and tcp.connection.syn, the model can discern the state of the
connection (e.g., whether it is established or in the process of being established). The
tcp.len feature is vital for understanding the packets’ size, which can indicate the
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Model Training
23
Figure 4.5. Standardized block plot of labels for our dataset
type of traﬀic.
Overall, the selected features are not arbitrary; they are based on domain knowledge
and their significance in understanding network behavior. The practical use case of
selecting features in that way is that they can generalize well to new, unseen data.
This approach ensures that our models are both accurate and reliable, providing
valuable insights for decision-making in network traﬀic analysis.
4.4
Model Training
Five models were trained and utilized within our system, namely: LR, RF, XGBoost,
SVM, and KNN.
Each model underwent a training process, testing, and integra-
tion into our system under the controller’s oversight. The training process utilized a
carefully curated dataset that balanced benign and malicious network traﬀic repre-
sentations. This balanced approach is important so the models learn to distinguish
between different types of patterns and classify demeanors accordingly. The dataset
selected for our ML algorithms is called ”Edge-IIoTset” [41]. It consists of various
malicious network traﬀic patterns alongside normal, benign traﬀic. Our study focused
on the TCP-SYN DDoS attack and normal traﬀic to balance our models.
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Methodology
Figure 4.6. Standardized with no outliers block plot of labels for our dataset
Supervised learning techniques were employed during the initial training phase,
during which each model received labeled data. LR and SVM, being linear classifiers,
were tuned to identify linear separations in the dataset.
Meanwhile, as ensemble
methods, RF and XGBoost were optimized to handle non-linear relationships and
interactions. The KNN algorithm was trained to classify data points based on their
proximity in a multi-dimensional space.
Hyperparameter tuning played a critical role in optimizing model performance.
For example, parameters such as the number of trees and maximum depth in Random
Forest were adjusted using grid search techniques. Cross-validation was employed to
prevent overfitting and ensure robust generalization to new data.
Following training, rigorous testing with a separate validation dataset was con-
ducted to evaluate each model’s effectiveness. Key performance metrics such as accu-
racy, precision, recall, and the F1-score were computed to assess the models’ ability
to distinguish between benign and malicious traﬀic.
The key-performance metrics for accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score, are
illustrated in Equations 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4, respectively. Each metric is important
for understanding different aspects of a model’s predictive power as each may pro-
vide a unique insight for validation, especially when dealing with imbalanced datasets.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Model Training
25
tcp.seq
tcp.dstport
tcp.srcport
tcp.ack_raw
tcp.flags.ack
tcp.flags
tcp.connection.syn
tcp.ack
tcp.len
tcp.connection.rst
tcp.seq
tcp.dstport
tcp.srcport
tcp.ack_raw
tcp.flags.ack
tcp.flags
tcp.connection.syn
tcp.ack
tcp.len
tcp.connection.rst
1.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
-0.74
-0.00
0.33
0.31
-0.56
-0.43
-0.54
0.42
-0.00
-0.74
1.00
0.15
-0.12
-0.12
0.27
0.15
0.22
-0.58
-0.00
-0.00
0.15
1.00
0.43
0.38
-0.26
0.01
-0.17
-0.33
0.00
0.33
-0.12
0.43
1.00
0.96
-0.85
-0.65
-0.78
0.15
0.00
0.31
-0.12
0.38
0.96
1.00
-0.85
-0.65
-0.75
0.22
-0.00
-0.56
0.27
-0.26
-0.85
-0.85
1.00
0.76
0.92
-0.41
-0.00
-0.43
0.15
0.01
-0.65
-0.65
0.76
1.00
0.82
-0.31
-0.00
-0.54
0.22
-0.17
-0.78
-0.75
0.92
0.82
1.00
-0.40
0.00
0.42
-0.58
-0.33
0.15
0.22
-0.41
-0.31
-0.40
1.00
Feature Correlation Matrix
−0.75
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Figure 4.7. Correlation Matrix | Selected Features Acknowledged
Figure 4.8. Confusion Matrices for all models
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Methodology
Accuracy is the ratio of correctly predicted observations to the total observations.
It is calculated in equation 4.1. While accuracy is a straightforward and intuitive
metric, it can be misleading, especially in imbalanced datasets.
For example, in
a dataset where 97% of the observations belong to one class, a model that always
predicts the majority class will have high accuracy (97%) but may fail to identify any
instances of the minority class.
Accuracy = True Positives + True Negatives
Total Observations
(4.1)
Precision measures the ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to the total
predicted positives and is calculated as shown in equation 4.2. It is a useful metric
when the cost of false positives is high.
Precision =
True Positives
True Positives + False Positives
(4.2)
Recall, also known as sensitivity, measures the ratio of correctly predicted positive
observations to all actual positives. It is calculated in equation 4.3. Recall is critical
in scenarios where missing a positive case has a high cost.
Recall =
True Positives
True Positives + False Negatives
(4.3)
F1 Score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a single metric
that balances both. It is beneficial when the cost of false positives and negatives are
similar. The F1 score is calculated as shown in equation 4.4.
F1 Score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(4.4)
The integration of these models into the system followed a modular approach.
Each model independently evaluated packets within network flows, and their assess-
ments were combined using a majority voting system [42]. This ensemble method
leveraged the strengths of individual models while mitigating their weaknesses, thereby
improving overall decision-making. If most models classified a flow as malicious, the
controller promptly blocked the external IP associated with that flow, ensuring robust
network security.
4.4.1
Filtering TCP Packets
TCP packets are filtered from the input packet collection to focus exclusively on TCP-
based network traﬀic. This filtering step ensures that subsequent analysis is specific
to TCP protocol characteristics.
Our DDoS detection protocol is precisely engineered to identify and mitigate TCP-
SYN Flood attacks, among the most common and disruptive types of network security
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Model Training
27
threats. Characterized by their unique pattern of abuse of the TCP handshake pro-
cess, these attacks pose significant challenges to network stability and security. The
protocol is designed to detect and correctly classify attacks of this kind, ensuring
network integrity is maintained.
==PAGE:42==
28
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Evaluation
The following sections in this chapter assess the effectiveness and robustness of our
DDoS detection methodology, focusing on TCP-SYN Flood attacks.
We utilized
various tools and metrics to test our system, with iperf3 and tcpreplay being one of
the primary tools in our analysis.
5.1
Experimental Setup
Our project was developed on P4Pi [39], on raspberry Pi 4 model B with 4GB of
RAM, running the latest release V0.0.4 using bmv2 with v1model architecture [43].
The project code is mainly written in P4 and Python to provide data and control
plane functionality. The training and mapping of the ML model are based on scikit-
learn and xGBoost libraries. For performance evaluation, our project was connected
to a desktop with AMD Ryzen 7 3800X 8-Core Processor at 3.90 GHz and 32 GB
RAM, which served as a server, and a laptop or another Raspberry Pi, which acted
as clients. The datasets Edge-IIoTset [41] and CIC-IDS2017 [44] are used for ML
model training and evaluation of each ML model. The captured packet traces in the
dataset were replayed using tcpreplay.
5.2
Datasets
The datasets used and chosen for the evaluation in our project were publicly available
and had different traﬀic scenarios, described below. Both datasets offered PCap and
labeled Comma Separated Value (CSV) files.
Edge-IIoTset: Dataset collected benign and malicious traﬀic for a relatively long time
period, around three months, with a maximum of 3 hours each time data was collected.
It has realistic IoT network, which includes sensors, SDN controllers, MQTT brokers,
etc.
CIC-IDS2017: Dataset has collection of 5-days traﬀic records, PCaps and CSV files.
This dataset contains a broad scope of known attack tactics, such as ssh brute force,
heart bleed, and DDoS attacks. The dataset ”Monday” solely focused on collecting
benign traﬀic, while on the days that followed, malicious traﬀic was collected in
dedicated time slots.
==PAGE:44==
30
5 Evaluation
5.3
Traﬀic Generation
We used the iperf3 utility to monitor the load and throughput for regular and mali-
cious traﬀic. The iperf3 server was set up on the server side and on a separate client
side, allowing our Raspberry Pi setup to work as a switch as intended for regular and
malicious traﬀic.
We extended iperf3’s capabilities using a tcpreplay tool to generate TCP-SYN
Flood attack traﬀic. Tcpreplay replays packet-captured data and sends a high volume
of SYN packets to the server, simulating a TCP-SYN Flood attack. This flexibility
allowed us to precisely control the rate and intensity of the attack traﬀic, facilitating
a thorough evaluation of our detection system’s performance under different attack
scenarios.
5.4
Evaluation Metrics
The effectiveness of our DDoS detection practices was evaluated based on the following
key metrics:
• Detection Rate:
– The proportion of TCP-SYN Flood attacks correctly identified by each
model and leveraging the majority voting system.
• False Positive Rate:
– The percentage of normal traﬀic incorrectly classified as malicious by the
system.
• Response Time:
– The time taken to update shared resources, i.e., the blocklist table, to
mitigate a single threat.
• Resource Utilization:
– The impact of the detection system on network and server resources, in-
cluding the CPU.
• Scalability:
– The ability of the detection system to maintain performance as network
traﬀic volume increases.
5.5
Evaluation Results
The results demonstrated the eﬀicacy of our DDoS detection methodology. Using
tcpreplay for traﬀic generation and iperf3 for throughput monitoring showed that our
system could accurately detect and mitigate DDoS attacks.
==PAGE:45==
5.6 Model Performance
31
Using tcpreplay, a tool for replaying packet captures from real-world scenarios, was a
resounding success. We could pipe our results into a log file while replaying real traﬀic
by nesting a logger within the Python controller. The packet capture, pre-labeled in
a separate CSV file, allowed us to assess our model’s eﬀiciency in mitigating known
threats. Our detection practices, as evidenced by our results, effectively identified
real-life threats.
We encountered issues with the input/output logging of each packet that flowed in.
The issue remains unresolved; however, we suspect it relates to semaphores and task
handling, as we invoke agents to handle the response traﬀic observed on the switch.
Consequently, the predictions from each model for each packet had to be evaluated
without using P4Runtime. This function heavily relies on asynchronous functionality
in our system, where agents are invoked for process handling. A separate script, ex-
cluding P4Runtime, was created, and each model’s accuracy and the majority voting
system were evaluated using that script. We tested it on the training data to ensure
all models were in scope and correctly configured. It was accurate as all the models
correctly classified a subset of 500,000 randomly picked packets from the training
set. In addition to that, approximately 500,000 predictions were made on previously
unseen data.
The unseen data is a dataset called ”CIC-IDS2017” [44]. It consists of approximately
twenty million packets, each labeled benign or by the attack type the packet belonged
to. Since this dataset contains multiple attack types, and we are only interested in
the TCP-SYN flood aspects, we had to ensure we evaluated the same attack type as
our models have been trained to detect. To do this, we first filtered out the UDP
traﬀic in our replay. We made sure to receive only TCP packets, and second, after
predicting 451,224 packets, we filtered out entries that matched a different attack
type than what we were interested in inspecting. The benign traﬀic label and the
DDoS attack label traﬀic were kept and evaluated against our models’ results.
5.6
Model Performance
The results detailed in Table 5.1, evaluated against previously unseen data, showed
varying levels of accuracy, with KNN, RF, and SVM models performing the best.
The configuration of each ML model was as following:
LR: The max_iter parameter, set to 1000, is crucial for ensuring the logistic
regression solver has ample opportunity to converge, particularly in complex datasets
where convergence might require numerous iterations.
SVM: The kernel trick, an essential feature of SVM, allows it to eﬀiciently handle
non-linearly separable data by mapping inputs into higher-dimensional spaces, thus
==PAGE:46==
32
5 Evaluation
Predictions
Model
Correct
Incorrect
Overall Score
Logistic Regression
282,428
168,796
∼63%
Random Forest
432,661
18,563
∼96%
XGBoost
111,920
339,304
∼25%
Support Vector Machine
415,954
35,270
∼92%
K-Nearest Neighbor
448,402
2,822
∼99%
Table 5.1. Prediction score per model
significantly enhancing its versatility and applicability.
RF: With n_estimators set to 100, this parameter increases the number of trees
in the forest, thereby improving the model’s accuracy and robustness. Although this
increment leads to higher computational demands, the trade-off is often justified by
the resultant gains in model performance.
XGBoost: The eval_metric parameter, utilizing ’logloss’, is pivotal for optimiz-
ing the model during training. Measuring the logarithmic loss allows us to quantify
the accuracy of probability predictions, ensuring the model’s predictive performance
is reliable and precise.
KNN: Setting n_estimators to 5, this parameter determines the count of nearest
neighbors to consult for classifying a new data point. This approach leverages the
majority voting mechanism among the nearest neighbors, assigning the most common
class to the new point.
Implementing a majority voting system further improved detection accuracy, as shown
in Table 5.2. This approach ensured the system could accurately classify DDoS traﬀic
with minimal false positives.
Metric
Value
Total packets detected as DDoS
53,449
True positives (correct detections)
53,449
False positives (incorrect detections)
0
Detection accuracy
1.00
False negatives (missed DDoS packets)
0
True negatives (correct non-DDoS detections)
397,775
False positives (incorrect DDoS detections)
0
Table 5.2. Evaluation of DDoS Detection
We achieved a perfect detection accuracy score by implementing a majority voting
system. Each model’s accuracy is based on the distribution of 451,224 predictions, as
==PAGE:47==
5.6 Model Performance
33
illustrated in Figure 5.1, which shows the accuracy of each model’s predictions.
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
Number of Packets
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Accuracy
Model Accuracy Over Time
Model
BENIGN T
raffic
DDoS T
raffic
LR
RF
SVM
XGB
KNN
Figure 5.1. Model Accuracy Over Time
Throughout the replay, the XGBoost model consistently identified a significant por-
tion of unseen data as malicious traﬀic. In contrast, the logistic regression and SVM
models exhibited similar detection patterns, occasionally misclassifying DDoS traﬀic
as benign. Toward the end of the replay, there was a noticeable shift in behavior,
with both XGBoost and logistic regression showing improved accuracy in identifying
malicious traﬀic.
The observed behavior might be due to XGBoost’s initial configuration, which used
a log loss function for training. Likewise, logistic regression’s linearity contributes to
its performance.
It is important to note that each DDoS entry in our dataset is labeled based on
whether either the destination or source IP address is identified as the malicious ac-
tor in the communication flow. This labeling approach means any packet within the
communication flow can be classified as a DDoS if it involves a known sinful actor.
This presents a potential risk where our algorithms inadvertently block a local IP ad-
dress while predicting and detecting these anomalies. In order to address this concern,
our system includes a proactive safeguard mechanism designed to mitigate such risks.
This safeguard function verifies that any IP address flagged for potential malicious
activity is an external source, not part of the internal system.
In addition to evaluating the accuracy, we measured the response time on the server
itself. Using the P4Runtime utility, the time to add an individual IP to the blocklist
was measured by naively printing out the interaction times between the controller
==PAGE:48==
34
5 Evaluation
and the programming plane during a typical detection run. Measurements of 300 IPs
were stored in a log file, and the mean average time computed was 15.7 milliseconds.
5.6.1
Scalability
During a normal idle run, as can be seen in Fig. 5.2, the server achieves an average
throughput of ∼52 Mbits/s; this represents the server’s capability to handle data
transmission when it is not under significant stress such as DDoS attack.
Under
heavy load conditions, the server’s throughput drops slightly to ∼50 Mbits/s. The
server maintains a relatively high throughput despite the increased load, with only
a ∼2 Mbits/s (approximately 3.8%) reduction from the idle run. The throughput
measurements show that the server maintains strong performance across different
conditions. Although there is a slight drop in throughput under heavy load, it still
handles and transmits data eﬀiciently, even under increased stress.
Figure 5.2. Throughtput of the server while normal traﬀic vs. DDoS is happening
5.6.2
Resource Utilization
In Table 5.3, we can evaluate CPU resource consumption by examining its impact on
CPU temperature and utilization; it allows us to understand how much strain our im-
plementation puts on the CPU regarding temperature and processing capacity. The
results show that when the system is under load, CPU utilization and temperature
==PAGE:49==
5.6 Model Performance
35
increase, ∼57% increase in CPU utilization, and ∼25% for CPU temperature, com-
pared to our baseline. This aligns with what should be and was expected as we are
running five ML models, making predictions and assumptions around vast amounts
of rapid traﬀic flows.
CPU utilization
(%)
CPU temperature
(°C)
Baseline
31 - 38
56 - 59
Malicious
49 - 60
70 - 74
Table 5.3. Performance of the CPU idling and under stress
==PAGE:50==
36
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
After reviewing our previous work and exploring the capabilities of the P4 program-
ming language, we have identified potential improvements to our system. One idea
revolves around our initial approach to implementing our system, where a rate lim-
iter was previously implemented in the data plane (P4). Its development remained
incomplete as it was missing any control plane logic whatsoever. The improvement
enhances the rate-limiting mechanism by implementing a dynamic packet counter for
ingress traﬀic. This counter would adjust its behavior based on the live traﬀic flow
observed by the control plane. To achieve this, we would utilize a hill-climbing al-
gorithm that detects spikes by comparing the moving average to the mean squared
average. When a spike is detected, the data plane will raise an update flag to signal
the controller. The controller will utilize ML models to determine if the triggered
source IP exhibits malicious behavior, along with tailing traﬀic that follows, until the
traﬀic is considered stable again. If identified as malicious, the IP would be blocked.
We imagine such enhancement could improve the communication pipeline between
the data and control plane, potentially reducing processing overhead.
Another idea was introducing federated learning to our system, a type of RL.
Federated learning shows promise in analyzing historical histograms to detect net-
work attacks. By learning from previous data, these algorithms can effectively and
confidently identify anomalies in network traﬀic, such as spikes or dips, which may
indicate potential security threats. For example, sudden increases in data packets
could signal a DDoS attack, while unexpected drops might indicate network failures
or intrusions. We recently discovered the federated learning approach when reviewing
one of the literature articles [13]. Thus, given our limited time after this discovery,
we did not integrate the principle into our already-implemented system.
During the final hours of proofreading, we stumbled on an article that described
the dataset [44] as having faulty data due to incorrect flow retrieval from the network
packets. The paper in question [45] found that with this incorrect method, using the
dataset CIC-IDS2017 could yield some incorrect predictions from models. The pro-
cess that CIC-IDS2017 used had six problems when gathering data from the PCap’s,
namely: feature duplication, feature miscalculation, wrong protocol detected, inconsis-
tency in TCP termination flow, and labeling issues. The proposed solution managed
to increase the accuracy from 88.10% to 96.59% and decrease false positive rates from
22.61% to 6.35%. These changes can drastically impact outcomes for pre-trained ML
==PAGE:52==
38
6 Discussion
models. Although paper [45] provides the source code to regenerate the correct flow
of [44], the discovery came too late for retraining our ML models for comparisons.
To compare our detection, we used a framework called KitNET, the core detection
model of Kitsun [46]. It should be noted that the Kitsun is a detection framework
that does not have the capability of mitigation; with this being said, we deployed the
KitNET solution on our Raspberry Pi. We compared our ML models detection with
KitNET to dataset CIC-IDS2017, as Table 5.1 shows our prediction score for each of
our ML models, and Table 5.2 explains the results of our majority voting system’s
accuracy, in which our whole system is based around. The comparison of the results
will be on those outcomes. The KitNET scored ∼65%, compared to our results, as
shown in Figure. 6.1.
Figure 6.1. Comparison of the overall score of our machine learning models to KitNET
This result may be explained by the dataset [44] itself, as the dataset contains other
labeled DDoS attacks than just TCP SYN-ACK flood, but are not distinguishable
from their labels. Another example of the performance can be explained by [45] as
the dataset was faulty but the algorithm in KitNET predictions was correct but the
comparison data was wrong.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions
In this project, we developed and implemented ML-based software solution on a Rasp-
berry Pi platform, using P4pi, to detect and mitigate DDoS attacks, with a specific
focus on TCP SYN-ACK flood attacks. By using Python for ML and the P4 program-
ming language for eﬀicient data plane processing, we aimed to provide a cost-effective
and eﬀicient defense mechanism against TCP SYN-ACK flood DDoS attacks.
Our implementation on the Raspberry Pi involved integrating the ML models
that performed majority voting with a P4-programmed data plane to ensure high-
speed packet processing and real-time attack detection. Using the P4 programming
language helped achieve these results.
P4 allowed us to precisely control packet
processing, making our data handling precise and eﬀicient. This capability enabled
us to manage network traﬀic swiftly and seamlessly, which was essential for detecting
and mitigating DDoS attacks in real-time.
Five different ML models were trained on TCP SYN-ACK flood type DDoS attack
and tested on unseen dataset, with the performance of each of the individual trained
models as follows: LR (63%), RF (96%), XGBoost (25%), SVM (92%), KNN (99%).
However, with the combination of majority, we managed to reach 100% accuracy
when it comes to the detection of TCP SYN-ACK flood DDoS attack, demonstrating
the importance of majority voting in the prediction process. The result of this thesis
indicates a great potential for combining software-defined networking principles with
advanced ML techniques.
In this project, we have shown that P4 with a combination of ML models can be
utilized for cybersecurity prevention against DDoS attacks. We are confident in our
results, referring to Table 5.2, showcasing its feasibility.
Of course, future studies are needed to establish additional training of the models
and evaluate their performance in other datasets, as well as the possible improvements
to the system we have already identified. Furthermore, since there exist more DDoS
attack methods than evaluated in this thesis, these also need to be tested, trained, and
implemented into the models with the majority voting for consideration of optimal
performance.
==PAGE:54==
40
==PAGE:55==
Appendices
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX A
Figures
Logistic Regression - Confusion Matrix
==PAGE:58==
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
Number of Packets
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Accuracy
Model Accuracy Over Time
Model
BENIGN Traffic
DDoS Traffic
LR
RF
SVM
XGB
KNN
==PAGE:59==
Random Forest | Confusion Matrix
XGBoost | Confusion Matrix
==PAGE:60==
Support Vector Machine | Confusion Matrix
K-Nearest Neighbor | Confusion Matrix
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX B
Psudocodes
Algorithm 1: Data Plane | P4 Program
Input:
Ingress packet stream
Output:
Processed packet stream with filtered DDOS mitigation
1 foreach packet in Packet stream do
2
if packet is IPv4 then
3
srcIP = packet’s source IP address;
4
subnet = srcIP & 0xFFFFFF00;
5
switch srcIP or subnet do
6
case subnet is in blocked subnets do
7
Drop packet;
8
case srcIP is in blocked IPs do
9
Drop packet;
10
case subnet packet count for subnet ≥SUBNET_PACKET_THRESHOLD do
11
Block subnet in blocked subnets register;
12
Drop packet;
13
case IP packet count for srcIP ≥IP_PACKET_THRESHOLD do
14
Block srcIP in blocked IPs register;
15
Drop packet;
// Increment packet counts
16
Increment subnet packet count for subnet using hash function;
17
Increment IP packet count for srcIP using hash function;
18
Forward packet;
19
else
20
Forward packet;
21 An ongoing packet processing remains consistant;
==PAGE:62==
Algorithm 2: Control Plane | Python
Input:
Packet stream from network interface
Output:
Blocked IPs and detection logs
1 foreach packet in Packet stream do
2
if packet contains IP then
3
flowID = (packet’s source IP, packet’s destination IP, packet’s protocol);
4
Append packet to flow’s packets;
5
if flow is already processed then
6
if number of packets in flow ≥PACKET_THRESHOLD then
7
features = ExtractFeatures(flow’s packets);
8
if features is valid then
9
predictions, ddos_detected = PredictDDoS(features);
10
if ddos_detected then
11
ip_to_block = packet’s source IP if not local else packet’s destination IP;
12
WriteBlockedIPRule(p4info_helper, switch, ip_to_block);
13
Mark flow as processed;
14
else
15
Forward packet;
16 SignalHandler:
17
Set shutdown_flag to True;
18 InitScapy:
19
Initialize Scapy settings;
20 LoadModels:
21
for each model in model_filenames do
22
Try to load model;
23
if error then
24
Print error and exit;
25 WriteBlockedIPRule(p4info_helper, switch, ip_addr):
26
if switch is None then
27
Log error and return;
28
if ip_addr already blocked then
29
Log info and return;
30
Acquire lock for ip_addr;
31
Convert ip_addr to integer;
32
Build table entry for blocking ip_addr;
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
F. S. Dantas Silva, E. Silva, E. P. Neto, M. Lemos, A. J. Venancio Neto, and
F. Esposito, “A taxonomy of ddos attack mitigation approaches featured by sdn
technologies in iot scenarios,” Sensors (switzerland), vol. 20, no. 11, p. 3078,
2020.
[2]
M. Yu, L. Jose, and R. Miao, “Software defined traﬀic measurement with opens-
ketch,” in Proceedings of the 10th USENIX Conference on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation, nsdi’13, (USA), p. 29–42, USENIX Association,
2013.
[3]
J. Boite, P. A. Nardin, F. Rebecchi, M. Bouet, and V. Conan, “Statesec: Stateful
monitoring for ddos protection in software defined networks,” 2017 Ieee Confer-
ence on Network Softwarization: Softwarization Sustaining a Hyper-connected
World: En Route To 5g, Netsoft 2017, p. 8004113, 2017.
[4]
Ritzau and N. S. Skydsgaard, “Massivt prorussisk cyberangreb har klart formål,
siger IT-ekspert,” 2 2024.
[5]
D. Menscher, “Exponential growth in DDOS attack volumes,” 10 2020.
[6]
M. Zhang, G. Li, S. Wang, C. Liu, A. Chen, H. Hu, G. Gu, Q. Li, M. Xu,
and J. Wu, “Poseidon: Mitigating volumetric ddos attacks with programmable
switches,” 27th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium,
Ndss 2020, 2020.
[7]
P. W. Group, “P4 16 language specification version 1.0.0.” https://p4.org/p4-
spec/docs/P4-16-v1.0.0-spec.html, 2017. Accessed: 2024-02-01.
[8]
A. C. Lapolli, J. Adilson Marques, and L. P. Gaspary, “Offloading real-time ddos
attack detection to programmable data planes,” 2019.
[9]
B. L. Dalmazo, J. A. Marques, L. R. Costa, M. S. Bonfim, R. N. Carvalho,
A. S. da Silva, S. Fernandes, J. L. Bordim, E. Alchieri, A. Schaeffer-Filho,
L. Paschoal Gaspary, and W. Cordeiro, “A systematic review on distributed
denial of service attack defense mechanisms in programmable networks,” Inter-
national Journal of Network Management, vol. 31, no. 6, p. e2163, 2021.
==PAGE:64==
[10] P. Bosshart, D. Daly, M. Izzard, N. McKeown, J. Rexford, C. Schlesinger,
D. Talayco, A. Vahdat, G. Varghese, and D. Walker, “Programming protocol-
independent packet processors,” 2014.
[11] G. Apruzzese, P. Laskov, E. Montes De Oca, W. Mallouli, L. Brdalo Rapa,
A. V. Grammatopoulos, and F. Di Franco, “The role of machine learning in
cybersecurity,” Digital Threats: Research and Practice, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 8, 2023.
[12] R. M. Haseeb-ur rehman, A. H. M. Aman, M. K. Hasan, K. A. Z. Ariﬀin,
A. Namoun, A. Tufail, and K. H. Kim, “High-speed network ddos attack de-
tection: A survey,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 15, p. 6850, 2023.
[13] F. L. de Caldas Filho, S. C. M. Soares, E. Oroski, R. de Oliveira Albuquerque,
R. Z. A. da Mata, F. L. L. de Mendonça, and R. T. de Sousa Júnior, “Botnet de-
tection and mitigation model for iot networks using federated learning,” Sensors,
vol. 23, no. 14, p. 6305, 2023.
[14] P. Bhatnagar, S. Pai, and M. Khan, “Ddos attack and defense mechanism in a
server,” Quantum Computing in Cybersecurity, pp. 33–56, 2023.
[15] B. Al-Duwairi, W. Al-Kahla, M. A. AlRefai, Y. Abdelqader, A. Rawash, and
R. Fahmawi, “Siem-based detection and mitigation of iot-botnet ddos attacks,”
International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering, vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 2182–2191, 2020.
[16] S. T. Zargar, J. Joshi, and D. Tipper, “A survey of defense mechanisms against
distributed denial of service (ddos) flooding attacks,” Ieee Communications Sur-
veys and Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2046–2069, 2013.
[17] W. I. Khedr, A. E. Gouda, and E. R. Mohamed, “P4-hldmc: A novel framework
for ddos and arp attack detection and mitigation in sd-iot networks using machine
learning, stateful p4, and distributed multi-controller architecture,” Mathematics,
vol. 11, no. 16, 2023.
[18] R. Miao, H. Zeng, C. Kim, J. Lee, and M. Yu, “Silkroad: Making stateful layer-4
load balancing fast and cheap using switching asics,” Sigcomm 2017 - Proceedings
of the 2017 Conference of the Acm Special Interest Group on Data Communica-
tion, pp. 15–28, 2017.
[19] P. Oktivasari, A. R. Zain, M. Agustin, A. Kurniawan, F. A. Murad, and M. F.
Anshor, “Analysis of effectiveness of iptables on web server from slowloris attack,”
2022 5th International Conference on Computer and Informatics Engineering,
Ic2ie 2022, pp. 215–219, 2022.
[20] M. Ahsan, K. E. Nygard, R. Gomes, M. M. Chowdhury, N. Rifat, and J. F.
Connolly, “Cybersecurity threats and their mitigation approaches using machine
learning—a review,” Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 527–
555, 2022.
==PAGE:65==
[21] F. Hu, S. Zhang, X. Lin, L. Wu, N. Liao, and Y. Song, “Network traﬀic classifica-
tion model based on attention mechanism and spatiotemporal features,” Eurasip
Journal on Information Security, vol. 2023, no. 1, p. 6, 2023.
[22] T. H. Chua and I. Salam, “Evaluation of machine learning algorithms in network-
based intrusion detection using progressive dataset,” Symmetry, vol. 15, no. 6,
p. 1251, 2023.
[23] A. Dziedzic, N. Dhawan, M. A. Kaleem, J. Guan, and N. Papernot, “On the
diﬀiculty of defending self-supervised learning against model extraction,” 2022.
[24] W. H. Choi and J. Kim, “Unsupervised learning approach for anomaly detection
in industrial control systems,” Applied System Innovation, vol. 7, no. 2, p. 18,
2024.
[25] M. Chaudhry, I. Shafi, M. Mahnoor, D. L. R. Vargas, E. B. Thompson, and
I. Ashraf, “A systematic literature review on identifying patterns using unsu-
pervised clustering algorithms: A data mining perspective,” Symmetry, vol. 15,
no. 9, p. 1679, 2023.
[26] N. M. Yungaicela-Naula, C. Vargas-Rosales, J. A. Pérez-Díaz, and D. F. Carrera,
“A flexible sdn-based framework for slow-rate ddos attack mitigation by using
deep reinforcement learning,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
vol. 205, p. 103444, 2022.
[27] S. H. Oh, J. Kim, J. H. Nah, and J. Park, “Employing deep reinforcement learn-
ing to cyber-attack simulation for enhancing cybersecurity,” Electronics (switzer-
land), vol. 13, no. 3, p. 555, 2024.
[28] A. Aldoseri, K. N. Al-Khalifa, and A. M. Hamouda, “Re-thinking data strat-
egy and integration for artificial intelligence: Concepts, opportunities, and chal-
lenges,” Applied Sciences (switzerland), vol. 13, no. 12, p. 7082, 2023.
[29] G. Engelen, V. Rimmer, and W. Joosen, “Troubleshooting an intrusion detection
dataset: The cicids2017 case study,” Proceedings - 2021 Ieee Symposium on
Security and Privacy Workshops, Spw 2021, pp. 7–12, 2021.
[30] D. Kreutz, F. M. Ramos, P. E. Verissimo, C. E. Rothenberg, S. Azodolmolky, and
S. Uhlig, “Software-defined networking: A comprehensive survey,” Proceedings
of the Ieee, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 14–76, 2015.
[31] T. P. A. W. Group, “P4runtime specification.” https://p4.org/eb88ca9d-
e8ec-43db-84f6-8a8653a26394/, 2024.
[32] J. Gomez, E. F. Kfoury, J. Crichigno, and G. Srivastava, “A survey on tcp
enhancements using p4-programmable devices,” Computer Networks, vol. 212,
p. 109030, 2022.
==PAGE:66==
[33] A. place to discuss the P4 Programming Language and Ecosystem, “fo-
rum.p4.org.” https://forum.p4.org/.
[34] N. Gude, T. Koponen, J. Pettit, B. Pfaff, M. Casado, N. McKeown, and
S. Shenker, “Nox: Towards an operating system for networks,” Acm Sigcomm
Computer Communication Review, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 105–110, 2008.
[35] L. Tan, W. Su, W. Zhang, J. Lv, Z. Zhang, J. Miao, X. Liu, and N. Li, “In-band
network telemetry: A survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 186, p. 107763, 2021.
[36] D. Ding, M. Savi, and D. Siracusa, “Tracking normalized network traﬀic entropy
to detect ddos attacks in p4,” 2021.
[37] A. S. Ilha, A. C. Lapolli, J. A. Marques, and L. P. Gaspary, “Euclid: A Fully
In-Network, P4-Based Approach for Real-Time DDoS Attack Detection and
Mitigation,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 18,
pp. 3121–3139, sep 2021.
[38] Z. Liu, A. Manousis, G. Vorsanger, V. Sekar, and V. Braverman, “One sketch
to rule them all: Rethinking network flow monitoring with univmon,” Sigcomm
2016 - Proceedings of the 2016 Acm Conference on Special Interest Group on
Data Communication, pp. 101–114, 2016.
[39] S. Laki, R. Stoyanov, D. Kis, R. Soulé, P. Vörös, and N. Zilberman, “P4pi: P4
on raspberry pi for networking education,” Acm Sigcomm Computer Communi-
cation Review, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 17–21, 2021.
[40] M. M. Taye, “Understanding of machine learning with deep learning: Architec-
tures, workflow, applications and future directions,” Computers, vol. 12, no. 5,
p. 91, 2023.
[41] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke, “Edge-iiotset:
A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of iot and iiot applications
for centralized and federated learning,” Ieee Access, vol. 10, no. 99, pp. 40281–
40306, 2022.
[42] B. J. Zubillaga, A. L. Vilela, M. Wang, R. Du, G. Dong, and H. E. Stanley,
“Three-state majority-vote model on small-world networks,” Scientific Reports,
vol. 12, no. 1, p. 282, 2022.
[43] p4lang, “Github - p4lang/behavioral-model: The reference p4 software switch.”
https://github.com/p4lang/behavioral-model, 2024.
[44] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a new
intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traﬀic characterization,” Icissp 2018 -
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Information Systems Security
and Privacy, vol. 2018-, pp. 108–116, 2018.
==PAGE:67==
[45] A. Rosay, F. Carlier, E. Cheval, and P. Leroux, “From cic-ids2017 to lycos-
ids2017: A corrected dataset for better performance,” Acm International Con-
ference Proceeding Series, pp. 570–575, 2021.
[46] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensemble of
autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 25th Annual Network and
Distributed System Security Symposium, Ndss 2018, 2018.
==PAGE:68==
