==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Motion Blur Estimation for Face Image Quality
Assessment
Master Thesis
Jonas Bøttzauw Pedersen (s184181)
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Face Recognition Systems are increasingly integral to personal and large-scale security
applications, requiring robust mechanisms to ensure reliability. A critical aspect of
Face Recognition Systems performance is the quality of captured face images, with
motion blur being a reason for degraded recognition performance, stemming from cap-
ture subject movement or poor illumination. To address this, Face Image Quality As-
sessment quality assessment algorithms are employed to evaluate quality components
to estimate the utility of face images for Face Recognition Systems. The ISO/IEC
DIS 29794-5:2024 [1] standard proposal describes several quality components and their
corresponding quality assessment algorithms but also lacks defined quality assessment
algorithms for some quality components, including motion blur.
This thesis focuses on developing and evaluating Face Image Quality Assessment
quality assessment algorithms for estimating the motion blur intensity in face images
with both real and synthetic motion blur. This has been done utilizing both classic
computer vision and machine learning approaches.
The results achieved for motion blur intensity estimation using the classic computer
vision method indicate that the implementation is inadequate, performing worse than a
general sharpness measure. Conversely, the classic computer vision method for motion
blur direction estimation shows promising results on the Essen Darmstadt Motion Blur
(EDAMB) dataset, although it lacks ground truth labels. Over 500 machine learning
models were fine-tuned for the machine learning method as part of hyperparameter tun-
ing, combining several different base models and input transformations. Among these,
a configuration using the DenseNet169 [2] base model, with the alias densenet_jp_p1,
demonstrates the best balance of complexity and predictive performance.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in close collaboration with the
Norwegian Biometrics Laboratory of NTNU, fulfilling the requirements for acquiring
a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 14, 2024
Jonas Bøttzauw Pedersen (s184181)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I’d like to thank my supervisors, Wassim Kabbani, Christoph
Busch, Christian Jensen, and Tyge Tiessen.
Thanks especially to Wassim for his
invaluable daily supervision, feedback, and availability to answer questions at odd
times of the day. I’m immensely grateful that Christoph has invited me to conduct
this master’s thesis at his group. It has been a great pleasure. Thanks to Tyge for
being able to take over the supervision and facilitation of the project at short notice
following Christian’s recent professorship appointment at Aarhus University.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and my friends for their support, along
with the countless long days at the DTU library working on and discussing each of our
own master’s theses.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Face Recognition Systems (FRS)
2
2.1
Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Motion Blur . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Applications of Face Recognition Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Related Works
5
3.1
Existing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Error versus Discard Characteristic (EDC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Theory
8
4.1
Luminance Conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Hann Windowing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.4
Cepstrum Transformation and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.5
Radon Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.6
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.6.1
Categories of Machine Learning Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.6.2
Machine Learning Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.6.3
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.6.4
Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.6.5
Model Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Implementation
26
5.1
Synthetically Blurred Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.2
Blur Application Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Hyperparameter Tuning with Hydra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5.3
Classic Computer Vision Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.1
Hyperparameters of Classic Computer Vision Method
. . . . . .
31
5.3.2
High- and Low-Pass Filtering of Magnitude Spectrum . . . . . .
31
5.3.3
Inspection of Radon Transformed Magnitude Spectrum to Find
Motion Blur Direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.4
Rotation of Cepstrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.5
Peak Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Machine Learning Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4.1
Fastai Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4.2
Machine Learning Base Models Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4.3
Transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4.4
Hyperparameters of Machine Learning Method . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Face Image Quality Assessment Quality Measure Value Interpolation . .
45
5.5.1
Classic Computer Vision Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5.2
Machine Learning Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Experimental Setup
46
6.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.1.1
Essen Darmstadt Motion Blur (EDAMB) Dataset
. . . . . . . .
46
6.1.2
LFW and FRLL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2
Face Image Quality Assessment Toolkit (fiqat)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2.1
Face Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2.2
Primary Face Estimator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2.3
Face Image Preprocessor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2.4
Face Recognition Feature Extractor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3
Classic Computer Vision Method Hyperparameter Selection . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Preliminary Model Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.5
Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.6
Evaluation Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Results
58
7.1
False Non-Match Error versus Discard Characteristic (FNM-EDC) Curves 58
7.2
Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3
Confusion Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.3.1
convnext_jp_p1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.3.2
densenet_jp_p2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.3.3
convnext_jp_p2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.3.4
densenet_jp_p1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.3.5
vit_jp_p1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.3.6
vit_jp_p2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8
Discussion
71
8.1
Analysis of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
8.1.1
Partial Area Under Curve (pAUC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
8.1.2
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Squared Error (MSE)
.
72
8.1.3
Machine Learning Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
8.1.4
Confusion Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.2
Potential Errors Encountered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.3
Model Complexity and Portability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8.4
Best of the Selected Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9
Further Work
76
10 Conclusion
77
Acronyms
79
List of Figures
81
List of Tables
83
A Top 100 Fine-Tuned Models - Average MSE
85
B Top 100 Fine-Tuned Models - Average pAUC
88
C Full FNM-EDC Curves
91
Bibliography
96
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Face Recognition Systems have become more and more prevalent in current times,
being found anywhere from personal electronic devices, such as phones and laptops,
to large-scale surveillance and border control for identification and authentication of
individuals [3].
Since we’ve become more reliant on the security provided by Face
Recognition Systems, it should be a high priority to ensure that these systems are not
compromised, as this could lead to severe consequences, such as unauthorized access
to sensitive information or restricted areas.
If the quality of the captured face images is of low quality, the performance of Face
Recognition Systems will be severely impacted. To tackle this, Face Image Quality
Assessment (FIQA) are employed to estimate the utility of captured face images for
use in Face Recognition Systems [4]. Face Image Quality Assessment can consist of
either a series of smaller individual quality components or a single monolithic algorithm
producing a unified Quality Score (QS). The ISO/IEC DIS 29794-5:2024 [1] standard
proposal defines a series of quality components and their associated quality assessment
algorithms. However, the ISO/IEC DIS 29794-5:2024 standard proposal also lists a
series of quality components without a quality assessment algorithm formulated or
tested as of the proposal submission. One of these quality components is the one for
motion blur prevention. Motion blur can occur with travelers using Automated Border
Control (ABC) gates, as there is not always manual supervision of all gates, and thus,
there could be situations where sub-optimal probe face images are captured. The ABC
gates are used in airports to improve passenger flow [5].
In this master thesis, I developed and evaluated Face Image Quality Assessment
quality components using classic computer vision and machine learning methods to
estimate motion blur intensity on both face images with real and synthetic motion
blur.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Face Recognition
Systems (FRS)
In this chapter, I will introduce the concepts for Face Recognition Systems (FRS) in
general, along with Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA), motion blur, and some
potential applications of FRS.
Face recognition is a subfield within the broader field of biometric authentication,
which deals with identifying or verifying individuals by analyzing and comparing bio-
metric features.
Modern FRS, such as ArcFace [6], specifically works by extracting mappings of face
images to features using deep Convolutional Neural Networks, which can be stored as
mathematical representations and be compared by a computer in a process called face
comparison to perform face verification or identification [6]–[9].
2.1
Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA)
It is paramount for the performance of FRS that the presented samples are of suﬀicient
quality. Accepting samples of insuﬀicient quality will degrade the performance of FRS.
To ensure that the stored reference face image samples are of suﬀicient quality, as well
as any captured probe image samples, Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) is used
to assess the utility of a face image for a FRS [4], [10].
FIQA can be performed as a series of individual quality components, where each
component assesses the quality of the individual aspects of the face image to be eval-
uated or as a single monolithic algorithm that produces a unified Quality Score (QS).
In this thesis, I have been working with a quality component. Quality components
typically have a specific algorithm defined for them, if such exists, which can be seen
in the ISO/IEC DIS 29794:5-2024 standard [1].
These quality components can be
further categorized into either capture-related or subject-related components [1]. Ex-
ternal conditions influence capture-related quality components of the captured subject,
such as the capture device or the lighting. Subject-related quality components, such
as pose, inter-eye distance (IED), or motion blur prevention, are influenced by the sub-
ject. While some quality components have a clear definition of being either capture- or
subject-related, others may be subject to a mixture and capture- and subject-related
properties [4].
==PAGE:11==
2.2 Motion Blur
3
An example of the implementation of various quality components is the Open Source
Face Image Quality (OFIQ) framework [11], which is an open-source reference imple-
mentation of the still-under-development, ISO/IEC DIS 29794-5:2024 [1] standard,
developed by the German Federal Oﬀice for Information Security (BSI). The goal of
the OFIQ framework is to enable transparent and detailed quality assessment of facial
images in the future, which can be used in commercial and government applications in
Europe and the rest of the world. Since the framework is open-source, anyone can re-
view the implementations to ensure they align with the design specified in the ISO/IEC
DIS 29794-5:2024 standard and propose potential improvements.
Currently, a series of standardization and evaluation work is being conducted on
quality assessment algorithms. This includes the NIST Specific Image Defect Detection
(SIDD) track, part of the larger ongoing Face Analysis Technology Evaluation (FATE)
activity, which aims to support quality assessment in general, along with the current
ISO/IEC DIS 29794-5:2024 standard, which is currently in the process of being finalized.
Some quality components do not yet have a quality assessment algorithm formulated or
tested as of the ISO/IEC DIS 29794-5:2024 standard proposal [1, Appendix D]. One of
these quality components is the one for motion blur prevention, which was investigated
in this thesis. Motion blur can generally both be considered a capture- and subject-
related measure, but the motion blur happens for different reasons. Capture-related
motion blur occurs if the capture device is moved during the capture process or if the
capture device is misconfigured for the environment, with a shutter speed that is too
long. On the other hand, subject-related motion blur occurs if the subject is moving
during the capturing process. Another closely related quality measure is sharpness,
which is considered a capture-related measure since a loss of sharpness can occur if
the capture device is misconfigured. These misconfigurations could be damaged, low-
quality camera components, or incorrectly set focus [4].
2.2
Motion Blur
Motion blur is a specific category of blur that happens because of the movement of
either the subject or the capturing device while capturing the image. The captured
motion blur is a projection of the captured motion path of the subject onto the image
plane. Most often, in the case of FRS, the capturing device will be stationary. There-
fore, the captured motion path will be due to the subject’s translation and rotation.
When the light is limited during the capturing process, motion blur is more likely due
to the extended exposure time. When the exposure time is long, these motion paths
can be more significant, resulting in more noticeable motion blur. Therefore, motion
blur can typically be reduced by increasing the available light in the scene, such that
the shutter time of the camera can be minimized [12].
One situation where motion blur could occur would be with travelers in Automated
Border Control (ABC) gates. In these automatic gates, there is no manual supervision
of all individual gates, and therefore, there could be situations where sub-optimal
probe face images are captured. The quality component algorithm should be capable
of detecting these sub-optimal probe face images, whether they contain motion blur
==PAGE:12==
2.3 Applications of Face Recognition Systems
4
or not, then either retry the capture after providing actionable feedback to the user or
redirect to a manual border control gate, depending on the implementation.
2.3
Applications of Face Recognition Systems
FRS have become widely adopted in fields such as border control, law enforcement, and
surveillance systems, where either identification or authentication are needed.
The
appeal of FRS is the non-intrusive nature, ease of use, and high availability of the
technology [8], [13].
One prime example of the application of FRS is by the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) in their implementation of biometrics storage in passports, also
known as electronic Machine Readable Travel Documents (eMRTD). This enables the
member countries to store high-resolution reference face images of the document holders
on an integrated circuit within the eMRTD, along with further optional fingerprint
and iris biometric data, in a globally interoperable way. The biometric data stored
in the eMRTD allows border control of member countries to perform verification of
the passport holder, along with searching in various databases for information on the
document holder, whether they hold multiple eMRTD under several identities or have
a criminal record. In this way, the stored biometric data also allow two-, three- or
four-way identity checks if desired, reducing the risk of falsification of eMRTD [14].
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 3
Related Works
In this chapter, I will introduce some related works to the work I am conducting. This
includes some preexisting proposed motion blur detection or estimation methods, as
well as Error versus Discard Characteristic (EDC) curves and their partial Area Under
Curve (pAUC) values for evaluating quality assessment algorithms.
3.1
Existing Methods
A lot of different work has been performed already in an attempt to estimate the inten-
sity of motion blur in images correctly. In [15], it is described how it may seem logical
that sharper images also contain more edges relatively compared to blurred images.
Thus, simple edge detection filters might be used to estimate image sharpness and mo-
tion blur. For example, Marziliano, Dufaux, Winkler, et al. proposed the application of
the widely recognized Sobel operator to estimate image sharpness [16]. Alternatively,
other edge detection filters, such as the Laplacian filter, can be utilized for sharpness
estimation, as demonstrated in [17]. Ferzli and Karam illustrated in [17] that specific
image sharpness metrics may inaccurately assess image sharpness when confronted with
Gaussian noise. To address this issue, a noise-resistant wavelet-based sharpness met-
ric is suggested, leveraging the concept of Lipschitz regularity to distinguish between
edges and noise singularities. Following this, Bahrami and Kot introduced a compu-
tationally eﬀicient method [18]. They defined each pixel’s maximum local variation
(MLV) as its maximum intensity change among its eight neighbors. The distribution
of MLVs across pixels reflects overall sharpness.
A weighting scheme is applied to
the MLVs to prioritize high-intensity variations as sharper features, assigning greater
weights to more significant variations. Ultimately, the standard deviation of weighted
MLV distribution serves as a metric for assessing image sharpness.
Zhao, Fang, and Tang employ the expectation of wavelet transform coeﬀicients
to estimate image sharpness, leveraging the observation that higher probabilities of
significant detail coeﬀicients correlate with sharper images [19].
This method com-
putes expectation values from three wavelet sub-bands obtained via separable discrete
wavelet transform combined through weighted summation. Hassen, Wang, and Salama
propose a technique utilizing Local Phase Coherence (LPC), motivated by the disrup-
tion of LPC structure by image blur, where LPC strength serves as a measure of
sharpness [20]. Li, Wu, Wu, et al. introduce an image sharpness measure based on
patch-based sparse coeﬀicients for a pre-learned dictionary [21]. They compute patch
energies and estimate sharpness as the variance-normalized energy over high-variance
blocks, achieved by normalizing total block energy using corresponding block variances.
==PAGE:14==
3.1 Existing Methods
6
Gu, Zhai, Lin, et al. presents a sharpness metric in the autoregressive parameter space
[22]. They estimate energy- and contrast differences in locally estimated autoregressive
coeﬀicients and quantify sharpness through percentile pooling.
Various methods have been proposed in the scientific literature for detecting blurry
regions in partially blurred images, which could serve as sharpness metrics. These blur
detection and classification approaches, exemplified in [23]–[27] typically aim at pixel-
wise three-classification (sharp, defocus, motion blur) through analysis of neighboring
pixels.
These schemes commonly involve feature extraction followed by pixel-wise
classification, often employing machine learning techniques.
Kumar, Gupta, and Venkatesh proposed an innovative approach to estimate con-
current defocus and motion blurs within a single image [28]. They demonstrate the
modeling and analysis of motion blur using Gaussian functions. Additionally, they
establish and experimentally validate relationships between equivalent Gaussian pa-
rameters and motion blur length (intensity). These relationships enhance the accuracy
of defocus map estimation from a single image by correcting for spatially varying mo-
tion blur.
Varindani, Zhang, and Zhu developed a novel Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-
based motion blur estimation method from local patches of an image [29]. Since motion
blur estimation can be applied to both general and face images, this can be considered
relevant for further investigation. Varindani, Zhang, and Zhu did not conduct any
thorough evaluation compared to existing methods, and therefore, the effectiveness
of their implementation is unknown relative to other methods. Kim, Son, Park, et
al. introduce a method for detecting defocus and motion blur in images using a deep
CNN with long residual skip-connections and multi-scale reconstruction loss functions
[30]. By leveraging high-level contextual features and a synthetic dataset with both
types of blur, the approach effectively detects and classifies blur. Sun, Cao, Xu, et al.
presents a novel deep learning approach to estimate and remove non-uniform motion
blur from blurry images [31]. The method uses a CNN to predict the probabilistic
distribution of motion blur at the patch level. The candidate set of motion kernels is
expanded through careful image rotations and a Markov random field model, leading
to the inference of a dense non-uniform motion blur field enforcing motion smoothness.
The proposed approach effectively handles complex non-uniform motion blur, achiev-
ing state-of-the-art results in motion deblurring. Lijun, Xiaohu, Fei, et al. presents a
multi-branch face quality assessment (MFQA) algorithm that considers measures af-
fecting face recognition, including blur [32]. Using a lightweight CNN, the algorithm
extracts features and predicts quality scores for alignment, visibility, deflection, and
clarity. These scores are fused to provide a final quality confidence metric.
What is notable about the methods mentioned above is that they are either only
described in theory, without any functioning reference implementation, or the reference
implementation cannot provide the required output to be used as a FIQA quality value
for motion blur prevention. The methods evaluated by NIST in the SIDD track [33] are
also not public and are only assessed on synthetically blurred images using Gaussian
blur. The closest thing to an applicable method with a public reference implementation
would be the OFIQ framework’s sharpness measure, which I will compare my results
against. It should, however, be noted that such sharpness measure is not designed to
capture directional motion, but rather quality defects such as optical blur or loss of
==PAGE:15==
3.2 Error versus Discard Characteristic (EDC)
7
focus [1].
3.2
Error versus Discard Characteristic (EDC)
The Error versus Discard Characteristic (EDC) curve is being regarded as the de facto
standard for the evaluation of quality assessment methods. It is also standardized as
part of the ISO/IEC 29794-1:2024 standard [34]. EDC curves visually represent how
the error rate might change as samples are progressively discarded, based on their
QS. The EDC curve can be used for several biometric quality assessment algorithms,
including face image and fingerprint quality assessment algorithms. The partial Area
Under Curve (pAUC) metric from the EDC curves serves as a quantitative metric for
evaluating the predictive performance of, for example, FIQA methods. By calculating
the area under the curve for a specific discard fraction limit that is operationally
relevant1, it is possible to rank and compare the different methods quantitatively based
on their effectiveness in assessing the quality of face images [10].
An individual instance of an EDC curve consists of several components. The first
and most significant is the type of error utilized.
Typically, this is the False Non-
Match Rate (FNMR) in the case of EDC, and when used for EDC, it is typically
abbreviated as FNM-EDC and is also what is being utilized in this thesis [10]. Secondly,
a set of comparisons is used, where each comparison processes a pair of samples as
input and one Comparison Score (CS) as the output.
The error type determines
the type of comparison computed.
For FNM-EDC curves, mated comparisons are
performed, which are comparisons of a probe and a reference from the same biometric
capture subject [35]. Since a CS must be computed, a biometric recognition system is
also utilized to calculate these CSs. Finally, and most importantly, a series of FIQA
methods are required since these are what is being evaluated and what is computing
the QSs for the samples. A function is also used to compute a pairwise QS for each
pair of samples from their respective QSs. When visualizing an EDC curve, this is
what is being represented. Usually, this function computes the pairwise minimum of
the QSs [10]. An example of a FNM-EDC curve can be seen in Figure 7.1 later in the
thesis.
1A biometric system in operation discarding more than 20% of captured samples would not be
considered successful [10].
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 4
Theory
In this chapter, I will present various theoretical topics relevant to understanding the
design decisions for implementing the quality component of motion blur estimation in
FIQA. Some topics are exclusively used in the classic computer vision method, while
others are used exclusively in the machine learning method, and some might be used
in both methods.
4.1
Luminance Conversion
Many computer vision techniques rely on the invariance of illumination to derive mean-
ing from images captured under varying lighting conditions [36]. Consistent lighting
conditions cannot be guaranteed for the input images because the capture environ-
ments for face images can vary wildly from dedicated photo booths with a uniform
background to an image captured at an automated border control gate, where the
lighting conditions may vary wildly depending on the location and time of the day.
The method utilized can be seen in the steps enumerated below [37], and an example
of the luminance conversion can be seen in Figure 4.1(b).
1. Scale R, G, and B to the interval [0; 1], where R, G, and B denote the pixel’s red,
green, and blue channels respectively:
r = R/255
g = G/255
b = B/255
2. Do gamma compression:
a) RL = ColorConvert(r)
b) GL = ColorConvert(g)
c) BL = ColorConvert(b)
3. where
ColorConvert(V ) =





(V + 0.055
1.055
)2.4
if V > 0.04045
V
12.92
if V ≤0.04045
4. Compute the luminance
Y = 0.2126RL + 0.7152GL + 0.0722BL
==PAGE:17==
4.2 Hann Windowing
9
producing a normalized value between [0; 1].
5. Scale the normalized luminance to an integer in the interval [0; 255] by setting
Y ′ = FLOOR (256Y )
(a) Synthetically blurred input image, orig-
inally from FRLL [38] dataset.
(b) Luminance conversion applied to Fig-
ure 4.1(a).
Figure 4.1: Example application of luminance conversion.
4.2
Hann Windowing
The Hann window, also known as the Hanning Window or the Cosine Bell function, is
a signal processing method used to smoothen values in both one- and two-dimensional
signals. Window filtering is generally a common preprocessing step for frequency anal-
ysis, such as Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT), which will be introduced in Section
4.3. Window filtering is utilized to reduce boundary and periodic artifacts in Fourier
transforms [39]. These window filtering functions are characterized by having the value
zero or near zero outside a specific interval, defined as part of the function.
Hann windowing is known to be effective at removing these boundary artifacts but
also has the drawback of emphasizing the central region of the input image. How-
ever, in the domain of face recognition, this drawback can be considered insignificant
since images used in face recognition are often preprocessed with face detection and
landmarking algorithms, which center and crop the input images before further pro-
cessing [39]. By removing these boundary artifacts in face recognition, we can reduce
the influence of the noise from the background of the input face images and minimize
the spectral leakage when performing discrete Fourier transformation and Magnitude
Spectrum transformation [40, Chap. 6.4].
==PAGE:18==
4.3 Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
10
There is another windowing function that is quite similar to the Hann window,
named the Hamming window. The only difference between these two windowing func-
tions is the value for α, where Hann uses α = 0.5, and Hamming uses α = 0.54. The
Hann window in one dimension can be calculated as shown in Equation 4.1 [41, Chap.
5.4.6.1], where the signal is centered at x = 0, If the signal starts at x = 0 instead, the
limit can be defined as 0 ≤x ≤N −1.
Hann/Hamming(x) =



α + (1 −α) cos 2πx
N −1
|x| < N −1
2
0
Otherwise
(4.1)
The Hann window in two dimensions can then be calculated as the outer product
of two vectors representing the x- and y-axis.
An example of applying the Hann window to the luminance-converted image from
Section 4.1 can be seen in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Hann window applied to image from Figure 4.1(b).
4.3
Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
For working with the representation and analysis of signals and images in the frequency
domain, Fourier transformation is often applied to decompose the signals into sine and
cosine functions [42]. Meanwhile, most operations and techniques on images can be
applied in the traditional spatial domain, certain operations and methods are more
easily applied in the frequency domain. One such technique is edge and motion blur
detection since they can be considered related [42].
In this section, I will focus on the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) in two di-
mensions since this applies to image analysis, such as what is being performed in this
thesis.
The definition of the two-dimensional DFT for an image g (u, v) of size M × N is
as follows:
==PAGE:19==
4.3 Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
11
G (m, n) =
1
√
MN
M−1
∑
u=0
N−1
∑
v=0
g (u, v) e−i2π( mu
M + nv
N )
for spectral coordinates m = 0, . . . , M −1 and n = 0, . . . , N −1. Before the sums, we
see the normalization factor
1
√
MN , which is in place to ensure that the transformation
is unitary, such that the total energy of the signal is preserved between the spatial and
frequency domains. This is relevant since the original spatial domain image can be
restored using the inverse DFT in two dimensions, which is defined as follows:
g (u, v) =
1
√
MN
M−1
∑
m=0
N−1
∑
n=0
G (m, n) ei2π( mu
M + nv
N )
for spatial coordinates u = 0, . . . , M −1 and v = 0, . . . , N −1 [43].
Because of the complex properties of the Fourier transformation, there is no simple,
direct way to visualize the full 2D complex-valued output. The most common method,
and also the one applied here in this thesis, displays the absolute values of the complex
output, for the case of Fourier transformation is |G(m, n)| [43]. This spectrum is also
known as the magnitude or power spectrum.
Due to the nature of regular images, their spectral energy often concentrates at
lower frequencies, in particular, noticeable with a clear maximum at the center (0, 0).
Because the spectral energy is often concentrated at lower frequencies, the smaller
values can be challenging to visualize if attempting to display the values linearly. As
such, frequently, the logarithm is applied to the magnitude spectrum to enable the
visualization of the full spectrum, such as log10 |G (m, n)| [43].
The clear maximum at the center of (0, 0) does not appear without altering the view
of the output. Since the Fourier transformation is the decomposition of a signal into
sine and cosine waves, the output from the Fourier transformation is indeed periodic.
Thus, this centered representation of the Fourier spectrum can be defined as
−⌊M
2 ⌋≤m ≤⌊M−1
2
⌋
and
−⌊N
2 ⌋≤n ≤⌊N−1
2 ⌋
where m and n are the coordinates [43].
Besides motion blur detection, which is the focus of this thesis, two-dimensional
discrete Fourier transformation is also used in several other applications within image
analysis, filtering, and reconstruction.
Filters with large kernel sizes can be computationally expensive to apply to images;
meanwhile, if transforming the image and filter kernel to frequency space and then
simply performing a pointwise multiplication, the filter is applied after performing the
inverse Fourier transformation on the result [43].
Due to the frequency nature of the Fourier transform, low- and high-pass filters
are very quickly specified and applied within the frequency spectrum. This property
is also used later in conjunction with the Cepstrum transformation, as seen in Section
4.4. High-pass filters can also be used in edge detection, as mentioned in [44].
In Figure 4.3(a), the application of the DFT on the image from Figure 4.2, fol-
lowed by the logarithm of the magnitude spectrum and centered representation. In
==PAGE:20==
4.4 Cepstrum Transformation and Analysis
12
Figure 4.3(b), a low- and high-pass filter have also been applied to the same magnitude
spectrum.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Application of log10 magnitude spectrum (a) on Hann-windowed image
from Figure 4.2 and a low- and high-pass filter applied to said magnitude
spectrum (b).
Finally, there is the field of image reconstruction, where one can construct inverse
filters, which can be applied to an image in the frequency spectrum, and then, after
performing the inverse Fourier transformation, will reveal an image with the pattern
or blur removed. However, these filters can be challenging to construct and often lead
to introducing noise into the image [43].
4.4
Cepstrum Transformation and Analysis
The Cepstrum transform is a mathematical transformation closely related to the Fourier
transform. This is because it is a clever use of the inverse Fourier transformation on
the log-transformed magnitude spectrum, allowing the detection of periodic patterns
in spectra [45]. These peaks can, for example, be detected using simple peak detection
algorithms when the two-dimensional data is averaged into a one-dimensional array.
The definition of the real Cepstrum transformation is given as
cs (u, v) = F−1 (log10 |F (g (u, v))|)
given a image g (u, v) from [46] but extrapolated to two dimensions, as also seen in
[47].
The word ”Cepstrum” comes from reversing the first four letters of ”Spectrum”.
Likewise, the frequency of a Cepstrum is named ”Quefrency”, coming from the original
word ”Frequency” [45].
==PAGE:21==
4.4 Cepstrum Transformation and Analysis
13
Figure 4.4: Cepstrum transformation of Figure 4.3(b). Dynamic range has been re-
duced to increase the perception of Cepstrum.
Figure 4.4 shows an example of a Cepstrum transformation. Under normal circum-
stances, the signal would be a lot harder to see due to a very prominent peak in the
signal at the center, but for illustrative purposes, the image’s dynamic range has been
reduced such that more of the Cepstrum is visually perceivable.
Cepstrum transformation and analysis were initially used for sound processing, in-
cluding petrol exploration, utilizing the properties of differences in the reflectiveness
of different materials in the ground, calculating the RPM in machines from the sound
emitted, as well as speech analysis, which today is one of the primary uses for Cepstrum
analysis [45].
In 2011, Park, Kim, Chang, et al. proposed a novel method for the estimation
of parameters of motion blur with the use of Cepstrum analysis, without any other
transformation methods for estimating the angle, but using the difference of Gaussian
as the input for the Cepstrum transform. Their method has shown decent results in
synthetically blurred images. However, results are only presented for experiments with
either locked motion orientation or length, not with both variables simultaneously.
Their demonstration on images with real motion blur, concerning restoring original
images, shows that their method can be applied to images with real motion blur,
although not perfectly [47].
In 2019, Shi and Gong proposed another method for parameter identification for
motion-blurred images using Cepstrum analysis. However, rather than just focusing on
motion blur, they also investigate defocus blur and the mix of both of these blur types.
Shi and Gong utilize a radon transform of the Cepstrum to identify the motion blur
direction by observing the maxima of the Radon transformed Cepstrum. Then, they
rotate the Cepstrum according to the motion blur direction to estimate the motion
blur length by finding a local minimum in the summed one-dimensional array of the
Cepstrum, as introduced previously. Their results show high correct identification rates
with minor errors for the scopes specified in their paper but seem only to have been
==PAGE:22==
4.5 Radon Transform
14
verified on synthetically blurred images [48].
4.5
Radon Transform
Radon transform was invented in 1917 and is commonly used in computer tomography
to study data from X-ray emissive devices. Radon transform allows the visualization
of individual slices of these X-ray data samples [49]. Given a two-dimensional function
f defined in the plane, the function Rf represents the Radon transformed output with
t and θ as the arguments. This allows for the following definition
Rf (t, θ) =
∫
ℓt,θ
fds
=
∫∞
s=−∞
f (t cos (θ) −s sin (θ) , t sin (θ) + s cos (θ)) ds.
Since the input f is a two-dimensional planar function, it has the Cartesian coor-
dinates x and y, where Rf is a function of polar coordinates t and θ. The definition
shows that for any choice of f, t, and θ, Rf (t, θ) represents the value of the definite
integral. It can also be observed that the variable of integration is s, and therefore,
the variables t and θ should be interpreted as constant during the evaluation of the
integral [49].
The visualization of the Radon transform is called a ”sinogram” and can be pro-
duced by treating t and θ as rectangular coordinates. The term sinogram represents
the periodic symmetry Rf (−t, θ + π) = Rf (t, θ) [49]. In Figure 4.5, such a sinogram
of the magnitude spectrum from Figure 4.3(b) can be seen.
Figure 4.5: Sinogram of Figure 4.3(b). During the integral of the Radon transform,
when θ is parallel to the lines, a peak occurs in the middle. The diamond
shape of the sinogram shows this..
As mentioned in Section 4.4, Shi and Gong proposed a method to utilize the Radon
transform of the Cepstrum to identify the motion blur direction [48].
==PAGE:23==
4.6 Machine Learning
15
4.6
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a subset of the larger computer science field of artificial intelligence.
Artificial intelligence, in general, is the discipline that allows computers to learn from
existing information and then apply this learned experience to perform similar tasks,
potentially in entirely other domains [50].
Machine learning, specifically, learns patterns from the initial data provided to the
model and then makes predictions on new data from the patterns learned from the
initial data.
4.6.1
Categories of Machine Learning Methods
Machine learning can be divided into two major categories, supervised and unsuper-
vised learning, along with a couple of smaller ones, semisupervised and reinforcement
learning [50].
Supervised Learning
Supervised learning is training a machine learning model on
a labeled dataset, such that when training the model, a loss can be used to assess the
model’s performance. This loss is then used as a minimization target of the training
process and allows for the tuning of internal weights within the model to improve
performance. Supervised learning is often used for classification or regression problems
[50].
Unsupervised Learning
The machine learning model is trained on an unlabeled
dataset in unsupervised learning. This means that the model cannot learn what is
necessarily correct. Instead, the model is learning the ability to detect patterns in the
initial dataset, which it then can do on other datasets later on [50]. Unsupervised
learning is often used for clustering problems, where each data point needs to be given
a specific cluster where it belongs.
Semisupervised Learning
Semisupervised learning is a hybrid of both supervised
and unsupervised. In semisupervised learning, the model is trained on a dataset where
some are labeled, and the rest are unlabeled. Usually, most of the training dataset
is unlabeled for the model to learn the patterns in the dataset from the more minor
labeled part [50]. Semisupervised learning can be beneficial if you have a lot of data,
but manually labeling all the data is too resource-intensive.
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning is a machine learning type used
to solve decision-making problems. This is done by finding the optimal policy during
training to maximize the long-term rewards. In reinforcement learning, when the model
needs to make a decision, correct decisions reward the algorithm, whereas incorrect
decisions do the opposite and punish the model.
This enables the model to learn
behaviors to achieve the specified goal by generating rewards accordingly [51].
==PAGE:24==
4.6 Machine Learning
16
When it is decided to use machine learning, it is crucial to carefully determine
what type of machine learning approach to apply. Very broadly, if an initially labeled
dataset is provided, supervised learning is applied [50].
As previously mentioned, supervised learning problems are often further classified
into regression and classification problems. In regression problems, machine learning is
used to predict the value of a data point in a continuous dataset, where it is desired to
determine the relationship between one dependent variable and one or more indepen-
dent variables. In layperson’s terms, this type of algorithm may also be known as data
interpolation. As for classification problems, it deals with dividing data based on the
features learned from the training dataset into a given set of classes. The more complex
the features of the input data, the more diﬀicult it can be to perform this classification
using traditional manual methods. This is where machine learning classification can
prove very beneficial [50].
4.6.2
Machine Learning Workflow
When working with machine learning, the workflow is often constructed, as described
in the following paragraphs. This workflow briefly describes some of the steps that can
be taken to enhance the machine learning model’s performance as the end product.
4.6.2.1
Dataset Collection
The collection of the dataset is the initial step of this workflow since it creates the basis
for all further work. When collecting the dataset, it is vital to attempt to ensure an
even distribution of data. For the classification problem, it can be an even distribution
of ground truth classes. If the collected dataset is not somewhat evenly distributed,
you can run the risk of introducing unwanted bias into the trained model, which will
hurt performance, in the end [50]. In this thesis, a dataset called the Essen Darmstadt
Motion Blur (EDAMB) dataset was provided by the NBL for this thesis, so I will not
focus much on the dataset collection process. This dataset will be formally introduced
in Section 6.1.1.
4.6.2.2
Preprocessing
Like the dataset collection step, the preprocessing step can be surprisingly substantial.
This is because, in this step, the collected data will be prepared for the training of the
machine learning model. These preprocessing steps can enhance training performance,
both concerning the accuracy of the end product and the time required to perform the
training. Some of the steps to be performed during preprocessing are as follows:
Processing Missing Data
In the collected dataset, there might be instances where
the data is incomplete. This could, for example, be missing values from a series of
numbers or a table or unknown ground truth classifications. Rather than manually
attempting to complete these missing values, it is commonly dealt with purely program-
matically. This could either be by simply removing any data points in the dataset that
==PAGE:25==
4.6 Machine Learning
17
contain missing or invalid values, but could also be by imputing the missing values
with libraries such as scikit-learn, filling the values by constant or a mean of the cor-
rect values, for example [50].
Standardization and Normalization
Often, some feature scaling is also applied,
such that all of the values in the dataset come into some similar workable range. This
can either be standardization or normalization. Standardization involves scaling the
values of the dataset in such a way that it has the mean and standard deviation of 0 and
1, respectively, and is primarily used when the dataset follows a normal distribution
already. Standardized datasets do not have any bounding range for which the values
are limited to. On the other hand, normalization scales all data points into the range
[0, 1]. This is useful when there is uncertainty in the distribution of the data points, or
they do not follow the normal distribution [50].
Data Augmentation
Another step that might be performed as part of the prepro-
cessing procedure is data augmentation. These augmentations can help by supplement-
ing datasets with less than the desired amount of data. In theory, the more data fed
to the machine learning model during the next step, training, the better chance it has
to perform well. Data augmentation works by synthetically increasing the amount of
training data available to the model by creating modified data from existing data [50].
Regarding image processing models, this may include, but is not limited to, rotation,
scaling, blurring, contrast, and brightness modifications and projections.
Dataset Splitting
Finally, before beginning the training process, the dataset must
be split into subsets. These sets include the training, testing, and potential valida-
tion sets. During training, it is crucial to ensure the model does not under- or overfit.
Underfitting means that the trained machine learning model cannot capture the com-
plexity of the data, as required. Underfitting can be solved with dataset splitting, but
the underlying machine learning model and the dataset should be investigated as po-
tential culprits for underfitting if this is being identified. On the other hand, overfitting
is when the trained machine learning model begins to learn data from the noise and
irrelevant details in the data, thus reducing the accuracy on the test dataset. The pro-
cess of dataset splitting can help against overfitting and thus improve the performance
of the final model. This is because the validation subset can validate the performance
during training on unseen data. This means that the validation subset is not used to
tune the parameters and weights of the model. This can also help with selecting the po-
tentially best version of the model during training, as when the validation performance
stops improving, theoretically, the best achievable model have been found. The test
subset is used after training is complete for the evaluation step. The validation and
test subset are typically 20% of the entire dataset each, and then the training subset
is the remaining 60-80%, depending on whether a validation subset is utilized [50].
==PAGE:26==
4.6 Machine Learning
18
4.6.2.3
Training
The training step of the machine learning workflow is probably the most iconic. This
is where the parameters and weights of the model are tuned in such a way as to
optimize accuracy. The tuning is done based on a loss function. This loss function is
also considered an error function, which describes the error between the predicted and
ground truth values. The model then aims to minimize the error function to maximize
accuracy. A small loss value can be accepted, but the use case and criticality of the
application of the output entirely determine the acceptable magnitude of this. In this
thesis, the loss function used during training is cross-entropy loss. This loss function
is heavily used in machine learning for classification problems, which is also why it
has been applied here. In the notion of cross-entropy loss, entropy denotes the level of
information, or potentially the uncertainty, of a given variable’s outcome. In this case,
the variable is the prediction. The formula for Loss is given by Equation 4.2, where
n is the number of classes, yi is the ground truth probabilities, ˆyi is the predicted
probabilities [50].
LCE = −
n
∑
i=1
yi log (ˆy1)
(4.2)
Usually, the log to the base 2 is used for the cross-entropy loss but can vary by
application. In the Pytorch library used in this thesis, log to the base e is used without
any explicit reason, but it can be argued to be reasonably close to 2 and is consistent
with this implementation decision.
4.6.2.4
Evaluation
Evaluation is the final step of the machine learning workflow. Many methods exist
to evaluate a machine learning model, and some of the metrics used in this thesis are
introduced in section 4.6.5 and are therefore not introduced yet.
To reiterate, why it can be beneficial to use machine learning for the classification
problem, as done in this thesis.
This is because the classification problem can be
diﬀicult to model for complex data manually, and conveniently, humans do not need to
program every action for a machine learning model explicitly but can potentially rely
on existing general-purpose machine learning models and utilize the vast amounts of
computing power available these days for training these models for the specific use-case.
Because of this, I will dive deeper into deep learning in the next section.
4.6.3
Deep Learning
As briefly hinted above, in recent years, the amount of computational resources has
increased manyfold, which has allowed for greatly accelerated development of modern
artificial intelligence methods. One of the biggest beneficiaries of this is the deep learn-
ing method, which is heavily dependent on vast amounts of computational resources
[50].
In particular, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become very popular and have
also proven to perform well in many applications across many domains, including image-
==PAGE:27==
4.6 Machine Learning
19
and speech workloads. DNNs are constructed using a large number of a specific core
component, called neurons. A single neuron is in itself ”just” a basic mathematical
formula that takes some input value, weights, and biases to predict an output value.
What makes DNNs powerful is the massive number of neurons they are built of, which
are capable of solving complex problems. When training a neural network model, these
weights and biases are being adjusted to encompass the target data and hopefully make
meaningful predictions [50]. The more intricate details and inner workings of neurons
in neural networks are left up to literature, such as [50].
DNNs are just the broad general term for a group of different neural networks,
which will be introduced in the following subsections. I will focus on Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs), which will be used later in this thesis.
4.6.3.1
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are also known as Feed-forward Neural Networks
(FNNs), meaning that the information in the network only flows in one direction:
forward. They are constructed by placing many neurons together at specific layers.
ANNs require at least one input layer, one output layer, and one to many hidden layers.
If there is more than one hidden layer in the ANN, it is also commonly recognized as a
deep neural network. The input layer takes features from the data as inputs and has a
neuron count equal to the features of the input data. The output layer has a number
of neurons equal to the class count in case of classification problems [50]. Figure 4.6
shows an example of a simple ANN with one hidden layer.
Figure 4.6: An example ANN, which takes three features as input, has five neurons
in the single hidden layer and two neurons in the output layer, meaning
it can return two different results [50].
==PAGE:28==
4.6 Machine Learning
20
4.6.3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
Another type of neural network is a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). This net-
work architecture is prevalent in image classification tasks to the degree that most
image classification tasks utilize CNNs as part of their workflow [50]. Similar to ANNs,
CNNs are built from several layers but also other components. The components are con-
volution layers, pooling layers, activation functions (AFs), batch normalization (BN)
layers, and finally, a fully connected layer [50]. In the following paragraphs, I will
describe the different components of CNN.
Convolution Layer
A convolution layer contains a kernel of filters or weights and
biases, which are all trainable neural network parameters. The convolution layer is
described by a series of parameters, including the input size, filter size, and window
step, also known as stride. If the input dimensions are not divisible by the filter dimen-
sions, the input is often zero-padded such that it becomes divisible. The final output
dimensions of the result from the convolution layer depend on the input dimensions,
filter dimensions, and stride [50].
Pooling Layer
Pooling layers are often used between two convolutional layers. The
purpose of the pooling layer is to reduce the activation size of the output from the
previous convolution layer. This is done to reduce memory consumption during the
training process. Several different kinds of pooling layers exist. For example, some
simple pooling layers could be maximum or average pooling, where the pooling layer
processes the maximum or average of a patch of a given size of the output from the
previous convolution layer, such that it is ready for the following convolution layer [50].
Activation Functions (AFs)
Activation functions (AFs) are a type of function that
perform computations between hidden layers and the output layer of various neural
network architectures. In CNNs, the majority of the hidden layers are convolution and
pooling layers, as introduced above. They are used to decide whether to activate, also
known as firing, a specific neuron or not, based on a weighted sum of input and biases
[52].
The choice of AF in a neural network has a significant potential performance impact
on the final model. The selection of AF also depends on the working domain, such
as object recognition, image classification, image segmentation, or many others [53].
Likewise, the desired output is also part of the decision process for AF in the neural
network.
The AF has different roles, depending on where it is found in the neural network.
AFs placed after the hidden layers convert linear mappings into non-linear forms for
further propagation into the neural network. In contrast, AF placed after the output
layer calculates the probabilities used for the final predictions of the neural network.
Multiple choices for AFs in the same neural network are possible since the desired
behavior might differ depending on the AF’s placement. Many different AFs exist,
and many popular choices for AFs can be seen in [52]. It can be seen in [52, Table 1]
that ReLU [54] and Softmax are the most popular AFs among the model architectures
surveyed in their paper, despite not being the most recent AFs.
Newer ones also
==PAGE:29==
4.6 Machine Learning
21
seemingly outperform those older ones [52]. The AFs for the chosen base models will
be introduced later in the thesis.
Batch Normalization (BN)
Batch normalization (BN) is a layer responsible for
scaling the output between several convolutional layers, typically including additional
trainable parameters. An example of a channel-wise BN operation is shown in Equation
4.3, where Oc is the output of channel c, µc and σc are the mean and standard deviation
of the channel, respectively, γc and βc are both trainable parameters of the model and
ϵ is a small number, ensuring that division by 0 is not occurring [50].
Oc = γc
(xc −µc
√
σ2c + ϵ
+ βc
(4.3)
Fully Connected Layer
A CNN’s final fully connected layer is responsible for pre-
senting the network’s output. For this purpose, in the case of the classification problem,
the fully connected layer will have the same number of output neurons as the number
of classification classes [50].
The reason for the popularity of CNNs for object recognition, image classification,
and several other domains lies in the network architecture’s outstanding ability to
capture the semantic information in images and extract detailed feature information
from there. In broad terms, CNN architectures are generally regarded as more eﬀicient
than ANNs. This allows for a less complex network with a smaller parameter size than
an equally performing ANN. This also makes CNNs ideal for edge- and mobile devices
with constrained resources.
4.6.3.3
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), as introduced by Mikolov, Karafiát, Burget, et
al. [55], is a type of neural network that allows the capture of semantic information of
sequential data, such as words and sentences in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
[50]. Recurrent refers to the ability to use recurrent information; thus, information can
cycle inside the RNN for arbitrarily long periods. This makes them differ significantly
from the other neural networks introduced thus far since they do not possess any
long-term memory like this [55].
Since RNNs deal with sequential data, typically text or speech, further details about
this subject are left out, as it is considered out of scope for this thesis.
4.6.3.4
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) is another type of DNN that, in recent years,
has gained a lot of popularity. The network type was introduced by Goodfellow, Pouget-
Abadie, Mirza, et al. [56] and is often used to generate fake images, videos, and audio,
among other tasks [50].
GANs are constructed of two neural networks, which are faced against each other.
The first network is known as the discriminator. It discriminates between real and
==PAGE:30==
4.6 Machine Learning
22
fake data from the pool of real data and the data generated by the second network,
the generator. The generator is responsible for generating this fake data from random
noise. It aims to replicate an underlying target distribution and fool the discriminator
into classifying the fake data as real [50].
Some examples of GANs are, for instance, StyleGAN2 [57] and StyleGAN3 [58].
StyleGAN2 can synthesize artificial adversarial images for a wide range of subjects,
depending on the data source on which it has been trained [57].
Since GANs do not deal with the classification of image data, they are not the
target of this thesis and will not be explored further here.
4.6.4
Transfer Learning
Transfer Learning is the method of adapting an existing, pre-trained model from one
problem or dataset to another. This can be done by taking an existing model and
”fixing” part of the model and replacing the final output layer to suit the specific
problem at hand. This can, for example, be replacing the existing classification layer
with one, such that it can output the desired classes for the problem.
This works
because the initial convolution layers capture the low-level features, which are often
similar across different types of datasets. Then, the last few layers, and especially the
final layer, perform the classification task upon those extracted and processed features
from the earlier layers. So by just taking an existing model and replacing the final
layer with a new classification layer, also often referred to as fine-tuning, the modified
model can make predictions on a new problem [50].
4.6.5
Model Evaluation Metrics
As briefly hinted at in Section 4.6.2.4, the evaluation of machine learning models is
essential to the development of machine learning models. A wide variety of evaluation
metrics exists, and several can be used simultaneously. In this section, I will introduce
the evaluation metrics used to evaluate the models trained in this thesis.
4.6.5.1
Confusion Matrix
The confusion matrix provides an accessible and digestible overview of the performance
of a given model. Where other evaluation metrics might provide a number as a result,
the confusion matrix visualizes the distribution of the classification results. This can
help with providing more depth to the evaluation process.
For example, a model
might have the accuracy of 90 % correct classifications, but what are the remaining
10% classifications then? They could be completely wrong, indicating that the model
cannot make reliable predictions, or they could be close to the correct classifications
and argue that the model provides satisfactory performance still [50].
Figure 4.7 shows an example confusion matrix from one of my fine-tuned models.
The ground truth classifications can be seen along the Y-axis, and along the X-axis,
the predicted classifications can be seen. Thus, the correct classifications can be found
along the diagonal from the upper left corner to the lower right corner, and any wrong
==PAGE:31==
4.6 Machine Learning
23
predictions are found elsewhere in the matrix. The confusion matrix in Figure 4.7
shows a model that performs decently but tends to predict labels above the ground
truth.
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
57
7
24
6
0
1
0
0
0
15 13 28 14
1
3
4
0
2
8
4
17 13
6
7
5
0
1
0
1
8
8
2
6
11
0
2
0
0
3
5
6
10 17
3
11
0
0
1
2
1
6
12
4
23
0
0
1
0
1
8
12
1
13
0
0
0
0
0
7
4
2
37
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
19
Confusion Matrix of
pAUC_P1 on
Protocol dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 4.7: Example of a confusion matrix with ten classes, based on a classification
model fine-tuned as part of this thesis.
4.6.5.2
Accuracy
The simplest evaluation measure of a model is accuracy. It can be calculated based
on the values in the confusion matrix in Figure 4.7. If the matrix has the dimensions
of M × M, and ci,j denotes the count of occurrences in the confusion matrix at index
i, j, then the accuracy can be calculated as seen in Equation 4.4 and ranges from 0 to
1 [50].
Accuracy =
∑M
i=0 ci,i
∑M
i=0
∑M
j=0 ci,j
(4.4)
For a well-balanced dataset with almost the same number of data points for each
class, the accuracy score can be a reasonable indication of the model’s performance.
However, if the dataset is improperly balanced, the accuracy score itself cannot fully
encapsulate the model’s performance. For this reason, other evaluation metrics are
also used.
4.6.5.3
F1-Score
Another evaluation metric is the F1-score. The F1-score is a harmonic mean of two
other evaluation scores: precision and recall scores. The F1-score is used when neither
accuracy, precision, nor recall scores can fully encapsulate the performance of the model
being evaluated [50].
==PAGE:32==
4.6 Machine Learning
24
A series of different types of F1-scores exists and will be introduced in the following
paragraphs.
Binary F1-Score
The binary F1-score can be used for simple, binary classification
problems with only two classes.
To define the binary F1-score, we first introduce
precision and recall.
Precision is defined as seen in Equation 4.5 for the case of simple binary classification
problems.
Precision =
TruePositive
TruePositive + FalsePositive
(4.5)
Precision can tell how precise a given model is when making correct predictions,
which align with the ground truth [59].
Recall is defined as seen in Equation 4.6 for the case of simple binary classification
problems.
Recall =
TruePositive
TruePositive + FalseNegative
(4.6)
Recall differs from precision in that it can only tell the model’s predictive accuracy
for the correct class. This means it can quantify the model’s ability to find all correct
predictions [59].
Now that the precision and recall have been introduced, the F1-score for simple
classification problems can be introduced, as seen in Equation 4.7.
F1-score = 2 ∗
(Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
)
(4.7)
Utilizing both precision and recall, the F1-score can detect weaknesses of the model,
if any such were to exist [59].
When it comes to more complex classification problems with more classes, such as
the classification problem in this thesis, the definitions from Equation 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7
are expanded further upon. For those classification problems, there are three types of
F1-scores to consider: macro, micro, and weighted.
Macro F1-Score
The macro F1-score considers all classes equally in the calculations;
thus, any imbalances in the classes are not considered. When calculating the macro F1-
score, the macro-precision and macro-recall are also required. The definition of those
is dependent on the definition of the binary precision and recall. If the classification
problem has M classes, the macro-precision and macro-recall are simply averages of
the respective binary metrics. Their definitions can be seen in Equations 4.8 and 4.9
[59].
MacroPrecision =
∑M
m=1 Precisionm
M
(4.8)
MacroRecall =
∑M
m=1 Recallm
M
(4.9)
==PAGE:33==
4.6 Machine Learning
25
Once macro-precision and macro-recall have been defined, the macro F1-score is
simply a harmonic mean of those two values, as seen in Equation 4.10, similarly to the
binary F1-score [59].
Macro F1-score = 2 ∗
(MacroPrecision × MacroRecall
MacroPrecision + MacroRecall
)
(4.10)
Micro F1-Score
Like the macro F1-score, the micro F1-score considers all classes
equally in the calculations. This again means that any imbalances in the classes are
not considered. The micro-precision and micro-recall are defined as seen in Equations
4.11 and 4.12, where ci,j denotes the number of occurrences in the confusion matrix at
index i, j [59].
MicroPrecision =
∑M
m=1 TruePositivem
∑M
i=0
∑M
j=0 ci,j
(4.11)
MicroRecall =
∑M
m=1 TruePositivem
∑M
i=0
∑M
j=0 ci,j
(4.12)
When looking closer at Equations 4.11 and 4.12, it can be seen that they are
identical to each other, this is a side-effect of how the micro F1-score is calculated.
When reflecting further upon this, it can be seen that the micro F1-score is identical
to the accuracy score introduced previously. This can be seen in Equation 4.13 [59].
Micro F1-Score =
∑M
m=1 TruePositivem
∑M
i=0
∑M
j=0 ci,j
=
∑M
i=0 ci,i
∑M
i=0
∑M
j=0 ci,j
= Accuracy
(4.13)
Weighted F1-Score
The third and final F1-score introduced here is the weighted
F1-score, which is a modification of the macro F1-score such that it can take potential
class imbalance into account. The weighted F1-score calculates the precision and recall,
followed by the F1-score, as seen in Equations 4.5-4.7, individually for each class. When
averaging all of the F1-scores, a weight is applied to each F1-score. These weights are
the number of ground truths for each class in the data sets [59]. The final definition
for the weighted F1-score can be seen in Equation 4.14.
Weighted F1-score =
M
∑
m=1
wm × F1-scorem
(4.14)
In this thesis, the weighted F1-Score has been used to evaluate the performance of
the fine-tuned machine learning models since the EDAMB dataset used for training
has some class imbalance.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
In this chapter, I will introduce the details of the specific implementations created as
part of this thesis. These will be the methods for generating the synthetically blurred
datasets and the implementation details of the classic computer vision and machine
learning methods. Any source code files referenced in the following sections will be
relative to the root of the project folder.
5.1
Synthetically Blurred Images
To evaluate the methods developed as part of this thesis, I wish to assess the perfor-
mance of the methods with some datasets other than the EDAMB dataset. Because of
this, I have generated additional blurred datasets by synthetically blurring existing face
image datasets, such that the machine learning models can be evaluated on synthetic
and previously entirely unseen data. The implementation of the synthetic blur method
can be seen in the Jupyter notebook located at jupyter-notebooks/data_processing
/synthetic_dataset_generator.ipynb.
5.1.1
Datasets
The datasets chosen to be synthetically blurred are the full Labeled Faces in the Wild
(LFW) [60] dataset, as well as the front and 3-quarter yaw images from the Face
Research Lab London (FRLL) [38] dataset. The LFW dataset [60] was chosen because
of the large size and the wide variety of subjects and backgrounds in the images. The
full LFW [60] dataset has been used as-is in the evaluation of the methods. The LFW
[60] dataset contains 13233 images of 5739 subjects, with a varying number of images
per subject. Examples of images from the LFW [60] dataset can be seen in Figure
5.1(a). The FRLL [38] dataset was chosen because of the images’ high fidelity and
uniform background, similar to the EDAMB dataset. As mentioned, only the front
and 3-quarter yaw images from the dataset were used, which yielded a dataset size of
612 images of 102 subjects, with six images of each subject. No filtering was performed
on the datasets before applying the synthetic motion blur. Examples of the images
from the FRLL [38] dataset can be seen in Figure 5.1(b).
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Synthetically Blurred Images
27
(a) Original LFW [60] images.
(b) Original FRLL[38] images.
Figure 5.1: A random selection of original images from LFW [60] and FRLL [38] to
be synthetically blurred in Figure 5.2.
5.1.2
Blur Application Method
The method for applying synthetic motion blur to the image, the Blur Generator1
package for Python has been used. It allows for multiple kinds of blur, including lens,
Gaussian, and motion blur. This implementation differs from the one used by NIST for
the Specific Image Defect Detection (SIDD) track, as they use ImageMagick’s convert
command with the motion-blur flag [33]. The algorithm used for applying motion blur
is described in the following steps for synthetic motion blur applied with a kernel size
of N = 5 and angle θ = 45:
1. Create a zero matrix, k, of size N × N.
k =


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


2. Set the (N−1)
2
th row of k to ones.
1https://pypi.org/project/BlurGenerator/
==PAGE:36==
5.1 Synthetically Blurred Images
28
k =


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


3. Create the rotation matrix, Rot, for the given N and θ, where the center is
( N
2 −0.5
N
2 −0.5
)
and scale is 1.0, using cv2.getRotationMatrix2D2.
The equation to compute the rotation matrix is given by:
Rot =
[ α
β
(1 −α) center.x −β center.y
−β
α
β center.x + (1 −α) center.y
]
where α and β are defined as follows:
α = scale · cos θ,
β = scale · sin θ.
This gives the following rotation matrix:
Rot =
[ 0.70710678
0.70710678
−0.82842712
−0.70710678
0.70710678
2.0
]
4. Apply the found rotation matrix, Rot, to k using cv2.warpAffine3.
k =


0
0
0
0.24609375
0.15625
0
0
0.28125
1.0
0.24609375
0
0.28125
1.0
0.28125
0
0.24609375
1.0
0.28125
0
0
0.1875
0.24609375
0
0
0


5. Scale the kernel matrix, k, such that the sum is 1.0.
k = k ·
( 1.0
∑k
)
=


0
0
0
0.04512894
0.0286533
0
0
0.05157593
0.1833811
0.04512894
0
0.05157593
0.1833811
0.05157593
0
0.04512894
0.1
0.05157593
0
0
0.03438396
0.04512894
0
0
0


2https://docs.opencv.org/4.9.0/da/d54/group__imgproc__transform.html#afbbc470ce838129
14a70abfb604f4326
3https://docs.opencv.org/4.9.0/d4/d61/tutorial_warp_affine.html
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Hyperparameter Tuning with Hydra
29
6. Apply the kernel k to the image img, using cv2.filter2D4.
blurred (x, y) =
k.cols
∑
x′=0
k.rows
∑
y′=0
k (x′, y′)·img (x + x′ −(center.x) , y + y′ −(center.y))
The larger the kernel size, the more intense motion blur can be perceived. For
this reason, a mapping from kernel size to quality measure value needed to be made
to evaluate the synthetic dataset on equal terms with the EDAMB dataset. Such a
mapping has been created and can be seen in Table 5.1 by manually comparing various
images of various quality measure values from the EDAMB dataset with synthetic
blurred images, such that the kernel sizes from Table 5.1 are roughly equivalent to the
matched quality measure values.
Kernel size
1
2
4
8
12
16
22
28
34
Quality measure value
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Table 5.1: Mapping from kernel size to quality measure value.
θ
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
120
135
150
165
Table 5.2: Range of θ values that are applied to the synthetic motion blur algorithm.
When generating the blurred datasets, one permutation of each original image is
made, where one kernel size from Table 5.1 and one θ value from Table 5.2 have been
applied in the processing. This, too, differs from NIST’s SIDD implementation, as they
only apply six different displacement values between 0 and 20, and only the angle of
0 [33]. It is also unclear how many permutations of the original images they generate.
A few examples of synthetic motion blurred images can be seen in Figures 5.2(a) and
5.2(b). In Figure 5.3, a demonstration of the effect of rotation can be seen for θ values
in the range 0-180.
5.2
Hyperparameter Tuning with Hydra
A framework used across both the classic computer vision and machine learning meth-
ods is the Hydra5 hierarchical configuration framework developed by Facebook, de-
signed to configure complex applications in Python, such as machine learning and
other programs with many hyperparameters [61]. Besides just storing configurations,
the Hydra framework can also run multiple similar jobs simultaneously, which has
given the framework its name.
4https://docs.opencv.org/4.9.0/d4/d86/group__imgproc__filter.html#ga27c049795ce870216
ddfb366086b5a04
5https://hydra.cc
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Hyperparameter Tuning with Hydra
30
(a) Synthetically blurred LFW [60] images.
(b) Synthetically blurred FRLL [38] images.
Figure 5.2: Same selection of random images from Figure 5.1, now synthetically
blurred.
(a) θ = 0 / θ = 180
(b) θ = 30
(c) θ = 60
(d) θ = 90
(e) θ = 120
(f) θ = 150
Figure 5.3: Demonstration of the effect of rotation at different values of θ. It can
be seen that the rotation starts at horizontal at θ = 0 and continues
anticlockwise until it reaches horizontal again at θ = 180.
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Classic Computer Vision Method
31
The machine learning method utilizes the base multi-run functionality to generate
fine-tuned models for all possible combinations of hyperparameters. For the classic com-
puter vision method, the base multi-run functionality was extended with the Optuna
plugin6, which allows automating hyperparameter search to find the optimal hyper-
parameter definitions to achieve the best performance given one or several objective
functions. The classic computer vision method utilizes the pAUC value, as introduced
in Section 3.2, as a minimization goal for the hyperparameter search, evaluated on the
EDAMB dataset.
5.3
Classic Computer Vision Method
The classic computer vision method implemented as part of this thesis is inspired by
the methods proposed by Park, Kim, Chang, et al., [47], and Shi and Gong, [48], and
uses several subjects from the theory chapter, such as DFT, Cepstrum transformation
and Radon transform, among others. A pseudo-code example of the algorithm can be
seen in Algorithm 1, while the complete implementation can be seen in the Jupyter
notebook jupyter_notebooks/hand_crafted/motion_blur_
implementation.ipynb and the Python file src/motion_blur_estimation_methods/
hand_crafted.py. In Figures 5.4(a) - (l), visualizations of the individual steps can be
seen. In the captions of the figures, references to steps from Algorithm 1 can be found
to be able to correlate the visualizations to the algorithm. Some of the steps from
Algorithm 1 will be explained further in depth in the following sections.
5.3.1
Hyperparameters of Classic Computer Vision Method
As briefly mentioned in Section 5.2, Hydra has been used to search for the optimal
combination of hyperparameters for the designed algorithm. The list of the searchable
hyperparameters can be seen in Table 5.3, and the pAUC value was used as the mini-
mization goal for the hyperparameter search. The best variable assignment yielded is
the one seen in Table 5.3, and is also utilized later to evaluate the classic computer
vision method. These variables can be seen in step 1 of Algorithm 1.
5.3.2
High- and Low-Pass Filtering of Magnitude Spectrum
In an attempt to enhance the peak detection process later in the algorithm, both
high- and low-pass filtering have been applied to filter the magnitude spectrum. The
low-pass filter removes a lot of noise from the outer parts of the magnitude spectrum,
while the high-pass filter removes the high concentration of spectral energy at the lower
frequencies. This leaves an image with a band-pass applied to it, which retains the
periodic patterns of the magnitude spectrum while removing much of the noise. The
application of these filters can be seen in Figure 5.4(e) and step 5 of Algorithm 1.
6https://hydra.cc/docs/plugins/optuna_sweeper/
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Classic Computer Vision Method
32
Algorithm 1 Classic computer vision algorithm
1: Given: input image I, low-pass band l, high-pass band h, window size u, win-
dow sigma σ, prominence p, distance d and width w.
2: L ←LuminanceConversion(I)
3: H ←Hann(L)
4: MS ←log(|DFT(H)|)
▷Get magnitude spectrum from H
5: FMS ←HighPass(LowPass(MS, l), h)
6: C ←|DFT−1(FMS)|
▷Perform Cepstrum transformation on FMS
7: R ←Radon(FMS)
8: i ←Max(R[:, size(R.y)
2
]) ▷Get index i of maximum of R along the X-axis, on the
middle of the Y-axis
9: θ ←R[i, size(R.y)
2
]
▷Get the estimated motion blur direction θ, from R
10: if θ ≥85° then
▷Rotate C depending on θ
11:
RC ←Rotate(C, −θ −90°)
12: else
13:
RC ←Rotate(C, −θ)
14: end if
15: V ←Mean(RC, y)
▷Get the mean of RC along Y-axis
16: V S ←Smooth(V, u, σ)
▷Apply smoothing to V using u and σ
17: P ←FindPeaks(V S, p, d, w) ▷Find the locations of peaks of V S with p, d and w
18: p ←P[ size(V )
2
+ d]
▷Get first peak following the peak in the middle of V,
separated by distance d
19: r ←p −size(V )
2
▷Subtract the position of the peak in the middle of V from p
20: return r, θ
Hyperpara-
meter Name
Variable
Name in
Algo-
rithm 1
Lower
Limit
Higher
Limit
Step
Size
Best
Hyperpa-
rameter
Assign-
ment
Low-Pass Band
l
80
115
5
80
High-Pass Band
h
30
55
5
30
Window Size
u
1
5
2
3
Window Sigma
σ
0.3
0.5
0.05
0.5
Peak
Prominence
p
0.000005
0.0005
0.000005
0.000035
Peak Distance
d
3
8
1
4
Peak Width
w
1
2
1
1
Table 5.3: Searchable hyperparameters of the hyperparameter search for the classic
computer vision algorithm. These hyperparameters can be found in the
file src/config/config_hc.yaml.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Classic Computer Vision Method
33
(a) Step 1.
(b) Step 2.
(c) Step 3.
(d) Step 4.
(e) Step 5.
(f) Step 6.
(g) Step 7-9.
(h) Step 10-14.
(i) Step 15.
(j) Step 16.
(k) Step 17.
(l) Step 18-19.
Figure 5.4: Full visualization of steps performed in the classic computer vision
method shown in Algorithm 1.
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Classic Computer Vision Method
34
5.3.3
Inspection of Radon Transformed Magnitude Spectrum to Find
Motion Blur Direction
The utilization of Radon Transform for motion blur direction estimation was introduced
by Shi and Gong, and I’ve found it to work quite nicely as well. However, rather than
applying the Radon Transform to the Cepstrum, which I had some challenges with
getting to work, I found that applying it to the magnitude spectrum yielded great
results for estimating the motion blur direction of synthetically blurred images during
initial experimentation. Figure 5.4(g) shows an example of this method, where the
ground truth synthetic motion blur direction is θ = 30°. The motion blur direction
found in the Radon Transform is, in fact, also θ = 30°. In the pseudo-code of Algorithm
1, this is implemented in steps 7 through 9.
5.3.4
Rotation of Cepstrum
During the above-mentioned initial experimentation, I also made another interesting
observation that I decided to implement in my classic computer vision method. De-
pending on the motion blur direction, different methods of rotating the Cepstrum had
a noticeable impact on the accuracy of the algorithm’s final estimated motion blur
kernel size.
What was found is that once the motion blur direction, θ, got near 85°, then rotating
the Cepstrum by −θ −90° improved motion blur estimation accuracy, while up to 85°,
rotating the Cepstrum by −θ° had the best results.
Although hard to see due to the small size of the images, Figure 5.4(h) depicts the
Cepstrum of Figure 5.4(f) rotated by −30°. In the pseudo-code of Algorithm 1, this is
implemented in steps 10 through 14.
5.3.5
Peak Detection
Aside from the previously introduced theoretical methods, the classic computer vision
method utilizes peak detection as part of the algorithm to determine the final estimated
motion blur kernel size. The estimated motion blur kernel size is defined as the distance
from the tallest peak in the middle of the signal to the first peak following it. This is
done using the Python package scipy’s signal.find_peaks7 method. This method
takes a 1D array as input, finds all the local maxima of the signal, and then filters
the peaks by a wide variety of arguments. The arguments used here are the peaks’
prominence, distance, and width. The prominence of a peak is defined as the amount
the peak stands out from the surrounding signal. It is measured as the vertical distance
between the peak and the lowest contour line of the signal. Distance is defined as the
minimal horizontal distance between neighboring peaks.
Smaller peaks are always
removed first until all remaining peaks fulfill the condition. Finally, the width defines
the minimum required width of a found peak. If a peak does not fulfill the condition,
it is discarded.
7https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.signal.find_peaks.html
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
35
5.4
Machine Learning Method
This section will explain the steps to develop the machine learning method applied
in this thesis.
This includes the chosen machine learning framework, base models,
hyperparameters used for different models, and the transformations used.
A Jupyter notebook demonstrating the workflow for training the models can be seen
in jupyter_notebooks/deep_learning/fastai_implementantion.ipynb, as well as
the complete training script at src/generate_models.py and configuration in
src/config/config_fastai.yaml.
5.4.1
Fastai Framework
The fastai framework8 has been chosen to develop and implement the machine learn-
ing models. Fastai is a deep learning framework in Python that provides a series of
easy-to-use high-level components that enable rapid prototyping and simple implemen-
tation while also providing low-level components and compatibility with the PyTorch
framework9 which fastai is directly constructed with.
Different models, hyperparameters, and transformations have been evaluated to
find the best machine learning model for the motion blur quality component. More
about the models, transformations, and hyperparameters can be seen in Sections 5.4.2,
5.4.3, and 5.4.4, respectively.
5.4.1.1
Training Method
A step performed in every training session is the automatic finding of the ideal learning
rate for fine-tuning. The learning rate is regarded as one of the most critical hyper-
parameters because it ensures that the training algorithm reaches the global minima
of the training process [62]. In fastai, this is done using the lr_find function of the
Learner class. It provides the ability to find four different learning rates automati-
cally. This is done by training the model with exponentially growing learning rates in
a specified interval until divergence is seen or the complete interval has been exhausted.
The initial learning rate named ”valley” is generally regarded as the best and has also
been chosen for this implementation.
5.4.1.2
Training Callbacks
Besides the learning rate, a series of callback functions have also been utilized during
the training process to optimize the likelihood of the best possible fine-tuned model
are found in the training process. These callbacks can monitor various aspects of the
training process and are activated when certain conditions are met. Their functionality
and the monitored conditions are introduced in the following paragraphs.
8https://docs.fast.ai
9https://pytorch.org/docs
==PAGE:44==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
36
Learning Rate Reduction
The fastai framework has a training callback function
named ReduceLROnPlateau, which allows for the reduction of the learning rate during
the training process if the monitored metric stops improving. In my implementation,
the monitored metric is the validation loss, which here is the cross-entropy loss. When
it stops decreasing, then the function will divide the current set learning rate by a
factor of 10.
This allows the training process to finish by making smaller steps in
an attempt to discover a potentially better model before stopping due to the early
stopping callback.
Early Stopping
The early stopping callback function, named EarlyStoppingCallback
in fastai, allows the training process to stop before the specified number of epochs have
been reached if the monitored metrics, validation loss, stop improving beyond what is
defined in the parameters. The function is being used with the patience parameter
set to 4, which allows four consecutive training iterations to be performed, with worse
metrics than the best found, before the training process ultimately stops.
Combined with the learning rate reduction, this allows for the learning rate to be
reduced three times before stopping the training process.
These two callbacks are
used in conjunction with the model saving callback to avoid ending up with a subpar
fine-tuned model.
Model Saving
The model saving callback function, named SaveModelCallback,
allows the training process to save the best-performing iteration according to the val-
idation loss, even if it is not the final fine-tuned model before stopping. The callback
function will save the best-performing fine-tuned model to a designated location and
then load this model so that any subsequent operations will be performed with the
best-performing model.
5.4.2
Machine Learning Base Models Used
The fastai framework allows for easy use of models from the Pytorch Image Models
(timm) library10, where a wide variety of state-of-the-art computer vision models are
to be found. Because of this, these selected base models in this thesis are a choice of
models from timm that supported the input format (224×224 pixels) and had multiple
pre-trained weights for comparing different complexities of models. The base models
chosen are not the complete, exhaustive list from timm due to the time constraints of
this thesis. However, a representative selection has been attempted. The selected base
models will be briefly introduced in the following sections, and a table summarizing
the characteristics of each model and their pre-trained weights can be seen in Table
5.4. All of the training and optionally the fine-tuning has been done on a variation of
the ImageNet dataset, either the ImageNet 1k [63] dataset with 1.000 classes, a subset
of the full 21k [64] dataset, referred to as ImageNet 12k, or the full ImageNet 21k [64]
dataset.
10https://huggingface.co/docs/timm/index
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
37
5.4.2.1
ResNet
The ResNet model architecture, initially introduced in [65], is generally considered the
gold standard for many scientific publications [66] and is therefore included.
The ResNet architecture introduced the concept of deep residual learning, using
shortcut connections to perform identity mapping, thus explicitly letting the network
layers fit a residual mapping by simply adding the identity mapping to the output of
the stacked layers [65]. The ResNet architecture uses the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
AF between layers and the Softmax AF after the final fully connected layer. The AFs
will be described briefly here.
Rectified Linear Units (ReLU)
The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) AF was intro-
duced by Nair and Hinton as an attempt at creating a better AF for hidden layers
in neural networks [54]. To state anything else than that they succeeded would be
incorrect because since then, ReLU has been a commonly applied AF for hidden layers
in many model architectures [52]. The ReLU AF is as described in Equation 5.1 [54].
f (x) =
{
x
x > 0
0
x ≤0
(5.1)
Softmax
The Softmax AF is a ubiquitous AF applied in neural computing. The
Softmax function can compute the probability distribution of a vector of real numbers.
The output is a list of values between 0 and 1, with the sum of 1.0. Each element in
the list represents the probabilities of each class, where the target class has the highest
probability in the list. The definition of the Softmax function can be seen in Equation
5.2 [52].
f (xi) =
exp xi
∑
j exp xj
(5.2)
In 2021, Wightman, Touvron, and Jégou revised the training procedure for ResNet
to bring it up to date with the modern best practices for training neural networks,
including replacing the classic loss cross-entropy loss function with a multi-label classi-
fication objective function using Mixup and CutMix augmentation and a binary cross-
entropy loss [66].
5.4.2.2
ResNeXt
The ResNeXt model architecture, developed by Xie, Girshick, Dollár, et al. is a model
that adopts the modular design of the ResNet [65] by constructing the network with
stacks of residual blocks of the same topology. The goal of the ResNeXt model was to
increase the model’s predictive accuracy without adding larger layers and, thus, more
complexity. It is generally known that adding more complexity to the model is an
easy way to increase the accuracy, while it is rare to increase accuracy without adding
complexity. However, this is what has been done with the ResNeXt model [67].
==PAGE:46==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
38
ResNeXt achieves this by introducing the concept of ”cardinality” to the blocks by
making each block a set of transformations, which is later aggregated by summation.
This cardinality is shown to be a more effective way of increasing accuracy than increas-
ing bottleneck width in [67]. To very simply explain the construction of the ResNeXt
model architecture, the blocks in the regular ResNet architecture are replaced by the
blocks developed by the ResNeXt team, which incorporates the cardinality into the
blocks [67]. Just like ResNet, ResNeXt also uses the ReLU [54] and Softmax [52] AFs
in the same fashion as ResNet.
Besides the notation of layer numbers in the specific model architectures, ResNeXt
also denotes the cardinality and bottleneck width as part of the configuration. This is
seen by the M × Nd denotation, where M indicates the cardinality and Nd indicates
the bottleneck width.
5.4.2.3
DenseNet
In [2], Huang, Liu, Van Der Maaten, et al. introduced the notion of dense convolutional
networks, also referred to as DenseNets, which is neural networks, where the network is
constructed using several ”dense blocks”, which allow for a feed-forward flow of feature
maps from all preceding layers within the same block. This block construction approach
is similar to the one employed by both ResNet [65] and ResNeXt [67], but also differs
in that the features at the end of each block are not combined with summation, but
instead concatenated. These dense blocks are connected by a transition layer with
convolution, using BN, ReLU and convolution, average pooling, and global average
pooling at the end of the network in the classification layer, along with a Softmax
AF. This makes DenseNets different from other neural networks because conventional
networks with L layers have L connections too, which all are linearly connected, where
DenseNets have L(L+1)
2
direct connections between the layers, thanks to the additional
connections within the dense blocks [2].
The densely connected nature of DenseNets has been observed to provide benefits
compared to other state-of-the-art networks released at the time of publication. One
of these benefits is the observed improved information flow and gradient within the
network, making it easier to train, especially for deep networks with many layers, and
reducing the risk of information vanishing in the layers. These dense connections have
also been observed to have a regularizing effect on the network, which has been observed
to reduce the risk of overfitting, especially on tasks with smaller training sets. Another
benefit is the substantially reduced need for model parameters in the model since less
redundant information must be relearned, thanks to the dense connections [2].
5.4.2.4
RegNet
RegNet (Regular Networks), as introduced in [68] by Radosavovic, Kosaraju, Girshick,
et al., approaches the model design paradigm fundamentally different from the previ-
ously introduced model architectures in this thesis. The RegNet architecture aims to
solve the challenges of finding well-optimized networks manually. This is done by using
a new network design paradigm that combines the benefits of manual design and Neu-
ral Architecture Search (NAS). This is solved by designing ”design spaces”, which is
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
39
parameterized populations of networks, and then using semi-automated procedures to
find simple, well-functioning, and generalizable networks across varying settings. The
parameters utilized are d (depth), w0 (initial width, w0 > 0), wa (slope, wa > 0), wm
(quantization), b (bottleneck ratio) and g (group width). They are used to calculate all
of the parameters for the full network, including block width u, which is later converted
into a quantized per-block width wj. All of this can be seen in Equation 5.3-5.5 [68].
uj = w0 + wa · j
for
0 ≤j < d
(5.3)
uj = w0 · wsj
m
(5.4)
wj = w0 · w⌊sj⌉
m
(5.5)
The network design process starts with an AnyNet, where the network width and
depth can vary freely across the stages within the network. Then, the human-in-the-
loop methodology can be utilized to achieve low-dimensional design space, arriving at
these RegNets. Because RegNets have simpler models than AnyNets, they are easier
to interpret and have high concentrations of good models in the design space. The
entire design process occurs in a low-compute and low-epoch regime using a single
network block type, trained on ImageNet as a foundation and then generalized to
larger compute regimes, schedule lengths, and other network block types. This low-
compute and low-epoch regime allows for the rapid design of models. The training
time for 100 RegNet models at 400 MegaFLOPs (MF) at ten epochs is equivalent to
training a single ResNet-50 model at 4 GigaFLOPs (GF) for 100 epochs. The Empirical
Distribution Function (EDF) is used to analyze these large groups of models, which
can be seen in Equation 5.6, where n is the model count and ei is the error. The EDF
returns the fraction of models with an error less than e [68].
F (e) = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
1 [ei < e]
(5.6)
The standard RegNet, RegNetX uses the standard residual bottleneck block with
group convolution introduced in ResNeXt [67]. Then there further exists RegNetY,
which is RegNetX, with the addition of the Squeeze-and-Excitation (SE) operation,
which has been observed to reduce further the error rate of the models relative to
RegNetX [68].
Because of the unique semi-automated design process of RegNets, they are not de-
signed with a specific layer count in mind but rather a general scalability that allows
the network to be scaled to any target regime, denoted in FLOPs. This is also why the
specific model names are not denoted by layer count but rather by the FLOP regime
that they are targeting. It has been seen that RegNets, in general, have considerable
improvements over ResNet and ResNeXt in all metrics when comparing models tar-
geting the same FLOPs regime. For each FLOP regime, the model picked is the best
model from 25 random settings of the RegNet parameters and then re-trained five
times at 100 epochs [68].
==PAGE:48==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
40
5.4.2.5
ViT
Visual Transformers (ViTs) is an architecture for computer vision tasks introduced by
Dosovitskiy, Beyer, Kolesnikov, et al. in 2021. Traditionally, transformer architectures
[70], a self-attention-based architecture, have mainly been used in Natural Language
Processing (NLP). Meanwhile, the traditional convolution architectures, popularized
by ResNet [65], remained dominant in computer vision tasks. Several attempts have
been made to apply self-attention to images, and some have shown promising results
but have required complex engineering to be implemented on hardware accelerators.
Dosovitskiy, Beyer, Kolesnikov, et al. applied a standard transformer directly to images,
with minimal modifications. This was done by splitting a 2D image of dimensions
(H, W) into N = H·W
P 2
patches, where each patch has the dimensions (P, P), and then
passing these patches as linear embeddings into the transformer. When considering
the domain of transformers, then these patches are treated like tokens, or words, in
NLP applications. In addition to the patches, a learnable embedding is also prepended
to the sequence of embedded patches, which serves as the image representation at
the end of the transformer encoder. Position embeddings are also added to the patch
embeddings so that positional information of the patches can be retained. A simple
learnable 1D position embedding is used for the position since it provides satisfying
performance compared to 2D embeddings [69].
Visual Transformers use the Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU) [71] AF rather
than the ReLU AF of previously introduced architectures.
Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU)
The GELU activation function was in-
troduced by Hendrycks and Gimpel as an improvement to existing ReLU and ELU
activation functions. Unlike the ReLU function, it allows for some negative numbers,
which only returns values x ≥0. This makes GELU sometimes regarded as a smoother
version of ReLU and can provide improved training speed in some cases. This is done
using the standard Gaussian cumulative distribution function Φ (x) for the AF xΦ (x).
This allows for a more probabilistic view of a neuron’s output, unlike ReLU, which
has a less statistical motivation. A deterministic decision of whether to fire a neuron
is often desired for neural networks. In Equation 5.7, the deterministic definition of
GELU can be seen, and in Equation 5.8, a numeric approximation can be seen as well
[71].
GELU (x) = xP (X ≤x) = xΦ (x) = x · 1
2
[
1 + erf
(
x
√
2
)]
(5.7)
≈1
2x
(
1 + tanh
[√
2
π
(
x + 0.044715x3)])
(5.8)
The approach to train this network is to use supervised training to pre-train on
a large general dataset and then later fine-tune on a smaller task-specific dataset.
This is because it has been documented that the transformer does not generalize well
when trained on small amounts of data, but if trained on larger datasets, such as
ImageNet-21k [64] (14 million images) or Dosovitskiy, Beyer, Kolesnikov, et al. in house
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
41
dataset, JFT-300M (303 million images), it approaches, or beats, state-of-the-art image
recognition benchmarks at the time of publishing [69].
5.4.2.6
ConvNeXt
The ConvNeXt model architecture is a new, reworked convolutional network that aims
to explore the limits of architectures built exclusively from standard convolutional
network modules. It was introduced by Liu, Mao, Wu, et al. in 2022, following the
introduction of transformer-based architecture, such as ViT [69] and SWIN Transform-
ers [73], a hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows, similarly to what had
been done with traditional convolutional methods. Transformers have generally been
regarded to be able to provide superior scaling behavior compared to conventional
convolutional networks. Throughout the paper [72], Liu, Mao, Wu, et al. gradually
introduces a series of enhancements to ResNet-50 and ResNet-200 inspired by what
has been seen in transformer-based architectures. Quickly summarized, these enhance-
ments can be seen in the list below [72]:
• Use AdamW optimizer
• Increase training time to 300 epochs
• Use state-of-the-art data augmenta-
tion methods
• Use state-of-the-art regularization
schemes
• Modifying the stage compute ratio
• Replace stem with ”patchify”, as
seen in ViT
• Use
depthwise
convolution
layer
from ResNeXt
• Use inverted bottleneck
• Move depthwise convolution layer
up and increase kernel size to 7 × 7
• Replace ReLU with GELU, as seen
in ViT
• Only use GELU once in each block
between the two 1 × 1 convolutional
layers
• Reduce number of BN layers,
• Replace remaining BN layers with
LN layers
• Use separate downsampling layers,
as seen in SWIN [73]
All of these individual enhancements to ResNet-50 and ResNet-200 enable the en-
hanced model architecture to compete favorably against SWIN Transformer architec-
tures in both accuracy, scalability, and robustness while still maintaining the eﬀiciency
of being a standard convolutional network, and thus also simple to implement [72].
5.4.3
Transformations
In this section, the various candidates for transformations for model fine-tuning are
briefly described, along with the considerations for the individual transformations.
These transformations, along with the dataset split discussed in the next chapter and
the previously introduced machine learning base models and weights from Table 5.4,
make up the hyperparameters of the training process.
==PAGE:50==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
42
Model Name
Parameters
MACs
Activations
Weight Name
References
ViT Tiny Patch16 224
5.7 × 106
1.1 × 109
4.1 × 106
timm/vit_tiny_patch16_224.
augreg_in21k_ft_in1k
[69], [74]
RegNetY-1.6GF
11.2 × 106
1.6 × 109
8.0 × 106
timm/regnety_016.tv2_in1k
[68]
ResNet18
11.7 × 106
1.8 × 109
2.5 × 106
timm/resnet18.a1_in1k
[65], [66]
DenseNet121
8.0 × 106
2.9 × 109
6.9 × 106
timm/densenet121.ra_in1k
[2]
RegNetY-3.2GF
19.4 × 106
3.2 × 109
11.3 × 106
timm/regnety_032.ra_in1k
[68]
DenseNet169
14.1 × 106
3.4 × 109
7.3 × 106
timm/densenet169.tv_in1k
[2]
ResNet34
21.8 × 106
3.7 × 109
3.7 × 106
timm/resnet34.a1_in1k
[65], [66]
ResNet50
25.6 × 106
4.1 × 109
11.1 × 106
timm/resnet50.a1_in1k
[65], [66]
DenseNet201
20.0 × 106
4.3 × 109
7.9 × 106
timm/densenet201.tv_in1k
[2]
ViT Small Patch16 224
22.1 × 106
4.3 × 109
8.2 × 106
timm/vit_small_patch16_224.
augreg_in21k_ft_in1k
[69], [74]
ResNeXt50 32x4d
25.0 × 106
4.3 × 109
14.4 × 106
timm/resnext50_32x4d.a1h_in1k
[67]
ConvNeXt Tiny
28.6 × 106
4.5 × 109
13.4 × 106
timm/convnext_tiny.in12k_ft_in1k
[72]
DenseNet161
28.7 × 106
7.8 × 109
11.1 × 106
timm/densenet161.tv_in1k
[2]
ResNet101
44.5 × 106
7.9 × 109
16.2 × 106
timm/resnet101.a1h_in1k
[65], [66]
RegNetY-8.0GF
39.2 × 106
8.0 × 109
18.0 × 106
timm/regnety_080.ra3_in1k
[68]
ConvNeXt Small
50.2 × 106
8.7 × 109
21.6 × 106
timm/convnext_small.in12k_ft_in1k
[72]
ResNet152
60.2 × 106
11.6 × 109
22.6 × 106
timm/resnet152.a1h_in1k
[65], [66]
ConvNeXt Base
88.6 × 106
15.4 × 109
28.8 × 106
timm/convnext_base.fb_in22k_ft_in1k
[72]
ResNeXt101 64x4d
83.5 × 106
15.5 × 109
31.2 × 106
timm/resnext101_64x4d.c1_in1k
[67]
RegNetY-16GF
83.6 × 106
16.9 × 109
23.0 × 106
timm/regnety_160.sw_in12k_ft_in1k
[68]
ResNeXt101 32x8d
88.8 × 106
16.5 × 109
31.2 × 106
timm/resnext101_32x8d.tv_in1k
[67]
Vit Base Patch16 224
86.6 × 106
16.9 × 109
16.5 × 106
timm/vit_base_patch16_224.
augreg2_in21k_ft_in1k
[69], [74]
Table 5.4: Overview of the different machine learning base models and their pre-
trained weights, from https://huggingface.co, sorted by MACs and
split into smaller groups based on the MACs values.
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
43
5.4.3.1
Normalization
Normalization, as introduced in Section 4.6.2.2, is utilized as a potential transformation
for the data the models are trained on and when evaluating individual images. Using
ImageNet [64] statistics for normalizing datasets for machine learning is very common.
These statistics can be seen in Equations 5.9-5.10.
INµ = [0.485, 0.456, 0.406]
(5.9)
INσ = [0.229, 0.224, 0.225]
(5.10)
However, the ImageNet [64] dataset is quite different from the EDAMB dataset.
The ImageNet-1k [64] dataset contains 1000 classes, of which only 3 are people cate-
gories [75], and the full ImageNet-21K [63] also only contains 2832 people categories
[75], which account of around 8.3% of the total images.
Meanwhile, the EDAMB dataset contains only people and is also captured in
a controlled environment.
For this reason, I decided to generate my own normal-
ization statistics, which can be seen in Equations 5.11-5.12, based on the EDAMB
dataset. The method for generating these statistics can be seen in the Jupyter note-
book jupyter_notebooks/deep_learning/normalization.ipynb.
EDAMBµ = [0.568, 0.453, 0.400]
(5.11)
EDAMBσ = [0.177, 0.195, 0.202]
(5.12)
5.4.3.2
Grayscale
Grayscale transformation is being investigated as a potential transformation for the
datasets. The idea behind the grayscale conversion is that fine-tuned models might
generalize better if some of the skin and hair color information is minimized, potentially
creating a greater emphasis on facial traits. This transformation is applied by replac-
ing the regular fastai color data block ImageBlock with an equivalent for grayscale,
ImageBlockBW.
5.4.3.3
Magnitude Spectrum
The magnitude spectrum transformation is another one whose effectiveness is being
investigated regarding the fine-tuned models. This transformation adopts the elements
of the classic computer vision method from the original input (Figure 5.4(a)) until the
magnitude spectrum is produced (Figure 5.4(d)). The idea behind this is that there are
periodic patterns noticeable to the naked eye, already in the magnitude spectrum, and
potentially, a machine learning model could extract motion blur intensity information
from this.
Because the magnitude spectrum method used in the classic computer vision method
was designed for color images, this transformation has been made mutually exclusive
with the grayscale transformation described above.
==PAGE:52==
5.4 Machine Learning Method
44
5.4.3.4
Rotation
When investigating the EDAMB dataset using the motion blur direction estimation of
the classic computer vision method, it was noticed that there was a severe lack of data
outside of the horizontal and vertical directions. Therefore, the rotation transformation
was added as a potential transformation to investigate whether this yielded improved
performance compared to the unmodified dataset. A rotation of at most 45° is applied
to the images with a probability of 0.5 and padded with the reflection of the image
itself, if necessary.
5.4.4
Hyperparameters of Machine Learning Method
As mentioned in Section 5.2, Hydra has been utilized to generate all combinations of
models from a series of defined hyperparameters such that these models can be evalu-
ated. As mentioned above in Section 5.4.3.3, the grayscale and magnitude spectrum
transformations are mutually exclusive. The list of hyperparameters can be seen in
Table 5.5. When looking at all of the hyperparameter definitions and considering the
mutually exclusive hyperparameters, it can be seen that 528 different models have been
fine-tuned. A selection of these models will be made in the next chapter for further
evaluation.
Hyperparameter Name
Possible values
Normalize
[True, False]
Grayscale
[True, False]
Magnitude Spectrum
[True, False]
Rotate
[True, False]
Protocol
[protocol1, protocol2]
Model
[resnet18, resnet34, resnet50, resnet101,
resnet152, regnety_016, regnety_032,
regnety_080, regnety_160,densenet121,
densenet161, densenet169, densenet201,
resnext50_32x4d, resnext101_32x8d,
resnext101_64x4d, convnext_tiny,
convnext_small, convnext_base,
vit_tiny_patch16_224, vit_small_patch16_224,
vit_base_patch16_224]
Table 5.5: All hyperparameters that are being combined with the Hydra framework
to generate all combinations of models. These hyperparameters can be
found in the file src/config/config_fastai.yaml.
==PAGE:53==
5.5 Face Image Quality Assessment Quality Measure Value Interpolation
45
5.5
Face Image Quality Assessment Quality Measure Value
Interpolation
Both the classic computer vision and machine learning methods described in Sections
5.3 and 5.4, respectively, do, in fact, not directly output a FIQA quality measure value.
Therefore, some further processing of the outputs needs to be performed. This will be
described in the following sections for both methods.
5.5.1
Classic Computer Vision Method
Just like the synthetic motion blur application method described in Section 5.1.2 cannot
take a quality measure value as an input, the classic computer vision method cannot
output a quality measure value either.
The output of the classic computer vision
method is a motion blur kernel size. Therefore, the same conversion table, as seen in
Table 5.1, is applied to convert from kernel size to quality measure value. However, the
conversion table does notably not cover all possible values of either quality measure
value or kernel size. Because of this, the conversion table is used to interpolate the
quality measure value equivalent to the estimated motion blur kernel size.
This is
performed using the interp method of the NumPy package.
5.5.2
Machine Learning Method
The fine-tuned machine learning models can likewise not output all possible values
of quality measure values since they have been implemented to solve a classification
problem. However, since the machine learning models solve a classification problem,
they do output probabilities for all classes. Traditionally, for a classification problem,
you would most often just be interested in which class has the highest probability,
for example, whether an image contains a dog or cat. Here, the probabilities can be
used to compute a weighted classification label, which can be used as a FIQA quality
measure value. Letting P be the list of probabilities, L be the list of classes, and n the
length of the lists, then the method of computing the weighted classification label can
be seen in Equation 5.13
lw =
n
∑
i
Pi × Li
(5.13)
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6
Experimental Setup
In this chapter, I will introduce the final and complete experimental setup used to
compute the results of Chapter 7. I will introduce the Essen Darmstadt Motion Blur
(EDAMB) dataset and the splits utilized for fine-tuning the machine learning mod-
els. I will also introduce the Face Image Quality Assessment Toolkit (fiqat) utilized
for preprocessing the datasets and generating the False Non-Match Error versus Dis-
card Characteristic (FNM-EDC) curves and the associated partial Area Under Curve
(pAUC) values [10], along with the frameworks and models it utilizes. Following this, I
will evaluate the trained machine learning models from Chapter 5, perform a selection
of the best-performing models, and finally introduce the complete evaluation method.
6.1
Datasets
In this thesis, I use a total of three different datasets, the Labeled Faces in the Wild
(LFW) [60] and Face Research Lab London (FRLL) [38] as already introduced in
Section 5.1.1, as well as the EDAMB dataset, which up until this point only have been
mentioned by name. In this section, I formally introduce the EDAMB dataset and the
modified subsets of LFW and FRLL used for evaluation.
6.1.1
Essen Darmstadt Motion Blur (EDAMB) Dataset
The EDAMB dataset is fascinating since it consists of 1341 images of 35 subjects,
with varying images per subject, all captured with differing levels of real motion blur
directly in the camera with a uniform background. All of the images have manually
been annotated by an expert with a quality measure value, which is one of nine different
classes, where 10 is the most intense motion blur, and 90 is the least intense motion blur.
The images were captured across two locations (Darmstadt (HDA) and Essen) and with
three cameras (Canon EOS50D, Canon PowerShot SC200IS, and Kodak EasyShare
DX6490). Images captured from Darmstadt (HDA) have 26 subjects, and images from
Essen have nine subjects. All cameras at both locations have samples from all subjects.
This combination of cross-location and cross-camera was performed to alleviate any
potential bias from the setup at either location or from the cameras. Figure 6.1 shows
images with three different motion blur intensities and quality measure values.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Datasets
47
(a) Quality measure value 70
(b) Quality measure value 50
(c) Quality measure value 30
Figure 6.1: Examples of images from EDAMB dataset with varying quality measure
values, following preprocessing with fiqat.
6.1.1.1
Excluded Images
As part of the preprocessing, which will be described in section 6.2, performed using
fiqat, some images from the EDAMB dataset did not have a face detected. Thus, they
had to be excluded from the dataset since they could not be preprocessed. In total, 108
images from the EDAMB dataset have been excluded from the training and evaluation
process and the dataset statistics.
6.1.1.2
Dataset Statistics
All the statistics presented in this section have been performed using the Jupyter note-
book jupyter_notebooks/data_processing/edamb_dataset_inspection.ipynb.
Figure 6.2 shows the distribution of the labeled quality measure values of the
EDAMB dataset.
There is a noticeable imbalance, where images with the quality
measure value class 10 have a significant prevalence but also the quality measure value
class 90.
The images from the EDAMB dataset have only been labeled with a quality measure
value but not with a motion blur direction. In Figure 6.3, the estimated motion blur
direction of the dataset can be seen when computed with the classic computer vision
method.
Notably, there is a definite abundance of movement along the immediate
vertical and horizontal directions. Naturally, the method cannot be assumed to be
perfect, but the results do make sense when trying to reason. When people are asked
to move in front of a camera to force motion blur to be captured by the camera, it
is the most natural for people to begin jumping up and down (motion blur direction
90°) or from side to side (motion blur direction 0°/ 180°).
In Figures 6.4(a) and (b), the distribution of images across the locations and camera
models, respectively, can be seen.
Notably, there is a significant difference in the
number of images between the locations, with Darmstadt (HDA) being the majority
and the camera models with EOS50D being the majority. These differences may form
the basis for two different training and evaluation protocols.
==PAGE:56==
6.1 Datasets
48
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Quality Measure Value
0
100
200
300
Frequency
313
159
130
78
104
102
82
95
170
Quality Measure Values
Figure 6.2: Histogram of the distribution of quality measure values of the EDAMB
dataset.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
Estimated Motion Blur Direction
0
50
100
150
200
250
Frequency
126
51
16 13 5
6
17
6
3
3
6
8
8
5
17 21
48
118
272
194
80
20 19
8 14 9
3
1
3
8
3
0
11 7 16
60
Estimated Motion Blur Directions
Figure 6.3: Histogram of the estimated motion blur directions of the EDAMB dataset,
using my classic computer vision method. Motion blur direction 0/180
is horizontal.
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Datasets
49
HDA Essen
Location
0
200
400
600
800
Frequency
750
483
Locations
(a)
EOS50D
SC200IS
DX6490
Camera Model
0
200
400
600
800
Frequency
756
262
215
Camera Models
(b)
Figure 6.4: Histogram of the distribution of images by location and camera models
of the EDAMB dataset.
6.1.1.3
Dataset Splits
The dataset must be split somehow to ensure that the models can be evaluated on the
part of the EDAMB dataset that they have not been trained on. A proper dataset split
also decreases the likelihood of the models overfitting and improves the performance
of the models [50]. Here, the splits will not align with the traditional percentages of
80%-20%, as introduced earlier, but have instead been chosen to evaluate the trained
model’s performance on previously unseen data.
Protocol 1
The first split is referenced as protocol 1, allowing for model evaluation
across locations. This is done by leveraging the differences in image counts between
the two locations. Since Darmstadt (HDA) has the most images, at 750, it will be the
training subset, while the Essen location will be the evaluation subset. Figures 6.5 and
6.6 show the distribution of quality measure values and camera model images across
the locations, respectively.
Protocol 2
The second split is referenced as protocol 2 and allows for the evaluation
across camera models. This split leverages the fact that EOS50D makes up most of
the images. Thus, images captured by the EOS50D will make up the training subset,
and the images captured by both SC200IS and DX6490 will make up the evaluation
subset. In Figures 6.7 and 6.8, the distribution of quality measure values and locations
across camera models can be seen, respectively, for each subset.
==PAGE:58==
6.1 Datasets
50
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Quality Measure Value
0
50
100
150
200
Frequency
218
46
151
69
79
45
53
49
40
95
36
19
61
80
50
49
55
38
Quality Measure Values by Location
HDA
Essen
Figure 6.5: Histogram of the distribution of quality measure values across each loca-
tion of the EDAMB dataset.
EOS50D DX6490 SC200IS
Camera Model
0
100
200
300
400
Frequency
418
148
184
338
67
78
Camera Models by Location
HDA
Essen
Figure 6.6: Histogram of the distribution of camera models across each location of
the EDAMB dataset.
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Datasets
51
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Quality Measure Value
0
50
100
150
200
250
Frequency
250
32
87
82
122
23
58
57
45
16
26
37
13
12
35
30
33
13
47
24
46
35
25
37
14
14
20
Quality Measure Values by Camera Models
EOS50D
DX6490
SC200IS
Figure 6.7: Histogram of the distribution of quality measure values across each cam-
era model of the EDAMB dataset.
HDA
Essen
Location
0
200
400
600
800
Frequency
418
338
148
67
184
78
Locations by Camera Models
EOS50D
DX6490
SC200IS
Figure 6.8: Histogram of the distribution of locations across each camera model of
the EDAMB dataset.
==PAGE:60==
6.2 Face Image Quality Assessment Toolkit (fiqat)
52
6.1.2
LFW and FRLL
Since both the LFW [60] and FRLL [38] datasets have already been introduced, and
they only will be used for evaluation, I will not go in-depth with the statistics for these
datasets.
I wish to highlight that, just like with the EDAMB dataset, some synthetically
blurred images created for evaluating the performance of the fine-tuned models do not
have a detectable face once blurred. Therefore, it will also only be a subset of these
datasets, which will be used for evaluation.
For the LFW [60] dataset, there are 303 images without a face detected, while for
the FRLL [38] dataset, the preprocessing successfully detected faces in all images. This
means that LFW [60] has 303 images removed from the dataset. On top of this, the
LFW [60] dataset also contains many images, with only one image per subject. Due
to the method of calculating FNM-EDC curves requiring paired images, these images
are also removed following the initial removal of 303 images. The images removed due
to lack of pairable images are a lot more significant, as it is 4069 images that will be
removed, for a total of 4372 fewer images in the LFW [60] dataset.
This leaves the usable LFW [60] dataset with 8861 images of only 1637 subjects,
which is significantly less than the original full LFW [60] dataset.
6.2
Face Image Quality Assessment Toolkit (fiqat)
The Face Image Quality Assessment Toolkit (fiqat)1 is a framework developed by one of
the authors of [10], Torsten Schlett, to facilitate various FIQA experiments. The frame-
work provides various functionalities, including face detection, primary face estimation
if multiple faces are detected, face image preprocessing (cropping and alignment), face
recognition feature extraction and comparison, and Error versus Discard Characteristic
(EDC) curves. These functionalities can both be used as parts for training new models
or as a complete framework for evaluating face image quality assessment methods, both
of which I am using it for.
To support all of these functionalities, the fiqat framework uses several different
external tools and models. The methods utilized will be introduced in the relevant
sections.
6.2.1
Face Detector
The first component used of the fiqat framework is the face detector. Four different
face detectors are supported in the framework, dlib, MTCNN [76], RetinaFace [77]
(”RetinaFace-R50” model) and SCRFD from insightface2 (”buffalo_l” model).
To decide which one to use in the implementation, three of the face detectors, except
dlib because it would not run, were evaluated on the EDAMB dataset. Since it is known
that one face exists in every image of the EDAMB dataset, the goal is to find out which
1https://hda10196.h-da.io/face-image-quality-toolkit/source/readme.html
2https://github.com/deepinsight/insightface/tree/48282789fa2e440868b971a4b72fbec7fbc3
c049/python-package
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Face Image Quality Assessment Toolkit (fiqat)
53
face detector has the least non-detections. This experiment can be seen in the Jupyter
notebook jupyter_notebooks/data_processing/face_detector_eval.ipynb
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Quality Measure Value
0
50
100
150
200
Frequency
197
16
6
1
0
0
0
0
0
186
23
9
4
2
6
6
12
22
97
8
2
0
0
0
0
1
0
Failed Quality Measure Values by
Face Detection Framework
mtcnn
retinaface
scrfd
Figure 6.9: Histogram of quality measure values of images where face detectors failed
to detect a face of the EDAMB dataset.
Initially, I wished to inspect the frequency of the quality measure values at which the
face detectors failed to detect faces. This can be seen in Figure 6.9. Immediately when
looking at the histogram, it can be seen that RetinaFace discards many images, even
those with high quality measure values. When inspecting the failed images further,
some of the images have potential reasons for being discarded, such as eyes closed,
reflections in glasses, and open mouth. While I cannot determine the definite reason
for the non-detections, the defects mentioned above could be the cause. However, in
this application, this is not desirable behavior and should be in and of itself reason
enough not to choose RetinaFace as the face detector.
When inspecting the results of MTCNN and SCRFD, both of these perform pretty
well until they reach a quality measure value of 40, where the motion blur is also quite
intense. SCRFD has one failure at a quality measure value of 80, which is an image
where the eyes are closed, and MTCNN has one failure at a quality measure value of
40, where the entire head is not in the frame. Both of these face detectors are good
candidates for the use case, but ultimately, SCRFD has the least non-detections and
is, therefore, selected.
The distributions of failed face detections by location and camera model can be
seen in Figures 6.10 and 6.11, respectively.
==PAGE:62==
6.2 Face Image Quality Assessment Toolkit (fiqat)
54
HDA
Essen
Location
0
50
100
150
200
Frequency
209
11
215
55
92
16
Failed Face Detections by Location
mtcnn
retinaface
scrfd
Figure 6.10: Histogram of locations of images where face detectors failed to detect a
face of the EDAMB dataset.
EOS50D
SC200IS
DX6490
Camera Model
0
50
100
150
200
Frequency
154
49
17
182
61
27
95
9
4
Failed Camera Models by
Face Detection Framework
mtcnn
retinaface
scrfd
Figure 6.11: Histogram of camera models of images where face detectors failed to
detect a face of the EDAMB dataset.
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Classic Computer Vision Method Hyperparameter Selection
55
6.2.2
Primary Face Estimator
The second component used from the fiqat framework is the primary face estimator.
Here, fiqat only has one built-in method, SCCPFE (Size- and Center- and Confidence-
based Primary Face Estimation), which, as the name hints, uses the size, center, and
confidence values from the face detector. The size and center values refer to the detected
face’s Region of Interest (ROI), which means the larger the size of the ROI, and the
closer to the center of the image the ROI is located, the more likely a face is to be
selected as the primary face, given that the face detector is confident of the detection.
6.2.3
Face Image Preprocessor
The face image preprocessor is the third and final component used from the fiqat frame-
work for preprocessing. fiqat provides two built-in methods: crop and simt (similarity
transformation). The crop method is a very crude and primitive method, which crops
the image based on the ROI and then resizes the cropped image to the desired size. The
similarity transformation method, on the other hand, is very popular in state-of-the-
art face recognition methods such as ArcFace [6] and CosFace [9], where ArcFace will
be utilized later as the face recognition feature extractor. Similarity transformation
works by cropping and aligning the face image to five facial landmarks: the eyes, nose
tip, and mouth corners. These landmarks come from the initial face detector method.
The result is preprocessed images where the faces align very well, which, as seen in
[6], [9], is desirable for the face recognition model utilized since it was trained for faces
processed this as well. Therefore, similarity transformation is the selected method.
6.2.4
Face Recognition Feature Extractor
The face recognition feature extractor is another fiqat component used for computing
the EDC curves and pAUC. fiqat ships with one method, which is ArcFace [6] using
the LResNet100-IR,ArcFace@ms1m-refine-v23 model. Since ArcFace provides good
performance [6], the only provided method out of the box, and since it is out of the
scope of this thesis to evaluate different face recognition models, ArcFace was chosen.
6.3
Classic Computer Vision Method Hyperparameter
Selection
To represent the classic computer vision method in the evaluation of methods, a set
of hyperparameters for the method needs to be selected. This was already done in
Section 5.3.1, where in Table 5.3, the best hyperparameter assignment can be seen in
the last column. This was done using Hydra and Optuna, introduced in Section 5.2,
by setting the pAUC as the optimization goal.
3https://github.com/deepinsight/insightface/wiki/Model-Zoo/6633390634bcf907c383cc6c9
0b62b6700df2a8e#31-lresnet100e-irarcfacems1m-refine-v2
==PAGE:64==
6.4 Preliminary Model Evaluation
56
6.4
Preliminary Model Evaluation
Since a total of 528 models have been fine-tuned, to properly evaluate some of the
models in depth, a selection of models has to be made based on specific metrics. This
is done with a preliminary model evaluation, comparing the models on two metrics.
The first one is the Mean Squared Error (MSE), which has been computed for all the
models across all datasets. The MSE have been computed using scaled scores, such that
the weighted classification labels occur in the full range between 0 and 1, rather than
just 0.1 and 0.9 which they do out of the box since the models have been fine-tuned on
the nine classes between 10 and 90. This can be seen implemented in the Jupyter note-
book jupyter_notebooks/deep_learning/evaluation_metods.ipynb in the section
on Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Squared Error (MSE). The average MSE
across FRLL [38], LFW [60], and respective protocol evaluation subsets for the top 100
best-performing models can be seen in Appendix A.
The other metric is the pAUC score. This has been computed for the three datasets
for the top 100 MSE models. The average pAUC score across the datasets can be seen
in Appendix B.
6.5
Model Selection
To create a representative selection of models, the following selections have been made:
• The best-performing protocol 1 model, according to the average MSE.
• The best-performing protocol 2 model, according to the average MSE.
• The best-performing average MSE across protocols 1 and 2 with a shared base
model and hyperparameter configuration.
– Both the protocol 1 and 2 models will be evaluated further.
• The best-performing protocol 1 model, according to the average pAUC.
• The best-performing protocol 2 model, according to the average pAUC.
• The best-performing average pAUC across protocols 1 and 2 with a shared base
model and hyperparameter configuration.
– Both the protocol 1 and 2 models will be evaluated further.
This results in up to eight different models being evaluated. However, this can be
less if some of the base models and hyperparameter configurations are shared between
the best-performing average and best-performing per protocol; this is also the case. In
Table 6.1, the selected models for the respective bullet points above can be seen. These
selections are also highlighted in Appendices A and B. Notably, two configurations
overlap between the individually best performing and the average across both protocols
and hyperparameter configuration, leaving us with six models to evaluate.
==PAGE:65==
6.6 Evaluation Method
57
Alias
Base Model
C
N
G
MS
R
Average
MSE
convnext_jp_p1
convnext_base





0.047157
densenet_jp_p2
densenet161





0.042938
convnext_jp_p1
convnext_base





0.047157
convnext_jp_p2
convnext_base





0.054237
Alias
Base Model
C
N
G
MS
R
Average
pAUC
densenet_jp_p1
densenet169





0.00361
vit_jp_p2
vit_small_patch16_224





0.00282
vit_jp_p1
vit_small_patch16_224





0.00474
vit_jp_p2
vit_small_patch16_224





0.00282
Table 6.1: The selected best-performing models, their hyperparameter configurations,
and their respective aliases. The columns C, N, G, MS, and R each indicate
whether the training images utilized cropping, normalization, grayscale
conversion, magnitude spectrum conversion, or rotation transformation,
respectively.
6.6
Evaluation Method
The next chapters will gather and analyze a wide array of metrics. Besides the afore-
mentioned Mean Squared Error (MSE) and partial Area Under Curve (pAUC), the
metrics will be the following:
• Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
• False Non-Match Error versus Discard Characteristic (FNM-EDC) curves
• Accuracy†
• Weighted F1-score†
• Confusion Matrix†
These metrics will be reported for the LFW [60], FRLL [38], and full EDAMB datasets
and protocol-specific results for both protocols. The evaluated methods will be all of
the fine-tuned models from Table 6.1, the classic computer vision method, and the
sharpness measure of the OFIQ library. However, the metrics denoted with a † have
not been computed for the classic computer vision method or the sharpness measure
of the OFIQ library because they are not classification methods, and these metrics are
reserved for those methods.
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 7
Results
7.1
False Non-Match Error versus Discard Characteristic
(FNM-EDC) Curves
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on Protocol 1 Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
convnext_jp_p1
densenet_jp_p1
vit_jp_p1
Figure 7.1: The FNM-EDC curves for the Protocol 1 evaluation dataset. pAUC for
the best-performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.1.
==PAGE:67==
7.1 False Non-Match Error versus Discard Characteristic (FNM-EDC) Curves
59
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on Protocol 2 Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
densenet_jp_p2
convnext_jp_p2
vit_jp_p2
Figure 7.2: The FNM-EDC curves for the Protocol 2 evaluation dataset. pAUC for
the best-performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.2.
==PAGE:68==
7.1 False Non-Match Error versus Discard Characteristic (FNM-EDC) Curves
60
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on LFW Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
convnext_jp_p1
densenet_jp_p2
convnext_jp_p2
densenet_jp_p1
vit_jp_p1
vit_jp_p2
Figure 7.3: The FNM-EDC curves for the LFW [60] dataset. pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.3.
==PAGE:69==
7.1 False Non-Match Error versus Discard Characteristic (FNM-EDC) Curves
61
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on FRLL Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
convnext_jp_p1
densenet_jp_p2
convnext_jp_p2
densenet_jp_p1
vit_jp_p1
vit_jp_p2
Figure 7.4: The FNM-EDC curves for the FRLL [38] dataset. pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.4.
==PAGE:70==
7.1 False Non-Match Error versus Discard Characteristic (FNM-EDC) Curves
62
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on EDAMB Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
convnext_jp_p1
densenet_jp_p2
convnext_jp_p2
densenet_jp_p1
vit_jp_p1
vit_jp_p2
Figure 7.5: The FNM-EDC curves for the full EDAMB dataset. pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.5.
==PAGE:71==
7.2 Tables
63
7.2
Tables
Method
Protocol 1
Protocol 2
LFW
FRLL
EDAMB
Classic_CV
0.00762
0.00920
0.00830
0.00908
0.00820
OFIQ_Sharpness
0.00704
0.00871
0.00785
0.00879
0.00740
convnext_jp_p1
0.00751
0.00596
0.00530
0.00704
densenet_jp_p2
0.00337
0.00615
0.00523
0.00469
convnext_jp_p2
0.00382
0.00619
0.00480
0.00624
densenet_jp_p1
0.00361
0.00631
0.00478
0.00440
vit_jp_p1
0.00474
0.00717
0.00531
0.00611
vit_jp_p2
0.00282
0.00771
0.00477
0.00517
Table 7.1: Partial Area Under Curve results for evaluated methods and all datasets.
Theoretically best have been subtracted. Smaller is better. The best value
for the dataset is shown in bold. Dark cells denote incompatible models
and protocols.
Method
Protocol 1
Protocol 2
LFW
FRLL
EDAMB
Classic_CV
0.298201
0.329730
0.282390
0.344244
0.318701
OFIQ_Sharpness
0.261460
0.334948
0.316017
0.190678
0.262806
convnext_jp_p1
0.132394
0.177164
0.216884
0.135643
densenet_jp_p2
0.133201
0.154310
0.206773
0.091436
convnext_jp_p2
0.154274
0.193123
0.223031
0.133302
densenet_jp_p1
0.151160
0.120080
0.315944
0.086238
vit_jp_p1
0.142163
0.126443
0.282240
0.110770
vit_jp_p2
0.161455
0.193948
0.233233
0.110549
Table 7.2: Mean Absolute Error (MAE) results for evaluated methods and all
datasets. Smaller is better. The best value for the dataset is shown in
bold. Dark cells denote incompatible models and protocols.
==PAGE:72==
7.2 Tables
64
Method
Protocol 1
Protocol 2
LFW
FRLL
EDAMB
Classic_CV
0.122594
0.148666
0.113472
0.162434
0.138823
OFIQ_Sharpness
0.118766
0.191470
0.165358
0.055458
0.132008
convnext_jp_p1
0.029928
0.047739
0.0638042
0.030244
densenet_jp_p2
0.029853
0.036511
0.0624502
0.018389
convnext_jp_p2
0.038004
0.058630
0.0660777
0.030993
densenet_jp_p1
0.038252
0.023202
0.1347465
0.018773
vit_jp_p1
0.037885
0.025886
0.1052085
0.026179
vit_jp_p2
0.042955
0.053206
0.0749096
0.025658
Table 7.3: Mean Squared Error (MSE) results for evaluated methods and all datasets.
Smaller is better. The best value for the dataset is shown in bold. Dark
cells denote incompatible models and protocols.
Method
Protocol 1
Protocol 2
LFW
FRLL
EDAMB
convnext_jp_p1
0.281573
0.214197
0.183007
0.424980
densenet_jp_p2
0.387841
0.196479
0.163399
0.620438
convnext_jp_p2
0.327044
0.193883
0.119281
0.451744
densenet_jp_p1
0.289855
0.256179
0.117647
0.620438
vit_jp_p1
0.310559
0.288794
0.104575
0.503650
vit_jp_p2
0.299790
0.157544
0.106209
0.515004
Table 7.4: Accuracy results for evaluated methods and all datasets. Larger is better.
The best value for the dataset is shown in bold. Dark cells denote incom-
patible models and protocols.
Method
Protocol 1
Protocol 2
LFW
FRLL
EDAMB
convnext_jp_p1
0.23089
0.124069
0.112962
0.349072
densenet_jp_p2
0.360873
0.160303
0.106496
0.609778
convnext_jp_p2
0.236100
0.106503
0.079503
0.377408
densenet_jp_p1
0.281718
0.202612
0.054616
0.608136
vit_jp_p1
0.258517
0.257501
0.080734
0.449111
vit_jp_p2
0.253218
0.112400
0.085410
0.481209
Table 7.5: Weighted F1-score results for evaluated methods and all datasets. Larger
is better. The best value for the dataset is shown in bold. Dark cells
denote incompatible models and protocols.
==PAGE:73==
7.3 Confusion Matrix
65
7.3
Confusion Matrix
7.3.1
convnext_jp_p1
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
67 15
8
1
3
0
0
0
1
41 20 16
2
0
0
0
0
1
21
5
27
2
1
4
0
0
1
4
1
16
2
1
2
0
0
12
4
0
21
2
1
1
0
0
26
0
1
9
0
0
1
0
0
38
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
32
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
18
Confusion Matrix of
convnext_jp_p1 on
Protocol dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
(a)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
237512 3
1
11 21
0
0
3
265639 6
0
14 22
0
0
0
252722 6
1
6
18
0
0
0
177877 9
3
14
6
0
0
0
175768 24
7
31
5
0
0
1
113616113 10 130 40
1
0
4
0
23 57 44 164104 19
4 613
0
3
21
5
19 10
0
0 949
0
3
15
9
7
6
0
0 923
Confusion Matrix of
convnext_jp_p1 on
LFW dataset
0
200
400
600
800
(b)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
10 23 35
0
5
1
0
0
0
4
7
33
3
6
8
2
0
1
0
0
35
5
13
0
0
0
12
0
0
10
0
6
0
0
0
43
0
0
4
0
4
0
0
0
58
0
0
6
0
1
0
0
0
62
0
0
9
0
0
0
0
0
56
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
0
81
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
56
Confusion Matrix of
convnext_jp_p1 on
FRLL dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
(c)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
245 42 18
1
5
0
0
0
2
68 47 38
2
2
0
0
0
2
41 15 57
2
4
4
0
0
7
8
9
40
3
1
2
0
0
15
5
13 41
2
7
1
0
0
35
0
4
23
2
6
4
0
0
63
0
0
13
0
2
4
0
0
63
0
0
2
0
2
1
0
0
90
0
0
7
2
0
0
0
0 161
Confusion Matrix of
convnext_jp_p1 on
EDAMB dataset
0
50
100
150
200
(d)
Figure 7.6: Confusion matrices for the convnext_jp_p1 model.
==PAGE:74==
7.3 Confusion Matrix
66
7.3.2
densenet_jp_p2
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
55
4
2
1
1
0
0
0
0
21
7
5
2
0
1
0
1
0
12
7
16
3
5
3
2
0
0
2
1
17
6
4
1
0
1
1
2
1
13
6
9
3
7
4
2
0
0
11
6
7
12
5
3
0
0
0
3
8
8
9
10
6
6
0
0
1
11
7
5
17
6
25
1
0
0
3
6
3
3
3
64
Confusion Matrix of
densenet_jp_p2 on
Protocol dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
(a)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
596165 3
0
2
2
13
7
0
664231 11
3
9
2
18
7
1
567325 24
0
29
6
37 16
1
335416 94 17 52 46 93 32
1
118236180 48 95 119181 32
2
16 46 130 90 140257284 56
8
1
4
32 36 163364343 71 14
0
0
13 34 157326334 85 58
2
3
17 39 172271273 93 93
Confusion Matrix of
densenet_jp_p2 on
LFW dataset
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
(b)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
0
6
47 10
7
0
1
3
0
0
2
36
9
9
2
1
5
0
0
2
26 14
9
3
5
6
0
0
0
18
8
7
5
6
9
6
0
0
9
8
9
1
12 10 17
0
0
6
3
1
0
6
15 38
0
0
1
1
5
1
4
4
49
0
0
1
6
0
1
2
2
77
0
0
2
7
0
0
1
2
49
Confusion Matrix of
densenet_jp_p2 on
FRLL dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
(c)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
284 17
8
2
1
0
1
0
0
50 78 17
2
8
2
0
2
0
20 13 66
8
13
7
3
0
0
3
1
23 37
9
3
0
1
1
2
1
15
9
49 10
8
8
2
0
0
11 10 14 50 10
7
0
0
0
4
8
10 14 28
8
10
0
0
1
11
7
9
18 23 26
1
0
0
3
6
3
4
3 150
Confusion Matrix of
densenet_jp_p2 on
EDAMB dataset
0
50
100
150
200
250
(d)
Figure 7.7: Confusion matrices for the densenet_jp_p2 model.
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Confusion Matrix
67
7.3.3
convnext_jp_p2
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
51
6
3
0
3
0
0
0
0
19 11
5
0
2
0
0
0
0
14
8
13
1
8
0
0
0
4
5
5
10
0
10
0
0
0
3
6
8
8
0
13
1
0
0
11
3
1
5
0
13
0
0
0
22
0
0
3
0
11
0
0
0
36
0
0
0
0
7
1
1
0
63
0
0
0
0
9
4
2
0
68
Confusion Matrix of
convnext_jp_p2 on
Protocol dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
(a)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
335403 9
0
8
2
2
28
1
415473 6
0
18
0
0
32
2
452525 4
0
8
0
0
15
1
436612 20
0
7
0
0
11
0
352591 52
0
13
1
0
1
1
204421279 0 118 0
0
0
5
6
2
71
1 401 27
0
1 519
1
0
10
0
79
1
1
0 915
1
1
5
1
59
3
0
0 893
Confusion Matrix of
convnext_jp_p2 on
LFW dataset
0
200
400
600
800
(b)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
0
28 31
1
14
0
0
0
0
0
2
36
2
23
0
0
0
1
0
0
14
1
41
2
0
0
7
0
0
2
1
16 10
2
0
28
0
0
0
0
16
2
6
0
42
0
0
1
1
5
5
3
0
54
0
0
1
1
9
8
3
0
43
0
0
0
2
9
9
15
0
54
0
1
1
0
3
11 13
0
32
Confusion Matrix of
convnext_jp_p2 on
FRLL dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
(c)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
271 23 11
1
5
0
0
0
2
74 55 18
0
11
0
0
0
1
38 23 43
2
19
0
0
0
5
8
10 22
0
25
0
0
0
13
6
14 16
0
40
1
1
0
26
3
2
7
0
33
2
1
0
54
0
0
3
0
17
0
0
0
62
0
0
0
0
7
1
1
0
86
0
0
0
0
16
6
2
0 146
Confusion Matrix of
convnext_jp_p2 on
EDAMB dataset
0
50
100
150
200
250
(d)
Figure 7.8: Confusion matrices for the convnext_jp_p2 model.
==PAGE:76==
7.3 Confusion Matrix
68
7.3.4
densenet_jp_p1
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
57
7
24
6
0
1
0
0
0
15 13 28 14
1
3
4
0
2
8
4
17 13
6
7
5
0
1
0
1
8
8
2
6
11
0
2
0
0
3
5
6
10 17
3
11
0
0
1
2
1
6
12
4
23
0
0
1
0
1
8
12
1
13
0
0
0
0
0
7
4
2
37
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
19
Confusion Matrix of
densenet_jp_p1 on
Protocol dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
(a)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
769 14
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
905 26 11
2
1
0
1
0
0
893 59 33 10
5
4
1
0
0
702122125 32 30 48 22
0
5
296 98 140 87 74 167117 17 15
41 15 35 91 60 276419 43 47
1
0
5
27 14 214407124236
0
0
2
13
8 148238129469
1
0
0
15
4 145138136524
Confusion Matrix of
densenet_jp_p1 on
LFW dataset
0
200
400
600
800
(b)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
3
1
11 19
4
15 14
2
5
1
0
6
10
5
14 26
0
2
0
0
2
7
4
6
31
3
12
0
0
0
3
0
7
22
2
25
0
0
0
0
1
5
16
0
44
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
0
64
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
63
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
89
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
61
Confusion Matrix of
densenet_jp_p1 on
FRLL dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
(c)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
264 13 26
8
0
1
0
1
0
31 67 37 14
1
3
4
0
2
16 11 67 14
8
7
6
0
1
1
2
9
40
4
8
12
0
2
0
1
8
5
40 14 19
3
14
0
0
2
2
7
45 18
5
23
0
0
2
1
3
12 46
2
16
0
0
0
1
0
9
7
27 51
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 169
Confusion Matrix of
densenet_jp_p1 on
EDAMB dataset
0
50
100
150
200
250
(d)
Figure 7.9: Confusion matrices for the densenet_jp_p1 model.
==PAGE:77==
7.3 Confusion Matrix
69
7.3.5
vit_jp_p1
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
82
3
4
1
1
1
1
0
2
51
5
15
0
4
2
3
0
0
18 10 15
0
7
6
4
1
0
8
0
2
0
7
3
10
2
6
5
1
4
1
14
9
11
2
8
3
1
3
0
7
3
19
1
12
0
1
2
0
3
2
7
3
18
0
1
3
0
0
0
3
7
36
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
17
Confusion Matrix of
vit_jp_p1 on
Protocol dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
(a)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
324417 20 13
6
1
5
1
1
334536 46 11 13
1
4
0
1
350511 81 22 29
2
9
0
1
260491164 49 89 14 16
1
2
188313163 70 194 49 27
5
2
44 53 37 19 465184209 16
0
2
1
1
0
79 142737 65
1
0
0
0
1
5
72 677116136
0
1
3
2
5
80 427107338
Confusion Matrix of
vit_jp_p1 on
LFW dataset
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
(b)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
11
1
19
1
19 21
0
2
0
5
0
5
0
25 16 13
0
0
5
0
1
0
20
5
30
3
1
0
0
0
0
5
5
42
5
2
0
0
0
1
3
0
40
7
15
0
0
0
5
1
1
8
5
49
0
0
2
1
3
0
0
1
58
0
1
2
2
3
5
0
8
68
2
0
5
1
0
2
0
11 40
Confusion Matrix of
vit_jp_p1 on
FRLL dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
(c)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
287 7
8
1
5
2
1
0
2
94 24 23
4
7
2
4
0
1
51 15 36
0
10 10
5
1
2
14
5
11
5
15
4
11
3
10
5
2
9
1
37 13 17
3
17
4
2
5
1
10 20 27
9
24
0
2
3
1
6
7
29
4
30
0
1
3
0
1
3
10 22 55
0
0
1
0
1
2
3
2 161
Confusion Matrix of
vit_jp_p1 on
EDAMB dataset
0
50
100
150
200
250
(d)
Figure 7.10: Confusion matrices for the vit_jp_p1 model.
==PAGE:78==
7.3 Confusion Matrix
70
7.3.6
vit_jp_p2
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
54
8
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
23
6
0
2
4
1
0
1
0
24 19
1
0
1
3
0
0
0
16
7
1
2
4
2
0
0
1
11
8
0
11 12
4
0
0
1
1
4
5
6
14
8
2
0
4
0
1
3
5
13 17
3
2
6
1
2
1
6
12 17
2
3
28
0
0
2
0
14
9
1
3
54
Confusion Matrix of
vit_jp_p2 on
Protocol dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
(a)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
721 55
2
0
0
7
0
1
2
813121 5
1
0
2
0
3
1
819156 14
1
0
11
1
2
1
704282 27
6
26 25
7
8
1
364341 66 46 90 74 20
9
1
33 59 68 197406244 17
3
0
3
1
3
65 87 834 35
0
0
1
1
8
28 56 556322 4
31
2
1
11 43 80 362290 13 161
Confusion Matrix of
vit_jp_p2 on
LFW dataset
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
(b)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
0
14 26 15 18
1
0
0
0
0
4
12 14 33
1
0
0
0
0
0
5
27 22
9
0
0
2
0
0
3
18 13 23
0
0
2
0
0
3
16
8
20
8
1
10
0
1
4
7
0
10
6
4
37
0
6
2
1
2
0
0
1
53
1
7
0
15
7
12
0
4
43
0
6
0
6
10 16
0
7
16
Confusion Matrix of
vit_jp_p2 on
FRLL dataset
0
10
20
30
40
50
(c)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Predicted label
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
True label
280 21
6
1
4
0
0
0
1
76 61
7
3
7
4
0
1
0
41 33 40
4
9
3
0
0
0
18
7
10 22 13
5
0
0
3
13 10
3
17 40 12
2
0
7
2
6
6
8
25 38
6
0
11
0
1
4
7
16 24 11
2
17
1
2
1
7
13 21
5
8
37
0
0
2
0
17 10
1
5 135
Confusion Matrix of
vit_jp_p2 on
EDAMB dataset
0
50
100
150
200
250
(d)
Figure 7.11: Confusion matrices for the vit_jp_p2 model.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
In this chapter, I will analyze the results presented in the previous chapter. Following
this, I will discuss some potential errors in the data found during the analysis and
how to mitigate them if I were to repeat the experiments. Finally, I wish to bring the
model complexity and portability perspective before discussing the best-performing
method(s).
8.1
Analysis of Results
I have further split the analysis into grouped metrics sections to introduce the results
gradually.
Before diving into the individual metrics, I will start by looking at the results of
the classic computer vision method and the sharpness measure of the OFIQ library.
As can be seen in the FNM-EDC curves of Figures 7.1-7.5, as well as the numeric
results in Tables 7.1-7.3, both methods provides results which are at times multitudes
worse than the selected machine learning models. In the FNM-EDC curves, the classic
computer vision method rarely goes below the initial FNMR value before reaching the
discard fraction limit at 0.20. The OFIQ sharpness measure does a little better and can
occasionally compete with some of the worse-performing models. In an isolated world
where no better methods exist, the OFIQ sharpness measure could also be considered
for application to assess face image quality regarding motion blur. However, other and
better methods exist, so I will no longer dwell on these methods.
8.1.1
Partial Area Under Curve (pAUC)
When considering the pAUC values from Table 7.1, along with the FNM-EDC curves
in Figures 7.1-7.5, it can be seen that the densenet_jp_p1 model performs quite well,
being the best in Protocol 1 and the full EDAMB dataset, as well as only 0.16% behind
the best-performing model on the FRLL [38] dataset, vit_jp_p2. It is also only 4.9%
worse than the best-performing model on the LFW [60] dataset, convnext_jp_p1,
which is pretty good to perform this well across the datasets.
vit_jp_p2 is a notable model since it performs the best for the Protocol 2 and
FRLL [38] datasets. However, it performs 24.2% worse than convnext_jp_p1 on the
LFW [60] dataset and 13.6% worse than densenet_jp_p1 for the full EDAMB dataset.
Another notably well-performing model is the densenet_jp_p2 model, which is not
the best performer for any dataset but provides decent results across the board. It
==PAGE:80==
8.1 Analysis of Results
72
is only 2.6% worse than convnext_jp_p1 on the LFW [60] dataset, 7.6% worse than
vit_jp_p2 on the FRLL [38] dataset, 13.5% worse than vit_jp_p2 in Protocol 2 and
13.6% worse than densenet_jp_p1 on the full EDAMB dataset.
What is essential to keep in mind when looking at Table 7.1 with the pAUC values
is that with the given starting error (0.05), the theoretically best achievable pAUC
value is 0.00125. This area is left under the gray dashed line in the FNM-EDC curves.
This value has been subtracted from the presented pAUC values, like what has been
done in [10] by Schlett, Rathgeb, Tapia, et al.
8.1.2
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Squared Error (MSE)
Since the MAE and MSE metrics are somewhat related, in that MAE emphasizes all
errors equally and is thus more robust to outliers. In contrast, MSE emphasizes outliers.
The MAE and MSE results can be seen in Tables 7.2 and 7.3 respectively.
Again here, the densenet_jp_p1 model shows good results, with the smallest MAE
and MSE for the LFW [60] dataset, while only the MAE is smallest for the full EDAMB
dataset, where the MSE is 2.1% larger than for the model densenet_jp_p2. When it
comes to the FRLL [38] dataset, densenet_jp_p1 is 52.8% higher than densenet_jp_p2
in terms of MAE and 115.8% higher in terms of MSE, and 14.2% and 27.8% higher than
convnext_jp_p1 in terms of MAE and MSE respectively for the Protocol 1 dataset.
So despite having some decent pAUC results, it has some pretty big errors, particularly
for the FRLL [38] dataset.
The densenet_jp_p2, as mentioned, has the best MAE and MSE for the FRLL
[38] dataset, and also the best MSE for the full EDAMB dataset. The MAE for the
EDAMB dataset is only 6% higher than densenet_jp_p1. Besides, densenet_jp_p2
is also the best-performing model for the Protocol 2 dataset for both MAE and MSE,
but 28.5% and 57.4% higher than the densenet_jp_p1 model on the LFW [60] dataset
for the MAE and MSE respectively. The remaining selected models do not stand out
positively in any way.
8.1.3
Machine Learning Metrics
Just like the MAE and MSE scores, the machine learning metrics of accuracy and
weighted F1-score are also related, and when looking at Tables 7.4 and 7.5, it can be
seen that, except for Protocol 1, all models with the best values are identical. Therefore,
I will solely focus on the weighted F1-scores since these are the more representative of
the two metrics for what I wish to investigate. It is also worth stating that none of the
results would be particularly impressive if the models were only used as classification
models.
Once again, densenet_jp_p1 is notable. It has the best results for Protocol 1, while
only 21.3% worse than the best model for the LFW [60] dataset, vit_jp_p1. It is also
only 0.3% worse than the best model for the full EDAMB dataset, densenet_jp_p2.
It is, however, 51.7% worse than the best model, convnext_jp_p1, for the FRLL [38]
dataset.
==PAGE:81==
8.2 Potential Errors Encountered
73
As mentioned, densenet_jp_p2 is the best model for the full EDAMB dataset and
the best model for the Protocol 2 dataset. As for the LFW [60] dataset, it is 37.7%
worse than the best model, vit_jp_p1, and 5.7% worse than the best FRLL [38] model,
convnext_jp_p1.
8.1.4
Confusion Matrices
When looking at the confusion matrices for the convnext_jp_p1 model in Figure 7.6,
it can be seen that the model, in general, has a hard time predicting quality measure
values between 30 and 90 across all datasets, and thus also has a general tendency
to under- or overpredict by a lot. When keeping in mind that this is the model that
has the best weighted F1-score on the FRLL [38] dataset, it says a lot about what to
expect for the confusion matrices for the other models for the FRLL [38] dataset. This
would not be usable as a classification model.
The confusion matrices of the densenet_jp_p2 model in Figure 7.7 show way better
performance than convnext_jp_p1, as some predictions along the diagonal can be seen.
Notably, it tends to underpredict the quality measure values in all datasets except for
FRLL [38].
This can be seen in that values tend to be below the diagonal of the
matrices. As for the FRLL [38], the precision seems to be all over the place.
Regarding the convnext_jp_p2 model, we again see a model with really poor results
in the confusion matrices of Figure 7.8. For the images from the EDAMB dataset it
was trained on, it completely fails to predict values in the range of 60-80 reliably, and
the same goes for the LFW [60] dataset. Once again is the FRLL [38] confusion matrix
all over the place.
The densenet_jp_p1 model was a good model when considering the previous results.
When looking at the confusion matrices of Figure 7.9, we see that for all datasets, except
FRLL [38], which once again is unusable, it performs decently. However, it potentially
underpredicts a bit on the LFW [60] dataset.
The results in the confusion matrices for the vit_jp_p1 model, as seen in Figure
7.10, seem to be very widely distributed, in particular for the Protocol and full EDAMB
datasets, but also to a lesser degree in the LFW [60] dataset, which also seems to suffer
from underpredicting. The confusion matrix for the FRLL [38] dataset appears highly
skewed to the right and suffers from extreme overprediction.
Finally, the confusion matrices for the vit_jp_p2 model, from Figure 7.11, seems to
suffer from a strong tendency to underestimate, which can be seen in both the Protocol
and LFW [60] datasets. The full EDAMB dataset seems to be better regarding that,
but instead, it has very spread-out predictions.
The FRLL [38] dataset confusion
matrix is all over the place for this model.
8.2
Potential Errors Encountered
As already mentioned in the previous section, all of the selected models had a hard
time predicting well on the FRLL [38] dataset, as evidenced not only by their confusion
matrices but also by the weighted F1-scores compared to the other datasets.
==PAGE:82==
8.2 Potential Errors Encountered
74
I believe the method used to apply the synthetic motion blur might be fundamen-
tally flawed. When inspecting the synthetically blurred datasets in Figure 5.2, a big
difference in perceived motion blur intensity to the human eye can be seen between
the two datasets. For an image with a quality measure value of 40 in the FRLL [38]
dataset, an equivalent for the LFW [60] dataset would be a quality measure value of
70. This means that the quality measure value labeling between the two datasets is
inconsistent. When manually inspecting images from the two datasets of Figure 5.2
and comparing the images from the EDAMB dataset with real motion blur, then it is
noticeable that the blurred LFW [60] dataset and their labeling is a lot closer to what
has been applied in the EDAMB dataset.
I believe these blur intensity and labeling inconsistencies stem from the datasets
having different input resolutions before applying the synthetic motion blur. Due to
the nature of kernel sizes, a larger kernel size needs to be utilized for higher-resolution
input images to achieve the same perceivable motion blur intensity compared to another
input image with a lower resolution. The mapping presented in Table 5.1 was created
with face images cropped and aligned with a face detection method, as described in
Section 6.2.1, and an expected resolution of 224 × 224 pixels in mind.
But in the
end, it was mistakenly applied directly to the raw FRLL [38] and LFW [60] datasets,
with resolutions of 1350 × 1350 and 250 × 250 respectively, without being cropped
and aligned. When applying the synthetic motion blur directly on the raw images
and following cropping and aligning the images as part of the preprocessing, incorrect
intensities are applied.
For the LFW [60] dataset, it results in slightly too strong
synthetic motion blur applied since the face image ends up being enlarged as part of
the preprocessing, while for the FRLL [38] dataset, the synthetic motion blur ends up
being way too weak.
This explains, when looking at the confusion matrices in Figures 7.6-7.11, why the
models tend to underpredict on the LFW [60] dataset, and overpredict, or be all over
the place with the FRLL [38] dataset. If I were to repeat the experiments on those
datasets, I would ensure I properly preprocessed them before applying the synthetic
motion blur.
Since the results for the FRLL [38] dataset seem so sporadic, I will exclude them
from further analysis here in this thesis since they do not contribute to reliable results.
The LFW [60] dataset is somewhat better and less affected by this and is therefore still
considered for further analysis. Ideally, if time had allowed, I would have generated
the synthetic datasets anew and processed new results, such that the results from the
synthetic datasets could be utilized better.
If I were to redo the classic computer vision method as well, I would have put
more work into creating the conversion, as mentioned earlier in Table 5.1. Instead of
creating it by manually comparing images from the EDAMB dataset with synthetic
blurred images, I would have automated it and only used the EDAMB dataset to create
the mapping. This could be done by finding a sensible set of starting hyperparameters
for the classic computer vision method, processing all of the images from the EDAMB
dataset, and making each quality measure value mapping the average predicted kernel
size. Then, the hyperparameters could be tuned further using Hydra as already done.
Another thing to consider is the quality of the images of the LFW [60] dataset.
Since these images have been captured in the wild over a long period of time and
==PAGE:83==
8.3 Model Complexity and Portability
75
are provided in a low resolution, these images can be affected by a series of other
quality degradations, which in themselves could affect FIQA. This could, for example,
be out-of-focus blur or just very low image resolution.
8.3
Model Complexity and Portability
When looking into the model complexity of the two best-performing selected mod-
els, densenet_jp_p1 and densenet_jp_p2, it is notable that both are based on the
DenseNet [2] architecture. The models utilize the DenseNet169 and DenseNet161 base
models, respectively, which are far from the most complex base models when looking
at the overview in Table 5.4.
The slightly less complex DenseNet121 has been utilized in vision-based machine
learning applications on mobile devices, such as seen in [78], and the DenseNet169 base
model has also been benchmarked on mobile devices in [79]. While DenseNet169 was
not the best-performing model benchmarked, it still performed decently, proving that
the DenseNet models of this complexity can run on a wide range of hardware.
8.4
Best of the Selected Methods
When solely considering the pAUC score, which assesses the quality component’s pre-
dictive performance within the domain of FIQA, the densenet_jp_p1 is the best of the
selected models, although the densenet_jp_p2 model is also very good, only slightly
worse than densenet_jp_p1. Both are also pretty equal regarding the MAE, MSE,
and machine learning metrics.
What makes up the differences in the predictive performance between these two
models could be the protocol they’ve been fine-tuned on or just a pure coincidence of
what information the machine learning models have learned from the training pro-
cess.
The densenet_jp_p1 model has been fine-tuned on grayscale images, while
densenet_jp_p2 has been fine-tuned on color images.
This could also have an in-
fluence.
Since there is over a two-times difference in complexity between the two models in
regards to parameters and MACs and 50% increased activations of densenet_jp_p2,
the densenet_jp_p1 model is undoubtedly the best performing of the selected models,
both in regards to model complexity, but also predictive performance.
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 9
Further Work
In this chapter, I will describe some potential venues for further work on this project to
further investigate potential performance improvements, improve usability, and more.
As I already eluded to in Section 8.2, it would be very beneficial to recreate the
synthetically blurred LFW [60] and FRLL [38] datasets, such that the blur intensities
and quality measure values properly aligns with the scoring utilized in the EDAMB
dataset. Following these newly generated datasets, all of the fine-tuned models would
have to be evaluated anew to ensure that the best-performing model found in Chapter
8 really is the best-performing model found.
I also believe that further experimentation on the classic computer vision method
should be performed, as described in Section 8.2, including recreating the mapping
from blur kernel sizes to quality measure values. This could allow for performance
improvements to the predictive performance of the classic computer vision method.
The selection of base models, as presented in Table 5.4, could also be extended fur-
ther, evaluating even more base models, such as the new family of MobileNetV4 models,
which are optimized for fast performance on modern mobile devices [80], and have been
released in April 2024. Besides extending the used base models, the fine-tuned models
should also be attempted to be fine-tuned anew, but instead of targeting a classification
problem, as done here, to directly target a regression problem to investigate whether
this yields performance improvements.
Finally, since the OFIQ framework was released following the commencement of
work on this thesis, it has not been integrated as thoroughly as it could have been.
Instead of using the fiqat framework to detect faces and find the face bounding box
as described in Section 6.2.1, the OFIQ framework can perform the same task.
If
the quality component for motion blur prevention proposed as part of this thesis is
to become part of the ISO/IEC 29794-5 [1] standard in the future, it would also need
to be implemented into the OFIQ framework as it serves a reference implementation.
To facilitate this, the densenet_jp_p1, and potentially densenet_jp_p2, models need
to be exported to a more transportable format than the existing Python pickle object
serialization, such as ONNX, which allows for the deployment in other frameworks and
programming languages, such as C++ as seen in the OFIQ framework.
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
As part of this master’s thesis, I have developed and evaluated FIQA quality compo-
nents using classic computer vision and machine learning methods to estimate motion
blur intensity.
The classic computer vision method I developed performed very poorly for motion
blur intensity estimation, even worse than non-motion blur intensity-specific quality
components, such as the OFIQ sharpness measure.
However, the classic computer
vision method for motion blur direction estimation, inspired by work by Shi and Gong
[48], performed seemingly well on the EDAMB dataset, although no ground truth labels
were provided.
Over 500 machine learning models have been fine-tuned in different ways to deter-
mine which hyperparameter configuration could yield the best possible performance.
Through selective model evaluation on datasets with both real and synthetic motion
blur, six configurations were selected for further evaluation, where one configuration,
referred to by the alias densenet_jp_p1 using the DenseNet169 base model, performed
the best in regards to the model complexity and predictive performance.
==PAGE:86==
10 Conclusion
78
==PAGE:87==
Acronyms
ABC Automated Border Control.
AF Activation Function.
ANN Artificial Neural Network.
BN Batch Normalization.
CNN Convolutional Neural Network.
CS Comparison Score.
DFT Discrete Fourier Transform.
DNN Deep Neural Network.
EDC Error versus Discard Characteristic.
EDF Empirical Distribution Function.
eMRTD electronic Machine Readable Travel Documents.
FIQA Face Image Quality Assessment.
FNM-EDC False Non-Match Error versus Discard Characteristic.
FNMR False Non-Match Rate.
FNN Feed-forward Neural Network.
FRS Face Recognition Systems.
GAN Generative Adversarial Networks.
GELU Gaussian Error Linear Unit.
IED inter-eye distance.
LN Linear Normalization.
==PAGE:88==
Acronyms
80
MAE Mean Absolute Error.
MSE Mean Squared Error.
NLP Natural Language Processing.
pAUC partial Area Under Curve.
QS Quality Score.
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit.
RNN Recurrent Neural Network.
ROI Region of Interest.
==PAGE:89==
List of Figures
4.1
Example application of luminance conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Hann window applied to image from Figure 4.1(b) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3
Application of log10 magnitude spectrum (a) on Hann-windowed image from
Figure 4.2 and a low- and high-pass filter applied to said magnitude spec-
trum (b) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4
Cepstrum transformation of Figure 4.3(b). Dynamic range has been reduced
to increase the perception of Cepstrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5
Sinogram of Figure 4.3(b). During the integral of the Radon transform,
when θ is parallel to the lines, a peak occurs in the middle. The diamond
shape of the sinogram shows this. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.6
An example ANN, which takes three features as input, has five neurons in
the single hidden layer and two neurons in the output layer, meaning it can
return two different results [50] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.7
Example of a confusion matrix with ten classes, based on a classification
model fine-tuned as part of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1
A random selection of original images from LFW [60] and FRLL [38] to be
synthetically blurred in Figure 5.2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Same selection of random images from Figure 5.1, now synthetically blurred
30
5.3
Demonstration of the effect of rotation at different values of θ. It can be seen
that the rotation starts at horizontal at θ = 0 and continues anticlockwise
until it reaches horizontal again at θ = 180
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Full visualization of steps performed in the classic computer vision method
shown in Algorithm 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1
Examples of images from EDAMB dataset with varying quality measure
values, following preprocessing with fiqat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Histogram of the distribution of quality measure values of the EDAMB
dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Histogram of the estimated motion blur directions of the EDAMB dataset,
using my classic computer vision method. Motion blur direction 0/180 is
horizontal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.4
Histogram of the distribution of images by location and camera models of
the EDAMB dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.5
Histogram of the distribution of quality measure values across each location
of the EDAMB dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:90==
List of Figures
82
6.6
Histogram of the distribution of camera models across each location of the
EDAMB dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.7
Histogram of the distribution of quality measure values across each camera
model of the EDAMB dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.8
Histogram of the distribution of locations across each camera model of the
EDAMB dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.9
Histogram of quality measure values of images where face detectors failed
to detect a face of the EDAMB dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.10 Histogram of locations of images where face detectors failed to detect a face
of the EDAMB dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.11 Histogram of camera models of images where face detectors failed to detect
a face of the EDAMB dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.1
The FNM-EDC curves for the Protocol 1 evaluation dataset. pAUC for the
best-performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.1 . . . . .
58
7.2
The FNM-EDC curves for the Protocol 2 evaluation dataset. pAUC for the
best-performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.2 . . . . .
59
7.3
The FNM-EDC curves for the LFW [60] dataset.
pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.3
. . . . . . .
60
7.4
The FNM-EDC curves for the FRLL [38] dataset.
pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.4
. . . . . . .
61
7.5
The FNM-EDC curves for the full EDAMB dataset. pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray. For a larger graph, see Figure C.5
. . . . . . .
62
7.6
Confusion matrices for the convnext_jp_p1 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.7
Confusion matrices for the densenet_jp_p2 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.8
Confusion matrices for the convnext_jp_p2 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.9
Confusion matrices for the densenet_jp_p1 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.10 Confusion matrices for the vit_jp_p1 model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.11 Confusion matrices for the vit_jp_p2 model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.1 The FNM-EDC curves for the Protocol 1 evaluation dataset. pAUC for the
best-performing method in gray . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.2 The FNM-EDC curves for the Protocol 2 evaluation dataset. pAUC for the
best-performing method in gray . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.3 The FNM-EDC curves for the LFW [60] dataset.
pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
C.4 The FNM-EDC curves for the FRLL [38] dataset.
pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.5 The FNM-EDC curves for the full NBL dataset. pAUC for the best-performing
method in gray . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
==PAGE:91==
List of Tables
5.1
Mapping from kernel size to quality measure value . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Range of θ values that are applied to the synthetic motion blur algorithm .
29
5.3
Searchable hyperparameters of the hyperparameter search for the classic
computer vision algorithm. These hyperparameters can be found in the file
src/config/config_hc.yaml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Overview of the different machine learning base models and their pre-trained
weights, from https://huggingface.co, sorted by MACs and split into
smaller groups based on the MACs values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.5
All hyperparameters that are being combined with the Hydra framework to
generate all combinations of models. These hyperparameters can be found
in the file src/config/config_fastai.yaml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1
The selected best-performing models, their hyperparameter configurations,
and their respective aliases. The columns C, N, G, MS, and R each indi-
cate whether the training images utilized cropping, normalization, grayscale
conversion, magnitude spectrum conversion, or rotation transformation, re-
spectively . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.1
Partial Area Under Curve results for evaluated methods and all datasets.
Theoretically best have been subtracted. Smaller is better. The best value
for the dataset is shown in bold. Dark cells denote incompatible models
and protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.2
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) results for evaluated methods and all datasets.
Smaller is better. The best value for the dataset is shown in bold. Dark
cells denote incompatible models and protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3
Mean Squared Error (MSE) results for evaluated methods and all datasets.
Smaller is better. The best value for the dataset is shown in bold. Dark
cells denote incompatible models and protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.4
Accuracy results for evaluated methods and all datasets. Larger is better.
The best value for the dataset is shown in bold. Dark cells denote incom-
patible models and protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.5
Weighted F1-score results for evaluated methods and all datasets. Larger is
better. The best value for the dataset is shown in bold. Dark cells denote
incompatible models and protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
==PAGE:92==
List of Tables
84
A.1 The top 100 best performing fine-tuned models when averaging the scaled
MSE of FRLL, LFW, and the protocol evaluation subset. The columns C,
N, G, MS, and R each indicate whether the training images utilized crop-
ping, normalization, grayscale conversion, magnitude spectrum conversion,
or rotation transformation, respectively
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.1 The top 100 best performing fine-tuned models when averaging the pAUC
of FRLL, LFW, and the protocol evaluation subset. The columns C, N,
G, MS, and R each indicate whether the training images utilized cropping,
normalization, grayscale conversion, magnitude spectrum conversion, or ro-
tation transformation, respectively. Theoretically best value have not been
subtracted.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX A
Top 100 Fine-Tuned
Models - Average MSE
Table A.1: The top 100 best performing fine-tuned models when
averaging the scaled MSE of FRLL, LFW, and the
protocol evaluation subset.
The columns C, N, G,
MS, and R each indicate whether the training images
utilized cropping, normalization, grayscale conversion,
magnitude spectrum conversion, or rotation transfor-
mation, respectively.
Protocol
Base Model
C
N
G
MS
R
Average MSE
(Scaled)
protocol2
densenet161





0,042938
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,042995
protocol2
densenet161





0,043530
protocol2
densenet161





0,044286
protocol2
regnety_160





0,044588
protocol2
vit_small_patch16_224





0,044727
protocol2
regnety_160





0,045014
protocol2
resnet18





0,045522
protocol2
densenet161





0,045735
protocol2
densenet169





0,046134
protocol2
vit_base_patch16_224





0,046366
protocol2
vit_small_patch16_224





0,046563
protocol2
densenet169





0,046579
protocol2
regnety_160





0,047061
protocol2
regnety_160





0,047119
protocol1
convnext_base





0,047157
protocol2
vit_small_patch16_224





0,047295
protocol2
densenet201





0,047533
protocol2
densenet161





0,047611
protocol2
resnet50





0,047646
protocol2
regnety_032





0,047680
==PAGE:94==
A Top 100 Fine-Tuned Models - Average MSE
86
Table A.1 continued from previous page
Protocol
Base Model
C
N
G
MS
R
Average MSE
(Scaled)
protocol2
densenet169





0,047710
protocol2
densenet169





0,047770
protocol2
densenet169





0,048016
protocol2
densenet169





0,048062
protocol2
densenet121





0,048332
protocol2
regnety_032





0,048390
protocol2
resnet18





0,048414
protocol2
vit_base_patch16_224





0,048506
protocol2
densenet121





0,048534
protocol2
regnety_032





0,048622
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,048702
protocol2
densenet121





0,048881
protocol2
densenet169





0,048916
protocol2
regnety_080





0,048940
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,049413
protocol2
vit_base_patch16_224





0,049594
protocol2
densenet161





0,049621
protocol2
densenet201





0,049645
protocol2
densenet121





0,049688
protocol2
regnety_032





0,049762
protocol2
densenet169





0,049768
protocol2
resnet18





0,049881
protocol1
convnext_tiny





0,050006
protocol2
resnet34





0,050007
protocol2
densenet161





0,050058
protocol2
resnet34





0,050120
protocol2
densenet121





0,050174
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,050175
protocol2
vit_base_patch16_224





0,050186
protocol2
densenet161





0,050279
protocol2
resnet18





0,050446
protocol2
regnety_080





0,050460
protocol2
regnety_080





0,050544
protocol2
regnety_080





0,050928
protocol2
densenet201





0,051004
protocol2
densenet121





0,051245
protocol2
resnet18





0,051516
protocol2
resnet34





0,051593
protocol2
convnext_base





0,051655
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,051851
protocol2
densenet201





0,052029
==PAGE:95==
A Top 100 Fine-Tuned Models - Average MSE
87
Table A.1 continued from previous page
Protocol
Base Model
C
N
G
MS
R
Average MSE
(Scaled)
protocol2
densenet121





0,052090
protocol2
regnety_080





0,052124
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,052137
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,052356
protocol2
densenet201





0,052513
protocol2
regnety_080





0,052541
protocol2
regnety_160





0,052582
protocol1
vit_base_patch16_224





0,052637
protocol2
vit_small_patch16_224





0,052639
protocol2
resnet50





0,052767
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,052918
protocol2
densenet121





0,052986
protocol2
resnet50





0,052998
protocol2
resnet101





0,053296
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,053358
protocol2
resnet18





0,053382
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,053471
protocol2
densenet201





0,053526
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,053605
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,053904
protocol2
resnet152





0,053950
protocol2
regnety_080





0,054137
protocol1
convnext_base





0,054139
protocol2
regnety_032





0,054162
protocol2
convnext_base





0,054237
protocol2
resnet18





0,054299
protocol2
resnet34





0,054721
protocol2
regnety_160





0,055589
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,055678
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,055796
protocol2
convnext_base





0,055819
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,055855
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,055867
protocol2
resnet50





0,055887
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,055908
protocol2
resnet18





0,055911
protocol2
regnety_160





0,056056
protocol2
resnet152





0,056215
==PAGE:96==
APPENDIX B
Top 100 Fine-Tuned
Models - Average pAUC
Table B.1: The top 100 best performing fine-tuned models when
averaging the pAUC of FRLL, LFW, and the proto-
col evaluation subset. The columns C, N, G, MS, and
R each indicate whether the training images utilized
cropping, normalization, grayscale conversion, magni-
tude spectrum conversion, or rotation transformation,
respectively. Theoretically best value have not been
subtracted..
Protocol
Base Model
C
N
G
MS
R
Average
pAUC
protocol2
vit_small_patch16_224





0,00407
protocol1
densenet169





0,00486
protocol2
regnety_160





0,0049
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,00494
protocol2
resnet34





0,00498
protocol1
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,00501
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,00507
protocol1
densenet169





0,0051
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,005135
protocol2
regnety_160





0,005135
protocol2
regnety_160





0,005205
protocol2
regnety_160





0,00523
protocol2
densenet161





0,005265
protocol2
regnety_160





0,00532
protocol2
resnet34





0,005345
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,00535
protocol2
resnet34





0,005405
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,005445
protocol1
densenet169





0,00545
protocol2
regnety_160





0,00545
==PAGE:97==
B Top 100 Fine-Tuned Models - Average pAUC
89
Table B.1 continued from previous page
Protocol
Base Model
C
N
G
MS
R
Average
pAUC
protocol2
regnety_160





0,00547
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,005485
protocol2
densenet161





0,0055
protocol2
regnety_080





0,00555
protocol2
densenet161





0,00555
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,00556
protocol2
convnext_base





0,00556
protocol2
densenet161





0,005565
protocol2
vit_base_patch16_224





0,00559
protocol2
densenet161





0,005605
protocol2
regnety_032





0,005615
protocol2
regnety_080





0,00562
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,005625
protocol2
resnext101_32x8d





0,00569
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,005695
protocol1
densenet161





0,00572
protocol1
convnext_tiny





0,00573
protocol1
vit_small_patch16_224





0,00574
protocol2
resnet18





0,005775
protocol2
densenet121





0,00578
protocol1
densenet161





0,00578
protocol2
densenet161





0,005815
protocol2
resnet34





0,005815
protocol1
densenet161





0,00584
protocol2
densenet121





0,005855
protocol1
densenet169





0,00586
protocol2
convnext_base





0,005865
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,005875
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,00588
protocol2
densenet121





0,0059
protocol2
regnety_080





0,0059
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,0059
protocol1
vit_small_patch16_224





0,00599
protocol2
regnety_080





0,00599
protocol2
densenet169





0,006005
protocol2
densenet169





0,006005
protocol1
resnext101_32x8d





0,00601
protocol1
resnext101_64x4d





0,00603
protocol2
resnet18





0,00606
protocol1
convnext_tiny





0,00606
protocol2
vit_base_patch16_224





0,006085
==PAGE:98==
B Top 100 Fine-Tuned Models - Average pAUC
90
Table B.1 continued from previous page
Protocol
Base Model
C
N
G
MS
R
Average
pAUC
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,0061
protocol1
resnext101_32x8d





0,0061
protocol2
vit_base_patch16_224





0,006105
protocol2
regnety_032





0,00611
protocol2
densenet121





0,006135
protocol2
regnety_032





0,006165
protocol2
vit_small_patch16_224





0,00617
protocol2
densenet121





0,00617
protocol2
regnety_080





0,00618
protocol2
densenet169





0,006195
protocol2
vit_small_patch16_224





0,00623
protocol2
regnety_080





0,006265
protocol2
densenet121





0,006285
protocol1
resnet101





0,0063
protocol2
densenet169





0,0063
protocol2
resnet18





0,006305
protocol2
densenet169





0,006305
protocol2
densenet121





0,00631
protocol2
resnet18





0,006315
protocol2
densenet201





0,006325
protocol1
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,00634
protocol1
convnext_tiny





0,00634
protocol1
resnext101_32x8d





0,00634
protocol1
resnext50_32x4d





0,00634
protocol1
convnext_base





0,00635
protocol2
densenet169





0,00636
protocol2
resnet18





0,006375
protocol2
densenet161





0,006395
protocol2
convnext_tiny





0,0064
protocol1
resnext101_64x4d





0,00641
protocol2
vit_tiny_patch16_224





0,006415
protocol2
densenet161





0,006425
protocol2
regnety_080





0,00643
protocol1
resnet101





0,00644
protocol1
resnet34





0,00645
protocol2
densenet121





0,006455
protocol1
resnext50_32x4d





0,00646
protocol2
resnet34





0,00647
protocol1
densenet121





0,00648
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX C
Full FNM-EDC Curves
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on Protocol 1 Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
convnext_jp_p1
densenet_jp_p1
vit_jp_p1
Figure C.1: The FNM-EDC curves for the Protocol 1 evaluation dataset. pAUC for
the best-performing method in gray.
==PAGE:100==
C Full FNM-EDC Curves
92
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on Protocol 2 Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
densenet_jp_p2
convnext_jp_p2
vit_jp_p2
Figure C.2: The FNM-EDC curves for the Protocol 2 evaluation dataset. pAUC for
the best-performing method in gray.
==PAGE:101==
C Full FNM-EDC Curves
93
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on LFW Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
convnext_jp_p1
densenet_jp_p2
convnext_jp_p2
densenet_jp_p1
vit_jp_p1
vit_jp_p2
Figure C.3: The FNM-EDC curves for the LFW [60] dataset. pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray.
==PAGE:102==
C Full FNM-EDC Curves
94
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on FRLL Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
convnext_jp_p1
densenet_jp_p2
convnext_jp_p2
densenet_jp_p1
vit_jp_p1
vit_jp_p2
Figure C.4: The FNM-EDC curves for the FRLL [38] dataset. pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray.
==PAGE:103==
C Full FNM-EDC Curves
95
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Discarded
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
FNMR
FNM-EDC of Classic Computer Vision Method,
OFIQ Sharpness and Selected Models on EDAMB Dataset
Classic_CV
OFIQ_Sharpness
convnext_jp_p1
densenet_jp_p2
convnext_jp_p2
densenet_jp_p1
vit_jp_p1
vit_jp_p2
Figure C.5: The FNM-EDC curves for the full NBL dataset. pAUC for the best-
performing method in gray.
==PAGE:104==
Bibliography
[1]
ISO/IEC JTC1 SC37 Biometrics, ISO/IEC DIS 29794-5 information technology
- biometric sample quality - part 5: Face image data, International Organization
for Standardization, 2024.
[2]
G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely Con-
nected Convolutional Networks,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), volume 2017-January, 2017, pages 2261–2269.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.243.
[3]
S. M. M. Rahman, T. Howlader, and D. Hatzinakos, “Face Recognition,” in Or-
thogonal Image Moments for Human-Centric Visual Pattern Recognition, Springer
Singapore, 2019, pages 49–85. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9945-0_3.
[4]
T. Schlett, C. Rathgeb, O. Henniger, J. Galbally, J. Fierrez, and C. Busch,
“Face image quality assessment: A literature survey,” ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), December 2021. doi: 10.1145/3507901.
[5]
N. M. Chaki and M. W. Ashour, “Automated Border Control Systems: A Liter-
ature Review,” in 4th Smart Cities Symposium (SCS 2021), volume 2021, Insti-
tution of Engineering and Technology, 2021, pages 152–157. doi: 10.1049/ICP.
2022.0331.
[6]
J. Deng, J. Guo, and S. Zafeiriou, “ArcFace: Additive angular margin loss for
deep face recognition,” in Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), Jun. 2019. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00482.
[7]
R. Szeliski, Computer Vision (Texts in Computer Science). Springer International
Publishing, January 2022. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-34372-9.
[8]
A. K. Jain, A. A. Ross, and K. Nandakumar, Introduction to Biometrics, 1st edi-
tion. Springer New York, November 2011. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77326-1.
[9]
H. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhou, et al., “CosFace: Large Margin Cosine Loss for
Deep Face Recognition,” in 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, IEEE Computer Society, December 2018, pages 5265–
5274. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00552.
[10]
T. Schlett, C. Rathgeb, J. Tapia, and C. Busch, “Considerations on the evaluation
of biometric quality assessment algorithms,” Trans. on Biometrics, Behavior, and
Identity Science (TBIOM), December 2023. doi: 10.1109/TBIOM.2023.3336513.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
97
[11]
BSI - Open Source Face Image Quality (OFIQ), Federal Oﬀice for Information
Security, Last accessed: 2024-07-14, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.bsi.
bund.de/EN/Themen/Unternehmen- und- Organisationen/Informationen-
und-Empfehlungen/Freie-Software/OFIQ/OFIQ_node.html.
[12]
N. Joshi, “Motion Blur,” in Computer Vision: A Reference Guide, K. Ikeuchi,
Ed., 2nd edition, Springer International Publishing, Sep. 2021, pages 815–818.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-63416-2_512.
[13]
ISO/IEC JTC1 SC37 Biometrics, ISO/IEC 39794-5:2019 information technol-
ogy - extensible biometric data interchange formats - part 5: Face image data,
International Organization for Standardization, 2019.
[14]
International Civil Aviation Organization, Machine readable passports – part 9 –
deployment of biometric identification and electronic storage of data in eMRTDs,
Last accessed: 2024-07-08, International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
2021. [Online]. Available: http://www.icao.int/publications/Documents/
9303_p9_cons_en.pdf.
[15]
J. Merkle, C. Rathgeb, B. Tams, D.-P. Lou, A. Dörsch, and P. Drozdowski, “Fa-
cial Metrics for EES (EESFM) State of the Art of Quality Assessment of Facial
Images,” Federal Oﬀice for Information Security, Tech. Rep., November 2022.
arXiv: 2211.08030 [cs.CV].
[16]
P. Marziliano, F. Dufaux, S. Winkler, and T. Ebrahimi, “Perceptual blur and
ringing metrics: application to JPEG2000,” Signal Processing: Image Communi-
cation, volume 19, number 2, pages 163–172, February 2004. doi: 10.1016/J.
IMAGE.2003.08.003.
[17]
R. Ferzli and L. J. Karam, “No-reference objective wavelet based noise immune
image sharpness metric,” in IEEE International Conference on Image Processing
2005, volume 1, 2005, pages 405–408. doi: 10.1109/ICIP.2005.1529773.
[18]
K. Bahrami and A. C. Kot, “A Fast Approach for No-Reference Image Sharp-
ness Assessment Based on Maximum Local Variation,” IEEE Signal Processing
Letters, volume 21, number 6, pages 751–755, 2014. doi: 10.1109/LSP.2014.
2314487.
[19]
H. Zhao, B. Fang, and Y. Y. Tang, “A no-reference image sharpness estimation
based on expectation of wavelet transform coeﬀicients,” in 2013 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Image Processing, IEEE Computer Society, Sep. 2013,
pages 374–378. doi: 10.1109/ICIP.2013.6738077.
[20]
R. Hassen, Z. Wang, and M. Salama, “No-reference image sharpness assessment
based on local phase coherence measurement,” in 2010 IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., March 2010, pages 2434–2437. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.
2010.5496297.
[21]
L. Li, D. Wu, J. Wu, H. Li, W. Lin, and A. C. Kot, “Image Sharpness Assess-
ment by Sparse Representation,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, volume 18,
number 6, pages 1085–1097, Jun. 2016. doi: 10.1109/TMM.2016.2545398.
==PAGE:106==
Bibliography
98
[22]
K. Gu, G. Zhai, W. Lin, X. Yang, and W. Zhang, “No-Reference Image Sharpness
Assessment in Autoregressive Parameter Space,” IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, volume 24, number 10, pages 3218–3231, October 2015. doi: 10.1109/
TIP.2015.2439035.
[23]
B. Su, S. Lu, and C. L. Tan, “Blurred image region detection and classification,”
in MM ’11: Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
Association for Computing Machinery, 2011, pages 1397–1400. doi: 10.1145/
2072298.2072024.
[24]
H. Lee and C. Kim, “Blurred image region detection and segmentation,” in
2014 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., October 2014, pages 4427–4431. doi:
10.1109/ICIP.2014.7025898.
[25]
R. Liu, Z. Li, and J. Jia, “Image partial blur detection and classification,” in
2008 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Jun. 2008.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2008.4587465.
[26]
X. Chen, J. Yang, Q. Wu, and J. Zhao, “Motion blur detection based on lowest di-
rectional high-frequency energy,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on Im-
age Processing, Sep. 2010, pages 2533–2536. doi: 10.1109/ICIP.2010.5652935.
[27]
R. Wang, W. Li, R. Li, and L. Zhang, “Automatic blur type classification via
ensemble SVM,” Signal Processing: Image Communication, volume 71, pages 24–
35, February 2019. doi: 10.1016/J.IMAGE.2018.08.003.
[28]
H. Kumar, S. Gupta, and K. S. Venkatesh, “Simultaneous Estimation of Defocus
and Motion Blurs From Single Image Using Equivalent Gaussian Representa-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol-
ume 30, number 10, pages 3571–3583, October 2020. doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2019.
2944915.
[29]
K. Varindani, W. Zhang, and S. Zhu, “Detecting Motion Blur in Images,” Boston
University, Tech. Rep., 2017. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Sibozhu/
MotionBlur-detection-by-CNN/blob/master/Report/nips_2017.pdf.
[30]
B. Kim, H. Son, S. J. Park, S. Cho, and S. Lee, “Defocus and Motion Blur De-
tection with Deep Contextual Features,” Computer Graphics Forum, volume 37,
number 7, pages 277–288, October 2018. doi: 10.1111/CGF.13567.
[31]
J. Sun, W. Cao, Z. Xu, and J. Ponce, “Learning a convolutional neural network
for non-uniform motion blur removal,” in 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE Computer Society, October 2015,
pages 769–777. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298677.
[32]
Z. Lijun, S. Xiaohu, Y. Fei, D. Pingling, Z. Xiangdong, et al., “Multi-branch
Face Quality Assessment for Face Recognition,” in Proc. 19th Intl. Conf. on
Communication Technology (ICCT), IEEE, October 2019, pages 1659–1664. doi:
10.1109/ICCT46805.2019.8947255.
[33]
J. Yang, P. G. Mei, N. Kayee, and H. A. Hom, “Face Analysis Technology Evalu-
ation (FATE) Part 11: Face Image Quality Vector Assessment Specific Image De-
fect Detection,” NIST, Tech. Rep., February 2024. doi: 10.6028/NIST.IR.8485.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
99
[34]
ISO/IEC JTC1 SC37 Biometrics, ISO/IEC 29794-1 information technology -
biometric sample quality - part 1: Framework, International Organization for
Standardization, 2024.
[35]
ISO/IEC JTC1 SC37 Biometrics, ISO/IEC 2382-37:2022 information technology
- vocabulary - part 37: Biometrics, International Organization for Standardization,
2022.
[36]
A. Woodland and F. Labrosse, “On the separation of luminance from colour in im-
ages,” in Proceeding of the International Conference on Vision, Video and Graph-
ics, E. Trucco and M. Chantler, Eds., University of Edinburgh, 2005, pages 29–36.
doi: 10.2312/vvg.20051004.
[37]
B. Rohrer, How to convert an rgb image to grayscale, Last accessed: 2024-07-14,
November 2019. [Online]. Available: https://e2eml.school/convert_rgb_to_
grayscale.
[38]
L. DeBruine and B. Jones, “Face Research Lab London Set,” May 2017. doi:
10.6084/m9.figshare.5047666.v5.
[39]
R. Hovden, Y. Jiang, H. L. Xin, and L. F. Kourkoutis, “Periodic Artifact Re-
duction in Fourier Transforms of Full Field Atomic Resolution Images,” Mi-
croscopy and Microanalysis, volume 21, number 2, pages 436–441, April 2015.
doi: 10.1017/S1431927614014639.
[40]
B. McFee, Digital Signals Theory, 1st edition. CRC Press, October 2023, page 277.
doi: 10.1201/9781003264859.
[41]
G. Wolberg, Digital Image Warping. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1990, page 352,
isbn: 978-0-818-68944-4.
[42]
W. Burger and M. J. Burge, “Introduction to Spectral Methods,” in Digital Image
Processing, 3rd edition, Springer, Cham, Jul. 2022, ch. 18, pages 539–566. doi:
10.1007/978-3-031-05744-1_18.
[43]
W. Burger and M. J. Burge, “The Discrete Fourier Transform in 2D,” in Digital
Image Processing, 3rd edition, Springer, Cham, Jul. 2022, ch. 19, pages 567–587.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-05744-1_19.
[44]
D. Sundararajan, Digital image processing: A Signal Processing and Algorithmic
Approach. Springer Singapore, October 2017, pages 1–468. doi: 10.1007/978-
981-10-6113-4.
[45]
K. Kido, “Cepstrum Analysis,” in Digital Fourier Analysis: Advanced Techniques,
Springer, New York, NY, Jul. 2015, pages 85–104. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-
1127-1_4.
[46]
J. R. Deller, J. H. L. Hansen, and J. G. Proakis, “Cepstral Analysis,” in Discrete-
Time Processing of Speech Signals, Wiley-IEEE Press, February 2000, pages 352–
405. doi: 10.1109/9780470544402.CH6.
[47]
J. Park, M. Kim, S. Chang, and K. H. Lee, “Estimation of motion blur param-
eters using cepstrum analysis,” Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Consumer Electronics, ISCE, pages 406–409, 2011. doi: 10.1109/ISCE.2011.
5973859.
==PAGE:108==
Bibliography
100
[48]
M. Shi and X. Gong, “Parameters Identification via Cepstrum Analysis for Mix
Blurred Image,” in Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering, volume 463, Springer,
Singapore, 2019, pages 1515–1521. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-6571-2_183.
[49]
T. G. Feeman, “The Radon Transform,” in The Mathematics of Medical Imaging,
Springer, Cham, 2015, ch. 2, pages 13–37. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22665-1_2.
[50]
E. Hossain, Machine Learning Crash Course for Engineers, 1st edition. Springer
Cham, December 2023. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-46990-9.
[51]
H. Kim, Artificial Intelligence for 6G. Springer Cham, March 2022, pages 1–525.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-95041-5.
[52]
C. Enyinna Nwankpa, W. Ijomah, A. Gachagan, and S. Marshall, “Activation
Functions: Comparison of trends in Practice and Research for Deep Learning,”
November 2018. arXiv: 1811.03378 [cs.LG].
[53]
B. Karlik and A. Vehbi, “Performance Analysis of Various Activation Functions
in Generalized MLP Architectures of Neural Networks,” International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems (IJAE), volume 1, number 4, pages 111–
112, February 2011.
[54]
V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve Restricted Boltzmann
machines,” in Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on International
Conference on Machine Learning, series ICML’10, Omnipress, 2010, pages 807–
814.
[55]
T. Mikolov, M. Karafiát, L. Burget, C. Jan, and S. Khudanpur, “Recurrent neural
network based language model,” Proc. Interspeech 2010, pages 1045–1048, 2010.
doi: 10.21437/INTERSPEECH.2010-343.
[56]
I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, et al., “Generative Adversarial
Nets,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27, pages 2672–
2680, 2014. arXiv: 1406.2661 [stat.ML].
[57]
T. Karras, S. Laine, M. Aittala, J. Hellsten, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila, “Analyzing
and Improving the Image Quality of StyleGAN,” in 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE Computer Society,
2020, pages 8107–8116. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00813.
[58]
T. Karras, M. Aittala, S. Laine, et al., “Alias-Free Generative Adversarial Net-
works,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 852–
863, December 2021. arXiv: 2106.12423 [cs.CV].
[59]
M. Grandini, E. Bagli, and G. Visani, “Metrics for Multi-Class Classification: an
Overview,” August 2020. arXiv: 2008.05756 [stat.ML].
[60]
G. B. Huang, M. Ramesh, T. Berg, and E. Learned-Miller, “Labeled faces in the
wild: A database for studying face recognition in unconstrained environments,” in
Workshop on Faces in ’Real-Life’ Images: Detection, Alignment, and Recognition,
Sep. 2008.
[61]
O. Yadan, Hydra - a framework for elegantly configuring complex applications,
Github, Last accessed: 2024-07-14, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://github.
com/facebookresearch/hydra.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
101
[62]
Y. Bengio, “Practical Recommendations for Gradient-Based Training of Deep
Architectures,” in Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade, G. Montavon, G. B. Orr,
and K.-R. Müller, Eds., 2nd edition, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pages 437–
478. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_26.
[63]
O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, et al., “Imagenet large scale visual recognition
challenge,” International Journal of Computer Vision, volume 115, 3 December
2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
[64]
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L. J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet: A large-
scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE, 2009, pages 248–255. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.
2009.5206848.
[65]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, volume 2016-December, IEEE Computer Society,
December 2016, pages 770–778. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
[66]
R. Wightman, H. Touvron, and H. Jégou, “ResNet strikes back: An improved
training procedure in timm,” October 2021. arXiv: 2110.00476 [cs.CV].
[67]
S. Xie, R. Girshick, P. Dollár, Z. Tu, and K. He, “Aggregated residual transforma-
tions for deep neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), volume 2017-January, 2017, pages 5987–5995.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.634.
[68]
I. Radosavovic, R. P. Kosaraju, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Designing
network design spaces,” in 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE Computer Society, 2020, pages 10 425–10 433.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01044.
[69]
A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, et al., “An Image is Worth 16x16 Words:
Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale,” in International Conference on
Learning Representations, October 2021. arXiv: 2010.11929 [cs.CV].
[70]
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, et al., “Attention is All you Need,” in Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S.
Bengio, et al., Eds., Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
[71]
D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “Gaussian Error Linear Units (GELUs),” Jun.
2016. arXiv: 1606.08415 [cs.LG].
[72]
Z. Liu, H. Mao, C. Y. Wu, C. Feichtenhofer, T. Darrell, and S. Xie, “A Con-
vNet for the 2020s,” in 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), volume 2022-June, IEEE Computer Society, 2022,
pages 11 966–11 976. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01167.
[73]
Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, et al., “Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Trans-
former using Shifted Windows,” in 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Inc., 2021, pages 9992–10 002. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00986.
==PAGE:110==
Bibliography
102
[74]
A. Steiner, A. Kolesnikov, X. Zhai, R. Wightman, J. Uszkoreit, and L. Beyer,
“How to train your ViT? Data, Augmentation, and Regularization in Vision
Transformers,” Jun. 2021. arXiv: 2106.10270 [cs.CV].
[75]
K. Yang, K. Qinami, L. Fei-Fei, J. Deng, and O. Russakovsky, “Towards Fairer
Datasets: Filtering and Balancing the Distribution of the People Subtree in the
ImageNet Hierarchy,” Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Account-
ability, and Transparency, pages 547–558, January 2020. doi: 10.1145/3351095.
3375709.
[76]
K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “Joint face detection and alignment us-
ing multitask cascaded convolutional networks,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters
(SPL), volume 23, number 10, pages 1499–1503, 2016. doi: 10.1109/LSP.2016.
2603342.
[77]
J. Deng, J. Guo, E. Ververas, I. Kotsia, and S. Zafeiriou, “RetinaFace: Single-
Shot Multi-Level Face Localisation in the Wild,” 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 5202–5211, 2020.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00525.
[78]
M. Choudhary, V. Tiwari, and U. Venkanna, “Ensuring Secured Iris Authentica-
tion for Mobile Devices,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Consumer
Electronics (ICCE), volume 2021-January, Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc., January 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICCE50685.2021.9427584.
[79]
S. Richoz, A. Perez-Uribe, P. Birch, and D. Roggen, “Benchmarking deep clas-
sifiers on mobile devices for vision-based transportation recognition,” Adjunct
Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Sympo-
sium on Wearable Computers, pages 803–807, Sep. 2019. doi: 10.1145/3341162.
3344849.
[80]
D. Qin, C. Leichner, M. Delakis, et al., “MobileNetV4 – Universal Models for the
Mobile Ecosystem,” April 2024. arXiv: 2404.10518 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:111==
==PAGE:112==
