==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Online regression markets with varying 
feature space
Author: 
Carl Frederik Grønvald
DTU Wind-M-0784
July 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0784
July 2024
ECTS: 32,5
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Jalal Kazempour
Thomas David Falconer 
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: 
Carl Frederik Grønvald
Title:
Online regression markets with 
varying feature space
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Carl Frederik Grønvald
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Wind & Energy Systems, Frederiksborgvej 399,
4000 Roskilde Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Data that is useful for a forecasting task is often held privately by different owners in
direct or indirect downstream competition. Therefore, these data owners are not willing to
share their data freely even if their privacy is preserved. Current literature then proposes
analytics markets to provide monetary incentives for data sharing, pricing data according
to its value for the buyer’s prediction task. In this thesis, we examine analytics markets
and motivate them specifically for wind electricity production forecasting. Many current
proposals have limitations, specifically they assume a fixed set of features over time. We
relax this assumption, reviewing the current literature within online learning with varying
feature spaces for both classification and regression and developing a new model for this
case known as the Online Linear Model with Subregressions (OLM-S) that reconstructs
missing features linearly from present features.
To allocate revenue between market participants, we model features as players and their
interactions as a cooperative game. We investigate the outcome of using an allocation
policy founded in semivalues from cooperative game theory known as Shapley values in
varying feature space. Feature sellers with missing features have a new strategic choice
of whether to truthfully report their feature as missing or report a mean imputed value.
This gives rise to the property truthfulness under imputation. A market that is truthful
under imputation incentivizes participants to truthfully report missing features.
We show weak truthfulness under imputation for one market model, but do not show it
for the OLM-S model. We test the OLM-S model on a real-world wind energy produc-
tion dataset, and examine the equilibrium strategy for feature sellers in this market out-of
sample. We find them to be truthful under imputation in tested examples.
We conclude that we can use this new OLM-S model for a regression market in a re-
alistic forecasting situation with missing features to incentivize mutually beneficial data
exchange and increase society-level social welfare.
The code for the results presented in this thesis can be found at:
https://github.com/carlgronvald/varying_feature_spaces
ii
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Writing this thesis has been a huge experience for me. At times frustrating, at times
boring, at times exciting, and at times intensely rewarding. Thank you to everyone who
was there along the way.
Thomas Falconer, PhD Student, Technical University of Denmark
Thank you for supervising me on this thesis and taking so much time out of your days to
understand and discuss the problems I faced along the way.
Jalal Kazempour, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Thank you for supervising my thesis and introducing me to this field of research, as well
as prompt and useful feedback and guidance.
Liselotte & Søren Grønvald, My Parents
Thank you for being there for me and listening to me complain whenever things were not
going how I wanted, as well as housing me when the city got too loud and I needed some
peace and quiet.
Diogo Dantas, My Boyfriend
Thank you for always being supportive and present and dealing with the times where the
thesis was all I could think about, as well as the diversion, distraction, and general cozy
times that were exactly what I needed when the stress was getting to me.
I also want to thank my brother for sharing his thesis journey with me, my friends for
listening and providing input, as well as my boyfriend’s family for welcoming me during
my stay in Portugal and making it feel like home. Lastly, I want to thank my job for giving
me the flexibility and time I needed to write a master’s thesis while remaining employed.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Data Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Emergence of Data Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Motivation for Analytics Markets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Preliminaries
9
2.1
Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Online Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.4
Game Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Varying Feature Spaces and Analytics Markets
27
3.1
Evolving Feature Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2
Market Model Candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.3
Revenue Allocation for Missing Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4
Results and Discussion
41
4.1
Utilitarian Online Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2
Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.3
Regression Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5
Conclusions
59
5.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In the modern world, data is increasingly important for decision making. It is commonly
said in machine learning that ”the model is only as good as the data” - a clear message to
anyone seeking to improve their data-driven decisions. Interestingly, though, data is often
kept private and not exchanged or sold between private actors. This begs the question:
If better access to data is valuable and could improve market outcomes, why is this value
not extracted? And can anything be done about it?
In this thesis, we dive specifically into renewable electricity forecasting as our motivating
reason for the market we construct. Renewable electricity producers use forecasts to
accurately bid in the electricity market. In recent years, renewable electricity forecasting
has moved towards sophisticated machine learning methods and probabilistic forecasts,
as discussed in Hong et al. [2020]. It has been shown across literature that geographi-
cally distributed and heterogeneous data sources are useful for improving the quality of
renewable production forecasting. [Andrade and Bessa, 2017, Cavalcante et al., 2017]
This data is often owned by several different entities, so their results could be improved by
increasing the exchange of data. These entities are often in direct or indirect competition
with each other, which means that they are not willing to share data even though it would
be beneficial to the system as a whole.
1.1
Data Sharing
Since business decisions first started to be made based on machine learning, people
started to realize that they could improve their decision-making if they could access the
data of others. This inspired early research into what is known as data sharing where
multiple parties freely share their data with each other so that all parties can gain from it.
Data sharing was first studied in the context of sharing with no external incentive, e.g.
within the field known as federated learning. Federated learning is an approach for training
machine learning models in a decentralized manner where private data can be used for
training a model without the data itself being shared, thus retaining data privacy, as laid
out in Li et al. [2020]. Despite preserving privacy, federated learning is not enough to
incentivize data sharing for two central reasons:
1. There is some cost associated with preparing and providing data for sharing which
a participant would have to bear altruistically.
2. Data owners might be competitors in a downstream market which might leave any
single owner potentially worse off by sharing data, even if everyone was better on
average, as shown in Gal-Or [1985]. In the electricity market, for example, im-
proving the prediction of a competitor could potentially leave you worse off as they
outperformed you in the market.
1.2
Emergence of Data Markets
To incentivize data sharing, data markets were developed where participants receive com-
pensation for providing their data. Initial data markets were developed as a way to mone-
tize data samples, or what would in tabular data be known as a row of data, as discussed
in Balazinska et al. [2011]. This kind of data covers e.g. the information that a social net-
work site has about its customers — the site knows about a number of people and sells
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
1
==PAGE:10==
off the information that it has about a single person as a bundle. Examples of this kind of
marketplace are the Snowflake or AWS data exchanges. Markets also developed to sell
features, what in tabular data would be known as a column, directly as a type of raw data.
However, the pricing of both features and samples can be complicated, since it has been
shown that the value of data is dependent on the task of the buyer, so the same data can
have different value to different buyers. [Cong et al., 2022]
Another kind of data marketplace is the prediction marketplace. This kind of market does
not sell data for use in forecasting or decision-making, but instead directly sells predic-
tions. The design of prediction markets was investigated in Chen and Pennock [2010].
These work by giving payout contingent on real-world events, where parties bet on an out-
come of an event and get paid based on whether they bet correctly. In this way, prediction
markets effectively form financial securities based on real-world events.
1.3
Motivation for Analytics Markets
Let us now consider the electricity market. The electricity market generally works by par-
ticipants selling and buying electricity contracts a day before the electricity is consumed,
known as the day-ahead electricity market. The electricity is then consumed at what is
known as imbalance time or real time. Renewable generation depends on weather cir-
cumstances, meaning that the actual generation at imbalance time cannot be known but
only forecast when selling in the day-ahead market. Let us imagine first a single renew-
able generating participant in the electricity market, say that it is a wind farm.
We base our analysis on a stylized view of the electricity market. The system operator
of the electricity grid maintains a balance between real-time power supply and demand,
since electricity cannot be efficiently stored. Any deviation from this balance is known as
imbalance. Imbalance must be eliminated by ramping up or down additional resources,
which has a cost associated with it. This cost is paid by market participants that deviate
from the demand or supply they bid or offered in the day-ahead market in the direction
of imbalance. Deviations in the direction of balance will trade out the deviation at the
day-ahead spot price, i. e. under-producers will buy energy back at the day-ahead price
and over-producers will sell at the day-ahead price. This understanding of the market is
based on Aïd [2015] and approximates two-sided balancing markets as seen in France
and the Netherlands. We do not consider the intraday market nor futures from before the
day-ahead market.
The wind farm must decide how much power to sell in the day-ahead electricity market.
The wind farm wants to offer as close as possible to its true generation at imbalance time.
If the farm overestimates its production at day-ahead time and sells too much power, it
might have to pay for down-regulation in the grid. If it instead underestimates its produc-
tion at day-ahead time and sells too little power, it will never earn more than the day-ahead
price for its surplus power, and might have to pay for up-regulation in the grid. Its revenue
is then a function of its prediction accuracy. The single wind farm is illustrated in Figure
1.1, where we see that it bids based on its production forecast, and is paid based on the
accuracy of this forecast.
This wind farm makes a multi time horizon prediction based on some data that it has
available. Maybe it has some sensors, some current production data, etc. Now, let us
say that the wind farm has another competitor in the market — another wind farm. We
then have two participants in the market who both will earn more the better their prediction
is in our stylized version of the electricity market.
Intuitively, data from competing wind farms should improve forecasting accuracy, which
2
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:11==
Wind farm
Electricity market
Data
Production
Forecast
Bid,
Power
Payment
Figure 1.1: A single wind farm in the electricity market, using its own data to forecast
its production at imbalance time and provide day-ahead offers based on this. The wind
farm is then paid based on the offered power and the electricity price. If the farm over-
or undershoots its production, it might have to pay balancing costs for its misprediction,
meaning that its profit is based on forecasting accuracy as well.
was also shown in Tastu [2013]. Data exchange between the farms would not only benefit
the two wind farms, but also the system operator, as it would have a better incoming
prediction of total available generation and thus the total cost of balancing would be lower.
This means that the society-level social welfare would be increased if the participants
shared data. They might not be willing to share data freely, however, since they are in
direct competition in the electricity market. If both wind farms shared data, one wind
farm might be more penalized by the improvement in the prediction capability of the other
wind farm than they are rewarded by their increase in predictive power. Sharing data
with a downstream competitor is not always detrimental as shown in Raith [1996], but
data sharing is more likely detrimental when competitors produce highly similar products
as shown in Tsoy and Konstantinov [2023], which is the case in the electricity markets.
Then, we expect that many renewable electricity producers would not be willing to share
data without external incentives.
To incentivize this data exchange, we introduce a new type of data market known as an
analytics market. The word analytics market refers to many things in literature but in this
thesis it refers to a specific kind of data marketplace, also known as a regression market
or classification market. Where earlier data markets traded either 1) data samples, or 2)
features, or 3) predictions, sellers in analytics markets sell features indirectly through a
central market. A machine learning method then transforms the features into predictions,
and these are bought by the buyers. The market structure can be seen in Figure 1.2.
Since this requires features to pertain to the same observation or row, the market often
deals with time series problems, where sellers provide features for a single time point and
buyers buy predictions. This is how the forecasting problem in our motivating example
works. A single time step of the analytics market is shown in Figure 1.3. Analytics markets
are a fairly new concept and still have a lot of unanswered research questions surrounding
them, and are therefore not yet in use in the real world.
Sellers receive payment based on a method from cooperative game theory known as the
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
3
==PAGE:12==
Prediction
Mechanism
Analytics
Market
Buyers
Prediction task,
bid & payment
Prediction
Sellers
Data
Payment
Buyers
Figure 1.2: The setup of an analytics market. Sellers provide features and receive pay-
ment, and buyers provide a supervised learning task and payment and receive a predic-
tion. Their payment is based on predictive performance.
Features
Sellers
Prediction
Prediction
Mechanism
Target,
Payment
Buyers
Revenue
Revenue
Alllocation
Policy
Figure 1.3: A single time step of the analytics market. 1) Sellers provide features 2) These
are passed through the machine learning model used by the market, which then forms
a prediction 3) This prediction is supplied to buyers, who then give the true regression
or classification target along with payment for the predictive improvement 4) Revenue is
allocated between features by the allocation policy.
Shapley value. The Shapley value payment allocation is the unique allocation that fulfills
a specific set of market properties that are known as the Shapley fairness properties.
The analytics market provides incentives for data sharing for the participants. They are
now paid based on how much their competitor benefits from receiving their data, and
everyone will be better off individually. The market facilitates a cooperative environment by
aligning incentives between the participating parties. The situation is illustrated in Figure
1.4, showing how adding a market can improve the outcome for all participants.
Analytics market research up until this point has assumed that there is a fixed number of
feature sellers in the market that will be present at all market clearings. This is a strong
assumption since sellers are individuals or organizations that naturally change their goals
and status over time. For example, if a wind farm is temporarily shut off as in Figure
1.5, it would no longer be able to provide production information to a regression market.
This thesis seeks to investigate how analytics markets can support a changing number of
feature sellers over time, also known as a varying feature space.
The main contribution in this thesis is relaxing the assumption of a fixed set of market
participants and allowing feature sellers to leave the market or temporarily abstain from
providing features, as well as allowing new feature sellers to join the market. This meets a
need of the users of analytics markets, and brings these markets closer to being viable in
the real world. Relaxing this assumption brings in several new issues for the market: How
can revenue be allocated when features can be missing? Which prediction mechanisms
can we use and what new requirements will they have? What new risks or opportunities
do these markets present both sellers and buyers?
4
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:13==
Wind farm 1
Electricity
market
Wind farm 2
(a) Two wind farms in competition in the
electricity market, each bidding individ-
ually but wanting each other’s data.
Wind farm 1
Electricity
market
Wind farm 2
Data Market
(b) Two wind farms exchanging data
through the analytics market, incen-
tivizing sharing and improving societal
social welfare.
Figure 1.4: Example showing how two wind farms will not voluntarily share data, but can
be incentivized using an analytics market, improving social welfare for both of them as
well as the system operator.
Wind farm 1
Wind farm 2
Data Market
Wind farm 3
(a) At some time step in the market,
all three of the shown wind farms are
present in the market.
Wind farm 1
Wind farm 2
Data Market
Wind farm 3
(b) At another time, one wind farm is
missing from the market due to unfore-
seen events or maintenance or similar.
The other two wind farms still want to
participate.
Figure 1.5: An example that shows how an analytics market can at one time have three
present participants but then one can go missing. This is a situation that current literature
has not examined.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
5
==PAGE:14==
1.4
Literature Review
A thorough review of the state of the literature surrounding information economics was
presented in Bergemann and Bonatti [2019]. It opened up conversation about data mar-
kets where participants are in downstream competition, and pointed out that privacy con-
cerns will also be central in these markets. It also emphasized the role of an intermediary
for the function of data markets, which aligns with research within analytics markets where
an intermediary party, the data market itself, mediates the exchange of information.
The paper Rasouli and Jordan [2021] shows market mechanisms for directly sharing raw
data, both in the situation where data is exchanged for data, and where data is exchanged
for monetary compensation. They consider privacy and sharing costs in their models, and
find data exchange matching algorithms and competitive prices for clearing these market
setups. They use distortion of the traded data in the form of noise to control its value.
A regression market is presented in Goncalves et al. [2021] with a case study of a set
of wind farms. They value features based on in-sample loss reduction, and show that a
regression market can improve social welfare for all participants.
The paper Pinson et al. [2022] presents an analytics market in an online context. They
show that a regression market can be constructed using any linear model minimizing a
convex loss function as the market model. They also handle non-stationary distributions.
However, they assume that the set of features is constant and do not support adding or
removing features.
In Han et al. [2022], a regression market using the LASSO regressor is built, which at-
tempts to meet a need of both data buyers and data sellers. Sellers generally want a
minimum payoff before they are willing to disclose their feature, which they can decide
individually in the LASSO based market. Buyers also do not want to pay for data that is
barely informative, which is also avoided with this regularized market. Thus, the market
improves results for both buyers and sellers. However, there ends up being a cost in the
market for this feature selection, as buyers must pay for decreases in the regularization
term.
The paper Cao et al. [2017] uses an iterative auction mechanism where sellers report a
privacy cost for selling their data and buyers report a utility score for receiving it, thus
allowing direct sale of data, accounting for privacy costs. The paper Acemoglu et al.
[2022] shows that highly correlated data can lead to too much data being shared in a
marketplace. Every data seller can have an individual privacy cost, but since data is
correlated, one seller can reveal information about others. This is a negative externality
of data sharing, and drives down the price of data. It can result in the data market reducing
social welfare. The paper finds that a mediator that transforms the data by decorrelating
it with data owned by privacy-preferring agents before providing it to buyers can improve
welfare and bring social welfare higher than the situation with no data market. This mirrors
regression markets where the market model increases privacy for feature sellers.
An auction mechanism for data is presented in Agarwal et al. [2023] that only considers
the utility of data for buyers and the negative externality unto other buyers from a buyer
receiving the data. This results in either all data or no data being allocated to a buyer,
based on a simple threshold. If many buyers in competition enter the market, it can result
in a market where every buyer pays to avoid a competitor acquiring data, but no buyer
receives the data.
Payment allocation between feature owners in analytics markets are based on the Shap-
ley value, which is a concept from cooperative game theory introduced in Shapley [1953].
6
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:15==
It is also used in e.g. machine learning explainability to explain the contribution from every
input feature to a certain model output, e.g. in Chen et al. [2021].
A central issue within analytics markets is the problem of replication robustness, explained
in Agarwal et al. [2019]. The essence of the problem is that under the most common
revenue allocation policy, a feature seller can duplicate their own data and sell it twice and
thus increase their portion of the total revenue in the market if other correlated features
exist in the market. The preprint article Falconer et al. [2024a] investigates an alternative
policy where a different causal understanding of Shapley values is used and shows that
this revenue allocation policy is robust to replication; however, it also increases financial
risk for feature sellers.
While online regression is one option for updating a forecasting mechanism over time,
many actors in the electricity markets instead use batch regression models but retrain
their model every so often, often every day. This is equivalent to using an online model
to perform predictions with a certain forecasting horizon. One alternative in this case to
an online model that supports a varying number of features is a batch learning model that
supports the same. A framework for this is presented in Wen et al. [2024] that implements
a batch learning approach for arbitrary missing features using Fully Conditional Specifi-
cation (FCS) as originally presented in Van Buuren et al. [2006]. There are many other
options for batch learning approaches with missing features, e.g. any type of imputation
method. Many such imputation methods are presented in Van Buuren [2018].
Another alternative to imputation is to retrain the model with only the features present at
prediction time. In Tawn et al. [2020], this is shown to outperform imputation for wind power
forecasting. However, this can be computationally a lot more expensive than imputation,
since one can end up having to retrain the model for every single potential set of features.
This method also still requires in-sample imputation if features are missing in-sample.
Online machine learning is the field of machine learning models that learn not from a
batch of data in one go, but instead from receiving data in a streaming fashion. Online
learning is usually based on an iterative update of model parameters using data for one or
a few time steps at a time. Online learning also allows for the model to adapt to changes
in the underlying data, i.e. a non-stationary distribution. This can be done e.g. using
exponential forgetting algorithms like in Pinson et al. [2022].
Several state-of-the-art online learning models that support varying feature spaces are
presented in the survey article He et al. [2023], where they name this subfield Utilitarian
Online Learning. The subfield is concerned with online supervised learning models that
are computationally efficient and can handle arbitrarily varying feature spaces. The mod-
els presented are all classifiers, and they categorize the models into three classes. They
do not present a regressor.
There is then an open space in the literature both regarding a computationally efficient
online regression mechanism for varying feature spaces and regarding a market built on
one such mechanism, which would allow us to remove the assumption that no participants
enter or leave the data market.
1.5
Contributions
Motivated by this problem space, we would like to develop an online regression market
that supports a varying number of participants in the market over time. An analytics market
requires a regression mechanism that can work with the dynamics of its dataset, so we
will need to investigate regression mechanisms that work when the feature space varies
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
7
==PAGE:16==
over time. The regression mechanism would be employed for multi horizon forecasting
problems, since this is the nature of renewable forecasting problems in the electricity
market.
We will show that a market based on a developed regression mechanism with varying
feature space fulfills the same properties for revenue allocation as seen in previous re-
search, covering Shapley fairness, truthfulness, and individual rationality when using the
traditional Shapley allocation policy.
Additionally, we will examine methods for allocating revenue in markets with a changing
set of participants. We will show that some alternatives that one might consider to the
traditional Shapley value revenue allocation policy do not fulfill the above properties, and
we will show the consequences of using the Shapley value in varying feature space, along
with a new truthfulness property relating to missing features known as truthfulness under
imputation.
8
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:17==
2
Preliminaries
In this chapter, I will introduce the theoretical preliminaries needed to understand the
contributions and results of this thesis. It is split into two main sections, one on machine
learning, and one on game theory.
2.1
Notation
This section contains notation for use as reference throughout the thesis.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
9
==PAGE:18==
ˆy Prediction of a supervised learning method
l(ˆy, y) Loss function, takes in the predicted value ˆy and the true value y
w Coefficients of a linear model
L(X, Y ) The empirical risk, i.e. mean loss over the dataset X, Y
h(x) The logistic function h(x) =
1
1 + e−x
ΠRA(x) The projection operator, projects the vector x onto the space RA so that the features
or indices A are included, where A is an index set A ⊆N
f Function representing a relation between features and targets
F Family or space of functions
X Feature space
Y Target space
v Characteristic function of a cooperative game
ω Coalition of players in a cooperative game or set of features in a market
N Set of all players in a cooperative game
ψ Revenue allocation or Shapley value
π Revenue for all or some features
γ Willingness to pay function for a loss reduction, willingness to pay coefficent
L The likelihood function
F, G Objective functions
ut Index set of all features seen up to and including time step t
dt Index set of all features present at time t
xt Features reported at time t
xi,t Feature i at time t
τ Step size for gradient descent update
G Reconstruction matrix for linear reconstruction method
z Intermediate calculation based on values of x
ρ Feature correlation or parameter generating feature correlations
T Total number of time steps
∆T Prediction time horizon, i.e. number of time steps where predictions are made
but targets are not available
N Normal distribution
U Uniform distribution
Σ Covariance matrix
θ True parameters of linear relationship
β1 OCDS L1 regularization constant
β2 OCDS graph laplacian regularization constant
α OCDS reconstruction error scaling constant
For clarification about the projection operator: If A = {1, 3, 5} and x = [1, 0, −4, 2, 3], then
ΠRA(x) = [x1, x3, x5] = [1, −4, 3].
10
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:19==
X
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
1
2
3
4
Row Index
y
Figure 2.1: A diagram of a tabular dataset. Every green square is a single numerical or
categorical value. The dataset has 5 columns and 4 rows, i.e. 5 features and 4 observa-
tions. Attached to every row is also a true target, seen in the vector y.
2.2
Machine Learning
Machine learning is the field of constructing algorithms that learn from data. There are
several subfields within machine learning. Within machine learning, there is e.g. the
supervised and unsupervised distinction. Unsupervised learning attempts to make sense
of unannotated data, while supervised learning attempts to learn the relationship between
a set of inputs and a true label attached to the inputs.
We are interested in supervised learning problems, since the problems that are sold in
analytics markets fall within this umbrella.
2.2.1
Supervised Learning
Within supervised learning, the two most central problems are regression and classifica-
tion problems. Both problems assign a true label for every observation in a set of obser-
vations. In regression, the true label is continuous, while it is a discrete category in classi-
fication known as a class. The problems then concern finding a function that predicts the
label based on the observation. Regression problems and classification problems share
many facets and are quite similar under the hood.
When conceptualizing supervised learning problems, we often see our data as a table,
known as a tabular dataset. Here, every row is an observation, and every column is a
feature. For every row, a true label or class known as the target might be attached. A
tabular dataset is shown in Figure 2.1.
A supervised learning method generates based on every row indexed by t a prediction ˆyt
of the true label yt. It does this based on some function f : X →Y, where X is the space
that the features exist in or the feature space, and Y is the space that the targets exist in or
the target space. Then, predictions are made as ˆyt = f(xt). The problem of supervised
learning is the problem of choosing a ”good” function f, by some understanding of the
word good.
Features and targets can come from different spaces depending on the specific super-
vised learning problem. Very commonly features are continuous, in which case they come
from the real numbers, or a subset of the real numbers, but they can also often be dis-
crete in case of ordinal or cardinal features. Targets can also be continuous or discrete,
in many different ways, e.g. Y = {0, 1} for binary classification, Y = {0, 1, 2, . . . , K} for
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
11
==PAGE:20==
K-class classification, or Y = R for ordinary least squares regression, to name a few. We
also do not always explicitly predict a single numerical value for the target — we could
e.g. predict a distribution, in which case the space Y could be more complex.
Most supervised learning methods choose a function f from a family of functions F, choos-
ing based on a dataset. This dataset is known as the training dataset, and choosing a
function based on the dataset is known as fitting the model. Often, the family of functions
F is a space with a set of parameters that can be chosen by choosing the ”best” param-
eters, by some definition of ”best”. To do this, we need to decide what ”best” means.
2.2.2
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
We can model the relation between the features and targets as a conditional probability
distribution, assigning a probability density function p(y|x) to the targets given the features.
By finding the parameters of this distribution, we can predict values for new observations
by assuming that the distribution of these new data points is the same as the distribution
of the data points we used to estimate our distribution parameters. We then naturally get
a function f that predicts our regression target for a certain observation, ˆyt = f(xt) =
E[y|xt].
To determine the parameters of the distribution, we can use the likelihood function. The
likelihood function gives the probability of a certain observation given the parameters θ ∈
Θ of the conditional distribution, where Θ is the parameter space of the distribution. It is
written
L(θ; y, x) = pθ(y|x)
(2.1)
where pθ is the probability density function for the conditional probability distribution with
parameters θ. We can estimate the parameters by finding the parameters that maximize
the likelihood function, which is known as the maximum likelihood estimate, or MLE. This
estimator has some nice properties. It e.g. guarantees convergence as the sample size
goes to infinity, known as asymptotic convergence. Using the MLE estimator is a solu-
tion for finding a ”good” function to map from features to targets. It also lets us choose
what we mean by a ”good” function by our choice of conditional probability distribution.
Once we estimate the parameters of the distribution, we can use the expected value as
our function f from features to targets. For a more thorough introduction to maximum
likelihood estimation, see Sugiyama [2016].
Assuming that every observation xt, yt is independent and identically distributed, the like-
lihood function is the product of the likelihood for every observation individually. This
naturally leads us to take the logarithm of the likelihood function.
logL(θ; y, x) = log
T
∏
t
L(θ|yt, xt) =
T
∑
t
logL(θ; yt, xt)
(2.2)
Usually, it is more practical to maximize the log likelihood function, as we will see later in
Section 2.2.2.
Within machine learning we also have the concept of the loss function. The loss function
l : Y2 →R outputs a number known as the loss given the predicted label of the model
ˆyt and the true label of the model at this time step yt. The loss function corresponds to
the negative log likelihood, sometimes with some constant scaling factor or term which
does not change the optimum of the problem. Minimizing the mean loss over the dataset
12
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:21==
is also known as the empirical risk minimization problem, since it minimizes the expected
loss over the observed data. We prefer for the empirical risk minimization problem to be
convex, since convex optimization is a well studied field and methods exist for solving
convex optimization problems that guarantee convergence.
Note that in machine learning, the word model refers to 1) a specific function that maps
from an observation to a target, it refers to 2) a family of functions from where you can
choose a prediction function by solving the empirical risk minimization problem, and it
also refers to 3) a broader family of functions that has both parameters that can be de-
cided by solving the empirical risk minimization problem, and more parameters known
as hyperparameters that must be decided before solving the empirical risk minimization
problem.
Supervised Learning Example
To understand the concept of supervised learning, let us work through a hypothetical
example of a supervised learning task, specifically the task of our wind farm from earlier
forecasting its production forward in time.
Let us say that the wind farm continuously measures their current production as well as
the wind speed at their location, and they are interested in predicting their production one
hour ahead. The current production measure and the wind speed are then the features
of the tabular dataset, and the regression target is the production measure one hour later.
Let us say that the wind farm does this forecasting once an hour. The table would then
have an observation for every hour of the electricity production and the wind speed during
that hour, and after the next hour has passed, the electricity production the following hour
will be added as the true label of that observation.
Our goal is then to learn some relation between the features and the target. We do this
by deciding on a model to use. This model can be selected based on the data we have.
We can choose parameters of the model or input whatever information the model might
need from this dataset. This is known as training the model.
Let us say we decided to use a model with some unknown parameters that we can de-
cide using maximum likelihood estimation. To determine the parameters of our model,
we decide on a conditional probability distribution for the targets given the features, and
minimize the negative log likelihood of the parameters.
We now have a function f(x) = E[y|x] of the features x ∈X that outputs a prediction.
This is what we set out to find; the function f is our trained supervised learning model.
We can then take our trained model and use it on current generation and wind speed
measures to forecast the production in an hour.
Regression
Regression means estimating the dependence of a continuous variable on a set of other
variables, like we saw in the section above. The most well-known regression problem
is predicting a linear function f to estimate the regression targets Y based on the input
features X.
Linear regression can be understood in terms of Maximum Likelihood Estimation. Specif-
ically, ordinary linear regression assumes a relationship between the features and the
regression targets of the following form
Y = Xθ + ϵ
(2.3)
Where ϵ is independent identically distributed Gaussian noise, ϵ iid
∼N(0, σ2). The condi-
tional probability density function is then
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
13
==PAGE:22==
p(yt|xt) =
1
√
2πσ2 e−1
2 ( yt−θ⊤xt
σ
)2
(2.4)
which has the parameters θ and σ. The likelihood function can be found from this by taking
the product of the conditional probability density function for every observation xt, yt in the
training set. By taking the logarithm, we then get the log-likelihood function:
logL(θ, σ2|Y, X) = log
T
∏
t
1
√
2πσ2 e−1
2 ( yt−θ⊤xt
σ
)2
(2.5)
=
T
∑
t
−1
2log(2πσ2) + (−1
2σ2 (yt −θ⊤xt)2)
(2.6)
It turns out that the maximum likelihood estimator of θ does not depend on σ at all, as it
cancels out when setting the gradient equal to zero:
∇θlogL(θ, σ2|Y, X) = ∇θ(−T
2 log(2πσ2) −
T
∑
t
(−1
2σ2 (yt −θ⊤xt)2)) = 0
(2.7)
T
∑
t
(yt −θ⊤xt)xt = 0
(2.8)
We see that negating the log-likelihood function gives the mean squared error (MSE)
with a factor and a constant term that do not matter for the optimization problem. The
mean squared error is a common loss function in machine learning and is effectively the
default loss function used for regression problems. The MSE is what arises when you
assume that the regression target is distributed by a linear function of the features plus
independent identically distributed Gaussian noise. When solving regression problems,
we can choose our model f by finding the function minimizing the mean squared error.
Other choices can be made for the conditional probability distribution which result in other
loss functions, but we will stick to the one that gives rise to mean squared error for regres-
sion in this thesis since it is simple and maps well to many common use cases.
Classification
Regression and classification work largely the same way. They do have a central dif-
ference in the structure of the output. In regression, the output is continuous, and in
classification, the output is theoretically discrete, though classification methods usually
output not just the expected class of an observation, but the probability of an observation
belonging to each of the potential classes.
Binary classification problems, meaning problems where we classify observations into
only two categories, are usually solved by transforming the output of some regression
mechanism through a function that squishes the entire real number line into the interval
[0,1], and use this output as the probability of being of class 1. Let us investigate how to
solve the binary classification problem. We base our investigation off of Grosse [2019].
We need to determine a loss function for the binary classification problem. Let us think
about what we want to optimize for in a classification problem. At its base, we want
14
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:23==
0
0.5
1
t
0
1
loss
0/1 loss function
yt = 0
yt = 1
Figure 2.2: The 0/1 loss function, shown for both yt = 0 and yt = 1. It has a clear
discontinuity at ˆyt = 0.5. We can also see from the shape of the function that it is not
convex.
to maximize accuracy, i.e. minimize the difference between predicted classes and true
classes. We call this the 0/1 loss.
l(ˆyt, yt) =
{
0,
if ⌊ˆyt⌉= yt
1,
otherwise
(2.9)
Where ⌊x⌉is the rounding function. The function is shown in Figure 2.2. This function
has a derivative of zero everywhere, except for at the point ˆyt = 0.5 where the function
is discontinuous and does not have a derivative. The derivative is useful for optimization,
as we will see later, so optimizing for this loss function is impractical. On top of that, the
function is not convex. We then do not want to directly minimize the 0/1 loss. We instead
use what is called a surrogate loss function, a loss function that represents almost what
we want to optimize, but is easier to optimize for. We can find a surrogate loss function
by expressing classification in terms of maximum likelihood estimation.
Considering binary classification as a Maximum Likelihood Estimation problem, we need
to assume some conditional distribution of the targets given the features. A very sensible
choice is to assume that the targets are distributed by a Bernoulli distribution with a certain
probability p of being the positive class and 1 −p of being the negative class, where p is
a function of the features. The likelihood function given a true vector of targets y and a
predicted vector of probabilities p = ˆy is then
L(ˆy; y) =
T
∏
t
(ˆyt)yt(1 −ˆyt)(1−yt)
(2.10)
The log-likelihood function then becomes
logL(ˆy; y) =
T
∑
t
(ytlog ˆyt + (1 −yt)log (1 −ˆyt))
(2.11)
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
15
==PAGE:24==
This log-likelihood function when negated is also known as binary cross-entropy (BCE)
loss. This is the most common surrogate loss function for binary classification. It is also
convex, which is good for solving the empirical risk minimization problem.
We still need to decide how the predicted probability ˆyt depends on the features xt. A
common type of binary linear classifier assumes that there is a linear relation between the
odds of being of class 1 and the features. This is known as logistic regression, and the
relation between ˆyt and xt is then given by ˆyt = h(θ⊤xt), where h : R →]0, 1[ is the logistic
function h(x) =
1
1+e−x that converts odds which span the real numbers to probabilities
in the space [0, 1]. This then fully specifies the conditional distribution, allowing us to
estimate the parameters θ of the distribution by maximizing the log likelihood function.
Gradient Descent
We generally determine parameters for classification and regression models by minimiz-
ing the average loss, also known as the empirical risk. In the case of ordinary linear
regression, the optimization problem has an analytical solution, so we can find the pa-
rameters analytically.
There are many other parametric supervised learning problems, though, and most of them
do not have an analytic solution for the weights of the model. For example, the binary
linear classifier based on binary cross-entropy loss and the logistic function does not have
an analytic solution for a linear relation between the odds of being class 1 and xt. Then,
we need to solve the optimization problem in some other way.
One useful idea for solving this is that for some families of functions F, we can differentiate
the empirical risk with regards to the parameters of the function. This is e.g. true for the
family of linear functions, where we can find the gradient of the empirical risk given the
coefficients of the features as long as we have a differentiable loss function. We can then
follow the gradient backwards towards the minimum of the function which is known as
gradient descent, as we follow the gradient ”downwards”, i.e., follow the negative gradient
towards the minimum of the function. The concept is illustrated in Figure 2.3. In every
iteration of the gradient descent algorithm, the parameters of the model w are updated by
following the gradient of the empirical risk Lw(X, Y ) backwards with a certain step size τ.
w := w −τ∇wLw(X, Y )
(2.12)
The step size can vary at every iteration. If the step size goes to zero and the cumulative
step size goes to infinity, τt →0 as t →∞and ∑T
t τt →∞as T →∞, then gradient
descent is guaranteed to converge for a convex optimization problem. Model families F
where we can differentiate the loss function in the parameters are known as differentiable
models. If the loss function is differentiable or even subdifferentiable, we can perform
gradient descent with any differentiable model. If the loss function is convex in the model
parameters as well, then we can guarantee that following the gradient descent algorithm
will converge to the true minimum of the empirical risk. Then, using gradient descent
for determining the weights of a linear model using a convex loss function guarantees
converges.
2.2.3
Missing Data & Imputation
In a machine learning problem, data can be missing. If we go back to our motivating
example for regression, we could for example have our wind speed sensor break down
for an hour and thus have missing data for a certain time step. If we want to use a machine
learning model that uses a certain feature as input but the feature is missing for a timestep
t, we will have to somehow deal with the fact that the feature is missing. The data could
16
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:25==
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
x
20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
f(x)
Starting Point
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
...
Step 41
Gradient Descent
Figure 2.3: Gradient descent. The algorithm is given a starting value for x. It iteratively
follows the gradient backwards at that point moving by a certain step size and converges
to the minimum of the minimized function. The minimized function is x2 + 5x + 11, which
is convex.
In-sample
Out-of-sample
Impute
Skew training distribution
Produce suboptimal prediction
Discard
Do not learn from observation
Produce no prediction
Table 2.1: Possible solutions to missing data in the in-sample and out-of-sample case.
Note that while imputation can skew training distribution for all data, so can discarding
data if the missingness is informative, see MNAR data.
be missing from the training dataset, in which case we would either have to remove that
row when training our model, or somehow replace the missing feature with another value,
known as imputation. It could also be missing when we want to make a prediction on a new
observation, in which case we need to replace it with a value to be able to use our model
to generate predictions for this observation. The different decisions and their outcomes
regarding imputing missing data are illustrated in the Table 2.1. Even if a model that
inherently supports missing data is used, that model must internally have some method
for dealing with missing data. For an introduction to missing data, see Harrell [2001].
Replacing the missing feature with another value, however it is determined, is known
as imputation. Based on why data is missing, imputation methods can be more or less
appropriate and introduce more or less bias in the data. Imputation methods are discussed
below, and further covered in Longford [2005].
Types of Missing Data
Missing data mechanisms are classified into three categories:
1. MCAR — Missing Completely At Random
2. MAR — Missing At Random
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
17
==PAGE:26==
3. MNAR — Missing Not At Random, also known as informative missing (IM)
MCAR data is data that is missing independent of the data itself, so the data loss mecha-
nism has no relation to the data. MAR data is missing dependent on the rest of the data,
but independent of the missing data. This could e.g. be seen in our motivating example if
high wind speeds make the electricity production measuring apparatus malfunction, thus
making production data go missing dependent on the observed wind speed. MNAR data
is missing dependent on the missing data, e.g. if very high wind speeds also caused the
wind speed meter to malfunction so the value of the feature itself is the reason for the
feature going missing.
MCAR and MAR data has the advantage that it can be reconstructed from joint distribu-
tions between features with no introduced bias from this reconstruction. It has the disad-
vantage that the fact that the feature is missing carries no extra information, so missing
information is non-informative and only negative for overall model performance.
MNAR data has the issue that it cannot be accurately reconstructed from present features.
Any type of reconstruction will introduce a bias since the missing data is from a different
distribution than the present data, and even discarding rows where data is missing will
introduce bias. However, the fact that data is missing is itself informative and can be used
as a feature in the machine learning model.
In this thesis, we assume that missing data is either MCAR or MAR, since these types of
data can be imputed from the present data without introducing bias from the reconstruc-
tion.
Imputation Methods
As mentioned earlier, whenever data is missing, we have the choice of imputing or dis-
carding it. Imputation can be done based on very simple best guesses based on historical
observations of the feature, all the way up to quite complex model-based imputation meth-
ods using present features, recent observations, and statistical methods. Some common
imputation methods are:
1. Mean/Mode Imputation
2. Using Domain Knowledge
3. Tabular Supervised Learning Models
4. Auto-regressive Imputation
1) Mean/mode imputation replaces the missing value with the historical mean or mode of
the feature. This is simple and practical but might considerably skew the distribution. Non-
linear supervised learning methods can significantly deteriorate if mean/mode imputation
is used in the training set due to the change of the feature distribution.
2) Sometimes, domain knowledge can be used to reconstruct missing data. This is usually
in situations with either MAR or MNAR data.
3) Tabular supervised learning models, e.g. k-nearest-neighbors or random forest, can
be used for reconstruction, by training on historical data and reconstructing missing data
using the trained model and present features. This allows capturing quite complex rela-
tions between data, but pushes down the problem of imputation another step, since these
regressions will then also need to somehow deal with missing data. One such method is
Fully Conditional Specification, see Van Buuren et al. [2006].
18
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:27==
4) Sometimes, observations depend on recent observations in an autoregressive rela-
tionship. If this is the case, then features can be reconstructed based on former feature
values. However, in this thesis we assume that all observations are independent and iden-
tically distributed since some analysis becomes a lot more complicated if auto-regressive
imputation is a viable option.
2.3
Online Learning
Online learning is a different method of machine learning than the tabular learning ap-
proach. In online learning, observations and targets arrive in a streaming fashion, and
the model is updated continuously with new information.
Methods for learning model parameters are evaluated differently, since not only the found
parameters are important, but also how quickly they are found. If a model e.g. has high
loss compared to other methods and only starts performing well after many observations,
but then gets better than other methods after going through most of the observations it
will see, it might not perform very well for an online learning task. This could e.g. just be
a method with slow convergence, which in a batch learning setting would be an incon-
venience due to long training times, but in an online setting could materially impact the
results of using the method due to the poor results it would provide before converging.
To quantify this evaluation metric in online learning, we introduce the term regret. Regret
is a term that comes from adversarial game theory. Let us understand it with an example.
Imagine that you are playing a game against an adversary where he is secretly deciding
on a random number between 0 and 1 every round of the game from a fixed distribution.
You then want to decide on some number for your guess on every round. You are then pe-
nalized based on the distance between your guess and the random number every round,
where the penalty is the loss. Your regret is then the difference between the sum loss
you experienced and the sum loss experienced by the best fixed choice you could have
made. Seen from a supervised learning perspective, the regret is the difference between
the sum loss you experienced and the sum loss you would have experienced if you chose
the best fixed parameters.
In online learning situations we want to minimize our regret since sum loss is not well
defined for a dataset that can keep growing. We prefer models that have more slowly
increasing regret, and generally a good goal is sublinear regret, i.e. regret does not grow
linearly over time but instead grows more slowly the more observations have been seen.
Sublinear regret in an online setting is similar to guaranteeing convergence in a batch
learning setting. A general introduction to online modern learning can be found in Orabona
[2023].
Online learning methods usually iteratively update a set of model parameters, sometimes
one time step at a time, and sometimes using small batches of data. In this thesis, online
learning methods will run one time step t at a time. It will for that time step receive a set
of features xt, and then predict a value ˆyt for the target. Then, it will eventually receive
the true value yt, and use this to update its prediction model.
Let us consider online ordinary linear regression. Two ways of performing online linear
regression are 1) Keeping the matrix X⊤X around, updating it every step, to then invert
it and use a Newton-Raphson step to update regression coefficients. This converges
quickly, but is sensitive to initial conditions and can have numerical issues if the problem is
ill conditioned. It also requires knowledge of the Hessian of the objective function. Another
way is to 2) update coefficients using what is known as stochastic gradient descent, which
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
19
==PAGE:28==
is a modification of gradient descent for online situations. This does not converge as fast
as Newton-Raphson, but is more robust to the problem specification.
2.3.1
Stochastic Gradient Descent
Gradient descent for batch regression involves calculating a gradient over an entire dataset.
In online learning, we do not have access to the entire dataset at once. We instead receive
one observation at a time, so we cannot calculate the gradient of the loss function across
the entire dataset at once like we did for batch learning. We want to minimize regret for
the model we choose based on these single observations. We can do this using a variant
of gradient descent known as stochastic gradient descent.
In online learning we can compute the gradient over one or a few observations at a time
and see this gradient as an estimate of the true gradient. We can then update our model
parameters based on this estimated gradient. Due to the sampling error inherent in es-
timating the gradient based on a subset of the total dataset, this algorithm is known as
stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
Stochastic gradient descent lets us bound the regret of our model choice to sublinear
regret on the order of O(
√
T) if we can bound the variance of the estimated gradient and
choose our step sizes well, meaning that it is an appropriate optimization method in an
online setting. It is the only method we will use in this thesis for updating model weights.
We use Stochastic Gradient Descent instead of Newton-Raphson since large numbers
of missing features can often introduce ill-conditioning for Newton-Raphson for the used
models, making a Newton-Raphson step less stable.
2.4
Game Theory
Game theory is the study of strategic interactions between rational agents. Put another
way, game theory is the study of how agents will interact if every agent is acting to optimize
some measure of personal gain. An interaction between rational agents is known as a
game.
The first issue in game theory is then to quantify this personal gain. We assign a math-
ematical value to the preference of agents known as their utility. The agent prefers the
outcome with a higher utility to the outcome with a lower utility, and they will act to max-
imize their utility. The utility often represents the monetary value of an outcome to an
agent. Therefore, the utility of an outcome is also often known as the payoff of the out-
come.
A game has a set of possible outcomes O. Every agent i in the set of all agents N has a set
of strategies they can choose between, known as their strategy space, Si. The outcome
can be represented as the set of chosen strategies of every agent, O = {s1, s2, . . . , s|N|},
where si ∈Si, ∀i ∈N. When we investigate how agents act in a game, we assign them
a utility function that maps an outcome to the real numbers f : O →R. The output is
the utility. A note about naming: The words agent, player, and participant will be used
interchangeably to refer to the agents in a game. A basic introduction to game theory
from an algorithmic perspective is given in Roughgarden [2014].
The players of a game can have private information. In Bayesian games, an agent does
not fully know the value of each outcome based on their own private information, and it
depends on the private information of the other agents in the game. This makes the utility
of an outcome probabilistic before the game is run from the view of a single player, drawn
from a probability distribution based on the private information of the other agents.
20
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:29==
2.4.1
Cooperative Game Theory
Cooperative game theory is a branch of game theory in which players can make binding
agreements externally to the game, allowing players to join forces as groups known as
coalitions. A cooperative game is concerned with the payoff for coalitions of players, and
can be defined by a characteristic function v : 2N →R from a coalition ω of players to a
sum payoff v(ω). The coalition of all players is known as the grand coalition.
Shapley Values
Cooperative game theory investigates the question of how to fairly allocate the payoff of
a cooperative game and forming definitions for the meaning of fairness. One fair payoff
allocation is known as the Shapley value, named after economist Lloyd Shapley. It is
built on a definition of fairness understood by examining the effect of adding a player to
a coalition, and examining how adding the player increases or decreases the sum pay-
off. Specifically, it guarantees what is known as Shapley fairness, which is the following
properties:
1. Budget Balance — The total payoff from the grand coalition is allocated between
participants.
2. Symmetry — If two players have the same effect in all coalitions, then they receive
the same portion of the total payout. Equivalently, the way we order our players
does not matter.
3. Zero Element — If a player has no effect on any coalition, then they do not receive
any payoff.
4. Additivity — If we have two cooperative games and add them together, the sum
payoff for each player is the sum of their payoff in the first game and their payoff in
the second, i.e. how the payoffs are allocated is the same whether we examine the
games as two separate games or as a single game.
These are the fairness properties that are guaranteed by the Shapley value. The Shapley
value turns out to be the unique way to allocate payoffs that guarantees these properties.
It is calculated by examining the effect of adding a player to every possible coalition that
it is not already in. The Shapley value ψi for player i in the game given by characteristic
function v(ω) is calculated from the following equation:
ψi =
∑
ω⊆N\{i}
|ω|!(|N| −|ω| −1)!
|N|!
[v(ω ∪{i}) −v(ω)
(2.13)
Here, ω is a coalition, and N is the set of all players. N \ {i} is then the set of all players
except player i. |N| is the total number of players. The equation calculates for every
coalition ω without the player i the difference between the payoff for ω itself and ω with i
added in, and multiplies this by a factor based on the number of orderings of the coalition.
These values are then summed. The Shapley value can be seen as a function from a
characteristic game to the contribution of every participant to the overall payoff of the
game. This overview of Shapley values is based on Knight [2015].
The algorithm for calculating the Shapley values of a player is of runtime complexity
O(2|N|), where |N| is the number of players. This is generally prohibitively slow. Shapley
values can also be calculated approximately, through a scheme presented in Agarwal
et al. [2019]. This approximate calculation scheme samples coalitions, thus reducing run-
time, but does not give exact values. It is of order O(|N|2) for a certain choice of precision.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
21
==PAGE:30==
However, we will present the results in this paper using the exact Shapley value, knowing
that a practical market implementation could use the approximate Shapley value instead.
2.4.2
Truthfulness
Within game theory, we look at the incentivized behavior of the players in a game. We
often have a situation where the participants in a game have some private information
and a game then requests them to share that private information. Then, we prefer for our
players to truthfully report their private information. If they are incentivized to do this, i.e.
they expect to receive a higher payoff from truthfully reporting their private information
than any other information, our game has a property known as truthfulness.
The reason truthfulness is preferred is that it makes it easier to interact with the game
for players. When a game is not truthful, players need to make a decision within their
strategy space as to what information to report. This decision can quickly become very
complicated, and is often dependent on the distribution of the private information of the
other players, as well as the number of other players present. Sometimes, solving for the
optimal strategic choice is even intractable. A truthful game bypasses all this, since the
players just need to report their private information.
2.4.3
Individual Rationality
The payoff from a cooperative game can be both positive and negative. Sometimes,
players have a choice of entering the game or not, in which case we set their utility from
not entering the game as zero. Then, when designing markets, we will want our market
participants to have a positive utility from entering the market as they will abstain other-
wise. When the utility of entering a game is positive, it is known as individually rational. In
Bayesian games, there are two different versions of individual rationality. Individual ratio-
nality in expectation, often just known as individual rationality, means that players expect
a positive payoff from entering the game, while ex-post individual rationality (EPIR) means
that the players will receive positive payoff from the game in every run of the game, not
only in expectation.
2.4.4
Analytics Markets
Analytics markets are markets where participants can sell features and buy predictions for
certain machine learning tasks, mediated by a machine learning model. Analytics markets
are meant to incentivize exchange of data when data owners and data consumers are
in competition in another market, or just not otherwise incentivized to share data. An
analytics market can be investigated using game theory to understand the behavior of
participants. The market can be seen as a game contains two classes of agents, buyers
and sellers, and they interact with the market in different ways. The analytics market was
as mentioned earlier formalized in Agarwal et al. [2019]. While we only investigate the
seller side of the market, there is already a well-founded solution on the buyer side to
incentivize truthful bidding for a buyer in the market, which is presented in the previously
mentioned paper.
Though a market can have several buyers, we can clear the market separately for each
buyer. We then always consider a market with a single buyer and call that buyer the
central agent. Every other participant in the market is selling features, and we term it
a supporting agent. We see the market as an interaction between a single monopolistic
seller and a single buyer, and see the seller side internally as a cooperative game between
the supporting agents. The cooperative game produces payoff based on how much the
features in it improve the predictions of the buyer. The central agent will also themselves
bring some features to the table, and this set of features is called ωc. In terms of players
22
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:31==
Single Seller
Monopoly
Buyer
Predictions
Targets,
Payments
Mediated by pricing
mechanism from
Agarwal, Dahleh,
and Sarkar 2019
(a) The overall abstraction of the market.
The seller side is seen as a single ac-
tor which has a monopoly on selling pre-
dictions.
Buyers then buy predictions di-
rectly from this seller and send back true
targets and payments. Buyers also give a
willingness-to-pay, mediated by the pricing
mechanism mentioned, as well as their own
features, the central agent features ωc.
Single Seller
Monopoly
Feature Owners
Market Model
Features xt
ŷt
yt
Revenue
Allocation Policy
yt
πt
Payments ψi,t
(b)
Internally
in
the
prediction
seller
monopoly,
feature owners sell features
to the market in a cooperative game.
The model is updated and produces a
prediction ˆyt, the true targets and payment
are reported by the buyer, and revenue is
allocated.
Figure 2.4: The overall structure of the analytics market.
in the cooperative game, the coalition ωc is actually empty, but it is not necessarily empty
in terms of features. The structure of the market is shown in Figure 2.4.
The market works by training its model one time step at a time. It receives an observation
xt and the produces a prediction ˆyt that it sends to the buyer. The buyer sends payment
and the true value yt which is used to train the model and allocate revenue. In order
to allocate revenue using the Shapley value, the market maintains a model trained on
every coalition, and determines the loss using every coalition by examining the coalition
prediction and true target, lω,t = l(ˆyω,t, yt).
When determining the payoff, we only care about reduction in the loss function below what
the central agent loss would be with only their own features. We let the payment from the
central agent to the market be given by
πt = γ(lωc,t −lΩ,t)
(2.14)
Where ωc is the features belonging to the central agent, Ωis the grand coalition, and
γ(∆l) is the gain function for the central agent, indicating how much they are willing to
pay for a certain decrease in their loss function. The gain function must be monotonically
increasing for the buyer-side properties of the market from Agarwal et al. [2019] to hold,
but in this thesis we are just going to let it be linear, given by a single positive constant
coefficient γ known as the willingness to pay. This willingness to pay is given by a buyer
based on their revenue from increased forecasting accuracy in the market. It might be
complicated for participants to know their exact willingness to pay, since improved fore-
casting accuracy often has a complicated relation with exact downstream profit. Future
work could investigate methods to learn this willingness to pay over time for buyers in the
market.
Similarly, we can define the gain from any single coalition:
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
23
==PAGE:32==
Seller-side
Cooperative Game
Feature Owner
Coalition ω
Market Model
Features xω,t
ŷω,t
πω,t
yt
Figure 2.5: The cooperative game that feature sellers are engaged in. Each coalition has
a model trained up to time step t −1 on that coalition’s set of features. Then, the coalition
features for time step t come in. They are used to produce a prediction, and the gain πω,t
for the coalition is then given based on the predicted value ˆyω,t and the true value yt. All
coalition gains are used to calculate feature payments.
πω,t = γ(lωc,t −lω,t)
(2.15)
Where ω is a coalition. This mapping is the characteristic function of the cooperative
seller-side game that maps a coalition to a payoff, v(ω) = πω,t. The market uses the
Shapley value to allocate the revenue between sellers. We get a sum flow of revenue
πt from the central agent to the supporting agents through the market. The cooperative
game that the sellers are engaged in is shown in Figure 2.5, which shows how a single
coalition operates and is assigned a certain gain used to calculate shapley values and
feature payments.
Market Properties
We want our market to fulfill a number of properties for the incentives of the feature sellers.
We want the revenue allocation to be fair according to the Shapley fairness criteria as
well as truthful and individually rational in expectation. However we cannot guarantee
anything about the out-of-sample distribution. The out-of-sample distribution might drift,
which happens regularly in real-world machine learning tasks. Therefore, we instead look
at the properties of the market if applied in-sample, i.e. the properties of the market when
the model is trained to convergence of the in-sample data and applied on the in-sample
data.
At in-sample convergence, the four Shapley criteria come directly from using the Shapley
value as the revenue allocation policy. Individual rationality and truthfulness however
cannot be guaranteed for an arbitrary regression mechanism. We also need to define
exactly what truthfulness means in an analytics market, which is introduced later.
Individual rationality requires that every participant expects non-negative returns. Let us
consider a linear model with weights w that minimizes a convex loss function l.
argmin
w
E[l(w⊤x, y)]
(2.16)
24
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:33==
Where x, y is an observation drawn from the in-sample distribution. It is well known that
adding an additional feature to this setup will never increase the expected loss since the
new weight could always be set to zero, leaving the expected loss unchanged. Therefore,
the difference in payoff used to calculate the Shapley value will always be non-negative,
so the Shapley value itself will always be non-negative, and thus any seller expects non-
negative revenue in-sample and the market is individually rational.
Truthfulness
We want our market to incentivize the sellers to truthfully report their features, but first
we must define what truthfulness means in an analytics market. We define truthfulness
as the property that any market participant maximizes their expected returns by reporting
their features without adding centered gaussian noise. We understand any other transfor-
mation as feature engineering, which we allow agents to do freely. This is sensible, since
the agents might have features in any representation, and transforming your information
should be incentivized if it increases the quality of the market predictions.
In Agarwal et al. [2019], they assume that the prediction model is of a type where adding
gaussian noise to input features does not increase prediction accuracy. Pinson et al.
[2022] shows that this assumption holds in-expectation in-sample for any linear model that
minimizes a convex loss function when the Shapley value is used for revenue allocation
and the willingness to pay function is a linear monotonically increasing function in the loss
reduction, which is the type of models that we investigate in this thesis.
In-Sample Markets
Other literature on analytics markets present in-sample markets where participants pay
for in-sample performance directly. This makes market properties more sensible, since
market properties cannot be guaranteed to hold out-of-sample on non-stationary data
where the underlying distribution might not be the same as in the in-sample data, but they
can be guaranteed in-sample. In some way, paying for in-sample performance makes
sense, as it is at prediction time a useful measure for the expected predictive capabilities
of your model.
Since participants are not actually interested in the in-sample performance but instead
the out-of-sample performance, this thesis will only focus on the out-of-sample market.
While we noted before that in-sample performance is a useful measure, it is also not the
best measure for performance especially due to overfitting, which is the situation where
a model increases its performance on the in-sample dataset, but lowers its performance
out-of-sample. For many applications a set of hold-out data will be used to evaluate the
model. This data is known as either test or validation data depending on the exact use,
and is a better measure of model performance than the in-sample loss. There do exist
models and measures where in-sample evaluation is more useful, e.g. regularized models
or Bayesian models with coefficient uncertainties, but we do not investigate them in this
thesis.
While the properties of the market are only guaranteed in-expectation in-sample, I still
argue that leaving out the in-sample market is more appropriate as all users of the market
only care about out-of-sample performance. We assume the out-of-sample distribution
to be similar to the in-sample distribution. We do though investigate some properties in-
sample, since it can show us information about the asymptotic behavior of a market. It
might be possible for future research to establish guarantees or bounds on out-of-sample
market properties, but this would require making assumptions about the out-of-sample
distribution and is out of scope for this thesis.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:35==
3
Varying Feature Spaces and Analytics
Markets
In this chapter, I will describe the contributions of this thesis to the field of analytics markets
and online regression models. I present four main findings:
1. A review of current literature on online machine learning in evolving feature spaces,
including the quality of models.
2. A new utilitarian online learning model using linear reconstruction of missing fea-
tures.
3. A new market property known as truthfulness under imputation.
4. An investigation of the behavior of revenue allocations in varying feature space.
3.1
Evolving Feature Space
So far, we have always thought of our data as having a fixed set of features. We start out
expecting that all features are present, and whenever a feature is not present, we think
of it as missing and reconstructing it is then known as imputing this feature. In machine
learning generally and especially within online learning, it sometimes makes sense to
think of feature spaces as evolving over time. Instead of saying that we have a fixed set
of features over time, we instead have a set of features dt ⊆N at every time step t. dt
can be different at every time step. The set of all features observed until and including
time step t is known as the universal feature space, ut ⊆N. Varying feature space is
especially sensible when considering features from a group of real-life entities like wind
farms, since these can have sensor failures or be decommissioned, or new entities can
appear as discussed in the introduction.
The dynamics of feature spaces can be understood by considering the following four
events that happen over the course of a feature’s evolution.
1. The feature appears for the first time.
2. The feature is observed normally at a time step.
3. The feature is randomly missing at a time step.
4. The feature disappears forever.
Events 1 and 4 only happen one time each, while events 2 and 3 can both happen an
arbitrary number of times. This taxonomy explains the dynamics that a model designed
for variable feature space must deal with. It is shown as a timeline in Figure 3.1
While this taxonomy is useful, there is an issue with it. From the point of view of the
model, there is no difference between a feature that is randomly missing and a feature
that has disappeared permanently. In a non-stationary environment, a feature that has
been missing for a long time might suddenly appear again but now have a completely
different effect in the context of the model. It might then be better to think of a feature that
has been gone for long enough as a different feature.
Evolving feature spaces themselves can also be categorized. They are commonly cate-
gorized as:
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
27
==PAGE:36==
time step
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature observed
for the first time
1
2
3
4
5
6
Feature observed
Feature randomly
missing
Feature disappears
Figure 3.1: The ways that features can evolve over time. The figure shows feature 1
arriving to the model for the first time, then being ordinarily observed. Then feature 2
arrives as well at time step t = 3. Then, feature 1 is randomly missing at time step t = 4
and comes back again the next time step. Then feature 1 disappears forever at time step
t = 6.
1. Evolving Feature Streams — There is one set of features for a while, then an overlap
with a new set of features, and then the first set of features disappears. Models for
this situation are also known as transfer learning models.
2. Trapezoidal Feature Streams — New features appear over time but no features ever
disappear, so the feature space grows bigger and bigger.
3. Capricious Data Streams — Some features are randomly missing at many time
steps and new features can appear and go missing completely arbitrarily.
These are shown in Figure 3.2, and are useful for understanding the dynamics of evolving
feature spaces. Feature space evolution can also be understood by a combination of
these; you could e.g. have a feature stream where new features came available over
time, and then, once available, would randomly go missing every so often, combining the
trapezoidal and capricious types. In this thesis we will limit ourselves to data streams
where features all appear at approximately the same time and then go missing randomly,
but we do not investigate the dynamics of e.g. completely new features appearing after
the model has been running for a long time, or features going missing permanently. This
limitation is made simply to limit the scope of the thesis.
3.1.1
Utilitarian Online Learning
The name Utilitarian Online Learning (UOL) refers to online learning methods that natively
support evolving feature spaces. The name was introduced by the survey article He et al.
[2023]. The goal of utilitarian online learning models is to produce predictions in variable
feature spaces in a computationally efficient manner.
The survey article presents six state-of-the-art utilitarian online learning models. It also in-
troduces a taxonomy of current utilitarian online learning models based on their approach
to evolving feature space. It splits models into three categories:
1. Passive-Aggressive models
2. Feature Correlation models
3. Evolutionary Ensemble models
28
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:37==
Feature observed
for the first time
Feature observed
Feature randomly
missing
Feature disappears
Features
time
Features
time
Features
Evolvable
Feature Stream
Trapezoidal Feature
Stream
time
Capricious
Data Stream
Figure 3.2: Three categories of data streams: Trapezoidal, where new features appear
over time; evolvable, where there is an initial set of features, an overlap, and then a new
set; and capricious, where features can become available and go missing or disappear
completely arbitrarily.
Passive-Aggressive models work by waiting to incorporate new features into their pre-
dictions until they have been present for a while. Feature Correlation methods work by
reconstructing missing features using some relation between features estimated when
they were observed. Evolutionary Ensembles work by evolving a nonlinear ensemble of
weak classifiers, typically a forest of decision trees. Two models are presented in every
category in the survey article, and all models are classifiers. While they have been tested
on some datasets, one issue in this survey article is the relative lack of clarity regarding
when to use which of these models.
We will now introduce some models from the literature that we will touch on again later,
some in depth and some less so. While we spend some time introducing them here, we
will see in the results section that most of the models from the literature do not perform
very well. They are also mostly classifiers, and we will need a regressor for our intended
applications. The model OLM is partially from literature, but mostly developed for this
thesis since the literature that introduced it does not describe its function in any depth.
The OLM-S model is a newly constructed model for this thesis.
Online Linear Model (OLM)
The Online Linear Model, or OLM, is a way to implement linear models in a utilitarian
online learning context. The model is introduced in the paper He et al. [2019], where it is
termed the Online Convex Optimization model. They use it as a binary linear classifier, but
they do not present the exact workings of the model since they only use it as a baseline.
An online linear model can be implemented with any conditional probability distribution
between the targets and features. We specifically implement two variants, one for regres-
sion and one for binary classification. These correspond to the conditional distributions
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
29
==PAGE:38==
Xt=1
1
2
w1
w2
ŷ1
Xt=2
1
3
w1
w2
w3
ŷ2
Xt=3
3
w1
w2
w3
ŷ3
2
Figure 3.3: Function of the OLM model. We see it generate a prediction every time step
based only on the present features. When a new feature enters the model at time step 2,
it is initialized with a coefficient of w3 = 0. Only the coefficients for the present features
are updated.
specified as yt normally distributed around w⊤xt, and yt Bernoulli distributed with prob-
ability h(w⊤xt), respectively. The online linear model handles missing features by mean
imputing them. We assume centered input features, which means that mean imputing
missing features will be the same as setting them to zero. This will be useful for the
implementation of the model.
The OLM has a set of weights w, one for every input feature seen up to time t. This space
of all observed features up until time t is known as the universal feature space, ut. At
every time step t, it receives some features xt. All features are not necessarily present.
The set of present features is denoted dt, so that xt ∈Rdt
The idea of the model is then to receive the features for a time step and produce pre-
dictions based on only the present features, zeroing out missing features which is the
same as mean imputing them. The weights are then updated. Whenever a new feature
appears, it is given a new weight that is initialized to zero. The general function of the
model is displayed in Figure 3.3.
For the regression variant the prediction ˆyt is given by
ˆyt =
∑
i∈dt
wixi +
∑
i∈(ut\dt)
wi0 = ¯w⊤xt
(3.1)
Here, ¯w is the vector of weights for present features, ¯w = [wi for i ∈dt]⊤.
The weights are then updated using stochastic gradient descent. The loss function is
the mean square error, meaning that the loss observed at a single time step will be
l(ˆyt, yt) = (ˆyt −yt)2. The gradient descent update step is then given by following the
negative gradient of the loss function with regards to the weights of the model, noting that
the gradient is 0 for weights corresponding to missing features
∇¯w( ¯w⊤xt −yt)2 = 2xt( ¯w⊤xt −yt)
(3.2)
30
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:39==
This gives us the update step
¯w := ¯w −τ2xt( ¯w⊤xt −yt)
(3.3)
where τ is a step size parameter.
OLM Classification variant
The classification variant works mostly in the same way. The prediction is formed as
ˆyt = h(
∑
i∈dt
wixi +
∑
i∈(ut\dt)
wi0) = h( ¯w⊤xt)
(3.4)
where h is the logistic function, h(x) =
1
1+e−x .
Again, weights are updated using stochastic gradient descent. The loss function for the
classification model is the negative log likelihood function from the Bernoulli conditional
probability distribution, which is the binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss. The loss is then
l(ˆyt, yt) = −(ytlogˆyt + (1 −yt)log(1 −ˆyt)) for a single time step. The objective function
written for a single time step is then
F = −(ytlogˆyt + (1 −yt)log(1 −ˆyt))
(3.5)
Since ˆyt = h(w⊤xt), we can split the gradient up into a couple of factors using the chain
rule. We will define zt = w⊤xt, and the partial derivative for parameter wi will then be
given by
∂F
∂wi
= ∂F
∂ˆyt
· ∂ˆyt
∂zt
· ∂zt
∂wi
(3.6)
The three factors are found:
∂F
∂ˆyt
= −(yt
ˆyt
−1 −yt
1 −ˆyt
) = −yt −ytˆyt + ytˆyt −ˆyt
ˆyt(1 −ˆyt)
= −yt −ˆyt
ˆyt(1 −ˆyt)
(3.7)
∂ˆyt
∂zt
= ∂
∂zt
1
1 + e−zt =
e−zt
(1 + e−zt)2 =
1
1 + e−zt ·
e−zt
1 + e−zt = ˆyt(1 −ˆyt)
(3.8)
∂zt
∂wi
=
{
∂
∂wi ¯w⊤xt = xi
i ∈dt
0
otherwise
(3.9)
The partial derivative for wi for i ∈dt is then
∂F
∂wi
= −( yt −ˆyt
ˆyt(1 −ˆyt))(ˆyt(1 −ˆyt))(xi) = xi(ˆyt −yt)
(3.10)
and the gradient becomes ∇¯wF = xt(ˆyt −yt). Again, the gradient for any missing feature
will be zero, and they can be left out of the update. The update step for the classification
version of the online linear model is then given by
¯w = ¯w −τxt(ˆyt −yt)
(3.11)
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
31
==PAGE:40==
The model deals with new features by initializing their coefficients to zero. The vector of
parameters w can thus grow over time. The pseudocode for the OLM regression variant
is shown in Algorithm 1. The runtime complexity for a single time step is of order O(dt).
The memory use is of order O(ut). The model is a useful baseline model to compare to,
since it runs in linear time and is simple.
Algorithm 1 Online Linear Model - Regression
Initialize empty weights vector w
for t ∈{0, 1, . . . , T} do
Receive xt with present feature set dt.
Initialize newly appeared features, wi := 0 ∀i ∈{dt \ ut−1}.
Predict ˆyt = ¯w⊤xt
Update w, ¯w := ¯w −τ 2xt(ˆyt −yt)
end for
OCDS
The Online Learning on Capricious Data Streams (OCDS) algorithm is a binary linear
classifier from the paper He et al. [2019] and a feature correlation method in the catego-
rization from He et al. [2023]. It reconstructs missing features by averaging the expected
value of the feature given each feature in the set of present features.
If e.g. feature j is missing, it is reconstructed as ˜xj =
1
|dt|
∑
i∈dt E[xj|xi], where tilde is
used to refer to reconstructed features. Since it is assumed that features are drawn from
a normalized multivariate normal distribution, the expected value of one feature given
another is given by the function E[xj|xi] = Σi,jxi if all other features are marginalized
out. These coefficients are stored in a matrix G, E[xj|xi] = Gj,ixi. This is the basic idea,
where G can then be found by minimizing the reconstruction error.
The reconstruction can be expressed succinctly by forming at every time step the matrix
Grt, which is the columns dt of G. The reconstruction is then given by
˜xt = ΠR(ut\dt)( 1
|dt|Grtxt)
(3.12)
Where Π is the projection operator, and projects into the space of missing features in this
case. For any index set A ⊆N and vector x,
ΠRA(x) = [xi for i ∈A]⊤
(3.13)
The matrix G is found by minimizing the mean squared error of the reconstruction. This
can only be done on present features since we do not know the values for missing fea-
tures, so the reconstruction error becomes
∥ΠRdt( 1
|dt|Grtxt) −xt∥2
2
(3.14)
The paper introduces a term based on the supervised loss as well in the objective function
for determining G.
The model ensembles predictions based on reconstructed features and present features
together. It does this by using a parameter p that it sets based on the cumulative loss of
using only present and only reconstructed features. The prediction is given by
32
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:41==
ˆy = p ¯w⊤xt + (1 −p) ˜w⊤˜xt
(3.15)
Where ¯w is the subset of w corresponding to the present features, and ˜w is the subset
of w corresponding to the reconstructed features. The predicted label is then sign(ˆy),
where the positive class is given the value 1 and the negative class is given the value
−1. Note that the size of the present and reconstructed subsets can change at every time
step, e.g. if all features are present there will be no reconstructed features, in which case
the prediction is just ˆy = p ¯w⊤xt. The weights are then updated using stochastic gradient
descent and the mean square error.
The OCDS algorithm also introduces three regularization constants. One is called α, and
is used to scale the reconstruction error compared to supervised loss. The two others are
β1, which is an L1 loss on the coefficients, and β2, which sees G as a graph and finds
the graph laplacian, and uses this to make coefficients for highly correlated features more
similar. The optimization problem solved by the OCDS model is then
argmin
w,G
T
∑
t
((ˆyt −yt)2 + α∥ΠRdt( 1
|dt|Grtxt) −xt∥2
2 + β1∥w∥1 + β2Tr(w⊤Lw))
(3.16)
Where L is the laplacian of G seen as the incidence matrix for a weighted graph, and Tr
is the trace. This problem is then solved by stochastic gradient descent one observation
at a time, similar to the OLM. It is biconvex, so convergence is guaranteed by a proper
choice of step size, e.g. the step size
1
√
t used in the original paper.
The OCDS model makes some uncommon decisions in its design. The OCDS model is
discussed further in Section 4.2.4.
We also introduce a regression variant of the OCDS model. Since the OCDS model al-
ready uses the mean squared error for its loss and outputs a continuous value ˆyt for every
prediction, one needs only skip the step of turning ˆyt into a class label and it becomes a
regression model.
OLVF
The Online Learning from Varying Feature Spaces (OLVF) algorithm is also a linear clas-
sifier from the paper Beyazit et al. [2019], classified as a passive-aggressive learner in
the taxonomy from He et al. [2023]. It deals with missing features by projecting observed
features into a subspace known as the classifier subspace. The model minimizes a hingle
loss with slack which turns out to have some complications regarding markets as will be
discussed later.
OVFM
The Online Learning in Variable Feature Spaces with Mixed Data (OVFM) algorithm from
the paper He et al. [2021] is also a binary linear classifier. It is a development of OCDS
and works generally the same way. The main difference is that it uses Gaussian copula
to map features into a latent space and performs classification in this space. This allows
for better gradients for ordinal features.
Online Linear Model with Subregressions (OLM-S)
The Online Linear Model with Subregressions (OLM-S) algorithm is a new model devel-
oped for this thesis. The model is developed based on the idea of reconstructing missing
features using the regression variant of the OLM and using a linear classifier or regressor
on the reconstructed and present features.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
33
==PAGE:42==
Xt=1
1
2
w1
w2
ŷ1
OLM1
OLM2
Xt=2
1
3
w1
w2
w3
ŷ2
OLM1
OLM2
OLM3
Xt=3
3
w1
w2
w3
ŷ3
OLM1
OLM2
OLM3
2
Figure 3.4: The time step by time step workings of the OLM-S model. Seen is the predic-
tive flow of the model. Subregressions OLM1, OLM2, and OLM3 are trained whenever
the feature they reconstruct is present. Present features are used to reconstruct missing
features. The function of OLM1 with the same dataset as shown here is shown in Figure
3.5.
The model is a linear model like the OLM that uses stochastic gradient descent for the
coefficient update step. The new part of this model is the imputation method. It maintains
an OLM regression model for every feature in the model trained to predict said feature
based on the remaining features. When features are missing, it then imputes each missing
feature using its OLM regression model. An overview of its function is shown in Figure
3.4, and the function of a subregression for the model is shown in Figure 3.5
The simplest way to understand OLM-S is in terms of these sub OLM models used to
reconstruct missing features, but it can also represented by letting a matrix G contain the
weights for the OLM models. The reconstructed features are then ˜xt = ΠR(ut\dt)(Grtxt).
Then, the optimization problem solved by the model can be expressed succinctly as fol-
lows:
w∗= argmin
w
T
∑
t
(l( ¯w⊤xt + ˜w⊤˜xt, yt))
(3.17)
G∗= argmin
G
T
∑
t
∥ΠRdt(Grtxt) −xt∥2
2
(3.18)
s.t.
Gi,i = 0 ∀i ∈uT
(3.19)
Where uT is the set of all features observed over all timesteps. Both of these optimization
problems are convex so we can guarantee convergence using stochastic gradient descent
with a certain choice of step size. The two optimization problems are called F and G,
respectively. Note that the constraint in G is ensured by fixing Gi,i at 0 when performing
the update step. The step using stochastic gradient descent becomes
w = w −τ1∇wF G = G −τ2∇GG
(3.20)
where τ1 and τ2 are two fixed step size hyperparameters.
34
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:43==
Xt=1
2
w1,2
x̂ 1,1
Xt=2
x̂ 1,2
3
w1,3
Xt=2
x̂ 1,3
3
w1,3
2
w1,2
OLM1
Figure 3.5: The step by step of the subregression OLM1 reconstructing feature 1 in Figure
3.4. The output from this subregression is only used in the main model at time step
t = 3, since this is the only point where feature 1 is missing. At the other time steps, the
subregression coefficients are trained using other present features, and feature 1 as the
target.
The loss can either be specified as l( ¯w⊤xt + ˜w⊤˜xt, yt) for the regression variant or as
l(h( ¯w⊤xt + ˜w⊤˜xt), yt) for the classification variant using binary cross-entropy loss. The
regression prediction is ˆyt = ¯w⊤xt + ˜w⊤˜xt, and when classifying, the prediction is instead
ˆyt = h( ¯w⊤xt + ˜w⊤˜xt).
One advantage of the OLM-S model is that the reconstruction can be trained indepen-
dently of the true regression targets. This means that in time-ahead prediction situations,
the reconstruction can be trained for every time step up to prediction time, and sometimes
even later if features are available further ahead in time. This increases the total amount
of data that the reconstruction mechanism can learn from.
The prediction step of the algorithm is laid out in Algorithm 2, the update of the predictor
or base model is in Algorithm 3, and the update of the reconstruction is in Algorithm 4.
Note that in the reconstruction, the matrix G is updated by inserting the columns of the
updated Grt into the columns dt of G.
Algorithm 2 OLM-S Single Timestep Prediction
Receive xt with present feature set dt
Retrieve Grt as columns dt of G
Reconstruct missing features, ˜xt = ΠR(ut\dt)Grtxt
Predict ˆy = ¯w⊤xt + ˜w⊤˜xt
Algorithm 3 OLM-S Main Predictor Update
Retrieve xt with present feature set dt
Retrieve ˆyt from prediction algorithm
Update w := w −τ1∇wl(ˆyt, yt)
3.2
Market Model Candidates
Based on our preliminaries, we can establish our requirements for a model for our market
with varying feature space. We need:
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
35
==PAGE:44==
Algorithm 4 OLM-S Reconstruction Update
Retrieve xt with present feature set dt
Find ∇GrG = 2(ΠRdt(Grtxt) −xt)x⊤
t , fixing coefficients Gi,i to zero.
Update Grt := Grt −τ2∇GrG
update G using Grt
1. A regression model.
2. That can be updated in an online fashion.
3. And deals with varying feature spaces.
4. And is linear in the input features & minimizing a convex loss function.
We will now go through the presented models and investigate how they would fit into a
regression market as a market model.
3.2.1
OLM
Looking over the OLM model, we see that it is a regression model that can be updated in
an online fashion, works with varying feature spaces, and is linear in the input features. It
also minimizes a convex loss function. It is then a valid choice for a market model.
3.2.2
OLM-S
In this section, we will show that the OLM-S model is a valid candidate for a market model.
The OLM-S is clearly a regression model that updates in an online fashion, allowing vary-
ing feature spaces. It also reconstructs these missing features, which we expect to im-
prove its performance when feature spaces change. Let us look at the representation
of OLM-S shown in the optimization problem in Equation 3.17 again and see if we can
also fulfill the fourth requirement of linearity. The objective function for the minimization
problem is
F =
T
∑
t
(l( ¯w⊤xt + ˜w⊤˜xt, yt))
(3.21)
=
T
∑
t
(l(w⊤zt, yt))
where zi,t =
{
xi
i ∈dt
˜xi
i ∈ut \ dt
(3.22)
Since zt = [z1,t, z2,t, . . . , zut,t] results from a linear transformation of the input features xt at
every time step t, as ˜xt is just a linear transformation of the input features xt, the problem
is linear in the input features. We have also assumed that the loss function is convex, so
our model requirements are fulfilled, and choosing OLM-S as the market model will give
rise to our desired market properties.
3.2.3
OCDS
The OCDS model is online and deals with varying feature spaces. The model can readily
be used as a regression model, as mentioned earlier. Similarly to the OLM-S model, it
ends up using a linear combination of the input features to produce its predictions, so it
is linear in the inputs for the same reasons. It uses the mean squared error, which is a
convex loss function.
Then, OCDS is a valid candidate for a market model as well. Note that we do not look at
the OVFM model in terms of market properties, but it is a further development of OCDS.
36
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:45==
3.2.4
OLVF
The OLVF cannot easily have its loss function changed, unilke the OCDS, OLM-S, and
OLM models. The loss function is a hinge loss with a slack variable. Buyers in the market
would then need to pay for a reduction in this loss function if the OLVF was employed as
the market model. Minimizing a hinge loss with a slack variable is not a loss function that
immediately translates to common real-life problems, so buyers would not want to pay for
it directly. Therefore, it is not an obvious choice for a market model.
3.3
Revenue Allocation for Missing Features
We know that we can get a fair allocation using the Shapley value. However, within the
context of variable feature space, the straightforward Shapley value allocation will also
have us calculate Shapley values for the missing features. We sometimes expect nega-
tive Shapley values for missing features as will be shown in the results section, so sellers
in the market can be forced to pay an amount back to the market in the situation that they
do not have data available, and participation can thus carry future risk. This is not true
asymptotically in-sample though, and only in cases when small sample sizes or nonsta-
tionarity cause poor out-of-sample estimates.
Features can also have an expected positive Shapley value when not present. This might
not seem fair for other feature owners. I do show in the results in Section 4.3.3 that
out-of-sample, missing features generally have near-zero or negative payments, though.
Positive Shapley values for missing features would especially impact an in-sample based
market, where an extra feature at one time step would allow the model to overfit on another
time step, thus making the feature increase performance at both time steps and receive
positive compensation for both. In out-of-sample markets, positive Shapley values can at
most arise from a regularizing effect, since the model does not have a chance to overfit
on observations it has not yet seen. It could still be argued that the positive Shapley
value for a missing feature should not go to the missing feature, but instead be pooled
among the present features, since the result could just as easily have been obtained with
regularization.
We investigate two alternative allocation policies to more fairly handle missing features.
However, both turn out not to work. The market setup in this thesis requires the ordinary
Shapley value to produce a revenue allocation method that meets our desired market
properties.
Note that while we always call the monetary transaction between the market and feature
owner a payment, the payment can be positive, in which case it goes from the market to
the feature owner, or negative, in which case it goes from the feature owner to the market.
If all payments were non-negative we would have an ex-post individually rational market,
but we cannot guarantee this.
3.3.1
Alternative Allocation Policy — Redistributing Shapley Values
When reconstructing a missing feature, one revenue allocation policy could be to redis-
tribute Shapley values for missing features from the main model to the features used to
reconstruct a missing feature. With this approach, we might e.g. have three features
in our overall model. At time step t, feature 1 is missing. It gets assigned some Shap-
ley value ψ1. In the subregression used to reconstruct feature 1, feature 2 and 3 then get
Shapley values ψ1,2 & ψ1,3. We would then split out the Shapley value in the overall model
from feature 1 onto features 2 and 3 based on their Shapley value in the subregression.
See Figure 3.6 for a diagram of the method.
A problem is that the subregression Shapley value is not possible to find, since we do not
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
37
==PAGE:46==
Main regression
ψ1
feature
missing
ψ2
ψ3
x1 Reconstructing
Regression
ψ1,2
ψ1,3
Figure 3.6: Redistributing shapley values for missing features. Here, features 1, 2, and 3
receive a Shapley value in the main regression. Feature 1 is missing at this time step, so
its payoff is redistributed between feature 2 and 3 based on their Shapley values in the
regression that reconstructs feature 1.
know the true value of the missing feature. We can keep a historical average or moving
average Shapley value to serve as an expected Shapley value, but there is no direct way
to observe the true Shapley value when reconstructing a feature.
Another proposed option is to expect that features are not missing forever but simply
late, in which case the Shapley value would be possible to find once the true value of
the missing feature arrives. However, this is a different situation than this thesis seeks to
solve. When features are assumed to arrive late, a feature owner cannot have a broken
sensor, only issues in transmitting the feature on time. Feature owners also cannot exit
the market. One would also need to find a way to incentivize feature owners to report
their late features truthfully. All of this is outside of the scope of this thesis.
3.3.2
Alternative Allocation Policy — Ignoring Missing Features
Another possibility is to calculate Shapley values based only on present features. In this
allocation policy, we look at which features are present at every time step and calculate
Shapley values as if these were the only features in the market. It is illustrated in Figure
3.7. Sometimes missing features are expected to have positive Shapley values, though,
in which case feature owners will be missing out on returns and might turn to mean impu-
tation, negatively impacting the market.
This allocation policy also has an attack vector. The policy allows actors to damage the
market by providing features correlated with other market features and then letting them
go missing later, deteriorating market performance without paying for this reduction in
performance. Thus, market owners would not be sufficiently incentivized to keep their
features present in the market.
This allocation policy can be used if retraining is used in place of imputation, in which
case all missing features will have a Shapley value of zero. This is beyond the work of
38
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:47==
Regression, t=1
ψ1
Feature 2
missing
ψ3
Regression, t=2
Feature 1
missing
ψ3
ψ2
Figure 3.7: Illustration of the alternate allocation policy where missing features are ignored
when calculating Shapley values. At t = 1, feature 1 and 3 are present and feature 2 is
not, so coalitions containing feature 2 are ignored when calculating Shapley values, and
it receives no payment. Similarly, at time step t = 2, feature 1 is missing and coalitions
containing feature 1 are not included when calculating Shapley values.
this thesis, but is discussed in the further works, in Section 5.1.4.
3.3.3
Truthfulness Under Imputation
Previously, we defined truthfulness as incentivizing market participants to report their true
features to the market as opposed to adding Gaussian noise to their feature. When fea-
tures are missing, we have expanded the strategy space by allowing market participants
to report their feature as missing and letting the model used in the market handle the miss-
ing feature. This introduces a new challenge. Sellers with a missing feature now have
the choice between truthfully reporting their feature as missing or imputing their missing
feature using historical information, i.e. mean imputation. We assume that mean im-
putation is the only choice available to feature users; they could of course also provide
a regression- or domain knowledge-based imputation themselves, but this complicates
analysis significantly and is left for future work.
Mean imputation can have different effects on the market. In some markets, sellers are
incentivized to truthfully report their features as missing when they are missing. We term
this truthfulness under imputation. One reason this is preferable is that in some cases,
determining whether one should report a missing feature or mean impute is a difficult
problem — in essence, it introduces strategic bidding for the feature sellers, making their
interaction in the market more difficult to optimize.
Note that in this thesis we also are making the assumption that observations are indepen-
dent of previous observations. This is a fairly strong assumption, and doesn’t often hold in
practice. Without this assumption, another new method of imputation becomes available
to market participants, namely autoregressive imputation. Feature owners can supply a
value imputed based on their last observed feature value(s) when their feature is missing.
Whether a method is truthful under autoregressive imputation will depend on the specific
relationship between a feature and its previous values as well as the mechanisms of the
feature going missing, and will not be investigated in this work.
Truthfulness Under Imputation for OLM
The OLM method handles missing features by mean imputing. Therefore, the output of
the model both at the time step where a feature is missing and every following time step will
be the same whether a participant mean imputes or not, and so feature payments will be
unchanged. Thus, OLM is actually not strictly truthful under imputation, since participants
are not incentivized to truthfully report their features as missing, but suffers none of the
consequences of not being truthful under imputation. The model could be called weakly
truthful under imputation, or indifferent under imputation.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
39
==PAGE:48==
Truthfulness Under Imputation for OLM-S
Truthfulness under imputation is not guaranteed for OLM-S in this thesis. It is likely pos-
sible to show truthfulness under imputation in-sample in-expectation for OLM-S when the
distribution of missing features is stationary, but this is left for future work. Out-of-sample,
or when the distribution of missing features is non-stationary, the property becomes highly
context-dependent.
Practical results about truthfulness under imputation will be discussed in Section 4.3.5.
40
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:49==
4
Results and Discussion
This chapter reports on the results of the thesis. We will first investigate utilitarian online
learning models divorced from their market context, since this is relevant when we de-
termine which model to use for our regression market. Then, we will investigate market
results with varying feature spaces, showing the outcome of the market with both synthetic
and real-world datasets.
Note that whenever we test a model, we also add in a constant feature that is always 1
along with the other features which acts like the intercept in an ordinary linear regression
and is always present.
4.1
Utilitarian Online Learning
First, we want to investigate which model to use for our market setup. We want a perfor-
mant utilitarian online learning model, so we investigate and compare available models.
In the end we want a regression model as demonstrated in the motivating example —
forecasting in the electricity market is most often a regression problem. However, since
current research is within classifiers, we investigate these first.
4.1.1
OCDS
OCDS, if converted to a regression model, meets our requirements for a market model.
Therefore, we are interested in whether it could be a performant model. We test the OCDS
method against the baseline OLM method in a setup similar to what is used in the OCDS
paper He et al. [2019]. In this test, we examine both OCDS and OLM as classification
methods by comparing their mean accuracy. The test is not very representative of a
common use case for online models, but we use it for comparability.
We test on datasets from the UCI databank, since these are the datasets used by most
papers within the UOL subfield to argue for the utility of their models. The chosen datasets
are shown in Table 4.1, and are from the UCI databank. [Markelle Kelly] We choose
these since many models report results for them and they span a substantial amount of
the types of datasets these models test on in terms of numbers of features, numbers of
observations, and amounts of categorical features.
To prepare the datasets for use, we convert categorical features into discrete numerical
features. They are given integer values based on the order that they are observed in.
This means that non-binary categorical features are handled in a non-obvious way. This
is done since one-hot encoding was found to deteriorate performance.
The test takes in a dataset of features and associated targets X, Y . The time order of
these observations is shuffled so that there is no autoregressive relation between obser-
vations. Then, for every time step, half of the features are randomly removed, i.e. every
time step is missing 50% of features, so that methods must handle missing features. While
this does not match the situation where an online model would generally be used, since
online models are more useful when the coefficients in the model are changing over time
i.e. the distribution is non-stationary, this is the test performed by most current literature
in UOL, so we use this test for comparability.
The model first predicts a label for a single time step and then trains on that time step.
The test pseudocode is displayed in Algorithm 5. The entire test is run several times,
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
41
==PAGE:50==
Dataset
Observations
Features
Non-Binary Categorical Features
UCI ID
australian
690
14
4
143
ionosphere
351
34
0
52
german
1000
20
11
144
wdbc
569
30
0
17
wbc
699
9
0
15
magic04
19020
10
0
159
kr-vs-kp
3196
35
1
22
credit-a
690
15
5
27
Table 4.1: UCI datasets used for classification tests along with the number of observations
in the datasets and the number of features per observation. Also provided is the number of
features that are categorical and not binary, since we do not process them in a completely
standard way. All datasets are binary classification tasks. The ID in the UCI system is
supplied for easy lookup.
the mean accuracy is reported, and 95% confidence intervals are constructed using the
standard deviation of the mean accuracy.
Algorithm 5 Pseudocode for testing UOL methods
Permute X, Y
Initialize model m
for t ∈{0, 1, . . . , T} do
Create prediction ˆyt = m.predict(xt)
Train model m.train(xt, yt)
end for
evaluate model based on predictions ˆy
We test OCDS and OLM using this approach. We want to investigate a feasible upper
bound for predictive accuracy, so we also use a logistic regression on the same dataset.
Logistic regression is the batch learning variant of a linear classifier using binary cross-
entropy loss. We let this logistic regression train on the entire dataset with no missing
data, and then predict on the entire dataset as well. Its predictions are then in-sample
with full information, meaning that we expect it to maximize accuracy within the sample
for a linear classifier. So no other linear classification method, like e.g. OCDS, should be
able to surpass the logistic regression mean accuracy.
OLM has a hyperparameter in form of a fixed step size. We find this step size by per-
forming a grid search in the set [1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001] on a sample run through the dataset
and picking the step size with highest mean accuracy before running the tests. We use a
fixed step size for simplicity.
The original paper performed hyperparameter optimization by grid search for the OCDS
regularization constants, which we also perform. OCDS has three regularization con-
stants, α, β1, and β2. We search in the space α ∈[1, 0.1, 0.01], β1 ∈[0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0],
and β2 ∈[0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0]. The original OCDS implementation uses the step size τ =
1
√
t
but this was found to have numerical issues, so we use τ =
k
√
t, where we perform a hy-
perparameter search to find k in the space k ∈[1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001]. This hyperparameter
search is also performed on a sample run through the dataset.
Note that the test in the original OCDS paper is slightly different from the test we perform
42
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:51==
OCDS paper
OCDS Reimplementation
OLM
Logistic UB
australian
0.886 ± 0.011
0.753 ± 0.003
0.767 ± 0.002
0.858
ionosphere
0.906 ± 0.014
0.748 ± 0.001
0.795 ± 0.002
0.937
german
0.827 ± 0.021
0.701 ± 0.001
0.705 ± 0.002
0.755
wdbc
0.951 ± 0.009
0.921 ± 0.002
0.938 ± 0.001
0.993
wbc
0.939 ± 0.005
0.934 ± 0.001
0.938 ± 0.001
0.961
magic04
0.886 ± 0.013
0.732 ± 0.001
0.732 ± 0.001
0.791
kr-vs-kp
0.912 ± 0.006
0.733 ± 0.001
0.750 ± 0.001
0.960
credit-a
0.926 ± 0.014
0.766 ± 0.003
0.783 ± 0.002
0.864
Table 4.2: Mean accuracy. OCDS, both results from the paper and my own implementa-
tion, along with the logistic regression upper bound and the baseline OLM model. Note
that the logistic regression presents in-sample mean accuracy, while the other models
present out-of-sample accuracy. This is done since the logistic regression is meant to
serve as an upper bound on possible out-of-sample accuracy.
here. Instead of removing half the features at every time step, they remove up to half of
the features where the number of features removed is drawn from a uniform distribution.
This means that the original OCDS paper gives slightly more information to the model,
since more features are present at every time step. However, due to the choices made in
designing the OCDS model, it should perform better when the number of missing features
is similar at every time step, i.e. the setup that we use. The OCDS paper does not clarify
how they deal with categorical variables in their test.
The results for this test are in Table 4.2. It contains both the results from the original
OCDS paper and from the reimplementation of OCDS in this thesis. Note that the logistic
regression can feasibly be understood as an upper bound on prediction accuracy since
it reports in-sample accuracy for the function type, but the results reported in the OCDS
paper regularly break the bound, even though they report out-of-sample accuracy. This
is not purely due to a different handling of categorical variables, since it also happens in
the magic04 dataset that contains no categorical variables. Therefore, I suspect that the
reported results for OCDS are erroneous. My reimplementation is worse than the baseline
OLM implementation, so I expect that OCDS is not a performant model for classification.
4.1.2
Other Utilitarian Online Learning Methods
The results lead us to compare to other utilitarian online learning methods presented in
the survey article since OCDS is not very performant. We use the same testing method
as described above in Algorithm 5.
The added methods are the OLVF classifier and the OVFM classifier. The test presented
in the OLVF paper corresponds to the test that we perform, while the test in the OVFM
paper is equivalent to the test in the OCDS paper described before. The OVFM model
natively accepts categorical variables, so these are not transformed in their test. The
tests are then quite similar, with the OVFM paper receiving slightly more information than
the rest of the models. We also include the classification version of the OLM-S model
developed in this thesis. The two step size hyperparameters of the OLM-S model are
chosen by a similar hyperparameter grid search as the step size for OLM.
The results are in Table 4.3
The results for the new methods do not break the logistic upper bound, but no model has
consistently higher accuracy than the baseline OLM model. The OVFM model surpasses
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
43
==PAGE:52==
From papers
From this thesis
OLVF
OVFM
OLM
OLM-S
OCDS
australian
N/A
0.783 ± 0.001
0.767 ± 0.002
0.768 ± 0.003
0.753 ± 0.003
ionosphere
0.774 ± 0.021
0.752 ± 0.001
0.795 ± 0.002
0.787 ± 0.002
0.748 ± 0.001
german
0.649 ± 0.008
0.681 ± 0.001
0.705 ± 0.002
0.709 ± 0.001
0.701 ± 0.001
wdbc
0.903 ± 0.009
0.918 ± 0.001
0.938 ± 0.001
0.935 ± 0.001
0.921 ± 0.002
wbc
0.913 ± 0.008
0.922 ± 0.001
0.938 ± 0.001
0.941 ± 0.002
0.934 ± 0.001
magic04
0.644 ± 0.001
0.762 ± 0.001
0.732 ± 0.001
0.743 ± 0.001
0.733 ± 0.001
kr-vs-kp
N/A
0.687 ± 0.001
0.750 ± 0.001
0.753 ± 0.001
0.733 ± 0.001
credit-a
N/A
0.760 ± 0.001
0.783 ± 0.001
0.780 ± 0.002
0.766 ± 0.003
Table 4.3: Mean accuracy. Comparing results from the OLVF and OVFM paper with
results that come from the thesis implementation of the OLM baseline and OCDS, along
with the new OLM-S model. The best performing method for each dataset is in bold.
Note that even though OLM-S performs best on three occasions, it is very close to the
performance of OLM.
the OLM baseline in the australian and magic04 datasets, but apart from these, it performs
worse that the OLM method. The OLM-S model performs almost identically to OLM in this
test. If τ2 = 0, OLM-S reduces to OLM, so OLM-S can always perform at least as well as
OLM for a certain choice of hyperparameters.
The australian dataset has some categorical non-binary features, which is likely to explain
why OVFM performs better in this case as it is directed towards categorical features. This
does not explain the performance in the magic04 dataset though, where all features are
continuous. Even though OVFM does occasionally outperform the baseline OLM, the
OVFM paper does not provide information on when this might happen.
Based on these tests, the advice in a classification setting would be to use the baseline
OLM model if one would want an online linear classification model that supports variable
feature spaces.
4.2
Regression
Since we are looking for a regression model, we move on to investigating online models for
regression instead of classification. We now have some initial information on the quality of
different UOL methods. The UOL models from literature have not shown very promising
results, and we will not spend more time on OLVF and OVFM.
First we examine the time-ahead forecasting performance for OLM, OLM-S, and the re-
gression variant of OCDS.
Our initial regression tests use synthetic datasets where features are drawn from a multi-
variate Gaussian distribution and targets are given as a linear combination of these fea-
tures. The distribution has |N| features and a covariance matrix Σ, and a coefficient θi is
attached to each feature, where the vector of all coefficients is known as θ. The coeffi-
cients are drawn from the uniform distribution U.
xt ∼N(0, Σ) ∀t ∈{0, 1, . . . , T}
(4.1)
θi ∼U(0.1, 1) ∀i ∈N
(4.2)
yt = θ⊤xt
(4.3)
44
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:53==
The covariance matrix is given using a parameter ρ to control the level of correlation be-
tween features, σi,j = ρmin(|i−j|,|N|−|i−j|). The correlation is given based on the distance
mod |N|, since this makes every feature equally correlated with other features, and thus
all features are symmetric. For example, the covariance matrix for four features is given
by.
Σ =


1
ρ
ρ2
ρ
ρ
1
ρ
ρ2
ρ2
ρ
1
ρ
ρ
ρ2
ρ
1


(4.4)
Each synthetic dataset is generated with T = 200 observations. All features are present
for the first 50 observations whereafter half of the features are randomly missing for each
time step, rounded down. Every statistic is found by running the test several times, re-
generating the data every time. This gives both a more accurate result for the MSE, as
well as 95 % confidence intervals.
Both OLM and OLM-S are given fixed step sizes. For OLM the step size is set to τ =
0.01, and for OLM-S the step sizes are set to τ1 = τ2 = 0.01, where τ1 is the step size
for updating the main weights of the classifier, while τ2 is the step size for updating the
regressions that reconstruct missing features.
4.2.1
Time horizons
First, we test the impact of time horizons on the three regression methods. The pseu-
docode is seen in Algorithm 6. Note that OLM-S can use time steps where features are
available but targets are not yet available to train its reconstruction, and then revisit them
when their targets arrive to train its predictor. Results can be seen in Figure 4.1. We
see from these results that OLM-S is better than OLM when predicting on longer time
horizons, likely since it has a chance to improve its reconstruction of missing features
even when it cannot improve its predictor. When forecasting horizons are very short, the
missing features likely act as a sort of regularization on the weights of OLM, ensuring that
its predictions do not seriously deteriorate due to missing features. However, when fore-
casting horizons are longer, a long time passes between a feature going missing and the
model training with this feature missing, which lessens this regularizing effect. OLM-S, on
the other hand, performs well even without this regularizing effect, since reconstruction
makes it less vulnerable to missing features. OCDS underperforms both other models,
but at least seems to not deteriorate as much from longer forecasting horizons, possibly
also because of its reconstruction step.
4.2.2
Correlation
I then tested the impact of different levels of correlation between features by varying ρ. I
tested at a forecasting horizon of ∆T = 25, since day-ahead energy markets generally
require forecasting 12-36 hours ahead of time, with one prediction per hour. I followed
the testing procedure in Section 6.
The results for 6 and 20 features, can be seen in Figure 4.2 and Figure 4.3, respectively.
Both show a very similar result. The OLM method is slightly superior to the reconstructive
OLM-S method at low correlation, then they approach and cross at about ρ = 0.3, and
OLM-S is then superior at high correlation. OCDS never performs well compared to the
other two methods. An intuitive understanding of why OLM might be better than OLM-
S at low correlation is that while reconstruction should be able to improve performance
even at low correlation, introducing the reconstruction step also introduces errors due to
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
45
==PAGE:54==
Algorithm 6 Pseudocode for testing
Generate X, Y synthetically based on number of features and ρ
Initialize model m
Choose time offset ∆T
for t ∈{1, . . . , T} do
if t + ∆T ≤T then
Create prediction, ˆyt = m.predict(xt+∆T )
end if
if using OLM-S then
Train reconstruction on time step t + ∆T, m.train_reconstruction(xt+∆T )
Train predictor on time step t, m.train_predictor(xt)
else
Train model on time step t, m.train(xt, yt)
end if
end for
Evaluate model based on predictions ˆyt for t ∈{∆T, ∆T + 1, . . . , T}
0
20
40
60
80
100
Forecast horizon T
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
MSE
MSE vs forecast horizon, 6 features, rho=0.99
OLM
OLM-S
OCDS
Figure 4.1: Performance at different time-ahead prediction offsets, tested according to
Algorithm 6, T = 200, ρ = 0.99, 6 features, varying ∆T. 100 tests are run for every ∆T
tested. Note that ∆T = 0 means 1-step-ahead forecasting. We see that OLM deteriorates
much faster than OLM-S as time scales get larger. OCDS does not perform well, but does
approaches OLM at very long horizons.
46
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:55==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
rho
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
MSE
MSE vs correlation, 6 features, 25 time step ahead predictions
OLM
OLM-S
OCDS
Figure 4.2: Average mean square error with 95% confidence intervals for models OLM,
OLM-S, and OCDS with varying correlation, tested according to Section 6, T = 200,
∆T = 25, 6 features, up to ρ = 0.99. A hundred tests are run for every tested ρ. The MSE
is the expected loss of a new observation.
spurious correlations in the training data, and these spurious correlations might introduce
more errors than the reconstruction improves prediction at low correlation.
We see that OLM-S improves performance on synthetic data with high correlation signifi-
cantly. For example, at ρ = 0.99 and 6 features, the average MSE is 1.067 using OLM and
0.485 using OLM-S, or 55% lower. In comparison, at ρ = 0 and 6 features, the average
MSE is 1.256 for OLM and 1.288 for OLM-S, which is only 2.5% lower for OLM than for
OLM-S, and not a statistically significant difference. This suggests that OLM-S performs
better than OLM as long as features are at least slightly correlated, and performs nearly
identically at low to no correlation.
4.2.3
South Carolina Dataset
Now we test the models on a real world dataset. We use the South Carolina dataset, which
is a dataset of 9 geographically collocated wind producers in South carolina. It contains
the hourly production data for the 9 wind farms for the years 2007 through 2013, given for
each wind farm as its current production fraction out of its maximum production capacity.
The dataset is from Draxl et al. [2015]. The relative locations of the wind farms can be
seen in Figure 4.4b. This is the exact type of problem we seek to construct solutions for
in this thesis. It is an example of a set of wind farms that have correlated data and can
improve their forecasting ability by using each other’s data.
We no longer test OCDS, since it has shown to be considerably worse than OLM and
OLM-S in every case tested so far.
First we examine the dataset, since we want to know whether we expect that OLM-S can
perform well on this dataset. Therefore, we examine the inter-feature correlation, as seen
in Figure 4.4a. This correlation looks to be in the high-correlation domain where OLM-S
outperformed OLM on the synthetic dataset. We therefore expect OLM-S to outperform
OLM on this dataset as well when the wind electricity production actuals from the dataset
are used as features.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
47
==PAGE:56==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
rho
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
MSE
MSE vs correlation, 20 features, 25 time step ahead predictions
OLM
OLM-S
OCDS
Figure 4.3: Average mean square error with 95% confidence intervals for models OLM,
OLM-S, and OCDS with varying correlation, tested according to Algorithm 6, T = 200,
∆T = 25, 20 features, up to ρ = 0.99. A hundred tests are run for every tested ρ. With 20
features, the errors introduced by spurious correlations are so big that OLM-S is statisti-
cally significantly worse than OLM at ρ = 0. OCDS experiences numerical issues at very
high correlation which results in the explosion seen at around ρ ∈[0.95, 0.99].
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Wind Farm
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Wind Farm
1
0.88
0.88
0.61
0.67
0.67
0.75
0.74
0.65
0.88
1
0.9
0.57
0.63
0.63
0.78
0.77
0.69
0.88
0.9
1
0.57
0.63
0.65
0.8
0.79
0.7
0.61
0.57
0.57
1
0.82
0.76
0.53
0.51
0.46
0.67
0.63
0.63
0.82
1
0.82
0.59
0.58
0.51
0.67
0.63
0.65
0.76
0.82
1
0.62
0.61
0.55
0.75
0.78
0.8
0.53
0.59
0.62
1
0.93
0.81
0.74
0.77
0.79
0.51
0.58
0.61
0.93
1
0.83
0.65
0.69
0.7
0.46
0.51
0.55
0.81
0.83
1
South Carolina Wind Farms
Correlation Between Energy Production
(a) Correlation between % wind production
in the 9 wind farms in the South Carolina
dataset.
(b) Locations of the 9 wind farms repre-
sented in the South Carolina dataset.
Figure 4.4: Basic information about the South Carolina dataset. The wind farms are
geographically organized into three clusters, which also shows in the inter-feature corre-
lations. We then expect OLM-S to outperform OLM on this dataset.
48
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:57==
OLM
OLM-S
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
MSE
0.275 ± 0.005
0.250 ± 0.005
South Carolina wind dataset regression performance
Figure 4.5: Average MSE over 100 start times on the South Carolina dataset using OLM
and OLM-S. 900 runs of the market, one for each start time and wind farm. 1 step ahead
forecasting. OLM-S results in a statistically significant decrease in loss compared to OLM.
Note that due to erratic results on early time steps, the MSE is only calculated from ob-
servation 60 onwards, 1/4 through the dataset. OLM and OLM-S are equivalent on these
first 60 time steps since no features are missing.
We then test the two models, comparing their regression performance on the dataset. We
forecast production one hour ahead as introduced in Section 2.2.2. This forecast is useful
for wind producers when determining their position in the intraday market, where they can
modify their position from the position they took in the day-ahead market using the most
up-to-date information available. This test then lets us understand the usefulness of the
OLM and OLM-S regresion methods in a realisitic forecasting situation.
We compare mean squared error, since this is the loss function we minimize. For every
test, we pick 240 observations from the dataset, equivalent to ten days of observations.
We take one of the 9 wind farms and use its production as the regression target and
use the production data of all nine wind farms as features with a single hour of lag. We
normalize all features. From halfway through the test, we randomly choose half of the
features every time step to go missing. For every start time chosen, we run the regression
through for every target feature.
The results can be seen in Figure 4.5. We see that OLM-S outperforms OLM in this
realistic forecasting situation, indicating that there is improvement to be found by using
OLM-S for real world regression markets.
4.2.4
Discussion of OCDS
The results for the OCDS method were quite a lot worse than the baseline OLM model,
and not as good as what was reported in the original paper. Therefore, we investigate
some of the choices made by the OCDS algorithm, to understand why it underperforms.
a) Loss function
OCDS uses Mean Squared Error loss for classification. I’ve changed this in my imple-
mentation for Binary Cross-Entropy loss, since MSE loss for classification means that a
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
49
==PAGE:58==
classifier could make a correct prediction, but be penalized more for that than it would be
for making an incorrect prediction, e.g. if it predicted ˆyt = 3 and yt = 1, even though it
predicted the correct label, sign(ˆyt) = 1.
b) Step size
OCDS is meant to work for arbitrarily changing feature spaces. This means that it should
not matter when a feature first enters the model. Yet, OCDS uses a step size that de-
creases over time. Imagine that only one feature is present until time step 100, where
a new features enter the model. This new feature has a much lower step size than the
original feature did when it appeared, meaning that OCDS will treat features differently
based on when they enter the model. This observation also motivates the fixed step sizes
presented for OLM and OLM-S in this thesis, though further work investigating changing
step sizes in variable feature spaces and non-stationary distributions could be valuable.
c) Ensembling Method
The present and reconstructed feature predictions are ensembled together by a param-
eter p, where a prediction based on the present features and reconstructed features are
produced independently and then weighed together, ˆy = pˆypresent + (1 −p)ˆyreconstructed.
The parameter p is not at all dependent on the number of features present. This means
that if all features are present, the model prediction becomes pˆypresent + (1 −p) · 0, i.e. it
receives a vote of 0 with weight 1 −p for no other reason than no features being missing.
d) G matrix dynamics
The G matrix is trained on the reconstruction error ∥ΠRdt( 1
|dt|Grtxt) −xt∥2
2. However, this
means that if the same features are present for a long time, the matrix Grt will converge
to |dt|Irt, where Irt is the columns dt of the identity matrix I so that Irtxt is equal to xi,t
on all indices i ∈dt and 0 on all indices i ∈ut \ dt, since the error will then be
∥ΠRdt( 1
|dt||dt|Irt xt) −xt∥2
2 = ∥ΠRdt(Irt xt) −xt∥2
2 = ∥xt −xt∥2
2 = 0
(4.5)
This means that the G matrix does not necessarily converge towards a useful reconstruc-
tion function; in fact, if all features are present up until some time step t1, the matrix will
at time step t1 −1 be converging towards the identity matrix I times the number of fea-
tures present |ut−1|. This also motivated the reconstruction method used in OLM-S, which
avoids this dynamic by not training the subregression reconstructing a certain feature on
the feature itself.
There are more choices worth analyzing within OCDS, but I will end my analysis here for
brevity.
4.3
Regression Market
We conclude that OLM and OLM-S are the best choices available for constructing an
online regression market with varying feature space. We can construct a market with
either of the two models. We expect OLM to perform better when features are not very
correlated, and OLM-S to perform better when features are more highly correlated.
In this section we examine results from running a regression market using the OLM and
OLM-S models as market models. We compare using reconstruction as seen in OLM-S
50
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:59==
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
0
100
200
300
400
Cumulative feature payments, OLM-S regression (rho = 0.9)
Total market loss improvement: 1865.32
Total payments: 1865.32
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 3
Feature 4
Feature 5
Feature 6
(a) Cumulative payments over time for the
sold features in the synthetic dataset.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
OLM-S regression coefficients, grand coalition regression (rho = 0.9)
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 3
Feature 4
Feature 5
Feature 6
Constant
(b) Coefficients of the features over time.
Feature 7 is the constant feature owned by
the central agent. Note that the coefficients
in the model are not in fact tracking the true
coefficients underneath.
This is because
of inter-feature correlation and missing fea-
tures.
Figure 4.6: An example run of a regression market on a synthetic dataset generated as
described earlier, following the method in Algorithm 6, T = 200, ∆T = 25, 6 features,
using the OLM-S regressor. Shows both cumulative payments over time as well as the
regression coefficients for the six sold features and the constant feature.
with the baseline OLM. We also investigate the structure of the revenue allocation in-
cluding instances of negative payment, missing features, how revenue is increased from
feature reconstruction, and the effects of mean imputation on revenue allocation.
The always-present constant feature is given to the central agent as its only feature.
4.3.1
Running the Market
In this section, we test the models OLM and OLM-S as market models in situations with
missing data. We use a setup as seen in the regression section, Algorithm 6. We set the
buyer’s willingness to pay to 1. We generate the synthetic datasets and run the market
several times to generate 95% confidence intervals for statistics.
An example run of the market is shown in Figure 4.6. We see the cumulative payouts for
each feature, as well as how the coefficients of the model change over time. The missing
features are reconstructed each time step. Note that as coefficient estimates improve
over time, payments also increase, as the value of features increases.
To investigate the out-of-sample outcome of using OLM-S versus OLM in the market, we
run the market several times. The average feature payments using market models OLM
and OLM-S in a high correlation context are shown in Figure 4.7. All features are paid
better using reconstruction than without reconstruction. Note that if all market participants
mean impute, the OLM-S method reduces to OLM. We then expect that market partici-
pants are incentivized to truthfully report their features as missing, since OLM-S pays
better. We investigate this further in Section 4.3.5. However, when correlations are low,
we know that OLM sometimes outperforms OLM-S, so participants might be incentivized
to mean impute when their feature does not correlate much with other features. Then,
truthfulness under imputation might not always hold at low correlation using OLM-S as
the market model in out-of-sample situations.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
51
==PAGE:60==
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Market payout using OLM and OLM-S (rho=0.9)
Average loss reduction: 5.06
OLM
OLM-S
Figure 4.7: Average payment for each feature over 100 runs of the market, generating
predictions using Algorithm 6, T = 200, ∆T = 25, 3 features. The difference in the
mean payments for the features are all statistically significant in a paired t-test with p <
10−10. While the differences here are not large percentage-wise, they could still be large
in absolute terms if the willingness to pay was very large. Even small differences can also
change profit margins considerably.
4.3.2
Negative payments
Feature owners sometimes receive negative payments, when they have negative Shapley
values. The fraction of negative payments and the sum negative payments allocated by
OLM and OLM-S are shown in Figure 4.8. We see that the risk of having to pay back
to the market is much smaller when using OLM-S as the regression mechanism. For a
risk-averse agent, this is a bonus of using OLM-S as the market mechanism, and brings
us closer to an ex-post individually rational market.
4.3.3
Payment for missing features
Features still get Shapley values assigned to them when they are missing, and thus still
receive payments. We examine the payment received by missing features in Figure 4.9.
We see that the scale of payments for missing features are very small. We also see that
feature owners are much more likely to receive a negative payment when their feature is
missing, and for OLM they actually expect negative payments both on average and on
most time steps.
We see that using OLM-S makes the payments to missing features less negative, and
actually makes them positive on average. This is favorable since it means less risk for
market participants. While payments for missing features are positive on average using
OLM-S, they are still very small compared to payments for present features. While it might
seem to be unfair to pay features that are not present, I argue that this is fair since the
increase does still originate from an increase in predictive performance due to that feature
being present before. If the increase is only caused by a regularizing effect, though,
then a market with appropriate regularization wouldn’t pay this positive payout to missing
features.
The expected in-sample payment for a missing feature at the time step when it is missing
52
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:61==
OLM
OLM-S
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Fraction
Fraction of feature payments that are negative, rho=0.95
OLM
OLM-S
(a) Fraction of all payments to feature sellers
that are negative.
OLM
OLM-S
25
20
15
10
5
0
Average total negative payments, rho=0.95
OLM
OLM-S
(b) Total negative payments given out in a
single run of the market.
Figure 4.8: Fraction of all payments that are negative and total negative payment per
run, over 100 runs of the market, generating a synthetic dataset and using Algorithm 6,
T = 200, ∆T = 25, 3 features. For comparison, the total payment given out in a single
run of the market is 455 on average for OLM, and 471 for OLM-S.
OLM
OLM-S
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Fraction
Fraction of payments to missing features that are negative, rho=0.95
OLM
OLM-S
(a) Fraction of single time-step payments to
missing features that are negative.
OLM
OLM-S
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Average single time step payment for missing features, rho=0.95
OLM
OLM-S
(b) The average single time-step payment to
missing features across all time steps and
runs. Error bars indicate the standard devi-
ation.
Figure 4.9: Payments for missing features for a hundred runs of the market using a syn-
thetic dataset. Following Algorithm 6, T = 200, ∆T = 25, 3 features. For comparison,
every time step that a feature is present in the market, it is paid on average 0.98 by OLM
and 0.96 by OLM-S, meaning that payments for missing features are about a magnitude
or two smaller.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
53
==PAGE:62==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time Step
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Payment
Feature 2 in-sample payment, OLM model, rho=0.8.
Feature 2 missing on time step 8.
Figure 4.10: In-sample payment to feature 2 over 10000 runs using an in-sample version
of the OLM, i.e. ordinary linear regression with mean imputation. Two features, eight
time steps, no constant feature. Features are drawn from a centered normal distribution,
ρ = 0.8. True coefficients are drawn from a uniform distribution U(0.1, 1). Feature 2 is
present on time steps 1-7, and missing on time step 8, which causes it to have a negative
Shapley value at time step 8 in-sample in-expectation. Feature 1 is always present
is entirely dependent on the distribution of the data and the distribution of the missing
values, so we can only evaluate this payment in specific situations. This allows us to
understand what payments to expect for feature owners when their features are missing.
We investigate the in-sample average payment for missing data at fixed time steps using
the in-sample regression version of the OLM, i.e. an ordinary linear regression where
missing features are mean imputed as 0.
We use just two features. We draw true coefficients from the uniform distribution θi
iid
∼
U(0.1, 1) ∀i ∈{1, 2}. The features are drawn from a centered multivariate Gaussian dis-
tribution xt
iid
∼N(0, Σ). The true targets are given by yt = [θ1, θ2]xt, and the regression
is performed on xt but with feature 2 missing for some time steps (which is equivalent to
setting it to zero).
The results are shown in Figure 4.10. We see that feature 2 has a positive Shapley value
when present, but then receives a small negative Shapley value when it is missing. We
can learn two things from this:
1. Feature owners expect significantly higher payments when their features are present
than when they are not, and thus are incentivized to keep their feature present
2. In some situations using the OLM model, feature owners get negative payments
even in expectation when their features are missing.
54
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:63==
4.3.4
Revenue Impact from Reconstruction
Feature revenue is increased in OLM-S from reconstruction. Using a Shapley value ap-
proach we can decompose the gained revenue for each feature by each other feature
being reconstructed. We construct a cooperative game where the payoff is the revenue
for feature i, while the coalitions are the set of features that are reconstructed. The fea-
tures that are not in the coalition are mean imputed. This cooperative game then shows
how much feature i earns when the features ω are being reconstructed, so finding the
Shapley value for feature j shows the impact on the revenue of feature i from feature j
being reconstructed. This approach is described in Algorithm 7. Remember that N is the
set of all players in the game, i.e. all features in the market.
Algorithm 7 Pseudocode for decomposing revenue gain by feature.
Generate X, Y synthetically based on number of features and ρ
for ω ⊆N do
Initialize OLM-S model mω that only reconstructs features ω and mean imputes fea-
tures N \ ω.
Calculate sum payment πi,ω for each feature i using model mω and dataset X, Y .
end for
for i ∈N do
Calculate Shapley value ψi,j for each feature j where the payoff for each coalition
ω is πi,ω
end for
Shapley values ψi,j show contribution to payment to feature i from the algorithm recon-
structing feature j
The revenue breakdown from reconstructing each feature is shown in Figure 4.11. We
see that a feature has its revenue considerably increased by being reconstructed, but
decreased by other features being reconstructed. Since we know that payments are very
small at time steps where features are missing, this indicates that reconstruction keeps
feature coefficients of high quality while a feature is missing, so that it can continue per-
forming when it reenters the market. Reconstruction is thus a service that the rest of the
features perform for the missing feature. This could be a motivation for the allocation idea
presented in Section 3.3.1, where the Shapley value of a missing feature is redistributed
between the present features, but that actually doesn’t entirely track, since the increase in
feature revenue from being reconstructed is not the same as their payment when missing.
4.3.5
Truthfulness under Imputation
When a feature is missing, participants in the market have the option to mean impute their
missing information based on historical data. This is uninformative, and can worsen the
market performance.
Mean imputation has no effect on the OLM model, and reverts OLM-S to OLM. As we saw
in Section 4.2.2, the OLM model outperforms OLM-S in some low correlation situations.
We expect that features are disincentivized from mean imputing in a high correlation set-
ting from the revenue impact in Figure 4.11. The fact that OLM outperforms OLM-S in low
correlation points to features being incentivized to mean impute at low correlation. To be
certain in both low and high correlation, we investigate the difference in payment for every
feature if they mean impute versus if they do not at both low and high correlation. This
is shown in Figure 4.12. This shows that at low correlation, the difference in revenue is
not significant, while at high correlation, every feature loses revenue by mean imputing.
Then for the synthetic dataset at high correlation, truthful reporting is an equilibrium since
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
55
==PAGE:64==
Revenue of feature 0
sum impact 5.77
Revenue of feature 1
sum impact 5.27
Revenue of feature 2
sum impact 5.58
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Revenue Impact
Revenue Impact of Reconstructing Features, rho=0.9
Sum revenue increase: 16.62
Reconstructing feature 0
Reconstructing feature 1
Reconstructing feature 2
Figure 4.11: Impact to feature revenue from reconstructing other features, calculated by
Algorithm 7. From 100 runs of the market, using Algorithm 6, T = 200, ∆T = 25, 3
features.
no feature can increase their own revenue by mean imputing, and the high correlation
market is truthful under imputation in practice. In the low correlation market, we cannot
determine if the market is truthful under imputation based on these results.
For OLM-S, we do not establish guarantees for truthfulness under imputation. Feature
owners will have to determine whether to mean impute their feature or not when interact-
ing in the market, which depends on the other features available in the market and the
distribution of their missing features. We also see in Figure 4.11 that features do have
their revenue increased from being reconstructed in high correlation settings, but actually
have their revenue decreased from other features being reconstructed. Then, every fea-
ture owner would prefer to be the only feature that is reconstructed. They do not have
control over this, and so this does not cause unintended incentives in the market. One
feature owner imputing their feature will seemingly not damage the gains of other feature
owners, though, meaning that a feature owner cannot use this maliciously, either.
Theoretical bounds and guarantees for truthfulness under imputation are not constructed
in this thesis. The payment method where Shapley values are calculated only based on
present features is intended to solve truthfulness under imputation since missing features
often have negative or near-zero Shapley values in expectation. However, as mentioned
before, this allows features to deteriorate the market without paying for it by going missing,
thus breaking the Shapley fairness criteria.
4.3.6
South Carolina Dataset
In this section, we test the market when the forecasting problem is as described in Section
4.2.3 for the South Carolina wind farm dataset. When running the market, we will choose
a start time and run the market nine times for that start time, once predicting the output of
each wind farm.
The results are shown in Figure 4.13. We see how almost all features earn more from
using the reconstructive market model, except features 4 and 9. To investigate whether
all features will truthfully report their features as missing, with special interest in features
4 and 9, we will examine their difference in revenue when mean imputing. This can be
seen in Figure 4.14. We see that even though features 4 and 9 do not have their revenue
56
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:65==
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 3
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
<- MI pays less | MI pays more ->
Difference in revenue when mean imputing (MI) for individual features
rho=0.1
(a) Difference in revenue when mean imput-
ing at low correlation, showing no significant
difference for any feature.
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 3
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
<- MI pays less | MI pays more ->
Difference in revenue when mean imputing (MI) for individual features
rho=0.9
(b) Difference in revenue when mean im-
puting at high correlation, showing that all
features have their revenue significantly re-
duced by mean imputing when all other fea-
tures are reconstructed.
Figure 4.12: Difference in sum market revenue for each feature for mean imputing when
all other features do not, using the OLM-S market model. 100 runs of the market, T = 200,
∆T = 25, 3 features, synthetic dataset. Using Algorithm 6.
increased from using OLM-S as the market model, they and all other feature owners still
lose revenue by mean imputing, so the participants are incentivized to report their missing
features truthfully. This might be slightly confusing, since we know that OLM-S becomes
equivalent to OLM when features mean impute; however, this is only true when all features
are mean imputing. The revenue difference seen in Figure 4.14 is the revenue difference
when a single feature decides to mean impute instead of truthfully reporting their features
as missing.
The wind farm owners would then be better off selling data to one another through this
market. With a functional solution for the buyer side, this market would successfully in-
crease the revenue of every wind farm. The market would continue running if one wind
farm was unable at one hour to provide its production information to the other farms, for
whatever reason that might be, or if new wind farms were to join the market, or old farms
were to leave. We can then use our market that supports missing features to loosen up
the constraints on regression markets, facilitating mutually beneficial data exchange and
improving social welfare.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
57
==PAGE:66==
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 3
Feature 4
Feature 5
Feature 6
Feature 7
Feature 8
Feature 9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Market payout using OLM and OLM-S (rho=0.99)
OLM
OLM-S
Figure 4.13: Average total revenue using the OLM and OLM-S models on the South
Carolina dataset like in Section 4.2.3. 10 different starting points, 90 runs of the market,
1-step-ahead predictions. All features except feature 4 and 9 have increased revenue
from using OLM-S.
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 3
Feature 4
Feature 5
Feature 6
Feature 7
Feature 8
Feature 9
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
<- MI pays less | MI pays more ->
Difference in revenue when mean imputing (MI) for individual features
South Carolina dataset
Figure 4.14: Difference in market revenue for each feature for mean imputing when all
other features truthfully report their features as missing, Using the OLM-S market model.
South Carolina datset, 10 start times, 90 runs of the market (1 for each start time and col-
umn), same setup as in Figure 4.13. We see that all features have their revenue reduced
when mean imputing, so truthful reporting of missing features is an equilibrium strategy,
and we have truthfulness under imputation.
58
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:67==
5
Conclusions
In this work we explored analytics markets as a method for incentivizing data sharing for
forecasting problems, focusing on renewable energy forecasting in particular. We relaxed
the assumption in existing literature that the features in the market are fixed over time, as
this represents a key barrier to the practical implementation of analytics markets.
We have investigated current research into models that support varying feature spaces
and found that existing methods in utilitarian online learning literature did not live up to
their reported performance. This motivated us to develop a new regression model as
a contribution to this field. The model supports varying feature spaces and improves
regression accuracy in situations with high correlation, and is known as the Online Linear
Model with Subregressions (OLM-S). We have shown that both OLM-S and a simpler
online linear model (OLM) can be used for regression markets with varying feature spaces,
using the Shapley value allocation policy.
We have investigated the dynamics of the Shapley value allocation policy when features
are missing, and found that the OLM model often assigns negative values to missing
features. We have found that OLM-S does not do this as much, thus bringing the market
closer to being ex-post individually rational, a desirable property of analytics markets that
incentivizes sellers to participate in the market. More work can be done to make the
market closer to ex-post individually rational, as will be discussed below.
We have also found that there is a new strategy space when features are missing, namely
whether feature owners impute their missing value or not. This results in a new property,
truthfulness under imputation. A market setup that is truthful under imputation will have
all feature owners truthfully report their features as missing, instead of reporting an im-
putation. In this thesis, we only consider mean imputation as an imputation method, and
leave the consequences of other imputation types as further work. Truthfulness under
imputation holds weakly with the OLM, but it is not established for the OLM-S model.
We have used both the OLM and OLM-S models on synthetic and realistic regression
tasks. We find that both can result in working markets and that our proposed model,
OLM-S, can increase revenue over OLM in realistic market situations where we have
truthfulness under imputation.
Our regression model proposed here has application beyond analytics markets in general
online machine learning tasks. Typically in real-world regression tasks, only few features
are randomly missing at one point in time compared to the total amount of features. On
the other hand, it is common for the number of features available to change over time,
i.e. new features appearing and old features disappearing permanently. Methods dealing
with varying feature spaces are useful in this case, and the results in this thesis could be
applied, though a more focused handling of appearing and disappearing features would
then be relevant.
The online setting likely complicates reconstruction of missing features. High-quality in-
sample imputation methods like Fully Conditional Specification along with retraining the
model for only the features present at prediction time could likely improve the quality of
predictions in varying feature spaces. Additionally, retraining at prediction time ensures
a Shapley value of zero for missing features, and thus removes the question of whether
negative and positive payments to missing features is really fair. These are avenues for
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
59
==PAGE:68==
further research as described below, and together could form the basis of a well-working
regression market with varying feature space.
5.1
Future Work
In this section, we will identify some avenues for further research.
5.1.1
Ex-post Individual Rationality
The market presented in this thesis is not ex-post individually rational. This means that
while all participants expect positive returns, they cannot be sure that they will receive
positive returns at every run of the market. This dissuades risk-averse participants from
entering the market. However, even though every feature seller is almost guaranteed to
eventually receive negative payments if their feature occasionally goes missing, any infor-
mative feature is also almost guaranteed to receive positive payments from the market in
total over the course of the market. A solution could then be to use expected Shapley val-
ues using a running average or similar, like what is used in Pinson et al. [2022], and work
on out-of-sample guarantees could possibly establish full ex-post individual rationality, or
bounds on the proportion of payments that might be negative.
5.1.2
Other Types of Feature Spaces
All results in this thesis are about data streams where features are randomly missing. A
natural question would be how these results hold up in data streams where new features
appear or old features disappear permanently. In real-world forecasting tasks within re-
newable electricity production, new features appearing and old features disappearing is
common.
The problem of new features appearing is a simple one, since the new feature simply
does not receive any Shapley value until it appears. Then, when it appears, it is in the
market on the same level as every other feature. The only issue to deal with with these
new features is that of warm up time. We expect models to be pretty poor at early time
steps, since they don’t have a lot of information about the coefficients of the model. This
can lead to wildly erratic payments, and is usually dealt with by setting a warm up time
where the model is training but no payments are issued. This can be implemented for
trapezoidal streams, where it would be possible to keep two models running when new
feature(s) enter, one with the old set of features and one where the new feature(s) are
included, and only switch to the new model once the new feature(s) have passed their
warm-up time. The payments can also be made less erratic by introducing regularization.
Disappearing features are more interesting, since after disappearing, they will have a
”tail” of payments that might all be negative. It would then be relevant to investigate the
effect of market and model choices on this tail. One could e.g. imagine that a model with
decreasing step size over the existence of a feature might be useful, but detrimental for
a feature that has disappeared, since its former existence would worsen the market for a
long time. It might also be necessary to set a sort of timeout on features, where features
that have been missing for more than a certain number of time steps are entirely removed
from the model, to limit both their losses and their negative effect on the market model.
5.1.3
Batch Learning and Variable Features
As mentioned earlier, using an online learning model for multi-horizon forecasting is sim-
ilar to using a batch learning model that is occasionally retrained. Using batch learning
would allow work on batch learning markets to more easily translate to varying feature
spaces. It would also allow more sophisticated imputation methods like Fully Conditional
Specification. A natural avenue to pursue for further study would then be to compare
60
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:69==
the performance of a batch learning model using e.g. Fully Conditional Specification to
handle missing features with the OLM-S model presented in this paper.
5.1.4
Retraining vs imputation
The paper Tawn et al. [2020] finds that in practice, retraining a regressor instead of im-
puting missing features at prediction time actually provides superior performance for the
market model. The only issue is that this can be computationally very expensive since the
model can theoretically need to be retrained for every set of features if the set of missing
features changes often.
However, this method allows use of the payment allocation policy where only present fea-
tures receive payment in the market, since missing features will always receive a Shapley
value of zero as they do not influence the model. This removes the risk of providing miss-
ing features to the market and would be a very good avenue for research to improve the
behavior of variable feature space markets. Truthfulness under imputation would be im-
portant to investigate for a market of this type since feature owners know that they receive
no payment when they are not present.
5.1.5
Theoretical Work for Truthfulness Under Imputation
Truthfulness under imputation is relevant for any regression or classification market in
varying feature space that uses reconstruction to handle missing features. This is true
whether the model is online or meant for batch learning, and whichever reconstruction
model is used. Therefore, it could be useful to establish more theoretical bounds and
guarantees on truthfulness under imputation, and to build up a framework for evaluating
truthfulness under imputation for other markets in varying feature space when and if these
are constructed.
Seller-side imputation in this thesis is limited to mean imputation, but sellers have many
other imputation methods at their disposal. They could use regression imputation similar
to what is used in the market, or autoregressive imputation, or use some other knowledge
they have available to reconstruct their features. At this point, we might actually want
sellers to provide their own imputations; even though they likely wouldn’t be as good as
the true value of their feature, the sellers might still improve regression performance com-
pared to the imputation used by the market. It might then be relevant to split truthfulness
under imputation into properties based on the exact type of imputation that the market is
truthful under, e.g. truthfulness under mean imputation.
When feature sellers impute their feature, they are in effect selling predictions of their
missing feature. This interaction could be investigated from the view of prediction markets,
where the incentives of selling predictions have already been worked through.
5.1.6
Probabilistic and Bayesian Models
The optimal bid in electricity markets is often a function of the probability distribution of
the forecasted power output. (Hong et al. [2020]) This is a motivation for probabilistic
models which model the entire conditional distribution instead of a specific charactersistic
of it, e.g. the expected value in our case. The Online Linear Model presented in this
thesis can naturally be extended to a probabilistic model by using the Maximum Likelihood
Estimation specification of the model and estimating the noise variance along with the
model parameters.
The probabilistic version of OLM-S could be improved beyond simply estimating the noise
variance when extending to a probabilistic model, since the subregressions can also out-
put a probabilistic estimate of the missing features. To effectively model the uncertainty
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
61
==PAGE:70==
due to imputation, one would need to propagate these noise estimates to the main re-
gression problem.
Uncertainty propagation also gives us another reason why truthfulness under imputation
is useful: When features are truthfully reported as missing, the deterioration in predictive
quality can accurately be reported through the market, e.g. by increased uncertainty in
a probabilistic forecast. When feature sellers impute their feature themselves, this un-
certainty cannot be propagated, and the probabilistic forecast might be overly confident
compared to what the data suggests. If one does not seek truthfulness under imputa-
tion as mentioned in Section 5.1.5, another option would be to let feature sellers report
their features as a probability distribution, e.g. as an expected value and standard devi-
ation. Thus, feature sellers could accurately report a self-produced imputation including
uncertainty to the market, and be rewarded for the improvement in the prediction quality.
Another natural development would be to use Bayesian linear regression where coeffi-
cients also have an uncertainty attached to them. These models can naturally be ex-
tended to the online setting, since the Bayesian update step used for fitting these models
can be used on an entire dataset or a single observation at a time.
Probability distribution estimation requires some more work on the market side regarding
market properties and revenue allocation, but this work has already been done in Falconer
et al. [2024b].
62
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
Tao Hong, Pierre Pinson, Yi Wang, Rafał Weron, Dazhi Yang, and Hamidreza Zareipour.
Energy forecasting: A review and outlook. IEEE Open Access Journal of Power and
Energy, 7:376–388, 2020. doi: 10.1109/OAJPE.2020.3029979.
José R. Andrade and Ricardo J. Bessa. Improving renewable energy forecasting with a
grid of numerical weather predictions. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy, 8(4):
1571–1580, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TSTE.2017.2694340.
Laura Cavalcante, Ricardo J. Bessa, Marisa Reis, and Jethro Browell. Lasso vector au-
toregression structures for very short-term wind power forecasting. Wind Energy, 20
(4):657–675, 2017. ISSN 10991824, 10954244. doi: 10.1002/we.2029.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Chal-
lenges, methods, and future directions. Ieee Signal Processing Magazine, 37(3):50–60,
2020. ISSN 15580792, 10535888. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2020.2975749.
Esther Gal-Or. Information sharing in oligopoly. Econometrica, 53(2):329–343, 1985.
ISSN 00129682, 14680262. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/1911239.
Magdalena Balazinska, Bill Howe, and Dan Suciu. Data markets in the cloud: An op-
portunity for the database community.
Proceedings of the Vldb Endowment, 4(12):
1482–1485, 2011. ISSN 21508097.
Zicun Cong, Xuan Luo, Jian Pei, Feida Zhu, and Yong Zhang. Data pricing in machine
learning pipelines. Knowledge and Information Systems, 64(6):1417–1455, 2022. ISSN
02193116, 02191377. doi: 10.1007/s10115-022-01679-4.
Yiling Chen and David M. Pennock. Designing markets for prediction. Ai Magazine, 31
(4):42–52, 2010. ISSN 23719621, 07384602. doi: 10.1609/aimag.v31i4.2313.
René Aïd. Electricity markets. Electricity Derivatives, pages 5–25, 2015. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-08395-7_2.
Julija Tastu. Short-term wind power forecasting: probabilistic and space-time aspects.
2013.
Michael Raith. A general model of information sharing in oligopoly. Journal of Economic
Theory, 71(1):260–288, 1996. ISSN 00220531, 10957235. doi: 10.1006/jeth.1996.
0117.
Nikita Tsoy and Nikola Konstantinov. Strategic data sharing between competitors. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023. ISSN 10495258.
Dirk Bergemann and Alessandro Bonatti. Markets for information: An introduction. Annual
Review of Economics, 11(1):85–107, 2019. ISSN 19411391, 19411383. doi: 10.1146/
annurev-economics-080315-015439.
Mohammad Rasouli and Michael I. Jordan. Data sharing markets, 2021. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2107.08630.
Carla Goncalves, Pierre Pinson, and Ricardo Jorge Bessa.
Towards data markets in
renewable energy forecasting. Ieee Transactions on Sustainable Energy, 12(1):533–
542, 2021. ISSN 19493029, 19493037. doi: 10.1109/TSTE.2020.3009615.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
63
==PAGE:72==
Pierre Pinson, Liyang Han, and Jalal Kazempour. Regression markets and application
to energy forecasting. Top, 30(3):533–573, 2022. ISSN 18638279, 11345764. doi:
10.1007/s11750-022-00631-7.
Liyang Han, Pierre Pinson, and Jalal Kazempour. Trading data for wind power forecasting:
A regression market with lasso regularization. Electric Power Systems Research, 212:
108442, 2022. ISSN 18732046, 03787796. doi: 10.1016/j.epsr.2022.108442.
Xuanyu Cao, Yan Chen, and K. J. Ray Liu. Data trading with multiple owners, collectors,
and users: An iterative auction mechanism. Ieee Transactions on Signal and Informa-
tion Processing Over Networks, 3(2):268–281, 2017. ISSN 23737778, 2373776x. doi:
10.1109/TSIPN.2017.2668144.
Daron Acemoglu, Ali Makhdoumi, Azarakhsh Malekian, and Asu Ozdaglar. Too much
data: Prices and inefficiencies in data markets.
American Economic Journal: Mi-
croeconomics, 14(4):218–256, 2022. ISSN 19457685, 19457669. doi: 10.1257/mic.
20200200.
Anish Agarwal, Munther Dahleh, Thibaut Horel, and Maryann Rui. Towards data auctions
with externalities. 2023.
Lloyd S Shapley. A value for n-person games. In Harold W. Kuhn and Albert W. Tucker,
editors, Contributions to the Theory of Games II, pages 307–317. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 1953.
Hugh Chen, Scott Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Explaining Models by Propagating Shapley
Values of Local Components, pages 261–270. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2021. ISBN 978-3-030-53352-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-53352-6_24. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-53352-6_24.
Anish Agarwal, Munther Dahleh, and Tuhin Sarkar. A marketplace for data: An algorithmic
solution. Acm Ec 2019 - Proceedings of the 2019 Acm Conference on Economics and
Computation, pages 701–726, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3328526.3329589.
Thomas Falconer, Jalal Kazempour, and Pierre Pinson. Towards replication-robust ana-
lytics markets, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06000.
Honglin Wen, Pierre Pinson, Jie Gu, and Zhijian Jin. Wind energy forecasting with miss-
ing values within a fully conditional specification framework. International Journal of
Forecasting, 40(1):77–95, 2024. ISSN 18728200, 01692070. doi: 10.1016/j.ijforecast.
2022.12.006.
S. Van Buuren, J. P.L. Brand, C. G.M. Groothuis-Oudshoorn, and D. B. Rubin.
Fully
conditional specification in multivariate imputation. Journal of Statistical Computation
and Simulation, 76(12):1049–1064, 2006. ISSN 15635163, 00949655. doi: 10.1080/
10629360600810434.
S. Van Buuren. Flexible Imputation of Missing Data. CRC Press, second edition edition,
2018.
Rosemary Tawn, Jethro Browell, and Iain Dinwoodie. Missing data in wind farm time
series: Properties and effect on forecasts. Electric Power Systems Research, 189:
106640, 2020. ISSN 18732046, 03787796. doi: 10.1016/j.epsr.2020.106640.
Yi He, Christian Schreckenberger, Heiner Stuckenschmidt, and Xindong Wu. Towards
utilitarian online learning - a review of online algorithms in open feature space. Ijcai
64
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:73==
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023-:6647–6655, 2023. ISSN
10450823.
Masashi Sugiyama. Chapter 12 - maximum likelihood estimation. Introduction To Sta-
tistical Machine Learning, pages 123–138, 2016.
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-802121-
7.00023-6.
Roger Grosse. Csc 421/2516 winter 2019: Lecture 2, part 3: Training a classifier, 2019.
Frank E. Harrell. Missing data. Regression Modeling Strategies, pages 41–52, 2001. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4757-3462-1_3.
Nicholas T. Longford. Multiple imputation. Missing Data and Small-area Estimation, pages
59–95, 2005. doi: 10.1007/1-84628-195-4_4.
Francesco Orabona. A modern introduction to online learning. 2023.
Tim Roughgarden.
Lectures notes on algorithmic game theory stanford cs364a, fall
20131, 7 2014.
Vincent Knight. Lecture notes for game theory, chapter 16 - cooperative games, 2015.
Yi He, Baijun Wu, Di Wu, Ege Beyazit, Sheng Chen, and Xindong Wu. Online learn-
ing from capricious data streams: A generative approach.
Ijcai International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019-:2491–2497, 2019. ISSN 10450823. doi:
10.24963/ijcai.2019/346.
Ege Beyazit, Jeevithan Alagurajah, and Xindong Wu. Online learning from data streams
with varying feature spaces. 33rd Aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Aaai 2019,
31st Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference, Iaai 2019 and the 9th
Aaai Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, Eaai 2019, pages
3232–3239, 2019. ISSN 23743468, 21595399.
Yi He, Jiaxian Dong, Bo-Jian Hou, Yu Wang, and Fei Wang. Online learning in variable
feature spaces with mixed data. 2021 Ieee International Conference on Data Mining
(icdm), pages 181–190, 2021. ISSN 23748486, 15504786. doi: 10.1109/ICDM51629.
2021.00028.
Kolby Nottingham Markelle Kelly, Rachel LongJohn. The uci machine learning repository.
URL https://archive.ics.uci.edu.
Caroline Draxl, Andrew Clifton, Bri-Mathias Hodge, and Jim McCaa. The wind integration
national dataset (wind) toolkit. Applied Energy, 151:355–366, 2015.
Thomas Falconer, Jalal Kazempour, and Pierre Pinson. Bayesian regression markets.
2024b.
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
==PAGE:75==
Online Regression Markets with Varying Feature Space
67
==PAGE:76==
Have you ever wondered why data is always siloed up? Have you been there, screaming for help,
but no one wanted to give you the data you so desperately needed? They wouldn’t even sell it to
you, ”oh, it’s so hard to put a price on data”, they would say. You even presented them with the
regression market, said, ”here, we’ve solved it. We can price data.” They simply said ”what if I want
to leave the market again? What if I want my friend Tim to join the market? What then?” Well, I
have the solution for you! Read this thesis and find out how to build a regression market where
participants can freely enter and leave the market, no muss no fuss.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
