==PAGE:1==
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Performance dependent
shift-scheduling in healthcare
using mathematical modeling
and optimization
Author
Arieti Andrea - S225570
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Table of Contents
I
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research question and scientific contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Personnel Scheduling and Nurse Rostering:
Background and Related Literature
4
2.1
Previous works implementing fatigue and performance considerations
in personnel scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
8
3.1
Introduction and objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Work-related fatigue: definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Overview of the most known modeling frameworks for the prediction
of work-related fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.1
Non-commercial frameworks based on the 2-process model . .
11
3.3.2
Commercially applied frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3.3
Comparison of the presented frameworks and relative conclu-
sions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Impact of work-related fatigue on performances
. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4.1
Quantitative relation between predicted fatigue levels and phys-
iological performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4.2
Analysis of the impact of work-related fatigue on healthcare
personnel performances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and per-
formance impairment
20
4.1
Relation between fatigue score and performance . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Data Description
29
5.1
The INRC II data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Dataset preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Problem Formulation
31
6.1
Classic problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Performance dependent formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
MIP model definition
36
7.1
Definition of sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
I
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
7.2
Definition of parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.3
Definition of variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.3.1
Variables used in both formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.3.2
Variables used only in the performance-dependent formulation
39
7.4
Constraints for setting the value of auxiliary variables . . . . . . . . .
40
7.5
Hard constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.5.1
Hard constraints used in both formulations . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.5.2
Hard constraints used only in the performance-dependent for-
mulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.6
Soft constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.6.1
Soft constraints used in both formulations
. . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.6.2
Soft constraint used only in the performance-dependent for-
mulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.7
Objective function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
Experimental methodology
48
9
Results
50
9.1
Comparison of rosters obtained using classic vs.
performance-dependent model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9.1.1
Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9.1.2
Overtime
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
9.1.3
Maximum number of consecutive workdays . . . . . . . . . . .
52
9.1.4
Minimum number of consecutive days off . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9.1.5
Underscheduling and minimum consecutive workdays . . . . .
55
9.2
Trade-offs analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
9.2.1
Trade-off between coverage and overtime . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
9.2.2
Trade-off between coverage and maximum consecutive work-
days rule violation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
10 Conclusions and future research
61
Bibliography
I
II
==PAGE:4==
Introduction
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
Staff shortages have been affecting the healthcare sectors in developed coun-
tries for a long time, with the first testimonies in the literature dating back to the
end of the twentieth century (see for example Shoemake (1994)). Despite numerous
efforts undertaken to address this issue, and significant technological advancements
that have considerably improved the efficiency of various operations, its proportions
have continued to grow. In fact, according to the "Analysis of shortage and sur-
plus occupations 2022" report, published by the Publications Office of the European
Union (2022), healthcare was among the sectors presenting the most severe degree
of under-staffing, with nursing professionals that were included in the list of short-
age occupations submitted by 22 of the 30 countries/regions covered in the report,
while other frequently mentioned healthcare workers were general practitioners (15
countries/regions), healthcare assistants (12) and associate professional nurses (10);
all professions presenting a steady increase of these numbers if compared to the same
reports of 2020 and 2018.
According to the literature, the leading causes of this growth can be traced
back to some of the macro-trends that are often present, in various combinations,
in the societies of most industrialized countries, in particular the aging popula-
tion and changing workforce dynamics (Shadia and Alshahrani, 2022). The aging
population macro-trend is especially critical, as it contributes in multiple ways to
the problem of healthcare personnel shortage. Indeed, as populations in developed
countries age, there is an increased demand for healthcare services to address age-
related illnesses and conditions. At the same time, many experienced healthcare
professionals are retiring, creating a gap in the workforce. Besides these exogenous
factors, staff shortage is also a self-perpetuating problem. With a mostly fixed de-
mand for shift coverage to meet patients’ needs, the resulting overtime and long
streaks of consecutive workdays inevitably lead to high levels of work-related fa-
tigue (Barker and Nussbaum, 2011).
This fatigue triggers in turn a generalized
decrease in performance, as exhausted nurses are less able to perform their duties
effectively. Furthermore, the chronic strain causes many healthcare professionals to
quit their jobs or take more sick days due to burnout and related health conditions.
Consequently, the staff shortages are exacerbated, creating a vicious cycle where the
remaining staff are further overburdened, continuing the cycle of fatigue, decreased
performance, and attrition. Being on the front line of healthcare operations, nurses
are particularly affected by all the reported issues and it comes as no surprise that
they are quietly quitting their jobs more than other healthcare workers due to higher
levels of burnout, lower job satisfaction, and shift work (Galanis et al., 2024).
1
==PAGE:5==
Introduction
Considering the challenges outlined, it becomes evident that efficient resource
allocation at the tactical level, and specifically, the creation of work schedules that
assign nurses to shifts, is a critical managerial problem within healthcare. How-
ever, despite the academic advances in this area, the available software has little
focus on optimization and automatic roster generation (Petrovic, 2019). Due to this
lack of automated solutions, in most cases, nurse rostering problems are still solved
manually (Bodvarsdottir, 2021), and even though ward managers try their best to
consider all aspects, we cannot expect them to find high-quality solutions to such a
complex problem. The main reason nurse rostering solutions provided by research
are not implemented in practice is the communication barrier between researchers
and nursing managers, who are often nurses themselves and generally have little
or no understanding of complex mathematical formulations. Additionally, most re-
search models are difficult to implement out of the box, as they typically involve
multi-objective formulations with significant trade-offs between objectives. Manag-
ing these trade-offs requires a deep understanding of both the realities of the field and
optimization theory, an expertise combination that is rare to find. More specifically,
these trade-offs mostly concern the previously discussed problem of limiting fatigue
and providing the required coverage at the same time. Therefore, the primary task
of research within the shift-scheduling field, as pursued in this thesis, should be to
provide innovative modeling solutions capable of addressing these trade-offs by op-
timizing schedules to create the best possible conditions for healthcare workers to
perform at their best.
1.2
Research question and scientific contributions
One of the key reasons why classical scheduling solutions using mathematical
models can result in inadequate schedules is that they are based on the unrealistic
assumption that human performances are constant, and only consider shift work
regulation policies, which often oversimplify the conditions underlying work-related
fatigue and causing performance degradation. The general research question of this
work is thus how to align the effective satisfaction of demand in terms of cover-
age with an efficient use of staff resources in healthcare and less stressful working
conditions by improving the creation of work schedules for nurses.
To effectively address the proposed research question, the first goal of this
project is to derive a quantitative model that predicts how scheduling impacts per-
sonnel performance and well-being, based on relevant previous research. This thesis
then addresses the need for a holistic solution to mitigate the adverse effects related
to staff shortages by developing an innovative shift scheduling model. Using a Mixed
Integer Programming formulation, the proposed model aims to create a dynamic
scheduling framework that adapts to individual performance levels, ensuring sus-
2
==PAGE:6==
Introduction
tainable staffing practices and enhancing the well-being of healthcare professionals.
Therefore, the main scientific contributions of this paper are represented by the cited
performance-dependent MIP formulation of the nurse rostering problem and by the
comparison of the results from this model with those obtained without considering
performance drivers. This comparison is further used to gain possible managerial
insights and assess the effectiveness of the proposed performance-dependent model
in providing well-balanced work schedules.
3
==PAGE:7==
Personnel Scheduling and Nurse Rostering:
Background and Related Literature
2
Personnel Scheduling and Nurse Rostering:
Background and Related Literature
The personnel scheduling problem is a specific type of assignment problem that
involves the allocation of employees to specific tasks, shifts, or time slots to ensure
that organizational objectives and operational requirements are met efficiently and
effectively. Because of its intrinsic complexity and its vast application realm, this
problem can present in multiple forms depending on the peculiarities of the work
environment to which it is applied. Due to its important relevance across various
industries, such as healthcare, aviation, customer service, and production, person-
nel scheduling problems have been an object of research since the 1950s (Dantzig
(1954), Edie (1954)). Van Den Bergh et al. (2013) reviewed the personnel schedul-
ing literature and identified various classes of personnel scheduling problems based
on the different stages of the scheduling process that they address: i.e. staffing,
rostering, and rerostering. Staffing problems (e.g. Brunner and Edenharter (2011))
model decision-making at a strategic level, and aim at optimizing the workforce
dimension. Rostering and rerostering instead involve decisions on a tactical level.
In particular, personnel rostering problems (e.g. Haspeslagh et al. (2014)) have the
goal of optimizing the allocation of human resources so that the right competen-
cies are available at the right time and aim at generating a complete work schedule
(also referred to as a roster) that satisfies a certain demand. Finally, rerostering
problems (e.g. Gross et al. (2019)) deal with unexpected events that disrupt the
schedule and aim to minimize their impact on the original roster. More recently,
Özder et al. (2020) have published an updated systematic literature review of the
personnel scheduling research, revealing that the majority of the studies focused on
the evaluation of different optimization techniques to be utilized to address person-
nel scheduling problems, such as mathematical programming, metaheuristics, and
hybrid approaches, showcasing the diverse strategies employed in this field. How-
ever, in the conclusions, they underscore how the primary goals should also include
developing models that help achieve organizational goals by balancing employee
satisfaction, operational efficiency, and cost-effectiveness.
In the personnel scheduling field, personnel rostering problems constitute the
most studied subclass. As said, these problems focus on creating schedules for a rel-
atively short scheduling horizon, i.e. optimizing the assignment of workers to shifts.
However, the concept of optimality of a schedule cannot be defined just in terms of
effectively covering the shifts to meet a certain demand, as a good solution should
also meet the personnel’s need for sufficient rest, their preferences, and allow them
to maintain a healthy work-life balance. As rostering problems within healthcare
require round-the-clock coverage of nurses and physicians to ensure patient safety,
4
==PAGE:8==
Personnel Scheduling and Nurse Rostering:
Background and Related Literature
the nurse rostering problem (NRP) is amongst those personnel rostering problems
that have received the most attention in the literature regarding how to manage
the trade-offs between the needs of the organization and those of the individual.
Burke et al. (2004) reviewed the nurse rostering literature and found that NRPs
usually involve a scheduling horizon between 2 and 4 weeks. From a modeling per-
spective, they typically include coverage constraints, ensuring a minimum number
of nurses on duty in each shift; time-related constraints e.g. a number of hours to be
worked by each nurse during the planning period; and constraints capturing work
regulations. They concluded that since many of the models were limited to these
dimensions, they were in general too simple and did not match the complexity of
the real-world rostering problem. Furthermore, they stated that "fully addressing
the needs and requirements of the real world" (Burke et al. (2004), p. 469) was a
crucial scientific goal. With the advancements of research in the field many vari-
ants of the problem have been proposed, but a standard and complete framework
has not been defined.
The International Nurse Rostering Competitions, INRC-I
(Haspeslagh et al., 2014) and INRC-II (Ceschia et al., 2015), attempted to address
this issue by providing standard formulations to work on. These competitions have
been successful in bringing the research community closer to the practical complex-
ity of real-world nurse rostering problems and have especially stimulated important
advancements in the solving techniques, which have arrived to include metaheuris-
tics (e.g. Lü and Hao (2012)), and hyperheuristics (e.g. Asta et al. (2016)), along
with MIP techniques and column generation (e.g. He and Qu (2012).
Despite the large body of literature produced to address the NRP, only a very
limited amount has actually been implemented in practice, confirming the distance
that still exists between research formulations and the actual needs of the health-
care industry.
For example, of the 64 articles concerning the NRP reviewed by
Van Den Bergh et al. (2013), less than 20% was suitable to be applied in practice.
Before, Kellogg and Walczak (2007) reviewed nurse rostering models published be-
tween 1985 and 2005 and found that, despite 86% of them being originally intended
to be applied in practice, only 30% was successfully implemented. The presented
literature suggests that current research on personnel scheduling, particularly in
nurse rostering, has predominantly concentrated on developing and refining solution
techniques. However, there remains a need for models that address the challenges
affecting the sector and provide actionable insights for real-life decision-makers.
5
==PAGE:9==
Personnel Scheduling and Nurse Rostering:
Background and Related Literature
2.1
Previous works implementing fatigue and performance
considerations in personnel scheduling
Xu and Hall (2021) presented a literature review of how operational research
considers fatigue and its effects on operational performance, and how it contributes
to mitigating those effects. In particular, they found two research areas within per-
sonnel scheduling that support the study of fatigue: work-rest scheduling, i.e. the
allocation of work and rest periods for employees within a shift, and shift scheduling.
Among the reviewed papers, only some of the work-rest scheduling studies directly
integrate predictive models for the estimation of work-related fatigue (e.g. Chan
et al. (2012) and Jaber et al. (2013)). On the contrary, shift scheduling models con-
centrate on implementing fatigue avoidance restrictions given by labor agreements
and/or minimizing indirect fatigue drivers like overtime or long shifts (e.g. Brunner
et al. (2009), Stolletz and Brunner (2012)).
To further assess the existence of nurse rostering papers implementing work-
related fatigue models, a specific literature search has been conducted for the pur-
poses of this paper using DTU Findit, Google Scholar, Scopus, and ResearchGate
as primary databases.
The search resulted in only 3 relevant papers that are summarized below:
1. Lin et al. (2013) present a MIP model for nurse scheduling taking into account
fatigue using two different approaches. The first is survey-based and the second
uses a sinusoidal function that includes a parameter implying individual nurses’
chronotype (propensity to sleep at different times). The scheduling horizon is
reduced to one week and the objective function consists of minimizing fatigue
at the end of the week while maximizing preferences.
The results show a
trade-off between preferences and fatigue.
2. Amindoust et al. (2021) include a self-developed empirical model for accumu-
lated fatigue into a classic nurse rostering model and solve it using a Hybrid
Genetic Algorithm for a randomly generated instance with the objective of
minimizing costs and fatigue. The results show consistent improvements in re-
ducing theoretical fatigue levels while containing operational costs and stress
the advantages of automated solutions compared to manual scheduling.
3. Klyve et al. (2023) use a real Nurse Rostering Problem and a validated model
of human sleep to formulate a rostering problem including fatigue. The model
includes individual biologies, thus enabling personalized schedules for every
nurse. The problem is then solved using an algorithm that combines Mixed-
Integer Programming and Constraint Programming with a Large Neighbour-
hood Search. The results demonstrate the realism of protecting nurses from
6
==PAGE:10==
Personnel Scheduling and Nurse Rostering:
Background and Related Literature
highly fatiguing schedules and ensuring the alertness of staff.
In conclusion, while the presented models that include fatigue in their formula-
tions contribute to minimizing fatigue and adhering to minimum required policies,
they fall short of explicitly addressing the trade-off between coverage and perfor-
mance degradation caused by fatigue. In substance, these models primarily aim to
reduce fatigue without considering the broader implications of how fatigue directly
impacts performance and coverage. As a result, they do not provide a comprehensive
solution that balances the need for adequate coverage with the necessity of main-
taining high-performance levels among healthcare workers. This gap highlights the
necessity for more advanced models that can integrate performance considerations
alongside fatigue minimization, offering a more holistic approach to nurse rostering.
7
==PAGE:11==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
3
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related
Literature
3.1
Introduction and objectives
The impact of work schedules on employees’ performance has garnered signifi-
cant attention across various industries, with the healthcare sector being particularly
scrutinized due to its demanding and critical nature.
The overarching aim of this section is to formulate, based on a thorough analysis
of the available literature, the hypotheses regarding how personnel performance is
affected by shift scheduling. These hypotheses will be used as the basis for im-
plementing the performance-dependent shift-scheduling model that constitutes the
final objective of this thesis.
Numerous experimental and field studies on shift work have investigated the
impact of various characteristics of work schedules on performance. These studies
generally indicate that performance and alertness are lower at night than during
the day and that 12-hour shifts result in reduced performance compared to 8-hour
shifts (see for example Bonnefond et al. (2006) and Rosa and Bonnet (1993)). In
this context, several authors have also highlighted that the headline-hitting disasters
of Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, Bhopal, and Exxon Valdez all took place at night
and were, at least in part, attributed to human error (e.g. Mitler et al. (1988)).
It is very difficult, however, to determine how much of the increased risk of having
an accident at a certain time of day is due to deficits in human performance, as
opposed to other risk factors that increase at the same time of day. For instance,
if it were observed that air accidents are less frequent at night, it would be difficult
to ascertain whether this is due to fewer flights operating during the night (i.e. the
exposure rate), a less congested airspace (i.e. the hazard level), or improvements in
aircrew performance (i.e. changes in performance capabilities).
Therefore, however interesting, all the findings reported so far are not suitable
with respect to the aim of this paper; as they don’t provide any clear evidence or
empirical law to determine to which degree personnel performances are affected by
work schedules. That is, we cannot state or generalize, based on these correlations,
that the performances of an employee who has so far been exposed to a certain
workload, distributed according to a certain schedule, will be decreased by a relative
amount. To overcome such a problem, we need to introduce the concept of work-
related fatigue. Although its definition is very broad, for work-related fatigue we
indicate here a state of physical and mental exhaustion caused by prolonged or
intense work activities (a more detailed definition is provided in subsection 3.2). In
this context, it is especially interesting for the purposes of this thesis how research
8
==PAGE:12==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
has been able to prove that this phenomenon is caused by how work schedules are
designed, establishing at the same time a clear link between work-related fatigue and
specific reductions in physiological performance. In fact, physiological markers such
as decreased reaction times, impaired coordination, and reduced muscle strength
have been consistently observed in fatigued workers, particularly among doctors
and nurses (Barker and Nussbaum, 2011). Moreover, work-related fatigue can be
related to these measurable physiological parameters, allowing it to be numerically
quantified, which has enabled the development of predictive models and frameworks
that estimate fatigue itself as a measurable characteristic.
Given the consideration presented in the previous paragraph, the objective of
defining how performance is affected by shift scheduling is here pursued through a
deductive approach; wherein the indirect relationship between scheduling and job
performance is constructed by proving, first, how the scheduling features influence
the accumulation of work-related fatigue, and then, by establishing the direct cor-
relations between work-related fatigue and job performance.
The purposes of this section can be broken down into the following 3 objectives:
1. Introducing the concept of work-related fatigue and identifying a general def-
inition.
2. Providing an overview of the available modeling frameworks concerning work-
related fatigue and establishing how this can be induced by work schedules.
3. Establish research-based hypotheses on the relationship between fatigue and
performance.
3.2
Work-related fatigue: definition
In the most accepted general definition, given by Tiesinga et al. (1996), fatigue
is defined as a multi-causal, multidimensional, and subjective state resulting from
prolonged activity with insufficient recovery and psychological, socioeconomic, and
environmental factors that affect both the mind and the body. Due to its intrinsic
multidimensionality, many specific definitions and models have been developed to
describe work-related fatigue, usually varying in terms of the inclusion of circadian,
behavioral, and/or subjective components.
Furthermore, Martin and Fiorentino
reviewed the literature on fatigue and proposed a classification based on how the
relation to sleepiness is handled or defined. They found that some studies present
how fatigue and sleepiness should be viewed as two distinct phenomena that are not
correlated, as fatigue arises in response to excessive work demands, while sleepiness
is generally defined as a state caused by an imbalance of sleep and wake drives.
9
==PAGE:13==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
However, the majority of the literature focusing on work-related fatigue agrees on
considering these two components as highly correlated, and usually intend sleepiness
mainly as a consequence or as a symptom of fatigue itself. This perspective suggests
that while fatigue and sleepiness can arise from different sources, they often inter-
act and influence each other, particularly in work environments where demanding
schedules and insufficient rest periods are common (Martin and Fiorentino, 2013).
In conclusion, the approach that has been chosen for this paper sees sleepiness
caused by protracted sleep deprivation, and fatigue caused by workload, as two faces
of the same medal, constituting the two main drivers of the broader definition of
work-related fatigue. This choice is further supported by the fact that they can
both be directly caused by a combination of scheduling parameters, such as working
hours and working times arrangements (Tucker and Folkard, 2012), and they have
both been linked to performance reductions (Fan and Smith, 2017), as described in
more details throughout the following sections.
3.3
Overview of the most known modeling frameworks for
the prediction of work-related fatigue
Researchers have developed various mathematical models to predict and study
fatigue levels based on the intrinsic features of any shift system, i.e. the shift length,
frequency of the shifts, number of consecutive days off, consecutive assignments, and
timing of the shift over the 24-hour day. These models allow the user to specify a
work schedule design in terms of a range of parameters (i.e.
the features of a
shift system) and to obtain estimates of the relative fatigue level. These types of
models are typically based on fatigue data from a large range of sources, including
both laboratory experiments and field studies. The output of such studies is usually
composed of an empirical law that takes as input some key data about the frequency
and timing of work and rest, and returns as output an abstract aggregated measure
of the amount of work-related fatigue induced by the schedule.
These laws are
most often found by fitting a function to experimental data obtained as frequent
subjective ratings of fatigue, or objective tests of physiological parameters. The
general form of this function typically consists of two components.
The first component is a monotonic function, either increasing or decreasing, which
describes how fatigue levels change with periods of work and rest. This part is used
for capturing the cumulative impact of continuous work or recovery during non-work
periods.
The second component is often a wave function designed to model the effects of
different shift timings on fatigue, accounting for the influence of circadian rhythm.
This wave function reflects the natural fluctuations in alertness and fatigue that
occur throughout the day, driven by the body’s internal biological clock, and how
10
==PAGE:14==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
they interact with the process of fatigue accumulation.
These assumptions were firstly presented in a seminal model proposed by Bor-
bely (1982) for predicting how levels of sleepiness (and hence the likelihood of falling
asleep) vary according to hours of forced wakefulness caused by work schedules. In
fact, Borbely’s "two-process" model of fatigue is a widely recognized framework that
explains the regulation of sleep and wakefulness. It is called "two-process model"
because Borbely recognizes two drivers (or processes) for sleepiness: how long the
individual has been awake, and the influence of the body clock, and poses that these
two processes interact to regulate sleep-wake patterns.
The first process, called
homeostatic pressure to sleep, or homeostatic sleep drive, represents the need for
sleep that builds up during waking hours and diminishes during sleep. The second,
called circadian rhythm of arousal, models the body’s internal biological clock and
regulates the timing of sleepiness and wakefulness throughout the day and night,
influencing periods of alertness and fatigue.
To assess the state of the art in research regarding work-related fatigue predic-
tion and compare the most well-known models, a comprehensive literature review
was conducted using DTU Findit, Google Scholar, Scopus, and ResearchGate as
primary databases. This review identified six quantitative models, which are here
classified and presented based on their commercial availability and their reliance on
the two-process model.
3.3.1
Non-commercial frameworks based on the 2-process model
The following section provides a brief overview of 4 well-known models, each of
which can be seen as an extension of the previously discussed Borbely’s model.
• Three-Process Model of Alertness (Akerstedt et al. (2004); Mallis et al. (2004))
- The three-process model of alertness enhances Borbely’s original model by in-
corporating a third process that accounts for increased sleepiness immediately
after waking, known as the "wake-up" or "sleep inertia" effect. This model uses
inputs such as work-rest history, or sleep-wake history, gathered from records,
self-reports, or estimates based on work-rest patterns. It estimates sleep and
predicts subjective alertness, neurobehavioral performance, and fatigue risk.
Validated in both workplace and shift work environments, this model is also
employed as a tool for managing shift schedules and predicting accident risk.
• System for Aircrew Fatigue Evaluation (SAFE) (Belyavin and Spencer (2004);
Mallis et al. (2004))
SAFE is a fatigue model originally intended to assess pilot fatigue initially
developed for the UK Civil Aviation Authority and used by them since 1994.
11
==PAGE:15==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
SAFE is an adaptation of Borbely’s two-process model, omitting the sleep
inertia component but incorporating a function that combines "time awake"
and the "wake-up" effect. This system uses self-reported sleep-wake history as
input and compares it with experimental data to predict subjective alertness
and neurobehavioral performance.
• Interactive neurobehavioural model (INM) (Jewett and Kronauer (1999); Mallis
et al. (2004))
The interactive neurobehavioral model is a three-process framework that com-
bines the effects of time spent awake, the body’s circadian rhythm, and sleep
inertia. It represents the circadian rhythm using two interacting Van der Pol
oscillators (Kronauer et al., 1982), which are adjusted based on light expo-
sure according to research findings (Jewett and Kronauer, 1999). This model
uses inputs such as sleep-wake history, ideally recorded objectively using a
sleep-tracking wearable device (like an actigraph worn on the wrist), and light
exposure to predict neurobehavioral performance.
• Circadian Alertness Simulator (CAS) (Mallis et al., 2004)
CAS is another model based on Borbely’s two-process framework, it was
mainly developed for assessing the risk related to the reduction in alertness
and the slowed reflexes in truck drivers caused by work-related fatigue, and
therefore it has been validated only against work/rest and accident data from
the trucking industry.
These initial models, although valuable for building a research-based foundation
for the prediction of work-related fatigue, present some common limitations. Firstly,
they all rely on a limited amount of field and experimental data and they have
not been extensively tested in real applications. Secondly, they all require some
knowledge of the sleep pattern of the subject to which the model is applied, a
characteristic that complicates their application incredibly across most industries
and real working environments.
3.3.2
Commercially applied frameworks
To address the first of the issues presented in the previous paragraph, the
United States of America’s Department of Defence (DOD), developed one of the
most famous comprehensive frameworks for the evaluation of work-related fatigue,
the "Sleep, Activity, Fatigue, and Task Effectiveness"(SAFTE) model. This model
has been primarily developed as a tool for predicting the effectiveness and the per-
formance of members of the US armed forces during military duties and combat
missions but has since been used in a variety of other contexts (Hursh et al., 2006).
The SAFTE model outputs, among other measures, an indicator of expected per-
12
==PAGE:16==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
formance effectiveness as a percentage. Since SAFTE is a commercial product sold
by the Institutes for Behavior Resources Inc.
under the brand "SAFTE-FAST"
(SAFTEFAST), most procedures and documentation are proprietary and not pub-
licly disclosed. However, it has been possible to estimate with good precision the
underlying equations based on available materials and research findings as reported
by Sean et al. (2021).
The empirical law derived for the estimation of the performance percentage for
SAFTE is reported in Equation 1 (Sean et al., 2021):
E(t) = 100 · R(t)
Rmax
+ C(t) · (7 + 5(Rmax −R(t)
Rmax
)) + I(t)
(1)
In the equation, R(t) represents the level of the so-called sleep reservoir (sleep home-
ostasis), this value is calculated in seconds and has a max of Rmax = 2880s corre-
sponding to 8 hours of sleep. During hours of wakefulness, this reservoir degrades at
a constant level K = 0.5/60 s−1, which means that the sleep reservoir is completely
depleted after 24 hours of constant wakefulness; during sleep instead the reservoir
is replenished at a variable rate, that is based on an estimated "sleep intensity"
parameter and is generally faster during the first hours of sleep until the Rmax is
reached after 8 hours (Sean et al., 2021).
The term C(t) instead is used to capture the circadian effect related to the time of
day, it is calculated as the sum of two wave functions with respective periods of 24
and 12 hours each, opportunely scaled.
Finally, the term I(R, t) is used to model a phenomenon called "sleep inertia", which
is intended to describe the observation that performance can be low for a short pe-
riod after waking (Tassi and Muzet, 2000). This term also depends on the time of
the day presenting a sort of circadian trend, but instead, it accounts for a perfor-
mance loss of 5 % immediately after waking and the dissipation of sleep inertia over
the following 2 hours. (Sean et al., 2021).
As mentioned previously, all fatigue models presented so far share a common
feature: they require real (like the Interactive Neurobehavioural Model or the Three-
Process Model of Alertness) or estimated (like the SAFTE model) sleep-wake pattern
as a fundamental input. While this was suitable for researchers studying fatigue in
laboratory settings, it creates significant challenges for organizations attempting
to evaluate fatigue effects in the workplace. In fact, relying on actual sleep times
as input is problematic in real-world applications due to the difficulty, expense,
and time involved in collecting objective sleep-wake data for every potential worker
and duty schedule. Using estimated sleep times as input also presents issues, as it
necessitates subjective judgments unless the process is automated, complicating the
creation of the fatigue model’s input file.
13
==PAGE:17==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
To address this issue, the University of South Australia’s Center for Applied
Behavioural Science has developed and validated the Fatigue Audit InterDyne model
(FAID), which requires hours of work (i.e., start/end times of work periods) as the
sole input (Roach et al., 2004). The major advantage of the FAID model is indeed
that it does not rely on actual or estimated sleep/wake records as input. Instead,
it assigns a "recovery value" to non-working periods. This value is only based on
the likely amount of rest and sleep that is possible to obtain during these off-duty
moments, taking into account the duration and the time of day when these periods
occur. The approach used in FAID sees a work schedule as a time-varying function
whereby an individual can exist in one of two states: work or non-work. Each indi-
vidual employee is seen as a black box into which a specific shift signal is input and
from which a continuously varying signal is output. Using this approach, the shift
schedule can be viewed as the "input signal" and the fatigue level as the continuous
"output signal" (Dawson and Fletcher, 2001). Similarly, an organizational perspec-
tive of shift work can be seen as the signal processing of the aggregated group of
black boxes. The modeling then consists of expressing the "transfer function" be-
tween work schedules and work-related fatigue, where the "transfer function" is
intended to be the mathematical function that links the input and output func-
tions of a signal processing system. In terms of validation, the predictive reliability
of the model has been extensively tested and applied both in laboratory environ-
ments (Fletcher and Dawson, 2004) and in actual shift work situations on the field
(Fletcher and Dawson, 2001a), demonstrating that FAID clearly discriminates be-
tween more and less demanding schedules in both settings. In particular, a study
was conducted on 1933 train drivers who filled in sleep and work diaries, wore acti-
graphs, and performed subjective alertness and objective performance tests before
and after each shift for two weeks. The results showed that there was a significant
correlation between predicted fatigue and self-rated alertness and between predicted
fatigue and performance. The model is commercially available and is currently pro-
vided by InterDynamics (InterDynamics, 2024) under the name "FAID Quantum".
Based on the information available from the InterDynamics website and from the
report "Introduction to Fatigue Audit Tools" by Transport Canada (2018), FAID
is utilized by various prominent organizations and institutions, such as Qantas, the
Civil Aviation Safety Authority, Hitachi Europe and the Australian Transportation
Safety Bureau.
3.3.3
Comparison of the presented frameworks and relative conclusions
All the presented leading fatigue models were compared in 2002 at the Inter-
national Fatigue Risk Management Conference in Seattle, sponsored by the United
States Departments of Transportation and Defense. In order to compare their pre-
dictive performances, the models were tested in predicting the fatigue levels caused
14
==PAGE:18==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
by five different scenarios and the results were then compared with the outcomes
obtained through objective and subjective measures of work-related fatigue gath-
ered from the participants to each scenario. Of the five scenarios, three were based
on laboratory studies involving various conditions of physical and mental stress and
chronic sleep restriction and recovery. One scenario instead was based on a field
study of alertness in freight locomotive engineers. Finally, the last scenario was
based on a theoretical study for future ultra-long-range flight operations
The findings that emerged from the conference have been analyzed by Van Don-
gen (2004). From this analysis, the author concludes that the models were capable
of predicting the data for the field scenario and two laboratory scenarios fairly well.
However, no model was substantially and consistently better at predicting the ac-
tual data than the others (Van Dongen, 2004). As expected, the two more advanced
frameworks explicitly developed for the evaluation of real situations, SAFTE and
FAID, performed better in predicting fatigue levels of the field scenario, with FAID
placing first and SAFTE second (Van Dongen, 2004). For all other scenarios, the
ranking order of the models varied, with FAID ranked as high as first and as low
as sixth, SAFTE and INM ranked between first and fourth, CAS ranked between
first and sixth and SAFE ranked between third and fifth (Roach et al., 2004). From
taking together the results of these analyses, it is therefore possible to conclude that
FAID, with its relatively simple input requirements, consisting only of start/end
times of the work periods, has a predictive power at least comparable with the other
models.
Given the previous conclusion, the FAID framework has been selected as the
foundation for developing the simple model for estimating work-related fatigue
and its impact on personnel performances to be integrated into the performance-
dependent shift-scheduling programming model that constitutes the final objective
of this paper.
Some key considerations on which this choice is based are here resumed and sum-
marized:
• Results emerged from the International Fatigue Risk Management Conference
demonstrate that FAID effectively discriminates between more and less de-
manding schedules in both laboratory and workplace settings (Roach et al.,
2004).
• As previously said, the FAID model requires only shift times and duration
as input, which are the only data directly available when solving the shift-
scheduling programming model. Furthermore, differently from other models
like SAFTE, it does not require any post-processing of these data, simplifying
its integration.
15
==PAGE:19==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
• FAID treats each worker as existing in one of two states: work or nonwork.
This binary condition is straightforward to model and can be directly inte-
grated into a mixed integer programming formulation using binary variables
to represent workers’ states.
• There is extensive literature (Fletcher and Dawson (2001b), Dawson and Reid
(2007), Fletcher et al. (2003)) linking FAID model results with physiological
parameters and alertness levels, e.g.
comparing the decrease of these per-
formance parameters caused by work-related fatigue to the ones caused by
alcohol intoxication. This makes it relatively easy to formulate hypotheses on
how work schedules impact healthcare personnel performance.
3.4
Impact of work-related fatigue on performances
The previous section has provided an overview of the most known quantitative
models for predicting work-related fatigue and has discussed the relationship be-
tween schedules and fatigue. The following section will complete the discussion by
presenting research findings that demonstrate the impact of work-related fatigue on
employee performance.
3.4.1
Quantitative relation between predicted fatigue levels and physi-
ological performance
According to a literature review study conducted by Sutherland et al. (2023),
work-related fatigue can lead to decreased cognitive function, affecting decision-
making, attention, and memory, and ultimately impairing overall job performance.
In particular, impaired concentration and alertness deriving from fatigue, are rec-
ognized as leading causes of increased errors and lower quality of work, causing a
generalized decrease in productivity (Sutherland et al., 2023). Most of these issues
are caused by sleep deprivation, a condition that affects especially workers per-
forming shift work and particularly night shifts, as is common for nurses and other
healthcare personnel in general.
The relative performance impairment caused by fatigue and sleep deprivation
has been quantitatively compared to that caused by different stages of alcohol in-
toxication, with previous research showing that sleep deprivation and fatigue levels
associated with common shift schedules can produce a decrease in cognitive per-
formance greater than what would be acceptable in many countries if it were due
to alcohol intoxication (Akerstedt et al., 2004). In their study published on Na-
ture (2007), Dawson and Reid have assessed the correlation between relative fatigue
scores obtained from their predictive model (Dawson and Fletcher, 2001) conducing
two counterbalanced experiments on forty subjects. In one they were kept awake
16
==PAGE:20==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
for 28 hours (from 8:00 until 12:00 the following day), and in the other, they were
asked to consume 10-15 g alcohol at 30-min intervals from 8:00 until their mean
blood alcohol concentration reached 0.10%. Cognitive psychomotor performances
were measured at half-hourly intervals using a computer-administered test of hand-
eye coordination. The results expressed as a percentage of performance at the start
of the session are reported in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Scatter plot and linear regression of mean relative performance levels
against: a, time between the tenth and twenty-sixth hour of sustained wakefulness
and b, blood alcohol concentrations up to 0.13% (Dawson and Reid, 2007)
The numeric results indicate a clear linear trend in mean relative performance as
a function of Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC). The same linear trend becomes
visible after the tenth consecutive hour of wakefulness, while it has been shown
that before this threshold the trend usually fluctuates and starts to decrease after
8-9 hours (Dawson and Reid (2007), Fletcher et al. (2003), Fletcher and Dawson
(2001b)). Equating the two rates at which performance declines, it is possible to
calculate that the reduction in performance for each hour of wakefulness between
10 and 26 hours is equivalent to the one caused by a 0.005% rise in blood alcohol
concentration. Therefore, after around 20 hours of forced wakefulness, cognitive
psychomotor performance results to be reduced to a level equivalent to the perfor-
mance impairment caused by a BAC concentration of 0.05% grams per deciliter of
blood, which is the proscribed level of alcohol intoxication for operating a vehicle in
most European countries and US states.
The established correlation between performance impairment due to hours of
wakefulness and alcohol intake enables us to link work-related fatigue scores, ob-
tained using the predictive model proposed by Dawson and Fletcher (2001) and
17
==PAGE:21==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
integrated into the FAID framework, with performance levels and BAC. This rela-
tionship is further detailed in subsection 4.1 following the derivation of the equations
for the fatigue model.
3.4.2
Analysis of the impact of work-related fatigue on healthcare per-
sonnel performances
After discussing the effects of performance impairment caused by work-related
fatigue, this final section briefly presents a literature background of the implication
that this can have in a healthcare environment.
Across the healthcare industries of most developed countries, the issue of work-
related fatigue has come under increasing attention of both research and institutions
as early as the last decades of the past century; as concerns surrounding medical
errors and their legal ramifications started becoming an especially serious problem
(Marano et al., 2005). At the end of the twentieth century, roughly 5 −15 % of
patients admitted to US hospitals were experiencing an adverse event (Kohn et al.,
2000). Still in 2024, it is estimated that preventable medical errors cause a num-
ber approximately comprised between 750,000 and one million injuries or more, and
nearly 100,000 patient deaths in the US each year (Newman et al., 2024). It is there-
fore obvious how, apart from the huge ethical problems deriving by the harm and loss
of lives caused, these errors result in substantial unnecessary personal and economic
costs (Kohn et al., 2000). In this context, work-related fatigue is frequently cited as
an influential factor in a variety of medical error situations (Barker and Nussbaum
(2011), Carayon and Gurses (2005)). Both nurses and residents commonly report
making fatigue-related errors and consider prolonged working hours and lack of sleep
all as risk factors for committing a medical error. Research has also demonstrated
that fatigue often leads individuals to "cut corners" or exhibit increased carelessness
to minimize effort while performing tasks (Papp, 2004). In this context, nurses are a
particularly vulnerable category with respect to fatigue, given the mounting expec-
tations for them to work extended hours spanning all shifts. These extended hours
and task demands have indeed been linked to an increased risk of work-related
injuries, increased levels of fatigue, burnout, job dissatisfaction and performance
reduction (Trinkoff, 2010). Long shifts all around the clock are not the only risk fac-
tor for nurses, since they usually need to perform more physically demanding tasks
compared to physicians. An experimental study from Barker and Nussbaum (2011)
has shown a prevalence of both mental and physical fatigue in nurses. The study
was carried out with the overall goal of evaluating hypothesized causal relationships
between mental and physical fatigue and performance reduction during simulated
nursing tasks. In the study, a laboratory setting with simulation of nursing tasks
was used in order to facilitate control over the test environment and exposure to de-
18
==PAGE:22==
Work-Related Fatigue: Background and Related Literature
mands. Resulting fatigue levels were measured subjectively (perceptual responses)
and objectively (physiological measures) Barker and Nussbaum (2011). The study
is particularly interesting in order to prove the relationship between work-related
fatigue and performance, as fatigue levels were repetitively assessed after a range
of mental and physical tasks. Participants engaged in four experimental sessions
where simulated nursing tasks were performed. Mental and physical demands were
manipulated to induce varying levels of fatigue. A repeated measures design was
employed, exposing participants to combinations of high and low levels of mental
and physical fatigue across separate sessions. Although the tasks were not specific
to a nursing work environment, they closely resembled duties in non-critical adult
units like medical or surgical wards. Fatigue was assessed using a set of fatigue sur-
veys. In terms of performances, physical performance was measured based on force
variability fluctuation and a box placement task, while mental performance was
measured through standardized cognitive assessments targeting skills like vigilance,
memory, arithmetic, and problem-solving, which are commonly involved in a variety
of nursing tasks (Barker and Nussbaum, 2011). Regarding the relationship between
performance and fatigue, results have shown a consistent degradation of both physi-
cal and mental performances at the end of the experiment when work-related fatigue
levels were higher.
In summary, the literature clearly demonstrates the profound impact of work-
related fatigue on healthcare performance, particularly in the context of nursing.
The empirical evidence underscores that fatigue not only compromises the safety
and quality of patient care but also exacerbates personal and economic costs due
to increased errors, burnout, and job dissatisfaction. The experimental studies re-
viewed provide robust data linking both mental and physical fatigue to performance
degradation, reinforcing the necessity for innovative scheduling models that can mit-
igate these risks.
19
==PAGE:23==
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and performance
impairment
4
Quantitative model for predicting work-related
fatigue and performance impairment
The following section has the aim of defining a quantitative model in order
to forecast fatigue levels based on available scheduling parameters and relate these
levels to personnel performances.
The quantitative model that has been chosen to be integrated into the shift
scheduling programming model of this paper (see section 7) is the one used by
the Fatigue Audit InterDyne (FAID) framework and described in the paper "A
quantitative model of work-related fatigue: background and definition" (Dawson
and Fletcher, 2001). Because FAID is a commercial product, the paper does not
include a complete mathematical description of the model, nonetheless from the
information provided in the literature it has been possible to derive a set of equations
for predicting work-related fatigue scores.
At the broadest level, Dawson’s model considers the individual to exist in one
of two states: work or non-work. Any shift schedule can therefore be expressed as
a square wave function that is continuously oscillating between the two states and
can be described by Equation 2.
Figure 2 reports the graph of the square wave function obtained for a standard work
week of five working days with shifts starting at 9:00 and finishing at 17:00.
w(t) =
1 if hour t is a working hour
0 otherwise
(2)
Using the analogy of a signal processing system, it is possible to consider each
individual employee as a "black box" into which a specific "signal", corresponding to
the work schedule represented by the wave function is input. Then, a continuously
varying "signal" is output, corresponding in this case to the score representing the
work-related fatigue accumulated. The mathematical function that we are interested
in is, therefore, the function linking the input and output functions, that in signal
processing is commonly referred to as the "transfer function".
20
==PAGE:24==
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and performance
impairment
Figure 2: Square function representing a standard 5-days work-week schedule with
shifts starting at 9:00 and ending at 17:00
Regarding the transfer function, the paper provides the following generic infor-
mation:
1. Fatigue in an individual at a specific point of time can be thought to reflect
the balance between two competing forces, i.e.
forces producing "fatigue"
and forces reversing the effects of fatigue, leading to "recovery" (Dawson and
Fletcher, 2001).
2. Fatigue increases monotonically as a function of hours of prior work and wake-
fulness, however, this increase is not a simple polynomial function.
3. In accordance to Borbely’s two-process model that has been already discussed,
the function that links hours of wakefulness to fatigue levels needs to express a
complex relationship that takes into account significant linear (hours of prior
work/wakefulness) and sinusoidal (circadian) components.
4. Dawson and Fletcher (2001) assume that the circadian component of fatigue,
which takes the name of "fatigue accumulation rate", is mapped closely to
the core temperature rhythm. Based on these considerations, the circadian
function is assumed to have a sinusoidal form with a period of 24 hours and
an arbitrary amplitude of 1 unit.
5. The peak of the circadian function is assumed to occur at 05:00 hours, cor-
responding to the maximum fatigue accumulation rate, while the minimum
occurs at 17:00 hours.
21
==PAGE:25==
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and performance
impairment
6. To produce more realistic outputs, a saturation function that limits the total
value of recovery that can be accumulated at any time is required. In practice,
this saturation function does not let recovery be stored beyond full recovery.
That is, individuals can only recover from fatigue that has been accumulated
and cannot store recovery to offset against potential future fatigue.
Before deriving the mathematical form of the transfer function, it is worth
noting that Dawson and Fletcher actually propose two different versions of the
model, both based on the considerations outlined above. The first is called Workload
Model and assumes that fatigue just accumulates indefinitely the more someone
works and the accumulated fatigue can only be reduced through rest periods. The
second instead is called Fatigue Model and is equal to the Workload Model but
fatigue does not accumulate in the same way. Instead, a weighted moving average
of previous fatigue and recovery scores is used, giving more value to the work and
non-work periods that are most recent. The weights for the moving average have
been arbitrarily defined as having a linear decay from a peak weighting of 1 for the
most recent hour to 0 after 7 days or 168 h. The profiles for the two models for the
same shift pattern tend to be quite similar for the majority of the most common
shift patterns, with the fatigue model presenting smoother variations. The workload
model accumulates higher levels of fatigue and tends to be able to better distinguish
the highest, lowest, and average levels of fatigue, combined with both the speed of
accumulation and the maintenance of the levels of fatigue (area under the profile).
The fatigue model instead concentrates mainly on when the levels of fatigue occur,
and the normality of the height of the peaks, and tends to be more suitable when
evaluating longer periods (more than 3-4 weeks). Based on these considerations,
the workload model has been deemed the most suitable for integration into the shift
programming model used in this paper, as our primary focus is on minimizing peak
and average fatigue levels, with a scheduling horizon set to four weeks (see section 7).
Consequently, we will refer to the workload model throughout the remainder of this
paper.
Going back to deriving the transfer function, in the appendix to their paper
Dawson and Fletcher only report the following intuitive equations for the workload
model:
Fatigue(x) = Circadian(x)
(3)
Recovery(x) = −Scalar · Circadian(x)
(4)
Where Circadian(x) is the score or measure of the relative difficulty of working
during hour "x", alternatively called fatigue accumulation rate.
22
==PAGE:26==
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and performance
impairment
The fatigue score Score(x) then can be calculated using the following recursive
relation:
Score(x) = Score(x −1) + Fatigue(x) (if hour x is worked)
(5)
Score(x) = Score(x −1) + Recovery(x) (otherwise)
(6)
Score(0) = 0
(7)
To identify the fatigue and recovery functions we must first identify the function
Circadian(x). We know that this has a sinusoidal form, which in the most general
expression can be written as:
c(t) = a · sin
2π
T · (t + s)

+ k
(8)
where a is the amplitude, T is the period, s is the phase shift and k corresponds to
the vertical shift. As reported in point 4 above, the period T of the function must
be equal to 24 hours, corresponding to the duration of the circadian rhythm, which
is tied to the cycle of light and darkness.
Furthermore, the amplitude is said to be arbitrarily set to 1, therefore a = 1.
For what regards the phase shift s instead Dawson and Fletcher assume the
maximum accumulation rate of fatigue per hour to occur at 05:00 hours and the
minimum at 17:00 hours. Based on this assumption, the phase s can be calculated
for example from the expression:
2π
24 · (5 + s) = π
2 ⇒s = 6 −5 = 1
(9)
Although this assumption is based on the notion that the circadian rhythm maps
closely to the core temperature of the human body, which is supported by other
research (e.g. Valdez (2019), Van Dongen and Dinges (2005)), it is worth to precise
that this issue remains a topic of ongoing discussion in the literature. For example,
it is acknowledged the existence of at least two circadian chronotypes, morning and
evening, with each individual being characterized by one of these. About this topic,
Bailey and Heitkemper (2001) have shown that the acrophases (i.e., peak times)
of the core temperature rhythms, corresponding to the peaks of physical perfor-
mances, occurred approximately one to four hours earlier for morning chronotypes
than evening chronotypes, while recent literature has questioned the existence of
just two circadian chronotypes and the fact that peak times for athletic performance
correspond to peak hours for cognitive performances (Maheshwari et al., 2022).
23
==PAGE:27==
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and performance
impairment
To complete the identification of the fatigue accumulation rate (circadian) func-
tion we need to derive the value of the vertical shift parameter k. This is not explic-
itly cited by Dawson and Fletcher (2001), but it is easy to calculate knowing some
boundary conditions from validation studies involving the same model published by
the authors. For example, on multiple occasions is reported that a relative work-
related fatigue score of 80 is produced after 22 hours of continuous sleep deprivation
(Fletcher and Dawson (2001b), Dawson and Fletcher (2001), Fletcher and Dawson
(2004)). This information allows us to arrive at a unique solution for the value of k,
as the recovery function is not involved and, therefore, the problem presents just one
degree of freedom. Consequently, it can be numerically shown that k = 10
3 = 0.3.
The identified form of the transfer function is then the one reported in Equation 11,
corresponding to the blue line in Figure 3.
c(t) = sin
2π
24 · (t + 1)

+ 10
3
(10)
Finally, to complete the model we need to identify the recovery function. From
Equation 4 we know that its generic form corresponds simply to the circadian func-
tion that has been just calculated, multiplied by a scalar. We can therefore write
the following expression for the recovery function:
r(t) = ν · (sin
2π
24 · (t + 1)

+ 10
3 ) = ν · c(t)
(11)
To obtain a value for ν we can use the same method followed for k. In fact, in
multiple occasions is reported that a standard work week schedule, corresponding to
working 8 hours a day for 5 days a week from 09:00 to 17:00, causes a peak relative
level of work-related fatigue between 40 and 41 (In Dawson and Fletcher (2001) the
reported value is 40.9, while in Roach et al. (2004) and Fletcher and Dawson (2001a)
it is referred as 40). Furthermore, from the same papers, we know that for a worker
starting to work a standard workweek schedule well rested, i.e. with fatigue score
f(0) = 0, the fatigue score at the end of the week must also be equal to zero, i.e.
f(168) = 0. Given these boundary conditions, it can be numerically shown that
ν ≃0.3608.
The complete model is then defined by the following set of equations:
c(t) = sin
2π
24 · (t + 1)

+ 10
3
(12)
24
==PAGE:28==
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and performance
impairment
w(t) =
1 if hour t is a working hour
0 otherwise
(13)
f(t) = max(0, f(t −1) + w(t)c(T) −(1 −w(t)) · r(t))
(14)
f(0) = 0
(15)
where f(t) expresses the relative work-related fatigue score at the end of the hour t.
Figure 4 shows the graph obtained by plotting f(t) caused by a standard work-
week schedule for people with evening and morning chronotypes. From the graph,
it is possible to appreciate how working during the morning times favors workers
presenting a morning chronotype in terms of accumulated fatigue.
Figure 3: Circadian functions for morning and evening with 3-hour difference in the
acrophases
25
==PAGE:29==
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and performance
impairment
Figure 4: Fatigue accumulation for morning and evening chronotypes caused by a
standard workweek schedule (Monday to Friday 9-17)
4.1
Relation between fatigue score and performance
After deriving the equations for the model, we can finally compare physiological
performance reductions with work-related fatigue scores, as discussed in subsubsec-
tion 3.4.1.
As a reference, scores obtained as outputs of the FAID model can be classified
in one of the following five ranges (Roach et al., 2004):
• STANDARD (0-40): the upper limit of this range is similar to the maximum
fatigue score produced by the standard 9-5, Monday-Friday work week.
• MODERATE (40-80): The upper limit of this range is similar to the maximum
fatigue score produced by a forward-rotating schedule (morning, after- noon,
night) with six consecutive 8 hours work periods or by 22 hours of continuous
wakefulness
• HIGH (80-100): The upper limit of this range is similar to the one caused by
26 hours of continuous wakefulness.
• VERY HIGH (100-120): Fatigue levels in this range are similar to the ones
produced by a schedule that rotates through two 12-h day shifts, and two 12-h
night shifts, with 2 days off.
26
==PAGE:30==
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and performance
impairment
• EXTREME (120+): Fatigue scores of this magnitude are similar to those
produced by a permanent night shift schedule with six consecutive 12-h work
periods followed by 1 d off.
Comparing the three plots in Figure 5, it is evident that no significant perfor-
mance impairment is visible until around 16 hours of wakefulness, corresponding
to a predicted relative fatigue score of around 50. This means that a relative fa-
tigue score of roughly 40, corresponding to the peak fatigue level reached during a
standard work week, does not result in significant impairment as it corresponds to
approximately 13 hours of wakefulness. However, in the next four hours both the
work related fatigue score and the performance impairment grow significantly. At
20 hours of continuous wakefulness, the cognitive psychomotor performance declines
to levels similar to the ones caused by a concentration of 0.05 grams per deciliter of
blood. Therefore, impairment at 80 points, which reflects a fatigue score of 200%
of the maximum fatigue score obtained for a standard work week, is at a level that
would not legally be permitted in a motor vehicle operator if it were due to alcohol
intoxication in most countries.
In conclusion, it is worth noting how most critical industries, including health-
care, usually have code of conducts prohibiting working under the influence of alco-
hol. For example, The California Board of Registered Nursing explicitly prohibits
the practice of nursing under the influence of any alcohol or drugs. This is articu-
lated in sections 2762 and 1444 of the Nursing Practice Act and the California Code
of Regulations (https://www.rn.ca.gov/pdfs/enforcement/discguide.pdf, 2024), and
similar regulations are common in most countries.
In the scheduling programming model described in section 7, it is assumed that per-
formance begins to decrease due to work-related fatigue when a nurse’s fatigue level
exceeds 40. Performance is modeled to decrease linearly from 100% between fatigue
levels of 40 and 80. Once a fatigue level of 80 is reached, the nurse is considered too
fatigued to work, resulting in their performance being set to zero. Consequently,
no coverage is provided by that nurse for the shift. It is further assumed that the
level of coverage a nurse can provide for a shift is directly proportional to their
performance level during the shift. This adjusted coverage, will be referred to as
"performance-corrected coverage." Therefore, the performance-corrected coverage of
a nurse as a function of the accumulated work-related fatigue score is provided by
the following piece-wise linear function:
p(s) =





1 if f(t) <= 40
−1
40f(t) + 2 if 40 < f(t) ≤80
0 if f(t) > 80
(16)
27
==PAGE:31==
Quantitative model for predicting work-related fatigue and performance
impairment
Figure 5: Linear regression of mean relative performance levels against: time be-
tween the tenth and twenty-sixth hour of sustained wakefulness (top left) and BAC
up to 0.13% (top right) (Dawson and Reid, 2007). The bottom graph represents the
relative fatigue scores predicted for 24 hours of sustained wakefulness
28
==PAGE:32==
Data Description
5
Data Description
This study uses a modified version of one of the datasets that were provided
for the Second International Nurse Rostering Competition (INRC II). The compe-
tition ran from October 2014 to June 2015 and competitors were asked to find the
most computationally efficient solution to a number of rostering problem instances
of different sizes and complexity. Despite the different goals that this paper pro-
poses, this choice has been made for several key reasons: firstly, all data that were
included in the competition material are publicly accessible via the INRC II website
(INRCII). Moreover, the INRC II data bank provides a wide variety of rostering sce-
narios, encompassing different constraints and requirements, which helps in testing
the robustness and versatility of the proposed model. Additionally, this dataset is
relatively well-known within the nurse rostering community, which may facilitate a
better understanding and reception of the results presented in this paper. The fol-
lowing section outlines the primary features of the data and details the modifications
made to better align with the objectives of this study.
5.1
The INRC II data
Each dataset provided for the INRC II is composed of two types of input files:
one "scenario file" and 10 "week files".
The scenario file contains the following information:
• Length of the planning horizon.
• Number of shifts per day (3-4) and relative shift types (morning, afternoon
night in case of 3 shifts per day or early, day, late, night in case of 4). Fur-
thermore, for each shift type, some forbidden shift-type successions are given
(e.g. it may not be allowed to assign a nurse to any shift on the day following
a night shift apart from another night).
• Number of skills that nurses can have (e.g. head nurse, regular nurse, trainee).
Each nurse can have one or more skills, but in each working shift, she/he can
cover exactly one skill request.
• Number of contract types (e.g. full-time, part-time). For each contract type
the following information is provided: minimum and maximum total number
of assignments in the planning horizon, minimum and maximum number of
consecutive working days, and minimum number of consecutive days off.
• For each nurse, the identifier, the contract type, and the set of skills are given.
29
==PAGE:33==
Data Description
Each of the 10 week files instead constitutes an instance of a scheduling problem
and provides information regarding shift requirements and nurse preferences for
the weeks in the planning horizon. For each shift, the minimum and the optimal
requirements of nurses of each skill are given. Nurse preferences instead are expressed
by requesting to be off on a specific day.
5.2
Dataset preparation
The scenario selected for this study from the INRC II databank includes 30
nurses and has the following key features.
The shift structure comprises three 8-hour shifts per day, with one specific forbidden
shift type succession: a night shift cannot be followed by a morning or day shift,
thereby prohibiting the sequence 3-1-2. The planning horizon spans 4 weeks, total-
ing 84 shifts.
In the scenario, each nurse is assigned with 1 of 3 contract types: 12 nurses have
a full-time contract, 8 nurses have a part-time contract, and 10 have a half-time
contract. Contracts differ based on the number of minimum and maximum assign-
ments that should be scheduled during the planning horizon. The full-time contract
requires a maximum of 20 shifts and a minimum of 15 every 4 weeks. The part-time
and the half-time contracts require instead a maximum of respectively 15 and 10
shifts, and a minimum of 7 and 5. The number of maximum and minimum consec-
utive workdays are also provided, these requirements are the same for all contracts
and are respectively equal to 5 and 2 consecutive workdays. Finally, a minimum of
2 consecutive days off is required by all contracts.
The main criticality identified for the purposes of this paper consists of hav-
ing a large number of nurses employed with part-time or even half-time contracts.
Indeed, the consequential variability in the number of hours worked could make it
difficult to isolate the effects of work-related fatigue and their influence on personnel
performances, and these may be less influenced by work schedule features.
To address this issue it has been decided to modify the dataset to only have nurses
with full-time contracts. Inevitably, this operation ends up for substantially increas-
ing the number of full-time equivalents, or "coverage units", available for creating
a roster, where for "coverage unit" is intended here the availability to cover a shift
without exceeding the maximum hours envisaged by the contract; for example, in
this case a coverage unit is constituted of 8 man-hours that can be worked without
overtime. To fix the resulting imbalance between requirements and personnel avail-
ability, both the optimal and the minimum requirements of each shift have been
scaled by a constant corresponding to the ratio between the total coverage units in
the case of 30 full-time nurses and the total of the original INRC II scenario.
30
==PAGE:34==
Problem Formulation
6
Problem Formulation
The following section presents the 2 problem formulations for the nurse rostering
problem that are compared in this paper. The first formulation to be presented
is the classic problem formulation, which does not take into account fatigue and
performance factors. The second formulation is the performance-dependent problem
formulation, which builds over the first introducing the estimation of work-related
fatigue levels and performance-corrected coverage as discussed in section 4.
6.1
Classic problem formulation
In addition to the various scenarios and problem instances, the competitors
of the INRC-II were provided with a problem formulation that closely resembles
a classic nurse rostering problem. This formulation includes a series of hard and
soft constraints.
As usual, hard constraints must be always satisfied while soft
constraints can be violated, but each violation is then penalized in the objective
function. Therefore, the objective function is composed as the weighted sum of the
total violations of each soft constraint, the necessary weights were also provided
among the inputs for the competition and are reported in Table 1.
As for the dataset, the two formulations presented and compared in this paper
are built on the original INRC II formulation. The formulation described here, which
we can call the "classic" formulation, as opposed to the "performance-dependent"
formulation introduced in the following section, uses all the hard and soft constraints
from the original one from the INRC II, apart from 2 soft constraints. Firstly, the
restriction on the maximum number of consecutive days off that can be assigned to
a nurse is relaxed. This soft constraint was primarily intended to ensure a certain
consistency in the schedules of part-time and half-time nurses. It has been dropped
because the full-time contract does not impose any limits on the maximum number
of consecutive days off, rendering this constraint unnecessary for full-time employees.
Secondly, the soft constraint regarding the violations of nurse preferences for having a
certain shift off is also lifted. This adjustment aims to better isolate the differences
in terms of performance and work-related fatigue between the two formulations.
The remaining hard and soft constraints that are used in the classic formulation are
presented below.
Hard constraints:
• H1: A nurse can be assigned 1 shift per day at most.
• H2: The number of nurses for each shift for each skill must be at least equal
to the minimum requirement.
31
==PAGE:35==
Problem Formulation
• H3: The shift-type assignments of one nurse in two consecutive days must
belong to the legal successions (forbidden shift-type successions are provided
for the scenario).
• H4: If a specific skill is required for a shift, only nurses having that skill can
fulfill the shift.
Soft constraints:
• S1: If the optimal requirements for a shift are not covered, each missing nurse
is penalized.
• S2: If a nurse is assigned a number of shifts exceeding the maximum number
of contract working days over the planning horizon, each overtime shift is
penalized.
• S3: If a nurse is assigned a number of shifts inferior to the minimum number
of contract working days, each contract day not worked is penalized.
• S4: If a nurse is set to work for a number of consecutive days exceeding the
maximum number of consecutive assignments, each extra day is penalized.
• S5: If a nurse is set to work for a number of consecutive days inferior to the
minimum number of consecutive assignments, each missing day is penalized.
• S6: If a nurse is assigned a number of consecutive days off inferior to the
minimum, each missing day off is penalized.
Constraint
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
Weigth
30
20
20
30
15
30
Table 1: Soft constraints weights used in the second international nurse rostering
competition (Ceschia et al., 2015)
Analyzing the INRC II constraints we can see that they resemble some of the
realistic requirements that are commonly used for creating nurse rosters and shift
schedules in general. These scheduling policies can usually be divided into three
macro categories based on the main objective that they pursue.
Given a certain number of employees earning a fixed salary per month with extra
paid overtime, the first goal of a work schedule is usually that of ensuring adequate
coverage to all shifts so that the job can be effectively carried out; this for example
is the focus of constraints H2 and S1 in the problem formulation.
The second objective deals with limiting costs by containing overtime work and
32
==PAGE:36==
Problem Formulation
ensuring that work-related levels of fatigue and stress remain under control. This is
for example the focus of constraints H1, H3, S2, and S4.
Finally, the third objective aims at creating "fair" rosters. The concept of fairness in
scheduling science is complex and multiple definitions have been given, but in general
it is referred to as the quantification of how work is evenly distributed in terms of
the number of assignments and shift timing, and how violations to preferences are
balanced over all employees (Stolletz and Brunner, 2011).
Although built with the intent of realistically resembling the needs and chal-
lenges of work scheduling in a hospital ward, it should be noted that the INRC II
formulation does not include some important legal policies and other widely used
constraints. For example, according to the EU’s Working Time Directive, all em-
ployees working in the European Union are entitled to a minimum rest of 24 un-
interrupted hours within every seven days. Therefore, although the overall work
and the consecutive work are restricted over the planning horizon using soft con-
straints, these could be violated creating potentially illegal constraints. However,
it has been chosen not to add additional constraints to the classical formulation,
as the purpose of this paper is not that of presenting a detailed and flexible nurse
rostering scheduling model, but rather compare the results obtained with the most
used modeling practices with those achieved by using an innovative approach that
implements fatigue and performance considerations into the model.
6.2
Performance dependent formulation
As most work scheduling models, the INRC II formulation is based on the
unrealistic assumption that human performances are constant, meaning that when
calculating the coverage of a shift no difference is made between a shift covered by a
well-rested employee coming from a day off and a highly fatigued one, who instead
is coming from two consecutive night shifts.
The performance-dependent formulation (PDF) proposed in this paper builds on
the original INRC II formulation and aims to address this issue by implement-
ing the work-related fatigue model presented in section 4 for the calculation of a
performance-corrected shift coverage variable.
For each nurse, a fatigue score is calculated recursively every shift using Equa-
tions 13 to 16 in section 4. Based on this score, an estimated performance level is
calculated using Equation 17. This implies that when a nurse reaches a degree of
accumulated work-related fatigue corresponding to a score of 40, which is equivalent
to the peak level of fatigue caused by a standard work week of 5 working days from
9:00 to 17:00, the shift coverage that said nurse is able to provide starts decreasing
because of the physiological performance drop.
33
==PAGE:37==
Problem Formulation
The decrease of the shift coverage that the nurse can ensure continues linearly until
the fatigue score reaches the level of 80, at which various physical and cognitive per-
formance indicators are equivalent to those caused by an alcohol intoxication caused
by roughly 0.07 grams of alcohol per deciliter of blood (note that the proscribed level
for driving a vehicle in most European countries corresponds to a BAC of 0.05).
Therefore, in terms of soft constraints, the PDF retains all the soft constraints
(S1 to S6) of the classic formulation.
However, the constraint penalizing if the
optimal requirements for the coverage of a shift are not met is changed substan-
tially. This ensures that the penalization is not calculated in terms of how many
personnel elements are missing to reach the optimal coverage, but instead keeps
into account the level of effectiveness of each nurse assigned in order to optimize
the "performance-corrected" coverage variable of each shift. Additionally, the PDF
inherits all the hard constraints (H1 to H4) of the classic formulation and adds sev-
eral new ones to manage the fatigue score and compute the performance-corrected
coverage.
To reduce computational time, the model calculates the fatigue score only at
the end of each shift instead of on an hourly basis as reported in Equation 15 and
17 of section 4. A shift is here defined as any period equivalent to the duration of a
typical work shift. This approach ensures that even if a worker is scheduled to rest
for one or more shifts, the fatigue score is computed consistently at these regular
intervals.
Calculating the fatigue score at the end of each shift allows us to use the average
of the fatigue accumulation rate function found in section 4 (which is reported in
Equation 17 for better clarity) for the hours when the shift occurs, instead of using
the continuous value.
For example, given a scheduling system with S shifts per day, the length of each
shift in hours can be expressed as 24/S and the average fatigue accumulation rate
for a shift starting at hour h, ah, is given by Equation 19.
c(t) = sin
2π
24 · (t + 1)

+ 10
3
(17)
ah =
R h+24/S
h
c(t)dt
24/S
(18)
Therefore, knowing the fatigue score at the end of previous shift f(h −1), we
34
==PAGE:38==
Problem Formulation
can simply calculate the score at the end of shift h as:
f(h) = f(h −1) + ah ∗S
24
This procedure can be done without any significant loss of information regarding the
calculated fatigue levels, as the fatigue score is by definition computed recursively
as the sum over a certain period of the fatigue accumulation rate, which in other
words corresponds to the area under the circadian curve c(t). This equivalence is
expressed in discrete terms by the following equations:
ah =
Pt=h+24/S
t=h
c(t)
24/S
f(h + 24/S) = f(h −1) +
c(t)
X
t=h
= f(h −1) + ah · 24
S
(19)
Adopting this approach requires of course knowledge of the number of shifts
per day and the specific starting and ending hours for each shift as dictated by the
scheduling system. For the INRC II multiple scheduling systems have been provided
changing from dataset to dataset, with a number of shifts per day varying between
2 and 4. However, every dataset does not provide information regarding the specific
start and end times of the shifts.
Garde et al. (2019) have analyzed the organization of working hours in the Northern
European countries, finding that in all three populations of Denmark, Norway, and
Finnland the majority (> 40%) of morning shifts among nurses started at 7:00,
which is also the time where night shifts ended, and the traditional scheduling
system arranges the day into three 8-h shifts. Therefore the dataset for this paper
has been selected among those presenting 3 shifts per day, and it will be assumed
from now on that the morning, afternoon, and night shifts start respectively at 7:00,
15:00, and 23:00. The average fatigue accumulation rates derived are reported in
Table 2.
Shift
Morning (07-15)
Afternoon (15-22)
Night (23-07)
Average fatigue
accumulation rate
3.442
2.567
3.991
Table 2: Average fatigue accumulation rates for shifts starting at 07:00, 15:00, and
23:00 calculated using the model work-related fatigue model derived in section 4
35
==PAGE:39==
MIP model definition
7
MIP model definition
In the following section the classic and the performance-dependent formulations
are presented as MIP models. Since the 2 models share the general structure and
most constraints they are presented together. Parameters, variables, and constraints
that are common to both formulations are presented first, while the ones that should
be added to obtain the PDF will be reported at the end of each section.
7.1
Definition of sets
Table 3 presents the notation used for sets necessary for both the classical and
the performance-dependent formulation. These include sets for nurses (N), shift
types spanning a 24-hour day (S), days constituting the scheduling horizon (D), and
skills that each nurse can possess (SK).
Finally, F is defined as the set of forbidden shift type successions (in this case the
only forbidden succession is 3-2-1).
Symbol
Description
N
Set of nurses (n)
S
Set of shifts (s) occurring during a single day
D
Set of days in the scheduling horizon (d)
SK
Set of skills that can be possessed by each nurse (sk)
F
Set containing couples of forbidden shift type successions
Table 3: Symbol of sets for the classical formulation and the PDF
Table 4 reports instead the notation indicating the sets that are only required
for the performance-dependent formulation.
Symbol
Description
H
Set of shifts counted progressively for the whole
scheduling horizon (|H| = |S| · |D|)
H1
Set of morning shifts (1,4,...)
H2
Set of afternooon shifts (2,5,...)
H3
Set of night shifts (3,6,...)
Table 4: Symbols of sets for the performance-dependent formulation
36
==PAGE:40==
MIP model definition
7.2
Definition of parameters
Table 5 reports the notation used for indicating the parameters for both the
classical and the performance-dependent formulations. Table 6 reports instead the
additional parameters used for the PDF.
Symbol
Description
Rmin
s,d,sk
Minimum number of nurses with skill sk
required for covering shift s on day d
Ropt
s,d,sk
Optimal number of nurses with skill sk required
for covering shift s on day d
Amax
n
Maximum number of assignments for nurse n
over the entire scheduling horizon
Amin
n
Minimum number of assignments for nurse n
over the entire scheduling horizon
cW max
n
Maximum number of consecutive work days
envisaged by contract for nurse n
cW min
n
Minimum number of consecutive work days
envisaged by contract for nurse n
cOmax
n
Maximum number of consecutive days off for nurse n
required by contract
cOmin
n
Minimum number of consecutive days off for nurse n
required by contract
skilln,sk
Matrix of binary values indicating if nurse n
possess skill sk
Table 5: Symbols representing paramaters used by the classical formulation and
PDF
Parameter
Description
a1
Average fatigue accumulation rate for the morning shift
a2
Average fatigue accumulation rate for the day shift
a3
Average fatigue accumulation rate for the morning shift
Table 6: Symbols for parameters used in the PDF
37
==PAGE:41==
MIP model definition
7.3
Definition of variables
7.3.1
Variables used in both formulations
Let N, S, D, and SK be the sets of nurses, shift types, days and skills as
reported in Table 3. Equation 20 defines the binary decision variable xn,s,d,sk that
states whether nurse n is scheduled to work shift type s on day d in a role requiring
a certain skill sk.
The sets of auxiliary variables, yn,s,d, zn,d, on,d, are then defined respectively in
Equation 21, 22, and 23. Variable y denotes if a nurse is scheduled to work a certain
shift type on a certain day regardless of the assigned role/skill; variables z and o
instead denote if a certain day d is scheduled to be on or off for a nurse.
xn,s,d,sk =
1 if nurse n works shift type s on day d requiring skill sk
0 otherwise
(20)
yn,s,d =
1 if nurse n works shift type s on day d
0 otherwise
(21)
zn,d =
1 if nurse n works any shift type on day d
0 otherwise
(22)
on,d =
1 if nurse n is scheduled to be off d
0 otherwise
(23)
Additionally, the auxiliary variables lw
n,d and lo
n,d are defined in Equation 24 and
Equation 25. These variables denote respectively, if a certain day d is scheduled to
be the last work day (or last day off) before having one or more days off (or one or
more work days). For example, if a nurse n is scheduled to work on day d, and at
the same time is scheduled to be free on day d + 1, then the binary variable lw
n,d will
assume the value of 1. These two auxiliary variables are required in order to model
limitations on minimum consecutive work days and minimum consecutive days off
using linear constraints.
lw
n,d =



1
if day d is scheduled to be the last work day for nurse n
before having one or more days off
0
otherwise
(24)
38
==PAGE:42==
MIP model definition
lo
n,d =



1
if day d is scheduled to be the last day off for nurse n
before working one or more days after
0
otherwise
(25)
Table 7 presents the notation for the variables used for quantifying deviations
from the optimal requirements of the schedule. All variables are used in both the
classic formulation and the PDF.
Variable
Description
V (Ropt)s,d,sk ≥0
Violation of optimal requirements of nurses
with skill sk for shift s on day d
oTn ≥0
Denotes the number of overtime days worked by nurse n
over the planning horizon
uTn ≥0
Denotes the number of contract days of nurse n not used
in the schedule
V (cW max)n,d ∈0, 1
Denotes if nurse n works on day d in violation
of the maximum consecutive work-days rule
V (cW min)n,d ∈0, 1
Denotes if the minimum consecutive work-days rule
is violated by scheduling nurse n to be off on day d+1
V (cOmax)n,d ∈0, 1
Denotes if nurse n is scheduled to be off on day d
in violation of the maximum consecutive days off rule
V (cOmin)n,d ∈0, 1
Denotes if the minimum consecutive days off rule
is violated by scheduling nurse n to work on day d+1
Table 7: Variables used in the MIP model for denoting violations to soft constraints
7.3.2
Variables used only in the performance-dependent formulation
Table 8 reports the variables that should be added to the classical formulation
to get the PDF. In particular variables fn,h and pn,h are introduced to model the
fatigue score and the performance level of nurse n at the and of shift h (shifts are
here counted progressively).
39
==PAGE:43==
MIP model definition
Variable
Description
wn,h ∈0, 1
Denotes if nurse n is scheduled
to work on shift h (shift are counted progressively
from 1 to |S| ∗|D| over the planning horizon
0 ≤fn,h ≤80
Denotes the fatigue score of nurse n
at the end of shift h
0 ≤pn,h ≤1
Denotes the performance level of nurse n
at the end of shift h
uh,sk
Denotes the performance-corrected undercoverage
for shift h and skill sk
Table 8: Variables used in the MIP model of the performance-dependent formulation
7.4
Constraints for setting the value of auxiliary variables
The following linear constraints are included in the model for both formulations
in order to set the values of auxiliary variables defined in Equations 21 to 25. The
values of these variables can all be uniquely defined based on the value of the binary
decision variable xn,s,d,sk.
Equation 26 and 27 determine the values of the binary variables y and z for each
nurse. The use of the equal sign is justified by the hard constraint enforcing that
each nurse can be assigned a maximum of one assignment per day, as explained in
subsection 7.5. Consequently, while the sum of the variable x over shifts and skills
could theoretically exceed 1, this possibility is prevented by the "single assignment
per day" constraint, ensuring that the sum is always less than or equal to 1.
Equation 28 sets the value of the binary variable o, which is defined as the logical
negation of the auxiliary variable z.
yn,s,d =
X
sk∈SK
xn,s,d,sk
∀n ∈N, s ∈S, d ∈D
(26)
zn,d =
X
s∈S
X
sk∈SK
xn,s,d,sk
∀n ∈N, d ∈D
(27)
on,d = 1 −zn,d
∀n ∈N, d ∈D
(28)
Equation 29, 30, 31 and 32 determine the value of the binary variable lw
n,d, which
indicates if a working day d is followed by a day off for nurse n. This condition is
modeled as a "logical AND" between variables zn,d and on,d+1 as reported in the
equations. Lastly, in Equation 13, the variable lw
n,d is set to zero for all nurses on
40
==PAGE:44==
MIP model definition
the last day of the planning horizon as, even in the case that this is scheduled as
a work day for certain nurses, it is impossible to know if that will be followed by a
free day in the schedule for the next planning period.
The same logic is used in setting the value for the binary variable lo
n,d, as reported
in Equation 33 to 36.
lw
n,d ≤zn,d
∀n ∈N, d ∈D
(29)
lw
n,d ≤on,d+1
∀n ∈N, d ∈[1 : (|D| −1)]
(30)
lw
n,d ≥zn,d + on,d+1 −1
∀n ∈N, d ∈[1 : (|D| −1)]
(31)
lw
n,|D| = 0
∀n ∈N
(32)
lo
n,d ≤on,d
∀n ∈N, d ∈D
(33)
lo
n,d ≤zn,d+1
∀n ∈N, d ∈[1 : (|D| −1)]
(34)
lo
n,d ≥on,d + zn,d+1 −1
∀n ∈N, d ∈[1 : (|D| −1)]
(35)
lo
n,|D| = 0
∀n ∈N
(36)
7.5
Hard constraints
In this section a mathematical representation of the hard constraints is given
as reported in subsection 6.1 and subsection 6.2. Constraints that are common to
both formulations are presented first, then are presented the constraints that should
be added to obtain the PDF.
7.5.1
Hard constraints used in both formulations
Equation 37 ensures that each nurse is assigned a maximum of one shift per day
regardless of the skill covered. Equation 38 instead, ensures that a nurse can cover
a certain role for a shift, only if he/she is in possess of the specific skill required.
Equation 39 ensures that the minimum requirements of personnel are met for each
shift of each day of the planning horizon, both in terms of number of nurses and
required skills.
Finally, Equation 40 ensures that if a nurse has been scheduled to work a night on
day d −1, he/she cannot be scheduled to work any shift type on the following day,
apart from another night. It should be noted that this constraint is ensured from
the second day of the planning horizon as the previous work history of the nurses
is not taken into account in this model. Furthermore, in the set of shifts S, the last
41
==PAGE:45==
MIP model definition
shift (|S|) will always be a night shift by construction of the model, therefore the
constraint assumes in effect the form reported in the equation.
H1. Single assignment per day
X
s∈S
X
sk∈SK
xn,s,d,sk ≤1
∀n ∈N, d ∈D
(37)
H2. Aligning required skills
xn,s,d,sk ≤skilln,sk
∀n ∈N, s ∈S, d ∈D, sk ∈SK
(38)
H3. Under-staffing
X
n∈N
xn,s,d,sk ≥Rmin
s,d,sk
∀s ∈S, d ∈D, sk ∈SK
(39)
H4. Forbidden shift types succession
yn,s,d ≤1 −yn,3,(d−1)
∀n ∈N, s ∈[1 : 2], d ∈[2 : |D|]
(40)
7.5.2
Hard constraints used only in the performance-dependent formu-
lation
Auxiliary variable wn,h
Equation 41 maps the shift assignments from the notation specifying day and
shift type to the notation specifying only the shift number when shifts are counted
progressively from the first to the last shift of the planning horizon.
Note that
the mapping is done by calculating h as h = s + |S|(d −1) where |S| and d are
respectively the number of shifts per day and the day for which the calculation is
done.
wn,h = yn,s,d
∀n ∈N, s ∈S, d ∈D, and h = s + |S| · (d −1)
(41)
Fatigue score calculation
Equations 42-45 calculate the fatigue score for every nurse at the end of each
shift using the method presented in subsection 6.2.
In particular, Equation 42 initializes the value of the score for the shift of the first
day. In Equation 42 it is assumed that the initial fatigue score at the beginning of
42
==PAGE:46==
MIP model definition
the planning horizon is equal to zero, but this assumption could easily be changed
by using another parameter for the initialization, e.g. values from the day before
the roster starts.
fn,1 = 0 + a1 · wn,1 · 24
|S|
∀n ∈N
(42)
fn,h ≥fn,h−1+a1·wn,h· 24
|S| −ν ·a1·(1−wn,h)· 24
|S|
∀n ∈N,
∀h ∈H1\1 (43)
fn,h ≥fn,h−1 + a2 · wn,h · 24
|S| −ν · a2 · (1 −wn,h) · 24
|S|
∀n ∈N,
∀h ∈H2 (44)
fn,h ≥fn,h−1 + a3 · wn,h · 24
|S| −ν · a3 · (1 −wn,h) · 24
|S|
∀n ∈N,
∀h ∈H3 (45)
Performance level calculation
Equations 46-47 calculate the performance level of every nurse for a shift h,
corresponding to the performance-corrected coverage that the nurse can provide for
that shift.
pn,h ≤2 −1
40 · fn,h
∀n ∈N, h ∈H
(46)
pn,h ≤xn,s,d,sk
∀n ∈N, s ∈S, d ∈D, sk ∈SK, and ∀h = s + |S| · (d −1)
(47)
7.6
Soft constraints
In this section, a mathematical formulation of the soft constraints as reported
in subsection 6.1 and subsection 6.2 is given.
As usual, first are presented soft
constraints that are common to both formulations and then the ones that should be
added to obtain the PDF.
7.6.1
Soft constraints used in both formulations
S1. Insufficient staffing for optimal coverage (undercoverage)
Equation 48 calculates the difference between the number of required personnel
and the scheduled nurses for every shift.
43
==PAGE:47==
MIP model definition
V (Ropt)s,d,sk ≥Ropt
s,d,sk −
X
n∈N
xn,s,d,sk
∀s ∈S, d ∈D, sk ∈SK
(48)
S2. Overtime
Equation 49 counts the number of overtime days scheduled for each nurse.
oTn ≥
X
s∈S
X
d∈D
yn,s,d −Amax
n
∀n ∈N
(49)
S3. Insufficient utilization of work-force, under-scheduling
Equation 50 calculates the difference between the number of working days en-
visaged by the contract and the number of scheduled working days.
uTn ≥Amin
n
−
X
s∈S
X
d∈D
yn,s,d
∀n ∈N
(50)
S4. Violation of limit on maximum consecutive work days
The parameter cW max
n
denotes the maximum number of consecutive workdays
that should be scheduled. Equation 51 counts the number of violations to this rule
using a moving sum. For example if cW max
n
= 5, each day the difference between
the sum of workdays in the previous 6 days and 5 is calculated . This difference can
be at most 1, therefore if the rule is violated the variable V (cW max)n,d is forced to
1.
V (cW max)n,d ≥
d
X
d=d−cW max
n
zn,d −cW max
n
∀n ∈N, d ∈[(1+cW max
n
) : |D|] (51)
V (cW max)n,d = 0
∀n ∈N, d ∈[(1 : cW max
n
)]
(52)
S5. Violation of limit on minimum consecutive work days
The parameter cW min
n
denotes the minimum number of consecutive workdays
that should be scheduled. Equation 53 counts the violations to this rule using a
"Big M constraint". For example, if the minimum number of consecutive work days
is 2, the variable V (cW min)n,d is forced to be greater than 0 if on the last day of
work before a day off the sum of the previous consecutive workdays is less then 2.
This happens as the last term of the equation becomes zero on the last day of each
44
==PAGE:48==
MIP model definition
streak of consecutive workdays.
V (cW min)n,d ≥cW min
n
−
d
X
d+1−cW min
n
zn,d −(M · (1 −lw
n,d))
∀n ∈N, d ∈[cW min
n
: |D|]
(53)
V (cW min)n,d = 0
∀n ∈N, d ∈[1 : (cW min
n
−1)]
(54)
S6. Violation of limit on minimum consecutive days off
The parameter cOmin
n
denotes the minimum number of consecutive days off
that should be scheduled. Equation 55 counts the violations to this rule applying
the same logic used for the minimum number of consecutive workdays.
V (cOmin)n,d ≥cOmin
n
−
d
X
d+1−cOmin
n
on,d −(M · (1 −lo
n,d))
∀n ∈N, d ∈[cOmin
n
: |D|]
(55)
V (cOmin)n,d = 0
∀n ∈N, d ∈[1 : (cOmin
n
−1)]
(56)
7.6.2
Soft constraint used only in the performance-dependent formula-
tion
As explained in subsection 6.2, the only difference between the PDF and the
classical formulation in terms of soft constraints is represented by how the undercov-
erage is calculated. If in the classical formulation, this is computed as the difference
between the optimal requirement for a shift and the number of assigned personnel;
in the PDF the undercoverage value is precautionarily corrected based on the per-
formance level that each assigned nurse has at the end of the shift. The performance
level, which is defined in turn based on the fatigue score calculated at the end of the
shift, starts decreasing linearly from p = 1(100%) at a score f = 40 until it reaches
p = 0 when f = 80, as explained in section 4.
Therefore Equation 57 is used for computing the performance-corrected undercov-
erage as the difference between the requirement and the overall performance level
that the scheduled personnel can assure.
45
==PAGE:49==
MIP model definition
Performance-corrected undercoverage
uh >=
X
sk∈SK
Ropt
h,sk −
N
X
n=1
pn,h
∀h ∈H
(57)
7.7
Objective function
From a theoretical point of view, both formulations are multi-objective opti-
mization problems where the objectives are constituted by the minimization of the
total number of violations of each soft constraint (relative equations are summarized
in Table 9) as reported in Equations 58-59. The only difference between the two
objectives is that in the PDF the term expressing the difference between the optimal
requirements and the allocated personnel (∆1) is substituted by the performance-
corrected undercoverage (∆′
1).
Since this general representation does not assume linearity, it is not possible to solve
the problem as is. Therefore, to be able to use standard methods for single-objective
optimization problems, a commonly applied technique consists of using a Weighted
Sum Scalarization (WSS). The WSS of the objective function of the classical and
PDF formulations is reported in Equations 60-61.
Objective functions for the classical and performance-dependent prob-
lems expressed using the multiobjective formulation:
min (∆1, ∆2, ∆3, ∆4, ∆5, ∆6)
(58)
min (∆′
1, ∆2, ∆3, ∆4, ∆5, ∆6)
(59)
Weighted sum scalarization:
min
6
X
i=1
wi∆i
(60)
min w′
1 · ∆′
1 +
6
X
i=2
wi∆i
(61)
46
==PAGE:50==
MIP model definition
Soft constraint
Total number of violations
S1
(undercoverage)
∆1 = P
s∈S
P
d∈D
P
sk∈SK V (Ropt)s,d,sk
S2
(overtime)
∆2 = P
n∈N oTn
S3
(underscheduling)
∆3 = P
n∈N uTn
S4 (maximum number
of consecutive workdays)
∆4 = P
n∈N
P
d∈D V (cW max)n,d
S5 (minimum number
of consecutive workdays)
∆5 = P
n∈N
P
d∈D V (cW min)n,d
S6 (minimum number of
consecutive days off)
∆6 = P
n∈N
P
d∈D V (cOmin)n,d
(Performance-corrected undercoverage)
∆′
1 = P
h∈H uh
Table 9: Total number of violations for each soft constraint
47
==PAGE:51==
Experimental methodology
8
Experimental methodology
The focus of the experimental study that constitutes the second part of this
thesis is that of evaluating the potential of the performance-dependent model to
generate better schedules in terms of ergonomics and practical utility if compared
to the solutions obtained using the classic model.
When discussing the optimal solutions to complex personnel scheduling problems,
like in our case, it is important to acknowledge first that these are usually multi-
objective optimization problems where individual objectives often conflict with one
another. As a result, we cannot assume the existence of a single solution that min-
imizes all objectives simultaneously. Thus, the concept of a single optimal solution
is not applicable in a multi-criteria setting. Instead, we can at best identify a set
of feasible solutions called Pareto optimal solutions, which are solutions where no
objective can be further improved without degrading some other objective(s).
Specifically, if we have a multi-objective minimization problem:
min(f1(x), f2(x), ..., fn(x))
s.t. x ∈X
where X is the space of feasible solutions, we say that a solution x dominates another
solution y if fi(x) ≤fi(y) ∀i ∈[1 : n] and ∃j ∈[1 : n] : fj(x) < fj(y). Thus, a
Pareto optimal solution is a solution that no other solution dominates, and we refer
to the set of all Pareto optimal solutions as the "Pareto frontier". Figure 6 displays
an example of a Pareto frontier for a bi-objective optimization problem, where the
green points are the undominated solutions.
Figure 6: Example of a Pareto frontier for a multi-objective optimization problem
with two objective functions (Di Somma, 2016)
48
==PAGE:52==
Experimental methodology
Without any further information, we cannot differentiate between the Pareto
optimal solutions with regard to optimality. In fact, it is usually up to the decision
maker to decide which objective to assign the most "weight" based on the perceived
trade-offs between all the others and choose the solution that better interprets these
trade-offs. Therefore, the weighted sum scalarization is generally considered the
"standard" approach for tackling multi-objective optimization problems (Branke
et al., 2008), as this not only allows for solving multi-objective optimization problems
using classic OR techniques developed for single-objective models, but also closely
resembles the decision-making process allowing to easily control the values of the
weights. However, selecting the appropriate weights to reflect the decision maker’s
preferences is not a trivial task, and it becomes increasingly difficult as the trade-offs
between different objectives become more significant. Therefore, if the performance-
dependent formulation can be proven to reduce some of the trade-offs present in the
classic model, its potential benefits would be substantial.
In order to evaluate the differences between the classic and the performance-
dependent model, two experiments are conducted.
The first experiment consists of bench-marking the solutions obtained with the
performance-dependent model to the classic model’s schedules for the 10 instances
of the dataset using the set of fixed weights provided for the INRC II. This analysis
also allows us to get an initial overview of the trade-offs between the different ob-
jectives in the two models.
The second experiment, instead, uses the first instance of the dataset and con-
centrates on the evaluation of the trade-offs between coverage, overtime, and con-
secutive workdays. This is done by decomposing the multi-objective problem into
sub-problems having only two objective functions, in order to facilitate the calcu-
lation and visualization of the Pareto frontier as proposed by Engau and Wiecek
(2007). To get a sample of the Pareto optimal solutions, the weights of the two
objectives in the weighted sum are then systematically varied and the dominated
solutions are discarded. This approach is guaranteed to find Pareto optimal solu-
tions in the case of a weighted sum scalarization with a set of non-negative weights
wi (Ehrgott, 2005).
49
==PAGE:53==
Results
9
Results
9.1
Comparison of rosters obtained using classic vs.
performance-dependent model
The following section presents the numerical results obtained by running the
classic model and compares them to those obtained with the performance-dependent
model for the 10 instances of the dataset. The weights used for the objective func-
tions are fixed and equal to the ones provided for the INRC II reported in subsec-
tion 5.1, Table 1. When running the performance-dependent model the weight used
in the objective function for the performance-corrected undercoverage has been kept
equal to the one used for the deviation from the optimal requirements in the classic
model, i.e. w1 = w′
1 = 30.
9.1.1
Coverage
Figure 7 presents the levels of classic and performance-corrected undercoverage
with respect to the optimal requirements obtained with the classic model, where for
classic undercoverage it is here intended the difference between the optimal require-
ment and the allocated personnel. Since this model optimizes classic undercoverage
without considering the fatigue-caused performance reduction, the fatigue scores
and the performance-corrected undercoverage are calculated ex-post by applying
the fatigue model to the resulting solution.
The first thing that can be noticed is how the performance-corrected undercov-
erage (red) is considerably higher if compared to the classic undercoverage (blue).
This means that a consistent number of shifts are scheduled to be covered by nurses
presenting work-related fatigue scores well above the threshold of 40 relative points.
The consequential performance reduction causes potential undercoverage levels that
are even higher than the maximum undercoverage allowed to meet the minimum
coverage requirements (black dotted line). If we compare these results to the ones
obtained with the performance-dependent model presented in Figure 8, we can see
that using this model it is possible to optimize the performance-corrected under-
coverage and considerably close the gap with the classic undercoverage, therefore
reducing the fatigue-caused performance reduction. Furthermore, this can be done
without losing too much in terms of classic undercoverage compared to what is
achieved when this is explicitly optimized, meaning that this reduction in fatigue,
and parallel performance improvement, is mainly obtained by a better arrangement
of work and rest times and shifts distribution, as otherwise, we would see a consistent
increase in the deviation between the requirements and the assigned personnel.
50
==PAGE:54==
Results
Figure 7: Classic (blue) and performance-corrected (red) percentage of undercover-
age with respect to the optimal coverage requirements obtained solving the classic
formulation model for 10 instances
Figure 8: Classic (blue) and performance-corrected (red) percentage of undercov-
erage with respect to the optimal coverage requirements obtained solving the PDF
model for 10 instances
51
==PAGE:55==
Results
9.1.2
Overtime
Figure 9 presents the average number of overtime shifts assigned to each nurse
obtained by solving each instance with the classic (blue line) and performance-
dependent (red line) models.
It is clear from the graph that the classic model consistently tends to assign more
overtime shifts, as it doesn’t consider the resulting work-related fatigue and subse-
quent performance reduction. However, this difference is relatively small, ranging
from 0.4 to 0.6 additional overtime shifts per nurse assigned by the classic model.
Thus, it can be concluded that the performance-dependent model’s optimization
primarily involves a general rearrangement of the schedule rather than a substantial
reduction in total hours worked and it’s mainly thanks to the resulting reduction in
work-related fatigue, that it is possible to achieve lower levels of undercoverage.
Moreover, reducing the overall amount of scheduled overtime shifts while si-
multaneously improving performance-corrected coverage creates a win-win situation
from an economic standpoint. Theoretically, in fact, this approach should allow
for maintaining or even enhancing personnel effectiveness without increasing salary
expenses due to overtime payments.
Figure 9: Average number of overtime shifts per nurse obtained solving the classic
(blue) and the performance-dependent (red) models for 10 instances
9.1.3
Maximum number of consecutive workdays
Figure 10 shows the average number of violations of the maximum consecutive
workdays soft constraint obtained when running the classic model (blue) and the
performance-dependent model (red) for the 10 instances of the dataset.
52
==PAGE:56==
Results
Once again, the numerical results clearly show how the classic model has a tendency
to schedule long streaks of consecutive workdays, with a majority of nurses on the
roster that are scheduled with at least a long week of more than 5 workdays over
the 4-week planning horizon in all the 10 instances. This choice is primarily made
by the model to reach higher levels of coverage, but it doesn’t keep into account the
resulting work-related fatigue increase.
On the other hand, the performance-dependent model tends to systematically
avoid any violation to the maximum consecutive workdays rule, and provides a
solution with zero violations of this soft constraint for 5 out of 10 instances, with
the remaining still below 0.2 violations per nurse, which means that less than 6 nurses
out of 30 are scheduled with a streak of workdays longer than 5. This tendency can
be explained by the fact that minimizing the performance-corrected undercoverage
at least partially eliminates the trade-off existing between coverage and consecutive
workdays. In fact, thanks to how the fatigue model is designed, scheduling more
than 5 consecutive workdays inevitably results in a fatigue score at the end of the
sixth shift comprised between 49 relative points for 6 consecutive day shifts, and 104
for 6 consecutive nights; meaning that even with the best possible combination of 6
consecutive day shifts the performance level during the sixth shift would be reduced
by around 23 %.
Figure 10:
Average number of violations of the maximum number of consecu-
tive workdays per nurse obtained solving the classic (blue) and the performance-
dependent (red) models for 10 instances
53
==PAGE:57==
Results
9.1.4
Minimum number of consecutive days off
Figure 11 shows the average number of violations of the minimum consecutive
days off rule per nurse obtained running the two models for the 10 instances of the
dataset.
This time the situation presented for the previous soft constraints is reversed, with
the performance-dependent model providing optimal solutions that systematically
violate the rule more than 1.5 times per nurse, while the classic model provides
solutions with zero violations to this soft constraint for all 10 instances. This means
that, considering the low level of overtime of the performance-dependent model so-
lutions reported in Figure 9 above, around 2 out of 7-8 days off for each nurse are
assigned as a single day. This lack of consistency can be interpreted by considering
2 main causes.
The first of these reasons consists of the following inequality that holds between the
classic (∆1) and the performance-corrected undercoverage (∆′
1): ∆′
1 ≥∆1. There-
fore, since the performance-corrected undercoverage is generally higher, this tends
to be optimized by the model at the expense of other objectives.
The second cause, instead, relies once again on the fatigue model characteristics.
In general, it is in fact sufficient to completely recover from a work-related fatigue
score of around 40 in a period between 24 and 32 hours, hence the model tends
to schedule a single day off as this allows enough fatigue recovery to reset the per-
formance level of the nurse above 95%. Therefore, the objective of minimizing the
performance-corrected undercoverage and that of minimizing the violations to the
minimum number of consecutive days off soft constraint present a potential trade-
off, that becomes more consistent the more consecutive days off are required by the
contract.
54
==PAGE:58==
Results
Figure 11: Average number of violations of the minimum number of consecutive days
off per nurse obtained solving the classic (blue) and the performance-dependent (red)
models for 10 instances
9.1.5
Underscheduling and minimum consecutive workdays
The remaining objectives, i.e.
the minimization of the deviations from the
minimum number of total assignments (underscheduling) and from the minimum
number of consecutive workdays rule do not present significant differences between
the two models in terms of provided solutions.
In fact, for all the 10 instances in the dataset, both models provide solutions where
all nurses are assigned to a number of shifts consistently higher than the minimum
required by the contract (15) and the minimum consecutive workdays (2) rule is
never violated: i.e. ∆3 = ∆5 = 0 for all instances and solutions.
These results cannot be generalized, as tightening the soft constraints, for ex-
ample by increasing the minimum number of total assignments or the minimum
number of consecutive workdays, could potentially result in some violations, but for
a workforce where the majority of the personnel has a full-time contract, these two
constraints are intuitively quite easy to satisfy and do not present trade-offs with
any of the other objectives, as it is always possible to schedule more assignments
without breaking any other constraint.
55
==PAGE:59==
Results
9.2
Trade-offs analysis
The following section analyzes the difference in terms of trade-offs between the
performance-dependent and the classic model. The trade-offs that are included are
the one between coverage and overtime and the one between coverage and limit on
consecutive workdays.
The analysis has been done using pairwise comparisons. Each pairwise compar-
ison is carried out by systematically varying the weights of the 2 objective functions
while all other weights are set to zero. For example, to establish the Pareto frontier
between undercoverage and overtime for the classic model, we take the weighted sum
scalarization of the objective function reported in Equation 62 and set all weights
to zero apart for undercoverage and overtime: wi = 0 ∀i = [3 : 6].
min
6
X
i=1
wi∆i
(62)
Then, we systematically vary the remaining weights setting w2 = 1 −w1 with
0 ≤w1 ≤1 and we look for the interval of w1 values for which the two objectives
change. To do this we first run the model with w1 = 1 to get the best possible
optimal solution for undercoverage, ∆∗
1, and we do the same for the overtime by
setting w1 = 0 to get ∆∗
2. Then we use a bisection method for searching the smallest
possible w1 (w1) so that ∆1 = ∆∗
1 and we do the same for finding the highest
possible w1, (w1 )to still get ∆2 = ∆∗
2. In this way we ensure that all solutions
where w1 < w1 ∨w1 > w1 are dominated; e.g. in case of solutions with w1 > w1 the
undercoverage value would be equal to ∆∗
1, as this is the best possible solution, but
the value of overtime would be higher than ∆∗
2, as w2 = 1 −w1 and therefore w2
would be lower.
Finally, to get a sample of the solutions in the Pareto frontier we divide the interval
[w1 : w1] into n steps and we run the model for each resulting value of w1 (and w2)
removing the dominated solutions.
This procedure is carried out for both models for each of the 2 trade-offs resulting
in 4 Pareto frontiers, with the only difference that n = 50 is used in the case of
the classic model and n = 15 is used for the performance-dependent model due to
higher solving times.
56
==PAGE:60==
Results
9.2.1
Trade-off between coverage and overtime
Figure 12 shows the Pareto frontier (blue line) between classic undercoverage,
i.e. the percentage difference between optimal requirements and the allocated num-
ber of personnel, and overtime expressed as a percentage of the maximum hours
allowed by contract for all nurses, obtained solving the classic model. The trend
is clearly linear, showing that increasing the overtime work improves coverage up
to a level where it is almost possible to effectively cover all optimal requirements.
However, if we look to the red graph representing performance-corrected undercov-
erage, which is calculated ex-post based on the work-related fatigue scores caused
by each schedule, it is possible to see that this doesn’t show the same decreasing
trend. On the contrary, after a brief reduction, the curve has a minimum at around
1.9% of overtime but then starts to slowly increase, reaching levels that are even
above the maximum allowed undercover required to meet the minimum coverage
requirements (black dotted line). This phenomenon is again explicable because of
the increased levels of accumulated work-related fatigue caused by high amounts of
overtime, which in turn causes the performance-corrected coverage not to increase
despite scheduling more nurses on duty per shift.
Figure 12: Pareto frontier (blue line) between undercoverage percentage and over-
time, showing the trade-off between the two objectives when solving the classic
model. Red line is the performance-corrected undercoverage calculated a posteriori.
Black line is the maximum undercoverage allowed to satisfy the minimum require-
ments
57
==PAGE:61==
Results
Figure 13: Pareto frontier (red line) between performance-corrected undercoverage
percentage and overtime, showing the trade-off between the two objectives when
solving the performance-dependent model. Blue line is the undercoverage calcu-
lated a posteriori. Black line is the maximum undercoverage allowed to satisfy the
minimum requirements
Figure 13 presents instead the Pareto frontier (red line) between the performance-
corrected undercoverage, i.e. the difference between the optimal requirements and
the overall performance level of the allocated personnel, and the percentage of over-
time, obtained by solving the performance-dependent model. Comparing these re-
sults to the ones obtained with the classic model, two key points can be noted.
First, the gap between the classic undercoverage (blue line, calculated ex-post)
and the performance-corrected undercoverage is significantly reduced, at least until
reaching a level of overtime of around 6%. This reduction can be attributed to
the arrangement of shifts in a manner that limits the accumulation of work-related
fatigue, ensuring that a nurse’s expected performance level remains close to optimal
when scheduled.
Secondly, if we compare the gradient of the Pareto frontier of classic under-
coverage in Figure 12 with respect to overtime, to the gradient the Pareto frontier
of performance-corrected undercoverage in Figure 13 , it is clear that the letter is
lower. Using an economic analogy, it can be said that the marginal rate of substi-
tution (MRS) between classic undercoverage and overtime is higher than the MRS
between performance-dependent undercoverage and overtime. Since the MRS can
58
==PAGE:62==
Results
be seen as a measure of the trade-off between 2 quantities, this indicates that the
performance-dependent model achieves a more efficient trade-off, reflecting its im-
proved ability to manage work-related fatigue and maintain higher performance
levels. Furthermore, reducing the trade-off can potentially facilitate the decision-
making process, as a decision-maker could tend to increase the number of overtime
hours to reach higher levels of coverage without taking into account the consequen-
tial performance reduction that could end up to partially or completely compensate
the absolute improvement.
9.2.2
Trade-off between coverage and maximum consecutive workdays
rule violation
Figure 14 shows the Pareto frontier (blue line) between classic undercoverage,
i.e. the percentage difference between optimal requirements and the allocated num-
ber of personnel, and the number of violations to the maximum consecutive work-
days rule per nurse, obtained solving the classic model. As expected, the Pareto
frontier shows that scheduling nurses to work for more consecutive days decrease
the undercoverage if performance degradation due to work-related fatigue accumu-
lation is not taken into account. However, as for the overtime, if we calculate the
fatigue levels from the obtained schedule solution ex-post, and then we compute
the performance-corrected undercoverage, we see that this presents a decreasing
trend only at the beginning. In fact, after a number of violations to the maximum
consecutive workdays rule of around 0.25 violations per nurse, the fatigue-caused
performance reduction compensate the additional workers that are scheduled, so
that scheduling more nurses to work has the opposite effect to the one wanted.
Figure 15 presents the Pareto frontier (red line) between performance-corrected
undercoverage and maximum consecutive workdays violations, obtained by solving
the performance-dependent model. As in previous analyses, it is evident that a bet-
ter arrangement of shift distribution closes the gap between performance-corrected
and classic coverage, indicating that work-related fatigue levels are drastically re-
duced compared to those obtained using the classic model. Regarding the trade-off
comparison, the same considerations from the previous analysis apply here. Specif-
ically, if we quantify the trade-offs using the marginal rate of substitution (MRS),
we find an MRS of roughly 1.6 between classic undercoverage and consecutive work-
days, while it is close to zero for performance-corrected undercoverage. Therefore,
the performance-dependent model helps the decision-maker understand the impact
of work-related fatigue on personnel performance, preventing these effects from be-
ing overlooked and avoiding the blind increase in the number of scheduled nurses in
an attempt to achieve better coverage.
59
==PAGE:63==
Results
Figure 14: Pareto frontier (blue line) between undercoverage percentage and maxi-
mum consecutive workdays rule violations per nurse showing the trade-off between
the two objectives when solving the classic model. Red line is the performance-
corrected undercoverage calculated a posteriori
Figure 15: Pareto frontier (red line) between performance-corrected undercoverage
percentage and maximum consecutive workdays rule violations per nurse showing
the trade-off between the two objectives when solving the performance-dependent
model. Blue line is the undercoverage calculated a posteriori
60
==PAGE:64==
Conclusions and future research
10
Conclusions and future research
The main goal of this thesis was to develop and test a decision-support tool
for improving the shift scheduling process of nurses in a healthcare setting, with
the ultimate aim of optimizing personnel performance to effectively mitigate the
negative effects caused by staff shortages and limiting the potential threat to the
patient’s safety caused by reduced physiological and mental capabilities, derived
from high levels of work-related fatigue. This was achieved by deriving a quantitative
predictive framework to estimate performance reductions caused by inadequate work
schedules based on a validated model of work-related fatigue and integrating it into
a classic Mixed-Integer Programming formulation for solving the nurse rostering
problem.
The result is a performance-dependent nurse rostering MIP formulation that
inherently includes and optimizes the existing trade-offs between achieving optimal
coverage for each shift and ensuring good working conditions by reducing work-
related fatigue, potentially preventing harmful fatigue-induced mistakes. Compar-
ing the numerical results obtained with the performance-dependent model to those
from the original classic nurse rostering model on 10 realistic instances from the
INRC II dataset reveals that commonly used rules and regulations for preventing
high levels of work-related fatigue tend to oversimplify the drivers of this condition.
Consequently, these rules often lead to sub-optimal solutions in terms of performance
reduction. In contrast, scheduling solutions provided by the performance-dependent
model demonstrate that it is possible to achieve high-quality work schedules with a
limited reduction of the absolute coverage while maximizing the probability of shifts
being covered by well-rested and efficient workers.
Furthermore, classic nurse rostering formulations present a multi-objective struc-
ture where trade-offs between objectives, such as minimizing absolute undercoverage
and minimizing fatigue (e.g., by penalizing overtime), must be managed by tuning
the respective weights in the objective function. A weight should indicate the level
of preference, suggesting that a highly preferred objective is associated with a high
weight. However, weights must also account for differences in magnitude between
objectives, such as hours, shifts, or days. Therefore, the tuning process is not a
trivial task, especially for decision-makers within healthcare who may have very
limited knowledge about multi-criteria decision-making and optimization.
Thus,
the proposed performance-dependent formulation incorporates these trade-offs di-
rectly into the model using the concept of performance-corrected undercoverage.
This approach simplifies the decision-making process and improves the likelihood of
achieving balanced scheduling solutions. Specifically, results have shown that the
performance-dependent model consistently provides work schedules that rely less on
61
==PAGE:65==
Conclusions and future research
overtime compared to the classic model. Additionally, schedules obtained with this
model present fewer streaks of consecutive workdays longer than five, ensuring more
frequent days off. However, this comes with the inevitable drawback of schedules
containing fewer consecutive days off, suggesting that, from a theoretical standpoint,
it is more important to ensure frequent breaks than long streaks of consecutive days
off. In conclusion, the performance-dependent model helps decision-makers under-
stand the impact of work-related fatigue on personnel performance and prevents the
creation of work schedules that may cause unhealthy levels of stress for workers,
thereby reducing the risk of medical errors.
Finally, this thesis also aims at opening the way for future studies in the same
direction. In the author’s opinion, future research should concentrate on exploring
new methods for incorporating performance considerations into personnel schedul-
ing models.
This could involve using different performance metrics, integrating
more sophisticated fatigue models, and adapting the approach to other sectors be-
yond healthcare. Additionally, empirical studies should be conducted to test these
solutions in real-world settings, thereby improving collaborations with the health-
care industry. Such research would not only validate the theoretical models but also
provide practical insights and refinements, ultimately leading to more effective and
sustainable personnel scheduling practices.
62
==PAGE:66==
REFERENCES
References
Akerstedt, T., Folkard, S., and Portin, C. (2004). Predictions from the three-process
model of alertness. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 75:A75–A83.
Amindoust, A., Asadpour, M., and Shirmohammadi, S. (2021). A hybrid genetic
algorithm for nurse scheduling problem considering the fatigue factor. Journal of
Healthcare Engineering, 2021:5563651.
Asta, S., Özcan, E., and Curtois, T. (2016). A tensor based hyper-heuristic for nurse
rostering. Knowledge-Based Systems, 98:185–199.
Aviation, T. C. C. (2018). Fatigue risk management system for the canadian aviation
industry: Introduction to fatigue audit tools. Technical report, Transport Canada,
Ottawa, Ontario. TP 14577E.
Bailey, S. L. and Heitkemper, M. M. (2001). Circadian rhythmicity of cortisol and
body temperature: morningness-eveningness effects. Chronobiology International,
18(2):249–261.
Barker, L. M. and Nussbaum, M. A. (2011). The effects of fatigue on performance
in simulated nursing work. Ergonomics, 54(9):815–829.
Belyavin, A. J. and Spencer, M. B. (2004). Modeling performance and alertness: The
qinetiq approach. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 75:A93–A103.
Bodvarsdottir, E. B. (2021). Addressing real-world challenges in nurse rostering.
PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark.
Bonnefond, A., Harma, M., Hakola, T., Sallinen, M., Kandolin, I., and Virkkala, J.
(2006). Interaction of age with shift-related sleep-wakefulness, sleepiness, perfor-
mance, and social life. Experimental Aging Research, 32(2):185–208.
Borbely, A. A. (1982). A two-process model of sleep regulation. Human Neurobiol-
ogy, 1(1):195–204.
Branke, J., Deb, K., Miettinen, K., and Slowinski, R. (2008). Multiobjective Opti-
mization: Interactive and Evolutionary Approaches. Springer-Verlag.
Brunner, J. O., Bard, J. F., and Kolisch, R. (2009). Flexible shift scheduling of
physicians. Health Care Management Science, 12(3):285–305.
Brunner, J. O. and Edenharter, G. M. (2011). Long term staff scheduling of physi-
cians with different experience levels in hospitals using column generation. Health
Care Management Science, 14:189–202.
I
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
Burke, K. E., De Causmaecker, P., Vanden Berghe, G., and Van Landeghem, H.
(2004). The state of the art of nurse rostering. Journal of Scheduling, 7(6):441–
499.
Carayon and Gurses (2005). A human factors engineering conceptual framework of
nursing workload and patient safety in intensive care units. Intensive and Critical
Care Nursing, 21(5):284–301.
Ceschia, S., Dang, N. T. T., De Causmaecker, P., Haspeslagh, S., and Schaerf,
A. (2015). Second international nurse rostering competition (inrc-ii) - problem
description and rules. Technical report, DIEGM, University of Udine.
Chan, A. P., Yi, W., Wong, D. P., Yam, M. C., and Chan, D. W. (2012). Deter-
mining an optimal recovery time for construction rebar workers after working to
exhaustion in a hot and humid environment. Building and Environment, 58:163–
171.
Dantzig, G. B. (1954). Letter to the editor - a comment on edie’s "traffic delays at
toll booths". Journal of the Operations Research Society of America, 2(3):339–341.
Dawson, D. and Fletcher, A. (2001). A quantitative model of work-related fatigue:
background and definition. Ergonomics.
Dawson, D. and Reid, K. (2007). Fatigue, alcohol and performance impairment.
Nature, 388(6639):235.
Di Somma, M. (2016). OPTIMAL OPERATION PLANNING OF DISTRIBUTED
ENERGY SYSTEMS THROUGH MULTI-OBJECTIVE APPROACH: A NEW
SUSTAINABILITY-ORIENTED PATHWAY. PhD thesis, Federico II University
of Naples.
Edie, L. C. (1954). Traffic delays at toll booths. Journal of the Operations Research
Society of America, 2(2):107–138.
Ehrgott, M. (2005). Multicriteria Optimization, volume 491. Springer Science &
Business Media.
Engau, A. and Wiecek, M. M. (2007). 2d decision-making for multicriteria design
optimization. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 34(4):301–315.
Fan, J. and Smith, A. P. (2017). The impact of workload and fatigue on performance.
Springer.
II
==PAGE:68==
REFERENCES
Fletcher, A. and Dawson, D. (2001a).
Field-based validations of a work-related
fatigue model based on hours of work. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic
Psychology and Behaviour, 4(1):75–88.
Fletcher, A. and Dawson, D. (2001b). A quantitative model of work-related fatigue:
empirical evaluations. Ergonomics, 44(5):475–488.
Fletcher, A. and Dawson, D. (2004). Laboratory based validations of a work-related
fatigue model based on hours of work, pages 648–656. Peter Lang, Frankfurt am
Main.
Fletcher, A., Lamond, N., Van Den Heuvel, C. J., and Dawson, D. (2003). Pre-
diction of performance during sleep deprivation and alcohol intoxication using a
quantitative model of work-related fatigue. Sleep Research Online, 5(2):67–75.
Galanis, P., Katsiroumpa, A., Vraka, I., Siskou, O., Konstantakopoulou, O., Kat-
soulas, T., Moisoglou, I., Gallos, P., and Kaitelidou, D. (2024). Nurses quietly
quit their job more often than other healthcare workers: An alarming issue for
healthcare services. International Nursing Review.
Garde, A. H., Harris, A., Vedaa, Ø., Bjorvatn, B., Hansen, J., Hansen, Å. M.,
Kolstad, H. A., Koskinen, A., Pallesen, S., Ropponen, A., and Härmä, M. I.
(2019). Working hour characteristics and schedules among nurses in three nordic
countries - a comparative study using payroll data. BMC Nursing, 18:12.
Gross, C. N., Brunner, J. O., and Blobner, M. (2019). Hospital physicians can’t
get no long-term satisfaction-an indicator for fairness in preference fulfillment on
duty schedules. Health Care Management Science, 22(4):691–708.
Haspeslagh, S., De Causmaecker, P., Schaerf, A., and Stølevik, M. (2014). The first
international nurse rostering competition 2010. Annals of Operations Research,
218(1):221–236.
He, F. and Qu, R. (2012).
A constraint programming based column generation
approach to nurse rostering problems.
Computers and Operations Research,
39(12):3331–3343.
https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/22189434-395d-11eb-
b27b-01aa75ed71a1/language-en (2022).
Analysis of shortage and surplus
occupations 2022. Website. Accessed: 2024-04-20.
https://www.rn.ca.gov/pdfs/enforcement/discguide.pdf (2024).
Nursing practice
act - business and professions code (bpc) section 2762.
https://www.rn.ca.
gov/pdfs/enforcement/discguide.pdf. Accessed: 2024-06-03.
III
==PAGE:69==
REFERENCES
Hursh, S. R., Raslear, T. G., Kaye, A. S., and Fanzone, J. F. J. (2006). Validation
and calibration of a fatigue assessment tool for railroad work schedules, summary
report. Technical report, Institutes for Behavior Resources.
INRCII (2024). Inrc ii website. Website. mobiz.vives.be/inrc2/ : Accessed: 2024-
06-20.
InterDynamics
(2024).
Interdynamics
website.
Website.
https://www.interdynamics.com/about-interdynamics/ : Accessed: 2024-05-15.
Jaber, M. Y., Givi, Z., and Neumann, W. P. (2013). Incorporating human fatigue
and recovery into the learning-forgetting process. Applied Mathematical Modelling,
37(12):7287–7299.
Jewett, M. E. and Kronauer, R. E. (1999).
Interactive mathematical models of
subjective alertness and cognitive throughput in humans. Journal of Biological
Rhythms, 14(6):588–597.
Kellogg, D. L. and Walczak, S. (2007). Nurse scheduling: From academia to imple-
mentation or not? Interfaces, 37(4):353–369.
Klyve, K. K., Senthooran, I., and Wallace, M. (2023). Nurse rostering with fatigue
modelling. Health Care Management Science, 26:21–45.
Kohn, L. T., Corrigan, J. M., and Donaldson, M. S. (2000). To Err is Human:
Building a Safer Health System. U.S. Institute of Medicine.
Kronauer, R. E., Czeisler, C. A., Pilato, M. C., Moore-Ede, M. C., and Weitz-
man, E. D. (1982). Mathematical model of the human circadian system with two
interacting oscillators. American Journal of Physiology, 242:R3–R17.
Lin, R.-C., Sir, M. Y., Sisikoglu, E., Pasupathy, K., and Steege, L. M. (2013).
Optimal nurse scheduling based on quantitative models of work-related fatigue.
IIE Transactions on Healthcare Systems Engineering, 3(1):23–38.
Lü, Z. and Hao, J.-K. (2012). Adaptive neighborhood search for nurse rostering.
European Journal of Operational Research, 218(3):865–876.
Maheshwari, D., Singla, D., Malhotra, D., and Zutshi, K. (2022). Circadian chrono-
types and their effect on athletic performance: a systematic review. Sport Sciences
for Health, 18:1161–1177.
Mallis, M. M., Mejdal, S., Nguyen, T. T., and Dinges, D. F. (2004). Summary of the
key features of seven biomathematical models of human fatigue and performance.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 75:A4–A14.
IV
==PAGE:70==
REFERENCES
Marano, C., Murianni, L., and Sticchi, L. (2005). To err is human. building a safer
health system. Italian Journal of Public Health, 33:109–120.
Martin, J. L. and Fiorentino, L. (2013). Fatigue and Sleepiness.
Mitler, M. M., Carskadon, M. A., Czeisler, C. A., Dement, W. C., Dinges, D. F., and
Graeber, R. C. (1988). Catastrophes, sleep and public policy: consensus report.
Sleep, 11:100–109.
Newman, D. E., Nassery, N., Schaffer, A. C., Yu-Moe, C. W., Clemens, G. D., Wang,
Z., Zhu, Y., Tehrani, A. S. S., Fanai1, M., Hassoon, A., and Siegal, D. (2024).
Burden of serious harms from diagnostic error in the usa. USABMJ Quality and
Safety.
Özder, E. H., Özcan, E., and Eren, T. (2020). A systematic literature review for
personnel scheduling problems. International Journal of Information Technology
& Decision Making, 19(06):1695–1735.
Papp, K. K. (2004). The effects of sleep loss and fatigue on resident-physicians: a
multi-institutional, mixed-method study. Academic Medicine, 79(5):394–406.
Petrovic, S. (2019). "you have to get wet to learn how to swim" applied to bridging
the gap between research into personnel scheduling and its implementation in
practice. Annals of Operations Research, 275(1):161–179.
Roach, G. D., Fletcher, A., and Dawson, D. (2004). A model to predict work-related
fatigue based on hours of work. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine,
75(3 Suppl):A61–A74.
Rosa, R. and Bonnet, M. (1993). Performance and alertness on 8h and 12h rotating
shifts at a natural gas utility. Ergonomics, 36(10):1177–1193.
SAFTEFAST (2024).
Safte-fast: Sleep, activity, fatigue, and task effectiveness.
Website. https://www.saftefast.com/ : Accessed: 2024-06-13.
Sean, F., Coutts, L. V., Phillips, R. A., Turner, R., Dijk, D.-J., and Skeldon, A. C.
(2021). Fatigue, alertness and risk prediction for shift workers. bioRxiv.
Shadia, H. and Alshahrani (2022). Reasons, consequences, and suggested solutions
for nursing workforce shortage. International Journal of Health Sciences (IJHS).
Shoemake, A. (1994). Solutions to the healthcare nursing shortage. Home Healthcare
Nurse, 12(4):35–39.
V
==PAGE:71==
REFERENCES
Stolletz, R. and Brunner, J. O. (2011). Fair optimization of fortnightly physician
schedules with flexible shifts. European Journal of Operational Research.
Stolletz, R. and Brunner, J. O. (2012).
Fair optimization of fortnightly physi-
cian schedules with flexible shifts.
European Journal of Operational Research,
219(3):622–629.
Sutherland, C., Smallwood, A., Wootten, T., and Redfern, N. (2023). Fatigue and
its impact on performance and health. British journal of hospital medicine.
Tassi, P. and Muzet, A. (2000). Sleep inertia. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 4(4):341–353.
Tiesinga, L. J., Dassen, T., and Halfens, R. J. (1996). Fatigue: A summary of the
definitions, dimensions, and indicators. International Journal of Nursing Termi-
nologies and Classifications, 7(2):51–62.
Trinkoff, A. (2010). How long and how much are nurses now working? The American
Journal of Nursing, 106(4):60–71.
Tucker, P. and Folkard, S. (2012). Working time, health and safety: a research
synthesis paper.
Conditions of Work and Employment Series No. 31.
DOI:
978-92-2-126061-5.
Valdez, P. (2019). Circadian rhythms in attention. The Yale Journal of Biology and
Medicine, 92:81–92.
Van Den Bergh, J., BeliĂŤn, J., De Bruecker, P., Demeulemeester, E., and De Boeck,
L. (2013). Personnel scheduling: A literature review. European Journal of Oper-
ational Research, 226(3):367–385.
Van Dongen, H. P. (2004). Comparison of mathematical model predictions to ex-
perimental data of fatigue and performance. Aviation, Space, and Environmental
Medicine, 75(3 Suppl):A15–A36.
Van Dongen, H. P. and Dinges, D. F. (2005).
Circadian rhythms in sleepiness,
alertness, and performance. pages 435–443.
Xu, S. and Hall, N. G. (2021).
Fatigue, personnel scheduling and operations:
Review and research opportunities. European Journal of Operational Research,
295(3):807–822.
VI
