==PAGE:1==
TiDBITS:
Time-Domain Based Interpolation
for Time Series
Giancarlo Andriano
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Deep neural networks have significantly advanced time-series forecasting but of-
ten at the cost of high computational requirements. Linear models, on the other
hand, have established their importance in this domain due to their computa-
tional efficiency in the long-term forecasting problem.
This thesis proposes a
novel full time-domain linear model, referred to as TiDBITS, as an alternative
to the Frequency Interpolation Time Series (FITS) model for long-term time se-
ries forecasting. The importance of linear models in time-series forecasting is
first highlighted, showing their advantages over deep neural networks in terms
of simplicity and interpretability. The study also reviews deep architectures pro-
posed in the literature, highlighting issues with frequency domain analysis such as
temporal smearing and aliasing. The paper then details the design of TiDBITS,
ensuring modular equivalence to FITS while shifting all computations to the time
domain. The key design goals include maintaining functional equivalence, opti-
mizing time-domain operations, and simplifying hyperparameter tuning.
The
resulting TiDBITS model is evaluated against FITS and other state-of-the-art
models across multiple datasets, demonstrating competitive performance and
achieving superior accuracy in 38% of the cases. Additionally, the computational
complexity of TiDBITS, in terms of multiply-accumulate operations (MACs) and
parameter count, is compared with state-of-the-art architectures.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
Developing and refining time-series forecasting models has been an important as-
pect of both academic research and practical applications, and the rapid advance-
ments in neural networks have particularly focused on the accuracy of their pre-
dictive capabilities. It is within this context that we decided to design TiDBITS:
Time-Domain Based Interpolation for Time Series, a novel full time-domain lin-
ear model as an alternative to the Frequency Interpolation Time Series (FITS)
model for long-term forecasting.
The motivation behind our work comes from the need to balance predictive accu-
racy with computational efficiency. While deep learning models have revolution-
ized time-series forecasting, their high computational demands are prohibitive in
many practical scenarios. Linear models, on the other hand, can often achieve sur-
prisingly better results in long-term forecasting while being significantly smaller
in size. Therefore, we decided to shed light on the gap between their strengths
and the limitations posed by computations in the frequency-domain.
Ultimately, I personally wish to thank the people whose support and guidance
made this work possible.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Special recognition goes to my reseach team at Aalto University, particularly
to my fellow reseachers Mohsen Amidzade and Ashutosh Vaishnav, and to my
main supervisor Mario Di Francesco. Their constant support throughout this
semester has given me a glimpse of the true values shared within the Research
Community, and their relevance for impactful social contributions.
In addition, I would like to thank professor Tommy Sonne Alstrøm for his co-
supervision of this work, and the DTU community for letting me experience the
Danish culture and its beautiful transports infrastructure.
Sincere and deep gratitude, lastly, goes to my family and the entire SECCLO
program. To my family, especially to my brother Cesare, for representing the
primary shelter from the challenges of a Double Degree program and the uncer-
tainties of an extremely international and dynamic lifestyle, and for unburdening
my studies with the privilege of unwavering financial support. And to SECCLO
and the friends I met here, for providing those challenges and lifestyle, and for
representing the most unconsciously impactful journey of my life, for which I will
be forever grateful.
Espoo, 25-June-2024
Giancarlo Andriano
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ARIMA
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average
CD
Channel Dependent
CI
Channel Indipendent
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
DESP
Double exponential smoothing-based prediction
DFT
Discrete Fourier Transform
DNN
Deep Neural Network
DWT
Discrete Wavelet Transform
DWT
Discrete Wavelet Transform
HP
Hyperparameter
LTSF
Long-Term Series Forecasting
MAC
Multiply-Accumulate operation
MSE
Mean Squared Error
OLS
Ordinary Least Squared
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
SOTA
State-Of-The-Art
STFT
Short-Time Fourier Transform
TS
Time Series
TSF
Time Series Forecasting
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Abbreviations and Acronyms
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of this Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Time Series Forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Properties of Time Series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Channel Dependent/Independent Strategies . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Bayesian/Statistical models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
ARIMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
DESP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Deep Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.2
CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.3
Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Frequency Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5.1
Discrete and Fast Fourier Transforms
. . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5.2
Temporal Smearing and Aliasing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
2.5.3
Short-Time Fourier Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.4
Discrete Wavelet Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Related Work
23
3.1
FEDformer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
PatchTST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
LTSF-Linear
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
FITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Methodology
29
4.1
FITS: Architecture and Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Design Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Time-Domain Operations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
TiDBITS Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
37
5.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Long-Term Forecasting Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Computational Complexity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion and Future Work
43
6.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Time series forecasting (TSF) stands as a cornerstone in both statistics and ma-
chine learning, serving as a predictive tool for future events based on historical
data analysis. A time series is a sequence of chronologically ordered data points,
generally recorded at regular intervals. This temporal structure enables the iden-
tification of patterns like trends, cycles, and seasonality, which are essential for
accurate forecasting [34]. Traditional statistical models such as ARIMA and ex-
ponential smoothing offer established methodologies, however, their limitations
in handling complex non-linear patterns have led to the emergence of deep neural
networks (DNNs) as a prevalent approach in modern TSF.
Among them, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Transformers have proven
particularly effective, leveraging their unique properties to model temporal de-
pendencies and use attention-based mechanisms, respectively [10, 37]. However,
a notable limitation of these models is their susceptibility to overfitting, as well
as spectral bias: the tendency to prioritize the learning of simpler, low-frequency
functions over complex, high-frequency ones [8]. To address this issue, the Fourier
and the Wavelet transforms have been employed, facilitating a frequency domain
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
representation of time series data that can enhance the learning of complex pat-
terns directly in the frequency domain [38, 42].
However, the computational
demands of large-scale DNNs, especially when processing high-dimensional time
series data, have prompted an interest in more efficient models.
Linear models - renowned for their computational efficiency and interpretability
- have emerged as a surprisingly effective alternative in TSF. In particular, the
Frequency Interpolation Time Series baseline (FITS) model operates in the fre-
quency domain using Fourier transform and has demonstrated remarkable per-
formance, often rivaling or even surpassing the accuracy of complex DNNs on
several benchmarks [33, 38]. FITS, along with other linear models, achieve state-
of-the-art accuracy scores in TSF while maintaining computational efficiency and
model simplicity. However, despite its impressive performance, FITS is not with-
out its drawbacks. In fact FITS is negatively affected by Inherent limitations of
frequency-domain methods, including time varying properties of non-stationary
time series, aliasing effects and temporal smearing [2, 4, 25, 28]. These limitations
motivate the search for alternative approaches that can overcome the challenges
of frequency-domain methods while achieving low computational complexity and
high prediction accuracy.
1.1
Scope of this Thesis
This thesis aims to investigate the impact of employing frequency-based opera-
tions, similar to those used in the FITS model, within a full time-domain architec-
ture. Such a study is motivated by the observation that the frequency spectrum
of non-stationary time series - obtained through Fourier transform - may contain
artifacts due to the stationarity assumption inherent in the transform, a phe-
nomenon known as temporal smearing [2, 25, 28]. Additionally, learning in the
frequency domain may not always be optimal due to aliasing, which arises when
the sampling frequency is below the Nyquist rate of the physical phenomenon
being studied [4]. By exploring alternative time-domain approaches, this thesis
seeks to mitigate these limitations while still harnessing the benefits of frequency-
based analysis for time series forecasting.
Specifically, this research endeavors to develop a novel time-domain model caled
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Research Methodology
3
Time-Domain Based Interpolation for Time Series or TiDBITS
to effectively
replicate the core functionalities of FITS while operating directly in the time
domain. This involves addressing the challenges of time interpolation and sim-
plifying the hyperparameters search space, thereby enhancing the efficiency and
usability of the model.
By achieving these goals, this study aims to demon-
strate the feasibility and potential advantages of utilizing frequency-based ma-
nipulations within a time-domain framework for accurate and efficient time series
forecasting.
1.2
Research Methodology
The research methodology of this study includes the following steps.
• Definition of Design Goals: establishing the primary objectives and
criteria for the TiDBITS model, ensuring alignment with the challenges
identified in the problem statement.
• Evaluation of Operational Equivalence: an analysis of the operational
equivalence between the operations of FITS and those performed in the
time domain.
• Architecture Design: devising the TiDBITS model, ensuring it can per-
form all key operations of FITS in the time domain, as well as meet the
design goals.
• Hyperparameter Definition: identifying and define the key hyperpa-
rameters necessary for optimizing the TiDBITS model.
• Implementation: realizing the TiDBITS model, incorporating necessary
optimizations and design choices.
• Evaluation: characterizing the TiDBITS model with the best hyperparam-
eters on several benchmark datasets, comparing its performance to FITS
and other state-of-the-art models.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
1.3
Structure of the Thesis
This study is structured as follows. Chapter 2 reviews key concepts and method-
ologies in time series forecasting, covering both traditional and modern approaches,
i.e., those based on deep learning. Chapter 3 discusses existing research and mod-
els related to time series forecasting, highlighting their contributions and limita-
tions. Chapter 4 details the design process of the TiDBITS model, illustrating
the operational breakdown, design goals, intermediate steps, and the final archi-
tecture. Chapter 5 presents a comprehensive evaluation of the TiDBITS model,
including experimental setup, performance comparison, and an analysis of its
computational complexity.
Finally, Chapter 6 summarizes the findings of the
study, discusses its implications, and proposes directions for future research.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Time Series Forecasting
Time series forecasting (TSF) is a pivotal process in statistics and machine learn-
ing, where historical data points are analyzed to predict future values. A time
series (TS) is essentially a sequence of data points ordered in time, typically
recorded at successive, equally-spaced points in time. This sequential nature of
data allows for the analysis of trends, cycles, seasonality, and other patterns that
can inform predictions of future dynamics.
Formally, a time series can be represented as a vector:
Xi = [x0, . . . , xL−1]T
where the look-back of L time steps is utilized to forecast the next H samples in
the prediction horizon:
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
Yi = [yL, . . . , yL+H−1]
In this context, each xi could be a single data point or a vector of multiple data
points. This distinction leads to two primary types of time series:
• Univariate: each xi is a single data point representing one variable ob-
served at each time step. A univariate time series focuses on forecasting
future values solely based on past and present values of a single variable.
It describes processes where the variable of interest is not affected by other
variables or when only one variable is available.
• Multivariate: in this case, each xi is a vector containing values for sev-
eral variables collected from the same process at each time step. Therefore,
multivariate forecasting focuses on analyzing variables (also called chan-
nels) which could exhibit mutual influence or correlation.
2.1.1
Properties of Time Series
TS analysis involves examining established characteristics that are ubiquitous
across various types of data observed sequentially over time. Understanding these
properties is crucial for extracting meaningful insights about the data, thereby
helping in selecting optimal data pre-processing methods and interpreting the
results. These key properties are:
• Trend: It represents a long-term persistent movement in the series over
time, e.g., upward or downward.
Formally, a trend can be modeled as
a deterministic function of time, either linear or nonlinear, indicating the
general direction of the series over a long period.
• Seasonality: It refers to the presence of variations that occur at specific
regular intervals, usually less than a year, such as weekly, monthly, or quar-
terly. They highlight a localized recurrent behaviour of the TS.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Time Series Forecasting
7
• Cyclicality: Cyclical patterns are fluctuations observed at intervals longer
than seasonality. A cycle can be formally defined as a periodic fluctuation,
whose length is associated to the duration of the external factors, such as
economic or environmental conditions.
• Noise: It is the random variation in the data that cannot be attributed to
trend, seasonality, or cyclicality. Formally, noise is defined as the irregular
component or the stochastic error term in a time series, which represents
unpredictable and random fluctuations that cannot be modeled determin-
istically.
• Stationarity: A time series is said to be stationary if its statistical proper-
ties do not change over time. This implies that the series does not exhibit
trends, varying variances, or other patterns that evolve over time.
The
formal definition of (weakly) stationarity for the series Xi is the following:
– The expected value does not depend on time:
E(xi) = µ, ∀i ∈[0, . . . , L −1]
– The variance is finite and does not depend on time:
Var(xi) = σ2 < ∞,
∀i ∈[0, . . . , L −1]
– The autocovariance of xi and xj does not depend on the time points
i and j. It only depends on the difference of i and j:
Cov(xi, xj) = γi−j , ∀i, j ∈[0, . . . , L −1]
where the expected values are calculated with respect to the marginal dis-
tribution of xi. However, in practice, most time series data exhibit non-
stationarity and transformations are applied to stabilize these three prop-
erties, including differencing and normalization [19].
2.1.2
Channel Dependent/Independent Strategies
Multivariate TSF methodologies can be broadly categorized into channel-dependent
(CD) and channel-independent (CI) approaches. The CD approach models mu-
tual interactions among different input channels, enabling to learn more complex
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
relationships, which is particularly useful when the channels exhibit inherent cor-
relations that are crucial for the model’s predictive capabilities. Conversely, the
CI strategy considers each input channel separately, disregarding potential corre-
lations among them. This approach can simplify the model and mitigate the risk
of overfitting, especially when channels are genuinely independent or when the
dataset is insufficiently large to reliably learn inter-channel dependencies [39].
Building on this, clustering channels into a smaller features set [39] represents an
hybrid approach, which has been evaluated in recent literature. As a matter of
fact, an examination of the performance of various models in TSF tasks reveals
that the choice of CI/CD configuration significantly affects forecasting accuracy,
especially for the class type of Linear learners [18]. These models are able to
achieve SOTA accuracy scores and are discussed in more detail in Section 3.3.
2.2
Datasets
The effectiveness of TSF models is often evaluated using several benchmark
datasets. These datasets serve as standardized testbeds, allowing researchers to
compare different models under consistent conditions. Below, the most widely-
used datasets are described in their structure and relevance:
• ETT (Electricity Transformer Temperature): It consists of 2 years of
data from two different counties in China with information about electric-
ity loads used to estimate electricity demand in urban areas [41]. Precisely,
electricity transformers and line loads data has been gathered into six differ-
ent channels to forecast transformers oil temperature, which is an estimator
for electricity demand. The dataset is divided into different subsets to ac-
commodate various time resolutions: ETTh1 and ETTh2 for hourly data,
ETTm1 and ETTm2 for 15-minute intervals.
• Weather: This dataset contains 21 meteorological measurements recorded
every 10 minutes from the Weather Station of the Max Planck Biogeochem-
istry Institute in Jena (Germany) in 2020 [16]. It is essential for training
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Bayesian/Statistical models
9
weather forecasting models and it represents a case of multivariate time
series.
• Electricity: The Electricity Load Diagrams 2011-2014 dataset from the
UCI Machine Learning Repository [35] contains electricity consumption
data for 321 clients, recorded every 15 minutes from 2011 to 2014. Each
entry includes a timestamp and the corresponding consumption in kilo-
watts. This dataset is valuable for tasks such as regression and clustering.
Dataset
Electricity
Weather
ETTh1 & ETTh2
ETTm1 & ETTm2
Channels
321
21
7
7
Sampling Rate
1 hour
10 min
1 hour
15 min
Total Timesteps
26,304
52,696
17,420
69,680
Table 2.1: Time series forecasting datasets details.
2.3
Bayesian/Statistical models
Over the years, the evolution of models for TSF has shifted from those prioritizing
simplicity and interpretability to others that emphasize complexity and nonlin-
earity to capture intricate data patterns. This section delves into the statistical
models of ARIMA family and Double Exponential Smoothing. They are charac-
terized by their probabilistic foundations and smaller parameter count than more
sophisticated Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which are able to model nonlinear
relationships at the cost of increased complexity and size and which will be dis-
cussed next.
2.3.1
ARIMA
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) models have been histori-
cally employed in forecasting for their simplicity and effectiveness [24]. These
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
models combines autoregressive (AR) and moving average (MA) components
along with differencing (opposite of Integration) to make the time series sta-
tionary and remove trend components. They are expressed as ARIMA(p, d, q)
where p is the order of the autoregressive term (how many past values the re-
gression is computed on), d is the degree of differencing, and q is the order of the
moving average term, and are formally represented for the univariate time series
Xi by the following equation:
(1 −
p
X
j=1
ϕjLj)(1 −L)dXi = (1 +
q
X
j=1
θjLj)εi
(2.1)
where L is the lag operator, ϕi are the parameters of the autoregressive part, θi
are the parameters of the moving average part, and εt is white noise.
Due to their well-defined structure, they present clear statistical interpretation
and are able to handle several data types, including seasonal behaviour and exoge-
nous variables [12]. They perform particularly well in the short term-forecasting
[3], are robust against incomplete datasets (i.e., when certain values are missing)
[20] and can rely on parameter estimation algorithms for (p, d, q) [21, 27], such
as Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) or Kalman Filter. However, despite
these advantages, ARIMA models have several limitations. They often struggle
with non-stationary and nonlinear data, requiring transformations to achieve sta-
tionarity [9]. The determination of appropriate (p, d, q) components can be sub
optimal due to the presence of local minima [27] and they are also sensitive to
outliers in the data.
As a multivariate extension to the ARIMA family, Vector Autoregression (VAR)
is also a flexible and effective statistical method for TSF, although it works under
assumption of collinearity [15] between the variables.
2.3.2
DESP
Double exponential smoothing-based prediction (DESP) is a widely-used method
for TSF, particularly effective for data with trends but without seasonal varia-
tions. The model extends simple exponential smoothing by incorporating a trend
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Deep Neural Networks
11
component, with two equations:
ℓi = αyi + (1 −α)(ℓi−1 + bi−1)
(2.2)
bi = β(ℓi −ℓi−1) + (1 −β)bi−1
(2.3)
where ℓi is the estimated ‘level’ or smoothed value of the series at time i, bi is
the estimated trend, yi is the actual value at time i, and α, β are smoothing
parameters.
Statistically, DESP captures both the level and trend of the time series, adapting
to changes in the trend direction more flexibly than single exponential smoothing.
The model’s strengths lie in its simplicity, and performance in data with trends
[5, 17], but it does not accommodate seasonality and can perform poorly with
noisy data. Compared to the ARIMA family, DESP requires less computational
resources; however, ARIMA offers more flexibility and is better suited for data
with seasonality or more complex linear patterns.
2.4
Deep Neural Networks
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become increasingly popular in forecasting
and differ significantly from Bayesian models. One of the fundamental differ-
ences is their higher parameter count and the ability to model complex, non-
linear relationships within data. However, this complexity comes with the need
for substantially larger datasets in order to be effectively trained, and several
optimizations to make them suitable for each specific application. This section
delves into the general structure of the most used DNNs in TSF, which will be
expanded in Chapter 3 with their state-of-the-art implementations .
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
2.4.1
LSTM
The Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model is a type of recurrent neural net-
work (RNN) architecture that is specifically designed to address the issue of
long-term dependencies in sequence prediction problems, including time series
forecasting. The core idea behind LSTM is to introduce a series of gates that
regulate the flow of information.
These gates determine what information is
stored, updated, or forgotten at each time step, enabling the model to capture
long-term dependencies in the data [10]. These gates together compose the LSTM
cell, which is concatenated to other cells to cover the whole length of the input
sequence. Hereby a more detailed description :
Figure 2.1: LSTM cell [36]
• Forget Gate (gf): This gate decides which parts of the previous cell
state ci−1 are to be kept or discarded. It computes a linear regression over
hi−1 (previous hidden state) and xi (current input) and outputs a number
between 0 and 1 for each ci−1. Gate value 1 indicates to completely keep
the previous cell state, while a 0 to discard it:
gf = σ(Wf · [hi−1, xi] + bf)
(2.4)
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Deep Neural Networks
13
• Input Gate (gI) and Candidate Cell State (z): The input gate layer
is computed similarly to gf:
gI = σ(WI · [hi−1, xi] + bi)
(2.5)
• Candidate state (z): The candidate cell state z is computed using the
previous state hi−1 and the new information coming from current input xi.
It is also normalized to the range [ -1, 1 ] using tanh :
z = tanh(Wz · [hi−1, xi] + bz)
(2.6)
• Cell State Update Rule: It computes the current cell state as a weighted
sum of the previous state ct−1 and the current candidate state z, using forget
and input gates as weights:
ci = gf · ci−1 + gI · z
(2.7)
• Output Gate (go) and Hidden State (hi): The output gate tunes
the value of the next hidden state ht, which serves as cell output, and is
computed in the same way as the other gates.
go = σ(Wo · [hi−1, xi] + bo)
(2.8)
hi = go · tanh(ci)
(2.9)
Each W with a subscript refers to the weight matrix associated with the respective
gate or operation(f, I, z, o) for the input and previous hidden state, and each b
is the respective bias term. The functions σ and tanh are non-linear activation
functions: σ maps input values to a range between 0 and 1, which is useful for
creating binary decisions, while tanh normalizes values within the range of -1 and
1, which helps to mitigate the vanishing and exploding gradient problem during
back-propagation [36] .
LSTM models are a preferred choice for complex forecasting challenges, such as
in financial markets [7] thanks to their ability to handle nonlinear, non-stationary
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
signals. Moreover, they outperform traditional models like ARIMA across various
domains [31].
2.4.2
CNN
Figure 2.2: CNN structure [32]
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a class of deep learning architectures
that are particularly suited for analyzing visual imagery. The typical structure
of a CNN consists of an input layer followed by a series of convolutional layers
(CONV), pooling layers, fully connected layers (FC), and an output layer that
yields the class scores for classification tasks. Each layer serves a distinct purpose:
the convolutions identify mid-high level features, such as patterns in the data,
which are then flattened and fed into fully connected layers for extrapolation.
Applying CNNs for TSF involves 1D convolutions to process temporal sequences,
or 2D convolutions in the case of multivariate (multi-channel) series, which al-
lows to model complex inter-channel dependences [6, 23] and spatial hierarchies
in the data [22, 30]. Moreover, many optimization techniques are available, such
as quantization, pruning and tensor decomposition [14], to make them computa-
tionally efficient.
However, CNNs have limitations compared to LSTM networks when applied in
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Deep Neural Networks
15
TSF. One major drawback is their inability to capture long-term temporal de-
pendencies effectively due to the fixed-size kernel in convolutions, which leads to
a loss of temporal information [13].
2.4.3
Transformer
Figure 2.3: Transformer Encoder (left) and Decoder (right) [37]
The Transformer model is an encoder-decoder architecture that was originally
proposed for natural language processing tasks. Its structure is characterized by
the use of attention mechanisms [37], to focus on different parts of the input
data differently. Both the encoder and the decoder are trained on augmented
versions of input and target output data, by employing embeddings that capture
the semantic meaning of the inputs, and positional encodings to retain sequential
order information. Attention is leveraged to focus on relevant information in the
input data:
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√dk

V
(2.10)
Q, K, and V represent Queries, Keys, and Values (respectively), each being
matrices that encapsulate different facets of the input information. The term dk
represents the dimensionality of the Keys, serving as a scaling factor to ensure
numerical stability.
Attention works in the following way: the computation of the dot product be-
tween Q and the transpose of K assesses the similarity between each query and
all keys. This similarity score represents the degree of attention or emphasis to
give to the corresponding values in V . To prevent the dominance of any single
value and to maintain gradient stability during the model’s training phase, these
scores are scaled down by the factor √dk. Subsequently, the softmax function
converts the scores into a probability distribution of attention weights for the
input V matrix. This operation aggregates the Values, weighted by their com-
puted relevance to each query, culminating in a weighted sum that synthesizes
the focused information.
Multi-head attention enhances this mechanism by splitting Q, K, and V into mul-
tiple ‘heads’, allowing the model to concurrently process information in different
representation subspaces. The attention function is computed independently for
each head, providing unique attention-weighted outputs. These outputs are then
concatenated and linearly transformed to capture diverse features and relation-
ships within the data from multiple perspectives. In the Transformer model, the
encoder and the decoder apply the concept of multi-head attention differently:
• Encoder Self-Attention: All Q, K and V come from the same previous
layer output, allowing each position in the encoder to attend to all posi-
tions in the previous layer of the encoder. This multi-head self-attention
mechanism computes the entire input sequence simultaneously, capturing
dependencies among all elements within the input.
• Decoder Masked Self-Attention: The self-attention is masked to pre-
vent positions from attending to subsequent positions. This masking en-
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Frequency Analysis
17
sures that the predictions for position i can depend only on the known
outputs at positions less than i.
• Decoder Cross-Attention: In this case, to implement the autoregressive
function, the decoder uses multi-head attention to attend to all positions in
the the encoder’s output. Here, the Queries (Q) come from the output of
the previous layer of the decoder, while the Keys (K) and Values (V ) are
from the output of the encoder.
The application of Transformers in time series forecasting has been investigated
in recent literature. Their efficiency in training due to parallelization contrasts
with the inherently sequential LSTM models, offering a distinct advantage in
handling forecasting with long time series [41]. However they typically require
substantial data volumes for optimal performance and are prone to overfitting on
smaller datasets, sometimes worse than simpler models [40].
2.5
Frequency Analysis
DNNs encounter several notable limitations, one of which is spectral bias. This
phenomenon indicates the tendency to learn simpler (lower-frequency) functions,
meaning simple patterns that generalize across data samples, rather than com-
plex (higher-frequency) ones, which are better learned during fine-tuning [8, 29].
This challenge has spurred interest in representing data in the frequency domain,
utilizing techniques of data transformation to extrapolate features at different
bands of the frequency spectrum.
2.5.1
Discrete and Fast Fourier Transforms
The Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) is a powerful tool in signal theory, con-
verting a sequence of values into components of different frequencies.
For an
univariate time series Xi = [x0, x2, . . . , xN−1], the DFT RN −→CN is defined
as:
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
X(k) =
N−1
X
i=0
xi · e−j 2πi
N k
i = 0, . . . , N −1
(2.11)
Here, X(k) represents the frequency component at frequency k, encapsulating
both amplitude and phase information. The computational complexity of DFT
is O(N 2), which can be prohibitive for large datasets. The Fast Fourier Trans-
form (FFT) is an algorithm to compute the DFT efficiently, and it reduces the
complexity to O(N log N) by recursively decomposing a DFT of size N = N1N2
into N1 DFTs of size N2, leveraging the symmetries and periodicities within the
DFT itself.
2.5.2
Temporal Smearing and Aliasing
Temporal smearing occurs when the Fourier Transform averages the frequency
content of a non-stationary signal over the entire analysis window [2, 25, 28].
This averaging process dilutes important temporal variations, leading to a loss
of temporal resolution .
Mathematically, consider a non-stationary series Xi
consisting of two components: the stationary part ˆ
Xi and the transient ˜
Xi:
Xi = ˆXi + ˜Xi = [ˆx0 + ˜x0 , . . . , ˆxN−1 + ˜xN−1 ]
(2.12)
where the transient ˜
Xi is only significant over a short interval, and the stationary
component ˆ
Xi persists over the entire window. The DFT X[k] of the series has
the form:
X[k] =
N−1
X
i=0
(ˆxi + ˜xi) · e−j 2πi
N k =
N−1
X
i=0
ˆxi · e−j 2πi
N k +
N−1
X
i=0
˜xi · e−j 2πi
N k
(2.13)
where both contributions accumulate over the window [0 , . . . , N −1]. If the
contribution from ˆXi is dominant (i.e., its amplitude is much larger and it persists
for longer time), the DFT effectively averages out the short-lived contributions of
˜
Xi over the entire sample period. The averaging effect can also be seen from the
perspective of energy distribution. The Parseval’s theorem for discrete signals
states that the total energy in the time domain is equal to the total energy in the
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Frequency Analysis
19
frequency domain:
N−1
X
i=0
|Xi|2 =
N−1
X
i=0
| ˆXi + ˜Xi|2 = 1
N
N−1
X
k=0
|X[k]|2
(2.14)
If ˆXi has more energy than ˜Xi, than also its frequency contribution is dominant
in X[k].
Aliasing is another critical issue, especially relevant when the signal is sampled
using a frequency lower than the Nyquist rate [4]. In such case high-frequency
components are folded back into lower frequencies and distort the true frequency
spectrum of the signal, affecting subsequent processing. When the inverse Fourier
Transform is applied, the reconstructed series Xi will include these aliasing arti-
facts.
2.5.3
Short-Time Fourier Transform
The Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) addresses the limitation of the DFT
and FFT regarding non-stationary signals, where frequency components vary over
time. It divides the time series into smaller segments and applies the Fourier
Transform to each, offering a time-frequency representation.
To perform the
STFT on a discrete time series Xi, a window function w[m] of size M is used to
isolate subsections of the series. The window is then shifted and at each position
the Fourier Transform is applied to the windowed data.
Mathematically, the
STFT X[m, k] at time step m and frequency k is computed as:
X[m, k] =
N−1
X
i=0
xi · w[m −i] · e−j 2πi
N k
(2.15)
Here, xi is the i−th sample of the time series, w[m −i] is the window function
centered at time m, and the exponential term represents the Fourier Transform
kernel. The result, X[m, k], is a complex value representing the amplitude and
phase of frequency k at time m.
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
The STFT’s time-frequency resolution depends on the size of the window func-
tion: a larger window provides better frequency resolution but poorer time resolu-
tion, while a smaller window provides better time resolution but poorer frequency
resolution. This trade-off is a key consideration in the application of the STFT,
as the choice of window size both adds complexity O(MN log N) and is affected
by specific characteristics of the series being analyzed.
2.5.4
Discrete Wavelet Transform
Discrete Wavelet Transformation (DWT) is a mathematical technique used to
decompose a signal into its constituent wavelets, unlike the Fourier transforms
that decompose signals into sinusoids. The DWT provides a time-frequency rep-
resentation of the signal, which is advantageous for analyzing signals with non-
stationary characteristics. For a given signal Xi = [x0, . . . , xN−1], the DWT is
mathematically expressed as:
DWTXi[j, k] =
N−1
X
n=0
xn · ψj,k(n)
(2.16)
ψj,k(n) =
1
√
2j ψ
n −2jk
2j

(2.17)
where ψj,k(n) represents the wavelet function at scale j and position k.
The
function ψ is the mother wavelet, and its translations and dilations by powers of
2 generate the basis functions.
The DWT is typically computed through iterative filtering and down-sampling
steps, using a pair of high-pass and low-pass filters, denoted as g[n] and h[n]
respectively. These filters are applied iteratively to the signal in a cascade, a
process known as filter banking. At each level of decomposition, the signal is
first passed through both filters.
Then, the outputs are down-sampled by a
factor of 2. The down-sampled output of the high-pass filter provides the detail
coefficients, while the output of the low-pass filter is further processed in the next
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Frequency Analysis
21
level of decomposition to provide the approximation coefficients:
Figure 2.4: Third order Filter bank [11]
The use of filter banks in the DWT allows for a hierarchical decomposition of
the signal, enabling the extraction of information at different resolutions. This
property is particularly useful for signals with varying frequencies over time, pro-
viding a more flexible analysis compared to the fixed time-frequency resolution of
the STFT. This allows for better time resolution at higher frequencies and better
frequency resolution at lower frequencies at a lower computational complexity
O(N).
==PAGE:32==
22
Background
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Related Work
This chapter explores the SOTA models in TSF and introduces the details of
their architecture. These models will be compared with TiDBITS in Chapter 5
for the final evaluation.
3.1
FEDformer
Figure 3.1: FEDformer architecture [42]
==PAGE:34==
24
Related Work
The Frequency Enhanced Decomposed Transformer model, or FEDformer, ad-
dresses the limitations of traditional Transformer-based methods in long-term
series forecasting by incorporating a seasonal-trend decomposition method and a
frequency enhancement technique [42]. The approach enables the model to cap-
ture both the global profile and detailed structures of time series data efficiently.
FEDformer leverages a combination of Frequency Enhanced Block (FEB) and
Mixture of Experts Decomposition (MOEDecomp) to replace the classical self-
attention mechanism in both the encoder and the decoder. The former extracts
features in the frequency domain representation of the data with DFT by select-
ing only the top modes in the frequency spectrum. It has two variants, namely
FEB-w and FEB-f, depending on whether it firsly decomposes the input data into
three time-frequency band representations using DWT (FEB-w) or not (FEB-f).
Whereas the latter extract season/trend patterns in the data by using Seasonal-
Trend decomposition though the LOESS algorithm, which tries to decompose the
series Xi as:
Xi = Ti + Si + Ri
(3.1)
where Ti, Si and Ri represent the trend, seasonal and residual parts, respec-
tively. Lastly, in the decoder, the Frequency Enhanced Attention employs cross-
attention on the complex values of the DFT frequency representation of such
features for representation learning.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 PatchTST
25
3.2
PatchTST
Figure 3.2: PatchTST architecture details [26]
PatchTST addresses the challenges of traditional Transformers, which often strug-
gle with long sequences and computational inefficiencies, by employing input seg-
mentation into patches and a Channel Independent mechanism, in addition to
the Transformer-based backbone [26]. The former retains local semantic infor-
mation of the TS and reduces the computational complexity of the attention
maps, effectively extending the look-back window. It also allows the model to
accurately capture longer dependencies. The latter assigns an univariate series
for each channel from the multivariate input for independent processing.
PatchTST also incorporates both self-supervised and supervised learning back-
bones to enhance its performance. In the self-supervised learning mode, the model
pre-trains on a large amount of unlabeled time series data, learning general rep-
resentations of the data patterns. This pre-training captures essential features
and dependencies within the time series, which can be fine-tuned later for specific
forecasting tasks. The supervised backbone, on the other hand, directly trains
the model on labeled data, optimizing it for the specific forecasting objective.
==PAGE:36==
26
Related Work
This dual approach leverages the strengths of both learning paradigms, resulting
in improved accuracy and generalization capabilities.
3.3
LTSF-Linear
The permutation-invariant nature of the self-attention mechanism in Transform-
ers may result in the loss of crucial temporal information.
Surprisingly, sim-
ple linear models from the Linear family of Long-term Series Forecasting [40]
have demonstrated superior performance in comparison to Transformers. One
significant advantage of these models is their reliance on the Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS) solution for the least-squares problem of a linear regression. The
closed-form solution finds the best regression coefficients that minimize the sum
of the least squared residuals for both univariate-to-univariate and multivarite-
to-multivariate regressions, since it represents a mathematical convex problem
with a global minimum.
Due to the convexity of their least-squares problem, Linear models are equivalent
to three main classes of linear regression, depending on whether they apply or
not some form of normalization to the data [33]:
• Linear and DLinear:
The Linear architecture is the simplest among the
two, comprising of just a single linear layer. DLinear, instead, firstly incor-
porates a moving average kernel decomposition to split data into seasonal
and trend components, then applies separate linear layers to each of them
and aggregates back the predictions to form the final output. These two
models are equivalent to the unconstrained regression class Y = A · X + b,
meaning there are no restrictions to the values of A and b.
• NLinear:
It computes the linear regression on the data normalized
through Now-Normalization (NowNorm). This normalization works by sub-
tracting the most-recent value xL to the whole series Xi, and adding it back
after computing the regression. This model is equivalent to the constrained
==PAGE:37==
3.4 FITS
27
regression class Y = ˜A · X + b, where the elements of each row in ˜A must
sum up to 1.
• RLinear:
It computes the linear regression on the data normalized
through Reversible-Instance-Normalization (RevIN or RIN) [19]. This nor-
malization works in two steps: the whole series X is first normalized ac-
cording to its mean and standard deviation δ(X), then a linear shift and
scale are applied. After the regression, the same operations are performed
backwards, to compute the final output.
The RLinear model is equivalent to the constrained regression class Y =
˜A · X + b · δ(X), where the elements of each row of ˜A must sum up to 1 and
the bias term is multiplied by standard deviation of the time series.
Compared to other deep architecture, these linear models have a significantly
smaller number parameters, leading to faster training times and achieve SOTA
accuracy for TSF on the datasets mentioned in Section 2.2.
3.4
FITS
Frequency-Interpolation Time Series (FITS) is a recent model based on the Linear
family, and apart from being among the most lightweight, it achieves SOTA
accuracy scores [38]:
Figure 3.3: FITS architecture [38]
==PAGE:38==
28
Related Work
The innovative approach to TSF used in the FITS architecture comes from sig-
nal theory. Figure 3.3 shows how the model, after applying RIN normalization,
transforms the input data into its Fourier frequency-spectrum representation us-
ing the FFT transformation on the real-valued input series (rFFT). The spectrum
is then low-pass filtered using truncation, which reduces the dimensionality of the
signal thereby limiting the number of learnable parameters, while also removing
high freuquency noise present in the data. The parameter learning is performed
through a complex-valued linear layer, which extrapolates features over the low-
pass filtered spectrum. Interpolation is then performed though zero-padding to
length L+H, where the first L elements represent the ‘reconstruction’ and the last
H represent the actual prediction. Then, after computing the inverse operations
inverse-rFFT (irFFT) and inverse-RIN (iRIN) the output is returned.
FITS utilizes three important optimizations to improve its accuracy and reach
SOTA scores on most datasets: low-pass filtering, training over look-back and
forecasting windows with fine-tuning, and weight-sharing approach. The low-
pass filtering computes the cutoff frequency from a multiple of the dominant
harmonic in the spectrum and from the dominant period of the data, which is
manually inferred using statistical analysis. Also, the filtering is an important
differentiating factor from other Linear models, which makes FITS not equivalent
to the unconstrained linear regression model class [33]. The second improves ac-
curacy by first minimizing both reconstruction (L) and prediction (H) loss at the
same time (LH training mode), then focusing only on prediction through fine-
tuning the parameters. The weight-sharing approach is then implemented under
the assumption that data has similar distributions across all channels. Therefore,
the same linear layer is applied for all channels for feature extrapolation, though a
separate linear layer for each channel can also be set before training as a Channel
Independent approach. Finally, while maintaining superior forecasting accuracy,
FITS also achieves this with a remarkably small parameter count, i.e., whithin
10k-80k (when using weight-sharing), utilizing significantly a fewer amount than
LSTM or Transformer-based models.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Methodology
This chapter describes the design of TiDBITS as the proposed alternative archi-
tecture for the FITS model. It first illustrates FITS as well as its main operations.
It then introduces the goals that have have guided the design of the proposed
architecture. The chapter also describes the time-domain equivalent of each oper-
ation in FITS, highlighting the possible design choices and optimizations options.
Finally, it presents the final TiDBITS architecture for TSF in the time domain.
==PAGE:40==
30
Methodology
4.1
FITS: Architecture and Operations
X
α(L+H)
L
αL
RIN
Zero-Padding
Linear
LPF
iRIN
Y
L+H
L+H
FFT
iFFT
Figure 4.1: FITS operations
Figure 4.1 shows the operational breakdown of the FITS model. Each step also
indicates how the length of input vector X is modified through the neural network
to compute the output vector Y . From its original size L, the input is truncated
wit a the Low-Pass Filter (LPF) to the size αL with 0 < α < 1, which is
then projected to α(L + H) by the Linear Layer. Zero-padding and iFFT are
then performed to interpolate in frequency domain and to match the output size
L+H, which allows the model to compute the loss on both reconstruction ( first L
samples ) and prediction ( last H samples). Moreover, RIN and iRIN operations
are time-domain linear transformations applied symmetrically at both ends on the
values of the input and output vectors, respectively, without modifying their size.
The advantage of this modular representation is to provide a clear overview of the
key computations in the FITS model and to better understand the equivalence
with the time-domain components of TiDBITS .
4.2
Design Goals
The design goals for the proposed TiDBITS architecture are aimed at providing
a full time-domain alternative to the FITS model, while maintaining flexibility
for optimizations. The primary goals are the following.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Time-Domain Operations
31
1. Modular Equivalence:
Ensure that the architecture can be broken
down into modular parts that directly correspond to the components of the
FITS model. This facilitates a clear understanding of the functional equiv-
alence between the two architectures, by guaranteeing that each operation
in TiDBITS can be directly compared to its FITS counterpart.
2. Time-Domain Learning:
Shift the architecture from frequency to full
time-domain processing. The linear layer should directly learn parameters
over the filtered time-domain representation of the input series.
3. Optimization Strategies:
Clearly identify and incorporate optimiza-
tion strategies to enhance the performance of time-domain operations in
TiDBITS with limited increase in model complexity.
4. Simplified Hyperparameters Tuning:
Hyperparameter (HP) tuning
helps finding the optimal configuration for the hyperparamters of the model,
as well as for those of the training. The proposed architecture should ideally
have less hyperparameters than FITS.
4.3
Time-Domain Operations
X
α(L+H)
L
αL
RIN
Linear
1D
Convolution
DWS
L+H
Y
iRIN
UPS
L
Figure 4.2: FITS operations
The Figure 4.2 highlights the general architecture of a full time-domain model
performing the same operations as FITS but in time domain. The frequency-
domain truncation employed as LPF in FITS is replaced by a 1-dimensional (1D)
convolution operation followed by downsampling (DWS) to discard samples that
==PAGE:42==
32
Methodology
are not representative.
The structure of the linear layer remains unchanged,
projecting the filtered vector from size αL to α(L + H). The zero-padding and
inverse-FFT in FITS is replaced by a time interpolation using an upsampling
(UPS) operation to match the target output size of L + H. The RIN and iRIN
operations remain unchanged.
This modular representation satisfies design goals 1-2 by providing clear func-
tional equivalence and transition to time-domain processing. However, additional
considerations are necessary for goals 3-4.
Firstly, different functions can serve as LPFs, such as Triangular, Gaussian, But-
terworth, and Sinc, each characterized by a distinct response in frequency (Figure
4.3).
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Normalized Frequency (×  rad/sample)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Magnitude
Triangular Filter
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Normalized Frequency (×  rad/sample)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Magnitude
Gaussian Filter
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Normalized Frequency (×  rad/sample)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Magnitude
Butterworth Filter
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Normalized Frequency (×  rad/sample)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Magnitude
Windowed Sinc Filter
Figure 4.3: Frequency spectrum of common LPFs
An ideal filter should closely mimic frequency truncation in FITS by having uni-
tary gain for the intended frequencies, a small transition bandwidth, and high
attenuation for the rest of the spectrum.
Secondly, the DWS factor α should be chosen to ensure that the LPF’s cutoff
==PAGE:43==
4.4 TiDBITS Architecture
33
frequency fc satisfies the condition fc ≤
α
2 , in accordance with the Nyquist-
Shannon sampling theorem. This ensures that the downsampling does not lose
significant information. From the perspective of digital filter design, the convo-
lution parameters are the filter kernel size and the window function (to reduce
the transition bandwidth and roll-off), while fc and α could be defined as neural
network HPs. Moreover, the DWS process must handle non-integer values of αL
effectively, since 0 < α < 1. In addition, the UPS operation can be performed
using zero-insertion followed by an interpolation filter, therefore removing the
spectral replicas created during zero-insertion.
Balancing optimization strategies for time-domain operations with HP search is
crucial. While setting LPF function, LPF kernel size, fc, α, and the interpolation
filter as HPs can optimize performance, it also increases the search space for the
optimal solution, potentially conflicting with the goal of simplified HP tuning.
Therefore, it is recommended a careful selection of essential HPs to meet design
goals while maintaining model efficiency and accuracy.
4.4
TiDBITS Architecture
X
α(L+H)
L
αL
RIN
Linear
Windowed
Sinc LPF
DWS
(linear)
L+H
Y
iRIN
UPS
(zero-insertion)
L
Windowed
Sinc LPF
L+H
0s
Figure 4.4: TiDBITS architectural overview
Figure 4.4 outlines the final architecture of the TiDBITS model, according to
the analysis in the previous section. The LPF incorporates a Sinc filter using a
Hamming window function. This choice is due to the excellent properties of the
windowed Sinc filter in digital filter design, notably its minimal transition band-
width and effective roll-off characteristics, which closely simulate the frequency
truncation employed in FITS. The model utilizes linear interpolation to handle
==PAGE:44==
34
Methodology
the non-integer size of the αL vector after DWS. This method was chosen over in-
teger rounding because it has shown superior performance through a preliminary
evaluation, as it preserves more information between sample points. Conversely,
UPS is performed through zero-insertion to length L + H, followed by a 1D con-
volution with another LPF. This filter is actually utilizes the same Windowed
Sinc LPF from the DWS stage, though this time it performs time-interpolation
and removes the unrepresentative spectral replicas in the frequency spectrum.
The cutoff frequency fc is set to fc = α
2 for both filters.
The TiDBITS architecture uses HP search for the DWS factor α and the filter
kernel size , which are shared by the two filters to reduce complexity.
A comparison of the HPs between TiDBITS and FITS is presented in Table 4.1.
HP Function
HP Flag
FITS
TiDBITS
Channel-Independence
indiv
Shared
Shared
Training Mode
train_mode
Shared
Shared
Harmonic Order
H_order
Dynamic
-
Dominant Period
base_T
Manual
-
Sampling Factor(α)
sampling_factor
-
Dynamic
Filter Kernel Size
filter_window
-
Shared
Total HPs
4
4
Table 4.1: Comparison of model hyperparameters between FITS and TiDBITS
In this context, Shared HPs are shared among several datasets and prediction
horizons, ensuring consistency across various training scenarios. Dynamic HPs
are instead optimized through automated HP search, adapting to the unique
features of each dataset and prediction horizons.
While the total number of HPs in TiDBITS does not necessarily decrease com-
==PAGE:45==
4.4 TiDBITS Architecture
35
pared to FITS, TiDBITS introduces a significant improvement by replacing a
Manual hyperparameter, i.e., the dominant period of the data requiring individ-
ual statistical analysis and adjustment for each dataset before training, with a
shared one, enhancing scalability and ease of use for practical applications.
==PAGE:46==
36
Methodology
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Results
This chapter presents a comprehensive evaluation of the TiDBITS model by as-
sessing its performance, computational efficiency, and scalability in comparison
with FITS model. It first outlines the experimental setup, detailing the datasets,
hyperparameter optimization strategy and evaluation metrics, followed by some
considerations on the two-stage training approach of the model. The chapter
continues by focusing on long-term forecasting accuracy, comparing TiDBITS
with SOTA architectures on multiple datasets. It finally characterizes the com-
putational requirements of TiDBITS in terms of multiply-accumulate operations
(MACs) and parameter count.
5.1
Experimental Setup
The TiDBITS model is evaluated on the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of the
six time series datasets mentioned in Section 2.2.
Hyperparameter tuning is
==PAGE:48==
38
Results
performed using the Optuna framework [1], which employs a Tree-structured
Parzen Estimator (TPE) algorithm for efficient exploration of the hyperparameter
search space. Optuna’s TPE sampler guides the search towards promising regions
of the HP space, aiming to minimize the MSE loss on the validation set. Moreover,
TiDBITS utilizes two training approaches, similar to FITS.
• LH Training:
The model is trained to minimize the MSE loss computed
over the entire output vector of length L+H. This output includes both the
reconstruction of the input sequence (L) and the prediction (H).
• LH Training + Fine-tuning:
The model is firstly trained on LH, then
the parameters are fine-tuned by minimizing the MSE loss computed solely
over the prediction segment (H) of the output vector. This is called LHH
mode.
Figure 5.1 shows their different behavior during training in for the ETTh1 dataset
with a prediction horizon of 96, as a function of the same number of epochs.
0
25
50
75
100
Epochs
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Loss (MSE)
LH Losses during Training
Reconstruction Loss
Prediction Loss
Validation Loss
0
25
50
75
100
Epochs
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Loss (MSE)
LHH Losses during Training
Reconstruction Loss
Prediction Loss
Validation Loss
Figure 5.1: Comparison of LH (left) and LHH (right) training on ETTh1-96.
In the figure, Reconstruction Loss refers to the MSE loss computed on the first
L samples (reconstruction), Prediction Loss refers to the MSE loss on the last H
samples (prediction), and Validation Loss’ to the MSE loss of the whole output
vector of size L+H, all computed on the validation set. The figures demonstrate
that, although both modes asymtotically converge to similar validation losses
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Long-Term Forecasting Accuracy
39
asymptotically, they represent different minimization problems. Unexpectedly,
the fine-tuning stage causes the model to forget the learning from the recon-
struction phase with LHH. This property has been consistently observed on the
benchmark datasets with both the FITS and TiDBITS models, highlighting a
shared characteristic in their training dynamics. Consequently, both training ap-
proaches have been incorporated as hyperparameters in this study experiments.
Chapter 6 will provide further considerations on this aspect.
5.2
Long-Term Forecasting Accuracy
This section evaluates the long-term forecasting accuracy of TiDBITS by compar-
ing its performance against other state-of-the-art (SOTA) models on different pre-
diction horizons. Each model’s performance is assessed using the Mean Squared
Error (MSE) metric across the ETTh1, ETTh2, ETTm1, ETTm2, Weather and
Electricity datasets. The results for the SOTA are taken from the FITS paper
[38]:
Dataset
Weather
ETTm1
ETTm2
Horizon
96
192
336
720
96
192
336
720
96
192
336
720
PatchTST
0.151
0.195
0.249
0.321
0.292
0.330
0.365
0.419
0.163
0.219
0.276
0.368
FedFormer
0.246
0.219
0.292
0.378
0.362
0.393
0.442
0.483
0.189
0.256
0.326
0.437
DLinear
0.174
0.217
0.262
0.332
0.301
0.335
0.371
0.426
0.171
0.237
0.294
0.426
FITS
0.143
0.186
0.236
0.307
0.303
0.337
0.366
0.415
0.162
0.216
0.268
0.348
TiDBITS
0.141
0.183
0.234
0.307
0.289
0.335
0.366
0.404
0.161
0.216
0.264
0.350
Table 5.1: Long-term forecasting results on Weather, ETTm1 and ETTm2
datasets. Best results for each horizon are highlighted in bold, the
second-best are underlined:
==PAGE:50==
40
Results
Dataset
Electricity
ETTh1
ETTh2
Horizon
96
192
336
720
96
192
336
720
96
192
336
720
PatchTST
0.129
0.149
0.166
0.210
0.385
0.413
0.440
0.456
0.274
0.338
0.367
0.391
FedFormer
0.188
0.197
0.212
0.244
0.375
0.427
0.459
0.484
0.340
0.433
0.508
0.480
DLinear
0.140
0.153
0.169
0.204
0.384
0.443
0.446
0.504
0.282
0.350
0.414
0.588
FITS
0.134
0.149
0.165
0.203
0.372
0.404
0.427
0.424
0.271
0.331
0.354
0.377
TiDBITS
0.136
0.152
0.168
0.206
0.376
0.407
0.436
0.447
0.274
0.336
0.359
0.392
Table 5.2: Long-term forecasting results on Electicity, ETTh1 and ETTh2
datasets. Best results for each horizon are highlighted in bold, the
second-best are underlined:
The results reveal that TiDBITS performs better than FITS in 8 out of 24 cases
and achieves the highest accuracy score in the SOTA on 38% of the benchmark
datasets. It consistently shows superior performance on the Weather dataset, for
which the model employs Channel Independent linear layers for all the prediction
horizons. However, its performance is slightly worse on the ETTh and Electricity
datasets, where FITS exhibits better accuracy.
5.3
Computational Complexity
This section assesses the computational complexity of TiDBITS in comparison
with to FITS and other other state-of-the-art models in terms of their estimated
parameter count and multiply-accumulate operations (MACs). Table 5.3 com-
pares the estimated number of parameters for each each dataset and prediction
horizon, quantified either in thousands (K), millions (M) or billions (G). The
results for the SOTA are taken from the FITS paper [38] also in this case.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Computational Complexity
41
Model
Parameters
MACs
PatchTST
1.5M
5.07G
FEDformer
20.68M
4.41G
DLinear
139.7K
40M
FITS
4.5K∼10K
1.6M∼8.9M
TiDBITS
28.3K
9.09M
Table 5.3: Number of trainable parameters and MACs of TSF models for a look-
back window of 96 and forecasting horizon of 720 on the Electricity
dataset.
The results show that TiDBITS typically has a higher complexity than FITS,
requiring three to five times more parameters. However, the complexity in TiD-
BITS follows the signal theory principles, since time domain operations usually
require more computations than those in the frequency domain. Despite this,
TiDBITS still maintains a significant advantage in terms of parameter efficiency.
The model has approximately 5 times fewer parameters than DLinear and 50 to
1000 times fewer than Transformer-based architectures. This efficiency in the
parameter count contributes to TiDBITS ’ scalability and practical applicability
in several real-world scenarios, making it a competitive choice despite its higher
computational demands compared to FITS.
==PAGE:52==
42
Results
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Future Work
This thesis introduced TiDBITS , a novel time-domain alternative to the FITS
model for time series forecasting. The design process was thoroughly detailed,
highlighting the breakdown of components in FITS, the design goals behind TiD-
BITS , the intermediate and final architectural choices, and a comprehensive
evaluation with a comparison against the state of the art.
The proposed TiDBITS model achieves a clear modular equivalence to the FITS
architecture, ensuring that the operations of each component in the time do-
main functionally align with those in the frequency domain. This shift enables
TiDBITS to leverage time-domain learning, offering an innovative approach for
long-term forecasting. Several optimization strategies and careful hyperparame-
ter tuning allow TiDBITS to maintain model efficiency while enhancing perfor-
mance.
The evaluation demonstrated that TiDBITS performs competitively across mul-
tiple datasets, and achieves SOTA accuracy scores on 38% of the considered
==PAGE:54==
44
Conclusion and Future Work
datasets. However, the model performance on the ETTh1, ETTh2 and Electric-
ity datasets showed room for further optimization. An analysis of the compu-
tational complexity revealed that TiDBITS generally requires more parameters
than FITS, correlating higher complexity with improved performance. Despite
this, the model has approximately 5 times fewer parameters than DLinear and 50
to 1000 times fewer than Transformer-based architectures, maintaining efficiency
while handling higher computational demands.
6.1
Future Work
The findings of this study could be extended:
• Exploration of Additional Datasets: the evaluation can be extended
to other other well-known time series datasets, such as the Traffic dataset,
which involves 862 channels. Besides the Electricity dataset consisting of
321 channels, other datasets were not covered in this study due to the
very long training hours. For such datasets, the Channel Independent (CI)
approach has proven challenging to be evaluated, in addition to the hyper-
paramters search.
• Aliasing Issues: this thesis could not reveal whether aliasing affects more
time domain or frequency domain learning. Therefore, additional studies
could aim to understand its impact on model performance on datasets with
varying sampling frequencies, such as ETTh and ETTm.
• Alternative Transformations: other transformations, such as the Dis-
crete Wavelet Transform (DWT) or the Short-Time Fourier Transform
(STFT), might offer improved representations in time or frequency, poten-
tially enhancing model performance without relying on full time-domain
computations. These transformations could provide a better balance be-
tween time and frequency information, leading to more accurate predictions.
• Frequency Band Decomposition: another promising approach involves
splitting the data into several frequency bands by using cascading convolu-
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Future Work
45
tions (similar to filter banks) and applying separate TiDBITS networks for
each of them. Such decomposition increases the granularity of model and
allows to learn spectral bands using separate linear layers. Initial exper-
iments with this approach have shown promising results, suggesting that
further investigation could be fruitful.
• Adversarial Learning in High Frequency: several adversarial learn-
ing techniques could be evaluated on the high frequency spectrum instead
of eliminating these components using a LPF. This approach could make
the model invariant to changes in high frequencies, potentially mitigating
the issue of non-stationarity. This could potentially preserve more informa-
tion in the frequency domain while enhancing robustness and generalization
capability of the model across different data conditions.
• LH and LHH Differences: these approaches could be systematically
compared against a model that projects the output vector directly to size H
instead of L+H. In fact, in LHH training mode, the initial LH phase acts as
an effective weights initialization step, guiding the model parameters closer
to the optimal configuration that minimizes the prediction loss only on the
last H samples. The LH training mode, instead, represents a minimization
problem of both prediction and reconstruction losses at the same time.
Therefore, a formal analysis could help better understand the differences
between LH and LHH training modes.
In conclusion, the TiDBITS model represents a significant step forward in time-
domain processing for time series forecasting. Continued research and experi-
mentation with additional datasets, alternative transformations, and novel archi-
tectural approaches will likely yield further improvements. The advancements
and insights gained from this study pave the way for more robust and efficient
models, ultimately enhancing the capability to accurately forecast time series
data in various applications.
==PAGE:56==
46
Conclusion and Future Work
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1] Akiba, T., Sano, S., Yanase, T., Ohta, T., and Koyama, M.
Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework.
In
Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2019).
[2] Al-Badour, F., Sunar, M., and Cheded, L.
Vibration analysis of
rotating machinery using time-frequency analysis and wavelet techniques.
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 25 (2011), 2083–2101.
[3] Ariyo, A. A., Adewumi, A. O., and Ayo, C. K. Stock price prediction
using the arima model. In 2014 UKSim-AMSS 16th international conference
on computer modelling and simulation (2014), IEEE, pp. 106–112.
[4] Bilinskis, I. Digital Alias-free Signal Processing. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
USA, 2007.
[5] Billah, B., King, M., Snyder, R., and Koehler, A.
Exponen-
tial smoothing model selection for forecasting.
International Journal of
Forecasting 22 (2006), 239–247.
[6] Borovykh, A., Bohté, S., and Oosterlee, C. Conditional time series
forecasting with convolutional neural networks. arXiv: Machine Learning
(2017).
==PAGE:58==
48
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[7] Cao, J., Li, Z., and Li, J. Financial time series forecasting model based
on ceemdan and lstm. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications
(2019).
[8] Cao, Y., Fang, Z., Wu, Y., Zhou, D.-X., and Gu, Q. Towards under-
standing the spectral bias of deep learning. International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-21) (2019), 2205–2211.
[9] Chen, P., Pedersen, T., Bak-Jensen, B., and Chen, Z. Arima-based
time series model of stochastic wind power generation. IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 25 (2010).
[10] Cheng, Z., Wang, H. X. Y., and Zhou, H.
Time series forecasting
based on arima and lstm models. 2023 International Conference on Power,
Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Control (PEEEC) (2022).
[11] Commons, W. File:wavelets - filter bank.png — wikimedia commons, the
free media repository, 2023. [Online; accessed 27-March-2024].
[12] Cools, M., Moons, E., and Wets, G. Investigating the variability in
daily traffic counts through use of arimax and sarimax models: assessing the
effect of holidays on two site locations. Transportation research record 2136,
1 (2009), 57–66.
[13] Cui, Z., Henrickson, K. C., Ke, R., and Wang, Y. Traffic graph convo-
lutional recurrent neural network: A deep learning framework for network-
scale traffic learning and forecasting.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 21 (2018), 4883–4894.
[14] Deng, L., Li, G., Han, S., Shi, L., and Xie, Y. Model compression
and hardware acceleration for neural networks: A comprehensive survey.
Proceedings of the IEEE 108, 4 (2020), 485–532.
[15] Dormann, C., Elith, J., Bacher, S., Buchmann, C. M., Carl, G.,
Carré, G., Márquez, J., Gruber, B., Lafourcade, B., Leitão,
P., Münkemüller, T., McClean, C., Osborne, P., Reineking, B.,
Schröder, B., Skidmore, A., Zurell, D., and Lautenbach, S.
Collinearity: a review of methods to deal with it and a simulation study
evaluating their performance. Ecography 36 (2013), 27–46.
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
49
[16] for Biogeochemistry, M. P. I. Weather dataset from max planck bio-
geochemistry institute, 2020.
[17] Gardner, E. S., and McKenzie, E. Forecasting trends in time series.
Management Science 31 (1985), 1237–1246.
[18] Han, L., Ye, H.-J., and Zhan, D.-c. The capacity and robustness trade-
off: Revisiting the channel independent strategy for multivariate time series
forecasting. arXiv preprint (2023).
[19] Kim, T., Kim, J., Tae, Y., Park, C., Choi, J.-H., and Choo, J.
Reversible instance normalization for accurate time-series forecasting against
distribution shift. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(2021).
[20] Kong, L., Li, G., Rafique, W., Shen, S., He, Q., Khosravi, M. R.,
Wang, R., and Qi, L.
Time-aware missing healthcare data prediction
based on arima model. IEEE/ACM transactions on computational biology
and bioinformatics (2022).
[21] Lebel, J., Kratz, F., and Bloch, G.
Missing values rebuilding by
prediction and arima modelling in time series.
In Advanced Information
Processing in Automatic Control (AIPAC’89). Elsevier, 1990, pp. 357–361.
[22] Li, X., Kang, Y., and Li, F. Forecasting with time series imaging. Expert
Syst. Appl. 160 (2019), 113680.
[23] Liu, S., Ji, H., and Wang, M. C. Nonpooling convolutional neural net-
work forecasting for seasonal time series with trends. IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks and Learning Systems 31 (2020), 2879–2888.
[24] Mahalakshmi, G., Sridevi, S., and Rajaram, S. A survey on forecast-
ing of time series data. IEEE Xplore (2016).
[25] Matalgah, M., and Knopp, J.
Time-varying spectral analysis of
non-stationary signals based on combined wavelet and fourier transforms.
International Journal of Electronics 78 (1995), 463–476.
==PAGE:60==
50
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[26] Nie, Y., Nguyen, N. H., Sinthong, P., and Kalagnanam, J. A time
series is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2211.14730 (2022).
[27] Ong, C.-S., Huang, J.-J., and Tzeng, G. Model identification of arima
family using genetic algorithms. Appl. Math. Comput. 164 (2005), 885–912.
[28] Pukhova, V., Gorelova, E., Ferrini, G., and Burnasheva, S.
Time-frequency representation of signals by wavelet transform.
In 2017
IEEE Conference of Russian Young Researchers in Electrical and Electronic
Engineering (EIConRus) (2017), IEEE, pp. 715–718.
[29] Rahaman, N., Baratin, A., Arpit, D., Draxler, F., Lin, M., Ham-
precht, F., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. On the spectral bias of
neural networks. In International conference on machine learning (2019),
PMLR, pp. 5301–5310.
[30] Semenoglou, A.-A., Spiliotis, E., and Assimakopoulos, V. Image-
based time series forecasting: A deep convolutional neural network approach.
Neural Networks 157 (2023), 39–53.
[31] Siami-Namini, S., Tavakoli, N., and Siami Namin, A. A comparison of
arima and lstm in forecasting time series. In 2018 17th IEEE International
Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA) (2018).
[32] Sze, V., hsin Chen, Y., Yang, T.-J., and Emer, J. S. Efficient pro-
cessing of deep neural networks: A tutorial and survey. Proceedings of the
IEEE 105 (2017), 2295–2329.
[33] Toner, W., and Darlow, L. An analysis of linear time series forecasting
models. ArXiv abs/2403.14587 (2024).
[34] Torres, J. F., Hadjout, D., Sebaa, A., Martínez-Álvarez, F.,
and Lora, A. T.
Deep learning for time series forecasting: A survey.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 2020 (2020).
[35] Trindade, A. Electricity load diagrams 2011-2014. UCI Machine Learning
Repository, 2015.
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
51
[36] Ushiku, Y. Computer Vision: A Reference Guide. Springer International
Publishing, 2021, ch. Long Short-Term Memory.
[37] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L.,
Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you
need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[38] Xu, Z., Zeng, A., and Xu, Q.
Fits: Modeling time series with 10k
parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03756 (2023).
[39] Yuan, P., and Zhu, C. Is channel independent strategy optimal for time
series forecasting? ArXiv abs/2310.17658 (2023).
[40] Zeng, A., Chen, M., Zhang, L., and Xu, Q. Are transformers effective
for time series forecasting?
In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence (2023), vol. 37, pp. 11121–11128.
[41] Zhou, H., Zhang, S., Peng, J., Zhang, S., Li, J., Xiong, H., and
Zhang, W.
Informer:
Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence
time-series forecasting. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence (2021), vol. 35, pp. 11106–11115.
[42] Zhou, T., Ma, Z., Wen, Q., Wang, X., Sun, L., and Jin, R. Fed-
former: Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series
forecasting. In International conference on machine learning (2022), PMLR,
pp. 27268–27286.
