==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master thesis
The Impact of Obesity on the Immune System
as Studied in Ossabaw Pigs
July 14, 2024
Authors:
Helene Vingborg Toft,
s174600
Supervisors:
Peter M. H. Heegaard
Sunil Kumar Saini
DTU Health Tech
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Obesity or overweight is estimated to affect 54% of the world’s adult population by 2035. It
is linked to various metabolic dysfunctions, collectively known as metabolic syndrome (MetS),
which increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases and type II diabetes.
Chronic low-grade
inflammation, marked by elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α and IL-
6, is associated with obesity, suggesting an interplay between obesity and the immune system.
This thesis explores the use of flow cytometry to study T-cell populations in Ossabaw pigs, a
model that mirrors human metabolic and immune system. The project had two main objectives:
to implement and optimize flow cytometry for T-cell identification and to examine the impact of
obesity on T-cell populations using peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from Ossabaw
pigs.
Initially, staining protocols for T-cell identification, gating strategy, and antibody panel for
CD3, CD4, and CD8 markers, were optimized. An experiment confirmed that cryopreserva-
tion did not significantly affect T-cell population frequencies. Functional differences was not
investigates and require further investigation.
T-cell populations in PBMC samples from two diet-induced obesity experiments were compared
to those from lean control pigs. In one study, obesity led to a general increase in lymphocytes
and T-cell subsets, particularly CD8+ single positive (SP) T-cells, though in cannot be excluded
that age differences between obese and lean groups may have influenced these results. The
second study showed no significant changes, likely due to a milder degree of obesity induced by
a shorter time frame and less cholesterol-rich diet. Additionally, a polymorphism in the CD4
allele, which affects the binding of the 74-12-4 clone CD4 antibody, is likely the reason why
some pigs showed no expression of CD4.
This research demonstrates that flow cytometry can identify T-cell populations in Ossabaw
pigs and reveal differences in T-cell composition between lean and obese pigs. However, fur-
ther optimization of the antibody panel and consideration of age-dependent changes in T-cell
compositions are necessary for future studies. This work establishes a foundation for using flow
cytometry to study the immunological effects of obesity in Ossabaw pigs, providing a valuable
tool for investigating obesity-related immune dysfunctions.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface & Acknowledgement
The present project was conducted by Helene Vingborg Toft to obtain a Master degree in phar-
maceutical design and engineering. The thesis was credited 32.5 ECTS point and started the
29th of January and was handed in on the 14th of July. The thesis made as a collaborating
between the ”Innate Immunology and Metabolism” and the ”T-cell antigen and Immunogenic-
ity” group at the institute of Health Technology at DTU and under the supervision of Professor
Peter M. H. Heegaard and Professor Sunil Kumar Saini.
I would like to give my gratitude to my supervisors Peter M. H. Heegaard given me the oppor-
tunity to do this projects for all the help and guidance add always being available for a chat. I
am gratefully to have been part of the journey towards understanding the immunological effects
of obesity. I would also like to thank Sunil Kumar Saini fro letting me work in their lab and
for helping me on my journey to understand flow cytometry.
I would also like to thank our labtechnician, Henriette Tackmann Vorsholt for all the help
in and out of the and always being helpful and available to answer questions. Furthermore,
thanks to the rest of the ”Innate Immunology and Metabolism” group for welcoming me into
their office. A special thanks to Sebastien Sebbaha for all the help and company in the flow
cytometry lab, and for always being interested and curious about how it was going.
Lastly, heartfelt thanks to my family and friends for their unwavering support.
A special
thanks to my dear friend, Alberte Obbitz Mogensen, for her support and companionship not
only during this thesis but throughout six years of university. I couldn’t have made it without
you.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abbriviations
Ab Antibody
BMI Body Mass Index
CTL Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
CVD Cardiovascular Disease
DC Dendritic cell
DN Double negative
DOB Day of Birth
DP Double positive
EDTA Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
FBS Fetal bovine serum
FC Flow Cytometry
FFA Free fatty acids
FMO Fluorescence Minus One
FSC Forward Scatter
HDL High density lipoprotein
MetS Metabolic syndrome
MHC Major Histocompatibility Complex
NIR Near-IR viability dye
PBL Peripheral blood lymphocytes
PBMC Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
PBS phosphate-buffered saline
RPMI Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640
SD Standard deviation
SI Separation index
SP Single positive
SSC Side Scatter
TCR T cell receptor
TG Triglycerides
Th T-helper
TNF-α Tumor Necrosis Factor- α
WHO World Health Organization
iii
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
Abstract
i
Preface & Acknowledgement
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project aims and outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Human T-cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
The Immune system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
T-cell development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.3
T-cell immune response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Obesity and metabolic syndrome
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Obesity affects immune response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Animal Models for Obesity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
The Ossabaw pig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells in humans and pigs
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Human PBMC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2
Pig PBMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Experimental background
12
3.1
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.1
The Instrument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
FACSCanto II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Methods
15
4.1
PBMC Isolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Flow Cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.1
Antibody Panel design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.2
Thawing of cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.3
Cell surface staining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.4
Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.5
Gating Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.6
Antibody Titration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
iv
==PAGE:6==
4.3.1
Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Experimental set up and pigs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4.1
Fresh vs Frozen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4.2
22 week obesity experiment - Leipzig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4.3
11 week obesity experiment - Short term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Results
24
5.1
Live cell count and viability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Part 1: Method design and optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.1
Establishment of gating strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.2
CD8 Antibody Titration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.3
T-cell subsets in fresh and frozen PBMC samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Part 2: T-cell subsets in the context of obesity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.1
Leipzig and 97 + 98
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3.2
Leipzig pre- and post-diet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.3
Short term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Discussion
38
7
Conclusion
43
8
Future Perspective
44
References
45
9
Appendices
53
Appendix A: Human T-cell staining protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Appendix B: Pig T-cell straining protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Appendix C: Diet specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Appendix D: Pig 103 and 105 second run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Appendix E: Cell frequencies and statistics - Part 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Appendix F: Cell frequencies and statistics - Part 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
==PAGE:7==
Introduction
Obesity is an major global health concern. According to World Obesity federation it is esti-
mated that by 2035, 54% of the worlds adult population will have a BMI > 25 and be classified
as overweight or obese [1] Obesity is connected to a range of different metabolic dysfunctions,
such as hypertension, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia and insulin resistance. Clustering of these
dysfunctions goes under the therm metabolic syndrome (Mets). People with Mets have an
increased risk of getting cardiovascular diseases and type II diabetes. [2] Both diabetes and
heart disease are found on the list of the top 10 global causes of death. [3]
Obesity have been linked with chronic low grade inflammation. This was first described by
Hotamisligi et al in 1993 by discovering that the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α was over-
expressed in adipose tissue of obese mice. [4] It has later been reported that high levels of
circulating IL-6 [5] and TNF-α [6] in adipose tissue of humans correlate with obesity. It is this
correlation between obesity and inflammation that suggest a connection to the immune system
and regulation of immune cells.
Pigs have been identified as a good model for the human immune system, as they share similar
physical and molecular biology. When it comes to obesity, the Ossabaw pig are a good model as
they can develop the same metabolic dysfunctions as obese humans by being feed a high calorie
diet. [7] The connection between obesity and the immune system raises a need for a reliable
method to study immune cells in the Ossabaw model. Flow cytometry has been identified as
such a method, as it can be used to rapidly identify multiple characteristics of cells on a single
cell level in a heterogenous population, like blood or tissue samples.[8]
This project will focus on the use of flow cytometry to study populations of T-cell in Ossabaw
pigs, with the goal to investigate T-cells in the context of obesity. The use of Flow cytometry to
investigate porcine cells is no novel concept, and studies using monoclonal antibodies and flow
cytometry to investigate porcine peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) can be dated back to the
80’s [9]. However, no known research have used flow cytometry to identify T-cells population
in Ossabaw pigs.
Porcine T-cell phenotypically resemble human and mice T-cells, however it has also been es-
tablished that pigs have unique characteristics of their T-cell subsets that are different from
other species like mice and humans.
[10] This even further underlines the need for T-cell
characterisation in the model in order to understand the translatability of the model on to
humans.
The goal of this project is to start the process of implementing flow cytometry as a tool for
studying peripheral blood T-cell in the Ossabaw pig model.
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Project aims and outline
This project has 2 main goals; first to implement and optimise the use of flow cytometry as a
tool to investigate T-cells population in Ossabaw pigs, second to investigate the effect of obesity
on the T-cell populations using PBMCs from Ossabaw pigs.
Design and optimization of staining protocol
Flow cytometry have never before been used to investigate the T-cell populations of Ossabaw
pigs in the group of ”Innate Immunology and Metabolism” at DTU. Therefore the first part
of the project aims to test and optimize the staining procedure for T-cell identification. This
included designing a simple panel of antibodies for CD3, CD4 and CD8 T-cell markers, adapting
staining protocol used for human T-cell staining, and titration of antibody (Ab), if needed.
This part was concluded with an experiment, where flow cytometry was used to investigate the
impact cryopreservation have on the T-cell composition of PBMC samples from Ossabaw pigs.
Effect of obesity on T-cell populations
The second part of the project focused on using flow cytometry to investigate the effect of
obesity on the T-cell populations in Ossabaw pigs.
In this part PBMC samples from two
different diet induced obesity experiments was compared to samples from lean control pigs.
The two different obesity experiments differed in both length (22 weeks and 11 weeks), in the
diet used to induce obesity and age of the pigs.
2
==PAGE:9==
Background
2.1
Human T-cells
2.1.1
The Immune system
The human immune system is a complicated system of cells and molecules that are constantly
in communication with one another in order to protect the body against foreign molecules and
microbial agents.
It is generally divided into two parts, the innate and the adaptive immune system. The innate
immune system is the first line of defense the body has against pathogens and consists of cells
like monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells (DC), and natural killer cells, as well as molecular
components like the complement system and cytokines. The response is rapid, but is not specific
to antigens of the invading pathogen and therefor holds no memory of previous encountered
pathogens. The adaptive immune system involves the activation and proliferation of antigen-
specific T- and B-cells and develops over time. The adaptive immune response takes longer
time to be established, but is specific to antigens of the invading pathogen. [11] T-cells have
multiple functions in the human body. Besides establishing and maintaining immune responses
by recognizing a diverse repertoire of antigens, T-cells are also responsible for maintaining
immune memory and self-tolerance. T-cells are also involved in the inflammatory responses by
both acting pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory . [12]
2.1.2
T-cell development
T-cells originate in the bone marrow which, along with the thymus is considered a primary
lymphoid organs. Lymphoid precursor cells from the bone marrow migrate to the thymus,
where they are matured into naive T-cells (T-cell that have not meet an antigen yet) . In the
thymus the lymphoid precursor cell becomes a double negative (DN) precursor cell expressing
none of the two co-receptors CD4 and CD8. The DN undergo rearrangement of the T-cell
receptor (TCR) genes.
The rearrangement can give rise to either a αβ TCR or γδ TCR
depending on which genes are arranged to form the TCR heterodimer. During this stage the
cells will also start to express the co-receptors CD4 and CD8 making them double positive
(DP) immature T-cells. The DP then interact with cortical epithelial cells, native to the cortex
region of the thymus, that express high amounts of major histocompatibility complex molecules
(MHC). This is called positive selection, where viable DP are selected based on their ability to
successfully bind to self MHC molecules. This is the first step in a rigorous selection process,
where viable cells are selected based on their ability to interact with MHC:peptide complexes.
[13] If the TCR does not bind or binds to weakly, the cell will be neglected and eventually
3
==PAGE:10==
die by neglect. Viable cells receives differentiation signals to become single-positive (SP) T-
cells and migrate to the medulla region of the thymus. SP T-cells only express one of the
co-receptors, depending on whether it interacts with a MHC class-I molecule (CD8) or a MHC
class-II molecule (CD4). [14]
Figure 2.1: T-cell development and activation: (Left) The Lymphoid precursor originates in
the bone marrow. When it enters the thymus it becomes a DN thymocyte, lacking both the CD4
and CD8 receptors. The thymocytes undergo TCR rearrangement and becomes a DP thymocyte,
expressing both CD4 and CD8.
Positive selection occurs in the cortex, where cortical epithelial
cells test their ability to recognize self-MHC molecules. Thymocytes that successfully recognize self-
MHC survive, while those that do not die by neglect. Surviving thymocytes become SP cells, either
expressing CD4 or CD8. In the medulla, SP thymocytes undergo negative selection, where medullary
epithelial cells and DC present self-antigens to them. Thymocytes that strongly bind to self-antigens
are eliminated. Surviving CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells enter the bloodstream as mature naive T-cells.
(Right) In secondary lymphoid tissues, naive T-cells encounter antigens presented by DC and starts
proliferation and differentiation. CD4+ T-cells differentiate into various subsets (Th1, Th2, Th17,
Treg, Tfh) in response to specific cytokine signals, while CD8+ T-cells differentiate into cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs). Figure created with BioRender.com
In the medulla region, SP undergoes negative selection by interaction with medulla epithelial
cells and DC. Negative selection ensures that T-cells, that recognize self-peptides, do not enter
into circulation. Medulla epithelial cells and DC presents SP with MHC bound self-peptides
and if the interaction is strong, the SP is promoted to initiate apoptosis (cell death). It is
assumed that SP T-cells stay in the medulla region for approx. 12 days and are repeatedly
checked with negative selection. After this, the T-cells exit the thymus into circulation as either
mature naive CD4+ T-cells or CD8+ T-cell. [12, 15] See Figure 2.1 right panel.
4
==PAGE:11==
2.1.3
T-cell immune response
The T-cell mediated immune response starts in the secondary lymphoid tissue, like the lymph
nodes, spleen and tonsils, where the naive T-cells are activated by DC that present anti-
gens collected in local tissue.
When the T-cell and DC interact, a synapse forms around
the TCR:peptide-MHC complexes where signals are exchanged to initiate T-cell proliferation.
The proliferation is dependent on 3 main signals. The first is the TCR binding to peptide
presenting MHC molecules on the DC. The second is activation of CD28 receptor on T-cell by
B7 on DC. This initiate proliferation of the T-cell by inducing production of IL-2. The third
signal comes from cytokines produced by the DC, which activates differentiation of the T-cells.
This signal is dependent on what T-cell repons needs to be induced. [16–18]
CD8+ T-cells differentiate into cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) after activation from IL-2. The
main role of CTL is to detect and kill compromised cells in the body such as cells infected with
virus or tumor cells. CTL kill target cells directly by binding to peptide:MHC-I complexes on
the cell surface and inducing apoptosis either via receptor activation or release of granzyme B
and perforin. However, CTL can also indirectly kill cells by release of INF-γ and tumor necrosis
factor-α (TNF-α). [16]
CD4+ T-cell, can differentiate to a variety of different subsets of T-helper cells (Th-cells)
depending on the 3. cytokine signal it receives from the DC, see Figure 2.1 left panel. The
5 main types of Th-cells are, Th1 induced by a combination of IL-12 and INFγ, Th2 induced
by IL4 and IL2, Th17 induced by IL-6, IL-12, IL23 and TGF-α, Treg induced by TGF-β and
follicular helper T cells (Tfh) induced by IL6 and IL21. Each cell type have different effector
function and are the result of different immunological needs. Th1 is reposible for elimination
of intracellular pathogens and promotes activation of monocytes and macrophages by secretion
of INFγ and CTL proliferation by secretion of IL-2. Th2 promotes immune response against
extracellular parasites. They produce cytokines like IL-4, which increase the production of
pro-inflammatory mediators. Th17 cells mount the response against extracellular bacteria and
fungi. Treg cells regulates the immune response by producing cytokines that inhibits other
immune cells and suppress inflammatory responses. Tfh cells are located in lymphoid tissue
and aid the development of B-cells. [17]
2.2
Obesity and metabolic syndrome
World Health Organization (WHO) defines obesity as ”a chronic complex disease defined by
excessive fat deposits that can impair health” [19]. Body mass index (BMI) is globally used as a
marker for obesity and is defined by weight(kg)/height2(m2), however other body measurements
such as waist and hip circumference are also used. WHO defines overweight in adults as having
a BMI ≥25 and obesity as BMI ≥30. [19] World Obesity Federation ads extra category with
BMI ≥40 is defined as severe obesity. [20].
5
==PAGE:12==
Obesity can be classified into three types. Two types being genetically linked (monogenic and
syndromic) and one caused by nutrition (polygenic). Monogenic obesity is caused by autoso-
mal mutations. It is characterised by obesity in the absence if developmental abnormaleties.
Syndromic obesity can be caused by a autosomal or X-linked mutation. It is characterised by
obesity in the presence of intellectual disability, dysmorphic features or organ developmental
disfunction. Polygenic obesity is the most common form and is caused by an imbalance in
energy intake and expenditure, where the intake is higher than the expenditure. [21]
Figure 2.2: The symptoms of metabolic syndrome: MetS is defined as a clustering of different
symptomes, Hyperglycaemia (Fasting glucose in blood ≥100 mg/dL), Low levels of HDL (Conc HDL
in blood < 50 mg/dL for women, < 40 mg/dL for men), High level of triglyceride (conc. of triglyceride
in blood > 150 mg/dL), central adiposity (Waist circumference > 89 cm for women and > 101 cm
for men, and hypertension (Blood pressure ≥130/80 mmHg).
[22] These conditions significantly
increase the risk of cardiovascular disease (2 times) and type II diabetes (5 times). Figure created with
BioRender.com
Obesity is often associate with metabolic dysfunctions, like insulin resistance, hypertension,
hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia. Clustering of these symptoms goes under the term metabolic
syndrome (MetS). Obesity is also associated with low-grade chronic inflammation caused by an
enlargement of adipose tissue and increase of adipocytes. Adipocytes secret pro-inflammatory
cytokines, known as adipokines. In obese individuals, there are an increased production of
adipokines, partly due the increased number of adipocytes, but also because obesity can causes
changes in cell composition in the adipose tissue, eg. increased number of macrophages. This
results in a localized inflammation in the adipose tissue, that can progress to systemic inflam-
mation.[2] Inflammation is thought to be the main cause of insulin resistance in obese, leading
to increased risk of developing type II diabetes along with other co-morbidities associated with
obesity. The chronic inflammation found in obesity is therefore believed to be the link between
6
==PAGE:13==
obesity and disease. [21]
Most definitions of MetS identify it as a clustering of multiple symptoms like Central adipos-
ity (often measured by waist circumference or BMI), hyperglycaemia, hypertension, low levels
of high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and raised levels of triglycerides in blood (dys-
lipidemia), see Figure 2.2 for specific thresholds. Factors like insulin resistance and chronic
inflammation are also often associated with MetS. All these symptoms are common metabolic
dysfunctions associated with obesity. [23] MetS increases the risk of cardiovascular disease
(CVD) with 2-fold and type II diabetes with 5-fold, and is therefor also called cardiometabolic
syndrom. [24]
2.2.1
Obesity affects immune response
Studies have shown that obese individuals exhibit a weakened response to vaccinations and face
a higher risk of complications when infected with viruses such as influenza and SARS-CoV-2.
[25, 26] This suggests that obesity alters the immune system, hindering its ability to mount an
effective immune response. Therefore, it is important to understand these changes to develop
more effective vaccines and therapies.
The innate immune system is first activated with the enlargement of the adipose tissue. The
stress caused by the expansion of the adipose tissue results in adipocyte apoptosis and a high
infiltration of macrophages, into the adipose tissue. This leads to increased levels of the pro-
inflammatory cytokine TNF-α in the adipose tissue, which is mainly produced by macrophages
and monocytes, but also adipocytes them self, [2] and increased levels of circulating IL-6. Both
cytokines are hallmarks for chronic inflammation. [27]
TNF-α inhibits insulin-mediated nutrient uptake causing an increased amount of free fatty
acids (FFA) and triglycerides (TG) in circulation. As a consequence lipids accumulate in none-
adipose tissue, like the heart, kidneys and intestines, but also lymphoid tissue and lymphoid
organs, like thymus and bone marrow, affecting the integrity of the tissue. This compromises
the development and maturation of T-cells in this tissue, as well as reduces the output of naive
T-cells. [24, 28]
In mice it have been demonstrated how obesity causes premature thymic involution similar
to the age depended involution seem in humans. This caused an overall reduction of T-cell
production, and restriction of the TCR diversity. Like seen with elderly humans, a limited
TCR repertoire increases the risk of severe disease during infection, increase risk of cancer and
decrease the success rate of vaccination. [28]
Obesity also have an effect on subsets of circulating lymphocytes. Multiple studies in human
blood, shows an increase of CD4+ T-cells in blood from obese subjects compared to blood
from lean control subjects.
[29–32].
Of the CD4+ T-cells there are evidence that show a
skewing towards Th2 and Treg phenotypes in peripheral blood as well as an increase in naive
7
==PAGE:14==
CD4+ T-cells. [30] When it comes to the effect on the CD8+ subset of T-cells the results are
conflicting. O’Rourke et al [29] and Fink et al [33] found a decrease in CD8+ T-cell frequency
in peripheral blood. Supporting this is Tanaka et al [34] who also found a decrease of CD8+ in
obese subject, but did however also find a decrease in CD4+ T-cells in obese subjects compared
to lean controls. Womack et al [32] made a study with only female participants and found a
significantly increased amount of CD8+ cells in morbidly obese women (BMI ≥35), but not
in overweight (BMI 25-29.9) or obese women (BMI 30-34.9). Van Der Weers et al [30] found
no significant difference in the amount of CD8+ T-cell in pheripheral blood between obese and
lean subjects.
In conclusion there is strong evidence showing a general increase of CD4+ T-cells in obese
humans compared to lean humans. This is attributed to an increase in naive CD4+ T-cells
and a skewing towards Th2 and Treg CD4+ T-cell response. However, there are conflicting
results as to the effect of obesity on the CD8+ subset of T-cells in peripheral blood and no
conclusion can be made at this point. These altercations in T-cell subsets can indicate that
obesity compromises the function of the immune system and the bodies ability to fight of
disease.
2.3
Animal Models for Obesity
The use of animal models is a central part of biological and biomedical research. They are the
link between in vitro assays and human biological mechanisms, and are an important tool to
better understand of the human biology as a whole. It is therefore also important to work with
the appropriate animal models and preferable ones that have biological systems similar to that
of humans. Rodents are a popular choice of animal model when studying human disease. They
are a popular choice because of their small size, cost efficiency and relatively short lifespan and
generation time. Mice are similar to humans, when it comes to genomics and physiology and
are therefore often a good choice to study human disease. [35, 36]
Mice have been used as animal model for human obesity and hypertension, but there are some
differences that make other larger animal models, like pigs, a more appropriate model. Apart
from pigs being more similar to humans in size and weight, the adipose tissue of mice and
humans have biological differences. [37] Obese mice have a lower level of the adipokine adipsin
than obese humans, and the amount of TNF-α, that is produces in high amount in adipose
tissue of both obese mice and humans, are in mice increased both locally and systemically [4].
However in humans the level of TNF-α is not raised systemically and seem to work primarily
as an autocrine and paracrine factor in the adipose tissue. [38] In mice there also seem to be
a direct influence of TNF-α on insulin resistance, as it can be counteracted by neutralising
TNF-α antibodies. This is not the case in humans, where the relationship between TNF-α and
insulin resistance is more indirect, and connected to the release of FFA in the blood. [39, 40]
Mice also have a different composition of lipoprotiens than humans.
8
==PAGE:15==
Pigs have a similar lipoprotein profile to humans, comprised mostly of low-density lipoprotiens.
[41] Obesity is often connected with CVD. Here pigs are a superior model compare to mice as
their cardiovascular autonomy and physiology are strikingly similar to humans. A study made
in large white domestic crossbred pigs showed that the development of the porcine heart from
birth is very similar to that of humans. [42] When it comes to diseases connected to diet, pigs
are also a very suitable model as they, like humans, are omnivore and will eat most of the same
food as humans, making it easier to investigate dietary effects. [41]
The Ossabaw pig breed have in recent years been identified as a good model for human obe-
sity, because of its evolutionary predisposition to becoming obese and developing metabolic
syndrome. [43]
2.3.1
The Ossabaw pig
Ossabaw pigs are a miniature pig breed that weighs between 30-70kg as adult. Ossabaw pigs
originate from Ossabaw Island off the coast of Georgia in the USA. They where originally
introduced to the island around 500 years ago by Spanish explorers. The pigs lived isolated on
the island and adapted to the ”feast and famine” ecology of the island. Due to the seasonal shift
in abundance of food the Ossabaw pigs developed a ”thrifty genotype” increasing their ability
to convert food into body fat in times of feast in order to store it, to survive long periods of
famine. [43, 44] The thrifty genotype is suspected to be caused by a single amino acid mutation
in the γ3 subunit of the AMP-activated kinase gene, Val199 →Ile. This mutation is associated
with reduced glycogen in muscle tissue and increased levels of intramuscular adipose tissue.
[45]. However, some Ossabaw pigs don’t have this mutation and still become obese similar to
those with the mutation. [46] Humans are suspected to also have a thrifty genotype, which is
thought to have developed during the hunter-gather stage of the human evolution. [47]
Due to this genotype, Ossabaw pigs have been identified as a model for MetS and obesity, as
they, with high calorie diet, develop obesity and symptoms of MetS. Though other pig breed,
such as Yucatan and domestic pigs, have been used to study obesity related CVD it is often
done by artificially inducing atherogenesis by toxins and atherogenic diets. Ossabaw pig can
develop Mets and CVD naturally through feeding with high calorie diet, similar to humans. A
study comparing Mets and atherosclerosis in Ossabaw pigs and Yucatan pigs feed with a high
calorie diet, showed that Ossabaw pigs displayed more of the symptoms of MetS and greater
atherosclerosis compared to Yucatan pig, making Ossabaw pigs a superior model for MetS and
CVD. [48]
A another study with female Ossabaw pigs, showed that after just 9 weeks of being feed
with a high calorie diet, the pigs manifested multiple symptomes for MetS. The obese pigs
compared to the lean controls, showed increase levels of triglycerides and cholesterol in plasma,
as well as raised levels of low density lipoproteins. They developed hypertension and insulin
resistance and a 1.5 fold increase in body weight. In this study, they also validated the use of
9
==PAGE:16==
non-invasive measures (body weight and circumference, ultrasound, and CT scans) to predict
adipose compartments in feral pig breeds, and found that the non-invasive measures was a more
accurate prediction tool in female Ossabaw pigs compared to female Yucantans pigs. [49]
Multiple other studies have used Ossabaw pigs to study diet induced obesity and MetS [44,
50–56] and it has repeatably been proven that high calorie diet alone can induce states of
metabolic dysfunction in Ossabaw pigs, not unlike what is seen in obese humans, making the
Ossabaw pig a superior model for human obesity.
2.4
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells in humans and
pigs
2.4.1
Human PBMC
Periphiral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) are isolated from peripheral blood, and consists of
lymphocytes (T cells, B cells and NK cells), monocytes, and dendritic cells. The exact frequency
of each cell type vary from species to species and individual to individual.[57] In humans the
lymphocytes make up around half of the cells in peripheral blood. Of the lymphocytes around
60% are T cells, 13% are B cells, 15% NK cells [58, 59]. Monocytes comprise approx 9% of
cells in whole blood and DC make up round 1% of all leukocytes. The T-cell distributed of
peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) are 35% [CD4+ CD8-], 21% [CD4- CD8+], 3.5% [CD4-
CD8-] and 0.5% [CD4+ CD8+]. [59].
2.4.2
Pig PBMC
Porcine T-lymphocytes share similarities with human lymphocytes by being characterised by
the same makers on the cell surface.
T-cell express CD3, Th-cells express CD4 and CTL
express CD8. However, pig T-cell sub-populations are different from humans and mice. [10]
Like humans, pig have both αβ and γδ T-cell, but in pigs γδ T-cell are much more frequent than
in humans and the amount found in blood is very age-dependent. In young pigs (4 months) γδ
T-cell account for approximately 40% of PBL, this drops to about 20% in 12 month old pigs
[60]. In humans less than 5% of PBL are γδ T-cells. [61] Porcine γδ T-cell are characterized
by being mainly CD4-CD8- (DN) and either CD2+ or CD2-. A small part of γδ T-cell are
however defined as CD8lo, meaning low expression of CD8. [10] The CD8lo γδ T-cell express
CD8αα homodimers, where CD8+ αβ T-cell have CD8αβ heterodimers. [62]
Porcine αβ T-cell are characterises by either being CD4 single positive T-cells (CD4+ SP), CD8
single positive T-cells (CD8+ SP) or CD4+CD8lo (DP). CD4+ SP count for approx 3-14 % of
PBL with a small age dependent increase [10, 60] Functionally porcine CD4+ SP are naive Th
cell, that when activated by antigens start to express CD8 and become DP Th effector memory
cells, that responds to recall antigen stimulation. DP T-cell are the predominate CD4+ T-cell
in pig but have high variation from individual to individual 8-60% of PBL. The amount increase
10
==PAGE:17==
with age and dependent on the immunological history of the animal. [63]
CD8 SP consists of 7-30% of PBL in pigs and are found in twice aa high amount as CD4+
SP. In humans and mice the ratio between CD4+ and CD8+ SP are reverse, with CD4+ SP
being twice as frequency in PBL. Like in humans CD8+ SP show cytotoxic function and are
characterised as CTL. [10, 60]
The frequencies of the T-cell subset and the rest of the PBMC population are summarized in
Table 2.1
Cell type
% of human PBL/PBMC
% of pigs PBL/PBMC
Peripheral blood Lymphocytes
T-cells CD3+
60 [48-77] [59]
60-80 [64]
CD4+,CD8-
35 [26-48] [59]
3-14 [60]
CD4-,CD8+
21 [12-33] [59]
7-30 [60]
DP - CD4+,CD8+
0.5 [0.2-0.8] [59]
8-60 [63]
DN - CD4-,CD8-
3.5 [1-7] [59]
N/A
γδ T-cells
1-5 [61]
40-20, age dependent decrease [60]
B-cells
13 [6-16] [59]
25 [60]
NK cells
15 [7-35] [59]
2-10 [65]
Monocytes
9 [6-11] [59]
5–15 [66]
Dendritic cells
1 [0.6-1.5] [59]
0.3-0.9 [66]
Table 2.1: PBMC composition in humans and and pigs: The frequencies are given as frequency
of all PBMCs for monocytes and dendrite cells. T-cell, T-cells subsets, B-cell and NK frequencies are
given as frequency of peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL). The frequency of CD4-,CD8- cells in pigs
is N/A as it is described as γδ T-cells in most papers.
11
==PAGE:18==
Experimental background
3.1
Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry is a technology used to analyze characteristics of single cells or particles. Flow
cytometry has the ability to rapidly analyze millions of cells in a heterogenous population,
making it an ideal tool to investigate cell population in tissue or blood samples. It has the
ability to analyse single cells on multiple different parameters, making it possible to get a
detailed characterisation of e.g. T-cell subsets in a sample.
Flow cytometry relies on lasers and detectors to measure light scatter and fluorescent emission.
Light scatter is detected in two directions forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC), see
Figure 3.1. FSC is a measure for the relative size of the cell and SSC is a measure for the
internal complexity or granularity of the cell. Fluorescent emission comes from staining with
fluorescent dyes or fluorochrome conjugated antibodies. The fluorescent emission is used to
identify cells with specific markers, the dye or antibodies, can bind to. The staining can be
done both intracellularly and extracellularly. [8]
Figure 3.1: Schematic drawing of Flow Cytometry. A sample stream containing cells is focused
into a single file line by a sheath fluid and passes by the laser. As the cells pass the laser it creates light
scatter in the forward and side directions. Forward scatter correlates with cell size, while side scatter
correlates with cell granularity or internal complexity. Fluorochromes attached to the cells also emit
fluorescent light when excited by the laser. These signals are collected and analyzed by detectors,
producing density plots that display the physical and molecular properties of the cells. Figure created
with BioRender.com
3.1.1
The Instrument
The flow cytometer it self consist of three different systems, the fluidics, optical and electronic
system.
12
==PAGE:19==
The fluidics system is what transports the cells through the instrument and ensures that the
cells pass the laser in a single line. The sample is injected into a fast moving fluid called sheath
fluid, in many systems it is phosphate-buffered saline PBS. The sample fluid is always injected
with higher pressure than the sheath fluid, creating a hydrodynamic focus which directs the
cell through the laser beam in a single line. The difference in pressure can be altered to adjust
the width of the sample stream depending on the application and sample. [8, 67]
The optical system includes the excitation optics; lasers, lenses and prisms and the collection
emission optics; lenses, filters and mirrors. Light scatter created when a cell passes through
the laser, reflects the physical properties of the cell and is independent of the fluorochromes
attached to the cell during staining. FSC is the light that passed around the cells corresponds
to the size of the cell. Some light will penetrate the cell membrane and be reflected of the
organelles in the cell this is SSC is proportional to the granularity and complexity of the cell.
[8]
When the cells pass the laser beam the fluorochromes bound to the cells will be excited, and emit
light within a range of wavelengths specific to that fluorochrome, called the emission wavelength.
The emission wavelengths are used to differentiate between the different fluorochromes and
therefore need to be sufficiently different in order to distinguish them from one another. The
fluorescent light is detected by photomultipliers placed behind optical filters, that only allow a
specific range of wavelengths to pass through and hit the photomultipliers. There are different
types of filters, some allow only a specific range to pass, and some only allows wavelengths
equal or short/longer than a specific value to pass. [8]
Figure 3.2: Spectral Spillover in Flow Cytometry The x-axis is the wavelength of emitted
light, while the y-axis represents the fluorescence intensity. The dashed outline illustrates the range
of two detectors. The blue and the yellow curve illustrates the emission sepctrum from two different
fluorochromes. The area of spectral spillover (green), can lead to signal contamination in the detectors.
This requires compensation to accurately distinguish between the signals from different fluorochromes.
Figure created with BioRender.com
13
==PAGE:20==
In a given flow cytometry instrument each detectors are design to detects the emission wave-
lengths for specific fluorochromes. However fluorochromes can have a wide spectrum of emitted
light causing some overlap between the spectres of different fluorochromes. This means a flu-
orochrome can be detected by more than one detector and thereby detected as a different
fluorochrome, as seen on Figure 3.2. This spectral spill over is corrected for by compensation.
Compensation is done by running each of the fluorochromes individually, often using single
coated beads, in order to determine the percentage that is detected by the wrong detectors.
[67]
The electronic system is what converts the optical signals to numerical data. The numerical
data is generated based on the height, width and area of a voltage pulse which is generated
when a cell passed the laser beam. The voltage of the detectors can be adjusted to amplify the
signal in order for the computer to display it. This should be done prior to a run to ensure
accurate data. [8]
3.1.2
FACSCanto II
For the present study the BD FACSCanto II [68] flow cytometer was used. The FACSCanto has
three excitation lasers a blue 488nm laser, a red 633nm and a violet 405nm laser. The instrument
has three detector arrays one octagon and two trigons. The octagon detects light from the blue
laser and contains five photomultimers, where one is used to collect side scatter signal. The
trigons detect light from either the red or the violet laser and contain two photomultimers each.
This give the instrument the capacity to run assays with up to 10 different flourochromes. [68]
The FACSCanto II system is compatible with at least 15 different colors, see Figure 3.3
Figure 3.3: Fluorochrome compatability of FACSCanto This table shows the fluorochomes
compatible with the FACSCanto II (BD biosciences). It shows the three lasers, blue, red and violet
and the excitation wavelength of each laser. Each fluorochrome is excited by one of the lasers and
detected by one channel. Some channels can detect light from more than one fluorochrome and that
needs to be taken into consideration when designing Ab panels. Figure is based on table found in BD
FACSCanto II brochure
14
==PAGE:21==
Methods
The work in this project was divided into two main parts.
Part 1 focused on testing and optimization of the method, as flow cytometry has not been
used to study T-cells in the Ossabaw pig in the ”Innate Immunology and Metabolism” group at
DTU Health Tech. This mainly included testing and optimization of the staining protocol and
gating strategy. The PBMC isolation protocol was already optimized and used in the group
an was therefor not look at. The staining protocol was adapted from the one used on human
PBMCs in the ”T-cell antigen and Immunogenicity” group at DTU Health Tech (Appendix A).
In this part, initial experiments on pigs similar in age, was run to define the gating strategy
and antibodies was titrated, if needed. Part 1 was concluded with an experiment testing the
effect of the freezing protocol on the T-cell subsets.
Part 2 focused on using flow cytometry to study the effect of diet induced obesity on T-cell
populations in Ossabaw pigs PBMCs. In this part samples from two different diet experiments
was used and compared with different control groups.
The following section will explain the over all methods used in both parts of the project, with
the exception of titration which was only used in part 1.
4.1
PBMC Isolation
PBMCs were isolated from fresh samples collected from Ossabaw pigs either as part of a health
monitoring or in connection with euthanasia. Blood sampling was preformed by veterinarians
and collected in vacutainer tubes containing Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) as an
anticoagulant. Before start 15 mL Lymphoprep (Stemcell, 07861 [69]) was added to SepMate™-
50 (IVD) tubes (Stemcell, 85460 [70]). The lymphoprep is used to create a density gradients
that isolates mononuclear cells from whole blood. [69] The mononuclear cells will be isolated
in the supernatant when centrifuged.
The blood was diluted 1:2 by adding a solution of 98% Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Gibco,
70013-016 [71]) + 2% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco, 10500-064 [72]). The
diluted blood was carefully added to the SepMate tubes and centrifuged for 20 min at 1200g
(≈2400 rpm) at room temp. The supernatant was poured into 50 mL tubes and washed with
PBS+2% FBS and centrifuged for 8 min at 300g (≈1500 rpm) at room temp. To remove
remaining red blood cells, 2 mL of a 1:20 dilution of RBC lysis buffer (41,45g NH4Cl + 5g
KHCO3 + 185g EDTA + 500 mL MQ water) was added. After 2 min the lysis was stopped by
adding PBS 2% FBS up to 50 mL total volume and centrifuged 8 min at 300g at room temp.
The cells were washed with 50mL PBS 2% FBS before being resuspended in 25mL PBS 2%
15
==PAGE:22==
FBS. The cell count and viability was determined with NucleoCounter NC-202 [73]. Cells was
frozen down in tubes containing 10 million live cells. The freezing solution contained 50% FBS,
40% Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 Medium (RPMI) (Gibco, 61870 [74]) 10% DMSO.
The cells where first frozen at -80°C for a couple of days and then later placed in liquid nitrogen
tanks and stores at -320°C until use.
4.2
Flow Cytometry
4.2.1
Antibody Panel design
The panel was built based on availability and instrument compatibility (FACSCanto), and
communication with Wilhelm Gerner (Group Leader Immunology, Vaccinology, The Pirbright
Institute) and Gregers Jungersen (Head of Section for Veterinary Vaccine Research, Department
of Infectious Disease Immunology, Statens Serum Institute). The panel consists of a viability
dye used to distinguish between live and dead cells. The dye binds to free amines in and on
cells. In dead cells with compromised membranes, the dye can bind to both internal amines
and amines on the cell surface. In live cells it can only react with amines on the cell surface.
The difference in fluorescence intensity is used to distinguish between live and dead cells. [75].
The rest of the panel consisted of monoclonal antibodies used to identify T-cells populations;
Anti-CD3ε antibody to identify T-cells, and anti-CD4α and anti-CD8β distinguish between Th
cells and cytotoxic T-cells, respectively. Table 4.1 shows the detailed on each antibody and dye
used in the project.
Cell Marker
Manufacturer
Catalog nr.
Live/Dead marker
Thermo Fisher Scientific
L34976
CD3ε
BD Biosciences
561478
CD4α
BD Biosciences
559585
CD8β
BD Biosciences
561484
Cell Marker
Conjugate
/color
Clone
Isotype
Amount [µL]
*
Excitation
Laser
Excitation
max [nm]
Emission
max [nm]
Fixable Viability Dye
Near-IR
n/a
n/a
0.1
Red
633
750
CD3ε
PerCP-Cy5.5
BB23-8E6-8C8
IgG2a, κ
5
Blue
482
676
CD4α
FITC
74-12-4
IgG2b, κ
5
Blue
494
518
CD8β
PE
295/33-25
IgG2a, κ
5/0.15 **
Blue
496, 566
576
Table 4.1: Antibody panel used for flow cytometry. The panel consists of three antibodies and one
dye. The dye was used to distinguish live cells from dead cells. Three antibodies was used to identify
T-cells (CD3), Th-cells (CD4) and cytotoxic T-cells (CD8). All the information in the table, except
amount, is cited from the respective manufacturer.
* Staining volume = 100µL.
** 5 µL was used in the part 1, 0.15 µL was used in part 2
16
==PAGE:23==
4.2.2
Thawing of cells
Cryopreserved cell was resuspended in 10 mL preheated RPMI+10% FBS (R10) (37°C) to thaw
and centrifuged for 4 min at 1500rpm at 4°C. The cells were then washed twice in 10mL R10.
Between each wash cells where centrifuged for 4 min at 1500rpm at 4°C. Cells where resuspended
in 1mL FACS buffer (PBS + 2% FBS) and cells where counted using NucleoCounter NC-202.
4.2.3
Cell surface staining
Cell was first washed in 10mL FACS and centrifuged for 4 min at 1500rpm and 4°C. FACS
buffer was added to get a concentration of approx 1 mio. cells per 100µL. 100µL of the cell
solution was added to a 96-well plate. Plate was centrifuged and supernatant was discarded.
Antibody was added to each well in the amount shown in Table 4.1. FACS buffer was added to
get a total staining vol of 100 mL (It was assumed that 20µL was left in each well after wash
and included in the 100µL). Plate was covered and left for 30 min in fridge (4°C) to incubate.
After incubation cells was washed twice first with 150µL/well and then 200µL/well. If sample
was directly run on flow cytometer, cells were respuspended in 150µL, if not cells was fixated
using 1% paraformaldehyde.
Fixation
50µL 1% paraformaldehyde was added to each well and plate was stored in fridge for a minimum
of 1h or a max of 24h. Cells was washed twice with FACS buffer (1st 150 µL, 2nd 200 µL) and
resuspended in 150 µL FACS buffer and stored in fridge till use.
4.2.4
Controls
In addition to the samples different controls samples was done with each run. Controls included
unstained samples, that had not been treated with any antibodies or dye, to control for auto-
fluorescence. Fluorescence minus one samples (FMO) which contain all the staining agents
except one was made for each run, to help set the gates. Prior to each run compensation was
preformed with single stain compensation beads in order to set voltages corrected and account
for spectral spillover between the different flourochromes.
4.2.5
Gating Strategy
Gating is a hierarchical system, where only cells within the previous gate are used in the next
plot. The same gating strategies was used for all experiments in the present study. FMO
samples was used to guide the gating, see Figure 4.1
First the lymphocytes were gated based on SSC-A and FSC-A. Next singles cells was gated
based on FSC. Single cells should have linear relationship between the area FSC-A and the
height FSC-H or width FSC-W and was gated based on these parameters. To gate the viable
cells the viability dye (NIR) was plotted against SSC-A, as mentioned a FMO sample was used
to guide the gating. However final gates was always placed based on visual evaluation of each
sample. NIR works different than the antibody markers, the strongest fluorescence comes some
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.1: Gating strategy: All gates are dependent on the previous gates. FMO’s was include
for each color/Ab to guide the gating. Lymphocytes were gated based on SSC-A and FCS-A –¿ Single
cell was selected based in FSC-A and FSC-H or FSC-W. Viable cells was identified based on their
absorption of the Nir viability dye. T-cells was gated based on their expression of CD3. Lastly CD4
and CD8 was used to divide CD3+ cells in four subsets (CD4 SP, CD8 SP, DN, and DP).
from the dead cells that have absorbed the dye. Therefor the gating was set on the cells with
the weakest fluorescence signal, to gate the live cells. Next CD3-marker was plotted against
SSC-A to gate all T-cells. Lastly CD4 and CD8 was plotted against each other to get four
gates, CD4+, CD8+, double positive CD4+CD8+ and double negative CD4-CD8-.
4.2.6
Antibody Titration
Antibody titration is a way to determine the optimal staining concentration to use of a specific
Ab and are specific for the type of sample the titration is done with. Ab titration was done by
making a serial dilution of the Ab. The rest of the staining agents of the panel was added to
all dilutions in the same amount described in Table 4.1.
The cells was thawed and counted like described in subsection 4.2.2. The cell was washed in 10
18
==PAGE:25==
mL FACS, centrifuged and resuspended in FACS (40uL× wells). 50µL FACS buffer was added
to wells in a 96-well plate. To make a 2 fold dilution, 2 times the volume needed for the first
well was added. FACS was added to get a total volume of 100 µL. 50µL was then continuously
transferring from on well to the next. From the last well 50µL was discarded. 10.1 µL Ab mix
(containing the rest of the panel Abs and Nir dye) was added to all wells along with 40µL of the
cell sample. The cells was incubated at 4°C. After 30 min the cells was washed twice (1. 150µL
2. 200µL) and suspended in 100 uL FACS. The samples was then run on the flow cytometer.
4.3
Data analysis
Preliminary data analyses was done in the FACSDiva software from BD biosciences simultane-
ously with running the samples on the flow cytometer. This was done by placing approximate
gates to continuously check the sample while running. The final data processes was done in
the FlowJo software from BD biosciences v.10.10.0. Prior to each data analysis compensation
was adjusted in FlowJo, to the specific experiment, by manually adjusting the compensation
matrix for the best fit. All gates was then placed following the gating strategy described in
subsection 4.2.5.
4.3.1
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was done with the frequencies of the different subsets in the lymphocyte
gate. Frequencies was extracted from FlowJo and statistical analysis was preformed in Excel.
T-test with a confidence level of 0.95 was used to determine if there was a significant difference
between cell subsets in the blood of the different experimental group (see section 4.4). To test
the significant difference between the fresh and frozen samples paired t-test was used for the
rest unpaired t-test was used. To display the subsets as histograms the mean frequency of each
group was calculated as well as standard deviation (SD) to display variation in the group.
4.4
Experimental set up and pigs
The following sections describe the setup for each of the experiments in this projects and provide
data on the pigs used. Specifications on lean and obese diets used in the experiments can be
found in Appendix C.
4.4.1
Fresh vs Frozen
In order to examine the effect of cryopreservation on the T-cell composition in Ossabaw PBMCs,
an experiment done with samples from 4 Ossabaw pigs (Two male and two female). Blood
samples was taken from each pig at Risø campus and transported to Lyngby campus. PBMCs
was isolated from the whole blood. On the same day one PBMC sample form each pig was
stained with antibodies and run on the flow cytometer the next day. The rest of the PBMCs
was frozen down and stored in the nitrogen tank. Approximatly 3 months later one tube from
each pig was thawed and stained using the same procedure as for the fresh samples and run on
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.2: Overview of fresh vs. frozen PBMC experiment: Blood samples was taken from
four pigs and PBMCs has purified from each sample. One PBMC sample was stained fresh on the
same day. The rest was frozen down. Approximately 3 months later one PBMC sample from each pig
was thawed and stained and run on the FACSCanto. Figure created with BioRender.com
the flow cytometer the following day. An overview of the experiment is shown in Figure 4.2.
Three out of the four animals used was used for breeding (Donna, Dean, Zazu) and all four was
feed on regular lean diet. Details of the four pig can be seen in Table 4.2.
Pig
Gender
DOB
Date of sampling
Age at sampling
Donna (2702)
Female
02-01-2017
11-03-2024
7 years 2 months
Tornado (95)
Female
02-10-2021
11-03-2024
2 years 5 months
Dean (2496)
Male
14-01-2016
11-03-2024
8 years 2 months
Zazu (2571)
Male
31-05-2016
11-03-2024
7 years 9 months
Table 4.2: Animals used in fresh vs frozen: The table shows the four animals used in the fresh
vs. frozen experiment, their gender, day of birth (DOB), date the samples was taken and age at the
time of sampling.
4.4.2
22 week obesity experiment - Leipzig
For 22 weeks five male castrated Ossabaw pigs was feed once a day with 1.25Kg, KT324, Purina
TestDiet (Obese diet) consisting of 41% kcal from carbohydrates, 19% kcal from fructose, and
41% kcal from fat. 3 weeks before the experiment the pig was gradually being introduced to
the diet. In week -3 they where feed with 25% obese diet + 75% normal diet (SDS Mini-pig
feed), in week -2 they got 50% obese diet + 50% normal feed and in week -1 they got 75%
obese diet + 25% normal diet. Blood samples was taken at start and every 4 weeks. Samples
used in this study was from week -2 (5 samples) and week 22 (4 samples). At the start of the
experiment the pigs was 1 year and at the end they were 1 year and 9 months. An overview of
the experiment is shown in Figure 4.3.
For the present project two flow cytometry studies were performed using samples form this
experimenet. One experiment compared the post-diet samples with two lean castrated male
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.3: Overview of 22-week obesity experiment: Five castrated male pig was feed with
1.24kg obese diet (KT324) for 22 weeks. 3 weeks prior to experiment start the pigs was gradually
introduced to the obese diet by mixing it with normal lean diet. First 25%, then 50% and the last
week 75% of their food was KT324. In this study, samples from week -2 (Pre-diet) and samples from
week 22 (port-diet) was used from each pig. NB. only samples from 4 pigs was available from week
22. Figure created with BioRender.com
Ossabaw pig of 9 months of age (97 and 98). The second comparing the 5 pre-diet samples
with the 4 post-diet samples. These pigs will for the rest of the report be referred to as the
Leipzig pigs. Details of each pig can be seen in Table 4.3.
21
==PAGE:28==
Pig
Gender
DOB
Weight [kg]
Date of sampling
Age at sampling
97
C. male
14-04-2023
40
16-01-2024
9 months
98
C. male
14-04-2023
43
16-01-2024
9 months
70
C. male
04-09-2020
(1) 69
(2) 117
(1) 05-01-2022
(2) 14-06-2022
(1) 1 year 4 months
(2) 1 year 9 months
71
C. male
04-09-2020
(1) 67
(2) 124
(1) 05-01-2022
(2) 14-06-2022
(1) 1 year 4 months
(2) 1 year 9 months
73
C. male
14-09-2020
(1) 56
(1) 05-01-2022
(1) 1 year 4 months
74
C. male
14-09-2020
(1) 54
(2) 101
(1) 05-01-2022
(2) 14-06-2022
(1) 1 year 4 months
(2) 1 year 9 months
75
C. male
14-09-2020
(1) 49
(2) 94
(1) 05-01-2022
(2) 14-06-2022
(1) 1 year 4 months
(2) 1 year 9 months
Table 4.3: Animals used in 22-week obesity experiment: The table shows the animals used
in the 22 week obese diet experiment, their gender, day of birth (DOB), weight and age at sampling
time of sampling. Samples from different time point from pig 71-75 and have two entries in the table
(1) from week -2 and (2) from week 22.
4.4.3
11 week obesity experiment - Short term
15 castrated male Ossabaw pigs was randomly split into two group, a lean control (n = 6) and
obese test group (n=9). For 11 weeks the lean group was fed with standard diet and the obese
group was feed with an high fat diet (44448888-7, Aarhus University). The obese diet contained
54% kcal from fat, 22 % kcal from fructose, 34% kcal from carbohydrates. Both groups was
feed twice times a day and the pigs in teh obese group was gradually introduced to the obese
diet over 3 weeks prior to experiment in the same manner as in with the Leipzig pigs. In week
11 all animals was weight and blood samples was extracted before the pigs was euthanized.
These pigs will for the rest of the report be referred to as the short term pigs. See Figure 4.4
for overview of experiment. In this study 4 samples from the lean group and 5 samples from
the obese group was used. See Table 4.4 for details of each animal.
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.4: Overview of 11 week obesity experiment: 9 castrated male pigs was divided into
two groups, one feed obese diet one a standard lean diet. For 11 weeks they were feed twice a day.
The obese group had a 3 week introduction to the obese diet. At week 11 the blood samples was taken
from each pig. Figure created with BioRender.com
Pig
Gender
DOB
Weight [kg]
Group
Date of sampling
Age at sampling
3
C. male
29-12-2018
36
Lean
19-11-2019
11 months
9
C. male
15-02-2019
30
Lean
19-11-2019
9 months
11
C. male
15-02-2019
32
Lean
19-11-2019
9 months
18
C. male
26-02-2019
31
Lean
19-11-2019
9 months
13
C. male
20-02-2019
47
Obese
19-11-2019
9 momths
14
C. male
20-02-2019
46
Obese
19-11-2019
9 months
15
C. male
20-02-2019
46
Obese
19-11-2019
9 months
20
C. male
26-02-2019
48
Obese
19-11-2019
9 months
25
C. male
27-03-2019
51
Obese
19-11-2019
8 months
Table 4.4: Animals used in short-term experiment: The table shows the animals used in the
11 week obese diet experiment, their gender, day of birth (DOB), weight, group, date the samples was
taken and age at the time of sampling.
23
==PAGE:30==
Results
5.1
Live cell count and viability
Cell count was used to transfer right amount of cells to the wells in the staining protocol and
viability was used to evaluate the quality of the sample. Table 5.2-5.5 shows the mean live cell
count (mio cells/mL) and viability (%) of each group in the experiments. The fresh vs frozen
experiment is the only experiment, where there is a significant different between both live cell
count and viability of the two groups. The fresh samples were stained right after isolation of
PBMCs and therefor all have a live cell count of 10 mio. cells/mL as this is what is transferred
to each tube after isolation, see section 4.1. For all other samples, live cell count and viability
was measured after thawing as described in subsection 4.2.2.
Most groups had mean live cell counts between 5 - 6 mio. cells/mL and viability mean between
80% - 95% except for pre-diet in the Leipzig experiment (Table 5.4). The Leipzig pre- post-
diet experiment was also the only obesity experiment where there was a significant difference
between live cell count of the 2 groups. The pre-diet group is a also the only group that have
a mean viability below 80%.
Initial runs
Live cell count [mio cells/mL]
Viability [%]
Mean ± SD
5.38 ± 0.59
94.0 ± 2.41
Samples (n=5)
Range
[4.44 - 6.00]
[92.0 - 98.7]
Table 5.1: Initial runs live cell count and viability: Mean live cell count (mio. cells/mL) and
viability (%) of the initial test runs used to test method and establish gating strategy. Two of the
samples are replicas from the same pigs.
Fresh vs Frozen
Live cell count [mio cells/mL]
Viability [%]
Mean ± SD
10.0 ± 0
94.8 ± 0.35
Fresh (n=4)
Range
[10.0- 10.0]
[94.3 - 95.3]
Mean ± SD
6.2 ± 0.67
89.0 ± 2.12
Frozen (n=4)
Range
[5.08 - 6.80]
[86.7 - 91.6]
Table 5.2: Fresh and frozen live cell count and viability: The mean live cell count (mio.
cells/mL) and viability (%) of the fresh and frozen samples from Donna, Tornado, Dean and Zazu.
There is a significant difference between both the cell count and viability of the fresh and frozen group
(p-value(count) < 0.01, p-value(viability) < 0.05).
24
==PAGE:31==
Leipzig + 97+98
Live cell count [mio cells/mL]
Viability [%]
Mean ± SD
5.48 ± 1.28
81.8 ± 1.30
Control (n=2)
Range
[4.20 - 6.76]
[80.5 - 83.1]
Mean ± SD
5.26 ± 0.30
82.6 ± 1.62
Obese (n=4)
Range
[4.92 - 5.60]
[80.7 - 84.9]
Table 5.3: Leipzig + 97 + 98 cell count and viability: The mean live cell count (mio. cells/mL)
and viability (%) of the Leipzig pig (70, 71, 74, 75) + 97 and 98. There is a no significant difference
between neither the cell count or viability of the obese and control group (p-value(count+viability) >
0.05).
Leipzig pre- post-diet
Live cell count [mio cells/mL]
Viability [%]
Mean ± SD
3.94 ± 0.84
72.0 + 5.31
Pre-diet (n=5)
Range
[2.71 - 5.12]
[64.6 - 79.1]
Mean ± SD
5.03 ± 0.25
81.1 ± 1.21
Post-diet (n=4)
Range
[4.72 - 5.36]
[79.6 - 82.5]
Table 5.4: Leipzig pre- and post-diet cell count and viability: The mean live cell count (mio.
cells/mL) and viability (%) of the Leipzig pigs pre-diet (70, 71, 73, 74, 75) and post-diet (70, 71, 74,
75). There is a no significant difference between the cell count of pre- and post-diet (p-value(count) >
0.05). There is a significant difference between the viability of pre- and post-diet (p-value(viability)
< 0.05).
Short term
Live cell count [mio cells/mL]
Viability [%]
Mean ± SD
5.58 ± 0.54
84.5 ± 1.71
Control (n=4)
Range
[4.71 - 6.04]
[82.7 - 87.3]
Mean ± SD
5.61 ± 0.31
86.8 ± 1.16
Obese (n=5)
Range
[5.08 - 6.00]
[84.9 - 88.0]
Table 5.5: Short term cell count and viability: The mean live cell count (mio. cells/mL) and
viability (%) of the short term control group (2, 3, 9, 11, 18) and obese group (13, 14, 15, 20, 25).
There is a no significant difference between neither the cell count or viability of the obese and control
group (p-value(count+viability) > 0.05).
25
==PAGE:32==
5.2
Part 1: Method design and optimization
5.2.1
Establishment of gating strategy
The gating strategy for T-cell identification in PBMC sample is no novel practice. However, as
it has never been used before in this groups, it needed to be established that the conventional
gating strategy described in subsection 4.2.5 consistently and reproducible could be used to
gate T-cell subsets. In order to evaluate this, 3 pig of the same age (9 months) was stained
and FMOs was used to gate the samples individually. The plot for each run can be seen in
Figure 5.1 and 5.2. By visual inspection of the plots it can be concluded, that it was possible
to identify the different T-cell population with the Ab panel with clear separation between the
positive and negative population. It can also be seen that the fluorescent intensities for the
different negative and positive populations are approximately the same between the three pigs.
Figure 5.1: 104 1 flourescence density plots and gating: First density plot shows the lympho-
cyte gate, then single cell gate and then live cell gate. Below that was the CD3+ cells gated and to the
left CD4 and CD8 cells was gated. The gating was supported by FMOs for each of the four stains. The
negative control in the bottom if of the CD3 gate and shows no auto-fluorescence or contamination in
the sample.
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.2: 103 and 105 flourescence density plots and gating: A) shows sample and the gating
for pig 103 and B) shows sample and gating from pig 105. First density plot shows the lymphocyte
gate, then single cell gate and then live cell gate. Below that was the CD3+ cells gated and to the
left CD4 and CD8 cells was gated. The gating was supported by FMOs for each of the four stains.
The samples from pig 103 A) and 105 B) was run in together on the flow cytometer and had the same
FMO. Both the FMOs and negative control showed clear contamination of CD4, CD8 and CD3 Ab
27
==PAGE:34==
Gate was placed based on FMO’s for each individual samples and even though they where
individually placed for each sample, they where placed approximately the same in each sample.
For the most part the separation point between the negative and positive population in the full
stain sample was consistent with the FMO. This was not the case for the CD8 Ab, where the
separation point in the full stain was higher, than in the CD8 FMO stain. It is however not
uncommon that the fluorescence intensity shifts when all Ab are present.
In Figure 5.2 there was a substantial amount of positive staining in the CD8 and CD3 FMOs
as well as the unstained negative control. To make sure that this is was a experimental error,
and not auto-fluorescence or error in the compensation, the samples was run again, and the
positive staining was gone or drastically reduced and no staining was seen in the unstained
sample. See Appendix D for plots.
To evaluate the consistency and reproducibility of the method and gating the frequency of the
different population was compared in Figure 5.3 using data from all of the five experiments
with samples from the three different pig. The difference in frequencies of each cell population
was small. The biggest was found in the CD3+ population and the double negative (DN)
population. They are also the biggest T-cell populations which might explain why there is a
bigger difference in the frequencies of these cells between the pigs. Frequencies of cell population
in individual pigs can be seen in Appendix E.
Figure 5.3: Distribution of PBMC in initial runs (n=5): The box plots displays displays
the frequencies of PBMC subpopulations as a percentage of total cell count/ PBL from the 5 initial
runs with 3 test pig. The boxes show the first and third quartile and the median for each cell type.
The whiskers show the highest and lowest cell frequency of that population. The plot illustrates the
variation of each subpopulation frequency within the 5 runs.
28
==PAGE:35==
Overall this shows that the method consistently can be used to reproducibily identify subsets
of porcine T-cells in PBMC samples.
5.2.2
CD8 Antibody Titration
Titration of antibodies are made in order to determine the optimal staining concentration
to used of a specific Ab with the type of sample that is being analysed.
A good titrated
Ab have a clear seperation between the negative and positive population.
As established
in section 5.2 with the use of the Ab panel it was possible to identified the wanted T-cell
subsets and distinguish between the positive and negative population with the concentrations
used. However the separation was not as clear with the CD8 Ab and it was therefor titrated.
The titration was done as a 2-fold dilution from 2.5µL to 0.08µL. Separation index (SI) was
calculated from the CD4-CD8+ (pos) and CD4-CD8-(neg) population using the equation below.
Medianpos −Medianneg
2 × rSDneg
By visual inspection of the separation seen on Figure 5.4 no concentration was better separated
than the others. The SI are plotted in Figure 5.4. This was used to compare the separation of
each concentration. The separation in good where the graph starts to plateau. Both 0.15µL
and 0.3µL was identified as a good possible concentrations based on the SI graph. From a
perspective of conserving Ab, 0.15µL would be the optimal concentration to use, but to be sure
a 10 fold titration was done with concentration starting from 0.15µL.
Figure 5.4: CD8 Titration from 2.5µL - 0.08µL: A 2 fold dilution titration was made starting
with a concentration of 2.5 µL to 0.08µL. The concatenated plots for each dilution of the titration
is displayed next to a graph showing the separation index between the negative an positive for each
dilution. From this 0.3µL or 0.15µL was identified at possible ideal concentrations.
SI from the first and second titration was plotted together in Figure 5.5. Here it clearly can
be seen that it the graph starts to fatten at 0.15µL and this was therefor identified as the best
29
==PAGE:36==
concentration of the CD8 Ab to use on Ossabaw PBMCs and was used for all experiments in
part 2 of the project.
Figure 5.5: CD8 Titration from 0.15µL - 0.0015µL: A 10 fold dilution titration was made
starting with a concentration of 0.15 µL to 0.0015µL. The titration was done to support the previous
titration. The concatenated plots for each dilution of the titration is displayed next to the graph
showing the separation index for both the 2-fold dilution and the 10-fold dilution. From this 0.15µL
was identified at the best concentration.
5.2.3
T-cell subsets in fresh and frozen PBMC samples
The purpose of this experiment was to investigate the effect of the freezing process and cryop-
reservation on the PBMC T-cell populations. Figure 5.6 shows the mean frequency of PBL and
PBL subsets for the fresh (orange) and frozen (blue) samples. All frequencies of cell population
from individual pigs and samples can be seen in Appendix E.
Figure 5.6: Cell population in fresh (n=4) and frozen (n=4) samples : The mean frequency
of the PBLs out of all cells in the sample (A) and live cells, T-cells and T-cell subsets out of the PBL
population (B) for the fresh (orange) and frozen (blue) samples. No significant difference between
fresh and frozen samples was found for any of the subsets (p<0.05). There was found a noticeable
high variation in the DP and DN subset. Error bars shows SD of mean and the circles show the data
point for each group. The dark data point corresponds to data from Tornado. Figure created with
BioRender.com
30
==PAGE:37==
No difference, significant or otherwise, was found in the PBL subsets between the fresh and
frozen group. The error bars showing the SD and the data point shows that the distribution
of PBL and PBL subsets are almost identical in the fresh and frozen samples.
Figure 5.7
shows the CD4/CD8 gate from each sample. It shows the same as in Figure 5.6, that the fresh
and frozen samples also visually are similar. Here it can also be seen that Tornado (top left)
have a different distribution of T-cells than the three other. Tornado showed no expression of
CD4 in both the fresh and frozen sample, where the other have high expression of especially
DP, cell Tornado have little to non. This is also the reason for the high variation observed in
especially the DP and DN subset. The data points for Tornado is colored dark in Figure 5.6.
The variation is however still highly similar between the fresh and frozen group. Interestingly
only a small amount, 1-2 %, of the lymphocytes was CD4+ SP cell in the pigs that did show
expression of CD4. Figure 5.6
Figure 5.7: CD8 and CD4 T-cell subsets of fresh and frozen: The plots shows the CD4 and
CD8 subsets of the CD3+ cells in the fresh sample (orange) and frozen sample (blue). Tornado showed
no expression of CD4 in both the fresh and the frozen sample. For the other three pigs (Donna, Dean
and Zazu) there is a similar distribution of cells with most of the cells being CD8 SP or DP. The
number in each gate is the % frequency of CD3+ cells.
5.3
Part 2: T-cell subsets in the context of obesity
The effect of obesity on the T-cell subsets was investigate using samples from two different
obesity experiments, Leipzig (22 weeks) and short term (11 weeks) and in 3 different flow
cytometry studies. In the following sections the obese and control groups was compared based
on frequencies of PBL and PBL subsets. All results will be presented as mean % frequencies
of either all cells, PBL or CD3+ cells and displayed with SD and data points. In the following
31
==PAGE:38==
graphs red represents the obese groups and green the lean control groups. The individual cell
frequencies and statistics for each experiment can be found in Appendix F.
5.3.1
Leipzig and 97 + 98
Figure 5.8 shows the mean frequencies of PBL (A) and PBL subsets (B) in the obese Leipzig
pigs (n=4) and lean control pig (n=2). There was found a significantly higher frequency of PBL
in the obese pigs compared to the control. The control group had a mean frequency of PBL of
≈43% and the obese group had ≈68% meaning, there is a 1.6 fold change (FC) between the
control pigs and the obese pigs. The variation with in each groups was small (SDcontrol = 1.3,
SDObese= 3.40).
There was also found a significant increase in frequency of CD3+ cells in the obese pigs com-
pared to the lean control pigs (p-value<0.001) with an increase of 2 FC. This resulted in
significantly increased frequencies of CD8 SP, CD4 SP, DP and DN. However, due to the high
frequency of CD3+ cells in the obese it makes sense to look at the CD8/CD4 subsets as subsets
of CD3+ cells instead of PBL, to be able to compare the difference and identify skewing of the
T-cell composition. This is illustrated in Figure 5.9.
Figure 5.8: Obese Leipzig pig (n=4) compared to pig 97 and 98: The mean frequency of
the PBLs out of all cells in the sample (A) and live cells, T-cells and T-cell subsets out of the PBL
population (B) for the lean control pigs (green) and obese pigs (red).
A significant increase was
found in the PBL (1.6 FC) and CD3+ T-cell (2 FC) populations. There was also found a significant
increase of all of the T-cell subsets. Error bars shows SD of the mean and the circles show the data
point for each pig. *** p-value < 0.001, ** p-value < 0.01, * p-value < 0.05. Graphs created with
BioRender.com
On Figure 5.9, showing mean frequencies of the CD8 and CD4 subsets of the CD3+ cells, it
can be seen that there was only a significant increase of the CD8 SP cells and a significant
decrease in the DP cell in the obese group compared to the controls. There was approx. 1.8
FC increase in CD8 SP and 0.6 FC decrease in DP.
32
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.9: Obese Leipzig pig (n=4) and 97 + 97 T-cell subsets: The mean frequency of the
T-cell subsets out of the CD3+ population. A significant increase was found between in CD8+ SP
population (1.8 FC) and a significant decrease was found in the DP population (0.6 FC). Error bars
shows SD of the mean and the circles show the data point for each group. * p-value < 0.05. Figure
created with BioRender.com
5.3.2
Leipzig pre- and post-diet
Similarly to what was seen in the previous experiment, a significantly larger subset of PBL
was found in the obese (post-diet) group than the lean (pre-diet) group as seen in Figure 5.10,
however only with a 1.2 FC increase. There was a very significant (p-value < 0.001) increase
in the CD3+ subset with a FC of 1.5. Also similar to the previous experiment, there was
a significant increase in the CD8 SP, CD4 SP, and DP T-cells with FC of 2.1, 1.6, and 1.6
respectively, but there was found no difference in the DN subset. When looking at the CD8/CD4
cells as subsets of the CD3+ population instead of the PBL, there was found no significant
difference between pre- and post diet in any of the subsets, see Figure 5.11.
However, A
small increase in the CD8+ SP subset (1.4 FC) could be seen similar to what was found when
comparing with 97 and 98 in the previous experiment.
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.10: Obese Leipzig pig pre-diet (n=5) and post-diet (n=4): The mean frequency of
the PBLs out of all cells in the sample (A) and live cells, T-cells and T-cell subsets out of the PBL
population (B) for the lean pre-diet (green) and obese post-diet pigs (red). A significant difference
was found in the PBL with an increase of 1.2 FC. and a significant increase was found in the CD3+
T-cell population (1.5 FC). There was also found significant increase on all of the T-cell populations.
Error bars shows SD of the mean and the circles show the data point for each group. *** p-value <
0.001, ** p-value < 0.01, * p-value < 0.05. Figure created with BioRender.com
Figure 5.11: Leipzig pre-diet (n=5) and post-diet (n=4) T-cell subsets: The mean frequency
of the T-cell subsets out of the CD3+ population. No significant difference was found, but a small
increase in the CD8+ SP population (1.4 FC) of the post-diet group was observed. High variation
was observed in the DN populations of the pre-diet group. Error bars shows SD of the mean and the
circles show the data point for each group. Figure created with BioRender.com
5.3.3
Short term
In the short term experiment, no difference was found in neither the PBL population nor the
CD3+ population, as seen in Figure 5.12 (A and B). The change in the CD8 and CD4 subsets
can not be compared, as 3 out of 4 of the lean pigs and 3 out of 5 of the obese pig showed no
expression of CD4, similar to what was seen in Tornado in the fresh vs frozen experiement.
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.12: Short term lean (n=4) and obese (n=5) pig’s cell populations: The mean
frequency of the PBLs out of all cells in the sample (A) and live cells, T-cells and T-cell subsets out of
the PBL population (B) for the lean (green) and obese (red) group. No significant difference was seen
in any of the cell population. 6 out of the 9 animal included in this study showed no staining with
the CD4 Ab. Error bars shows SD of the mean and the circles show the data point for each group.
Figure created with BioRender.com
Figure 5.13 shows the CD8 and CD4 staining of all the samples. It can clearly be seen that
only pig 3 (lean), pig 15 (obese) and pig 25 (obese) showed expression of CD4. On some of the
plots from pigs that didn’t show expression of CD4, a second positive population with lower
intensity of CD8 can be identified. This might be the CD8low population that have otherwise
been found in the DP population in other pigs.
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.13: CD4 and CD8 expression of lean (n=4) and obese (n=5) short term pigs:
Density plots of CD4 (x-axis) and CD8 (y-axis) staining for each of the 9 animals in the study. The
top row shows the lean animal. The two bottom rows show the obese animals. Only three of the nine
animals tested showed staining with the CD4 antibody. In some of the 6 animal with no CD4 stain it
is possible to identify a CD8low population that likely is the DP population.
To investigate the difference in the CD8/CD4 subsets between the obese and lean group, only
the three samples that did show expression of CD4 was compared in Figure 5.14. It was not
enough samples to identify any statistically significant differences, but there was some noticeable
tendencies. Most noticeable is the increase in the DN cells with a FC of 3.2 between the lean
pig and the mean of the two obese pigs. There is also a clear decrease in the CD8 SP and DP
between the lean and obese pigs with a decrease of 0.4 FC and 0.5 FC, respectively.
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.14: Cell populations of pig 3, 15 and 25: The frequency of the T-cells and T-cell
subsets of pig 3 from the lean group (green) and pig 15 and pig 25 from the obese group (red). The
red dotted lines show the mean of the obese pigs. The CD8 and DP population was reduced in the
obese animals compared to the lean pig with 0.4 and 0.5 FC, respectively. The DN population was
increased in the obese pig with a 3.2 FC. Figure created with BioRender.com
37
==PAGE:44==
Discussion
Method and optimization
The first goal of this project was to start the process of implementing the use of flow cytometry
to evaluate T-cell subsets in the Ossabaw pig. During the project, it have been shown that
porcine T-cell can be identified using anti-CD3 Ab, and that subsets of T-cells can be identified
using anti-CD8 and anti-CD4 Ab, in most pigs.
The pigs used for the initial testing of the method, was all the same age, and therefor suspected
to have approximately the same distribution of cell subsets in PBMCs. It was found that by
using the same staining protocol and gating strategy, guided by FMOs, the cell distribution
in all 5 samples was highly similar, showing that the method can be used to consistently and
reproducibly identify T-cell subsets in Ossabaw pigs.
The PE conjugated CD8 Ab was the only antibody that was titrated. Clear separation of
the positive and negative populations could be found using a concentration much lower than
the initially used 5µL, and 0.15µL was identified as an optimal concentration. This was not
unexpected, as PE is characterises as being a bright flourchrome [76], meaning its fluorescence
intensity is high, explaining why the concentration needed to be very low (0.0015 µL) before
no separation was observed. FITC (CD4 conjugate) and PerCP-Cy5.5 (CD3 conjugate) are
characterised as being moderate in brightness. Clear separation was observed for these Ab in
the present study, however it would be ideal to titrate all Ab in future. Not only to achieve
better separation, but also to determine if same results could be obtained using less Ab.
Fresh vs frozen
In this study the difference between cell populations of fresh and frozen PBMC samples, from
the same pigs, was used to evaluate the impact of cryopreservation on the reliability of the
frozen PBMCs. Though it would be desirable to always use fresh PBMC, this is rarely possible
in research, and cell samples are frozen to prolong their life time. It is therefor also impor-
tant to understand the impact it has on the cell in order to assume that the frozen cells are
representative for the living organism.
There was found a significant difference in both the live cell count and viability between the
fresh and frozen samples, displayed in Table 5.2. This indicates a higher quality of the fresh
sample. However, the cell count of the fresh samples are not the absolute number of cells in each
tube, but an estimate made during the PBMC isolation, and therefor not directly comparable
with the frozen samples live cell count. Furthermore, the PBL and live cell frequency found
with flow cytometry showed no difference between the fresh and frozen samples.
No significant difference was found between frequency of the PBL subsets in the fresh and frozen
38
==PAGE:45==
samples. These results are consistent with those reported by Li et al [77] in an unspecified breed
of pig. They also found no statistical significant difference between the T-cell subsets of fresh
and frozen samples. They did however observe a decrease of CD8 SP and increase of the DN
populations cell in the frozen samples, compared to the fresh, which was not observed in the
present study. The small difference in result could be due to difference in freezing medium
used. In the present study a freezing medium of 50% FBS, 40% RPMI and 10% DMSO was
used, Li et al used Cryostor CS10 from Stemcell Technologies, a non serum containing freezing
medium.
Other studies that have been made investigating the impact of cryopersevation of porcine
PBMCs, focus on the functional ability of the cells and reports no results on the subsets of
PBL. [78, 79] These studies did however found functional differences in cytokine production [78]
and proliferation [79] after stimulation with mitogens. Li et al found that frozen porcine PBMC
are suitable for both phenotyping and functional testing when mitogens are used, but found
that freezing significantly impacted the cells ability to response to antigen recall stimulation.
[77]
In humans it have been found that no changes are seen in the frequency of the T-cell subsets.
[80, 81] Conflicting results was seen when it comes to functionality of the T-cells. Kereher et al
reports that T-cells response to antigen recall stimulation was unaffected by cryoperservation
[81]. Where Owen et al found that long term cryopersevation affected the functionality of
human T-cell, by reduced IFNγ production in response to antigenic stimulation. [82]
In the present study, only the impact of cryoperservation on phenotypic distribution of PBL
was investiagted, but based on what is seen in humans and other experiments with pigs, it
would be necessary to investigate the impact on cell functionality in order to fully evaluate the
representativeness of the frozen samples.
Impact of obesity on T-cell subsets
Many studies on the effect of obesity on immune cell composition focus on the accumulation
of immune cells in the adipose tissue of obese subjects, and a limited number of studies have
investigated the composition of circulating T-cells. Given the connection between obesity and
systemic metabolic dysfunctions and diseases, like insulin resistance, hypertension, Type II
diabetes and CVD [83, 84] as well as an reduced response to vaccination and increased risk of
sever infection [25, 26], it is likely that circulating T-cell composition is also affected.
In the present study the impact of obesity on the T-cell populations was investigated using
samples from two different diet-induced obesity experiments in Ossabaw pigs. The most pro-
found difference was found between the Leipzig post-diet and the lean control pig 97 and 98.
Here a significant increase in PBL and CD3+ cells was observed as well as in all CD8/CD4
subsets (CD4+ SP, CD8+ SP, DP and DN) of the PBL population. However, when comparing
the CD8/CD4 subsets as frequency of the CD3+ population, there was only found a significant
39
==PAGE:46==
increase in CD8+ SP cells and a significant decrease in DP cells. CD4 SP and DN was un-
changed. Similar results was seen when comparing the pre-diet and post-diet samples from the
Leipzig experiment. However no significant difference was found in the CD8/CD4 subsets as
frequencies of CD3+ cells, but an increase in CD8+ SP in the obese group was still observed.
No change in DP cells was observed, instead a higher frequency of DN was observed in the
pre-diet group.
In the short term experiment, with limited data, a decrease in CD8+ SP cells was observed in
contrast to the Leipzig experiments. It is here worth noting that the frequency of CD8+ SP
in the lean pig 3 (46%) is significantly higher than those found in other lean controls like pig
97 and 98 (mean 7%) and the pre-diet group (mean 11%). If the obese pig 15 and 25 instead
was compared to the lean group of the other experiment an increase of CD8+ SP cell would
be observed in the obese pigs, similar to that found in lean the Leipzig pigs and 97 and 98. In
the short term experiment there was also found no difference in frequency of PBL and CD3+
Changes in T-cell composition of PBL during obesity have mainly been studies in humans.
In contrast to the findings of this study, studies in humans have shown that the frequency of
CD8+ T-cell either decrease [29] or is unchanged compared to lean controls [30, 85]. O’Rourke
et al and Wijngaarden et al did however find increased activation of the CD8+ cells in obese
subjects. This was based on an increased expression of CD95 on CD8+ T-cells [29] and increased
differentiation of effector and memory cells of CD8+ T-cell in obese compared to lean subjects
[85]. In contrast Van der Weerd et al found that differentiation was only induced in CD4+
T-cells and not CD8+ T-cells.
All three studies in humans found a significant increase in CD4+ cells in the PBL [29, 30, 85].
This increase in CD4+ cell was also observed in the present study, however only as overall
increased frequency of PBL and not as a skewing of CD3+ subssets, where similar frequency
CD4+ of was found between lean and obese pigs. Interestingly Wijngaarden et al found that
the increase of CD4+ T-cells was only induced in morbidly obese subjects that also had of Mets
and not in morbidly obese subjects without Mets. [85]
The decrease in DP found in the obese Leipzig pig compared to lean controls (97+98) could
maybe be due to an increased infiltration of CD4+ cell intro the adipose tissue, as have been
seen in mice. [86] In mice an increased frequency of Th1 CD4+ T-cell have been observed in
adipose tissue. Porcine DP cells are characterised as being Th effector and memory cells [63]
this might explain why the decrease mainly is seen in DP and not in CD4 SP (naive Th-cells).
Another explanation could be that the change is induced by age and not obesity.
There have generally been seen a significant age dependent change in subsets of porcine lympho-
cytes. [60, 87, 88]. Especially DP have been observed to be very age dependent. Zuckermann
and Husmann reports that new born pigs had a DP frequency of 2% where adult pig (3.5-4-5
years) had 35%. [87] The present study also included pigs of different age and though they
40
==PAGE:47==
where not tested together, a clear age dependent increase of DP cell can still observed. In the
fresh vs frozen experiment the pigs where all (excluding Tornado) over 7 years old and was
found to have a frequency of DP between 35-40%. In contrast non-obese animals tested in the
other experiments where all under 2 years old and had frequencies of DP between 6-12%.
Considering the 1 year age difference between the obese Leipzig pigs and the lean 97+98 pigs,
an increase in DP cells in the obese group would have be expected. Instead a decrease was
observed. It makes it more likely that the the decrease in DP in the obese and older group is
caused by some orther factor, maybe obesity. Supporting this it that a decrease of DP was also
seen in the short term experiment. where the pigs were all the same age.
The age difference of cause also have to be considered when looking at other T-cell subsets.
Studies have shown that CD4 have little to no age dependent difference, where CD8 have a
strong age dependent increase in pig [60, 87]. Considering the age dependent increase of CD8+
cells generally found in pig, it cannot be concluded whether the increase found in the CD8+
SP cell are induced by obesity or due to an age difference of 6 months to 1 year between the
obese and lean control groups.
Difference between the two diet experiments
The short term experiment generally showed less impacts on PBL population, than the Leipzig
experiment. This could be due to difference in diet used to induce obesity, the length of the
experiment and age of the pigs. Of these three the diet and length of the experiment likely
have the highest impact. The short term diet was higher in fructose and fat, where the Leipzig
diet was higher in carbohydrates, but the biggest difference is amount of cholesterol. The short
term diet had 0.5% the Leipzig diet had 2%. The Leipzig animals had a 20% increase in weight
after diet, where the short term only had 5% increase, indicating a much lower degree of obesity
was induced in the short term. This is supported by the fact that no difference was observed
in frequency of PBL and CD3 in the short term experiment, where an increase in both was
found in the Leipzig experiment. This suggests an activation of the immune system in the obese
Leipzig pig but not in the obese short term pigs. This might indicate that a higher degree of
obesity and possible Mets was induced in the Leipzig pigs than the short term pigs.
It have been seen that Ossabaw pigs can develop obesity and Mets after just 9 weeks of feeding
an obese diet [49]. The diet used by Dyson et al also contained 2% cholesterol, indicating that
there is a connection between feeding with a high cholesterol diet and inducing obesity and
Mets in Ossabaw pig.
CD4 isotype staining
In this project it was observed that some pigs did not show any expression of CD4 on their
CD3+ cells. One explanation for this could of course be that those particular pig have no
CD4+ cells. However given the essential role CD4+ cell play in the adaptive immune response
as Th-helper cells [89] it is unlikely that, many otherwise healthy pigs should not have any Th
helper cells. Another more likely explanation is that the Ab used does not bind to the CD4
41
==PAGE:48==
molecule of these pigs. In this study a 74-12-4 CD4 Ab was used. In other pig breeds it have
also been seen that this particular clone of CD4 Ab is not able to detect CD4+ T-cell in all
pigs. [90–92]
Matsubara et al reported that their herd of microminipigs had two CD4 alleles, CD4.A and
CD4.B, where A was responsive to 74-12-4 Ab and B was not. A similar pattern was reported
by Sundt et al in their NIH miniature swine with CD4.1 being responsive and CD4.2 being
non-responsive. This have also been seen with female G¨ottingen minipig, where one study
reported that one pig did not respond to the 74-12-4 CD4 Ab. [91] Sundt et al also reported
that no functional defect was found in the CD4.2 positive pigs, when stimulated with PHA
mitogen. [92]
It is likely that Ossabaw pigs have the same polymorphisme as seen in these other pigs and
is the reason why some pigs don’t respond to the 74-12-4 CD4 Ab. There is evidence for a
hereditary element to the expression of the CD4 allels, with the non-responsive allele being
recessive. [93] This might explain why it is so frequent in an inbreed herd like the danish
Ossabaw population.
42
==PAGE:49==
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to evaluate the use of flow cytometry for investigating T-cell
populations in Ossabaw pigs, focusing on optimizing the methodology and studying differences
between lean and obese pigs.
This study successfully demonstrated that flow cytometry could identify CD3+ T-cells and their
subsets (CD4+ SP, CD8+ SP, CD4+CD8+ DP, and CD4-CD8- DN) in PBMC samples from
Ossabaw pigs. A staining protocol adapted from human T-cell studies produced consistent
and reproducible results.
Cryopreservation was found not to affect the frequency of T-cell
populations, although further research is needed to assess functional differences between fresh
and frozen cells.
The impact of obesity on T-cell populations was investigated through two diet-induced obesity
experiments.
The first study showed a general increase in lymphocytes, T-cell and T-cell
subsets, particularly CD8+ SP T-cells, in obese pigs. However, age differences between the
groups might have influenced these results. The second study did not show significant changes,
likely due to a milder degree of obesity induced by a shorter time-frame and teh use of a less
cholesterol-rich diet. Additionally, a likely polymorphism in the CD4 allele affected the CD4
Ab’s ability to bind to and identify CD4+ cells
In conclusion, this project has established that flow cytometry can effectively identify T-cell
populations in Ossabaw pigs and reveal differences in T-cell composition between lean and obese
pigs. However, further optimization of the antibody panel is necessary. Age-dependent changes
in T-cell compositions should also be considered in future experiments. This work provides a
foundation for using flow cytometry to study the immunological effects of obesity in Ossabaw
pigs, offering valuable insights for future research on obesity-related immune dysfunctions.
43
==PAGE:50==
Future Perspective
This thesis has laid the groundwork for using flow cytometry to study T-cell populations in
Ossabaw pigs, particularly in the context of obesity-induced immune changes. However, several
areas require further investigation and optimization.
A critical next step is testing different clones of CD4 antibodies to identify one that interacts
with pigs that do not respond to the 74-12-4 clone. While the pool of porcine antibodies for
flow cytometry is limited, there is potential for cross-reactivity with antibodies specific to other
species, such as humans, and these might also be investigated.
The current study used a small panel of antibodies to identify CD3, CD4, and CD8 expression
on PBMC from Ossabaw pigs. Future studies could expand this panel to include antibodies
specific to various subsets of activated T-cells and other immune cells, like B-cells or monocytes.
Incorporating intracellular staining to identify cytokine-producing cells could also provide a
more comprehensive understanding of the phenotypical and functional impact of obesity on
circulating immune cells.
To better understand obesity’s effect on the general immune response, stimulation studies
involving pigs that have been infected or vaccinated would be valuable. Flow cytometry could
be used in these studies to investigate the ability of obese individuals to mount an immune
response against infections or vaccines.
By addressing these areas, future research can enhance our understanding of obesity’s impact
on the immune system, improve the utility of the Ossabaw pig model in translational research,
and ultimately contribute to developing effective strategies to combat obesity-related immune
dysfunctions and associated metabolic diseases.
44
==PAGE:51==
References
(1)
Obesity Atlas 2024 — World Obesity Federation Global Obesity Observatory, https:
//data.worldobesity.org/publications/?cat=22, Accessed: 05-07-2024.
(2)
Scarpellini, E.; Tack, J., Obesity and Metabolic Syndrome: An Inflammatory Condition,
2012, 2, June, 148–153, 30, issn: 0257-2753, DOI: 10.1159/000336664.
(3)
The top 10 causes of death, https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
the-top-10-causes-of-death, Accessed: 05-07-2024.
(4)
Hotamisligil, G. S.; Shargill, N. S.; Spiegelman, B. M., Adipose Expression of Tumor
Necrosis Factor-α: Direct Role in Obesity-Linked Insulin Resistance, 1993, 5091, Jan.,
87–91, 259, issn: 0036-8075, DOI: 10.1126/SCIENCE.7678183.
(5)
Rexrode, K. M.; Pradhan, A.; Manson, J. E.; Buring, J. E.; Ridker, P. M., Relationship
of total and abdominal adiposity with CRP and IL-6 in women, 2003, 10, 674–682, 13,
issn: 10472797, DOI: 10.1016/S1047-2797(03)00053-X.
(6)
Kern, P. A.; Saghizadeh, M.; Ong, J. M.; Bosch, R. J.; Deem, R.; Simsolo, R. B., The
expression of tumor necrosis factor in human adipose tissue. Regulation by obesity, weight
loss, and relationship to lipoprotein lipase., 1995, 5, May, 2111–2119, 95, issn: 0021-9738,
DOI: 10.1172/JCI117899.
(7)
Koopmans, S. J.; Schuurman, T., Considerations on pig models for appetite, metabolic
syndrome and obese type 2 diabetes: From food intake to metabolic disease, 2015, July,
231–239, 759, issn: 0014-2999, DOI: 10.1016/J.EJPHAR.2015.03.044.
(8)
Leach, M.; Drummond, M.; Doig, A., Principles of Flow Cytometry; John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd: 2013; Vol. Chapter 2, pp 3–19.
(9)
Pescovitz, M. D.; Lunney, J. K.; Sachs, D. H., Preparation and characterization of mono-
clonal antibodies reactive with porcine PBL., 1984, 1, July, 368–375, 133, issn: 0022-1767,
DOI: 10.4049/JIMMUNOL.133.1.368.
(10)
Charerntantanakul, W.; Roth, J. A., Biology of porcine T lymphocytes, 2006, 1-2, 81–96,
7, issn: 1475-2654, DOI: 10.1017/S1466252307001235.
(11)
Delves, P. J.; Roitt, I. M., The immune system. First of two parts, 2000, 1, July, 37–49,
343, issn: 0028-4793, DOI: 10.1056/NEJM200007063430107.
(12)
Kumar, B. V.; Connors, T. J.; Farber, D. L., Human T cell development, localization,
and function throughout life, 2018, 2, Feb., 202, 48, issn: 10974180, DOI: 10.1016/J.
IMMUNI.2018.01.007.
(13)
Krueger, A.; Zietara, N.;  Lyszkiewicz, M., T Cell Development by the Numbers, 2017, 2,
Feb., 128–139, 38, issn: 1471-4906, DOI: 10.1016/J.IT.2016.10.007.
45
==PAGE:52==
(14)
Gascoigne, N. R.; Rybakin, V.; Acuto, O.; Brzostek, J., TCR Signal Strength and T Cell
Development, 2016, Volume 32, 2016, Oct., 327–348, 32, issn: 15308995, DOI: 10.1146/
annurev-cellbio-111315-125324.
(15)
Takahama, Y., Journey through the thymus: stromal guides for T-cell development and
selection, 2006, 2, Feb., 127–135, 6, issn: 1474-1741, DOI: 10.1038/nri1781.
(16)
Andersen, M. H.; Schrama, D.; Thor Straten, P.; Becker, J. C., Cytotoxic T Cells, 2006,
1, Jan., 32–41, 126, issn: 0022-202X, DOI: 10.1038/SJ.JID.5700001.
(17)
Luckheeram, R. V.; Zhou, R.; Verma, A. D.; Xia, B., CD4+T Cells: Differentiation and
Functions, 2012, 1, Jan., 925135, 2012, issn: 2314-7156, DOI: 10.1155/2012/925135.
(18)
Liao, W.; Lin, J. X.; Wang, L.; Li, P.; Leonard, W. J., Modulation of cytokine receptors by
IL-2 broadly regulates differentiation into helper T cell lineages, 2011, 6, Apr., 551–559,
12, issn: 1529-2916, DOI: 10.1038/ni.2030.
(19)
Obesity and overweight, https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
obesity-and-overweight, Accessed: 03/06/2024.
(20)
Obesity Classification — World Obesity Federation, https://www.worldobesity.org/
about/about-obesity/obesity-classification, Accessed: 03/06/2024.
(21)
Emanuela, F.; Grazia, M.; Marco, D. R.; Maria Paola, L.; Giorgio, F.; Marco, B., In-
flammation as a Link between Obesity and Metabolic Syndrome, 2012, 1, Jan., 476380,
2012, issn: 2090-0732, DOI: 10.1155/2012/476380.
(22)
Metabolic Syndrome — Johns Hopkins Medicine, https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/
health/conditions-and-diseases/metabolic-syndrome, Accessed: 25-06-2024.
(23)
Alberti, K. G. M.; Zimmet, P.; Shaw, J., The metabolic syndrome—a new worldwide
definition, 2005, 9491, Sept., 1059–1062, 366, issn: 0140-6736, DOI: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(05)67402-8.
(24)
Andersen, C. J.; Murphy, K. E.; Fernandez, M. L., Impact of Obesity and Metabolic
Syndrome on Immunity, 2016, 1, 66–75, 7, issn: 2156-5376, DOI: 10.3945/AN.115.
010207.
(25)
Nasr, M. J. C.; Geerling, E.; Pinto, A. K., Impact of Obesity on Vaccination to SARS-
CoV-2, 2022, June, 13, issn: 1664-2392, DOI: 10.3389/FENDO.2022.898810.
(26)
Neidich, S. D.; Green, W. D.; Rebeles, J.; Karlsson, E. A.; Schultz-Cherry, S.; Noah,
T. L.; Chakladar, S.; Hudgens, M. G.; Weir, S. S.; Beck, M. A., Increased risk of influenza
among vaccinated adults who are obese, 2017, 9, Sept., 1324–1330, 41, issn: 1476-5497,
DOI: 10.1038/IJO.2017.131.
(27)
Roytblat, L.; Rachinsky, M.; Fisher, A.; Greemberg, L.; Shapira, Y.; Douvdevani, A.;
Gelman, S., Raised Interleukin-6 Levels in Obese Patients, 2000, 9, Dec., 673–675, 8,
issn: 1550-8528, DOI: 10.1038/OBY.2000.86.
(28)
Yang, H.; Youm, Y. H.; Vandanmagsar, B.; Rood, J.; Kumar, K. G.; Butler, A. A.; Dixit,
V. D., Obesity accelerates thymic aging, 2009, 18, Oct., 3803–3812, 114, issn: 0006-4971,
DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-213595.
46
==PAGE:53==
(29)
O’Rourke, R. W.; Kay, T.; Scholz, M. H.; Diggs, B.; Jobe, B. A.; Lewinsohn, D. M.;
Bakke, A. C., Alterations in T-cell subset frequency in peripheral blood in obesity, 2005,
10, Nov., 1463–1468, 15, issn: 0960-8923, DOI: 10.1381/096089205774859308.
(30)
Van Der Weerd, K.; Dik, W. A.; Schrijver, B.; Schweitzer, D. H.; Langerak, A. W.;
Drexhage, H. A.; Kiewiet, R. M.; Van Aken, M. O.; Van Huisstede, A.; Van Dongen, J. J.;
Van Der Lelij, A. J.; Staal, F. J.; Van Hagen, P. M., Morbidly obese human subjects have
increased peripheral blood CD4+ T cells with skewing toward a Treg- and Th2-dominated
phenotype, 2012, 2, Feb., 401–408, 61, issn: 1939-327X, DOI: 10.2337/DB11-1065.
(31)
Nieman, D. C.; Henson, D. A.; Nehlsen-Cannarella, S. L.; Ekkens, M.; Utter, A. C.;
Butterworth, D. E.; Fagoaga, O. R., Influence of Obesity on Immune Function, 1999, 3,
Mar., 294–299, 99, issn: 0002-8223, DOI: 10.1016/S0002-8223(99)00077-2.
(32)
Womack, J.; Tien, P. C.; Feldman, J.; Shin, J. H.; Fennie, K.; Anastos, K.; Cohen, M. H.;
Bacon, M. C.; Minkoff, H., Obesity and immune cell counts in women, 2007, 7, July, 998–
1004, 56, issn: 0026-0495, DOI: 10.1016/J.METABOL.2007.03.008.
(33)
Fink, S.; Eckert, E.; Mitchell, J.; Crosby, R.; Pomeroy, C., T-lymphocyte subsets in pa-
tients with abnormal body weight: Longitudinal studies in anorexia nervosa and obesity,
1996, 3, Nov., 295–305, 20, issn: 02763478, DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-108X(199611)
20:3<295::AID-EAT9>3.0.CO;2-J.
(34)
Tanaka, S.-I.; Isoda, F.; Ishihara, Y.; Kimura, M.; Yamakawa, T., T lymphopaenia in
relation to body mass index and TNF-α in human obesity: adequate weight reduction
can be corrective, 2001, 3, Mar., 347–354, 54, issn: 1365-2265, DOI: 10.1046/J.1365-
2265.2001.1139CN2155.X.
(35)
Vandamme, T. F., Rodent models for human diseases, 2015, July, 84–89, 759, issn: 0014-
2999, DOI: 10.1016/J.EJPHAR.2015.03.046.
(36)
Spurlock, M. E.; Gabler, N. K., The Development of Porcine Models of Obesity and the
Metabolic Syndrome, 2008, 2, Feb., 397–402, 138, issn: 0022-3166, DOI: 10.1093/JN/
138.2.397.
(37)
Wayhart, J. P.; Lawson, H. A., Animal Models of Metabolic Syndrome, 2017, Jan., 221–
243, DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-809468-6.00009-7.
(38)
Mohamed-Ali, V.; Goodrick, S.; Bulmer, K.; Holly, J. M.; Yudkin, J. S.; Coppack, S. W.,
Production of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors by human subcutaneous adipose
tissue in vivo, 1999, 6 40-6, 277, issn: 01931849, DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.1999.277.6.
E971.
(39)
Arner, P., Resistin: Yet another adipokine tells us that men are not mice, 2005, 11, Nov.,
2203–2205, 48, issn: 0012186X, DOI: 10.1007/s00125-005-1956-3.
(40)
Paquot, N.; Castillo, M. J.; Lefe‘bvre, P. J.; Lefe‘bvre, L.; Scheen, A. J., No Increased
Insulin Sensitivity after a Single Intravenous Administration of a Recombinant Human
Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor: Fc Fusion Protein in Obese Insulin-Resistant Patients,
2000, 3, Mar., 1316–1319, 85, issn: 0021-972X, DOI: 10.1210/JCEM.85.3.6417.
47
==PAGE:54==
(41)
Kalt, W.; Foote, K.; Fillmore, S. A.; Lyon, M.; Van Lunen, T. A.; Mcrae, K. B., Effect
of blueberry feeding on plasma lipids in pigs, 2008, 1, 70–78, 100, issn: 1475-2662, DOI:
10.1017/S0007114507877658.
(42)
Gabriel, G. C.; Devine, W.; Redel, B. K.; Whitworth, K. M.; Samuel, M.; Spate, L. D.;
Cecil, R. F.; Prather, R. S.; Wu, Y.; Wells, K. D.; Lo, C. W., Cardiovascular development
and congenital heart disease modeling in the pig, 2021, 14, July, 21631, 10, issn: 20479980,
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.121.021631.
(43)
Zhang, Y.; Fan, G.; Liu, X.; Skovgaard, K.; Sturek, M.; Heegaard, P. M., The genome
of the naturally evolved obesity-prone Ossabaw miniature pig, 2021, 9, Sept., 103081, 24,
issn: 25890042, DOI: 10.1016/J.ISCI.2021.103081.
(44)
Lee, L.; Alloosh, M.; Saxena, R.; Van Alstine, W.; Watkins, B. A.; Klaunig, J. E.; Sturek,
M.; Chalasani, N., Nutritional model of steatohepatitis and metabolic syndrome in the
Ossabaw miniature swine, 2009, 1, July, 56–67, 50, issn: 1527-3350, DOI: 10.1002/HEP.
22904.
(45)
Cluzel, G. L.; Ryan, P. M.; Herisson, F. M.; Caplice, N. M., High-fidelity porcine models
of metabolic syndrome: a contemporary synthesis, 2022, 4, Apr., E366–E381, 322, issn:
15221555, DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00413.2021.
(46)
Lloyd, P. G.; Fang, M.; Brisbin, I. L.; Andersson, L.; Sturek, M., AMP kinase gene
mutation is consistent with a thrifty phenotype (metabolic syndrome) in a population of
feral swine, 2006, 4, Mar., A299–A299, 20, issn: 1530-6860, DOI: 10.1096/FASEBJ.20.
4.A299-D.
(47)
Neel, J. V., Diabetes Mellitus: A “Thrifty” Genotype Rendered Detrimental by “Progress”
?, 1962, 4, Dec., 353, 14, issn: 00029297.
(48)
Neeb, Z. P.; Edwards, J. M.; Alloosh, M.; Long, X.; Mokelke, E. A.; Sturek, M., Metabolic
syndrome and coronary artery disease in Ossabaw compared with Yucatan swine., 2010,
4, Aug., 300–15, 60, issn: 2769-819X.
(49)
Dyson, M. C.; Alloosh, M.; Vuchetich, J. P.; Mokelke, E. A.; Sturek, M., Components of
Metabolic Syndrome and Coronary Artery Disease in Female Ossabaw Swine Fed Excess
Atherogenic Diet, 2006, 1, 35–44, 56.
(50)
Clark, B. A.; Alloosh, M.; Wenze, J. W.; Sturek, M.; Kostrominova, T. Y., Effect of diet-
induced obesity and metabolic syndrome on skeletal muscles of Ossabaw miniature swine,
2011, 5, May, 848–857, 300, issn: 01931849, DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00534.2010.
(51)
Matthan, N. R.; Solano-Aguilar, G.; Meng, H.; Lamon-Fava, S.; Goldbaum, A.; Walker,
M. E.; Jang, S.; Lakshman, S.; Molokin, A.; Xie, Y.; Beshah, E.; Stanley, J.; Urban,
J. F.; Lichtenstein, A. H., The Ossabaw Pig Is a Suitable Translational Model to Evaluate
Dietary Patterns and Coronary Artery Disease Risk, 2018, 4, Apr., 542–551, 148, issn:
1541-6100, DOI: 10.1093/JN/NXY002.
(52)
Vieira-Potter, V. J.; Lee, S.; Bayless, D. S.; Scroggins, R. J.; Welly, R. J.; Fleming, N. J.;
Smith, T. N.; Meers, G. M.; Hill, M. A.; Scott Rector, R.; Padilla, J., Disconnect Between
48
==PAGE:55==
Adipose Tissue Inflammation and Cardiometabolic Dysfunction in Ossabaw Pigs, 2015,
12, Dec., 2421, 23, issn: 1930739X, DOI: 10.1002/OBY.21252.
(53)
Edwards, J. M.; Neeb, Z. P.; Alloosh, M. A.; Long, X.; Bratz, I. N.; Peller, C. R.; Byrd,
J. P.; Kumar, S.; Obukhov, A. G.; Sturek, M., Exercise training decreases store-operated
Ca2+entry associated with metabolic syndrome and coronary atherosclerosis, 2010, 3,
Feb., 631–640, 85, issn: 0008-6363, DOI: 10.1093/CVR/CVP308.
(54)
Panasevich, M. R.; Wankhade, U. D.; Chintapalli, S. V.; Shankar, K.; Rector, R. S.,
Gut Microbiota in Health and Disease: Cecal versus fecal microbiota in Ossabaw swine
and implications for obesity, 2018, 5, May, 355, 50, issn: 15312267, DOI: 10.1152/
PHYSIOLGENOMICS.00110.2017.
(55)
Fullenkamp, A. M.; Bell, L. N.; Robbins, R. D.; Lee, L.; Saxena, R.; Alloosh, M.; Klaunig,
J. E.; Mirmira, R. G.; Sturek, M.; Chalasani, N., Effect of Different Obesogenic Diets on
Pancreatic Histology in Ossabaw Miniature Swine, 2011, 3, Apr., 438, 40, issn: 08853177,
DOI: 10.1097/MPA.0B013E3182061583.
(56)
Kreutz, R. P.; Alloosh, M.; Mansour, K.; Neeb, Z.; Kreutz, Y.; Flockhart, D. A.; Sturek,
M., Morbid obesity and metabolic syndrome in Ossabaw miniature swine are associated
with increased platelet reactivity, 2011, 99, 4, issn: 11787007, DOI: 10.2147/DMSO.
S17105.
(57)
Kleiveland, C., Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells, 2015, Jan., 161–167, DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-319-16104-4_15.
(58)
Cooper, M. A.; Fehniger, T. A.; Caligiuri, M. A., The biology of human natural killer-cell
subsets, 2001, 11, Nov., 633–640, 22, issn: 1471-4906, DOI: 10.1016/S1471-4906(01)
02060-9.
(59)
Autissier, P.; Soulas, C.; Burdo, T. H.; Williams, K. C., Evaluation of a 12-color flow
cytometry panel to study lymphocyte, monocyte, and dendritic cell subsets in humans,
2010, 5, May, 410–419, 77A, issn: 1552-4930, DOI: 10.1002/CYTO.A.20859.
(60)
Yang, H.; Parkhouse, R. M. E., Phenotypic classification of porcine lymphocyte subpop-
ulations in blood and lymphoid tissues¡/b¿, 1996, 1, Sept., 76–83, 89, issn: 0019-2805,
DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.1996.d01-705.x.
(61)
Battistini, L.; Borsellino, G.; Sawicki, G.; Poccia, F.; Salvetti, M.; Ristori, G.; Brosnan,
C. F., Phenotypic and cytokine analysis of human peripheral blood gamma delta T cells
expressing NK cell receptors., 1997, 8, Oct., 3723–3730, 159, issn: 0022-1767, DOI: 10.
4049/jimmunol.159.8.3723.
(62)
Yang, H.; Parkhouse, R. M., Differential expression of CD8 epitopes amongst porcine
CD8-positive functional lymphocyte subsets., 1997, 1, 45, 92, issn: 00192805, DOI: 10.
1046/J.1365-2567.1997.00308.X.
(63)
Saalm¨uller, A.; Werner, T.; Fachinger, V., T-helper cells from naive to committed, 2002,
3-4, Sept., 137–145, 87, issn: 0165-2427, DOI: 10.1016/S0165-2427(02)00045-4.
49
==PAGE:56==
(64)
Pietrasina, O.; Miller, J.; Rzasa, A., Differences in the relative counts of peripheral blood
lymphocyte subsets in various age groups of pigs, 2020, 1, Jan., 52, 84, issn: 19289022.
(65)
Gerner, W.; K¨aser, T.; Saalm¨uller, A., Porcine T lymphocytes and NK cells – An update,
2009, 3, Mar., 310–320, 33, issn: 0145-305X, DOI: 10.1016/J.DCI.2008.06.003.
(66)
Summerfield, A.; Guzylack-Piriou, L.; Schaub, A.; Carrasco, C. P.; Tˆache, V.; Charley,
B.; Mccullough, K. C., Porcine peripheral blood dendritic cells and natural interferon-
producing cells, 2003, 4, Dec., 440–449, 110, issn: 1365-2567, DOI: 10.1111/J.1365-
2567.2003.01755.X.
(67)
Adan, A.; Alizada, G.; Kiraz, Y.; Baran, Y.; Nalbant, A., Flow cytometry: basic principles
and applications, 2017, 2, Feb., 163–176, 37, issn: 15497801, DOI: 10.3109/07388551.
2015.1128876.
(68)
BD FACSCanto™Clinical Flow Cytometry System, Accessed: 02/05/2024.
(69)
Stemcell: Lymphoprep™Density Gradient Medium — STEMCELL Technologies, https:
//www.stemcell.com/lymphoprep.html, Accessed: 09/04/2024.
(70)
Stemcell: SepMate™-50 (IVD) Tubes for Density Gradient Centrifugation — STEM-
CELL Technologies, https://www.stemcell.com/sepmate-50-ivd.html, Accessed:
09/04/2024.
(71)
ThermoFisher: PBS (10X), pH 7.2, https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/
product/70013016, Accessed: 09/04/2024.
(72)
Thermofisher: Fetal Bovine Serum, qualified, heat inactivated, Brazil, https://www.
thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/10500064, Accessed: 09/04/2024.
(73)
Chemometec: NucleoCounter® NC-202™Consistent Cell Counter, https://chemomet
ec.com/nucleocounters/nc-202/, Accessed: 09/04/2024.
(74)
Thermofisher: RPMI 1640 Medium, GlutaMAX™Supplement, https://www.thermofi
sher.com/order/catalog/product/61870036, Accessed: 09/04/2024.
(75)
LIVE/DEAD™Fixable Near-IR Dead Cell Stain Kit, for 633 or 635 nm excitation, http
s://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/L34976, Accessed: 18/04/2024.
(76)
Lasers and Dyes for Multicolor Flow Cytometry, https://www.bdbiosciences.com/en-
dk/learn/applications/multicolor-flow-cytometry/lasers-and-dyes#overview,
Accessed: 09-07-2024.
(77)
Li, Y.; Mateu, E.; D´ıaz, I., Impact of Cryopreservation on Viability, Phenotype, and
Functionality of Porcine PBMC, 2021, Nov., 765667, 12, issn: 16643224, DOI: 10.3389/
FIMMU.2021.765667/.
(78)
Li, X.; Zhong, Z.; Liang, S.; Wang, X.; Zhong, F., Effect of cryopreservation on IL-4,
IFNγ and IL-6 production of porcine peripheral blood lymphocytes, 2009, 3, Dec., 322–
326, 59, issn: 0011-2240, DOI: 10.1016/J.CRYOBIOL.2009.09.004.
(79)
Koch, E.; Larak, M.; Ellendorff, F., Comparative studies on in vitro reactivity of fresh
and cryopreserved pig lymphocytes, 1991, 5, Oct., 405–412, 28, issn: 0011-2240, DOI:
10.1016/0011-2240(91)90048-S.
50
==PAGE:57==
(80)
Costantini, A.; Mancini, S.; Giuliodoro, S.; Butini, L.; Regnery, C. M.; Silvestri, G.;
Montroni, M., Effects of cryopreservation on lymphocyte immunophenotype and function,
2003, 1-2, July, 145–155, 278, issn: 0022-1759, DOI: 10.1016/S0022-1759(03)00202-3.
(81)
Kreher, C. R.; Dittrich, M. T.; Guerkov, R.; Boehm, B. O.; Tary-Lehmann, M., CD4+
and CD8+ cells in cryopreserved human PBMC maintain full functionality in cytokine
ELISPOT assays, 2003, 1-2, July, 79–93, 278, issn: 0022-1759, DOI: 10.1016/S0022-
1759(03)00226-6.
(82)
Owen, R. E.; Sinclair, E.; Emu, B.; Heitman, J. W.; Hirschkorn, D. F.; Epling, C. L.;
Tan, Q. X.; Custer, B.; Harris, J. M.; Jacobson, M. A.; McCune, J. M.; Martin, J. N.;
Hecht, F. M.; Deeks, S. G.; Norris, P. J., Loss of T cell responses following long-term
cryopreservation, 2007, 1-2, Sept., 93–115, 326, issn: 0022-1759, DOI: 10.1016/J.JIM.
2007.07.012.
(83)
Kahn, S. E.; Hull, R. L.; Utzschneider, K. M., Mechanisms linking obesity to insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes, 2006, 7121, Dec., 840–846, 444, issn: 1476-4687, DOI:
10.1038/NATURE05482.
(84)
Volpe, M.; Gallo, G., Obesity and cardiovascular disease: An executive document on
pathophysiological and clinical links promoted by the Italian Society of Cardiovascular
Prevention (SIPREC), 2023, Mar., 1136340, 10, issn: 2297055X, DOI: 10.3389/FCVM.
2023.1136340.
(85)
Wijngaarden, L. H.; van der Harst, E.; Klaassen, R. A.; Dunkelgrun, M.; Kuijper, T. M.;
Klepper, M.; Ambagtsheer, G.; IJzermans, J. N.; de Bruin, R. W.; Litjens, N. H., Effects
of Morbid Obesity and Metabolic Syndrome on the Composition of Circulating Immune
Subsets, 2021, July, 675018, 12, issn: 16643224, DOI: 10.3389/FIMMU.2021.675018.
(86)
Khan, I. M.; Dai Perrard, X. Y.; Perrard, J. L.; Mansoori, A.; Wayne Smith, C.; Wu, H.;
Ballantyne, C. M., Attenuated adipose tissue and skeletal muscle inflammation in obese
mice with combined CD4+ and CD8+ T cell deficiency, 2014, 2, Apr., 419–428, 233,
issn: 0021-9150, DOI: 10.1016/J.ATHEROSCLEROSIS.2014.01.011.
(87)
Zuckermann, F. A.; Husmann, R. J., Functional and phenotypic analysis of porcine pe-
ripheral blood CD4/CD8 double-positive T cells., 1996, 3, Mar., 500, 87, issn: 0019-2805.
(88)
Joling, P.; Bianchi, A. T.; Kappe, A. L.; Zwart, R. J., Distribution of lymphocyte sub-
populations in thymus, spleen, and peripheral blood of specific pathogen free pigs from 1
to 40 weeks of age, 1994, 2, Feb., 105–117, 40, issn: 0165-2427, DOI: 10.1016/0165-
2427(94)90027-2.
(89)
Saalm¨uller, A.; Bryant, J., Characteristics of porcine T lymphocytes and T-cell lines,
1994, 1-3, Oct., 45–52, 43, issn: 0165-2427, DOI: 10.1016/0165-2427(94)90119-8.
(90)
Matsubara, T.; Nishii, N.; Takashima, S.; Takasu, M.; Imaeda, N.; Aiki-Oshimo, K.; Ya-
mazoe, K.; Kakisaka, M.; Takeshima, S. n.; Aida, Y.; Kametani, Y.; Kulski, J. K.; Ando,
A.; Kitagawa, H., Identification and characterization of two CD4 alleles in Microminip-
igs, 2016, 1, Oct., 1–10, 12, issn: 17466148, DOI: 10.1186/S12917-016-0856-8.
51
==PAGE:58==
(91)
Boeker, M.; Pabst, R.; Rothk¨otter, H. J., Quantification of B, T and Null Lymphocyte
Subpopulations in the Blood and Lymphoid Organs of the Pig, 1999, 1, Sept., 74–87, 201,
issn: 0171-2985, DOI: 10.1016/S0171-2985(99)80048-5.
(92)
Sundt, T. M.; LeGuern, C.; Germana, S.; Smith, C. V.; Nakajima, K.; Lunney, J. K.;
Sachs, D. H., Characterization of a polymorphism of CD4 in miniature swine., 1992, 10,
May, 3195–3201, 148, issn: 0022-1767, DOI: 10.4049/JIMMUNOL.148.10.3195.
(93)
Matsubara, T.; Nishii, N.; Takashima, S.; Takasu, M.; Imaeda, N.; Aiki-Oshimo, K.;
Yamazoe, K.; Kametani, Y.; Ando, A.; Kitagawa, H., Identification of a CD4 variant in
Microminipigs not detectable with available anti-CD4 monoclonal antibodies, 2015, 3-4,
Dec., 176–183, 168, issn: 0165-2427, DOI: 10.1016/J.VETIMM.2015.09.008.
52
==PAGE:59==
Appendices
53
==PAGE:60==
SOP 
Protocol name: T cell staining with combi-coding  
 
Last revision date: 
18 
09/12/2021 
Prepared by: 
Approved by: 
Edition: 3 
Siri A. Tvingsholm 
Natasja W. Pedersen 
 
Distribution: T-cells and Cancer group, xTI, DTU Healthtechnology 
Target user: Experienced and trained lab personnel 
 
Purpose: 
Staining of T cells with a panel of combinatorial-encoded pMHC multimers, for 
simultaneous detection of multiple specificities  
 
Materials: 
RPMI (Gibco RPMI 1640 GlutaMax, #72400-021/054) 
 
FCS (Gibco, #10500-064) 
Dasatinib (LC Laboratories, D-3307) 
PBS 
 
Multimer panel 
 
Staining buffer (BD 563794) 
Antibody mix (protocol #19) 
Near IR viablilty dye (NIR, Invitrogen L10119) 
Paraformaldehyde 
96-well plate 
Eppendorf tubes 
FACS tubes 
 
Buffer/media 
R10: RPMI + 10 % FCS  
 
FACS buffer: PBS + 2%FCS 
 
 
T cell staining 
 
1. Thaw cells according to protocol ‘Thawing and freezing cells’ 
2. Wash twice in R10 (at 1500rpm for 5 min. at 4°C) 
3. Count and take out maximum 2*106 cells per well in a 96-well plates. 
4. Wash in FACS buffer (~200uL)  
5. Spin plate at 1500rpm, 5 min. at 4°C and sling the supernatant (we assume ~20ul medium 
remains in plate) 
6. Prepare a dasatinib* dilution from our 1mM stock (1uL in 1mL PBS) 
7. Add 5 µL diluted dasatinib to the cells (final conc = 50nM)  
8. If low affinity responses (e.g. shared antigens), pre-incubate with dasatinib for 30min. at 37°C if 
staining with multimers at <37°C, to ensure proper blockage of antigen-induced TCR down-
regulation. For high affinity responses (e.g virus), co-incubation with tetramers should be 
sufficient. 
9. Spin the multimer panel at 3300g for 5min. at 4°C  
Appendix A: Human T-cell staining protocol
54
==PAGE:61==
10. Collect multimer panel by adding 1µl of each specificity to an eppendorf tube on ice and top up 
to 50 µl staining buffer per sample (Note! 1µl applies when the combi coding panel is 
generated with a final monomer exchange concentration of 100µg/ml. If low affinity or low 
frequent responses (e.g. shared- or self-antigens), this volume can be increased)  
11. Spin collected multimer panels at 10.000g for 2min at 4°C 
12. Add multimer panel to the cells (avoid the pellet) (Add mixed multimers the cells shortly after 
mixing, to avoid peptide swapping) 
13. Add FACS buffer to a total volume of 100uL/well and carefully mix 
14. Incubate for 15min. at 37°C 
15. Add 20ul Antibody-mix per well to an eppendorf tube (2 ml stock according to protocol 
‘Antibody-mix (dump channel)’)  
16. Add 0.1 ul near-IR viability dye (NIR) per well to the antibody-mix 
17. Add 20 µl antibody-mix + NIR to each well and mix carefully 
18. Incubate 20-30 minutes at 4°C 
19. Wash twice in FACS buffer (at 1500rpm for 5 min. at 4°C) 
20. Transfer to FACS tubes in FACS buffer and analyze  
21. For up to 1 week storage at 4°C: resuspend in 50µl 1% filtered paraformaldehyde* and wash 
away no later than 24 hours after addition to the cells (Note: special rules apply for liquid PFA 
waste*) 
 
*Safety: 
1. Dasatinib is toxic and mutagenic: use fume hood and gloves, while handling the stock. Waste 
group B for tips, gloves etc. 
2. Paraformaldehyde (PFA) is carcinogenic and toxic also at 1%. Use fume hood and gloves. 
Waste group H – use tray in the fume hood. Place tissues in the tray and empty your plate with 
PFA waste. Discard the tissues in the waste bag marked PFA waste. When this bag is full take 
it to the chemical waste cabinet and put it in the white waste-bucket labelled with PFA waste. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
Helene V. Toft 
 
 
 
T cell staining protocol – Ossabaw Pig PBMC 
Required reagents and material 
▪ 50 mL Centrifuge tubes 
▪ 15 mL Centrifuge tubes 
▪ 96-well plate  
▪ FACS buffer 
▪ R10 media 
▪ PBMC samples 
▪ Eppendorf tubes 
▪ 1% paraformaldehyde - PFA (if fixating) 
 
Antibodies for identifying Porcine T cells 
Antibody 
Fluorophore Clone 
Company 
Catalog no. 
CD3e 
PerCP-Cy5.5 BB23-8E6-8C8 
BD 
561478 
CD4a 
FITC 
74-12-4 
BD 
559585 
CD8b 
PE 
295/33-25 
BD 
561484 
NIR (Live/dead) 
APC-Cy7 
- 
ThermoFisher 
L34976 
Thawing of cells: 
1. Preheat R10 (RPMI with 10% FCS) - 10ml R10 per freezing tube. 
2. Resuspend cells in warm R10 to thaw. 
▪ Centrifuge for 5min at 4°C, 1500rpm, and pour medium out. 
▪ NB. Media need to be discarded in container inside fume hood because it contains DMSO. 
3. Wash twice in 10 mL R10 
4. Resuspend in 1 mL FACS buffer 
Count cells: 
1. Take 25μL sample + 75μL FACS in an Eppendorf tube. 
2. Bring to flow lab on 2. Floor to count 
 
Pig 
Group 
Cell count [diluted] 
 
Cell count 
Viability [%] 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 *10^6 
x4 
 *10^6 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B: Pig T-cell straining protocol
56
==PAGE:63==
Helene V. Toft 
 
 
 
 
Plate Layout 
96-well plate 
Staining: 
4. Wash cells in 10 mL FACS 
5. Resuspend cells in FACS to get a conc of approx. 1 mio cells/100μL  
6. Spin plate and sling supernatant  
• Assume 20μL medium left in each well. 
7. Make antibody mastermix (add 10% more of each antibody to the mastermix) 
Antibody 
Fluorophore Ab vol * no. samples = vol [μL] 
CD3e 
PerCP-Cy 
5μL*___= ___ μL 
CD4a 
FITC 
5μL*___= ___ μL 
CD8b 
PE 
0,15μL*___= ___ μL 
NIR (Live/dead) 
APC-Cy7 
0,1μL*___ = ___ μL 
Total volume pr well 
 
15,1 μL pr well 
 Add 15,1 μL to each full stain well 
8. Add Ab to FMOs individually or make ab mix for each FMO 
9. Add FACS buffer to reach a volume of 100μL in each well 
• Full stain = 69,75 μL 
• CD3/CD4 FMO = 74,75 μL 
• CD8 FMO = 69,9 μL 
• -Nir FMO = 69,85 μL 
• Unst = 80 μL 
10. Mix well, cover and incubate in fridge (4°C) for 30 min. 
11. Wash 2x with FACS buffer: 
• 1st time: 150μL per well 
• 2nd time: 200μL per well 
• Spin down after each wash 
  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
Helene V. Toft 
 
 
 
 
12. If not fixating, go to step 17 
Fixation to keep up to 1 week:        
13. Add 50µl 1% filtered paraformaldehyde and keep at 4°C.  
14. Leave in fridge: min 1 hour -  max 24 hour. 
15. In fume hood: Wash PFA away with FACS buffer 2x 
• 1st: 150 μL FACS 
• 2nd: 200 μL FACS 
 
16. Resuspend in 150 μL FACS buffer 
17. Leave in fridge until ready to analyze with flow cytometry 
 
==PAGE:65==
% WEIGHT 
g/kg Feed
kcal/kg Feed
% kcal
Protein
13.03
130
521
18.6
Carbohydrates
52.41
524
2096
74.6
Fat
2.13
21
191.7
6.8
fibre
14.52
145
ash
7.35
74
water
10.00
100
Total
99
994
2809
100
% WEIGHT 
g/kg Feed
kcal/kg Feed
% kcal
Protein
13.00
130
520
12.5
Fructose
23.25
232
930
22.3
Carbohydrates
11.90
119
476
11.4
Fat
25.0
250.0
2250.0
53.9
Minerals
23.923
239
Vitamins
2.400
24
Cholesterol
0.50
5
Total
100
1000
4176
100
% Diet
g/kg Feed
kcal/kg Feed
% kcal
Feed: 5L1G
79.25
793
Protein
214
856
17.4
Carbohydrate
457
1828
37.2
Fructose
200
800
16.3
Fat
95
855
17.4
Soybean Oil
8.38
84
754
15.3
Hydrogentated Coconut 
Oil 
4.69
47
422
8.6
Carbohydrate
5.00
50
200
4.07
Fructose
2.75
28
110
2.24
Cholesterol
2.00
20
Cholic Acid
0.69
7
Total
100
1000
4915
100
% Kcal from Fat
% Kcal from 
Carbohydrates
% Kcal from 
Fructose
41.3
41.3
18.5
KT324
SDS Mini-pig feed
44448888-7
Appendix C: Diet specifications
59
==PAGE:66==
Appendix D: Pig 103 and 105 second run
Figure 9.1: 103.2 - First density plot shows the lymphocyte gate, then single cell gate and then live
cell gate. Below that was the CD3+ cells gated and to the left CD4 and CD8 cells was gated. The
gating was supported by FMOs for each of the four stains. The negative control in the bottom if of
the CD3 gate and shows no auto-fluorescence or contamination in the sample
60
==PAGE:67==
Figure 9.2: 105.2 - First density plot shows the lymphocyte gate, then single cell gate and then live
cell gate. Below that was the CD3+ cells gated and to the left CD4 and CD8 cells was gated. The
gating was supported by FMOs for each of the four stains. The negative control in the bottom if of
the CD3 gate and shows no auto-fluorescence or contamination in the sample
61
==PAGE:68==
Freq. of Total
Pig name
Stain
Total cell count
Lymphocytes
Live cells
CD3+ 
CD8+ SP
CD4+ SP
DP
DN
104
Full
1.30E+06
64
95.2
75.2
10.8
12.8
7.77
43.9
103
Full
1.26E+06
63.2
96.3
61.4
9.92
15
12.9
23.6
105
Full
1.05E+06
72
94.7
74.8
13.3
15
9.49
37
103_2
Full
8.67E+05
63.3
92.2
58.70
8.93
12.80
13.3
23.7
105_2
Full
8.28E+05
73.1
67
54.2
9.41
10.5
6.73
27.6
Mean
1.06E+06
67.12
89.08
64.86
10.47
13.22
10.04
31.16
SD
194302.8564
4.46
11.12
8.59
1.54
1.68
2.65
8.02
Fresh and Frozen
Freq. of Total
Pig name
Group
Total cell count
Lymphocytes
Live cells
CD3+ 
CD8+ SP
CD4+ SP
DP
DN
Donna
Fresh
8.77E+05
49.9
95.7
76.5
39.1
1.39
34.8
1.21
Tornado
Fresh
1.50E+06
29.6
94
62.6
47.8
0.18
1.72
12.9
Dean
Fresh
8.64E+05
62.9
99
68.6
26.5
1.68
37.3
3.09
Zazu
Fresh
9.24E+05
61.4
99.1
77.5
37.5
1.02
37.7
1.3
Donna
Frozen
7.90E+05
62.1
97.8
83.2
40.2
1.76
40.5
0.81
Tornado
Frozen
6.55E+05
41
96.6
65.4
49.2
0.05
0.81
15.3
Dean
Frozen
8.48E+05
56
98
68.3
26.8
2.02
36.7
2.75
Zazu
Frozen
1.00E+06
52.9
97.3
74.8
36.6
1.21
35.9
1.12
Mean
1.04E+06
51
96.9
71.3
37.7
1.07
27.9
4.62
SD
306917
15.4
2.52
7.03
8.75
0.65
17.5
5.58
Mean
8.23E+05
53
97.4
72.9
38.2
1.26
28.5
5
SD
142906
8.87
0.62
7.9
9.26
0.87
18.6
6.92
p-value
0.38
0.74
0.69
0.48
0.42
0.19
0.75
0.62
FC
0.79
1.04
1.01
1.02
1.01
1.18
1.02
1.08
Freq. of Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes
Freq. of Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes
Initial runs
Appendix E: Cell frequencies and statistics - Part 1
62
==PAGE:69==
Leipzig + 97 + 98
Freq. of Total
Pig
Group
Total cell count
Lymphocytes
Live cells
CD3+ 
CD8+ SP
CD4+ SP
DP
DN
CD8+ SP
CD4+ SP
DP
DN
97
Ctrl
7.99E+05
41.9
89.1
39
7.62
6.89
11.4
13.1
19.5
17.7
29.2
33.7
98
Ctrl
8.24E+05
44.4
89.1
41.6
5.9
8.35
9.88
17.4
14.2
20.1
23.8
41.9
70
Obese
8.46E+05
63.5
91.3
76.6
26.5
11.7
13.1
25.3
34.6
15.3
17.1
33
71
Obese
6.77E+05
68.5
92.5
79.9
20.8
11.8
11.8
35.5
26.1
14.8
14.7
44.4
74
Obese
7.14E+05
67.2
92
79.4
22.9
16.2
13.9
26.4
28.9
20.4
17.5
33.3
75
Obese
7.59E+05
73
95.5
85.1
25.7
13.8
13
32.6
30.2
16.2
15.3
38.3
Ctrl mean
811500.00
43.15
89.10
40.30
6.76
7.62
10.64
15.25
16.85
18.90
26.50
37.80
SD
12500.00
1.25
0.00
1.30
0.86
0.73
0.76
2.15
2.65
1.20
2.70
4.10
Obese mean
749000.00
68.05
92.83
80.25
23.98
13.38
12.95
29.95
29.95
16.68
16.15
37.25
SD
63083.28
3.40
1.60
3.07
2.27
1.83
0.75
4.24
3.07
2.21
1.18
4.63
P-value
0.3
0.001
0.05
0.0001
0.001
0.03
0.04
0.02
0.014
0.34
0.01
0.91
FC
0.9
1.6
1.0
2.0
3.5
1.8
1.2
2.0
1.8
0.9
0.6
1.0
Leipzig sample 1 + sample 2
Freq. of Total
Pig no.
Group
Total cell count
Lymphocytes
Live cells
CD3+ 
CD8+ SP
CD4+ SP
DP
DN
CD8+ SP
CD4+ SP
DP
DN
70
Sample 1
6.96E+05
54.4
95.7
59.3
9.04
7.52
8.47
34.3
15.6
12.7
14.3
57.4
71
Sample 1
6.92E+05
49.6
84.7
53.7
5.34
4.12
6.18
38.1
10.2
7.66
11.5
70.6
73
Sample 1
7.08E+05
42.1
88.6
46.9
10.9
11.2
7.82
17
23.9
23.9
16.7
35.6
74
Sample 1
7.71E+05
47.5
86.2
57.7
11.7
7.28
8.43
30.4
20.8
12.6
14.6
52
75
Sample 1
6.35E+05
52.8
90.2
63.8
17.2
9.71
10.9
25.9
27.6
15.2
17.1
40
70
Sample 2
8.64E+05
54.2
93.4
77.7
25.6
11.7
13.4
27
32.9
15
17.3
34.7
71
Sample 2
1.11E+06
57.6
94.2
81.1
20.1
11.8
11.7
37.5
24.7
14.6
14.4
46.3
74
Sample 2
7.65E+05
59.9
95.5
82.2
22.1
16.7
14.7
28.7
26.8
20.3
17.9
34.9
75
Sample 2
6.91E+05
63.5
97.4
86
24
11.8
13.4
36.8
27.8
13.7
15.6
42.8
Sample 1 mean
700400.00
49.28
89.08
56.28
10.84
7.97
8.36
29.14
19.62
14.41
14.84
51.12
SD
43380.18
4.32
3.82
5.70
3.86
2.41
1.52
7.30
6.14
5.34
2.00
12.52
Sample 2 mean
857500.00
58.80
95.13
81.75
22.95
13.00
13.30
32.50
28.05
15.90
16.30
39.68
SD
158174.75
3.39
1.51
2.96
2.06
2.14
1.07
4.70
3.02
2.58
1.38
5.03
P-value
0.1
0.02
0.03
0.0002
0.002
0.02
0.002
0.5
0.062
0.67
0.310
0.2
FC
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.5
2.1
1.6
1.6
1.1
1.4
1.1
1.1
0.8
Subsets of CD3+ cells
Subsets of CD3+ cells
Freq. of Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes
Freq. of Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes
Appendix F: Cell frequencies and statistics - Part 2
63
==PAGE:70==
Short term
Freq. of Total
Pig no.
Group
Total cell count Lymphocytes
Live cells CD3+
CD8+ SP
CD4+ SP
DP
DN
3
Lean
7.21E+05
71.4
96
72.2
45.9
5.82
12.7
7.79
9
Lean
5.29E+05
63.8
95.4
71.1
53.9
0.033
0.18
17.1
11
Lean
7.60E+05
70.5
96
70.6
42.7
0.026
0.075
27.8
18
Lean
6.79E+05
72
95.6
65.9
31.7
0.076
0.16
34
13
Obese
7.04E+05
77.4
97.9
74.6
32.7
0.095
0.14
41.7
14
Obese
7.09E+05
70.6
97.2
74.2
41.7
0.038
0.15
32.4
15
Obese
6.77E+05
73
97
61
22.4
3.65
7.36
27.6
20
Obese
6.07E+05
73.6
96.9
62.4
31
0.043
0.05
31.4
25
Obese
6.55E+05
75.9
67.2
51.4
18.3
6.3
5.13
21.7
Mean lean
6.72E+05
69.4
95.8
70.0
43.6
1.5
3.3
21.7
SD lean
87525
3.3
0.26
2.4
8.0
2.5
5.4
10.0
Mean obese
6.70E+05
74.1
91.2
64.7
29.2
2.0
2.6
31.0
SD obese
37200
2.4
12.0
8.8
8.2
2.6
3.1
6.6
P-value
0.971
0.065
0.53
0.34
0.053
0.79
0.83
0.18
FC
1.0
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.7
1.4
0.8
1.4
Pig no.
Group
Total cell count Lymphocytes
Live cells CD3+
CD8+ SP
CD4+ SP
DP
DN
CD8+ SP
CD4+ SP
DP
DN
3
Lean 
7.21E+05
71.4
96
72.2
45.9
5.82
12.7
7.79
63.6
8.07
17.6
10.8
15
Obese 
6.77E+05
73
97
61
22.4
3.65
7.36
27.6
36.70
5.98
12.1
45.3
25
Obese
6.55E+05
75.9
67.2
51.4
18.3
6.3
5.13
21.7
35.60
12.3
9.99
42.2
Mean obese
666000
74.5
82.1
56.2
20.4
5.0
6.2
24.7
36.2
9.1
11.0
43.8
SD obese
11000
1.5
14.9
4.8
2.0
1.3
1.1
3.0
0.6
3.2
1.1
1.6
FC
0.9
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.4
0.9
0.5
3.2
0.6
1.1
0.6
4.1
Subsets of CD3+ cells
Freq. of Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes
