==PAGE:1==
CSRD and AI in the building industry
Development and Testing of Various AI Ap┬¡
proaches to Address Challenges Related to the
CSRD
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Isabella Benedicte Vad
==PAGE:2==
CSRD and AI in the building industry
Development and Testing of Various AI Approaches to Address Challenges Related to the
CSRD
June, 2024
By
Isabella Benedicte Vad
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Brovej, Building 118,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Civil and Mechanical En┬¡
gineering at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering.
Isabella Benedicte Vad ┬¡ s183616
Signature
Date
ii
CSRD and AI in the building industry
22/06/2024
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Nine years after the Paris Agreement, global temperatures are still rising due to insufficient pre┬¡
emptive sustainability efforts. The Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) man┬¡
dates companies to compare their sustainability actions and prioritize sustainability alongside
economic goals, leaving the building industry with no exceptions.
Supported by 10 Delegated Acts from EFRAG, the CSRD incorporates over 1144 data points
analyzed to identify challenges specific to the building industry. However, the CSRD does not
effectively link current building related sustainable actions to its delegated acts, thus leaving
the industry in the dark as far as how closely they meet the CSRD requirements. Therefore,
this thesis sets out to explore how to leverage Artificial Intelligence (AI) in addressing CSRD
challenges within this sector. Specifically, it examines the potential for AI┬¡driven tools like gap┬¡
analysis to help companies in meeting new CSRD requirements.
Through interviews with industry experts, and subsequent iterative approaches, addressing AI
consistency, double materiality assessment (DMA), and gap analysis, it is shown that:
ÔÇó The current condition of data maturity and information architecture in the building industry
is an obstacle for meeting CSRD requirements.
ÔÇó The industryÔÇÖs digital readiness complicates the implementation of AI tools.
ÔÇó When the right conditions are present for using AI tools, these represent a significant help
in managing the myriad of requirements related to CSRD.
ÔÇó AI tools could help not only in regulatory compliance but also position companies well for
adopting more robust and strategic sustainability practices.
Key risks identified include a widespread misunderstanding of DMA, complicated by the unique
value chains of each company, which complicates the standardization of AI solutions. Moreover,
current AI models like GPT┬¡3 are shown to be unreliable for CSRD applications due to insufficient
data foundation in this new area, leading to unreliable and untrustworthy AI.
A four┬¡step roadmap for future work has been outlined and underscores the need for the fol┬¡
lowing processes within CSRD═¥ an understanding the objectives, advocate for early implemen┬¡
tation, gather data, creation of large language models (LLM), training LLM, and continuously
updating AI tools.
This thesis underscores the crucial importance of cautiously integrating AI and CSRD, empha┬¡
sizing the need to address these challenges to ensure regulatory compliance and strategic
sustainability in the future.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Kristoffer Negendahl, Associate Professor, Ph.D, Technical University of Denmark
A huge ÔÇØThank youÔÇØ for taking on this project and meeting me in my high ambitions. This thesis
would not have been so ahead of its time if it had not been for your optimism and curiosity!
Emilie Elmer Land Jensen, ESG Manager, AP Pension
Thank you for your huge support and sparring through the development of this thesis. It has
been unique, having a contact like you being hands on in the CSRD implementation.
Frederik Brauer, Sustainability Engineer, Sweco Denmark
To my friend, study buddy and later colleague ┬¡ Thank you for always being available for relevant
and less relevant discussions throughout the development of this project, but also through 5
years of studying together.
Interview group
Thank you for taking the time answering questions and being curious about the subject pushing
my thesis in a relevant direction.
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
2.1
Yearly surface temperature from 1880ÔÇô2023 compared with the 20th┬¡century av┬¡
erage (1901┬¡2000). Dark green indicate cooler┬¡than┬¡average years═¥ light green
show warmer┬¡than┬¡average years[5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Implementation timeline of CSRD and affected companies . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Implementation of EU directives and regulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
EFRAGÔÇÖs Delegated acts ┬¡ ESRS structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
ESRS structure and key words [26].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Overview of GHG Protocol scopes and emissions across the value chain [30].
.
15
2.7
Relation between EU Taxonomy and ESRS structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.8
Cross┬¡cutting and Environmental ESRS unfolded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.9
Neural network [40]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.10 Concept of data flows in genAI [44] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.11 GenAI in relation to other AI concepts [47] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1
To which extend and how can AI support the fulfillment of CSRD . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
digitalization development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Thesis process[49] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Process of approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Steps in Approach 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Consistency evaluation process of (a) semantic, (b) negation[51] . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7
Generated knowledge prompting ┬¡ history . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.8
Steps in Approach 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.9
Connection between EU regulation documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.10 Steps in Approach 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.11 Steps in Approach 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.12 Sheet E1 Climate Change, see full sheet in digital appendix [Aproach4tool] . . .
41
3.13 Questions for verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1
GPT┬¡3 hallucinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2
Difference of application goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3
Road map for implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.1
Process in reaching digital maturity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
CSRD and AI in the building industry
v
==PAGE:7==
Updates since the beginning of this thesis
vi
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
AI
Artificial Intelligence
AR
Application Requirements
CapEx
Capital Expenditure
COP
Conference Of the Parties
CSRD
Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive
DNSH
Do No Significant Harm
DR
Disclosure Requirement
EAI
Enterprise Artificial Intelligence
EEA
European Economic Area
EFRAG
European Financial Reporting Advisory Group
EFTA
European Free Trade Association
EGD
European Green Deal
ESG
Environmental, Social, and Governance
ESRS
Environmental Sustainability Reporting Standard
EUT
EU Taxonomy
GenAI
Generative Artificial Intelligence
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GRI
Global Reporting Initiative
HVAC
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
IFRS
International Financial Reporting Standard
IG
Implementation Guidance
ISSB
International Sustainability Standards Board
LLM
Large Language Model
MAIG
Materiality Assessment Implementation Guidance
MDR┬¡P
Minimum Disclosure Requirement ┬¡ Policies
NDC
Nationally determined contribution
NFRD
Non┬¡Financial Reporting Directive
OpEx
Operating Expenses
SFAP
Sustainable Finance Action Plan
SFDR
Sustainable Finance Disclosure Requirements
TCFD
Task Force on Climate┬¡related Financial Disclosures
UN
United Nations
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
VCIG
Value Chain Implementation Guide
CSRD and AI in the building industry
vii
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Updates since the beginning of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Artificial Intelligence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Research
25
3.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Findings
46
4.1
Industry Status on CSRD Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Approach ┬¡ 1: Ensuring Consistency in CSRD Prompt Design . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3
Approach ┬¡ 2: Double Materiality Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
Approach ┬¡ 3: Gap analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.5
Approach ┬¡ 4: Synergies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.6
Consolidated result of above
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.7
Road map for future implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Discussion
60
5.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2
Systemic Themes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Thesis┬¡Specific Themes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Recommendations and future studies
66
6.1
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.2
Future studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
70
A
Appendix: BECEL full script
74
B
Appendix: Deloitte IG feedback
80
C
Appendix: Confederation of Danish Industry IG feedback
87
D
Appendix: Keywords created in JSON file
92
CSRD and AI in the building industry
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
When words like ÔÇØCSRDÔÇØ and ÔÇØAIÔÇØ are mentioned, C┬¡suite executives often listen. While they
might not fully grasp the terms, they know that these have high impact and consequences on
the businesses they run. Why is that?
The term Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) has become a buzzword in many
boardrooms, yet there remains significant uncertainty about how to effectively comply and de┬¡
rive value from CSRD. As an example, companies that align their economic activities to the EU
Taxonomy have the opportunity to gain value through receiving favorable green loans. By now,
there is little doubt about the power of Artificial Intelligence (AI), however there is substantial
uncertainty about how it actually works and its reliability. Despite this, we have seen AI help us
in even the most complex situations. So, when a combination of something seemingly unman┬¡
ageable, such as CSRD, and immensely an useful tool, such as AI, is mentioned, it catches
everyoneÔÇÖs attention. But is the combination of CSRD and AI a viable way forward?
In an era where sustainability is no longer a choice but a requirement, the intersection between
AI and CSRD presents a groundbreaking opportunity for the building industry, still responsible
for over 42% of the global CO2 emissions [1]. The CSRD, a regulatory framework mandating
comprehensive sustainability reporting, demands transparency and accountability from corpo┬¡
rations regarding their environmental, social, and governmental impacts. Simultaneously, AI,
with its advanced data processing and analytical capabilities, emerges as a pivotal tool to facil┬¡
itate this transition towards sustainable practices.
This thesis explores the synergistic potential of AI in addressing the challenges related to the
implementation of CSRD within the building industry, encompassing development, managing
and consulting for buildings. The primary objective is to investigate, if AI can be used in stream┬¡
lining compliance with CSRD requirements, making sustainability reporting more efficient and
effective. The urgency of this thesis is underscored by the inherent contradiction in relying on
AI, a technology still grappling with issues of trust and transparency, to fulfill the CSRDÔÇÖs mission
of trustworthy reporting.
To address this, the thesis employs a multifaceted methodology. It includes a thorough analysis
of current industry practices, the development and testing of AI approaches tailored to CSRD
requirements, and an assessment of the digital maturity within the building sector. By integrating
interviews with key stakeholders and a review of existing literature, this thesis aims to present
a comprehensive picture of the current landscape, risks, and future possibilities.
The findings reveal, that the building industryÔÇÖs digital maturity varies significantly. This variability
coupled with the high stakes of CSRD compliance, creates a cautious approach to adopting new
technologies. Companies are understandably careful about experimenting with new tools due
to potential regulatory repercussions, which can sometimes slow the pace of innovation and
progress.
In conclusion, this thesis asserts, that while AI holds transformative potential for CSRD compli┬¡
ance, the building industry needs to embrace digital tools and innovative practices more fully
to gain value from CSRD compliance. By fostering a culture that encourages digital advance┬¡
ment, companies will not only meet regulatory demands, but also drive sustainable growth. This
research provides a roadmap for this transformation, highlighting the critical steps needed to
2
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:11==
harness the power of AI for a sustainable future.
Human to human
The thesis has been articulated in a language aiming for clarity in expression to humanize
sustainability with language that makes complex topics relatable and simple to understand. A
myriad of abbreviations are unavoidable why it might be advantageous to have a physical print
of the abbreviation list handy.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
2.1
Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive
In 2023, the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) entered into force as new
EU legislation.To understand the evolution of CSRD the background and connections to other
requirements are chronologically presented below.
When investigating a subject in the early phases of implementation, a big challenge is figuring
out the validity of the related literature, why the majority of it originates from the documents
made by the EU Commission, EU parliament or similar. These EU sources are then supported
by companiesÔÇÖ annual reports with CSRD obligations to contextualize and understand the ap┬¡
plication of CSRD. In conclusion of this section a short reading guide for better understanding
of the overarching structure of CSRD related standards(Environmental Sustainability Reporting
Standards (ESRS)).
The CSRD and related documents are interrelated to multiple financing directives and require┬¡
ments, however the scope of this chapter will solely be looking at the subjects from a sustain┬¡
ability point of view. This is why subjects like European Banking AuthorityÔÇÖs ESG Pillar 3 and
Benchmark Regulation reference will not be investigated in this thesis although they are a part
of the CSRD.
2.1.1
COP21 ÔÇô The Paris Agreement (2015)
It is difficult to exactly locate the origin of sustainability, however the Paris Agreement is a rea┬¡
sonable starting point because it was the first time, all nations agreed to take responsibility in
limiting climate changes, while supporting developing countries. This is why the Paris Agree┬¡
ment creates the beginning of this background chapter.
In 1992, member countries of the United Nations joined the United Nations Framework Con┬¡
vention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to address the challenge of climate changes. This con┬¡
vention aimed to limit global temperature increases and mitigate irreversible impacts caused by
human activities. The UNFCCC is also known as the Conference of the Parties (COP), which
serves as the supreme decision┬¡making body of the convention [2].
Three years after its beginning, the first COP in 1995, in Berlin, initiated negotiations to hold
member countries accountable for their emission reductions called the Kyoto Protocol. Legally
binding by 1997, this Protocol underwent several updates and discussions until it evolved into
the Paris Agreement at COP21 in 2015[2]. To understand the broader context and the specific
role of these agreements, a detailed examination is presented. The Paris Agreement is a treaty
under the UN. A treaty is a legally binding agreement between two or more countries, which
includes but not limited to a description of goals for the EU. Meaning that, all proposed EU law,
EU rules, regulations, directives, and decisions has to be developed and adopted in compliance
with the treaties.
The Paris Agreement commits nations to limit global warming to well below 2┬░C, aiming for
1.5┬░C above pre┬¡industrial levels[2]. Achieving this, requires a significant transformation of both
economic and social systems, challenging existing paradigms of economic growth. The treatyÔÇÖs
structure includes legally binding commitments for EU countries to align all new EU laws with
its objectives.
4
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:13==
In an attempt to reach the goal of the Agreement the ambitions set for countriesÔÇÖ climate actions
is revised and improved on a 5┬¡year basis, started in 2015. In 2020, countries presented their
action plans, called Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) as part of their mitigation plan.
These plans contained actions that the countries will make to═¥ reduce green house gas emis┬¡
sions to reach the goal of the Agreement by 2030, and actions to build resilience to adapt to the
impact of rising temperatures. These actions can include information on adaption and finance
flows, which have been included in the CSRD[3].
Lastly, the Paris Agreement provides a framework for finance, technological and capacity┬¡
building. The former, explains how the financially stable and developed countries has to lead in
providing financial assistance to countries that are more vulnerable. Climate finance is important
for all countries because large investments are a must to create solutions to reduce emissions.
The technological framework is necessary to optimize technological innovations and solutions
that enable reductions. The latter, concentrates on building climate┬¡related capacity in devel┬¡
oped countries that do not have the capacity to drive the climate change [4].
In total, this framework covers key aspects of actions in order to reach the goals of the Paris
Agreement. Today, nine years and two increased ambitions later, letÔÇÖs take a look at the devel┬¡
opment of the temperature increase in fig. 2.1 below.
Figure 2.1: Yearly surface temperature from 1880ÔÇô2023 compared with the 20th┬¡century av┬¡
erage (1901┬¡2000). Dark green indicate cooler┬¡than┬¡average years═¥ light green show warmer┬¡
than┬¡average years[5]
In the figure above, it is difficult to see how the many ambitions have resulted in a decrease in
CSRD and AI in the building industry
5
==PAGE:14==
the temperature increase of the global temperature. So how can a strategy be implemented to
assure our goal of 2050?
2.1.2
European Green Deal (2019)
The European Green Deal (EGD) is EUÔÇÖs strategy to reach the 2050 goal of climate neutrality.
This deal consists of multiple policy initiatives made under the Paris Agreement due to its treaty
format, as explained above. These policies aims to direct EU on the path to a green transition.
The Green Deal serves a reminder in the importance and need of a cross┬¡sector approach to
reach our climate┬¡related goals. Thus, the policies covers a broad range of initiative within cli┬¡
mate change, the environment, energy, transport, industry, agriculture, and sustainable finance
due to their high synergies [6]. The European Green Deal was implemented in December of
2019 by the European Council. Due to the scope of this project and for the sake of understand┬¡
ing the initiatives inter┬¡linkage to the Paris Agreement, the following initiatives will be presented
on a superficial level. This project exclusively investigate initiative two and three due to their
relevance in the ESRS E1.
The Green Deal consists of twelve initiatives═¥
ÔÇó (1) Fit for 55
ÔÇó (2) European climate law
ÔÇó (3) EU strategy on adaptation to climate
Change
ÔÇó (4) EU biodiversity strategy for 2030
ÔÇó (5) Farm to fork strategy
ÔÇó (6) European industrial strategy
ÔÇó (7) Circular economy action plan
ÔÇó (8) Batteries and waste batteries
ÔÇó (9) A just transition
ÔÇó (10) Clean, affordable and secure energy
ÔÇó (11) EU chemicals strategy for sustain┬¡
ability
ÔÇó (12) Forest strategy and deforestation.
The European climate law has turned the political ambition of reaching climate neutrality by
2050 into a legal obligation [6]. When a law requirement like this is adopted by the EU, all
member countries are obliged to decrease their net emissions with 55% by 2030 in order to
reach climate neutrality. The law was adopted in May 2021 and include actions for the countries
to take such as═¥ mapping the emission reduction pace until 2050, create a system that can
monitor and report the progress, and lastly that each country make sure the transition is cost┬¡
efficient and socially┬¡fair.
The EU strategy on adaptation to climate change goal is to create a vision for the EU to
become a climate┬¡resilient society. By being able to do so, countries need to═¥ adapt to the
climate┬¡related risks and unavoidable impacts that will occur in the years before 2050. This
requires, better sharing and gathering of data to improve knowledge exchange across nations.
Nature┬¡based solutions that can help build resilience. Lastly the integration of adaptation in
macro┬¡fiscal policies, meaning that government spendings and tax policies should be prioritized
for adaptation to climate change.
In conclusion, the European Green Deal represents a comprehensive approach in achieving the
EUÔÇÖs climate neutrality goal by 2050, aligning multiple sectors under the Paris Agreement. This
countless number of initiatives, introduces a complex landscape of overlapping regulations and
policies, potentially leading to confusion and challenges in their implementation. These initia┬¡
tives requires a nuanced understanding of their interconnections and the broader implications
for sustainable finance to fulfill.
6
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:15==
To streamline this complexity and enhance the effectiveness of EU policies, the Sustainable
Finance Action Plan (SFAP) was developed as a crucial component of the trilogy═¥ the European
Green Deal, Non┬¡Financial Reporting Directive (NFRD) and CSRD. The SFAP aims to mobilize
finance for sustainable growth, ensuring that capital flows moves towards sustainable projects
and activities across the EU. This plan not only addresses the financial needs of these ambitious
goals but also clarifies the pathways for investments and the roles various stakeholders should
undertake in the transition to a more sustainable future.
What is important to notice about this action plan, and in understanding the context of the climate
change aspect of the CSRD, is that it also refers to improving the quality of companies non┬¡
financial reporting. Because the SFAP was the main sustainability┬¡related reporting method
companies have followed, until the NFRD was adopted by the European Union in 2018 and has
been revised continuously until 2021[7].
2.1.3
Regulations
2.1.3.1
The Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (2018)
In 2018, the Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation 2019/2088 (SFDR)[8] came into force,
providing a framework for companies to report on their sustainability matters and information
within the environmental, social, and governance (ESG) areas. This regulation helps investors,
who are interested in sustainable investments, by offering essential information to assess the
risks and uncertainties related to a companyÔÇÖs sustainability practices. The SFDRÔÇÖs disclosure
requirements are structured at both corporate and product/service levels[9].
Financial institutions obligated to integrate the SFDR include banks, insurance companies, as┬¡
set managers, and investment companies within the European Union. These institutions must
report on their implementation of policies to identify, prioritize, and manage negative sustain┬¡
ability risks[10].
The primary goal of the SFDR, is to enhance transparency regarding sustainability in finan┬¡
cial institutions and to standardize sustainability measures, facilitating better comparisons of
companiesÔÇÖ sustainability actions and risks, and preventing greenwashing. The SFDR is a key
component of the EUÔÇÖs ambition to achieve climate neutrality by 2050, as outlined in the Euro┬¡
pean Green Deal. It also plays a crucial role in the Sustainable Finance Action Plan (SFAP),
the ÔÇØholy trinity,ÔÇØ which includes the SFDR, the EU Taxonomy, and the CSRD. The Taxonomy
provides a classification system for sustainable economic activities that is applied within both
the CSRD and the SFDR [11].
2.1.3.2
The EU Taxonomy
As part of the EUÔÇÖs sustainable financial framework, the EU Taxonomy 2020/852/EU (EUT) [12]
entered into force the 12th of July 2020. A central element of the EUÔÇÖs approach to sustainable
finance is the EU taxonomy, which enhances market transparency and helps funnel investments
towards activities that are critical for achieving sustainability. The EUT establishes a set of
criteria that categorize economic activities according to their alignment with the goal of reaching
net zero emissions by 2050, as well as other broad environmental objectives[13].
To accomplish the EUÔÇÖs 2030 climate and energy goals and advance the EGD, it is essential to
direct financial resources towards sustainable ventures. Achieving this, requires a universally
accepted definition of ÔÇÖsustainableÔÇÖ activities. Therefore, the action plan for financing sustain┬¡
able growth emphasized the necessity of creating a unified classification system for sustainable
economic activities, namely ÔÇ£EU taxonomyÔÇØ [13].
For an activity to be evaluated as sustainable, it must comply with all four overarching conditions
including: (1) substantial contribution to one or more of the climate and environmental objective,
CSRD and AI in the building industry
7
==PAGE:16==
(2) do no significant harm (DNSH) in any of the objectives, (3) has to be carried out in compliance
with the minimum social safeguards, and (4) comply with the technical screening criteria that
defines one and two. In the EUT all criterias are ÔÇØknock┬¡outÔÇØ criterias meaning that if one of
them are not fulfilled the activity cannot be aligned.
The EUT has defined multiple activities within different sectors that can be aligned. Each ac┬¡
tivity can be affected by one to six climate and environmental objectives, (1) climate mitigation,
(2) climate adaptation, (3) sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources, (4)
transition to a circular economy, (5) pollution prevention and control, and (6) protection and
restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems. Looking specifically on the Construction of new
buildings activity, it has three objectives within climate change mitigation, adaption and circular
economy. Meaning that when aligning a construction activity it has to be aligned with all three
activities [14].
The most common activities within the building industry is ÔÇØAcquisition and ownership of build┬¡
ingsÔÇØ and ÔÇØConstruction of new buildingsÔÇØ. These two activities are interconnected,meaning
that if the investment under ÔÇØConstruction of new buildingsÔÇØ is aligned then the maintenance of
it ÔÇØAcquisition and ownership of buildingsÔÇØ will automatically be aligned but not vice versa. The
process behind aligning activities, begins by making an eligibility assessment to find out which
activities to look at. Out of the total eligible activities aligning, the biggest activities will most
likely be prioritized. Solely looking at the eligible group of activities, x percentage can be either
aligned or non┬¡aligned[12].
Capital expenditures (CapEx) for aligned activities under the EU taxonomy, can be categorized
into three distinct categories┬¡ (A, B, C) that either can be added up as the total CapEx or divided
into different activity types for increasing transparency in a companyÔÇÖs annual report. Category
A, includes CapEx related to assets or processes directly associated with the taxonomy┬¡aligned
economic activities. Category B, consists of CapEx that is part of a five┬¡year plan, called a
ÔÇØCapEx┬¡planÔÇØ, aimed at expanding or upgrading taxonomy┬¡aligned economic activities, ensuring
these activities meet the defined criteria[12].
Finally, Category C encompasses CapEx related to the purchase of outputs from taxonomy┬¡
aligned economic activities, as well as measures enabling these activities to achieve low┬¡carbon
objectives or reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This three column structure help setting min┬¡
imum requirements when calculating a companyÔÇÖs CapEx, resulting in directing their fiance to┬¡
wards sustainability activities and providing clarity on the alignment with the EUTÔÇÖs goals.
Given the intricate framework of the EU Taxonomy and its focus on directing investments to┬¡
wards sustainable initiatives, it becomes crucial to understand how this intersects with other
regulatory requirements, like the NFRD and CSRD[12].
2.1.4
Directives
2.1.4.1
The Non┬¡financial Reporting Directive (2014)
The Non┬¡financial Reporting Directive (NFRD) (2014/95/EU)[15] represents an earlier effort by
the European Union to integrate transparency and accountability into the business practices
of large companies and groups as mentioned in section 2.1.2 . Enacted in 2014, the NFRD
requires, large entities to disclose information on the way they operate and manage social and
environmental challenges. This is part of the EUÔÇÖs broader strategy to enhance the consistency
and comparability of non┬¡financial information disclosed across member states, aiming to help
investors, consumers, policy makers, and other stakeholders make informed decisions based
on non┬¡financial aspects, like sustainability [15].
8
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:17==
The NFRD generally applies to large public┬¡interest entity═¥ with more than 500 employees, a
balance sheet total of EUR 20 million, or a net turnover of EUR 40 million. This includes listed
companies, banks, and insurance companies. The NFRD mandates the disclosure of informa┬¡
tion on environmental protection, social responsibility and treatment of employees, respect for
human rights, anti┬¡corruption and bribery, and diversity on company boards (in terms of age,
gender, educational and professional backgrounds)[16].
When analysing the literature connected to the NFRD, especially the Briefing for the Implemen┬¡
tation Appraisal by the European Commission [17] it becomes evident that the NFRD faced crit┬¡
icism for not being specific and non┬¡prescriptive approach ending up not meeting its purpose
in the review. This leads to significant discrepancies in the quality and depth of information
reported. As a result, in 2021 there was a call for more detailed regulations that would not only
standardize reporting practices but also make sustainability reporting more comparable and
reliable. Which leads the history of sustainability, to year 2022.
2.1.4.2
The Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (2022)
The Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) is a complex directive resulting from
multiple EU initiatives aimed at improving sustainability reporting compliant with the Paris Agree┬¡
ment treaty. This section provides an overview of the directive by examining its background, the
process of its implementation into Danish law, exceptions and adaptations, and its execution
within companies.
Background
The CSRD (2022/2464/EU) [18] was proposed by the European commission in April 2021, as
a response to the challenges around the NFRD during its 2021 review. The CSRD aims to
extend the scope of the NFRD, introduce more detailed reporting requirements, and implement
a stricter auditing regime to ensure trustworthy and reliable sustainability reporting. The primary
objective of the CSRD, is to enable better comparison of companiesÔÇÖ sustainability initiatives
within the same sector, facilitating more informed investment decisions.
The CSRD requires all large publicly listed companies in the EU, to comply on their sustainable
and financial impacts, risks and opportunities. This will expand the number of companies cov┬¡
ered by the NFRD, from about 11,000 to almost 50,000 companies now affected by the CSRD.
The CSRD requires extensive implementation work, why different companies are being affected
on a continuously basis depending on size, as illustrated below in fig. 2.2. The first companies
subject to the CSRD, are the ones already subject to the NFRD and listed companies with the
exception of micro listed companies. During the following years, the directive will gradually
encompass a wider range of companies, including those in a companyÔÇÖs value chain, extending
beyond the EU by 2029.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Implementation timeline of CSRD and affected companies
The CSRD contains requirements that are not necessarily immediately adaptable into country
law, why the EU member states have had transposition deadlines to adapt CSRD into their
law[19].
From EU Commission to Danish Law
The CSRD is a directive, meaning that it states common goals for EU countries, however the
way to reach the directiveÔÇÖs goals are up to each EU member state to figure out. In contrary,
EU regulations are automatically implemented directly into members statesÔÇÖ laws momentarily
from the EU parliament voting ÔÇØyesÔÇØ to the proposal from the EU commission. To illustrate the
processes and differences between regulations and directives from the EU, fig. 2.3 is presented
below.
Figure 2.3: Implementation of EU directives and regulations
The process of implementing a new directive till it is obtained by EU member statesÔÇÖ law can
vary. The CSRD was obtained by Danish law the 2nd of May 2024. When implementing an
EU Directive into member statesÔÇÖ law, modifications can be necessary, these are open for pub┬¡
lic interests and currently only Denmark, France, Czechia, and Romania have made national
transposition measures[19].
CSRD Adaptation
Due to the CSRD being related to financial reporting, companies obligations to CSRD depends
10
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:19==
on their accounting class. Meaning that only companies in ÔÇØaccounting class C (large) (regnsk┬¡
absklasse C(stor))ÔÇØ are required to implement CSRD in their annual report by 2025, based on
financial year 2024, as illustrated above in fig. 2.2.
Given the substantial organizational changes and financial impacts of the CSRD, the Danish
Parliament has made the national transposition measure of adjusting company size limits for
accounting classifications by 25%. This adjustment aims to channel demand and funding to┬¡
wards the largest companies to support their sustainability actions [20]. This was DenmarkÔÇÖs
sole transposition measure, effective from May 22.
The CSRD and the ESRS contain multiple implementation milestones which are listed below in
table 2.1 and are important to understand for the thesis discussion.
Table 2.1: Timeline for development (CSRD and ESRS)[21]
An important aspect of working with CSRD, is the exception of a three┬¡year grace period granted
to companies. During this time, companies can explain why they were unable to obtain the
necessary information and outline their plans for acquiring it. The Parliament acknowledges
the challenges in gathering the required data from a companyÔÇÖs value chain, hence allowing
this grace period [22].
The CSRDÔÇÖs legal documents are complex and lack specific disclosure requirements. There┬¡
fore, a specialized group was established to translate the directive into precise measures,
leading to the development of mandatory EU environmental sustainability reporting standards
(ESRS). This approach aims to standardize sustainability reporting across the EU, enhancing
comparability and understanding for stakeholders, including investors and regulators.
2.1.4.3
European Sustainability Reporting Standards (2023)
The European Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG) is a private association, made
in 2001, encouraged by the European Commission to serve the publicÔÇÖs interests. EFRAG
consists of two pillars, a financial reporting pillar in collaboration with the International Finance
Reporting Standards foundation (IFRS), and a sustainability reporting pillar that supports EU
with the development of the ESRSs.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
11
==PAGE:20==
EFRAG is funded by investors in the public sector like the European Commission as well as
investors in the private sector like NGOÔÇÖs. It is important to notice, that although EFRAG are co┬¡
funded by EU, countries in the European Economic Area (EEA), and countries in European Free
Trade Association (EFTA), the responsibility of the ESRSs and EFRAGs work, is only related
to EFRAG [23].
The ESRSs consists of 12 separate delegated act documents, presented below in fig. 2.4,
covering relevant aspects of sustainability including, E1 Climate Change, E2 Pollution, E3 Water
and marine resources, E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems, E5 Resource use and circular economy,
S1 Own workforce, S2 Workers in the value chain, S3 Affected communities, S4 Consumers
and end┬¡users, and G1 Business conduct.
Figure 2.4: EFRAGÔÇÖs Delegated acts ┬¡ ESRS structure
This project will solely be investing ESRS 1, ESRS 2 and ESRS E1 Climate Change due to
the scope and time limitations. In continuation of the adopted CSRD in 2022, the ESRSs was
approved by the EU Commission by the 31st of July 2023 [24]. The purpose of CSRD is to
create a foundation to compare companiesÔÇÖ sustainability efforts.
Up until now, companies obliged to report on their sustainability, have reported what they believe
is relevant to disclose. However, the companies assessment of important metrics are not always
the same as the investors and similar companies, making the comparison difficult to perform
[25]. Thus, an attempt to close this gap, the ESRS has been adopted by the EU Commission.
The introduction above reflects the assumed and expected outcome of the CSRD, but how does
it look from a company perspective, are the listed companies ready for the new demand and
do they have the necessary data to comply? These are questions that will be looked into in
section 4.1.4. To illustrate how the ESRSs are structured and to show the complexity of CSRD
a description are introduced below based on the fig. 2.5, leading up to the reading guide:
12
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5: ESRS structure and key words [26].
ESRS 1 and ESRS 2 introduces the overall structure and framework of the minimum require┬¡
ments and how the results and data should be presented in the annual report. The cross┬¡cutting
standards provide disclosures on how to identify risks, impacts and opportunities(IROs) which
are relevant for the double materiality assessment (DMA) that the cross┬¡cutting standard ESRS
1, provides information on.
The Double Materiality assessment concept, considers two dimensions of sustainability materi┬¡
ality, that creates the scope of a companyÔÇÖs sustainability reporting. Financial materiality reflects
the impacts sustainability issues have on the companyÔÇÖs financial performance. Equal to the fi┬¡
nancial materiality is the sustainable materiality, which considers the impact the company has
on the environment and society[27].
By including the DMA in a companyÔÇÖs annual report, financial and non┬¡financial investors can
evaluate the companyÔÇÖs performance related to the risk and opportunities within sustainability.
It is important to know, that the general disclosures are mandatory to disclose for all undertakings
with CSRD obligations as well as ESRS E1, S1 and G1, however the disclosure scope of these
delegated acts depends on the output of the undertakingÔÇÖs DMA.
The ESRS 1 General Requirements contains the reporting principles that must be applied for
companies with CSRD obligations. ESRS 1 states that the undertaking (the company) must
disclose all information significant to their sustainability IROs.
The ESRS 2 General Disclosures is the second cross┬¡cutting standard containing require┬¡
ments that are defining through the topical standards. Meaning that, what you disclose in ESRS
2 also needs to be disclosed in the topical standards. The ESRS 2 delegated act also requires
disclosures on how the undertakingÔÇÖs value chain is defined, as well as double materiality as┬¡
sessment.
The ESRS 2 introduces four reporting areas that are to be found in each of the 12 delegated
acts.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
13
==PAGE:22==
ÔÇó Governance(GOV) are the area covering disclosures of governance processes, controls
and procedures to manage and monitor companiesÔÇÖs IROs[28].
ÔÇó Strategy (SBM) relates to the strategy the undertaking is making to align with and address┬¡
ing IROs. It also includes disclosures on how the IROs are identified, assessed managed
through policies and actions[26]
ÔÇó Metrics & targets(MT) are concrete measures of the companyÔÇÖs sustainability data.
To make sure there is alignment with previous disclosures, the ESRS 2 consists of the same
four┬¡pillars as the Task Force on Climate┬¡Related Financial Disclosures(TCFD) and the Interna┬¡
tional Sustainability Standards Board(ISSB) ways of making standards. Meaning that the ESRS
2 follows the same structure as other directives, like the SFDR.
The ESRS E1 Climate Change is the first mandatory topical standard that includes disclosure
requirements. There are nine disclosure requirements in total, each with associated data points,
summing up to 70 data points. While all disclosure requirements significantly impact the final re┬¡
port, this thesis will focus on the most comprehensive disclosure requirement directly impacting
the building industry for illustration purposes: DR E1┬¡6.
The DR E1┬¡6 Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions requires the undertaking to dis┬¡
close its gross Scope 1, 2, and 3 and total emissions. The scope 1, 2, and 3 stems from
the Green House Gas Protocol of 2001, and are a framework to distinguish different types of
emissions to ensure that a company does not account for emissions within the same scope ┬¡
important when working in double accounting matters[29].
ÔÇó Scope 1 emissions: Direct GHG emissions are stems from sources owned or controlled
by a company directly. Example the fuel(gasoline) used in company owned vehicles.
ÔÇó Scope 2 emissions: Indirect GHG emissions are the emissions from the heating or elec┬¡
tricity used in the company building. Example the heating going into the radiators or the
electricity used for HVAC.
ÔÇó Scope 3 emissions: Indirect GHG emissions covers all the emissions that are not cov┬¡
ered by scope 1 and 2 both upstream and downstream value chain. This covers all prod┬¡
ucts that a company buys, uses, disposes etc. illustrated in fig. 2.6
14
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.6: Overview of GHG Protocol scopes and emissions across the value chain [30].
When investigating the reporting requirements for E1┬¡6 the related Appendix A, Application
Requirements (AR) in the ESRS E1, contains more elaborate guidelines of how to fulfil the DRs.
The AR related to the DR E1┬¡6 are AR39 ┬¡ AR55. For example the AR46 contains information on
how the information in reporting on Scope3 should be prepared and that the Scope 3 emissions
should consider the calculation methods stated in the GHG protocol. This could be, the ÔÇØspend┬¡
based methodÔÇØ or ÔÇØsupplier┬¡specific methodÔÇØ or a combination of both ÔÇØhybrid methodÔÇØ.
The spend┬¡based method estimates emissions based on the financial value of a good or service
and then multiplying it with an industry average emission factor. This method has its limitations
when a service is hour┬¡based potentially making the carbon emissions higher than the actual
emission. An example of this happens when a kitchen calculates their carbon emissions with
the spend┬¡based method. They will chose vegetables instead of meat, however vegetables
takes twice as long to prepare(cutting, staffing etc.) compared to meat. Thus even though the
emission factor for meat is higher than vegetables the total hours of the service of vegetables
will outperform the hours preparing meat multiplied by the emission factor. Resulting in meat
being more environmental friendly (falsely) in the carbon accounting (digital appendix [Expert
D ÔÇô Sweco Denmark A/S]).
The supplier┬¡specific method uses specific cradle┬¡to┬¡gate inventory data from the suppliers of
the goods or services allocating the carbon accounting to the primary producer of the goods
or services[30]. These calculation methods are important to be aware of because they have a
significant impact in the results of the carbon accounting.
The unfolding of the methods and calculation of carbon accounting is a subject to itself, why
CSRD and AI in the building industry
15
==PAGE:24==
this thesis will not investigate it further.
2.1.4.4
Connection between EU Taxonomy, SFDR, CSRD
The interrelation between the the EU Taxonomy, SFDR, and CSRD, collectively known as the
EU Sustainable Finance Framework, is crucial in understanding the CSRD. These regulations
and directives are interconnected, each playing a distinct role in linking finance to sustainability.
First, the CSRD mandates that companies measure their economic activities based on sustain┬¡
ability metrics. This requirement ties directly to the SFDR, which classifies economic activities
into Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) categories. The SFDR provides the foun┬¡
dational ESG categorization that companies must use.
Next, under EU Taxonomy Article 8, there is an assessment to determine whether the economic
activities classified by the SFDR can be reported as sustainable according to the CSRD. This
step ensures that only activities meeting specific sustainability criteria are considered aligned
with the EU Taxonomy. Consequently, the CSRD requires companies to report the percentage
of their revenue, CapEx, and OpEx derived from activities aligned with the EU Taxonomy.
The interrelation between the EU Taxonomy and the CSRD is illustrated in fig. 2.7 below. The
figure illustrates, how the environmental focus of the CSRD and the related environmental
ESRSs align with the same areas as the EU Taxonomy.
Figure 2.7: Relation between EU Taxonomy and ESRS structure
Even if a company does not engage in any aligned activities, it can still disclose zero alignment.
However, aligning economic activities with the EU Taxonomy offers a competitive advantage,
creating incentive for companies to adopt sustainable practices.
The CSRDÔÇÖs connection to other regulations and directives extends beyond the EU Taxonomy.
Figure 2.5 below expands on this complexity, illustrating the interrelations of ESRS data points,
disclosure requirements and cross┬¡cutting standards.
16
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.8: Cross┬¡cutting and Environmental ESRS unfolded
This figure highlights the complex interrelations within the ESRS for the environmental subject.
It does not, however, show the connections within the social and governance subjects. For
instance, ESRS 2 MDR┬¡P (Minimum Disclosure Requirement┬¡Policies) specifies that if a policy
covers both sustainability and social matters, it should be reported under the environmental
section of the sustainability statement, with a cross┬¡reference in the social section[28].
Given the complexity and volume of interdependent disclosure requirements, there is a signifi┬¡
cant opportunity to explore the integration and support of AI applications, particularly generative
AI, to streamline and manage these reporting tasks.
2.1.5
Recap CSRD
The exploration of sustainability literature and the CSRD reveal a complex regulatory environ┬¡
ment aimed at steering the EU towards sustainability. Despite numerous private companies
claiming expertise in CSRD, there is a discernible gap between their assertions and actual pre┬¡
paredness for the directiveÔÇÖs requirements.
In light of this, the following analysis in section 4.1.4 will focus on developing a methodology to
assess the feasibility of integrating AI with CSRD in companies, given the knowledge gap be┬¡
tween current corporate understanding and the actual progress in sustainability reporting. This
exploration aims to provide a road map for businesses to navigate the complexities of CSRD,
leveraging AI as a tool to enhance their reporting capabilities and align with the directiveÔÇÖs expec┬¡
tations. The goal is to bridge the gap between conceptual insights and their operationalization,
ultimately advancing corporate sustainability practices in line with EU directives.
The reading guide below shows how the ESRSs are related and how the documents are struc┬¡
tured. This has been made to get an overview of the processes [31][32].
CSRD and AI in the building industry
17
==PAGE:26==
CSRD ÔÇô Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive
A reading guide
DMA
Double Materiality Assessment
ESRS 1
Gap Analysis
ESRSs and company data
Revision
Accountant comp.
Final Annual Report
Overall CSRD process
ESRS 1 ÔÇô General requirements 
ESRS 2 ÔÇô General disclosures
Topical standards
Overall cross-cutting standard
ESRS 1
General requirements
General principles for reporting
Describes structure of the ESRSs
Materiality
Reportable information - mandatory to include 
all disclosure requirements in ESRS 2 and IRO-1 
in topical standards, regardless of DMA
Structure of sustainability reporting
No disclosure requirements
ESRS 2 ÔÇô General disclosures (DR)
mandatory for all companies
Metrics and targets(2)
Strategy(3)
Basis for preparation(2)
Objective of the standard
Governance(5)
Impact, risks and opportunities(IRO)(2)
,
==PAGE:27==
ESRS E1
Climate Change
Double Materiality Assessment (DMA): 
method presented in ESRS 2
Undertaking: the user who reports
Disclosure requirement(DR): datapoints   
Topical standards
General disclosures within climate change that 
must follow the reporting requirements 
presented in ESRS 2 in governance, strategy, 
IRO-1 which is mandatory to disclose 
independently of the DMA. 
Objective is there to make sure that the 
alignment with the overall strategy of CSRD
Disclosure requirement E1-2 to E1-9 must be 
disclosed dependent on the double materiality 
assessment
Appendix A ÔÇô Application Requirements is an 
integrated part of ESRS E1. The appendix 
supports the use of the DR and has the same 
authority as the rest of the standard
Understanding the Disclosure Requirements
ÔÇØShallÔÇØ, might, and ÔÇØmayÔÇØ 
indicates significance of 
the DR
Refers to IRO ÔÇô closely 
related to dependencies in 
the undertakingÔÇÖs value 
chain.
Multiple datapoints all 
must be assessed 
compared to their 
materiality
Bold typography = 
reference to definitions in 
ESRS 1
Bold 
,
==PAGE:28==
2.2
Artificial Intelligence
This background section gives a general introduction to Artificial Intelligence(AI), Generative AI
(GenAI), and Enterprise AI, while also investigate the work that already has been done within
AI implementation in corporations to gain more knowledge of how AI can address challenges
with CSRD in an increasingly digitized world. While this thesisÔÇÖ main objective not being the
theory behind AI, itÔÇÖs important to understand the basic of how AI models operate especially to
analyse the risks and opportunities in the developed method below.
2.2.1
Background and ChatGPT
The idea of artificial intelligence has been a topic of discussion since the late 1940s, with the
initial question of whether machines could think [33]. Nearly 75 years later, the answer remains
nuanced, largely dependent on the interpretation of the term ÔÇØthink.ÔÇØ According to the Cambridge
Dictionary, to ÔÇØthinkÔÇØ is ÔÇØto believe something or have an opinion or ideaÔÇØ[34]. This raises the
relevant question of whether AI can form opinions or hold beliefs? To answer these questions
with modern eyes, an examination of AI, is represented below.
Artificial intelligence is commonly associated with terms such as machine learning and deep
learning. Yet, the foundational theory behind AI models rests heavily on statistical concepts,
like probability and regression, which are crucial for quantifying uncertainty and making proba┬¡
bilistic forecasts based on given data. Among the regression methods, foundational to machine
learning and deep learning algorithms, logistic regression is particularly important. It utilizes
the logistic function, central to transforming outputs into probabilistic terms between 0 and 1,
essential for binary classification[35]. The logistic function is mathematically represented as
follows eq. (2.1) [36]:
1/(1 + e┬¡value)
(2.1)
Here, e represents EulerÔÇÖs constant, the base of the natural logarithm, and ÔÇØvalueÔÇØ refers to the
numerical value, that the logistic regression transforms. This regression method, models the
probability that an input belongs to a particular class, when classified into no more than two
categories is required (eg. yes or no). However, logistic regression is not just a classification
tool═¥ it also estimates probabilities associated with inputs, which is a core component of what
AI does in practice.
For instance, in an AI service like ChatGPT, logistic regression calculates the probabilities that
guides the AIÔÇÖs decision┬¡making processes, such as predicting the relevance of different re┬¡
sponses to a userÔÇÖs query. This is expressed mathematically as shown in eq. (2.2)[37]:
ln(pi/(1 ÔêÆpi)) = Beta0 + Beta1 ÔêùX1 + ÔÇĞ + Bk ÔêùKk
(2.2)
where p is the probability of the dependent variable (response) equaling a specific value, ╬▓0, ╬▓1,
..., ╬▓n are the coefficients, and x0, x1, ..., xn are the independent variables (features of the input).
By estimating these probabilities, logistic regression helps the AI rank potential responses by
their likelihood, thereby enhancing the systemÔÇÖs ability to generate appropriate and contextually
relevant interactions. This application of logistic regression, underscores its significance in the
AI tool, bridging statistical methods with real┬¡world AI tasks.
With AI being based on ÔÇØsimpleÔÇØ regression and probability mathematics it is gets difficult to
imagine that a machine can simulate human intelligence, like the dictionary defines it[38]. Nat┬¡
urally regression and probability mathematics, are not the only thing going on behind the ma┬¡
chine. However with large data inputs from ChatGPT users, it is evident that the regression
20
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:29==
becomes more qualified and thus better to create more concrete and correct answers to almost
all tasks and queries[36].
This is why the release of OpenAIÔÇÖs ChatGPT marked a significant milestone and not only initi┬¡
ated a new phase in the evolution of AI but also signaled a transformation in how our workflows
are structured and executed. This is also one of the reasons why the ChatGPT service is free
for users to use, because OpenAI need huge amount of inputs from users to train the model to
create better and more targeted answers by the AI.
2.2.2
Generative Artificial Intelligence
While traditional AI focuses on understanding and processing data through models like logistic
regression, generative AI (genAI) takes a step further by not only analyzing data but also cre┬¡
ating new original content based on user queries. The foundation of genAI contains a model,
most commonly, a large language model (LLM) when speaking genAI for ChatGPT. The basis
of a LLM is created on a deep learning algorithm that has been trained on an enormous amount
of raw, unstructured, and unlabeled data, put in other words, a data mess. By ÔÇØtrainingÔÇØ the
algorithm, it will try to predict the probability of a given output or sequence. While doing this,
it will simultaneously adjust its answers to minimize the gap between the real answer and the
prediction[39].
Based on this training the algorithm has created a neural network of parameters that can gen┬¡
erate valid and meaningful answers as shown in fig. 2.9. This exact training exercise is what all
the users of ChatGPT, take part in when using ChatGPT and one of the main reasons behind
it being a free and public service, due to the training of LLM being highly compute┬¡intensive,
expensive and time┬¡consuming[39]. In fig. 2.9 the complexity of imitating humans thoughts and
intelligence and how it is structured from input to output, to reflect the difficulty in back tracing
how the exact output is generated.
Figure 2.9: Neural network [40]
While ChatGPT is free source, the user also accepts the premise of all user input being used
to train OpenAIÔÇÖs model, which can have its challenges and limitations when dealing with confi┬¡
dential data and documents from a company perspective. When having an trained foundation
CSRD and AI in the building industry
21
==PAGE:30==
model, it it not very specific. Its knowledge is a bit about everything. Thus, it can be necessary
to ÔÇØfine tuneÔÇØ the model to make its knowledge more specific within a subject and enable it to
understand inputs in a more specific context. The method is basically the same as training the
model, however with fine tuning is simply with more specific datasets[41].
To summarize the processes above from having an algorithm to a useful model the following
three iterative steps is necessary[39]:
ÔÇó Training the LLM
ÔÇó Fine tuning
ÔÇó Re┬¡tuning the model
Especially the last step is important to verify to ensure that the model is up to date and stays
relevant.
2.2.3
Enterprise Artificial Intelligence
The development and refinement of generative AI, particularly through the training and fine┬¡
tuning of large language models, has also found its applications in companies, called Enter┬¡
prises Artificial Intelligence (EAI). EAI can leverage these models to address specific business
challenges, enhancing efficiency and decision┬¡making across various industries. The simplest
way of integrating EAI in companies are by subscribing to OpenaiÔÇÖs ChatGPT Enterprise solu┬¡
tion that allows enterprises to safely use chatGPT without confidential data or input are used to
train OpenAIÔÇÖs model [42].
To expand on this foundation, itÔÇÖs essential to address how enterprises can implement AI solu┬¡
tions that remain up┬¡to┬¡date without exposing confidential information during the model training
process. One effective strategy involves the use of federated learning, a technique that allows
AI models to learn from decentralized data sources without the need to transfer the data itself.
This approach not only helps protect privacy but also reduces the risks associated with data
centralization [43].
Moreover, enterprises can employ differential privacy techniques during the training phase, to
ensure that the AI modelÔÇÖs outputs cannot be used to deduce specifics about the underlying
training data[42], like illustrated in fig. 2.10. Where the frontend is ChatGPTÔÇÖs server and the
Orchestration is the companyÔÇÖs interface. This adds an additional layer of security, helping
enterprises maintain the confidentiality of their data, while still benefiting from the latest AI tech┬¡
nologies.
22
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.10: Concept of data flows in genAI [44]
Another approach is the use of synthetic data, which is artificially generated data that mimics
the statistical properties of real┬¡world data[45]. By training models on synthetic data, companies
can enhance the modelÔÇÖs performance without risking exposure of sensitive information.
Another method for connecting to OpenAIÔÇÖs model, is through an Application Programming In┬¡
terface (API) connection. To connect to OpenAIÔÇÖs API, an API key is required, which serves as
a secure token to authenticate requests. This key can be obtained by signing up for an account
on the OpenAI platform[46].
Once the API key is acquired, it can be loaded into a Python script. This involves installing
the necessary libraries, such as OpenAIÔÇÖs official Python client library. The library is then im┬¡
ported, configured with the API key, and methods like openai.Completion.create are used to
send prompts to the model and receive responses.
Using APIs provides a straightforward way to integrate AI into systems, allowing for flexible
and scalable interactions. This setup makes data management more efficient, enabling better
tracking and storage of model inputs and outputs. For example, in a customer support system,
queries can be sent to OpenAIÔÇÖs API, processed, and the generated responses can be sent
back to customers, streamlining support operations[44].
Exploring these methodologies reveals their effectiveness and practicality in ensuring that en┬¡
terprise AI solutions are secure, offering valuable insights into how businesses can adopt and
maintain cutting┬¡edge AI technologies in alignment with strict data privacy and security stan┬¡
dards.
2.2.4
Recap AI
To wrap up, this literature review has thoroughly examined the evolution and landscape of ar┬¡
tificial intelligence, focusing on generative AI and its deployment in the business sector. The
introduction of OpenAIÔÇÖs ChatGPT marks a crucial point in the journey of AI, illustrating its capac┬¡
ity to transform companies engagement with technology and reshape its operational processes.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
23
==PAGE:32==
This shift goes beyond the realm of theory, as businesses are actively implementing AI models
that can be enhanced and tailored while keeping confidential information safe.
The adoption of AI within corporate frameworks, especially with tools like ChatGPT, signifies a
move towards more sophisticated and self┬¡operating systems. Nevertheless, preserving the pri┬¡
vacy of training data and keeping the expenses of training low while exploiting AIÔÇÖs advantages
remains a critical issue to obtain the most optimal output of AI and new subjects.
Figure 2.11: GenAI in relation to other AI concepts [47]
24
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:33==
3
Research
This master thesis stems from a significant interest in understanding how companies in the
building industry can manage the tasks of CSRD and AI, particularly given their lag in digitaliza┬¡
tion, to optimize the related processes. The rapid evolution of both CSRD and AI has made the
research trajectory inherently non┬¡linear. This curiosity┬¡driven approach resulted in four distinct
methodologies, each reflecting the importance hierarchy when implementing AI in performing
CSRD. An iterative process was crucial due to the dynamic nature of CSRDÔÇöwhat was rel┬¡
evant in February might not be applicable or may have been resolved by May. This chapter
outlines the methods behind the different approaches, highlighting the extensive research and
investigation required to navigate this new field of CSRD and AI as illustrated in fig. 3.1.
Figure 3.1: To which extend and how can AI support the fulfillment of CSRD
3.1
Methodology
Researching in two of the fastest┬¡evolving areas presents both opportunities and challenges.
While AI has been around for some time and companies are increasingly implementing AI┬¡driven
tools, understanding the inner workings and structure of OpenAIÔÇÖs models remains challenging,
which limits their use in potential tool creation. Additionally, due to limited implementation ex┬¡
perience with CSRD among companies, there is scant literature on the opportunities and chal┬¡
lenges presented by this new regulatory requirement. Consequently, it was crucial to interview
various stakeholders in the building industry to accurately scope the project.
In 2024, companies began integrating CSRD into their workflows and annual reports for the
first time, meaning no data was available on the implementation of CSRD. Therefore, gathering
original data through concept testing became necessary. This iterative process involved devel┬¡
oping ÔÇØproof of conceptÔÇØ tools or scripts for each approach to test the concepts. These tools
were also essential in assessing the availability of relevant data or its potential use, ultimately
evaluating the building industryÔÇÖs digitalization level compared to global standards. The solu┬¡
tions have been illustrated in fig. 3.4 below to provide a visual representation of their relationship
to global and industry┬¡specific digitalization levels.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.2: digitalization development
The figure illustrates, the digitalization level required by the first approach and how the itera┬¡
tive process, resulted in revealing the digital immaturity in the building industry compared to
the rapid rise in global digitalization due to AI implementation, particularly ChatGPT. When as┬¡
sessing where digital solutions in the building industry are implemented and used, it is evident
that, compared to other industries, the building sector is lagging behind. For example, creating
Life Cycle Assessments (LCA) for buildings often involves collecting data via email and spread┬¡
sheets, reflecting the building industryÔÇÖs digital immaturity. In contrast, high┬¡maturity industries
within Fast┬¡moving consumer goods (FMCG), track and optimize user behavior extensively [48].
The graph also shows the varying digitalization levels of the proposed approaches, underscoring
the importance of industry interviews to ensure alignment with the building industryÔÇÖs digitaliza┬¡
tion level.
The final approach was verified through expert consultations, although it was found not appli┬¡
cable at the given stage of the industryÔÇÖs digitalization level. This highlights the importance of
developing tools even when their immediate worth or usage is uncertain.
Table 3.1: Verification experts
3.2
Methods
The overarching process followed in this thesis, has been based on the Double Diamond model,
illustrated below in fig. 3.3. This thesis began with a long diverging phase gathering information
and knowledge within CSRD and AI and then converging into testing different approaches of
how AI can be used in addressing CSRD challenges.
26
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.3: Thesis process[49]
What differentiates this thesisÔÇÖ process from a traditional double diamond workflow is that there
is a third diverging phase. This is due to the many findings made in this thesis that could be
beneficial for companies to investigate further, as presented in section 6.2.
The following section will present the interviews made in the diverging phase followed by the
method for each approaches stemming from the converging phases.
3.2.1
Interviews in the diverging phase
Conducting interviews in a broad subject area like this presents challenges for both the in┬¡
terviewer and interviewee. The interviews were conducted in an ÔÇØunstructuredÔÇØ (one of three
standard interview formats) format with the primary goal of identifying the most urgent areas
within CSRD and AI. A benefit of unstructured interviews is that they resemble a simple con┬¡
versation, making it easier to discuss a wide range of topics, from frustrations to progresses in
CSRD implementation and thoughts on AI tools. The unstructured interview was chosen over
semi┬¡structured and structured interviews as these can lead to too narrow answers and biases
when asking leading questions. Given that CSRD is a regulatory requirement affecting various
companies and multiple functions within each company, it was important to gather insights from
a diverse group of stakeholders in the building environment.
The interviews were made anonymous for easier integration in this thesis and ease the use of
quotes. Another important reason for the anonymity is related to the uncertainty of CSRD at the
time of the interviews.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.2: Interview group
The interview group consisted of representatives from different companies covering significant
parts of the CSRD value chain, including climate accounting executives, ESG managers re┬¡
sponsible for data gathering on property portfolios, heads of sustainability and climate reporting,
and accountants validating annual reporting compliance with CSRD. Each participant engaged
in a one┬¡hour unstructured interview focusing on AI and CSRD. To guide the conversation in
the subject of CSRD and to ensure that the main themes were covered, an interview template
was created. This template included broad questions about CSRD preparation and AI usage.
The interview template can be found in the digital appendix [Interviewtemplate]. These inter┬¡
views were also crucial in identifying any gaps in the understanding of CSRD, given the limited
literature and data available.
3.2.2
Approaches in the converging phases
Initially, this thesis aimed to provide guidance and recommendations for companies with CSRD
obligations in 2025, as few to no company┬¡specific tools existed at the thesis beginning. How┬¡
ever, as the reporting deadline approached, the willingness for companies to test out beta┬¡
versions of potential tools became limited. Consequently, the research strategy shifted to in┬¡
vestigate the intersection of AI and CSRD through an iterative process, necessitating the ex┬¡
ploration of 4 successive approaches. This shift also broadened the recommendations beyond
the building industry. All scripts referred to below, can be found in the digital appendix.
To better understand the relationships between the approaches and their relevance to AI op┬¡
portunities at specific time periods, a visual representation is provided in fig. 3.4 below. The
first approach serves as the foundation for AI implementation, while the second approach rep┬¡
resents the ÔÇØultimateÔÇØ future tool for AI and CSRD integration. This method was also used to
assess the digital maturity of the building industry.
Figure 3.4: Process of approaches
28
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:37==
3.2.3
Method for Approach 1
The steps of Approach 1 are illustrated in fig. 3.5 below, beginning with a thorough literature
review and a series of interviews. The literature reviewed examined the existing research on
consistency analysis of ChatGPT. The methodology for analyzing CSRD┬¡specific consistency
is derived from the work of an Oxford Doctoral Student Phil student Myeongjun Erik Jang[50],
whose study on ChatGPTÔÇÖs consistency serves as a foundational reference [51] (personal con┬¡
versation).
Figure 3.5: Steps in Approach 1
Their evaluation method involves a comparability exercise consisting of two main steps: gen┬¡
erating the predicted output for both the original and a perturbed test set, and then comparing
these outputs to measure consistency. For each of the four types of consistency, Jang created
perturbed test sets. To structure the CSRD┬¡specific dataset appropriately, an in┬¡depth exami┬¡
nation of JangÔÇÖs dataset was conducted.
The primary goal of Approach 1 is to ensure that the AI model produces consistent outputs,
which is crucial for the reliability of any AI tool. The analysis utilized an open┬¡source script
provided by Jang, available on their GitHub account. This script formed the basis of the back┬¡
ground analysis, while the prompt input data was gathered through industry interviews. This
comprehensive evaluation of the modelÔÇÖs consistency capabilities sat the stage for the further
development and refinement of AI tools in the industry.
3.2.3.1
Script walk through
There are 4 downstream tasks, meaning 4 different types of datasets which consistency should
be analyzed in the 4 different consistency scenarios═¥ symmetric consistency, negation consis┬¡
tency, semantic consistency, and transitive consistency.
ÔÇó Symmetric Consistency: This assesses if the modelÔÇÖs responses remain consistent re┬¡
gardless of the input order for text inputs with the same meaning.
ÔÇó Negation Consistency: This checks if the model provides different predictions for text
inputs with opposite meanings.
ÔÇó Semantic Consistency: This evaluates if the model makes consistent decisions in seman┬¡
tically equivalent contexts, aligning directly with the aim of Solution 1.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
29
==PAGE:38==
ÔÇó Transitive consistency: This ensures that if the modelÔÇÖs output maintains a certain re┬¡
lationship with one input, it should logically maintain that relationship with other related
inputs.
The 4 downstream tasks are═¥ Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE), Microsoft Research Para┬¡
phrase Corpus (MRPC), Word in Context (WiC), Stanford Natural Language Inference (SNLI).
For the simplicity of this thesis one (MRPC) of the downstream tasks is evaluated below for
possible implementation.
Looking at the MRPC task for negational consistency, it is structured around 3 sentences. Sen┬¡
tence 1 being the general sentence. Sentence 2 ┬¡ being the non┬¡negated sentence with the
class┬¡label 0 and sentence 3 being the negated sentence with the class┬¡label 1.
Example on one sentence for the MRPC task for negational consistency
Sentence 1: I would rather be talking about positive numbers than negative .
Sentence 2: But I would rather be talking about high standards rather than low standards.
Label: 0
Sentence 3: But I would not rather talking about high standards rather than low standards.
Label: 1
The MRPC negational dataset consists of 152 sentences with same structure as above. This
dataset will be loaded into the script, to assess the inconsistency in negation of a language
models predictions. It examines how frequently the model calculates varying predictions, for
a sentence versus its negated form. The full script is available in the GitHub repository and in
appendix A, below in listing A.1 their code of measuring MRPC is presented.
1
def negational_inconsistency(
2
prediction_original: List,
3
prediction_negated: List,
4
condition_correct_prediction: Union[int, Text] = None
5
) -> Dict:
6
"""A function that calculates negational inconsistency
7
8
Args:
9
prediction_original: the list of predictions on the original data instances
10
prediction_negated: the list of predictions on the negated data instances
11
condition_correct_prediction: correct answer when applying the conditioned
inconsistency (e.g., 0 (entailment) for SNLI)
12
13
Returns:
14
A dictionary containing inconsistency and conditioned inconsistency
15
"""
16
assert len(prediction_original) == len(prediction_negated)
17
18
inconsistency = accuracy_score(prediction_original , prediction_negated)
19
20
if condition_correct_prediction:
21
index_ = [i for i, p in enumerate(prediction_original) if p ==
condition_correct_prediction]
22
23
condition_pred_original_ = [prediction_original[i] for i in index_]
24
condition_pred_neg_ = [prediction_negated[i] for i in index_]
25
26
conditioned_inconsistency = accuracy_score(condition_pred_original_ ,
condition_pred_neg_)
27
else:
28
conditioned_inconsistency = inconsistency
29
30
outp = {
30
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:39==
31
"inconsistency": inconsistency ,
32
"conditioned_inconsistency": conditioned_inconsistency ,
33
}
34
return outp
35
36
with open(os.path.join(example_data_path , "mrpc-negational.json"), "r") as
readFile:
37
negational_ = json.load(readFile)
38
39
negational_inconsistency_ = negational_inconsistency(
40
negational_["original_preds"],
41
negational_["negation_preds"]
42
)["inconsistency"]
43
44
print(f"MRPC Negation inconsistency: {negational_inconsistency_}")
Listing 3.1: Script of MRPC negational dataset [52]
This section above of the script consists of the main function called ÔÇØnegational_inconsistencyÔÇØ.
This function uses three arguments defined as: prediction_original: A list of predictions that the
model made on the original sentences. (e.g. sentence 1)
prediction_negated: A list of predictions that the model made on the negated versions of those
sentences. The defined 1s.(e.g. sentence 3)
condition_correct_prediction: An optional argument that specifies the correct prediction that
should be used to calculate conditioned inconsistency. This could be a specific label (e.g., 0 for
sentence 2).
Check length: First step for the function is to ensure that the length of each list in input (pre┬¡
diction_original and prediction_negated) have the same length for later comparison. This is
important because each original prediction should correspond to a negated prediction.
Calculate Inconsistency: Next it uses the accuracy_score function from the ÔÇØsklearn.metricsÔÇØ
module (imported Python add in) to calculate the inconsistency between the original and negated
predictions. Essentially, this measures how many predictions in prediction_negated differ from
those in prediction_original.
Conditioned_inconsistency: the function filters the predictions to only include those where the
original prediction matches this correct prediction. It then recalculates the inconsistency for this
filtered set, which is called conditioned inconsistency. This step is important for focusing on
cases where the modelÔÇÖs initial prediction was correct and seeing if it remains consistent under
negation
Return outputs: The function returns a dictionary containing both the overall inconsistency and
the conditioned inconsistency.
The last step is for the script to read and analyze the actual dataset, this is done by reading
the JSON file for MRPC called ÔÇØmrpc┬¡negational.jsonÔÇØ. This file is expected to contain two lists:
original_preds and negation_preds. These lists represent the modelÔÇÖs predictions on original
sentences and their negated versions, respectively. Then the script reads the JSON file and
run through the steps above. The result is a dictionary from which the script extracts the incon┬¡
sistency value. Finally the scripts prints out the negational inconsistency for the MRPC dataset.
This method presented above is representative for the 3 other downstream tasks. Below in
fig. 3.6 the overall process is illustrated.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.6: Consistency evaluation process of (a) semantic, (b) negation[51]
It is important to note that the test sets used in JangÔÇÖs analysis are based on random sentences,
as shown above, which has been sufficient for their analysis and purpose. However, for the
scope of this thesis, the datasets need to consist of CSRD┬¡specific sentences to determine if
the model can detect inconsistencies within this specific subject area. To understand how this
was done the specific method for approach 1 is presented below.
To learn more about how to make such datasets specific and to investigate if the method of
Jang could be used for testing longer and more subject specific scenarios, a meeting with Mr.
Jang was conducted. This meeting gave important insight into their study and his take on the
validity on Approach 1. Mr. Jang was thrilled by the idea of further development of his work
and made a walk┬¡through about the necessary processes in order to obtain new results. An
important takeaway from this meeting was that it is doable to create a CSRD┬¡specific dataset
that could replace the MRPC dataset.
However their script tested, short and simple sentences, like the example given above, and
not longer and more complex sentences with multiple evaluation processes. This increase the
difficulty and created the need for a more advanced script. To do so, this would require quite
an extensive knowledge within NLP and would shift this thesisÔÇÖ scope into a more AI┬¡specific
thesis. So in order to stay on the civil engineering track their script was used solely to see if
it worked with CSRD┬¡sentences. This would naturally have many uncertainties but it would be
the naturally first step.
With excitement and new knowledge the interview with Sweco Group was conducted in order
to find CSRD┬¡specific prompts through the conversation. However this interview among others,
showed that those responsible for carrying out CSRD reporting, at that time, did not have suf┬¡
ficient information or experience about CSRD to provide information that could be transformed
into prompts.
This was in fact the biggest challenge due to the now lack of test┬¡data, the foundation for all AI
applications. If humans can not provide sentences relevant to CSRD, ChatGPT must be the
perfect tool for this, using the ChatGPT 3.5 model available at the time. The goal was to create
152 CSRD specific sentences similar to the MRPC dataset. Different use of prompt engineering
was used including ÔÇØgenerated knowledge promptingÔÇØ(GKP)[53]. GKP is a technique where the
32
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:41==
GPT generates facts to complete the final prompt. This is helpful when using prompts about
new facts like CSRD. The applied prompts used is illustrated below.
Figure 3.7: Generated knowledge prompting ┬¡ history
1
index sentence1 sentence2 label sentence2_neg neg_label tag
2
1 Our company 's sustainability metrics adhere to the materiality thresholds
specified in CSRD Annex I.
Our company 's sustainability metrics do not adhere
to the materiality thresholds specified in CSRD Annex I. 1 Our company 's
sustainability metrics do not adhere to the materiality thresholds specified in
CSRD Annex I. 0 negation_property
3
2 We conduct internal audits to ensure compliance with CSRD's reporting scope
requirements. We do not conduct internal audits to ensure compliance with CSRD'
s reporting scope requirements.
1 We do not conduct internal audits to ensure
compliance with CSRD's reporting scope requirements.
0 negation_property
4
3 Our sustainability reporting framework integrates the reporting principles
outlined in CSRD Annex II. Our sustainability reporting framework does not
integrate the reporting principles outlined in CSRD Annex II. 1 Our
sustainability reporting framework does not integrate the reporting principles
outlined in CSRD Annex II. 0 negation_property
5
4 We have established internal control procedures to validate the accuracy of CSRD
sustainability data disclosures. We have not established internal control
procedures to validate the accuracy of CSRD sustainability data disclosures. 1
We have not established internal control procedures to validate the accuracy of
CSRD sustainability data disclosures. 0 negation_property
CSRD and AI in the building industry
33
==PAGE:42==
Listing 3.2: Script of MRPC negational dataset
This technique was very useful in creating specific prompts, compared to starting with an input
prompt like ÔÇØCan you provide me with 152 CSRD┬¡specific sentences in the structure of a tsv┬¡file
illustrated below?ÔÇØ
However when comparing this tsv┬¡file with the original MRPC negation dataset it had a pat┬¡
tern where every other sentence began with alternating ÔÇØOurÔÇØ and ÔÇØWeÔÇØ. While the alternating
may provide some variation in the structure of the sentences, it also introduces consistency in
the form of possessive pronouns (ÔÇØourÔÇØ) and subject pronouns (ÔÇØweÔÇØ). Models trained on this
dataset might learn to recognize and anticipate this alternation pattern, which could impact their
generalization to real┬¡world text where such patterns may not be persistent.
This alternating structure of pronouns may also limit the diversity of the dataset, particularly
in terms of syntactic structures and sentence constructions. This could potentially affect the
modelsÔÇÖ ability to generalize to a broader range of linguistic patterns and contexts. This is
specifically relevant if these datasets are also used for training LLM, mentioned in section 2.2.2.
If the industry or GPT models cannot achieve this consistency, it suggests that developing such
a tool is premature given the current technological capabilities. However, if consistency is not
yet achievable, valuable insights can still be gained as interim steps to improve consistency,
guiding the project towards Approach 2.
3.2.4
Method for Approach 2
Interviews were conducted with MT H├©jgaard Holding (MTHH), Sweco Group and AP Pension
from the verification group to hopefully find tendencies in their DMA and to learn how their
process of DMA looked like. As mentioned earlier and also in the CSRD law requirement,
there is no correct way of integrating CSRD into annual report. This left the industry with many
questions and a general tendency to postpone reporting rather than trying. The overall method
for this approach is based on fig. 3.8, with a preliminary industry interview and then a review
of the previous work done within DMA and lastly an analysis if the approach is more broadly
applicable.
Figure 3.8: Steps in Approach 2
To figure out how the processes of DMA can be optimized so that companies do not intentionally
narrow their scope, the requirements in the CSRD was analysed and compared to the building
34
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:43==
industry that the companies should be extra cautious about e.g., the EU Taxonomy. This re┬¡
quired a thorough read through of the ESRS 1, ESRS 2, ESRS E1 together with the proposed
IG draft and its feedback from February 2nd.
The feedback for the DMA was given by companies in different sectors in EU countries, a total
of 106 responses was provided. Due to the scope of this thesis it was chosen to solely look
at Danish companies either collaborating or affecting the building industry. These feedback
letters were available on EFRAGÔÇÖs website [54]. The included companies were Deloitte and the
Confederation of Danish Industry (DI). The analysis of the feedback will be presented below
and used as an evaluation of the possibilities and risks of implementing future sector specific
ESRSs.
As the current sector specific ESRS drafts have not been finalized and does not contain one
specific for the building industry, it is difficult to use these to structure and propose a concrete
methodology for DMA in the building industry. It is important to note that the connections are not
ultimately linked to the DMA itself, but the companyÔÇÖs value chain and business model. Which is
why the primary step in DMA is to define the undertakingÔÇÖs business model, this is the foundation
for determining the scope, width and depth of the value chain for the DMA. Initiatives like the EU
Taxonomy has an indirectly effect on the value chain due to its strategic perspective. Meaning,
if there are EU taxonomy┬¡aligned activities in the value chain, it has an impact on the companyÔÇÖs
CSRD.
To understand the difficulty of performing a standardized method for DMA, a deep dive into EU
documents, the connection between these, and to the previously implemented requirements
are presented below. The EU regulative documents are═¥ ESRS 1, ESRS 2, ESRS E1, ESRS
S1, ESRS G1, IFRS, ISSB, SFRD and EUT. These documents are all connected and it is critical
that their requirements align in order to have a streamlined process, when implementing CSRD
into the strategy as well as a potential guideline as showed in fig. 3.9. The alternative is that all
processes have to be made from scratch again which will counteract the CSRD motive.
Figure 3.9: Connection between EU regulation documents
To make sure that all the connections between regulations showed above are aligned, EFRAG
made feedback sessions on their implementation guidelines (IG), giving companies in the EU a
possibility to comment on EFRAGÔÇÖs drafts. When looking into the draft for DMA (called MAIG)
it is structured around 4 key chapters═¥ (1) ESRSÔÇÖs approach to materiality, (2) how DMA is per┬¡
formed, (3) how undertakings can take other frameworks or standards into account and (4) a
FAQ. The MAIG draft introduces connections between the EU documents, however when feed┬¡
back companies reviews the draft there are concerning findings in the two analysed feedback,
explored further in section 4.3.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
35
==PAGE:44==
3.2.5
Method for Approach 3
The third approach was based on interviews and their mentioned shortcomings in the indus┬¡
try. As the second step in implementing CSRD in the company, performing a gap analysis is
instrumental to identify possible synergies or data overlaps with already gathered data. Given
the high number of disclosure requirements (1140 data points) and time constraints, being able
to assess documentation gaps early is crucial. Performing this gap analysis manually is very
time┬¡consuming. Thus, an automatic gap analysis tool was created, optimizing this process
and saving companies valuable time. The tool was developed using Python and an API con┬¡
nection, and it compares company data against the delegated act ÔÇØESRS E1 Climate ChangeÔÇØ
disclosure requirements to identify areas where existing data can be used. The assumption be┬¡
ing, that this approach can be extrapolated to other delegated acts with their related disclosure
requirements.
The process of reaching the goal of this approach was heavily based on the creation of the
gap┬¡analysis tool. When creating such a tool it needed to be usable for the users, why the
first step in this approach was to figure out what and how the current processes of the compa┬¡
nies within CSRD implementation looked like through interviews, shown in fig. 3.10. Because
CSRD is mainly a strategic tool, the majority of companies affected by CSRD are restructuring
their organisation[55]. Thus introducing a new tool should not create further implications in the
restructuring.
Figure 3.10: Steps in Approach 3
As the three interviewed companies all perform their gap┬¡analysis in huge Excel spreadsheets
the script needed to be implementable in Excel. It is currently possible to implement an OpenAI
API connection to the VBA code in Excel, however it makes the file very slow and the runtime
of the existing Excel function slow. Thus it was decided to create the script in Python using the
source code editor ÔÇØVisual Studio CodeÔÇØ (VS Code).
ÔÇØWhen I think about our process, it has essentially just been an Excel sheet and some lookups,
just that. However, much of it can be done with an Excel sheet and some lookups, covering
perhaps 80┬¡90 percent of the sustainability report, which we can then screen through.ÔÇØ
┬¡ Expert C, corporate perspective
The reason behind the use of Excel as the companiesÔÇÖ chosen tool is mainly because EFRAG
published the data points from the ESRSs in Excel that the companies can download and then
36
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:45==
develop further on. This is yet another reason for the script to be a simple Excel tool for easy
integration.
As a next step in the process of developing this gap┬¡analysis tool investigation of similar tools
were carried out. The majority of the gap┬¡analysis is related to identifying data gaps, as sup┬¡
posed to missing documentation compared to law requirements. The programming┬¡specific
gap┬¡analysis currently available as open source is made on numerical data making it easier to
compare rather than textual data. Textual data have the risk of being misspelled, using syn┬¡
onyms etc. where numerical data is easier to make 1:1 comparison. With the lack of open
source scripts to build upon, the development of a CSRD specific gap analysis began.
The key features and inputs of the script included a folder with the companyÔÇÖs data and the
current Excel sheet from EFRAGÔÇÖs tool. The main output was the addition of two columns in the
Excel sheet with the results of the gap┬¡analysis. The two columns are a ÔÇÖGap analysisÔÇÖ column
with the input ÔÇÖYesÔÇÖ and the ÔÇÖDocumentationÔÇÖ column with the input of the relevant PDF used. To
go through how this was attempted a walk through of the script is provided below.
3.2.5.1
Script walk through
The script created is based on three main functions and the use of an OpenAI API key in order
to connect to their AI server and engine.
The first function is called ÔÇØextract_text_from_pdf(pdf_path)ÔÇØ which, as the name implies, extract
text from PDFs making them readable for the AI also showed in the listing 3.3 below. This
function takes the path of the PDF file, then it creates an empty string variable where it stores
the extracted text from the PDF. The ÔÇØfitz.open(pdf_path)ÔÇØ is a library add on used for opening
the PDFs [56]. Then it iterates through the pages of the respective PDF before it extract all text
and appends the text to the text variable string. Finally, it return the accumulated extracted text.
1
def extract_text_from_pdf(pdf_path):
2
text = ""
3
with fitz.open(pdf_path) as doc:
4
for page in doc:
5
text += page.get_text()
6
return text
Listing 3.3: First function of Gap┬¡analysis script
In summary, this function reads a PDF file, extracts the text from each page, and returns the
complete text content of the PDF as a single string.
Next function, called ÔÇØcompare_with_keywords(pdf_text, keywords_dict)ÔÇØ compares the text list
generated above with CSRD specific keywords showed in listing 3.4. Because the script uses
an OpenAI API connection the serverÔÇÖs latest knowledge due to its training data being from
2021[57], through preliminary testing of the script it became evident that the engine needed
specific content/input to generate a specific output. Thus a CSRD keyword JSON file was
created with specific keywords for each disclosure requirement as a JSON file which can be
seen in appendix D. Naturally the quality of the keywords become defining for the output why it
is crucial to make them as representative for the intent of the disclosure requirement. This will
be discussed below in the results of the output.
1
def compare_with_keywords(pdf_text , keywords_dict):
2
matched_requirements = []
3
4
# Iterate through each disclosure requirement and its associated keywords
5
for requirement , keywords in keywords_dict.items():
6
# Extract a shorter excerpt of the PDF text
CSRD and AI in the building industry
37
==PAGE:46==
7
excerpt_length = 500
8
excerpt = pdf_text[:excerpt_length]
9
10
# Generate a prompt for GPT-3 to compare the excerpt with keywords
11
prompt = f"Given the PDF excerpt:\n{excerpt}\nDo you think it satisfies the
requirement '{requirement}'?\nif it does, return a 'Yes' Keywords: {
keywords}"
12
13
# Call the GPT-3 API to get a response
14
response = openai.Completion.create(
15
engine="davinci -002",
16
prompt=prompt,
17
temperature=1,
18
max_tokens=50
19
)
20
21
# Check if the response indicates a match
22
if "Yes" in response.choices[0].text:
23
matched_requirements.append(requirement)
24
print(matched_requirements)
25
26
return matched_requirements
Listing 3.4: Second function of Gap┬¡analysis script
The function begins by initializing an empty list called ÔÇØmatched_requirementsÔÇØ to store the
requirements that are identified as being satisfied.
It then iterates through each requirement in the provided path, ÔÇØkeywords_dictÔÇØ, which maps
requirements to their associated keywords. For each requirement, the function extracts a short
excerpt from the beginning of the PDF text. This excerpt, with a length set to 500 characters,
is used to limit the scope of text analyzed at a time resulting in a faster running script.
Next, the function constructs a prompt for the GPT┬¡3 API, incorporating the extracted PDF text
excerpt and asking whether the text satisfies the specific requirement based on the given key┬¡
words. The prompt is formulated to ask GPT┬¡3 if the excerpt meets the requirement, with in┬¡
structions to return ÔÇØYesÔÇØ if it does.
The function then calls the GPT┬¡3 API using the specified parameters, the model ÔÇØdavinci┬¡002ÔÇØ,
the constructed prompt, the temperature setting (which controls the randomness of the output),
and the maximum number of tokens to generate. The temperature setting runs on a scale from
0 to 2 where 0 is least random and 2 is the highest level of randomness. The response from
GPT┬¡3 is analyzed to check if it contains the word ÔÇØYesÔÇØ.
If the response indicates a match, the requirement is appended to the ÔÇØmatched_requirementsÔÇØ
list. This process is repeated for all requirements in the dictionary. Finally, the function returns
the ÔÇØmatched_requirementsÔÇØ list, which contains all the requirements that GPT┬¡3 has identified
as being satisfied based on the provided keywords and the text excerpts from the PDF.
The final function links the processed PDFs and take the output of the previously introduced
function which entails the comparison of the PDFs with the keywords and update the companyÔÇÖs
Excel sheet. This process is illustrated below in listing 3.6.
1
2
# Function to process PDFs and update the Excel sheet
3
def process_pdfs_and_update_excel(data_folder , excel_file , output_json):
4
# Load the Excel workbook
5
wb = load_workbook(excel_file)
6
# Select the active worksheet
38
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:47==
7
ws = wb.active
8
9
# Load the keywords from the JSON file
10
with open(output_json , "r") as json_file:
11
keywords_dict = json.load(json_file)
12
13
# Inside the loop where you iterate through PDF files
14
for filename in os.listdir(data_folder):
15
if filename.endswith(".pdf"):
16
pdf_path = os.path.join(data_folder , filename)
17
print(f"Processing PDF file: {pdf_path}")
18
19
# Extract text from the PDF
20
pdf_text = extract_text_from_pdf(pdf_path)
21
22
# Compare text with keywords using GPT-3
23
matched_requirements = compare_with_keywords(pdf_text , keywords_dict)
24
print("Matched requirements:", matched_requirements)
# Print matched
requirements
25
26
# Update the Excel sheet with comparison results
27
for requirement in matched_requirements:
28
print(f"Processing requirement: {requirement}")
29
# Find the row corresponding to the requirement in the Excel sheet
30
for row in ws.iter_rows(min_row=2, max_col=ws.max_column , max_row=
ws.max_row):
31
if row[1].value == requirement:
# Assuming 'Disclosure
requirement' is in the 3rd column
32
print(f"Match found for requirement: {requirement}")
33
# Update 'Gap analysis' column with 'Yes' and '
Documentation' column with the PDF filename
34
row[5].value = 'Yes'
# Assuming 'Gap analysis' is in the 6
th column
35
row[6].value = filename
# Assuming 'Documentation' is in
the 7th column
36
print(f"Updated 'Gap analysis' and 'Documentation' for
requirement: {requirement}")
37
break
38
39
# Save the updated Excel workbook
40
wb.save(excel_file)
41
print(f"Excel sheet '{excel_file}' updated.")
Listing 3.5: Third function of Gap┬¡analysis script
The function ÔÇØprocess_pdfs_and_update_excelÔÇØ processes the PDF files in a ÔÇØdata folderÔÇØ, ex┬¡
tracts text from them, and updates an Excel sheet with the results of keyword comparisons.
Initially, it loads the Excel workbook and selects the active worksheet. It also loads keywords
from a JSON file.
For each PDF file in the specified folder, the function extracts text from the PDF and compares
it with the loaded keywords using OpenAIÔÇÖs GPT┬¡3. The function then updates the Excel sheet
with the comparison results. For each matched requirement, it searches for the corresponding
row in the Excel sheet. When a match is found, it updates the ÔÇÖGap analysisÔÇÖ column with ÔÇÖYesÔÇÖ
and the ÔÇÖDocumentationÔÇÖ column with the PDF filename. Finally, the function saves the updated
Excel workbook, ensuring that the changes are applied and the file is saved with the same
name.
The script above solely compares company specific data with the ESRS E1 due to the limited
time of this project. In order to run the script created above company specific data was ideally
CSRD and AI in the building industry
39
==PAGE:48==
required, however it was decided to use publicly available data such as annual reports and
policies for quicker testing.
3.2.6
Method for Approach 4
Investigating several approaches of how to address the challenges related to CSRD with AI
has lead this project to the final approach. Figure 3.11 illustrates the process of the approach
initiated by an interview followed by the making of an Excel tool with VBA coding. Then this
has been tested by the experts in the verification group and later verified to understand the
usefulness of such a tool and whether it can be applied in the building industry.
Figure 3.11: Steps in Approach 4
Based on the gap analysis approach and an evaluation of existing tools (Excel) for integrating
CSRD into company strategies, The RFBB developed a guide to make existing building owner
data more accessible for ESG reporting[58]. Inspired by this guide, the final approach aimed to
create a tool that highlights synergies between various sustainable actions in the building indus┬¡
try while contextualizing CSRD within the building sector. This tool was designed to assess and
verify the industryÔÇÖs digital maturity and identify potential improvements for using AI to address
challenges related to CSRD integration.
Following interviews to determine the industryÔÇÖs progress with CSRD and the tools they currently
use, an Excel tool was created. This tool serves as a preliminary exercise for conducting a gap
analysis, helping CSRD specialists understand how CSRD applies specifically to the building
industry. It does not replace the work of CSRD specialists but provides a contextual framework.
Before creating the tool, the guide presented by RFBB was revised and analyzed to find any
potential synergies that could go into the tool. Then their guide was compared to the Excel sheet
EFRAG has made with the 1144 data points discovering very low comparability. From here the
development of the approach specific tool was created. The following section presents a walk
through of the tool together with the verification process.
3.2.6.1
Excel VBA walk through
The Excel tool consists of 5 sheets═¥ a onepager, Input, E1 Climate Change, Backend and a
ToDo sheet. The development of these sheets will be introduced below.
40
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.12: Sheet E1 Climate Change, see full sheet in digital appendix [Aproach4tool]
The process of creating this tool started by implementing the ESRS E1 into the the E1 Climate
Change sheet see fig. 3.12. The first 3 columns represents the structure of the ESRS with
chapter, paragraphs and disclosure requirements. From here it was important to find out which
actions in the building industry that could potentially be used as data or synergies to CSRD.
These actions were then compared to the disclosure requirements in ESRS E1. If there was
a synergy, match or similarities, a cross will indicate the match. There will never be a match
next to the objective of the disclosure requirements because they are not based on metrics or
require data they are there to make sure the company meets the objective.
The column ÔÇØShall/mayÔÇØ stems from the ESRS E1 and the column ÔÇØData typeÔÇØ is from the Excel
sheet with data points created by EFRAG, available in the digital appendix [Aproach4tool] where
the data type of the input is listed. This is a rather simple sheet because its main purpose is to
show the relations between E1 and the actions.
The ÔÇØInputÔÇØ sheet is related to the ÔÇØE1 Climate ChangeÔÇØ sheet where the user chooses which
actions they have implemented in their property portfolios or property investments. This sheet
is mainly to create a company customization of the tool. After choosing the relevant tasks the
ÔÇØToDoÔÇØ sheet is automatically created giving a list of disclosure requirements where no syner┬¡
gies are found, giving a to do list of disclosure requirements where the companies might need
to implement data tagging. To implement automatic functions and processes, VBA is very use┬¡
ful. The use of VBA to make automatically updates in the ToDo list is based on the specific
actions chosen. As the user does not need to change any code when using the tool, the user
experience is eased and suitable for broader use. Below the method for creating the VBA script
is presented.
3.2.6.2
VBA modules
The main goal of the VBA code is to make a sheet called ÔÇØTodoÔÇØ with a list of disclosure require┬¡
ments that the undertaking needs to consider, not saying that the disclosure requirements are
fulfilled just because they are not in the list there are just some synergies. The coding of this
script is based on prompting in ChatGPT┬¡4 through an iterative process in order to make the
script work. The first prompt was: ÔÇØI want to make an Excel tool with VBA coding. I have made
a process outline below.
┬¡ In the sheet ÔÇØInputÔÇØ the user checks of 1┬¡4 checkboxes depending on which actions they want
CSRD and AI in the building industry
41
==PAGE:50==
to filter on in sheet ÔÇØE1ClimateChangeÔÇØ.
┬¡ After checking 1 or more checkboxes I want all the rows within the chosen action(s) in sheet
ÔÇØE1ClimateChangeÔÇØ to be transferred into the ÔÇØToDoÔÇØ sheet. So the user can see all the rows
they need to gather data on.
┬¡ The ÔÇØToDoÔÇØ list needs to be expandable in case the user checks of multiple checkboxes.
Can you help me with this?ÔÇØ
The process of getting a useful output took 18 prompts different methods were used. The
subsequent prompts were comments on what the code was not missing or errors due to mis┬¡
understanding or ambiguity in the prompts. The final script is presented below.
1
2
Sub UpdateToDoList()
3
Dim wsInput As Worksheet , wsData As Worksheet , wsToDo As Worksheet
4
Dim lastRow As Long, toDoRow As Long, dataRow As Long
5
Dim actionCol As Integer
6
Dim i As Integer
7
Dim shouldCopy As Boolean
8
9
' Define worksheets
10
Set wsInput = ThisWorkbook.Sheets("Input")
11
Set wsData = ThisWorkbook.Sheets("E1ClimateChange")
12
Set wsToDo = ThisWorkbook.Sheets("ToDo")
13
14
' Disable screen updating and automatic calculations
15
Application.ScreenUpdating = False
16
Application.Calculation = xlCalculationManual
17
18
' Clear existing data and formatting in ToDo sheet, preserving headers
19
With wsToDo
20
.Cells(2, 1).Resize(.Rows.Count - 1, .Columns.Count).ClearContents
21
.Cells(2, 1).Resize(.Rows.Count - 1, .Columns.Count).ClearFormats
22
.Rows(1).Font.Bold = True ' Optionally reapply header formatting
23
End With
24
25
' Find last row of data in E1ClimateChange
26
lastRow = wsData.Cells(wsData.Rows.Count, 1).End(xlUp).Row
27
toDoRow = 2 ' Start copying data to second row in ToDo sheet
28
29
' Loop through data rows to find rows where all selected actions are missing "x
"
30
For dataRow = 2 To lastRow
31
shouldCopy = True ' Initialize the flag to True, assume it needs copying
unless proven otherwise
32
For i = 1 To 4
33
actionCol = 3 + i ' Adjust for columns D, E, F, G (columns 4, 5, 6, 7)
34
If wsInput.Cells(4 + i, 1).Value = True And wsData.Cells(dataRow ,
actionCol).Value = "x" Then
35
shouldCopy = False ' If any selected column has "x", set flag to
False
36
Exit For ' No need to check further if any "x" is found
37
End If
38
Next i
39
40
' Copy the row if shouldCopy flag is still True after checking all relevant
columns
41
If shouldCopy Then
42
' Copy both values and formats for the first 7 columns
43
wsData.Rows(dataRow).Columns("A:G").Copy
44
wsToDo.Rows(toDoRow).Columns("A:G").PasteSpecial Paste:=
xlPasteValuesAndNumberFormats
42
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:51==
45
wsToDo.Rows(toDoRow).Columns("A:G").PasteSpecial Paste:=xlPasteFormats
46
toDoRow = toDoRow + 1
47
End If
48
Next dataRow
49
50
' Clear clipboard and restore screen updating and calculation settings
51
Application.CutCopyMode = False
52
Application.ScreenUpdating = True
53
Application.Calculation = xlCalculationAutomatic
54
End Sub
Listing 3.6: Third function of Gap┬¡analysis script
The UpdateToDoList subroutine(sub) is a process designed to update a ÔÇØToDoÔÇØ worksheet
based on specific criteria from the three worksheets: ÔÇØInput,ÔÇØ ÔÇØE1ClimateChange,ÔÇØ and ÔÇØToDo.ÔÇØ
It temporarily disables screen updating and automatic calculations to make the run time more
efficient during the execution of the sub. It then clears the existing data and formatting in the
ÔÇØToDoÔÇØ sheet , except for the headers.
The sub then identifies the last row of data in the ÔÇØE1ClimateChangeÔÇØ worksheet and initializes
the starting row for copying data in the ÔÇØToDoÔÇØ worksheet. It then iterates through each row in
ÔÇØE1ClimateChangeÔÇØ, checking specific columns (D, E, F, G) to determine whether the row should
be copied or not. This decision is based on the absence of an ÔÇØxÔÇØ in the selected columns, which
correspond to actions indicated in the ÔÇØInputÔÇØ worksheet.
If a row meets the criteria (i.e., no ÔÇØxÔÇØ in the relevant columns), the sub copies the values, number
formats, and other formats from the first seven columns (A) of the ÔÇØE1ClimateChangeÔÇØ work┬¡
sheet to the ÔÇØToDoÔÇØ worksheet. This process continues for all relevant rows. Finally, the sub┬¡
routine clears the clipboard and restores the original screen updating and calculation settings
to ensure normal Excel functionality resumes. This method ensures that the ÔÇØToDoÔÇØ worksheet
is accurately and efficiently updated based on the specified criteria.
3.2.6.3
Verification
After the development of the Excel tool it needed to be verified by the industry. This was done by
in┬¡person meetings with expert 1 and 2 from PFA Pension and AP Pension. The reason behind
choosing these pension funds to verify the tool was because they both have a significant amount
of their assets in property. They represent multiple functions in the building industry such as
development, administration, and straight ownership. The meetings were structured by asking
the questions presented below in fig. 3.13. These were used to get feedback of potential wins
and potential risks of using the tool.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.13: Questions for verification
The feedback was discussed with the companies and the tool was updated accordingly. Due
to the time constraints on this project the decision to stop updating the tool was made after the
last meeting because the goal of this project is not creating a tool for companies but a proxy of
their digitalization level and a way of testing where and how it is possible to implement artificial
intelligence in the industry.
3.2.7
Recap
As mentioned earlier, this research aimed at exploring how companies in the building industry
could potentially manage the integration of CSRD and AI, particularly given their lag in digital┬¡
ization. The methodology adopted was inherently iterative, adapting to the rapid evolution of
both CSRD and AI, reflecting the same methodology, that companies will have to apply when
working in this fast developing cross section. This methodology involved developing and testing
four distinct approaches, each tailored to address potential wins and challenges associated with
using AI to address challenges related to CSRD.
The methodology above highlights the need for continual adaptation due to the dynamic nature
of CSRD. Stakeholder interviews were crucial for understanding the industryÔÇÖs current digital
maturity and aligning the proposed approaches with practical needs.
The methods used within each approach were detailed, showcasing the development and val┬¡
idation processes. For instance, Approach 1 involved a comprehensive consistency analysis
of AI models using an existing script adapted for CSRD┬¡specific data. Approach 2 focused on
optimizing DMA through industry interviews and literature reviews, leading to the creation of a
preliminary assessment tool. Approach 3 developed an automatic gap analysis tool to iden┬¡
tify documentation gaps efficiently, leveraging Python scripting and API connections. Finally,
Approach 4 created an Excel┬¡based tool to highlight synergies between various sustainability
actions and CSRD requirements, verified through consultations with industry experts.
Throughout these approaches, the importance of iterative development and industry validation
was underscored, ensuring that the tools and approaches remained relevant and practical for
real┬¡world application. This chapter has provided a comprehensive overview of the methodolo┬¡
gies and methods used to develop and validate AI and CSRD integration strategies.
The following chapter will investigate the outcomes of these approaches, analyzing their effec┬¡
tiveness and implementation timelines within the building industry. This analysis will highlight
44
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:53==
the potential benefits and risks associated with integrating AI into CSRD processes, offering a
roadmap for future implementation.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
45
==PAGE:54==
4
Findings
4.1
Industry Status on CSRD Implementation
Due to the race between the implementation of CSRD in Danish law and the development of
this thesis, there have been changes along the way. Initially, the focus was on large companies
as a method to understand how AI and CSRD could be implemented in businesses. However,
due to the rapid advancement of CSRD for large companies and the associated time pressure,
the results of the approaches might have highest relevance for small and medium sized enter┬¡
prises (SMEs) because they have not started their CSRD implementation yet. This shift does
not diminish the relevance of the methodology, nor does it imply that it is irrelevant for large
companies. It simply means that the current priority for large companies is to implement CSRD
and align their organizations with the new requirements, making implementation of the findings
a possible secondary priority.
The interviews represent large companies which has proven to be ideal, as they can reflect
on their experiences and better verify the various approaches this thesis has gone through.
This section will analyze the three interviews to find out the main tendencies that lead up to the
approaches. Interviews can be found in the digital appendix.
4.1.1
Interview with Expert A
The first interview was with Expert A, a technical supervisor from RFBB. RFBB is a non┬¡profit
member organisation to enhance documentation of sustainability in the building and construc┬¡
tion industry. RFBB mainly offers services of DGNB certification and associated conformity
checks. While an increasing amount of EU laws expands to the Danish building industry, initia┬¡
tives like the EU Taxonomy has now become an offering by RFBB. In continuation of this, RFBB
has made a guide of how DGNB and EU Taxonomy can be used for CSRD and sustainability
reporting in general [58].
The interview with Expert A, was crucial in understanding if actions such as DGNB and the EU
Taxonomy in the building industry could in fact be connected to their CSRD obligations. Despite
RFBB being a non┬¡profit member organization without an immediate need to integrate CSRD
into their own reports, they recognize the urgency in developing guidance and tools for their
member companies, who must comply with CSRD by 2025.
4.1.1.1
Data Collection
One of the main themes discussed was data collection. Expert A highlighted the differences in
the nature of data points between building┬¡level certifications like DGNB and the requirements
of CSRD:
ÔÇØWe have to differentiate between the nature of the data points. We usually work with
technical criteria at building level, but now with the CSRD we have to look at
DGNB┬¡certifications and EU┬¡Taxonomy, which we also offer, as strategy toolsÔÇØ.
┬¡ Expert A
With CSRD encompassing approximately 1140 data points, ensuring these are accurately in┬¡
corporated into a companyÔÇÖs reporting is a significant challenge. DGNB and EU Taxonomy data
points are evaluated on a building and investment level, respectively, not on a consolidated
company level. This complexity underscores the difficulty in creating sector┬¡specific tools, as
organizational structures and strategies can vary widely within the same sector.
46
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:55==
4.1.1.2
Double Materiality Assessment (DMA)
The interview also focused on the DMA, one of the first critical step in CSRD compliance. Ex┬¡
pert A noted the challenges in developing universal tools for DMA due to its variability across
industries:
ÔÇØThere is nobody who is or can be CSRD┬¡experts yet, due to the simple fact of it being too
early in the implementation stageÔÇØ.
┬¡ Expert A
Conducting a DMA involves mapping the entire value chain, which is particularly challenging
for organizations like RFBB to provide guidance in. Although they have specialists in specific
areas, such as chemistry in building materials, this expertise does not translate directly to CSRD
requirements. This lack of expertise raises questions about their ability to develop effective
guides for CSRD, a topic further explored in section 4.7.
4.1.1.3
Sector┬¡specific considerations and AI automation
The insights gained from the approaches highlight the potential for AI to assist in CSRD report┬¡
ing. However, given the early stages of CSRD implementation and the digital immaturity of the
building industry, a fully automated AI solution may be premature. Instead, AI can be used to
develop supportive tools, such as those created in this thesis, to assist with specific tasks like
data collection and gap analysis. These tools can bridge the gap between existing capabili┬¡
ties and the comprehensive requirements of CSRD, helping companies to gradually build their
expertise and digital maturity.
4.1.2
Interview with Expert B ┬¡ CSRD from a strategic perspective
The second interview was conducted with the Group Head of Sustainability at Sweco Group,
a consulting firm in the building industry. Although Sweco Group has no direct Scope 3 emis┬¡
sions, they have a significantly impact on their clientsÔÇÖ Scope 3 emissions through their advisory
services. This positions them as a crucial player in addressing CSRD challenges, especially in
how to implement sector specific ESRSs.
4.1.2.1
Sector┬¡Specific Challenges
Even with EFRAGÔÇÖs potential upcoming sector┬¡specific ESRSs, consulting companies like Sweco
Group face difficulties in aligning their services. Their operations span multiple sectors without
being major CO2 contributors themselves. This emphasizes the need for consultants to pro┬¡
vide sector┬¡specific advice while acknowledging their indirect impact on CO2 emissions through
client guidance.
ÔÇ£ThatÔÇÖs the problem here. If EFRAG includes consulting companies into the building sector or
into the transport sector, then itÔÇÖs not representative, because we ourselves are not the main
contributor to CO2.ÔÇØ
┬¡ Expert B
4.1.2.2
CSRD Implementation
CSRD is fundamentally a strategy tool designed to shift companies towards valuing sustainabil┬¡
ity alongside profit, not solely a compliance mechanism for data points. This makes it essential
for companies to involve consultants from diverse industries when developing their, DMA and
annual reports, as CSRD encompasses strategic and technical criteria on a consolidated level.
Implementing CSRD in large companies involves a steep learning curve, with the DMA being
one of the most urgent challenges. Companies struggle to balance financial risks and sustain┬¡
ability equally, highlighting a gap in expertise at this intersection.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
47
==PAGE:56==
ÔÇ£ItÔÇÖs a very new perspective because of its double materiality aspects. You have to relate to
the financial risks you might have, and itÔÇÖs not always that integrated because sustainability
has usually been, or is still, a very separate topic or a separate organization.ÔÇØ
┬¡ Expert B
A significant misconception is that CSRD is solely about data points. In reality, it requires a
holistic approach to integrate sustainability into business operations and strategies. From a
technical consultancy perspective, while data points are tangible actions, revising a business
strategy to incorporate sustainability is a more complex and nuanced task. This interview con┬¡
firmed the urgent areas and overall dilemmas previously identified, reinforcing the need for a
comprehensive approach to CSRD implementation in the building industry.
4.1.3
Interview with Expert C┬¡ CSRD from a corporate perspective
To understand the execution of the CSRD in the building industry and its implications, an in┬¡
terview was conducted with MT H├©jgaard Holding A/S (MTHH). MTHH have proactively begun
their CSRD journey, recognizing the significant time required to implement new strategic ac┬¡
tions. The findings from this interview confirm tendencies observed in previous discussions
and provide specific insights from an execution perspective. The main themes identified were
data collection, CSRD complexity, and AI potential.
4.1.3.1
Data Collection
From a corporate perspective, CSRD involves extensive data collection, consolidation, and en┬¡
suring data credibility. As a holding company, MTHH must report on a consolidated level for all
its entities, including MT H├©jgaard Danmark and Enem├Ğrke & Petersen A/S. This makes MTHH
a valuable case study, representing various facets of the building industry and the complexity
of sector┬¡specific reporting. MT H├©jgaard Danmark focuses on developing, constructing, and
renovating buildings, while Enem├Ğrke & Petersen A/S operates as a contracting business. All
data from their subsidiary companies must be gathered and reported at a consolidated level due
to CSRD requirements. This process is extremely time┬¡consuming and necessitates the imple┬¡
mentation of new data flows across their companies, along with an extensive review process to
ensure data accuracy.
ÔÇØWe used a large amount of time to dive into data and reviewing it with external auditÔÇØ.
┬¡ Expert C
4.1.3.2
Complexity of CSRD
The company structure also underscores the complexity of CSRD in large organizations. Un┬¡
derstanding and interpreting CSRD requirements in the building sector is challenging due to
their broad applicability across various companies. Aligning existing ESG data and policies
with CSRD standards has required significant effort and coordination.
ÔÇØIn other words, we have spent an enormous amount of time just reading and understanding
what the requirements entailed. That is also something we have talked to many people in the
industry about, if it could have been made a little bit more user┬¡friendly, it would have been a
big helpÔÇØ.
┬¡ Expert C
4.1.3.3
AI Potential
In this context, AI and automation present promising solutions. AI can significantly streamline
the process of understanding and implementing regulatory requirements. For instance, NLP
48
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:57==
capabilities of AI systems like GPT┬¡4 can be employed to analyse and simplify dense regulatory
texts, making them more user┬¡friendly. This can reduce the initial time spent on understanding
requirements, allowing companies to allocate more resources to implementation and compli┬¡
ance. Specifically, the consistency in CSRD prompt designing approach from the thesis aligns
with this potential. The approach aimed to ensure that AI models, like those used in ChatGPT,
provide consistent and reliable outputs for CSRD┬¡specific queries, thereby enhancing trustwor┬¡
thiness in AI applications for regulatory compliance.
The proactive approach of MTHH and the insights gained from their experience provide valu┬¡
able lessons for the broader industry in navigating CSRD implementation. The challenges high┬¡
lighted by MTHH, particularly in data collection and understanding complex regulatory require┬¡
ments, underscore the potential of AI tools to optimize these processes. However, the com┬¡
plexity and novelty of CSRD also indicate that a one┬¡size┬¡fits┬¡all AI solution may not be feasible.
Instead, customized AI tools that can adapt to specific company structures and needs will be
crucial for successful implementation.
4.1.4
Key insights from interviews
Based on the three interviews, integrating the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD)
in the building sector presents several key challenges and opportunities. The complexity of
this integration is exacerbated by the requirement of the DMA, which requires companies to
map their entire value chain to understand both financial risks and societal and environmental
impacts. Leveraging existing data is crucial to streamline this process, as CSRD involves ap┬¡
proximately 1140 data points. Companies face significant challenges in aligning their existing
ESG data with the new CSRD standards, underscoring the need for an effective gap analysis
approach.
Sector┬¡specific challenges further complicate CSRD integration. The building sector must adopt
sector┬¡specific metrics and standards. Consulting firms like Sweco Group navigate the complex┬¡
ity of indirect CO2 contributions through their clients, while construction companies like MT H├©j┬¡
gaard Holding A/S must consolidate diverse data sources across multiple subsidiaries. Scope
3 emissions and data consolidation are particularly challenging due to the variety of sources
and the extensive nature of the data required.
AI and automation, including tools like ChatGPT, could play a valuable role in enhancing data
collection, analysis, validation, and reporting efficiency. AI can assist in simplifying regulatory
texts, identifying relevant data points, and ensuring data accuracy. It can also monitor trends in
sustainability reports, helping companies streamline their processes.
In summary, the integration of CSRD involves complex processes, particularly DMA, and sector┬¡
specific challenges, especially in Scope 3 emissions and data consolidation. AI and automation
are crucial facilitators, helping companies manage data collection, ensure compliance, and en┬¡
hance reporting efficiency. Addressing these tendencies will help companies in the building
sector navigate CSRD implementation more effectively.
The insights from the interviews and research indicate that while AI holds significant promise for
optimizing CSRD processes, there are substantial challenges to address. Developing sector┬¡
specific tools and methodologies that consider the unique requirements and digital maturity of
the building industry is one of the most crucial ones of these. The following chapter will delve
deeper into the outcomes of the various approaches and their implementation timelines and risk
of implementing them too early within the building industry.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
49
==PAGE:58==
4.2
Approach ┬¡ 1: Ensuring Consistency in CSRD Prompt Design
This first approach arose from the literature review, reviewing the work done by Myeongjun Erik
Jang. Two NLP Scientist & Engineers from Oxford University investigating the trustworthiness of
ChatGPT and GPT┬¡4 through consistency analysis. Their analysis shows that both GPT models
shows good language understanding and reasoning ability, however they show a tendency to fall
short when giving logically consistent predictions. This means that the models are not efficient
in explaining the reasoning behind its answers, creating a lack of trustworthiness in the answers.
The reason behind that paper being interesting for this thesis is because the majority of Danish
companies implementing AI services are based on an API connection to ChatGPT. Meaning
that the language model they use is from OpenAI and is not a company created language
model. This is why it is very important to know the limitations, consistencies and risks of using
enterprise AI in the early implementation stages especially in the combination of a new area
like CSRD. This is one of the main reasons behind testing model consistency within a specific
subject, CSRD.
4.2.1
Results and direction for next approach
With a fraction of the complete dataset transformed into CSRD specific sentences, the tsv┬¡file
was loaded into the script directory, meaning that the script would run through the sentences
and check for consistency. However, when running the script solely using the MRPC dataset
the result of the MRPC Negation inconsistency is 0.86%. This number illustrates that 0.14% of
the predicted consistency is in fact met and the rest is not a match between the predicted and
the actual original sentence. When running the script for the CSRD┬¡specific dataset it returns
the same 0.86 result.
It became evident that it is not possible to replace only one tsv┬¡file in the BECEL dataset because
it is in inference with the background predicted output for the MRPC task which it compares to
the datasets. So if the predictions are not changed the results will always be the same. One
might wonder ÔÇØwhy not change the predictions then?ÔÇØ. Because it is extremely difficult to get a
yes/no answer to a CSRD┬¡specific question due to the users not being able to formulate specific
questions. At the same time also making it difficult to make a new predicted file to compare the
sentences with. In other words the key result was that it was too early to test for inconsistency
in the field of CSRD due to premature implementation and no concrete ÔÇØpromptsÔÇØ.
Another important thing to remember when using an approach from another study is to re┬¡
member the limitations. In the work of Jang one of the major limitations are the length of the
documents that it evaluates and the limitations due to the heavy usage of ChatGPT at the time
the study was made, making it difficult to create original test cases.
With this new knowledge, this thesis had to change its scope due to the difficulty of creating a
new CSRD language model with related predictions.
Although this approach was a dead┬¡end for this thesis it still reflects the importance of a trust┬¡
worthy AI application. Consistency is crucial, as any lack thereof introduces significant risks.
4.3
Approach ┬¡ 2: Double Materiality Assessment
With the knowledge of missing information concerning CSRD it is investigated into which urgent
areas AI potentially could be integrated and where the data foundation was in place. These
areas was assessed through the performed interviews and the proposed challenges mentioned
by the interviewees.
50
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:59==
The first challenge mentioned, also the first step in integrating CSRD, is making the companyÔÇÖs
DMA. At the time the interviews was conducted, in beginning of February, the majority of com┬¡
panies was in the DMA phase and some in the gap┬¡analysis phase.
The main goal of this approach was to understand how the outcome of a companyÔÇÖs DMA was
linked to the ESRSs and based on that make a DMA methodology assessment for companies in
the building industry. ÔÇØUpdate: EFRAG has published an implementation Guide for DMA, May
31stÔÇØ.
The reason behind the importance of a shared direction in the developed DMAs is because it
creates the basis of which sustainability matters that are material for companies in the same
industry. Hence the basis of comparison will be weak if it varies too much from company to
company within the same industry and then becomes incomparable.
The interview quickly showed a pattern that it was too difficult to make a DMA methodology.
However, one major challenge the interviewees mentioned was the lack of knowledge and un┬¡
derstanding within the DMA. In March 2023 EFRAG published three IG drafts for respectively,
Materiality Assessment, Value chain, and List of ESRS data points, open for public feedback
until 2nd of February 2024[54]. Despite the available drafts, interviewees shared a tendency of
being hesitant to use premature methods due to the possibility of major changes to the drafts.
The reason that you see that companies are still doing the double materiality is due to the fact
that the ESRS was not final until it was published July last year, and then the final decision
was made in December. So it is not totally unreasonable. [...] You donÔÇÖt want to do the work if
they(red. EFRAG) need to do it redo it because something changes.
Expert B ┬¡ Sweco Group
This issue was also highlighted as a key reason why companies were still conducting DMAs
in March. The delay in DMAs and the lack of official guidelines naturally postpone the im┬¡
plementation of CSRD. Large companies tend to follow the lead of even larger ones, and the
biggest companies await legislation. However, they cannot afford to wait for legislation to take
effect, emphasizing the importance of creating a benchmark for early processes like materiality
assessment.
To understand how the publication of the implementation guidelines potentially could effect the
building industry the feedback is presented below.
4.3.1
Feedback session ┬¡ Deloitte
The feedback from Deloitte mentions concerns about misalignment between materiality require┬¡
ments presented in the ESRS and the materiality requirements set out in the ISSB. This align┬¡
ment is crucial because this is the foundation of CSRD. To align sustainable impacts with an
undertakingÔÇÖs financial activity. Deloitte recognises that EFRAG attempts to align the definition
of financial materiality in the ESRS with the ISSBÔÇÖs definition, but raise concern about the IG
potentially referring to separation of the IROs, when they are in fact interrelated according to the
ISSB. The same concern applies to the VCIG (Value Chain Implementation Guide). To recap
the feedback given by Deloitte for the MAIG the most relevant and critical points are collected
in table 4.1.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
51
==PAGE:60==
Table 4.1: Deloitte feedback key points
Deloitte has also provided feedback for the VCIG together with an appendix of detailed com┬¡
ments with related recommendations. These can be found in appendix B. The feedback pro┬¡
vided by Deloitte had focus on the accounting and financial perspective of the ESRSs. To gain
knowledge about the challenges from an industry perspective the feedback provided by DI is
analyzed below.
4.3.2
Feedback session ┬¡ Confederation of Danish Industry
The Confederation of Danish Industry organization represents the interests of the business
community in Denmark. It is the largest and most influential organization of its kind in Denmark,
with a wide┬¡ranging membership that includes both large and small companies across various
industries.
DI plays a significant role in shaping economic and industrial policies in Denmark, advocat┬¡
ing for favorable business conditions, promoting innovation, and supporting initiatives aimed
at enhancing competitiveness and growth. The organization engages in dialogue with govern┬¡
ment authorities, policymakers, and other stakeholders to address issues relevant to the Danish
economy and business environment. This is exactly the reason behind why their feedback to
EFRAGs drafts could have a significant influence on the adaption of the CSRD in Danish law.
DIÔÇÖs biggest concern is that the steps necessary in performing MA is not comprehensive enough
in the MAIG. They propose the implementation of an additional step that is ÔÇØdefining the business
modelÔÇØ before ÔÇØDefining the Value ChainÔÇØ because when linking the business model to the VC
there is a potential in having different IROs identified which will affect the use of exemptions
in article 19(a) and article 29(a) in the Directive 2013/34/EU (referred to as the ÔÇ£Accounting
DirectiveÔÇØ). DIÔÇÖs feedback can be found in appendix C.
DI also mentioned the importance of making sure correct structure of the documents, interde┬¡
pendencies and references between sections. In the absence of this, the overview and un┬¡
derstanding of the EU documents gets difficult to navigate in, increasing the risks of mistakes.
This leads to the final key take away from the DI feedback being that the language of the MAIG
and other EFRAG documents can be difficult to understand, particularly in the descriptions of
52
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:61==
financial materiality. In the table below DIÔÇÖs concerns and recommendations are listed for future
use.
Table 4.2: DI feedback key points
DI have made their own guide to double materiality assessment for large companies[59]. Al┬¡
though the MAIG is not a requirement but a guide to how DMA can be executed, it is still im┬¡
portant that the different guidesÔÇÖ methods are somewhat similar. It will be assumed that due to
EFRAGÔÇÖs publication of the ESRSs their authority, when they publish their IGs, will be prioritised
by companies. There are currently no news related the publication of EFRAGÔÇÖs implementation
guides.
4.3.3
Results and direction for next approach
The industry interviews and the analysis of the feedback session on the MAIG from EFRAG,
provided valuable insights into the complexity of performing a double materiality assessment.
Here it quickly became evident that the execution of a DMA not only requires extensive knowl┬¡
edge within the undertakings up┬¡ and downstream value chain, but it also requires companies
to have a very clear business model before the scope of the value chain can be made. It was
also made clear that each assessment of the double materiality is a judgement call made by
the company, making it difficult to make a guide that fits all sectors and companies.
Finally as Deloitte mentions on page two of their feedback, in appendix B, DMA is a non┬¡linear
process and that an undertaking should begin with their already identified risks and opportuni┬¡
ties, that have been discovered through existing governance and risk management processes.
With this in mind, the development of a benchmark could potential be feasible however the sub┬¡
jectivity in the companies would reach a point where it gets very difficult to find tendencies and
there is a risk of neglecting key risks and opportunities if companies use a common benchmark.
These findings led to another dead┬¡end for now, however still obtaining valuable insights con┬¡
cerning the risks associated with performing the DMA and knowledge of how the CSRD im┬¡
plementation strategy can look like. As different companies begins to provide services within
DMA guide and tools it is very important to know the associated risks affecting the undertakingÔÇÖs
CSRD and AI in the building industry
53
==PAGE:62==
business model and up┬¡ and downstream value chain in the case of missed interdependenceÔÇÖs
between standards and regulations.
In conclusion it is clear that it is not feasible to develop a DMA tool for all companies within
the building sector when there is no clear implemented guidance or idea of how it should be
performed. This could have been evaluated through a tendency analysis however there were
few to none companies who had completed their DMA and willing to show it at the time of
developing this approach. With this new information on the development of the initial stage of
the CSRD it was clear to see that if a tool should be developed it could not be based on industry
generated prompts, value chain analysis and discussions it needed to be based on company
data and more factual insights, which leads to the Approach 3.
4.4
Approach ┬¡ 3: Gap analysis
Based on the second approach valuable information in the integration of CSRD in a company
and the following challenges lead the way into the third approach. The findings of lacking data
and uncertainties in understanding requirements are key in performing a gap analysis which is
the natural next step to take after the preparation of a companyÔÇÖs double materiality assessment.
In a gap analysis the undertaking maps out where it could have potential existing data that could
be used as documentation for the CSRD disclosure requirements.
From the interviews with MTHH, AP Pension and Sweco Group their CSRD process was dis┬¡
cussed and the main challenge after the DMA was the next step in finding out existing data
versus new data. This can be very comprehensive work because if the data is not already a
part of the undertakingÔÇÖs process stream it could be an obvious area to connect AI and CSRD.
The two biggest challenges for the companies within this challenge were the time associated
with performing a gap analysis task and the knowledge and understanding of the disclosure re┬¡
quirements from the ESRSs. Through the first and second approach, general usage of GPT has
been proven possible to use assisted by factual data and proper prompting to compare inputs
of existing data. A comparison is exactly what the companies are performing when doing a gap
analysis why the main goal of this approach was to make an automated gap┬¡analysis tool that
understands the ESRS 1, 2 and E1 and can compare the related disclosure requirements that
have been found material through the process above, with all the relevant data of the company.
4.4.1
Results and direction for next approach
The results of creating and running the Gap┬¡analysis script, as described in section 3.2.5, re┬¡
vealed multiple implications. To address and mitigate these implications, various actions were
implemented to obtain reliable results from the gap analysis tool.
In the first iteration of running the Python script, a comparison between the PDF content and
Excel requirements (disclosure requirements from the ESRS) was missing. To improve this
comparison, a list of keywords related to CSRD was generated using an API connection to
OpenAIÔÇÖs server. However, these automatically generated keywords were difficult to validate
due to the lack of transparency in the serverÔÇÖs processesÔÇöa common issue with AI tools.
Given the transparency issue with the API┬¡generated keywords, a specific list of keywords re┬¡
lated to each disclosure requirement was manually created, resulting in a functional script.
Although the script was running the comparisons were not correct when manually verifying
the outputs, due to random produced results. When investigating the processes within the
script (by printing each output) it became evident that the GPT┬¡3 AI model, was hallucinating
when comparing keywords to the extracted words from the PDFs. The extracted words were
often arranged arbitrarily, leading to nonsensical sentences such as ÔÇØCoupon cards containing
54
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:63==
savings for daily snacks, drinks, meals [...]ÔÇØ. The reasons behind a modelÔÇÖs hallucinations can
be many however in the case of CSRD it is crucial for the model to understand and interpret
the disclosure requirements and relate it to the data presented in the PDFs. It is clear that the
model, presented in fig. 4.1, cannot understand the complexity of CSRD. Most likely because
the model does not have any knowledge about CSRD yet.
Figure 4.1: GPT┬¡3 hallucinations
One way of limiting hallucinations are by describing the role of the chatbot(GPT). This could be
by changing the prompt in line 11 of the listing 3.4, to ÔÇØyou are a CSRD specialists given the...[]ÔÇØ.
However, this approach can lead to different outputs depending on the prompt, making it chal┬¡
lenging to ensure consistency across different users. More importantly, this method requires
that the database/server has knowledge about CSRD.
The results highlight the need for a strong data foundation to create useful outputs, akin to how
humans learnÔÇöthrough accumulating knowledge, making mistakes, and undergoing trial and
error. In the early stages of CSRD implementation, humans will naturally be more knowledge┬¡
able than any AI due to the lack of a comprehensive CSRD database for the AI to learn from.
Over time, as more data becomes available, AI tools and engines could eventually become
CSRD specialists.
In short AI have been seen very useful in optimising processes where the data foundation is
strong, like OpenAIÔÇÖs ChatGPT. However, we do not see AI models performing tasks that are
new to humans as well. Hence, to be able to find out how ChatGPT can be used in a highly
immature industry with a very narrow data foundation, a GPT model is not implemented directly
in the next approach due to the immature state of the industry and limited data, however, it is
still used for developing the tool. By using GPT indirectly, to create VBA scripts it can be verified
if the output is correct or not immediately, with the benefit of making the finished tool applicable
in the building industry, where Excel is the preferred tool.
4.5
Approach ┬¡ 4: Synergies
The performed interviews with the industry, showed that their preferred tools are rather sim┬¡
ple Excel sheets with manual inputs. Looking at CSRD, these company created Excel sheets
are based on EFRAGÔÇÖs Excel sheet with the ESRSs data points. At the moment, EFRAGÔÇÖs
CSRD and AI in the building industry
55
==PAGE:64==
Excel sheet is still a draft meaning it is not adopted and potentially could be up for revision or
changes.ÔÇØUpdate ┬¡ draft implemented 31/05/2024). However, it is a place to start the develop┬¡
ment of a more customized sheet for companies with CSRD obligations.
To make sure synergies to existing Excel tools are incorporated in this approach, the investi┬¡
gation of the guide made by RFBB showed to be less useful because of the misunderstanding
between the scope of CSRD, EU Taxonomy and DGNB. CSRD is made on a consolidated com┬¡
pany level where the parent company is responsible for CSRD implementation in the companyÔÇÖs
annual report. The EU Taxonomy is an assessment of whether or not an economic activity/in┬¡
vestment can be considered sustainable. Lastly, DGNB is a voluntary assessment of whether
a building meets the requirements verified by RFBB. Figure4.2 illustrates how the three ac┬¡
tions, RFBB compares in their guide, in essence donÔÇÖt have the same goal and scope, making
it impossible to compare and misleading when calling it a ÔÇØguideÔÇØ.
Figure 4.2: Difference of application goal
This finding led to the decision of not using their guide, and instead, create a thesis┬¡specific
tool that focuses on actions at the same level as CSRD. However, it is important to recognize
the potential synergies between building┬¡level actions, like those from DGNB, and CSRD. For
example, a building LCA from DGNB or EU Taxonomy can provide useful input for ESRS E1┬¡6
Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 in CSRD. However a building LCA is just a fraction of the total carbon
accounting required by the CSRD. Understanding this premise is key to recognizing and harvest
these potential synergies.
The tool proved to be useful for companies in the building industry, by helping them understand
CSRD within this context and potentially serving as an investment strategy tool to evaluate
opportunities in performing actions like GRESB assessments, complying with the EU Taxonomy,
setting targets through Science Based Target initiative, or DGNB, for their portfolio projects or
investments.
The verification process of the tool, revealed that an Excel tool aligns with the building industryÔÇÖs
current digitalization level. It is feasible for completion of the tool and offers clear implemen┬¡
tation potential. For companies to adopt this tool, it needs to be integrated into their existing
Excel sheets and workflows. Although the tool serves more as a ÔÇØlookupÔÇØ tool rather than fully
simplifying the CSRD process, its accessibility and ease of use are crucial for companies to
prioritize this or future tools.
Lastly, a key finding through this approach is, that when inputting data manually the user will
56
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:65==
be forced to gain the required knowledge of other EU legislation with synergies to CSRD that
either are a prerequisite for compliance or hold potential for future compliance. In instance, this
could be EU Taxonomy where one of the requirements in CSRD is to disclose the undertakingÔÇÖs
sustainability metrics related to their economic activities. To do this the users must be aware
of the interrelations between EUT and CSRD. Like the assessment of sustainability economic
activities originates from the EU Taxonomy where it is mandatory to disclose the share of their
turnover, CapEx and OpEx. Why the key financial figures in CSRD comes from the EU Tax┬¡
onomy[11]. To ensure these synergies, related to EU legislation, are taken care of, it requires
huge knowledge about not only CSRD, but also the connecting legislation
The problem concerning the misconception of what the industry is willing to accept and apply
(excel tool) versus what is possible to implement (AI tool), will be further discussed in section 4.7.
4.6
Consolidated result of above
When summarizing and looking at the process this project has been through, table 4.3, to find
out which challenges the building industry faces within CSRD and how and where it is possible
to implement AI solutions to address these challenges, an overall problem is revealed: The
digital immaturity in the building industry. Below the consolidated results are compared with
their presumed digitized level required to ensure successful implementation.
Table 4.3: Approaches and potential wins and concerns
The double materiality assessment, a crucial requirement for CSRD compliance, involves map┬¡
ping the entire value chain to understand financial risks and societal and environmental im┬¡
pacts. This process is particularly challenging due to industry variability and the extensive data
required. Companies struggle to align their existing ESG data with the new CSRD standards,
underscoring the need for effective gap analysis and sector┬¡specific methodologies.
Using an AI solution like ChatGPT to address this challenge poses significant risks. The main
issue is the lack of data for the language model, which can result in inaccurate or incomplete
outputs. This corresponds to hiring an under┬¡qualified person for a critical job. Since the CSRD
CSRD and AI in the building industry
57
==PAGE:66==
reporting scope depends on the accuracy of the materiality assessment, early mistakes made
by an immature model could lead to substantial consequences. Companies may need to update
their CSRD┬¡aligned annual reports to reflect their true sustainability matters accurately.
These risks extend beyond CSRD obligations and affect the entire value chain. CSRD, SFDR,
and the EU Taxonomy are becoming critical competitive advantages for companies and their
investors. Significant errors in annual reports could negatively impact the companyÔÇÖs reputation
and investor confidence.
The building sector faces unique challenges in adopting CSRD due to its need for sector┬¡specific
metrics and standards. Consulting firms like Sweco Group must navigate the complexities of
indirect Scope 3 emissions through their clients, while construction companies like MT H├©jgaard
Holding A/S must consolidate their CO2 data sources across multiple subsidiaries. The scope
of emissions and data consolidation is particularly demanding due to the variety and volume of
data required.
Implementing AI in multilateral and interdependent sectors introduces significant risks. The
building industry relies heavily on multidisciplinary collaboration between consultants and con┬¡
tractors, which complicates the application of sector┬¡specific ESRSs. If these standards divide
key areas of dependency, it becomes challenging to compare sustainability efforts accurately,
as these entities operate differently in the market. An AI model must understand the intricate
interdependencies and relationships within CSRD, an area still evolving and not fully compre┬¡
hended by humans. This complexity increases the likelihood of producing outputs that are
inaccurate or unusable.
AI tools, including ChatGPT, show significant promise in enhancing data collection, analysis,
validation, and reporting efficiency. AI can simplify regulatory texts, identify relevant data points,
and ensure data accuracy. Additionally, AI can monitor trends in sustainability reports, helping
companies streamline their processes when there is a significant annual reports to find tenden┬¡
cies in. However, a fully automated AI solution may be premature due to the industryÔÇÖs digital
immaturity.
The findings suggest that developing sector┬¡specific tools and methodologies is essential. These
tools should consider the unique requirements and digital maturity of the building industry. Cus┬¡
tomized AI tools that can adapt to specific company structures and needs will be crucial for
successful CSRD implementation. An Excel┬¡based tool developed in this thesis aligns well with
the current digitalization level of the building industry and offers clear implementation potential.
4.7
Road map for future implementation
There is no doubt about the implementation of AI in the building industry is possible and neces┬¡
sary, like other industries. However it is very important to minimize the potential risks associated
with solving CSRD related challenges with AI in a digitally immature industry. To minimize these
risks a road map of how a future implementation could look like in the building industry is pre┬¡
sented below in fig. 4.3.
58
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.3: Road map for implementation
This road map presents the necessary steps to take from the findings in approach 4 in order to
create a tool that is fully supported by AI. The first step is to make sure that the CSRD specialists
are in fact specialists. Meaning that they need to have an understanding of the synergies that
goes into the CSRD from other EU legislation and an understanding of the overarching purpose
of CSRD.
When understanding this, the foundation for the following steps is in place. Second step is to
advocate all companies to begin implementing CSRD into their annual reports. Not only to get
started due to the try and error method but most importantly because the data is necessary
for the following steps. These steps are relatively easy and cheap due to the fact that knowl┬¡
edge gaining and sharing is hopefully already an integral part of the team who performs the
consolidated annual reporting.
The third step is related to step 2 by gathering data and making sure that the data structures in
the company are in a format that can be used for future AI tools. Naturally it is difficult collecting
data if there is none, thus a solution for this could be making a shared data server for all CSRD
data going into annual reports, similar to OpenAI that publish their ChatGPT and outsourced
their workforce to the society in order to train their model, simply because the expenses would
have been too high.
Step 4 and 5 are time┬¡consuming and expensive but are however the foundation of an AI tool.
This step either requires in house programmers or outsourcing the development. But having a
CSRD trained language model would give consistent and meaningful output and understand the
synergies between EU legislation and company data. It would also understand the connections
to other similar companies making it a potential competitive advantage for the companies with
CSRD LLMs. A trained LLM has little value if it canÔÇÖt update its knowledge to the changes in
the industry or in the CSRD. Why step 6 always will be the last step of an AI application.
Interestingly, the EU Commission has recently approved financial support to SMEs how devel┬¡
ops generative AI which enables the outsourcing of the development of AI tools [60]. What
becomes evident when looking at the road map is that it is not solely applicable in the building
industry. The proposed steps are relevant for all industries that have not implemented their own
language models or are very early in the GenAI implementation process.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
59
==PAGE:68==
5
Discussion
In order to create structure and clarity in this discussion of complex themes, the following sec┬¡
tion is split into three main parts, one discussing the limitations concerning the methodology
and used methods, a second part discussing systemic themes related to the CSRD/AI imple┬¡
mentation and lastly, a third part focusing solely on thesis┬¡specific themes.
Of possible systemic themes to include in this section the following have been chosen:
ÔÇó ÔÇØPsychological safetyÔÇØ in fulfilling CSRD obligations
ÔÇó Chasing a moving target
ÔÇó Digitalization, whether you want it or not
ÔÇó Deprivation of knowledge and learning
ÔÇó Ethical considerations
5.1
Limitations
This thesis and the underlying work has been characterized by many challenging unknowns
due to working in not only one, but two (AI and CSRD) fast developing areas, all while under
a time constraint. This naturally creates limitations to the presented method and methodology.
To shed light on these, the key limitations within the methodology, method and approaches are
presented below:
The development of the methodology originated from a strong personal curiosity of the two
main subjects of this thesis, AI and CSRD. Starting from a point of ÔÇØunknown unknowsÔÇØ, the
process of identifying the main problems through ad hoc methodology began. This trial and
error methodology has been useful in finding a solution, however it is not possible to say if there
are other superior solutions.
Had the work not been under a fixed time constraint, one could have considered applying a more
systematic, holistic methodology, as opposed to the ad hoc one, where the diverging phases
could have been longer, allowing for more information to be available. Making it possible to use
corporate reports, EU documents, and EFRAG drafts, which coincidentally were made final by
May 31st, taking the industry closer to a point of ÔÇØknown unknowsÔÇØ.
The testing of a potential AI tool has been hindered by publicly listed companiesÔÇÖ rush to comply
with CSRD requirements. In their eagerness, they have reverted to classical excel tools rather
than spending the time on exploring AI tools that potentially could help address the CSRD
challenges.
In continuation of the above, another limitation of this thesis, is its focus solely on CSRD and
AI from a building industryÔÇÖs point of view. Both areas, but especially CSRD, are relevant for all
sectors, thus focusing on only the building industry is not 100% accurate. The sector specific
ESRSs are not published yet, but when/if this happens they could potentially have a different
understanding and division of the building sector than the one outlined in this thesis, which
impairs the evidence of the found consequences of premature implementation of AI to solve
CSRD. This could have been solved by trying to contact EFRAG to hear how they are dividing
the consulting part of the building sector, however, they have not announced building sector
specific ESRS drafts yet, why they most likely would not know.
60
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:69==
When looking at limitations, specifically concerning the method used in this thesis, there is two
overarching limitations that surface. The first one being the interview group being too narrow
within the same sector. When investigating a subject like CSRD that effects all publicly listed
companies within a sector, it is not necessarily the same challenges that they all struggle to
solve. Thus, it could have been beneficial to look into other sectors that differentiate drastically
from the building sector, in order to see if the urgent areas are a wider problem or only related
to the building industry. This would have been helpful in order to also prove the necessity of a
building sector specific ESRS, that currently not are on the drawing board from EFRAG. This
will be discussed further in section 4.7.
The second and final limitation concerns my personal programming skills and knowledge within
the field of AI. The programming assistance from ChatGPT, rests on a language model which
is based on historic known data. However, when programming complex new tasks, such as
Approach 1 and 3, that fundamentally requires a model that is based on continuously devel┬¡
oping new data, my personal competencies within the programming field became a limitation.
This limitation could have been helped along the way by collaborating with more professional
programmers. However, the creation of an AI tool was not the main goal of this thesis.
5.2
Systemic Themes
5.2.1
ÔÇØPsychological safetyÔÇØ in fulfilling CSRD obligations
Implementing CSRD in companies is inherently challenging, often requiring a trial┬¡and┬¡error
approach to get it right. The complexity and novelty of CSRD mean that initial attempts at com┬¡
pliance are likely to involve mistakes and adjustments. Therefore, postponing the problem by
changing the accounting classification of companies is not a viable long┬¡term solution. Even the
companies currently excluded will eventually need to start complying, so it would be beneficial
for all companies, large and small, to begin the process as soon as possible.
Rather than making substantial changes to accounting classifications, it would be more benefi┬¡
cial to modify the grace period provided in the CSRD. Allowing companies to start their compli┬¡
ance efforts early without the requirement to retroactively adjust all their previous annual reports
could create a more conducive environment for learning and adaptation. This approach would
enable companies to experiment and make mistakes without the fear of significant repercus┬¡
sions. By fostering a culture of psychological safety, companies would likely be more willing
to engage in a trial┬¡and┬¡error approach to meet CSRD requirements proactively, rather than
delaying and facing a steeper learning curve later.
A restructured grace period would encourage companies to begin their compliance efforts ear┬¡
lier, leading to a smoother transition once the CSRD requirements become mandatory. This
proactive approach would reduce the pressure on companies to achieve perfect compliance
immediately and would help build confidence and competence over time. Companies would
be able to develop their understanding and processes iteratively, leading to more robust and
effective sustainability reporting practices.
In short, this misalignment between legislative intent and practical implementation have lead to
compliance challenges. Risking companies prioritizing meeting regulatory requirements over
genuinely improving their sustainability practices, could undermining the directiveÔÇÖs objectives.
The increased administrative workload could divert resources from actual sustainability initia┬¡
tives, leading to potential ÔÇØgreen washing,ÔÇØ where compliance is reported without meaningful
action. This could erode public trust in sustainability reports. Additionally, companies might
struggle with the financial and technical resources needed to comply, potentially impacting their
competitiveness.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
61
==PAGE:70==
5.2.2
Chasing a moving ÔÇØtargetÔÇØ
EFRAG published their ESRS delegated act documents before EU member countries had in┬¡
tegrated the CSRD into their national legislation. As a result, companies adhered to ESRS
requirements without knowing potential national legal adaptations. Following the adaptation
deadline, EFRAG has continued to update their documents, including a significant update on
05/06/2024, to the ESRS data points and their complementary spreadsheet, which all the com┬¡
panies interviewed in this thesis used as a foundation for their CSRD management tools and
gap analysis[61]. With more than 1140 data points and frequent updates, there is a high risk that
companiesÔÇÖ reporting may not align with EFRAGÔÇÖs data points when they are a moving target.
Although using the EFRAG spreadsheet is optional, its close resemblance to the ESRS makes
it implicitly mandatory.
Another significant risk arises from the online availability of the EFRAG spreadsheet, which
EFRAG can update post┬¡publication. This situation is risky because users cannot ensure they
are using the most recent version, leading to potential discrepancies in their company┬¡specific
tools and making future comparisons of sustainability matters challenging and unreliable.
The continuous updates to EFRAG documents, intended to provide more detailed guidelines
and data points for sustainability reporting, add complexity and compliance challenges. EFRAGÔÇÖs
detailed requirements increase the comprehensiveness of reports but necessitate continuous
adaptation and learning, which is resource┬¡intensive. This complexity raises the risk of non┬¡
compliance, as companies may struggle to keep up with updates, resulting in outdated or incor┬¡
rect reporting. Continuous training and system updates impose additional costs, complicating
efforts to comply with CSRD.
5.2.3
IndustryÔÇÖs digitalization level
In 2023, the EU Parliament approved the EU CommissionÔÇÖs proposal for a digitalization strategy
aimed at promoting reliable and consistent AI developed within the EU [62]. This initiative seeks
to enhance the monitoring of sustainable development across countries, a crucial objective as
the CSRD mandates increased digitalization over time, utilizing tagged and open┬¡source data.
While the EUÔÇÖs digitalization strategy commendably focuses on fostering reliable AI for startups,
it falls short in addressing how large and complex companies, particularly in low┬¡digitalization
industries like construction (e.g., Sweco Group), can implement reliable AI tools. Including the
largest and most influential companies in the AI strategy to address CSRD┬¡specific challenges
would be beneficial. These companies set the standards and trends for sustainability reporting,
so their involvement would most likely have the most significant impact and signal value.
The digitalization level of the building industry is a critical factor in consistently complying with
the CSRD requirements. One of the main prerequisites within CSRD is ensuring that company
data is tagged, making it usable for future AI or digital tools. However, the industryÔÇÖs lack in dig┬¡
ital maturity complicates the effective collection, analysis, and reporting of sustainability data.
The integration of AI tools to facilitate compliance is limited by the industryÔÇÖs current techno┬¡
logical infrastructure. Inadequate digital infrastructure could lead to incomplete or inaccurate
sustainability reporting, putting companies with lower digital maturity at a competitive disadvan┬¡
tage and undermining the comparability of data.
From a performance perspective, the building industryÔÇÖs level of digitalization might appear
higher than it is in some areas. Although a tool might not explicitly incorporate AI, AI is often
utilized in its development. Generative AI, for instance, is increasingly used to perform repeti┬¡
tive tasks and due diligence. However, there is a tendency to rely on AI for tasks where human
knowledge is lacking, which can create significant risks. This reliance on AI, especially in areas
where expertise is insufficient, could introduce biases in performing tasks like CSRD. Without
62
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:71==
superior knowledge to validate AI outputs, the risk is that the very purpose of CSRD could be
compromised, leading again to a deprivation of essential knowledge and learning within the
industry.
5.2.4
The deprivation of knowledge and learning
The implementation of CSRD and related sustainability initiatives has revealed a significant
knowledge gap within the building industry. There is a disparity between the requirements of
CSRD and the existing knowledge and skills in the sector. Because CSRD affects unrelated
areas like finance and sustainability, bridging this gap necessitates continuous learning and de┬¡
velopment, requiring substantial investment in training and education, rather than solely relying
on AI knowledge.
Implementing AI solutions early in the process of learning new requirements poses the risk of
undermining the essential knowledge gathering and curiosity needed to understand and con┬¡
textualize these requirements because the GenAI is not up to date. This sentiment is echoed
by Expert B, who noted:
ÔÇØWhen you get too automated, people donÔÇÖt really dig that deep into the knowledge of the
CSRD or the topic that theyÔÇÖre working with.ÔÇØ
┬¡ Expert B
Early implementation of AI tools comes with both advantages and disadvantages. The key point
to remember is that the majority of GenAI models lacks intrinsic knowledge and must therefore
be provided with information. Consequently, GenAI can never fully replace humans, especially
in new areas like CSRD. This introduces two additional perspectives on the risk associated with
the knowledge gap going from being between the gap between humans and the new topic to
now also entails the gap between the topic and AI, and the gap between AI and humans.
These knowledge gaps could lead to misinterpretation or incorrect application of CSRD require┬¡
ments. Companies may struggle to build the necessary expertise internally, leading to a reliance
on external consultants and increased costs. Without adequate knowledge, the effectiveness
of sustainability initiatives could be compromised, as companies might not fully understand or
correctly implement the required measures.
5.2.5
Ethical considerations
As companies struggle with CSRD knowledge gaps which could lead to misinterpretation or
incorrect application of CSRD requirements, they are naturally tempted to rely on external expert
consultants. In a rapidly developing field, being an ÔÇØexpertÔÇØ is difficult and evaluating ÔÇØexpertÔÇØ
competencies even more so. So companies might find that ÔÇØtheyÔÇÖre doomed if they do, and
doomed if the donÔÇÖtÔÇØ.
One could thus speculate, that companies while knowing that true ÔÇØexpertsÔÇØ might not exist yet,
they buy themselves an insurance by being able to document that they have actually taken
actions towards their CSRD obligations.
As an example of this dilemma, RFBB (R├Ñdet for b├Ğredygtigt byggeri) has launched a guide,
promoted as an easy way to achieve CSRD compliance using existing data pertaining to one
specific building. RFBB, either knowingly or not, ÔÇØforgetsÔÇØ that CSRD needs to be assessed at
a consolidated level and not at a building level. They simply either forget or simply donÔÇÖt under┬¡
stand the complexity of sustainability matters and sustainability information. Having a council
publishing a guide that requires substantial knowledge to use increase the risk of companies
producing insufficient annual reports.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
63
==PAGE:72==
Following discussions among KOLs (key opinion leaders) in the field of CSRD, many voice
that it is truly troubling how little expertise there is among so┬¡called experts in the sustainability
field and actually call for a proper professional association with technical competence┬¡based
membership.
To address these challenges, companies must invest in other robust ethical frameworks and by
doing so, they can not only comply with CSRD requirements but also drive meaningful progress
towards sustainability and build stakeholder trust. Navigating an entirely new area with limited
general knowledge presents a significant challenge, underscoring the need for interdisciplinary
collaboration in order to make sure that the whole value chain is up to date and continual learn┬¡
ing. At the C┬¡site level, the role of a Chief Sustainability Officer is often created for solve exactly
some of these challenges[63].
5.3
Thesis┬¡Specific Themes
In addition to the systemic themes discussed above, there is also a number of thesis┬¡specific
themes that will be discussed below.
One significant theme when developing or investigating something at a very early stage is that
it can become quickly outdated or overtaken by new developments. While this dynamic nature
of progress is not inherently problematic, it poses challenges when ideas and thoughts are
continually being confirmed or refuted. For instance, the reading guide presented above was
developed in April, but not shared with relevant companies as the robustness and validity was
difficult to assess. In June, the same tool appeared on LinkedIn, now publishing by a reputable
KOL in the sustainability community. This is a good example, of how insecurity and lack of
trust in this field, prohibits the development and use of tools, that could have been helpful.
This highlights the importance of establishing trustworthiness from the beginning and evidence
before disseminating findings which will be created through learning by doing and trial and error
process.
5.3.1
Approach ┬¡ 1
The first approach examined consistency in short sentences with binary responses═¥ yes or no.
However, there are other methods to explore consistency within specific topics. Drawing con┬¡
clusions from a basis that only investigates short sentences, as done in this thesis, might be
insufficient when testing consistency within CSRD. More complex sentences and scenarios are
likely needed to fully assess consistency. This limitation suggests the need for more compre┬¡
hensive testing methods to ensure more robust findings.
5.3.2
Approach ┬¡ 2 and Approach ┬¡ 3
EFRAG published their Implementation Guide to Double Materiality Assessment long after the
testing of Approach 2, leading to a high chance of misalignments. This delay reflects a general
problem in the industry, where evolving guidelines can quickly render previous methodologies
outdated and obsolete. It is essential for methods to be continuously updated and checked to
ensure they remain relevant and correct, minimizing risks. Unfortunately, this was not possi┬¡
ble within the constraints of this thesis. However, revisiting the approaches five months later
to assess any changes would be beneficial, providing an opportunity to align with the latest
guidelines and insights.
5.3.3
Approach ┬¡ 4
Creating an Excel tool that reflects the industryÔÇÖs low digital maturity carries the risk of perpet┬¡
uating this immaturity by encouraging the continued use of Excel tools instead of pushing the
industry towards more mature digitalization. However, tools that are created and adapted by
64
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:73==
users to their own companies, similar to how EFRAGÔÇÖs data points have been utilized, can be
highly effective. This method is optimal because it has a higher chance of being adopted and
used effectively, promoting gradual digital transformation while accommodating for the current
maturity level of the industry. Instead of pushing the industry by developing AI tools that are too
time consuming and expensive to integrate.
In conclusion, the discussion of these approaches highlights the complexities and challenges in┬¡
herent in investigating and implementing AI and CSRD within the building industry. The evolving
nature of guidelines, the risk of perpetuating low digital maturity, and the need for comprehen┬¡
sive and adaptable methods all underscore the importance of continuous learning, interdisci┬¡
plinary collaboration, and iterative refinement of strategies to ensure successful and meaningful
implementation and aligning with the goals of the Paris Agreement.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
65
==PAGE:74==
6
Recommendations and future studies
6.1
Recommendations
The recommendations following this thesis begin with a focus on the integration of CSRD, and
then progressively expand to include suggestions on how the application of AI can be included
into the CSRD, based on the building industryÔÇÖs low digital maturity presented in approach 4
and below in fig. 6.1
Figure 6.1: Process in reaching digital maturity
6.1.1
Extending grace period for CSRD implementation
Following the CSRD, companies currently have a 3 year grace period from their initial reporting
date, due to the data gathering process in the value chain potentially being very time consuming.
However, this process is not the only one taking time. The process of gathering the needed
knowledge within the company to integrate CSRD is a continuous process that companies use
the majority of their time on.
The EU has made an implementation plan for when different companies according to size
have CSRD obligations, also illustrated in fig. 2.2. However postponing the implementation for
smaller companies are possibly not a help because they still need to gather the CSRD specific
knowledge.
Thus, it is recommended that all companies are forced to start their CSRD implementations in
their annual reports, but the grace period is extended according to the company size. Meaning
that companies with CSRD obligations in 2029 still have to report in the financial year of 2025
but their grace period will be until 2032. This will potentially foster a learning by doing behavior
and create higher comparability between companies aligning with the CSRD scope.
6.1.2
Be aware of experts with unknown┬¡unkowns
In the rush to meet CSRD obligations, companies might find it necessary to seek external help to
understand the broader implications of CSRD in relation to their specific company and sector. In
this process of finding the right consultants, it is highly important to make thorough background
66
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:75==
check and due diligence on the considered consultants to make sure they are not working in a
field of unknowns.
Given the complex and multifaceted nature of CSRD, suitable consultants must have a deep
understanding of the corporate and sustainability pillars, as well as how these elements interact
and influence each other. It is recommended to carefully review their work when it is completed,
critically evaluate their decisions and recommendations. Because ultimately, transforming un┬¡
knowns into knowns within CSRD requires industry┬¡wide consensus.
6.1.3
Cumulative release of updates
The many continuously updates in documents released by EFRAG, EU, and the Danish Parlia┬¡
ment make it difficult for companies to stay on track with their alignments between requirements
that contains synergies to other documents. Even though not all updates are law requirements,
majority of the updated documents are closely related to law requirements making it preferable
to follow the updates.
In order to give the companies, especially if all companies start to incorporate CSRD by 2025,
it is encouraged to release updates cumulatively each year so that companies can plan for
potential updates knowing when they come and making the alignment easier.
6.1.4
Building industryÔÇÖs digitilazation level how to follow the main stream
Being in an industry with a low digital maturity as the building industry, it is not only a recom┬¡
mendation but a necessity to convert the working processes to a more digital mature stage.
Provided that a company is storing data in the cloud, the data needs to be tagged and classified
by relevant requirements, one classification could be ÔÇØpublicÔÇØ data going into the annual report.
By having having data in the cloud and structured, it is easier to utilize, update and access from
different users in the company. Having data collected the same place also make it easier for
future AI tools to use as foundation.
This makes the data structure and data management a prerequisite for reaching higher digital
maturity which is necessary for utilizing AI and in the development of CSRD requirements.
6.1.5
AI is not the expert
As AI tools become more and more integrated and human┬¡like, the remembering of AIÔÇÖs limits
vanishes. An example of this is ChatGPT that with its current update functions more like a
ÔÇØmessengerÔÇØ application changing its reflection from being a service to more human, with own
knowledge. However this is not true. AI will never be the expert because it cannot be held up
to date as quickly as humans.
This underlines the importance of remembering that when the building industry reach a digital
level mature enough to implement CSRD specific AI tools, the output of this still needs to be
verified by a CSRD human specialist.
6.1.6
CSRD specific LLM
When a company reaches a high level of digital maturity and begins incorporating AI, it is rec┬¡
ommended to develop a language model specifically for CSRD or sustainability reporting. This
will increase the AI modelÔÇÖs expertise on the subject, resulting in more consistent and reliable
answers and solutions.
However, creating, training, and maintaining a CSRD┬¡specific language model is costly and
improves with more data. Therefore, it is also recommended that companies across the industry
collaborate and invest in a shared language model for all to use.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
67
==PAGE:76==
Within a model like this, data tagged as ÔÇØpublicÔÇØ can be used for training, while data tagged as
ÔÇØrestrictedÔÇØ can be used for company┬¡specific tasks and will not be shared.
6.2
Future studies
This section will introduce problems that would have been investigated have this thesis not been
under a time constraint and have the knowledge I have today been available in February.
6.2.1
Comparability in annual reports
The first study investigates the comparability in annual reports, especially focusing on the dou┬¡
ble materiality assessment made by companies. The DMA is the foundation for relevant and
trustworthy CSRD reporting, why it is crucial that the results of DMAs made within the same
sector, in general, show the same tendencies and approaches.
The main prerequisite for this study is the CSRD aligned annual reports are public and that the
company show their materiality obligations in the report, like Arla group. If this is not possible,
the collaboration with a group of compnaies are nessecary to get the correct data needed for
comparison.
The goal of this study is to find out whether CSRD in fact can be used to compare companiesÔÇÖ
sustainability actions within the same sector or if the basis for comparison is varying to much.
6.2.2
Adaptation in EU member countries
The second study evolves around the different adaptation made in the implementation of CSRD
in EU member countries. The integration of a directive into country law is necessary for the
requirements to be fulfilled by the companies who already have other obligations.
A prerequisite for this study is access and understanding of different countries laws and adapta┬¡
tion changes. Of course this study is not solely relevant for an Architectural Engineer however
it could potentially reveal misalignments with derived consequences affecting the building in┬¡
dustry.
The goal of this study is to find out if the intentions with the CSRD is still justified after country
adaptation and if EU as a whole is moving closer to the goals set in the Paris Agreement.
6.2.3
Transforming building specific data to CSRD requirements
The last study that would have been extremely interesting to delve into is, if the building data
in fact can be used, in the fulfilling of CSRD requirements. And if it is possible how might
a methodology look for doing this transformation on a more general level to make sure the
comparability is still justifiable.
This would require an understanding of how carbon accounting is made and how companies
tend to perform them in order to create a methodology that is applicable in already implemented
procedures. The goal of this study is to be able to utilize the huge amount of data that currently
is in the building industry and to find out whether CSRD can be investigated on a sector specific
level.
68
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:77==
7
Conclusion
In conclusion, this thesis reveals the critical role of artificial intelligence in addressing the chal┬¡
lenges posed by the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive within the building industry.
The study illustrates that AI can significantly streamline and enhance the effectiveness of sus┬¡
tainability reporting, ensuring that companies can meet regulatory demands more efficiently,
if the digital maturity of the industry and its data is present. By developing and testing vari┬¡
ous approaches, this research provides valuable insights into how digital tools can support the
industryÔÇÖs transition towards more trustworthy and reliable sustainability reporting.
The key findings highlight the industryÔÇÖs current digital maturity and underscore the need for an
industrial shift towards embracing digital innovation in the building industry. The proposed future
roadmap offers a strategic pathway for companies to integrate AI into their CSRD processes,
facilitating more accurate and comprehensive gap analyses and sustainability assessments.
This integration will not only help in regulatory compliance but also positions companies to
adopt more robust and strategic sustainability practices.
While challenges such as digital readiness and knowledge gaps persist, the potential bene┬¡
fits of AI in achieving CSRD compliance are compelling. The findings of this thesis advocate
for a proactive approach to digital transformation, emphasizing the long┬¡term gains in trans┬¡
parency, efficiency, and sustainability. As the building industry continues to evolve, the adoption
of AI┬¡driven solutions will be instrumental in meeting the growing demands for environmental
accountability and sustainable development.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
69
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
[1]
Architecture 2030. WHY THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT? Accessed: 22┬¡5┬¡2024. URL: https:
//www.architecture2030.org/why-the-built-environment/.
[2]
United Nations Climate Change. Conference of the Parties (COP). Accessed: 29┬¡5┬¡2024.
2023. URL: https://unfccc.int/process/bodies/supreme-bodies/conference-of-the-parties-
cop.
[3]
United Nation Climate CHange. Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). Accessed:
17┬¡6┬¡2024. URL: https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/nationally-
determined-contributions-ndcs.
[4]
UNFCCC. The Paris Agreement. Accessed: 29┬¡5┬¡2024. 2023. URL: https://unfccc.int/
process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement.
[5]
Rebecca Lindsey and Luan Dahlman. Climate Change: Global Temperature. Accessed:
10┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/
climate-change-global-temperature.
[6]
European Green Deal. European Green Deal. Accessed: 29┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https:
//www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/green-deal/.
[7]
CONSOB. Sustainable Finance Action Plan. Accessed: 17┬¡6┬¡2024. URL: https://www.
consob.it/web/consob-and-its-activities/sustainable-finance-action-plan.
[8]
European Union. REGULATION (EU) 2019/2088 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
AND OF THE COUNCIL. Accessed: 08┬¡6┬¡2024.
[9]
European Commission. SFDR ÔÇô EUÔÇÖs regulativ om b├Ğredygtig finansiering. Accessed:
03┬¡6┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://finance.ec.europa.eu/sustainable- finance/disclosures/
sustainability-related-disclosure-financial-services-sector_en.
[10]
Risma. SFDR ÔÇô EUÔÇÖs regulativ om b├Ğredygtig finansiering. Accessed: 03┬¡6┬¡2024. URL:
https://www.rismasystems.com/da/ressourcer/artikler/hvad-er-sfdr.
[11]
Envoria. EU Sustainable Finance Framework: How are the EU Taxonomy, CSRD, and
SFDR related? Accessed: 03┬¡6┬¡2024. 2023. URL: https://envoria.com/insights-news/eu-
sustainable-finance-framework-how-are-the-eu-taxonomy-csrd-and-sfdr-related.
[12]
European Union. REGULATION (EU) 2020/852 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND
OF THE COUNCIL. Accessed: 08┬¡6┬¡2024.
[13]
European Commission. EU taxonomy for sustainable activities. Accessed: 16┬¡5┬¡2024.
2018. URL: https://finance.ec.europa.eu/sustainable- finance/tools- and- standards/eu-
taxonomy-sustainable-activities_en.
[14]
European Commission. EU Taxonomy Compass. Accessed: 08┬¡6┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https:
//ec.europa.eu/sustainable-finance-taxonomy/taxonomy-compass.
[15]
European Union. DIRECTIVE 2014/95/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
THE COUNCIL. Accessed: 11┬¡5┬¡2024.
[16]
Plan A. Non┬¡Financial Reporting Directive (NFRD). Accessed: 11┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL:
https://plana.earth/policy/non-financial-reporting-directive-nfrd.
[17]
Nora Hahnkamper┬¡Vandenbulcke. Non┬¡financial Reporting Directive. Accessed: 29┬¡5┬¡2024.
[18]
European Union. DIRECTIVE (EU) 2022/2464 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND
OF THE COUNCIL. Accessed: 08┬¡6┬¡2024.
[19]
EUR. Directive ┬¡ 2022/2464 ┬¡ EN ┬¡ CSRD Directive ┬¡ EUR┬¡Lex. Accessed: 29┬¡5┬¡2024.
URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/NIM/?uri=CELEX:32022L2464.
[20]
Deloitte. Guide til brug af de forh├©jede st├©rrelsesgr├Ğnser i ├Ñrsregnskabsloven. Accessed:
13┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://www2.deloitte.com/dk/da/pages/audit/articles/guide-til-
brug-af-de-forhojede-storrelsesgraenser-i-arsregnskabs.html.
70
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:79==
[21]
Latham & Watkins. The EU Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive ÔÇö How Compa┬¡
nies Need to Prepare. Accessed: 11┬¡6┬¡2024.
[22]
McCann Fitzgerald. Parliament adopts the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive.
Accessed: 11┬¡6┬¡2024. 2022. URL: https://www.mccannfitzgerald.com/knowledge/sustainable-
finance/parliament-adopts-the-corporate-sustainability-reporting-directive.
[23]
EFRAG. EFRAG Today. Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024. 2018. URL: https://www.efrag.org/About/
Facts.
[24]
Financial Services Directorate┬¡General for Financial Stability and Capital Markets Union.
The Commission adopts the European Sustainability Reporting Standards. Accessed: 8┬¡
5┬¡2024. 2023. URL: https://finance.ec.europa.eu/news/commission- adopts- european-
sustainability-reporting-standards-2023-07-31_en.
[25]
European Commission. Questions and Answers on the Adoption of European Sustain┬¡
ability Reporting Standards. Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024. 2023. URL: https : / / ec . europa . eu /
commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_23_4043.
[26]
Liisa Kelo. Navigating the ESRS. Accessed: 29┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://www.getsunhat.
com / blog / navigating - the - csrd - standards - a - practical - guide - to - implement - disclosure -
processes-with-esrs-checklist.
[27]
PricewaterhouseCoopers. Understanding the CSRD Double Materiality Assessment Pro┬¡
cess. Accessed: 12┬¡6┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://www.pwc.com/mt/en/publications/
sustainability/understanding-the-csrd-double-materiality-assessment-process.html.
[28]
EFRAG. ESRS 2 General Disclosures. Accessed: 29┬¡5┬¡2024.
[29]
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol. A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard. Ac┬¡
cessed: 13┬¡6┬¡2024.
[30]
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol. Technical Guidance for Calculating Scope 3 Emissions.
Accessed: 13┬¡6┬¡2024.
[31]
Deloitte. Your Guide to CSRD and ESRS. Accessed: 30┬¡5┬¡2024.
[32]
Amanda Koefoed Simonsen. How to read Disclosure Requirements. Accessed: 11┬¡6┬¡
2024. 2024. URL: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7204376600635707392/.
[33]
Alan M. Turing. COMPUTING MACHINERY AND INTELLIGENCE. Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024.
[34]
Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary. Think. Accessed: 01┬¡6┬¡2024. URL: https://
dictionary.cambridge.org/da/ordbog/engelsk/think.
[35]
Penny S. Reynolds. Artificial Intelligence, Statistics, and Statisticians. Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡
2024. 2023. URL: https://magazine.amstat.org/blog/2023/09/01/aihistory/,.
[36]
Jason Brownlee. Logistic Regression for Machine Learning. Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024. 2023.
URL: https://machinelearningmastery.com/logistic-regression-for-machine-learning/.
[37]
IBM. What is logistic regression? Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024. 2023. URL: https://www.ibm.com/
topics/logistic-regression.
[38]
The Investopedia Team. What Is Artificial Intelligence (AI)? Accessed: 01┬¡6┬¡2024. 2024.
URL: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/artificial-intelligence-ai.asp.
[39]
IBM, Cole Stryker, and Mark Scapicchio. What is generative AI? Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024.
2024. URL: https://www.ibm.com/topics/generative-ai.
[40]
intellipaat. Types of input and number of input in neural network. Accessed: 28┬¡5┬¡2024.
2019. URL: https://intellipaat.com/community/1170/types-of-input-and-number-of-input-
in-neural-network.
[41]
IBM and Dave Bergmann. What is fine┬¡tuning? Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https:
//www.ibm.com/topics/fine-tuning.
[42]
OpenAI. Introducing ChatGPT Enterprise. Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024. 2023. URL: https : / /
openai.com/index/introducing-chatgpt-enterprise.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
71
==PAGE:80==
[43]
Yannick Bammens and Paul H├╝nermund. Using Federated Machine Learning to Over┬¡
come the AI Scale Disadvantage. Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024. 2023. URL: https://sloanreview.
mit.edu/article/using-federated-machine-learning-to-overcome-the-ai-scale-disadvantage/.
[44]
OpenAI. Redefine work in the age of AI. Accessed: 01┬¡6┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://openai.
com/chatgpt/enterprise/.
[45]
Moez Ali. Synthetic data is the future of Artificial Intelligence. Accessed: 8┬¡5┬¡2024. 2023.
URL: https://moez-62905.medium.com/synthetic-data-is-the-future-of-artificial-intelligence-
6fcfd2ce1a14.
[46]
OpenAI. OpenAI Platform. Accessed: 17┬¡6┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://platform.openai.
com/api-keys/.
[47]
McKinsey Company. Det ├©konomiske potentiale af GenAI i Danmark. Accessed: 04┬¡6┬¡
2024.
[48]
Levi Olmstead. Digital Transformation Tech Adoption by Sector (2024). Accessed: 15┬¡5┬¡
2024. 2024. URL: https://whatfix.com/blog/digital-transformation-by-sector/.
[49]
Dan Nessler. How to apply a design thinking, HCD, UX or any creative process from
scratch. Accessed: 11┬¡6┬¡2024. 2016. URL: https://medium.com/digital-experience-design/
how-to-apply-a-design-thinking-hcd-ux-or-any-creative-process-from-scratch-b8786efbf812.
[50]
Oxford University. Myeongjun Erik Jang. Accessed: 15┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://www.
cs.ox.ac.uk/people/myeongjun.jang/.
[51]
Myeongjun Erik Jang and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Consistency Analysis of ChatGPT. Ac┬¡
cessed: 14┬¡5┬¡2024.
[52]
Myeongjun Jang, Deuk Sin Kwon, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. ÔÇ£BECEL: Benchmark for
Consistency Evaluation of Language ModelsÔÇØ. In: Proceedings of the 29th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics. Gyeongju, Republic of Korea: International
Committee on Computational Linguistics, Oct. 2022, pp. 3680ÔÇô3696. URL: https://aclanthology.
org/2022.coling-1.324.
[53]
Amazon. What is Prompt Engineering? Accessed: 24┬¡5┬¡2024. URL: https://aws.amazon.
com/what-is/prompt-engineering/.
[54]
EFRAG. Implementation guidance documents. Accessed: 24┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https:
//efrag.org/lab8.
[55]
Emilie Elmer Land Jensen. Implementering af Ny B├Ğredygtighedslovgivning i St├©rre Virk┬¡
somheder. Accessed: 11┬¡6┬¡2024. 2024.
[56]
PyMuPDF. Document. Accessed: 26┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://pymupdf.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/document.html.
[57]
OpenAI. Models. Accessed: 17┬¡6┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://platform.openai.com/docs/
models/moderation.
[58]
R├Ñdet for B├Ğredygtigt Byggeri. S├Ñdan kan du bruge DGNB og Taksonomi i din virk┬¡
somheds ESG┬¡rapportering. Accessed: 24┬¡5┬¡2024. 2023. URL: https://rfbb.dk/publikation/
s%C3%A5dan-kan-du-bruge-dgnb-og-taksonomi-i-din-virksomheds-esg-rapportering-.
[59]
Dansk Industri. V├Ğsentlighedsanalyse. Accessed: 17┬¡6┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://www.
danskindustri.dk/vi-radgiver-dig/virksomhedsregler-og-varktojer/esg/lovkrav/i-dybden-med-
vasentlighedsanalysen/.
[60]
EU Commission. Commission launches AI innovation package to support start┬¡ups and
SMEs in artificial intelligence. Accessed: 26┬¡5┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/da/ip_24_383.
[61]
EFRAG. EFRAG IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points (1).xlsx. Accessed: 06┬¡06┬¡2024. 2024.
URL: https://efrag.sharefile.com/share/view/s6e410fb208aa4685bf9c482ee405f48d/foa75419-
44c9-4081-85a5-43217a6e8732.
72
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:81==
[62]
EU Commission. Commission launches AI innovation package to support Artificial Intel┬¡
ligence startups and SMEs. Accessed: 06┬¡06┬¡2024. 2024. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/da/ip_24_383.
[63]
Deloitte. The future of the Chief Sustainability Officer. Accessed: 20┬¡06┬¡2024. 2023. URL:
https://www.deloitte.com/cbc/en/Industries/financial-services/perspectives/the-future-of-
the-chief-sustainability-officer.html.
CSRD and AI in the building industry
73
==PAGE:82==
A
Appendix: BECEL full script
,
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
import os
3
import numpy as np
4
import pandas as pd
5
6
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score
7
from typing import Text, List, Union, Dict
8
from datasets import load_dataset
9
10
11
def semantic_inconsistency(
12
prediction_original: List,
13
prediction_paraphrase: List,
14
) -> Dict:
15
"""A function that calculates semantic inconsistency
16
17
Args:
18
prediction_original: the list of predictions on the original data instances
19
prediction_paraphrase: the list of predictions on the paraphrased data
instances
20
21
Returns:
22
A dictionary containing inconsistency
23
"""
24
assert len(prediction_original) == len(prediction_paraphrase)
25
26
inconsistency = 1 - accuracy_score(prediction_original , prediction_paraphrase)
27
28
outp = {
29
"inconsistency": inconsistency ,
30
}
31
return outp
32
33
34
def negational_inconsistency(
35
prediction_original: List,
36
prediction_negated: List,
37
condition_correct_prediction: Union[int, Text] = None
38
) -> Dict:
39
"""A function that calculates negational inconsistency
40
41
Args:
42
prediction_original: the list of predictions on the original data instances
43
prediction_negated: the list of predictions on the negated data instances
44
condition_correct_prediction: correct answer when applying the conditioned
inconsistency (e.g., 0 (entailment) for SNLI)
45
46
Returns:
47
A dictionary containing inconsistency and conditioned inconsistency
48
"""
49
assert len(prediction_original) == len(prediction_negated)
50
51
inconsistency = accuracy_score(prediction_original , prediction_negated)
52
53
if condition_correct_prediction:
74
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:83==
54
index_ = [i for i, p in enumerate(prediction_original) if p ==
condition_correct_prediction]
55
56
condition_pred_original_ = [prediction_original[i] for i in index_]
57
condition_pred_neg_ = [prediction_negated[i] for i in index_]
58
59
conditioned_inconsistency = accuracy_score(condition_pred_original_ ,
condition_pred_neg_)
60
else:
61
conditioned_inconsistency = inconsistency
62
63
outp = {
64
"inconsistency": inconsistency ,
65
"conditioned_inconsistency": conditioned_inconsistency ,
66
}
67
return outp
68
69
70
def symmetric_inconsistency(
71
prediction_original: List,
72
prediction_symmetric: List,
73
condition_correct_prediction: Union[int, Text] = None
74
) -> Dict:
75
"""A function that calculates symmetric inconsistency
76
77
Args:
78
prediction_original: the list of predictions on the original data instances
79
prediction_symmetric: the list of predictions on the negated data instances
80
condition_correct_prediction: correct answer when applying the conditioned
inconsistency (e.g., 0 (entailment) for SNLI)
81
82
Returns:
83
A dictionary containing inconsistency and conditioned inconsistency
84
"""
85
86
assert len(prediction_original) == len(prediction_symmetric)
87
inconsistency = 1 - accuracy_score(prediction_original , prediction_symmetric)
88
89
if condition_correct_prediction:
90
index_ = [i for i, p in enumerate(prediction_original) if p ==
condition_correct_prediction]
91
92
condition_pred_original_ = [prediction_original[i] for i in index_]
93
condition_pred_sym_ = [prediction_symmetric[i] for i in index_]
94
95
conditioned_inconsistency = 1 - accuracy_score(condition_pred_original_ ,
condition_pred_sym_)
96
else:
97
conditioned_inconsistency = inconsistency
98
99
outp = {
100
"inconsistency": inconsistency ,
101
"conditioned_inconsistency": conditioned_inconsistency ,
102
}
103
return outp
104
105
106
def transitive_inconsistency(
107
transitive_predictions: List,
108
originated_predictions: List,
109
data_path: Text,
110
task_name: Text,
CSRD and AI in the building industry
75
==PAGE:84==
111
):
112
if task_name == 'wic':
113
# consistency: model generate correct answer for the originated data points
-> correct on transitive data point
114
# inconsistency: 1 - consistency
115
train_df = load_dataset('super_glue', 'wic', split='train').to_pandas()
116
assert len(train_df) == len(originated_predictions)
117
118
transitive_df = pd.read_csv(os.path.join(data_path , 'transitive.tsv'), sep=
'\t')
119
120
originated_idx = transitive_df['originated_idx'].tolist()
121
originated_idx = [[int(i) for i in s.split('|')] for s in originated_idx]
122
123
hits_ = [1 if p == l else 0 for p, l in zip(transitive_predictions ,
transitive_df['label'])]
124
consistency = []
125
for idx_, (o_idx_, h_) in enumerate(zip(originated_idx , hits_)):
126
pred1_ = originated_predictions[o_idx_[0]]
127
pred2_ = originated_predictions[o_idx_[1]]
128
129
gs1_ = train_df['label'][o_idx_[0]]
130
gs2_ = train_df['label'][o_idx_[1]]
131
132
if pred1_ == gs1_ and pred2_ == gs2_:
133
if h_ == 0:
134
consistency.append(0)
135
else:
136
consistency.append(1)
137
138
consistency = np.sum(consistency) / len(consistency)
139
inconsistency = 1 - consistency
140
141
elif task_name == 'snli':
142
test_df = load_dataset('snli', split='test').to_pandas()
143
test_df = test_df[test_df['label'] != -1].dropna()
144
test_df = test_df.reset_index()
145
146
assert len(test_df) == len(originated_predictions)
147
148
transitive_df = pd.read_csv(os.path.join(data_path , 'transitive.tsv'), sep=
'\t').dropna()
149
transitive_label = transitive_df['label'].tolist()
150
151
hits_ = []
152
for l, p in zip(transitive_label , transitive_predictions):
153
if l == 2:
154
if p == 2:
155
hits_.append(1)
156
else:
157
hits_.append(0)
158
if l == 3:
159
if p in [1, 2]:
160
hits_.append(1)
161
else:
162
hits_.append(0)
163
if l == 4:
164
if p in [0, 1]:
165
hits_.append(1)
166
else:
167
hits_.append(0)
168
76
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:85==
169
# inconsistency
170
originated_idx = transitive_df['originated_idx'].tolist()
171
originated_idx = [[int(i) for i in s.split('|')] for s in originated_idx]
172
173
consistency = []
174
for idx_, (o_idx_, h_) in enumerate(zip(originated_idx , hits_)):
175
pred1_ = originated_predictions[o_idx_[0]]
176
pred2_ = originated_predictions[o_idx_[1]]
177
178
gs1_ = test_df['label'][o_idx_[0]]
179
gs2_ = test_df['label'][o_idx_[1]]
180
181
if pred1_ == gs1_ and pred2_ == gs2_:
182
if h_ == 0:
183
consistency.append(0)
184
else:
185
consistency.append(1)
186
187
consistency = np.sum(consistency) / len(consistency)
188
inconsistency = 1 - consistency
189
else:
190
raise NotImplementedError
191
192
outp = {
193
"inconsistency": inconsistency ,
194
}
195
return outp
196
197
198
def additive_inconsistency(
199
first_prediction: List,
200
second_prediction: List,
201
merged_prediction: List,
202
labels: List
203
):
204
"""A function that calculates additive inconsistency
205
206
Args:
207
first_prediction: the list of predictions on the first data instances
208
second_prediction: the list of predictions on the second data instances
209
merged_prediction: xhe list of predictions on the merged data instances
210
labels: the list of labels of the first and second (and merged) sentences
211
Returns:
212
A dictionary containing inconsistency
213
"""
214
# consistency: model generate correct answer on both the first and second
sentence -> correct on additive data point
215
# inconsistency: 1 - consistency
216
217
assert len(first_prediction) == len(second_prediction)
218
assert len(second_prediction) == len(merged_prediction)
219
assert len(merged_prediction) == len(labels)
220
221
consistency = []
222
for idx_, (merged_pred_ , label_) in enumerate(zip(merged_prediction , labels)):
223
first_pred_ = first_prediction[idx_]
224
second_pred_ = second_prediction[idx_]
225
226
if first_pred_ == label_ and second_pred_ == label_:
227
if merged_pred_ == label_:
228
consistency.append(1)
229
else:
CSRD and AI in the building industry
77
==PAGE:86==
230
consistency.append(0)
231
232
consistency = np.sum(consistency) / len(consistency)
233
inconsistency = 1 - consistency
234
235
outp = {
236
"inconsistency": inconsistency ,
237
}
238
return outp
239
240
241
if __name__ == '__main__':
242
import os
243
import json
244
245
example_data_path = os.path.join(os.path.abspath(os.path.dirname(__name__)), "
../data", "examples")
246
# 1. Semantic example
247
with open(os.path.join(example_data_path , "mrpc-semantic.json"), "r") as
readFile:
248
semantic_ = json.load(readFile)
249
semantic_inconsistency_ = semantic_inconsistency(
250
semantic_["original_preds"],
251
semantic_["paraphrase_preds"]
252
)["inconsistency"]
253
254
print(f"MRPC Semantic inconsistency: {semantic_inconsistency_}")
255
256
# 2. Negation example
257
with open(os.path.join(example_data_path , "mrpc-negational.json"), "r") as
readFile:
258
negational_ = json.load(readFile)
259
260
negational_inconsistency_ = negational_inconsistency(
261
negational_["original_preds"],
262
negational_["negation_preds"]
263
)["inconsistency"]
264
265
print(f"MRPC Negation inconsistency: {negational_inconsistency_}")
266
267
# 3. Symmetric example
268
with open(os.path.join(example_data_path , "snli-symmetric.json"), "r") as
readFile:
269
symmetric_ = json.load(readFile)
270
271
symmetric_inconsistency_ = symmetric_inconsistency(
272
symmetric_["original_preds"],
273
symmetric_["symmetric_preds"]
274
)["inconsistency"]
275
276
conditional_symmetric_inconsistency_ = symmetric_inconsistency(
277
symmetric_["original_preds"],
278
symmetric_["symmetric_preds"],
279
condition_correct_prediction=2
280
)["inconsistency"]
281
282
print(f"SNLI Symmetric inconsistency: {semantic_inconsistency_} | "
283
f"SNLI Conditional Symmetric inconsistency: {
conditional_symmetric_inconsistency_}")
284
285
# 4. Additive example
286
with open(os.path.join(example_data_path , "ag_news -additive.json"), "r") as
78
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:87==
readFile:
287
additive_ = json.load(readFile)
288
289
additive_inconsistency_ = additive_inconsistency(
290
first_prediction=additive_["first_preds"],
291
second_prediction=additive_["second_preds"],
292
merged_prediction=additive_["merged_preds"],
293
labels=additive_["labels"],
294
)["inconsistency"]
295
print(f"AG-News Additive inconsistency: {additive_inconsistency_}")
296
297
# 5. SNLI Transitive example
298
with open(os.path.join(example_data_path , "snli-transitive.json"), "r") as
readFile:
299
snli_transitive = json.load(readFile)
300
301
transitive_snli_inconsistency_ = transitive_inconsistency(
302
transitive_predictions=snli_transitive["transitive_preds"],
303
originated_predictions=snli_transitive["originated_preds"],
304
data_path="../data/snli",
305
task_name="snli"
306
)["inconsistency"]
307
print(f"SNLI Transitive inconsistency: {transitive_snli_inconsistency_}")
308
309
# 6. WiC Transitive example
310
with open(os.path.join(example_data_path , "wic-transitive.json"), "r") as
readFile:
311
wic_transitive = json.load(readFile)
312
313
transitive_wic_inconsistency_ = transitive_inconsistency(
314
transitive_predictions=wic_transitive["transitive_preds"],
315
originated_predictions=wic_transitive["originated_preds"],
316
data_path="../data/wic",
317
task_name="wic"
318
)["inconsistency"]
319
print(f"WiC Transitive inconsistency: {transitive_wic_inconsistency_}")
Listing A.1: BECEL full script
CSRD and AI in the building industry
79
==PAGE:88==
 
 
 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited 
1 New Street Square 
London 
EC4A 3HQ 
Phone: +44 (0)20 7936 3000 
Fax: +44 (0)20 7583 1198 
www.deloitte.com/about 
Direct phone: +44 20 7007 0884 
vepoole@deloitte.co.uk 
Deloitte refers to one or more of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, a UK private company limited by guarantee (ÔÇ£DTTLÔÇØ), its network of member firms, and their 
related entities. DTTL and each of its member firms are legally separate and independent entities. DTTL (also referred to as ÔÇ£Deloitte GlobalÔÇØ) does not provide 
services to clients. Please see www.deloitte.com/about for a more detailed description of DTTL and its member firms. 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited is a private company limited by guarantee incorporated in England & Wales under company number 07271800, and its registered 
office is 1 New Street Square, London, EC4A 3HQ, United Kingdom. 
┬® 2024 For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited. 
Dear Patrick, 
Draft EFRAG IG1 Materiality Assessment, Draft EFRAG IG2 Value chain and Draft EFRAG IG3 
List of ESRS datapoints 
We welcome EFRAG developing implementation guidance on materiality and value chain as 
these are areas of the sustainability reporting requirements that will be challenging for entities 
to apply.  
Our overarching comments on both sets of draft guidance are set out in the main body of our 
letter, with more detailed points in the Appendices. 
Proposed IG1: Materiality  
We are concerned that, as proposed, the guidance may lead to financial materiality as set out in 
ESRS and the ISSBÔÇÖs approach to materiality being misaligned. We believe that these issues 
should be addressed before the guidance documents are finalised because this is critical to 
ensuring interoperability with IFRS Sustainability Disclosure Standards and connectivity with 
IFRS Accounting Standards. We have identified four critical issues which are outlined below. 
Interaction between impacts and financial materiality  
We welcome the alignment of the definition of financial materiality in ESRS with the ISSBÔÇÖs 
definition of materiality. However, we are concerned that the guidance emphasises the 
separation of impacts, risks and opportunities and that this will lead to a narrower application of 
the concept of financial materiality than intended. For example, the guidance on the financial 
materiality assessment does not acknowledge that impacts, risks and opportunities are 
interrelated and as described by the ISSB, impacts may give rise to sustainability-related risks 
and opportunities (IFRS S1 General Requirements for Disclosure of Sustainability-related 
Financial Information, paragraph B2) (refer to Appendix A for further examples).  
2 February 2024 
 
Mr Patrick de Cambourg  
EFRAG  
35 Square de Mee├╗s  
1000 Brussels   
Belgium 
B
Appendix: Deloitte IG feedback
80
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:89==
 
2 
We have similar concerns on the draft guidance on the value chain.  This is illustrated in the 
examples in IG2 which either focus on ÔÇİimpactsÔÇÖ or ÔÇİrisk and opportunitiesÔÇÖ but do not recognise 
the overlap. In addition, there are some examples which imply that for a risk to be financially 
material, there must be an immediate monetary effect (refer to Appendix A). This perpetuates 
the risk of preparers taking a narrower lens for financial materiality without considering the 
broader risks that have not been recognised in the financial statements but could affect an 
entityÔÇÖs future development, performance or position.  
It is important that impacts, risks and opportunities are considered holistically in both sets of 
guidance.   
Financial materiality thresholds 
The guidance introduces new wording about risks and opportunities relating to an impact 
emerging ÔÇİover timeÔÇÖ or when they are ÔÇİexpectedÔÇÖ to occur. We are concerned that the draft 
guidance is setting different thresholds for reporting of risks that are financially material when 
compared to the approach in ISSB standards. 
We suggest that, where the guidance uses the term ÔÇİover-timeÔÇÖ, it makes it clear that risks that 
are financially material should be disclosed when identified, in the current period.  
Furthermore, there are some examples in the draft guidance which use the words ÔÇİexpectedÔÇÖ. 
The term ÔÇİexpectedÔÇÖ is interpreted and well understood in practice to mean when the likelihood 
of occurrence is more than 50 per cent. The implication is that there is an additional a 
materiality overlay for risk reporting. We suggest, the references to ÔÇİexpectedÔÇÖ are removed.   
Integrated approach to identification of impacts, risks and opportunities and materiality 
assessment 
We believe it is critical that the assessment of materiality for sustainability reporting is 
integrated into an entityÔÇÖs existing materiality processes. It should be seen as a holistic and 
cohesive process. 
The guidance should also explain that the assessment of materiality is not a linear process and, 
in practice, an entity could start with the risks and opportunities it has already identified 
through its existing governance and risk management processes. 
Requirements versus guidance 
We consider it essential that the implementation guidance is distinguishable from the 
requirements in the standards. As a minimum, we recommend that the relevant requirements 
are reproduced in full and included in quotes, with cross-references to relevant ESRS paragraphs 
rather than paraphrasing. 
 
CSRD and AI in the building industry
81
==PAGE:90==
 
3 
Other matters 
In addition to the four critical issues, we also have some observations about interoperability and 
the structure of the guidance. 
Interoperability 
We welcome the recognition that the materiality assessment performed under GRI would form 
an appropriate basis for the assessment of impact materiality under ESRS. This will be critical to 
ensuring interoperability between the two sets of standards.  
For ISSB, the guidance does not acknowledge that the material information required to be 
reported applying IFRS Sustainability Disclosure is likely to meet the requirements for financial 
materiality under ESRS. Acknowledging this symmetry is important to emphasising 
interoperability. This can be achieved by adding the words ÔÇİand vice versaÔÇÖ to paragraph 133.  
When the guidance refers to IFRS Sustainability Disclosure Standards, it needs to use the specific 
words in those standards. The proposed guidance suggests that the IFRS Sustainability 
Disclosure Standards use the term ÔÇİfinancial materialityÔÇÖ when the term used is ÔÇİmaterialityÔÇÖ 
(refer to Appendix A).  
As EFRAG and the ISSB develop further guidance on materiality, it is important that the boards 
continue their efforts to ensure that materiality assessments are aligned. A strong signal to 
support interoperability would be if the EFRAG guidance incorporated some of the application 
guidance on materiality in IFRS S1 General requirements (for example, from IFRS S1:B13-28). 
Structure  
We believe that the structure and flow of the guidance does not align with the structure and 
flow of the requirements it is designed to support. The clarity, conciseness and cohesiveness of 
both sets of guidance could be improved by distinguishing clearly between the processes for 
identifying of ÔÇİmaterial mattersÔÇÖ and disclosing ÔÇİmaterial informationÔÇÖ. The structure we have 
suggested in Appendix B would help achieve this. 
Proposed IG2: Value chain  
One of the major challenges for entities in applying the reporting requirements relating to the 
value chain is to determine how far they need to go to identify and assess material IROs. They 
also need to establish the boundaries between their ÔÇİown operationsÔÇÖ and upstream and 
downstream activities.  
ESRS uses the financial control concept in accounting standards to establish the reporting 
boundary and therefore ÔÇİown operationsÔÇÖ. It is unclear why the guidance focuses on the concept 
of operational control which is specific to the reporting of GHG emissions. Applying this concept 
to other sustainability matters seems to be interpretative and going beyond the requirements of 
ESRS. In addition, we note that the operational control concept is challenging to apply and 
82
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:91==
 
4 
therefore call for more guidance on the interaction of that concept with ESRS and financial 
accounting standards such as IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements. 
We believe additional guidance would help companies identify the boundaries of the value 
chain. Developing this guidance should be a priority and we suggest that the EFRAG Lab would 
be an appropriate forum to develop illustrative examples.  
If you have any questions on our comments, please contact Veronica Poole at +44 20 7007 0884 
or Laurence Rivat at +33 1 55 61 67 60. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Veronica Poole 
 
 
Laurence Rivat 
Global IFRS and Corporate Reporting Leader 
EU Corporate Reporting Policy Leader 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited                                         Deloitte France 
 
 
 
CSRD and AI in the building industry
83
==PAGE:92==
 
5 
Appendix A ÔÇöDetailed comments 
 
General 
Reference 
Comment 
Recommendations 
FAQs 
Interpretations: We consider that the FAQs are 
helpful but this does not negate the need for 
the European Commission to issue 
interpretations on the ESRS requirements, 
including on materiality and the value chain as 
practice develops. 
 
FAQs 
Accessibility   
We suggest EFRAG creates an FAQ 
database on its website which 
allows users to search FAQs across 
all implementation guidance 
documents. 
All IG 
documents 
Referencing: If a user of the implementation 
guidance does not have considerable previous 
knowledge of, or exposure to, ESRS, the 
implementation guidance can be difficult to 
understand due to the extensive use of internal 
and external references. It should be explicitly 
clear what content in the guidance references 
requirements in ESRS and the content that is 
EFRAG guidance on those requirements. 
We suggest:  
ÔÇó 
adding hyperlinks for internal 
FAQ/paragraph references 
and to either include 
hyperlinks to external 
references or integrate the 
relevant material into the 
document itself (or a 
combination of both)  
ÔÇó 
using direct quotes and 
quotation marks rather than a 
simplified reference to or 
paraphrase of ESRS text, or 
adding quoted text in a text 
box next to the guidance 
when referencing ESRS text. 
Disclaimer / 
Summary 
Acronyms: Users of the implementation 
guidance may not be familiar with certain 
acronyms used in the guidance. 
We suggest referencing the ESRS 
glossary (Annex II) either in the 
disclaimer or the summary 
section. 
All IG 
documents 
Examples: Across all implementation guidance 
documents, there are instances where, without 
including examples, the guidance may not be 
fully understood by users of the 
implementation guidance. 
We suggest that EGRAG consider 
developing illustrative examples 
for entities where they could help 
entities understanding the 
guidance. Ideally, some would be 
added before the guidance is 
84
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:93==
 
6 
 
published. However, we 
acknowledge that it can take time 
to develop meaningful examples 
and these could be added over 
time.   
In some cases adding simple 
examples could help entities 
understand the type of 
circumstance the standards are 
anticipating. For example, in the 
guidance on value chain 
(paragraph 142) it would be 
helpful to include some examples 
of the circumstances and type of 
explanation entities would be 
expected to provide  when no 
value chain data is available to the 
entity to enable it to make a 
meaningful estimate.  
Assurance 
The guidance uses the term criteria throughout. 
The manner in which it is used in the guidance 
is not consistent with the way it is defined or 
used in an assurance context and in assurance 
standards, for example within International 
Standard on Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 
3000 (Revised) or the proposed International 
Standard on Sustainability Assurance (ISSA) 
5000. Given that the process carried out by the 
entity to identify the information to be reported 
and related disclosures will be subject to 
assurance, the lack of clarification on this term 
could lead to misunderstanding for entities and 
assurance providers. 
We recommend EFRAG 
acknowledge within the guidance 
that criteria, as used in the 
guidance, does not have the same 
meaning and should not be 
interpreted to have the same 
meaning as when used in the 
context of assurance 
engagements and assurance 
standards. Further, we 
recommend referring to the 
characteristics of suitable criteria 
as outlined in ISAE 3000 (Revised) 
paragraphs 12c, A10, A36, and 
A45-A46 as the entityÔÇÖs 
description of their process will 
need to exhibit the characteristics 
of suitable criteria in order to 
establish that the preconditions 
for assurance are present.  
Assurance 
Recognising that documentation requirements 
and level of evidence to support the materiality 
assessment are outside of the remit of the ESRS 
Wording to this effect could be 
added to the existing content in 
paragraph 176 or made as an 
CSRD and AI in the building industry
85
==PAGE:94==
 
7 
(as per paragraph 177) we recommend 
clarifying that supporting documentation and 
evidence should be retained both for internal 
control and oversight purposes (as per 
paragraph 176) and for purposes of obtaining 
assurance.  
additional point in response to 
FAQ 12. 
 
IG1 
 
Reference 
Comment 
Recommendation 
Figure 1a) 
The diagram does not make it clear that it is 
possible that a matter could be material only 
from an impact or financial perspective. 
To supplement the diagram, we 
suggest considering including 
industry-agnostic examples of 
matters that are material from 
only one perspective. 
 
Figure 1b) 
The diagram is difficult to understand as there is 
no introduction to explain its purpose. 
Additionally, the arrows in the chart do not align 
in an easily comprehensible manner and the 
legend does not clarify sufficiently.  
We suggest either:  
ÔÇó 
communicating the message 
of the diagram in a few 
sentences or in a simplified 
manner (e.g. Step 1ÔÇôidentify 
material IROs, Step 2ÔÇô
determine what is needed 
for reporting, etc.). It should 
be clear that entities must 
first determine what are the 
material IROs/matters to 
report on, and then 
determine which 
information to report. As a 
minimum, include 
explanatory text in addition 
to the diagram to support its 
purpose, or 
 
ÔÇó 
presenting the materiality 
assessment performance 
narrative (such as Steps A-D 
in section 3 of the guidance) 
clearly and directly within 
the guidance in one location 
(as opposed to several 
86
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:95==
 
H. C. Andersens Boulevard 18 
(+45) 3377 3377 
1553 K├©benhavn V 
di@di.dk 
Danmark 
di.dk 
CVR-nr.: 16077593 
 
 
 
 
 
Comments regarding the EFRAG IG1-3 implementation guidance documents 
 
The Confederation of Danish Industry (DI) welcome the opportunity to comment on the three 
implementation guidance documents. 
 
DI supports the efforts of EFRAG to provide implementation guidance and support and recognise 
the importance of the three first guidance documents. The documents contain valuable guidance 
and assistance for preparers, auditors and users on selected areas, but DI would like to point out a 
few areas where clarifications or improvements/modifications would improve the guidance 
without making substantive changes to the drafts. 
 
General comments 
We fully support the disclaimer in the documents calling for preparers to ÔÇ£exercise their own 
judgment in applying ESRSÔÇØ (disclaimer of draft IG1 and IG2); and ÔÇ£an undertaking, based on its 
specific facts and circumstances, shall design a process that is fit for purpose, including 
consideration of the depth of the assessmentÔÇØ (IG 1, paragraph 27 and IG2, paragraph 79). 
 
The draft IGÔÇÖs provide generic and high-level examples where in particular the IG2 seems mostly 
relevant to a production entity which many entities can relate to but can be difficult for other 
types of entities to apply. It is our understanding, that the IGÔÇÖs are only providing overall guidance 
and examples and that it is not EFRAGÔÇÖs intention to establish a framework that covers all types of 
businesses or sectors. However, we believe that by including examples pertaining to e.g., the 
wholesale/retail industry, consultancy businesses, conglomerates or other sectors the guidance 
could become even more useful. We elaborate on this below. 
 
EFRAG Sustainability Reporting Board 
35 Square de Mee├╝s 
1000 Brussels 
Belgium 
2. februar 2024 
TIAG/KKO 
 
C
Appendix: Confederation of Danish
Industry IG feedback
CSRD and AI in the building industry
87
==PAGE:96==
 
 
Approach and process to determine Business Models, Value Chain and assess materiality 
The IG1 and IG2 are closely interdependent on each other as the outlining of the value chain and 
the identification of the gross list of IROÔÇÖs leads to a final materiality assessment. In our opinion a 
process illustration as the one provided in IG1, paragraph 64, is helpful.  
 
To highlight the dependencies, we suggest adding a specific paragraph describing, that each 
reporting entity should first define its own reporting entity (including operationally controlled 
entities) and its specific business model and subsequently based on that work it defines its value 
chain, assess its gross list of sustainability matters and finally conclude on double materiality based 
on its own circumstances. There will therefore be a large variety in the business models and 
materially matters identified between different reporting entities.  
 
It is our understanding that IG1 and IG2 assumes that the business model of the reporting entity is 
defined before initiating the process illustrated in IG1, paragraph 64. If this is correctly 
understood, we suggest adding this as first step (before Step A) in the illustration and that the 
process thereby should include the following 5 steps: 
 
- 
Step 1: Define the Business Model of the reporting entity. This step should include 
consideration of the fact, that the reporting and business model of the group may look 
different than the business model for subsidiaries (and subsidiary groups) and that it is not 
a simple addition of all the underlying activities.  
- 
Step 2: Definition of Value Chain ÔÇô including breath and dept ÔÇô based on this business model.  
- 
Step 3: IRO identification linked to the Business Model based on the Value Chain. i.e., the 
ÔÇ£Gross list of IROÔÇÖsÔÇØ 
- 
Step 4: DMA-assessment of the Gross list of IROÔÇÖs linked to the Business Model leading to 
the ÔÇ£List of material IROsÔÇØ 
- 
Step 5: Evaluation of whether further iterations of step 2-4 is needed, including whether 
material IROÔÇÖs for activities in the group not covered by Business Model needs to be 
addressed individually and will be material on group level. 
 
The key element in this approach is the linkage to the Business Model leading to potentially 
different IRO-identifications for different business models, and consequences on the ability to use 
the exemptions in article 19 (a) (9) and article 29(a) (9). 
 
We believe the approach (step 1-5) highlighted above is aligned with the model in IG1 paragraph 
64, but more clearly illustrate the starting point. We also believe the reporting standards and the 
guidance documents are built on this premise and suggest that the model is expanded to reflect 
the five steps in the approach described above.  
 
In addition, we suggest improving the definition of the VC provided in IG2, FAQ 1, paragraph 71 ÔÇô 
74, to include guidance on where it may begin and may end based on the undertakings business 
model, and through that its ability to make impacts and decisions-making. 
88
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:97==
 
 
Examples provides and implication of the Business Model on value chain definitions and 
materiality assessments for more types of activities 
The descriptions and examples provided in IG1 and 2 are mostly based on a production company 
with a relatively simple and clear value chain. We support using the production company as the 
base-example across the IG 1 and IG2. We do, however, suggest adding a few short, illustrative 
descriptions of areas/dilemmas of consideration for other types of business to support the 
description, for example to support IG2, paragraph 23-27. Such examples could cover:  
 
- 
A company in the wholesale/retail sector group and the difference in consideration 
between  
o having a few very large suppliers (typically a wholesaler), where it may not be 
relevant to look through that supplier due to lack of leverage, and  
o a very large number of suppliers and/or a large number of SKUs 
- 
A company/group providing consultancy or advisory services, and thus the reach of value 
chain depending on their advice based how these are applied. 
- 
A Conglomerate within two (or more) different sectors in order to illustrate how to work 
with and address more than one value chain. 
- 
An investment (holding)company that invests in a number of portfolio entities where it does 
not participate in the operations of the entities, but only provides financial investment and 
strategic ownership. 
 
Structure of the documents, interdependencies, and reference between section 
We appreciate that the use of FAQ provides an easy reference to the specific areas within the 
guidance documents. In this regard we would propose to create better coherence between the 
two parts of the guidance document, by including the key statements provided in the FAQs in the 
primary part of the document and to make specific reference to the elaborated explanation in the 
FAQ. Our opinion is that this a minimum, could be done by adding the topics dealt with in the FAQ 
to the last paragraph of each section, which refers to the additional guidance in the FAQs.  
 
We have noted that the language of the IGÔÇÖs in certain areas is hard to understand. This is in 
particular the case in the descriptions of financial materiality, among other in IG 1, section 3.3.2, 
paragraph 87 ÔÇô 94, and section 5.2., paragraph 154 ÔÇô 158. We suggest that these sections are 
reviewed, and the language is carefully considered also having the difference between financial 
materiality, cf. ESRS 1, section 3.5, paragraph 47-51, and anticipated financial effect related to 
opportunities, cf. ESRS 1, section 7.8, paragraph 109, in mind to avoid confusion.  
 
The guidance provided in IG1 and IG2 is circular. This is for example the case in IG2, FAQ 1, 
paragraph 71-74, which answers the question ÔÇ£Where does the VC begin and end?ÔÇØ with a 
description of how the undertaking identifies and assess material IROs. IG1, section 3.2, step B 
ÔÇ£Identification of the actual and potential IROÔÇÖs related to sustainability mattersÔÇØ, paragraph 71, 
however, describes that the undertaking identifies the material IROs across the value chain. The 
description in IG1 thereby assumes that the undertaking already knows its VC when it identifies 
CSRD and AI in the building industry
89
==PAGE:98==
 
 
the IRO, whereas IG2 defines the VC through the identification for IRO. We believe the suggested 
changes to enhance the guidance on the approach and process to determine Business Models, 
Value Chain and assess materiality, cf. above, would limit the issues around the circularity and 
improve understanding the connectivity between the guidance in IG1 and IG2. We do, however, 
suggest that the documents are reviewed to identify and consider other possible circularities.  
 
Examples illustrating the VC and IROs when more entities within the same group structure 
reports individually.  
We suggest adding an example, that illustrates the impact on the value chain definition, level of 
materiality and other elements in a group where both the parent entity and a subsidiary submits a 
(consolidated) sustainability report, i.e., both a full group reporting and a separate subsidiary 
group reporting is submitted. Our understanding is that the topics/impacts considered material in 
the subsidiary group reporting is not automatically considered material on full group level, and 
that the ÔÇ£own operationÔÇØ on subsidiary group level does not include the parent entity nor sister 
entities.  
 
In Denmark, we have several entities that are fully owned by EU/non-EU groups and that expects 
to (continue to) submit a sustainability report themselves.  Thus, it is important for them to 
understand the interrelations in terms of ÔÇ£own activityÔÇØ vs. value chain as well as the interrelations 
on IROs and the materiality assessment. In our opinion, this would depend on the understanding 
of the relationship to the ÔÇ£business modelÔÇØ as highlighted above, as we believe the ÔÇ£business 
modelÔÇØ is the overall deciding factor for the specific reporting. This reading is supported by the 
bottom-up approach in IG1 whereby a subsidiary reporting could inform the parent group in their 
materiality assessment.  
 
Furthermore, more guidance on the extent a subsidiary/parent can make use of for instance each 
otherÔÇÖs stakeholder engagements etc. would be helpful.  
 
Guidance on divergent business activities in a subsidiary 
We find that the guidance on how to report on divergent activities in a subsidiary, including 
whether and how this affects reporting on metrics, could be improved. We would assume that a 
metric that is material in a specific subsidiary would not necessarily trigger a general reporting 
across the group. Rather, this will depend on the materiality analysis performed at group level. 
When drafting the guidance, it may be helpful to illustrate a conglomerate and/or an entity with a 
main activity and a small subsidiary with a completely divergent activity. 
 
 
90
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:99==
 
 
Translations 
We understand that EFRAG will not translate the documents and we agree that translation is not a 
part of the EFRAGs task. However, we find translations important and very helpful given the broad 
user group of the reporting standards and their difficulties in understanding technical English 
legislation and guidance. We encourage EFRAG to push for the EU-Commission (potentially 
together with national authorities) to translate these essential guidance documents. 
 
 
Kind regards 
Confederation of Danish Industry 
 
 
Tina Aggerholm 
Leading Senior Advisor 
CSRD and AI in the building industry
91
==PAGE:100==
D
Appendix: Keywords created in JSON file
,
1
{
2
"1": ["Objective", "Disclosure Requirements", "climate change", "impacts", "Paris
Agreement", "sustainable economy", "1.5┬░C"],
3
"1a": ["GHG emissions", "material impacts", "actual and potential impacts"],
4
"1b": ["Paris Agreement", "mitigation efforts", "limiting global warming"],
5
"1c": ["strategy and business model", "sustainable economy", "climate neutrality"],
6
"1d": ["actions taken", "negative impacts", "mitigation or remediation"],
7
"1e": ["material risks and opportunities", "impacts and dependencies", "climate
change management"],
8
"1f": ["financial effects", "short-, medium - and long-term", "risks and
opportunities"],
9
"2": ["EU legislation", "regulation", "EU Climate Law", "Climate Benchmark
Standards Regulation", "Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR)", "EU
Taxonomy", "EBA Pillar 3 disclosure requirements"],
10
"3": ["Sustainability matters", "Climate change mitigation", "Climate change
adaptation", "energy -related matters"],
11
"4": ["Climate change mitigation", "global average temperature", "Paris Agreement",
"Greenhouse gases (GHG)", "CO2", "CH4", "N2O", "HFCs", "PFCs", "SF6", "NF3", "
transition risks"],
12
"5": ["Climate change adaptation", "adjustment", "expected climate change"],
13
"6": ["Climate -related hazards", "physical climate risks", "adaptation solutions"],
14
"7": ["Energy", "energy production", "energy consumption"],
15
"8": ["Ozone-depleting substances (ODS)", "nitrogen oxides (NOX)", "sulphur oxides
(SOX)", "air emissions", "climate change", "ESRS E2"],
16
"9": ["Impacts on people", "climate -neutral economy", "ESRS S1", "Own workforce", "
ESRS S2", "Workers in the value chain", "ESRS S3", "Affected communities", "
ESRS S4", "Consumers and end-users"],
17
"10": ["Climate change mitigation", "adaptation", "ESRS E3", "Water and marine
resources", "ESRS E4", "Biodiversity and ecosystems", "climate -related hazards"
, "AR 11"],
18
"11": ["ESRS 1", "General requirements", "ESRS 2", "General disclosures"],
19
"12": ["ESRS 2", "Governance", "Strategy", "Impact", "risk and opportunity
management", "sustainability statement", "SeM-3 Material impacts", "strategy",
"business model"],
20
"13": ["Governance", "ESRS 2 GOV-3", "sustainability -related performance", "
incentive schemes", "remuneration", "GHG emission reduction targets", "climate -
related considerations"],
21
"14": ["Strategy", "Transition plan", "climate change mitigation"],
22
"15": ["Transition plan", "mitigation efforts", "strategy", "business model", "
sustainable economy", "global warming", "1.5 ┬░C", "Paris Agreement", "climate
neutrality", "2050", "coal", "oil", "gas-related activities"],
23
"16": ["GHG emission reduction targets", "Paris Agreement", "1.5┬░C", "
decarbonisation levers", "product and service portfolio", "new technologies", "
upstream", "downstream", "value chain"],
24
"16a": ["GHG emission reduction targets", "Paris Agreement", "global warming limit"
],
25
"16b": ["decarbonisation levers", "climate change mitigation actions", "product and
service portfolio", "new technologies", "value chain"],
26
"16c": ["investments", "funding", "transition plan", "climate -related hazards"],
27
"16d": [""],
28
"16e": [""],
29
"16f": [""],
30
"16g": [""],
31
"16h": [""],
32
"16i": [""],
33
"16j": [""],
92
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:101==
34
"17": ["climate -related hazards", "climate -related physical risks", "climate
scenario analysis"],
35
"18": ["material climate -related risk", "climate -related physical risk", "climate -
related transition risk"],
36
"19": ["resilience of strategy and business model", "climate change", "scenario
analysis"],
37
"19a": ["scope", "resilience analysis"],
38
"19b": ["climate scenario analysis", "Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO
-1", "application requirement paragraphs"],
39
"19c": ["results", "resilience analysis", "scenario analysis"],
40
"20": ["material climate -related impacts", "risks", "opportunities"],
41
"20a": ["GHG emissions", "Disclosure Requirement ESRS E1-6", "impacts on climate
change"],
42
"20b": ["climate -related physical risks", "climate -related hazards", "assets and
business activities exposure"],
43
"20c": ["climate -related transition risks and opportunities", "climate -related
transition events", "assets and business activities exposure"],
44
"21": ["climate -related scenario analysis","range of climate scenarios","physical
risks and transition risks and opportunities"],
45
"22": ["policies related to climate change mitigation and adaptation","material
impacts , risks and opportunities","management and/or remediation"],
46
"23": ["policies that address climate change mitigation and adaptation","
identification , assessment , management","material climate change mitigation and
adaptation impacts , risks and opportunities"],
47
"24": ["policies to manage material sustainability matters","material impacts ,
risks and opportunities","climate change mitigation and adaptation"],
48
"25": ["Policies", "climate change mitigation", "adaptation", "energy efficiency",
"renewable energy deployment"],
49
"25a": ["climate change mitigation"],
50
"25b": ["climate change adaptation"],
51
"25c": ["energy efficiency"],
52
"25d": ["renewable energy deployment"],
53
"25e": ["other"],
54
"26": ["Actions and resources", "climate change policies", "mitigation", "
adaptation"],
55
"27": ["Key actions", "policy objectives", "targets"],
56
"28": ["Actions and resources", "climate change mitigation", "adaptation", "ESRS 2
MDR-A"],
57
"29": ["Decarbonisation lever", "nature -based solutions", "GHG emission reductions"
, "CapEx", "OpEx"],
58
"29a": ["climate change mitigation actions", "decarbonisation lever", "nature -based
solutions"],
59
"29b": ["outcome of actions", "GHG emission reductions", "achieved and expected
reductions"],
60
"29c": ["significant monetary amounts", "CapEx", "OpEx", "financial statements", "
performance indicators", "CapEx plan"],
61
"29i": ["CapEx","OpEx","financial statements"],
62
"29ii": ["Key performance indicators", "Commissions Delegated Regulation (EU)
2021/2178"],
63
"30": ["Climate -related targets", "mitigation", "adaptation"],
64
"31": ["Targets", "policies", "climate -related impacts", "risks", "opportunities"],
65
"32": ["Targets", "ESRS 2 MDR-T", "tracking effectiveness"],
66
"33": ["GHG emissions reduction targets", "renewable energy deployment", "energy
efficiency", "climate change adaptation", "risk mitigation"],
67
"34": ["GHG emission reduction targets", "Scope 1", "Scope 2", "Scope 3", "CO2eq",
"base year", "emission Scopes", "GHG inventory boundaries"],
68
"34a": ["GHG emissions", "Paris Agreement", "intensity"],
69
"34b": ["transition plan", "sustainable economy", "global warming limit"],
70
"34c": ["strategy and business model", "adaptation", "sustainable economy"],
71
"34d": ["mitigation actions", "negative impacts", "climate -related actions"],
72
"34e": ["material risks and opportunities", "climate change dependencies", "risk
management"],
CSRD and AI in the building industry
93
==PAGE:102==
73
"34f": ["financial effects", "short-, medium -, long-term", "climate change risks
and opportunities"],
74
"35": ["GHG emission reduction targets", "Paris Agreement", "climate neutrality by
2050"],
75
"36": ["decarbonisation levers", "product and service portfolio", "new technologies
"],
76
"37": ["investments and funding", "transition plan", "quantification"],
77
"37a": ["Energy consumption fossil sources"],
78
"37b": ["Energy consumption nuclear sources"],
79
"37c": ["Energy consumption renewable sources", "waste of biologic origin"],
80
"38": ["GHG emission reduction targets", "absolute value", "intensity value"],
81
"38a": [""],
82
"38b": [""],
83
"38c": [""],
84
"38d": [""],
85
"38e": [""],
86
"39": ["Scope 1, 2, 3 GHG emissions", "combined GHG emission reduction targets", "
GHG inventory boundaries"],
87
"40": ["base year", "baseline value", "GHG emission reduction targets"],
88
"41": ["progress", "GHG emission reduction targets", "historical data"],
89
"42": ["GHG emission reduction targets", "Paris Agreement", "1.5┬░C global warming
limit"],
90
"43": ["GHG emission reduction targets", "external initiatives", "science -based
targets"],
91
"44": ["Disclose metric tonnes co2eq"],
92
"44a": ["gross Scope 1 GHG emissions"],
93
"44b": ["gross Scope 2 GHG emissions"],
94
"44c": ["gross Scope 3 GHG emissions"],
95
"44d": ["Total GHG emissions"],
96
"45": ["Paragraph 44"],
97
"45a": ["Emission trading schemes"],
98
"45b": ["consumed energy","externally purchased or acquired"],
99
"45c": ["upstream", "donwstream","value chain","transition risks"],
100
"45d": ["GHG emission", "climate related targets","EU policy goals"],
101
"46": ["joint ventures","equity held","operational control"],
102
"70": ["Financial effects", "opportunities", "cost savings", "climate change
mitigation", "adaptation actions", "market size", "net revenue", "low-carbon
products", "services", "adaptation solutions"]
103
}
Listing D.1: Keywords created in JSON file
94
CSRD and AI in the building industry
==PAGE:103==
CSRD and AI in the building industry
95
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
