==PAGE:1==
Master of Science Thesis
Augmentation of a pricing offline
reinforcement learning algorithm using a
surrogate customer behaviour model
July 30, 2024
Shreyas Garani Srikanth, s223052
Supervisor: Tue Herlau
External supervisor: Pimin Konstantin Kefaloukos
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgement
In memory of Padmalakshmi Sheshadri, a loving grandmother.
I am extremely thankful and pay my gratitude to my supervisors, Tue Herlau, Associate
Professor at Technical University of Denmark, and Pimin Konstantin Kefaloukos, Senior Data
Scientist at A P Moller Maersk without which this work would not have been possible. I am
also extremely thankful to my entire family, who supported me during hard times which I had
to endure during the course of my thesis. I am also grateful for the support offered by all of my
friends during this period.
Page 1 of 59
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
A.P. Moller Maersk is a Danish company established in 1904 that holds a prominent position
in the global container shipping industry, renowned for its comprehensive supply chain and
logistics services. In 2022, the global shipping container market was estimated to be worth USD
9.21 billion, with Maersk holding a substantial market share. In order to set prices for containers
being shipped throughout its fleet, the company wishes to investigate dynamic pricing strategies,
which make use of past information on container prices as well as other relevant variables to
raise or lower container prices in response to specific circumstances. Reinforcement learning,
and specifically offline reinforcement learning, which is an effective way to learn good strategies
using historical data, is one approach being explored for dynamic pricing strategies. Because of
this, the business wants to evaluate various algorithms, and relying solely on historical data to
validate an algorithm’s performance can be challenging. It is important to determine whether
the algorithm leads the Reinforcement Learning agent to learn a basic or trivial policy and,
if so, to investigate ways to improve its performance.
This study investigates whether the
algorithm’s current configuration results in the implementation of a very basic strategy and
examines whether the introduction of a customer elasticity model using some learning techniques
allows the Reinforcement Learning agent to learn more effective strategies or policies.
By presenting an environment that has a very high incentive for the Reinforcement Learn-
ing agent to learn a basic policy, this report challenges the organization’s implementation of an
offline Reinforcement Learning algorithm known as Implicit Q Learning. Next, it uses linear re-
gression to estimate the customer elasticity between the container prices and booking quantities.
Ultimately, an environment that takes into account the elasticity of the customer is constructed,
and the algorithm is then applied to it. This report demonstrates that, when evaluated against
an environment that incentivises the agent to increase prices, as indicated by very high average
rewards and high actions computed - the agent trained using the Implicit Q Learning Algorithm
does learn a trivial policy. Training the Reinforcement Learning agent in an environment that
included the customer elasticity model, which was found to have a negative correlation between
booking quantities and container prices showed that the agent had learnt a better policy, as
demonstrated once more by the nature of the computed actions and average rewards. This is
further proved in this report by showing that the average rewards obtained by evaluating the
trivial policy against the environment incorporating the customer-price elasticity model, was
found to have lower average rewards in comparison with the policy trained in the customer-price
elasticity environment. This report’s conclusion is that the organization’s current algorithmic
setup does not generalise to new scenarios and instead accomplishes something that can be
abused. It also demonstrates that steps can be taken to train the Reinforcement Learning agent
to learn more effective pricing strategies for containers.
Page 2 of 59
==PAGE:4==
Symbols and Abbreviations
Maersk
Short for A P Moller Maersk
RL
Reinforcement Learning
MDP
Markov Decision Process
a
Actions
s
States
r
Rewards
st
Current state at time t
st+1
Next state at time t+1
at
Action undertaken at time t
at+1
Action undertaken at time t+1
π
Policy obtained from training the RL Model
π(a|s)
Action selected according to policy given a state
rt
Reward at time step t
rt+1
Reward at time step t+1
γ
Discount factor for future rewards
S
Set of all possible states
R
Set of all possible rewards
A
Set of all possible actions
γ
Discount factor where 0 ≤γ ≤1
Σ
Summation over some quantity
π∗
Optimal policy for the RL problem
D
Offline Dataset used for training
V or V (s, a)
Value function of the state
Q or Q(s, a)
Q value function of the state and action
V π or V π(s, a)
Value function of the state following a policy π
Qπ or Qπ(s, a)
Q value function of the state and action following a policy π
Page 3 of 59
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction and Background
6
1.1
Dynamic pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.1.1
Introduction to dynamic pricing and challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.1.2
Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Pricing Problems . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Reinforcement Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.1
Introduction to the Reinforcement Learning Problem and Types . . . . .
9
1.2.2
Context of the Reinforcement Learning Problem in Relation to the Dy-
namic Pricing of Containers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.3
Online vs Offline Reinforcement Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.4
Introduction to Implicit Q Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3
Purpose of this thesis and research areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Dataset
13
2.1
Geographical dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Sequential pricing dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methods
17
3.1
Foundations of Reinforcement Learning with respect to the container pricing prob-
lem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Modeling Reinforcement Learning and the Container Pricing Problem . . . . . .
18
3.3
Online vs Offline Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Implicit Q Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Modeling customer elasticity using Linear Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Experiments and Experimental Setup
27
4.1
Experimental Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Data Preprocessing and Transformations to setup the Training Dataset . . . . .
28
4.3
Setup of an Environment without Customer Elasticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.1
Initialisation of the environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.2
Transitioning of states in the environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.3
Resetting of the environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Customer Demand-Price Elasticity using Linear Regression
. . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Environment Incorporating the Customer Elasticity model . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.1
Initialisation of the environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.2
Transitioning of states in the environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.3
Resetting of the Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6
Training the Reinforcement Learning Algorithm using the default setup
. . . .
34
4.7
Exploration of alternate hyperparameter values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Results and Discussion
36
5.1
Trends and Behaviour in the MDP Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Results from Training the Reinforcement Learning Agent without customer elas-
ticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Results from Exploring Alternate Hyperparameter values . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
==PAGE:6==
Contents
5.4
Results from using Linear Regression to estimate customer elasticity . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Results from Training the RL agent with customer elasticity . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Conclusions
49
References
50
7
Appendix
54
7.1
Offline Reinforcement Learning for Pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2
Hyperparameters involved in training the Reinforcement Learning Agent
. . . .
54
7.3
Various curves for training RL agent for various hyperparameters using different
environments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Page 5 of 59
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction and Background
A. P. Moller Maersk is a Danish-founded logistics and transportation firm that was es-
tablished in 1904 [1].
Maersk is a multinational company with one of the biggest fleets of
container ships, offering frequent services. The company’s network enables the efficient and reli-
able transportation of a wide range of commodities. Maersk has a large fleet of containers that
are transported by several ships, and they must set their prices based on a number of variables,
including availability of containers and seasonal and regional demand. Right now, Maersk is
employing a pricing policy convention that was drawn up by humans to determine the price of
the containers, but intends to develop dynamic pricing strategies for container pricing.
Customers can select a specific origin and destination for different types of containers, and
the price for that will be revealed, when they log into their account on the Maersk portal.
A specific container can move via a number of corridors or routes. For instance, a container
travelling from Copenhagen to India has two options: it either travel via the Suez Canal as
a shortcut or towards the Cape of Good Hope. A wide range of variables, including demand,
seasonal variations, and other causative factors, might affect the price as mentioned before.
For instance, during the winter months in northern Europe, there is a surge in demand for
containers on ships arriving from equatorial regions such as Brazil, India, and parts of Africa.
This is because the climate in these regions makes it possible to grow a lot of fresh produce,
which is not possible in northern Europe. This pricing problem is exceedingly complex due
to the sheer volume of containers, the number of pairs of sources and destinations, and other
anomalies existing in the world and also, the complex and innumerable number of factors which
could alter demand and affect the pricing of containers. Because of these considerations, it is
very difficult for a group of people to manually determine pricing because human error will cause
certain underlying trends and opportunities to maximise profit to be ignored.
Therefore, in order to maximise long-term profit for the organisation in a reasonable manner
and avoid setting the price of the containers too high, modern methods must be developed. A
technique known as dynamic pricing can be used to get around these problems [2]. These days,
a variety of machine learning techniques, such as reinforcement learning, are being used to solve
problems of this kind with promising outcomes [3]. Whether Reinforcement Learning can offer
practical solutions to this pricing problem is an of interest for this thesis.
This introduction section provides a quick definition of dynamic pricing along with an
overview of the different techniques that can be applied. It then continues by showcasing a large
body of related research on the application of reinforcement learning to dynamic pricing and
how well it can address the issue. This chapter’s second section serves as an introduction to
reinforcement learning. Additionally, it places the previously discussed container pricing issue
within the framework of reinforcement learning. The research areas of this thesis are presented
to wrap up the chapter, along with a brief overview of the precise techniques utilised to solve
the dynamic pricing problem.
Page 6 of 59
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Dynamic pricing
1.1
Dynamic pricing
Today’s large-scale online traders need to use accurate pricing when trading goods or ser-
vices. Customers may choose less expensive competitors or those that provide a better service
or a comparable product if an organization’s product pricing are significantly higher than those
of the organization’s rivals. Although basic pricing techniques can be employed and their pa-
rameters adjusted manually, this begs the question of whether an automated solution to such
issues can be offered, and the answer to this is the use of dynamic pricing. [3]
1.1.1
Introduction to dynamic pricing and challenges
The study of calculating the best selling prices for goods or services in an environment
where adjustments are frequent and easy is known as dynamic pricing [2]. Prices can now be
regularly adjusted to reflect changing circumstances without incurring additional fees or effort
thanks to digital technology. These days, a wide range of organisations employ dynamic pricing
strategies, which are sometimes seen as an essential component of pricing strategies. In general,
digital sales environments give businesses access to a wealth of sales data. This information
could provide valuable insights into how consumers behave, particularly in relation to how they
react to various selling prices. Key competitive advantages may result from using the data’s
knowledge and using it to dynamic pricing strategies; understanding how this should be done is
both theoretically and practically interesting [2].
Dynamic pricing with learning can be understood as the convergence of two areas of re-
search: price optimisation and statistical learning, particularly as they relate to demand func-
tion estimation. Multi-armed bandit problems are intimately related to dynamic pricing under
uncertainty. The well-known exploration-exploitation trade-off is one of the key elements of this
class of problems that captures many important aspects of optimisation under uncertainty. The
decision maker must appropriately balance the two goals of maximising instant reward (exploita-
tion of current knowledge) and discovering the unknown properties of the system (exploration).
[2]
Dynamic pricing strategies can be affected by several factors. In the case of A P Moller
Maersk, it usually depends on factors like the port of origin and destination, customer demo-
graphics, geopolitical conditions, and others. These variables offer a wide range of possible price
contributors, but there is no way to assess how important each variable is in relation to the
others, which makes it difficult to implement dynamic pricing. When combined with real-time
incoming data that occasionally exhibits anomalies, it becomes essential to employ alternate
techniques for product pricing in order to guarantee profitability in a long-term manner. It
is hoped that these difficult issues can be resolved given the recent developments in machine
learning, particularly in the area of reinforcement learning. The next section provides truth to
the fact that Reinforcement Learning has been used in multiple avenues in pricing to provide
customised solution.
Page 7 of 59
==PAGE:9==
1.1
Dynamic pricing
1.1.2
Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Pricing Problems
Reinforcement Learning offers algorithms, that are focused around solving sequential de-
cision problems by maximizing a reward stream offered by taking a particular decision/action.
They simply need to be set up for hyper-parameter tuning and are problem-independent. They
have been applied to a number of issues in the past, such as robotics and video games. [3] An
excellent illustration of this can be found in [4], where deep Q networks (DQNs) were created
and evaluated in the classical domain of Atari 2006 games.
There are some classical features of Reinforcement Learning which make it a very good fit
for problems of dynamic pricing. Because RL algorithms are always learning and adjusting to
new information, they are ideal for situations where consumer behaviour and market conditions
fluctuate over time. This flexibility guarantees that the pricing plan will continue to work when
circumstances change [5]. In dynamic pricing settings, the goal of maximising long-term income
or profit is aligned with RL’s focus on cumulative rewards optimisation. RL can assist in setting
prices that will not only generate immediate sales but also foster enduring customer loyalty
and value by taking future rewards into account [5]. Dynamic pricing entails intricate decision-
making procedures that take into account a number of variables, including client segmentation,
rival pricing, and inventory levels.
Such complexity can be managed by RL because of its
capacity to handle high-dimensional state and action spaces [4]. These are some of many factors
which make Reinforcement Learning conducive to solve dynamic pricing problems.
Many examples are available where RL has been applied to different market models and
pricing systems. A multi-agent market model is presented by [6], in which the seller must decide
on the offer price as well as the quantity of items produced in a scenario where another rival
is making the same choice dynamically. In the above case, a price bot was implemented using
Q-learning. Although Q-learning is slower than specialised alternatives, it was observed to find
almost optimal policies.
Reinforcement learning is applied to airline pricing systems for revenue management in ([7]).
It has included real-world issues like overbooking and various consumer classes in the simulation.
An airline pricing model that works well and beats industry-standard algorithms was created at
that particular moment by combining temporal difference learning with neural networks.
The problem of selling computation time in a cloud service is formulated by [8] as a partially
observable Markov decision process, in which the agent has partial access to information about
potential competitors. Q-learning is proposed by [9] as a solution to pricing difficulties involv-
ing several items with interdependent demand. When a user needs to take into consideration
elements such as product relationships but lacks explicit information about them, Q-learning
appears to be a promising option.
Q-learning in energy markets is studied in [10]. As a result in [10], the service provider
must choose his price wisely in order to manage demand and increase profits. It looks for states
that are structurally comparable and utilise the information found to update the Q-estimation
at various intervals. The generality of reinforcement learning is forfeited since the method is
market model particular.
Page 8 of 59
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Reinforcement Learning
It is clear that dynamic pricing has been carried out across a range of markets and sectors
using RL algorithms with noteworthy accuracy and efficiency. Therefore, applying RL algorithms
to the container pricing problem is an interesting aspect of this thesis, as it allows for the analysis
and interpretation of results as well as the evaluation of the problem’s solveability using these
algorithms.
1.2
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning describes strategies for increasing performance via experimentation.
Even with the latest advancements in artificial learning systems, such as improved techniques
for training artificial neural networks, the majority of these systems still pick up knowledge from
an experienced teacher who can instruct them on how to react to a given set of training stimuli
[5]. But when obtaining the necessary training examples is expensive or perhaps impossible,
systems limited to learning under these conditions are insufficient. Instead of relying solely on
experienced teachers to impart knowledge, autonomous systems can now learn from their own
experiences thanks to reinforcement learning [4].
As mentioned in 1.1.2, RL algorithms have the ability to solve sequential decision problems.
This example can serve as a good illustration of how dynamic pricing is a sequential decision
problem in this context . A product with 100 units in stock is sold over a ten-day period by an
online retailer. They modify the price every day in accordance with inventory and sales. They
set the price at 20 Danish Krones on the first day, selling 30 units for a profit of 600 DKK, leaving
70 units. Due to reduced inventory, they increase the price to 25 DKK on Day 2 and sell 20
units, making 500 DKK. In order to maximise total revenue over the course of the ten days, this
process is repeated daily, adjusting the price to balance sales and inventory. Hence, by framing
a pricing problem as a sequential decision problem [11], Reinforcement Learning algorithms can
be fitted to find an optimal strategy.
This section of the chapter provides a brief definition of terms used in reinforcement learning
and explains how they apply to the container pricing pricing problem. It also explains some of
the key distinctions between the two main RL approaches, offline and online, and offers a high-
level summary of each. It also gives an introduction to Implicit Q Learning and emphasises the
importance of IQL, which is of interest later in this report.
1.2.1
Introduction to the Reinforcement Learning Problem and Types
As previously mentioned, this report examines the problem of dynamic container pricing
and its solution through the application of reinforcement learning. The state in reinforcement
learning refers to the current circumstances or surroundings that the agent observes. In the
dynamic pricing scenario mentioned in 1.2, this includes the amount of inventory left, the time
of day and even willing buyers. The choice the agent takes in reaction to the situation is known as
the action. An example of this would be daily product price setting by the retailer. The agent’s
feedback following a transaction, which quantifies the immediate gain (e.g., sales revenue), serves
Page 9 of 59
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Reinforcement Learning
as the reward. The agent is supposed to learn a policy that maximises the cumulative reward,
i.e, even future rewards over time by mapping states to actions [5]. In the pricing case mentioned
before, this would entail the total revenue gained by selling the products. In this scenario, the
agent’s goal would be to set prices of the products based on the inventory and demand from
customers for the product so that the total revenue gained from selling all the products would
be maximised in the future also.
The policy is the strategy that the agent learns and uses to decide which action to take
in each state. In the example, the strategy would be to incorporate all factors influencing the
price and determine whether to increase or decrease the price on a given time of day. It can
be either stochastic meaning that they can be random based off a given probability and hence,
giving a probability distribution across all possible actions, or deterministic, meaning precisely
determined with no randomness involved, giving a single action for every state [5]. The policy
directs the agent’s actions with the long-term goal of maximising cumulative reward. The core
of reinforcement learning (RL) is learning optimal policies, which is accomplished via a variety
of algorithms that iteratively enhance the policy based on observed rewards and state transitions
as mentioned before [5].
1.2.2
Context of the Reinforcement Learning Problem in Relation to the Dynamic
Pricing of Containers
A state in the Reinforcement Learning problem for the dynamic pricing problem of con-
tainers would have a number of variables, including the container price, the number of days till
the container departs, the origin and destination coordinates, and the booked quantities. Later
sections go into more detail about this. After taking into consideration every factor in the state,
the price of the concerned container would be adjusted. The overall value of the specific deal to
the company, which is the product of the booking quantities multiplied by the new price, along
with certain other quantities not included in this report, would be the reward function in this
context.
The action in this situation would be either to increase or decrease the price of the container
based on all the factors mentioned in the state. The organisation intends to carry out this at
various intervals, where the algorithm increase or decreases the prices for multiple intervals of
time. However, for the purposes of this report, the algorithm’s predicted action will occur every
four hours.
The goal of the Reinforcement Learning algorithm is to identify an optimal policy or strategy
(π) that attempts to maximise projected future rewards based on an increase or decrease in a
container’s price in the present while taking into consideration all of factors in the state. The
cumulative or projected future reward would just be the total value of the trade to the company
over the course of time, and this is influenced by how the prices are set as the reward is influenced
by this factor.
In summary, it can be stated that the RL algorithm for the dynamic pricing problem
Page 10 of 59
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Reinforcement Learning
should, given a state variable containing some container-related parameters, generate an effective
strategy or policy to raise or lower prices for the concerned containers in a way that maximises
long-term profits for the business.
1.2.3
Online vs Offline Reinforcement Learning
Learning using real-time interactions with an environment is known as online reinforcement
learning [12]. Based on real time feedback from its actions, the agent iteratively investigates
and refines its strategy. The need for effective exploration to gather a variety of experiences
and prevent becoming trapped in les than optimal behaviour is one of the challenges of online
RL. To optimise gains, the agent must strike a balance between investigating novel tactics and
utilising tried-and-true ones [13]. Furthermore, maintaining learning’s stability and convergence
while adjusting to changing surroundings can be challenging. The success and dependability of
online reinforcement learning systems depend on overcoming these obstacles [12].
Unlike real-time environment interaction, offline reinforcement learning makes use of histor-
ical data to inform its decisions. This method determines the best course of action by analysing
historical data [14]. Dealing with biased or incomplete data, which might not accurately reflect
all potential outcomes, presents difficulties and can result in suboptimal learning. Furthermore,
there is a significant challenge in guaranteeing that the learnt policy performs well outside the
training data, and the algorithm might struggle to generalise from the training data to new
scenarios. Making offline reinforcement learning dependable and successful requires addressing
these issues [14].
Deploying an online reinforcement learning system in the dynamic pricing scenario would
prove to be too expensive because an agent’s excessive exploration could result in losses from
higher price fluctuations and lost opportunities to maximise profit. Additionally, gathering real-
time data and enabling the RL agent to interact with it is quite computationally intensive.
In order to solve the dynamic pricing problem, offline reinforcement learning that is trained
repeatedly using historical datasets makes sense because the agent learns to navigate through
trajectories that are more likely to occur in real life in an optimal manner because it has already
experienced them during training. There are multiple literatures which have verified the effi-
ciency of offline reinforcement learning for dynamic pricing, and is left as an additional reading
in the Appendix section of this report 7. The above reasons mentioned is why using offline RL
methods is the objective for this thesis and why the organisation is looking into it.
1.2.4
Introduction to Implicit Q Learning
Implicit Q Learning is an offline reinforcement learning method mentioned in [15] that
permits multi-step dynamic programming but totally prevents any queries to values of out-of-
sample operations during training. Put simply, Implicit Q-learning is a technique that does
not need evaluating actions outside of the dataset and still allows the learnt policy to achieve
significant improvements through generalisation over the best behaviour in the data [15].
Page 11 of 59
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Purpose of this thesis and research areas
The majority of the literature does discuss deep Q networks, or DQNs, as can be seen in
1.1.2. The IQL approach was prioritised instead of the methods mentioned in [3] because it can
approximate or interpolate a number of other RL techniques, including DQNs [15]. Implicit Q
Learning is an interesting technique to apply to the dynamic container pricing problem as well
because of its capacity for some generalisation, which may allow it to produce a policy that can
still function well for unobserved states that are absent from the dataset. One more factor is
that Q Learning is only applicable in the case of discrete actions, but Implicit Q Learning has
the ability to be applied for continuous actions.
1.3
Purpose of this thesis and research areas
As previously indicated, this report assesses the application of offline reinforcement learning
for dynamic pricing of owned and leased containers by the shipping company. The robustness of
Implicit Q Learning, the sequential decision-making algorithm for container pricing that was first
presented in 1.2.4, is assessed in this report. Since the business currently uses this particular
algorithm, a thorough analysis and recommendation for improving the pricing algorithm are
required in order to pinpoint its shortcomings.
This master’s thesis considers the following
research areas/questions and examines them:
• Will the current setup of the Reinforcement Learning Algorithm at the organization learn
a trivial policy if evaluated against an environment with a high reward related to raising
prices, thereby calculating only high and trivial actions and have very high average rewards
and how do the rewards correlate with various hyper parameters?
• Can a simple customer elasticity model, which gives the propensity of a customer to buy
containers, be learnt from the existing dataset which has either a positive or negative effect
between the prices of the containers and the booking quantities of the containers?
• If the algorithm learns a trivial policy or strategy, will a new environment with the embed-
ded customer elasticity model which helps in training the agent lead to the agent learning
a policy which leads to lower rewards with non trivial actions thereby leading to more
sensible or better policies?
In order to address these questions, subsequent sections of this report are arranged as
follows. The datasets utilised in this report’s numerous studies are described in Chapter 2. In-
depth technical discussions from a mathematical perspective, both of Reinforcement Learning
and Implicit Q Learning are provided in Chapter 3. The environments used to examine the
research questions along with details on the setup of experiments to train the Reinforcement
Learning Agent are discussed in Chapter 4. The results of all experiments are discussed and
their interpretation is provided in Chapter 5. Chapter 6 brings the report and the answers to the
research questions to a conclusion and discusses potential directions for future investigation.
Page 12 of 59
==PAGE:14==
2
Dataset
This chapter gives a detailed explanation about the nature of the datasets used in this
thesis along with some summary statistics about the same. For the objectives of this paper, two
datasets were employed: the historical sequential price dataset, which contained the behaviour
policy for offline reinforcement learning training, and the geography dataset used by the orga-
nization. The reader only needs to skim this chapter in order to understand how the RL state
vector was created, a process that will be covered in more detail in later chapters.
2.1
Geographical dataset
This dataset includes the latitude and longitude positions of every origin and destination
that the company owned fleet sailed to and from. It also includes the Haversine distance also
known as the great circle distance between every pair of origin and destination. The Haversine
distance is the angular separation between two locations on a sphere’s surface. The precise
sailing distance between each pair of origins and destinations was additionally included. This
was instrumental in constructing the episodes which was used to train the RL agent which is
described later in this report. Totaling 608,407 records, the dataset was saved in a SQL database
with 16 fields that could be accessed using Structured Query Language (SQL). The variables in
the dataset with their description and datatypes are listed as follows:
• origin: A coded string indicating the port of origin from which the container is sailing.
• destination: A coded string indicating the port of destination to which a container is sailing
to.
• origin_lat: Float number indicating Latitude corresponding to port of origin.
• origin_lon: Float number indicating Longitude corresponding to port of origin.
• destination_lat: Float number indicating Latitude corresponding to port of destination.
• destination_lon: Float number indicating Longitude corresponding to port of destination.
• haversine_distance_km: Float number indicating the great circle distance between every
pair of port of origin and port of destination.
• sailing_distance_km: Float number indicating sailing distance between every pair of port
of origin and port of destination.
• used-canal-ids: Array of strings to indicate if the ship holding the container goes through
a canal anywhere on the globe.
• origin_dist_to_coastline: Float number indicating the distance between port of origin to
the nearest coastline.
Page 13 of 59
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Sequential pricing dataset
• destination_dist_to_coastline: Float number indicating the distance between port of des-
tination to the nearest coastline.
• bearing-degree: Float number indicating the bearing with which the ship must sail from
the port of origin to the port of destination.
• origin_region_cluster: Integer indicating the cluster of regions the port of origin belongs
to.
• destination_region_cluster: Integer indicating the cluster of regions the port of destination
belongs to.
• export_region: Integer indicating the region to which the port of destination belongs to.
• import_region: Integer indicating the region to which the port of origin belongs to.
In summary, the geographical dataset contains information about all ports of origin and des-
tination of the shipping company which can be used to construct the experiment setup required
to train the Reinforcement Learning agent, mentioned later in this report.
2.2
Sequential pricing dataset
This dataset contains the pricing behaviour policy, or the price set by human workers at
the shipping company. The offline dataset D, which is used to train the offline RL agent and
is detailed further in the report, is based on this dataset. The dataset was gathered in 4-hour
intervals and includes a sizable number of rows, 2,716,790,898, to be exact (counted up until
July 10, 2024). The dataset utilised for the purposes of this report only covered the period from
May 5, 2024, to May 31, 2024 to ensure robustness and reproducibility of results.
The period in concern had 61,654,208 records, again stored in a SQL database with 23 fields
that could be accessed using SQL queries. For the purposes of this report, a description and
datatype of only some of the fields are provided below:
• observation_timestamp: String at which the record was collected.
• origin: Coded string indicating the port of origin from which the container is sailing.
• destination: Coded string indicating the port of destination the container is sailing to.
• container_size_type: String indicating the size of container along with the type.
• departure_week_sun: String indicating the date of the Sunday of the week the container
is departing from the port of origin.
• trade: Coded string indicating a combination of regions in which the trade occurred.
Page 14 of 59
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Sequential pricing dataset
• interval_hours: Integer indicating the number of hours the particular observation was
valid for.
• avg_rate: Integer indicating the average rate of the container during the interval hours
• first_spot_price: Integer indicating the price of the container during the beginning of the
interval.
• last_spot_price: Integer indicating the price of the container during the end of the interval.
• days_to_departure: Integer indicating the amount of days to departure of the ship carry-
ing the container.
• searched_ffe: Integer indicating amount of searched for the forty foot equivalents of the
departing container.
• offers_rejected: Integer indicating the number of offers rejected which were placed for the
container.
• booking_count: Integer indicating the number of booking for the interval and the container
irrespective of the type.
• booked_ffe: Integer indicating the booked forty foot container equivalents during the
interval.
• total_value_to_company: Integer indicating the total value to the shipping company
which is a sum of the price of container sold times quantities sold and some constants.
A deeper comprehension of the dataset was achieved by a few experiments that were carried
out in order to potentially corroborate with results later on. One involved contrasting the price
differences between containers in a region with strong demand and those in a region with low
demand. The price changes over time for various departure dates for every size and type of
container were plotted on a graph as seen in Figure 1. The prices in the Figure are merely
illustrative and have been scaled for confidentiality reasons. They are meant only to illustrate
the fact that there are certain demand regions where shipping a container costs more, and other
regions where shipping a container costs much less on average. The figures do not reflect the
actual numbers.
To enhance comprehension of the human-established behaviour policy in the underlying
dataset, two dates of departure for every container-June 16, 2024, and July 14, 2024-were taken
into account. Given that the dataset was extracted between May 5 and May 31, it contained a
variety of values for the days until the container left. For various values of days to departure
from the date of observation, the prices were averaged. For instance, if you were to look at a
data point from May 30, it would indicate that the number of days until the departure of a
container leaving on June 16 is 17. Averaged values of prices for these days to departure values
were plotted on a graph as shown in Figure 2. It is to be noted that the prices in the Y axis
are purely illustrative and do not reflect the actual values and are intended only to show the
variation of prices with various departure dates.
Page 15 of 59
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Sequential pricing dataset
(a) Prices for containers moving from region A to region B
on various departure dates
(b) Prices for containers moving from region B to region A
on various departure dates
Figure 1: Variation of prices for a pair of varying demand regions in the dataset with x axis corresponding to
the number of data points and y axis to the prices indicating higher prices in a region of higher demand and
vice versa (Prices are for illustrative purposes only)
(a) Prices for containers for multiple days to departure
with departure date on 16th of June
(b) Prices for containers for multiple days to departure
with departure date on 14th of July
Figure 2: Variation of prices for multiple days to departure values for different dates of departure indicating
large variations in prices with large variations in days to departure (Prices are for illustrative purposes only)
It can be observed in Figure 1 that prices varied among regions with varying demands by
a significant factor. Additionally, price variations between large variations of days to departure
were larger than price variations between small variations in days to departure and this was a
trend seen in the dataset. In summary, both datasets were analysed to uncover some underlying
trends about the behaviour policy. It should be mentioned that as the departure data approaches,
the price of the containers decreases for some particular cases, as seen in Figure 2. The crucial
point to remember is that because this was exclusive to one trade group and particular types of
containers, and it cannot extrapolated to the entire dataset, and was performed only to analyse
some trends.
In summary, this chapter provided a detailed description of the datasets used to perform
various kinds of experiments in later chapters. There were also some underlying trends in the
dataset which were analysed and reported.
Page 16 of 59
==PAGE:18==
3
Methods
This chapter of this report presents and goes into great detail about the technical approaches
taken to look into the research questions cited in 1.3. Initially, the overview of the dynamic con-
tainer pricing issue is reintroduced and refreshed using the framework of reinforcement learning
in detail. Next, the modelling of Reinforcement Learning is discussed along with the modelling
of the container pricing problem as a Reinforcement Learning Problem. After that, a technical
discussion is provided regarding reinforcement learning, both offline and online, and how it re-
lates to the issue at hand. Additionally, a more thorough examination of Implicit Q Learning,
the primary algorithm employed in this study, is carried out. Finally, the chapter concludes with
a high level discussion of a model used to estimate customer elasticity to examine one of the
questions mentioned in 1.3.
3.1
Foundations of Reinforcement Learning with respect to the con-
tainer pricing problem
A Reinforcement Learning Agent is a decision maker that works with an environment or a
dataset to accomplish a certain objective, as was discussed in Section 1.2.2. States are depictions
of the circumstances or surroundings that an agent is in. After observing these states and drawing
lessons from them, the agent creates a strategy known as a policy that instructs it what to do
in a given state. A feedback signal, usually a real number, that the agent receives in response
to acting in a certain state is called a reward. The reward denotes the expense or immediate
benefit of the action. To maximise projected future rewards, or cumulative rewards, the agent
aims to develop an optimal policy, a highly effective strategy.
The state comprises all variables that can be associated with a container in relation to the
container pricing problem. These variables include the origin and destination, booked quantities
of the containers, number of customers who searched for the containers, and a host of other
variables that will be covered in a later chapter. A real number that represents the entire trade
value, if a customer books the container at a specific price, makes up the reward signal. With
the goal of maximising the long-term total value to the business, the Reinforcement Learning
agent must predict, given a state, whether to raise or lower the price and by how much, based
on the current state it is examining. This can be achieved by learning an optimal policy that
aims to select actions for a container at a specific time to maximise the total value in the future.
After providing an overview of the dynamic pricing problem, the following section focuses
on the technical details of the reinforcement learning problem and provides a modelling of the
various functions needed to be optimised, all the while connecting it to the container pricing
problem and will formally introduce the container pricing problem
Page 17 of 59
==PAGE:19==
3.2
Modeling Reinforcement Learning and the Container Pricing Problem
3.2
Modeling Reinforcement Learning and the Container Pricing Prob-
lem
A Markov Decision Process is a mathematical model for a fundamental reinforcement learn-
ing problem. MDPs are members of a family of stochastic sequential decision processes in which
the cost and transition functions are solely determined by the state of the system and the current
action. While there are many applications for these models, two of the more well-known ones are
inventory control and queuing. A sequential decision process is a model for a dynamic system
under the control of a decision maker. Sequential decision processes are classified according to a
number of factors, including the length of the decision-making horizon, the optimality criteria,
the mathematical properties of the state and action spaces, and the times at which decisions are
made [16].
Prior studies have shown that a dynamic pricing problem can be modelled as a particular
kind of Markov Decision Processes, which are sequential decision problems ([11] and [17]), as
was previously mentioned. Thus, it could be said that by drawing a parallel to the container
pricing problem, the container pricing problem has been modelled within the framework of a
Reinforcement Learning problem, as will be demonstrated in later stages of this section.
At every discrete time step, t = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . ., the agent and environment interact. The agent
chooses an action, at ∈A where A is the set of all actions, at each time step t, based on some
representation of the state of the environment, st ∈S, where S is the set of all states. A time
step later, the agent finds itself in a new state, st+1, and is partially rewarded numerically, rt+1.
The MDP and agent together thereby give rise to a sequence or trajectory that begins like this:
s0, a0, r1, s1, a1, r2, s2, a2, r3, . . . [5], representing a sequential decision problem.
The state of st at any current time t, representing the state of the container pricing problem,
as mentioned before considers a various number of variables. Hence, for illustrative purposes,
the state st is a multidimensional variable can be assumed to be represented as follows as follows:
st = {ot, dt, pt, bt | ot ∈O, dt ∈D, pt ∈P, bt ∈B}
(1)
where ot, dt, pt, bt are the origin coordinates, destination coordinates, price of the container and
booking quantities of the container at time t respectively, each belonging to the set of origin
coordinates O, set of destination coordinates D, set of prices of containers in the dataset P and
set of booking quantities in the dataset B respectively.
Similarly, the action at at any time t belonging to the set of actions, represents the increase
or decrease in the price at any time t.
Given the random variables st and the st+1, the transition probability function P(s′ | s, a)
[5] defines the probability of transitioning from the current state s ∈S to the next state s′ ∈S
given the action a ∈A:
P(s′ | s, a) = Pr(st+1 = s′ | st = s, at = a)
(2)
Page 18 of 59
==PAGE:20==
3.2
Modeling Reinforcement Learning and the Container Pricing Problem
Given all these functions, the reward function rt+1 is simply the price of the containers in
state st multiplied by the price in st which is either incremented or decremented by the action
at. This can be expressed formally in the following way:
rt+1 = [p′
t · bt | p′
t = pt + at, pt, bt ∈st]
(3)
The agent’s objective is expressed in terms of the reward. The reward is a single number,
rt ∈R, at each time step. The agent’s informal objective is to maximise the total benefit it gets.
This entails optimising long-term cumulative reward, which is represented by the total value of
future expected trades based on the current action at taken when the agent is in state st [5].
This can be formally described as:
Gt =
∞
X
k=0
γkrt+k+1,
(4)
where γ is the discount factor which determines the present values of future rewards which means
that a reward received k time steps in the future is only worth γk−1 in the present and rt+k+1
are the rewards (implied value of the trade to the shipping company) received at successive time
steps starting from t + 1 [5].
Value functions, or functions of states or state-action pairings, are used in almost all rein-
forcement learning methods to estimate expected future rewards based off an action undertaken
in the current state. It goes without saying that the agent’s future rewards will be determined by
the actions it takes in the present. As a result, value functions are defined in relation to specific
behaviours, or policies which are strategies followed by the agent to maximise expected future
rewards [5]. In relation to the container pricing problem, the value (V π) of a state s ∈S would
be, is the expected cumulative reward if the agent starts from state s and follows some particular
policy π which attempts to maximise the long term values of the total value to company variable.
It can be formally described as shown below:
V π(s) = Eπ
" ∞
X
k=0
γkrt+k+1 | st = s
#
(5)
where P∞
k=0 γkrt+k+1 is the sum of discounted rewards over time, starting from time t, k is the
time step index, γ is the discount factor, which lies between 0 and 1 and represents the present
value of future rewards. rt+k+1 is the reward received at time t + k + 1.
Formally, a policy is a mapping of states to the likelihood of choosing each potential course
of action. π(a | s) is the chance that at = a if st = s, assuming the agent is adhering to policy
π at time t. Techniques for reinforcement learning define how an agent’s policy is modified in
response to experience [5].
The expected return calculated from s representing some state of the container pricing
problem, performing action a which is to either increase or decrease the price, and then following
policy π is the value of taking action a in state s under a policy π, represented as Qπ(s, a), also
Page 19 of 59
==PAGE:21==
3.3
Online vs Offline Reinforcement Learning
called Q value, is calculated as shown:
Qπ(s, a) = Eπ
" ∞
X
k=0
γkrt+k+1 | st = s, at = a
#
(6)
Usually, Monte Carlo methods are used to the estimate both the state value and the action-
value functions.
The technique of the Monte Carlo approach involves creating a stochastic
process that yields a random variable whose expected value is the answer to a particular problem.
Sampling from the resulting distribution is then used to approximate the expected value [18].
The following consistency requirement holds true to the value of state s and the potential values
of its successor states for any policy π and any state s:
vπ(s) =
X
a∈A
π(a | s)
X
s′,r
p(s′, r | s, a) [r + vπ(s′)]
(7)
The above equation is also called the Bellman equation and shows how the value of successor
states are related to the value of the current state [5]. A sustainable high cumulative reward
over an extended period of time is the goal of an optimal policy, denoted by π∗and there exists
at least one optimal policy that outperforms or is on par with all other policies.
V ∗(s) = max
π
V π(s)
(8)
The state-value function shown above V ∗(s) represents the maximum expected return achievable
starting from state s, across all possible policies π [5].
Q∗(s, a) = max
π
Qπ(s, a)
(9)
The action-value function shown above Q∗(s, a) represents the maximum expected return achiev-
able starting from state s, taking action a, and thereafter following the optimal policy π∗[5].
To summarise, the container pricing problem can be modelled as a Reinforcement Learning
problem with a set of states S, where each state s is a multidimensional variable, a set of actions
A, where some action a ∈A is a real number that indicates a change in price, and a set of
rewards R that represent the total value of the specific trade to the shipping company. The
goal of the RL agent is to learn an optimal policy π∗, which maximises the long-term values of
trades.
3.3
Online vs Offline Reinforcement Learning
One kind of reinforcement learning (RL) that depends on interacting with the environment
to determine the best policy π∗is called online reinforcement learning, as mentioned before in
1.2.3. The use of simulators frequently makes this possible [12]. The agent repeatedly interacts
Page 20 of 59
==PAGE:22==
3.3
Online vs Offline Reinforcement Learning
with the simulator/environment by executing a policy and observing the resulting trajectory,
with the goal of maximizing expected future rewards [19]. The protocol operates over T rounds,
where in each round t = 1, . . . , T, the agent:
• Chooses a policy π(t) = (π(t)
1 , π(t)
2 , . . . , π(t)
H ) to execute in an unknown Markov Decision
Process (MDP) M.
• Observes the resulting trajectory (x(t)
1 , a(t)
1 , r(t)
1 ), . . . , (x(t)
H , a(t)
H , r(t)
H ).
The objective of the agent is to minimize its cumulative regret, defined as:
Regret :=
T
X
t=1

J(π∗) −J(π(t))

,
(10)
where J(π) denotes the cumulative reward (or cost) achieved by policy π, and π∗represents the
optimal policy [19].
Though online Reinforcement Learning has proved to be efficient and advantageous in a
few cases in recent literature, however, in real-world issues, frequent situations are encountered
with costly samples and sparse rewards, which are frequently made worse by high-dimensional
state and action spaces [12]. Furthermore, it is necessary to manually adjust the pace of explo-
ration vs exploitation, or how frequently adaptation actions are chosen that were not previously
chosen, in order to promote convergence of learning. The majority of current methods employ
a lookup table to represent the acquired information, necessitating the manual quantization of
environment states in order to enable scalability in cases when the environment contains a large
number of states. These two manual tasks could be costly and possibly unreliable [13]. Offline
reinforcement learning was taken into consideration because it was determined that traditional
online reinforcement learning algorithms, which learn from scratch by pricing containers in a live
environment, might set incorrect prices at first, causing the shipping company to suffer severe
financial and reputational losses.
Without any additional interactions with the environment, the problem of learning a policy
from a fixed dataset of trajectories is addressed by offline reinforcement learning.
For real-
world decision-making challenges, this configuration can make use of the enormous quantity of
currently logged interactions. An agent must generalise from a defined dataset of interactions to
new online interactions during evaluation in offline RL, as the agent does not receive any fresh
corrective input from the online environment. [14]
The offline reinforcement learning problem can be defined as a data-driven formulation
of the reinforcement learning problem mentioned in 3.2. A static dataset of transitions, D =
 st
i, at
i, st+1
i
, rt
i
	
, is given to the learning algorithm, which uses it to find the optimal policy.
This formulation more closely resembles the problem statement for normal supervised learning,
and D can be thought of as the policy’s training set. To put it simply, offline reinforcement
learning calls for the learning algorithm to build a policy π(a|s) that, when applied to actual
MDP interactions, maximises the cumulative reward.
This is achieved by first obtaining a
Page 21 of 59
==PAGE:23==
3.4
Implicit Q Learning
sufficient understanding of the dynamical system underlying the MDP M entirely from a fixed
dataset, which is shown in the previous section. [20]
In offline reinforcement learning, the agent does not actively execute policies in the under-
lying MDP M. The goal of the agent in offline reinforcement learning is to use this dataset D
to learn an ϵ-optimal policy πb, meaning:
J(π∗) −J(πb) ≤ϵ,
(11)
where J(π) denotes the expected total reward (or cost) achieved by policy π, π∗represents
the optimal policy, and ϵ is a small positive number representing the acceptable deviation from
optimality [19].
The most significant problem with offline reinforcement learning is that, since the learning
algorithm has to rely solely on the static dataset D, there is no way to enhance exploration. Since
exploration is not covered by the algorithm, it might not be possible to find those high-reward
regions of the state space if D does not contain transitions that illustrate them. There are also
other challenges that arise with using offline RL, and are not discussed in this report. [20].
In spite of these challenges, large pre-collected datasets can be leveraged for policy learning
through offline reinforcement learning, freeing agents from the frequently costly online data
collecting process [21]. Effective offline RL algorithms have a much wider range of applications
than online RL, being particularly appealing for real-world applications, such as education,
healthcare, and robotics [22].
Online reinforcement learning applied to the container pricing problem has been shown to
either result in missed opportunities or significant losses, as the RL agent may explore real-
world scenarios and increase or decrease container prices by unreasonably large values.
As
demonstrated by the large volume of records in the dataset in Chapter 2, gathering data for
online Reinforcement Learning is also computationally expensive. Equation 10 illustrates that
observing multiple resulting trajectories is computationally expensive, again due to the high
amount of records in the dataset and the high dimensionality of the RL states.
This leads
to longer training times and negates the goal of responding quickly and robustly to market
conditions.
Because of this, offline reinforcement learning is pertinent to both the shipping
company and this report.
3.4
Implicit Q Learning
Q-learning, mentioned in 1.1.2 multiple times, as a method to solve multiple types of dy-
namic pricing problems, aims to learn the action-value function Q(s, a), which estimates the
expected cumulative reward for taking action a in state s and following the optimal policy
thereafter. However, Q-learning can suffer from overestimation bias and slow convergence due
to the need for extensive exploration [23]. Implicit Q-Learning (IQL) is an offline reinforce-
ment learning method mentioned in [15] which addresses these issues by learning value functions
through a policy-centric approach, leading to more stable and efficient learning. Basically, the
Page 22 of 59
==PAGE:24==
3.4
Implicit Q Learning
main feature of IQL which is of interest is its ability to avoid overestimation bias by not relying
on direct Q-value maximization, leading to more stable learning dynamics, which is the rationale
behind its evaluation in relation to the dynamic container pricing problem.
Implicit Q-Learning (IQL) aims to optimize the policy directly, using value functions as
auxiliary objectives, instead of directly maximising or optimising the value functions themselves
[15]. The key components of IQL are:
• Policy Representation: The policy π(a|s) is represented implicitly through value-based
objectives.
• Value Function Estimation: Using the sampled transitions, the state-value function V (s)
and action-value function Q(s, a) are estimated, and policy improvement drives their up-
dates instead of direct optimisation of the value functions themselves.
• Temporal Difference (TD) Learning: The temporal difference error (TDE) is the difference
between the predicted value of a state (or state-action pair) and the actual value observed
after taking an action and transitioning to a new state. IQL uses TDE errors to update the
value functions indirectly, with an emphasis on improving the policy’s expected returns
[24].
The solution to the asymmetric least squares problem is the τ ∈(0, 1) expectile of a random
variable X:
arg min
mτ Ex∼X

L2
τ(x −mτ)

,
(12)
where
L2
τ(u) = |τ −1(u < 0)| u2.
(13)
For τ > 0.5, this asymmetric loss function downweights the contributions of x values smaller
than mτ while assigning more weight to larger values. This knowledge is helpful later in this
section to observe how different value functions are optimised.
All the value functions and the policy can be represented by a neural network which approx-
imates the optimal parameters to accurately represent the functions ([25] and [26]). Consider
the following nomenclature where, θ represents the parameters of the Q-value function Qθ(s, a),
where the parameters are the weights of a neural network that approximates the Q-value func-
tion, ϕ represents the parameters of the neural network of the policy πϕ(a|s), ψ represents the
parameters of the neural network of the value function Vψ(s) and ˆθ represents the parameters of
the neural network of the target Q-value function Qˆθ(s, a).
LV (ψ) = E(s,a)∼D

L2
τ (Qˆθ(s, a) −Vψ(s))

(14)
This equation represents the loss function for the value function Vψ(s). It is defined as the
expected value of the squared temporal difference error, where L2
τ is defined in Equation 13 and
D stands for the offline dataset. The other symbolical representations are as mentioned before.
Page 23 of 59
==PAGE:25==
3.4
Implicit Q Learning
The equation which represents the loss function for the Q-value function Qθ(s, a) is shown
below.
LQ(θ) = E(s,a,s′)∼D
h
(r(s, a) + γVψ(s′) −Qθ(s, a))2i
(15)
Finally, the equation shown below represents the loss function for the policy πϕ(a|s). It
is defined as the expected value of the weighted log probability of the policy, where β is a
temperature parameter that scales the advantage Qˆθ(s, a) −Vψ(s).
Lπ(ϕ) = E(s,a)∼D [exp (β (Qˆθ(s, a) −Vψ(s))) log πϕ(a|s)]
(16)
The value functions which are to be optimised using Implicit Q Learning are defined formally
above and they are optimised using an algorithm mentioned in [15]. Initialising the parameters
ψ, θ, ˆθ, and ϕ is the first step in the algorithm to optimise them. Gradient descent is used to
update the value function parameters ψ based on the loss LV (ψ) and learning rate λV . Gradient
descent is also used to update the Q-value function parameters θ with learning rate λQ on LQ(θ).
A smoothing factor α is used in averaging to update the target Q-value parameters ˆθ. In the
process of policy extraction, the learning rate λπ is used to update the policy parameters ϕ on
the policy loss Lπ(ϕ). To optimise the model, these steps are iteratively repeated.
The algorithm used in IQL to optimise neural network parameters of the value functions
mentioned in Equations 14, 15 and 16 is as follows:
• Initialize parameters ψ, θ, ˆθ, ϕ.
• TD Learning (IQL):
– For each gradient step do:
ψ ←ψ −λV ∇ψLV (ψ)
(17)
θ ←θ −λQ∇θLQ(θ)
(18)
ˆθ ←(1 −α)ˆθ + αθ
(19)
The value function parameters ψ are updated via gradient descent on the loss LV (ψ)
with learning rate λV . The Q-value function parameters θ are updated using gradient
descent on LQ(θ) with learning rate λQ.The target Q-value parameters ˆθ are updated
through Polyak averaging with smoothing factor α.
– End for loop
• Policy Extraction:
– For each gradient step do:
ϕ ←ϕ −λπ∇ϕLπ(ϕ)
(20)
The policy parameters ϕ are updated via gradient descent on the policy loss Lπ(ϕ)
with learning rate λπ. The gradient of the policy loss with respect to ϕ is denoted by
∇ϕLπ(ϕ).
Page 24 of 59
==PAGE:26==
3.5
Modeling customer elasticity using Linear Regression
– End for loop
Regarding the expectile regression used in [15] to train the value functions mentioned above,
there are two very important lemma that are relevant to the interpretation of a few results in
Chapter 5.
Lemma 1: For all s, τ1 and τ2 such that τ1 < τ2, it can be said that
Vτ1(s) ≤Vτ2(s).
(21)
This equation says that the value of a state increases or atleast stays the same with increasing
value of τ.
Lemma 2:
lim
τ→1 Vτ(s) =
max
a∈A s.t. π(a|s)>0 Q∗(s, a)
(22)
Basically, as τ approaches 1, the value function Vτ(s) converges to the maximum Q-value Q∗(s, a)
for actions a with positive policy probability π(a|s).
For larger values of τ < 1, the maximum is approximated more accurately. However, this
also makes the optimisation problem more difficult as is said in the literature [15]. Notably, the
literature treats τ as a hyperparameter and emphasizes that the value learning method developed
defines a continuous spectrum of methods between SARSA [5] (τ = 0.5) and Q-learning [5]
(τ →1), which is of interest pertaining to the container pricing problem.
Essentially, Implicit Q Learning, as described in [15], is an offline reinforcement learning
technique that allows for multi-step dynamic programming but completely prohibits any queries
to values of out-of-sample operations for training purposes. It is applied to the container pricing
problem and the results are evaluated because it has been demonstrated to be computationally
cheap and to offer a desirable degree of generalisation that allows it to react to unseen states
more effectively.
3.5
Modeling customer elasticity using Linear Regression
The term customer elasticity describes how sensitive consumers are to price fluctuations. It
is an important idea in business and economics because it enables companies to comprehend how
price adjustments may impact consumer demand for their goods or services [27]. A statistical
technique that has been demonstrated in earlier research [27], linear regression is one way to
model customer elasticity.
It is utilised to determine the relationship between a dependent
variable and one or more independent variables.
Linear regression aims to model the relationship between a dependent variable y and an
independent variable x [28]. With respect to the container pricing problem, y can be the booked
quantities of the containers, and x can either be multidimensional composing the entire state
Page 25 of 59
==PAGE:27==
3.5
Modeling customer elasticity using Linear Regression
of the problem, or just the prices of the containers in the set of states S. The linear regression
model can be expressed as:
y = β0 + β1x + ϵ
(23)
where y is the dependent variable, x is the independent variable, β0 is the intercept term,
representing the value of y when x is zero, β1 is the slope coefficient, representing the change
in y for a one-unit change in x and ϵ is the error term, accounting for the variability in y not
explained by x.
Booking quantities can be roughly estimated by entering prices or states into the previously
mentioned model. The price elasticity of demand, or the relationship between prices and booked
quantities, is estimated by the slope coefficient β1 after the model has been fitted. As stated
in [27], this is usually the case for most goods. If β1 is negative, it means that a rise in the
price of the container results in a fall in the number of containers demanded. Converging the
RL algorithm to an optimal policy may be aided by modelling this customer elasticity.
Page 26 of 59
==PAGE:28==
4
Experiments and Experimental Setup
The numerous experiments carried out to investigate the research questions listed in 1.3 are
covered in this chapter of the thesis, along with the setup required to carry out the experiments.
It discusses the different types of parameters that are looked at first. After that, it discusses
setting up various environments to look into the research questions.
In order to apply RL
methods to the data, it also discusses the preprocessing and preparation of the data. Lastly, it
discusses about the hyperparameters that were investigated and subsequently validated by the
findings in Chapter 5. These hyperparameters were used to train the models.
All of the experiments conducted for this thesis were performed using Databricks clusters
and the Databricks framework, which was provided by the shipping company. According to
the cluster specifications, the cluster had Scala 2.12 and Apache Spark 3.5.0 with a Databricks
runtime version of 14.3 LTS ML. Standard_DS3_v2 worker nodes were utilised with a minimum
of 2 nodes and a maximum of 8 nodes with a maximum capacity of 14GB of RAM with 4 cores.
The driver type node that was utilised was a Standard_DS4_v2, including eight cores and 28GB
of memory.
The d3rlpy Python library presented in [29] was used to construct the MDP dataset needed
to fit this specific model, and the Implicit Q Learning Reinforcement Learning Algorithm was
fitted using the same, where d3rlpy is an open-sourced offline deep reinforcement learning (RL)
library for Python [29]. Through a fully described plug-and-play API, d3rlpy supports both
off-policy online algorithms and a variety of offline deep reinforcement learning methods.
4.1
Experimental Methodology
The following procedures were performed in order to examine the research questions for
the purpose of this thesis and produce results that were interpreted.
Initially, the training
algorithm’s initial configuration was replicated using the original hyperparameters used in the
company’s training setup.To create the training dataset, the dataset underwent various data
transformations and preprocessing steps during setup.
Next, a straightforward environment
without a customer elasticity model, detailed in later sections, was created with a very high
reward incentive for large actions. This environment was designed to investigate the research
question of whether the model would learn a trivial policy which chooses to always increase the
prices of containers in order to maximise long-term rewards. This environment was analysed for
rewards when an imaginary agent did nothing.
Subsequently, the dataset was fitted with the linear regression model described in 3.5 to
ascertain the correlation between the customer’s propensity to purchase and the container prices
or customer elasticity for prices. A few graphs were used to analyse this. Another environment
was constructed by incorporating this linear regression model and its dynamic were analysed in
the same manner as before.
Page 27 of 59
==PAGE:29==
4.2
Data Preprocessing and Transformations to setup the Training Dataset
The RL agent was trained using the same hyperparameters as the algorithm setup used
by the shipping company and was applied to the simple environment without the customer
elasticity model, and the τ hyperparameter, which is mentioned in 3.4, was varied across three
values to evaluate the algorithm’s performance variation with respect to the parameter. Later,
by constructing a few basic data structures, the impact of more straightforward policy neural
network architectures on the algorithms’ performance was examined. The reward and loss curves
were then examined to evaluate the training’s stability. To grasp the rates of convergence of
the algorithm for various learning rates, the learning rates were also changed for a few policy
network architectures.
The customer elasticity model was then used to train the RL agent in order to investi-
gate the last research question.
The algorithm’s performance was correlated with the same
hyperparameter, τ, by varying it across multiple values. More straightforward policy network
architectures were also used to see if the performance held up well across different architectures.
Average reward graphs and loss curves were plotted, analysed, and interpreted for each of these
training setups in order to draw conclusions.
4.2
Data Preprocessing and Transformations to setup the Training
Dataset
First, in accordance with the timescales listed in 2.2, the data from the sequential and
geography datasets was extracted. The PySpark API described in [30] was utilised to extract
them. The final training dataset that was used to fit the algorithm was then created by applying
a variety of transformations and modifications to these extracted samples. It is noteworthy that
1 million samples were retrieved from the sequential price dataset.
To generate a meaningful dataset, a configuration file was built to record the state, action,
and reward columns and determine which specific state variables needed to be aggregated. The
process of creating these aggregations is explained later.
The setup was designed to gather forecasts for containers that had not yet departed for a
duration of four hours. Put another way, prices are set for a total of four hours using past data
that has been accumulated, and they are then modified in response to market reactions. The
extracted data mentioned above is joined with the geography dataset mentioned in 2.1 on the
columns ’origin’ and ’destination’ to retrieve the latitude and longitude coordinates of the origin
and destination in the extracted sequential pricing dataset.
A handful of the dataset’s columns were aggregated for this. There were primarily two sorts
of aggregations carried out: by group_id and by a 12 or 24 hour interval. This implies that if
a given group_id was to have its quantity aggregated by group, then the quantity in question
had to be aggregated for all particular group_ids. If the quantity was intended to be calculated
using intervals, then each individual record instance was calculated for both of the preceding 2
intervals of 12 hours and 24 hours. As indicated in 2.2, the following is a set of columns along
with an explanation of how their values are aggregated:
Page 28 of 59
==PAGE:30==
4.2
Data Preprocessing and Transformations to setup the Training Dataset
• Quantities in the dataset as represented in 2.2 that were aggregated by both group_id
and both interval hours and summed up: searched_ffe, booked_ffe, offers_rejected, book-
ing_count and total_value_to_company.
• Quantities in the dataset as represented in 2.2 that were aggregated by group_id and later
averaged: origin_lat, origin_lon, destination_lat, destination_lon and distance_km.
• Quantities in the dataset as represented in 2.2 that were aggregated by group_id and
summed: n_corridors.
• Quantities in the 2.2 dataset that were aggregated by interval hours and later summed:
rate_diff (derived using first and last spot price values mentioned in the dataset).
Following the aforementioned procedures, terminals are added to the state vector in the
dataset. This is done by determining whether the record’s days to departure are zero, which
indicates that the container has already departed. Next, in order to carry out the best possible
preparation of the dataset, the unnecessary null records are eliminated.
After performing the aggregations as mentioned above, the feature columns to be part of the
Reinforcement Learning state vector were clearly identified and the Data Frame columns were
renamed to reflect the same. The RL state consisted of the following variables after performing
the transformations stated above are mentioned below:
container_size
days_to_departure
searched_ffe_sum_12h
searched_ffe_sum_24h
booked_ffe_sum_12h
booked_ffe_sum_24h
booking_count_sum_12h
booking_count_sum_24h
offers_rejected_sum_12h
offers_rejected_sum_24h
last_spot_price
origin_lat
origin_lon
destination_lat
destination_lon
distance_km
rate_diff_sum_12h
rate_diff_sum_24h
n_corridors
total_value_to_company_12h
total_value_to_company_24h
Following these changes, the action vector column was just the rates that differed between
the last spot price and the first spot price that was defined during the intervals. According to
2.2, the entire value to the company for the booking was used to determine the reward.
One kind of dataset that is referenced in [29] is an MDP dataset. This structure of datasets
is helpful for deep reinforcement learning that is driven by data. The dataset is converted into
tuples of (st, at, rt+1, st+1), which include the action that corresponds to the state, the reward
that corresponds to the state, the action that was executed, and the state to which a transition
has happened based on the previous state and the action.
The MDP Dataset was created with an average of 7,800 episodes over multiple runs by
extracting the state vectors, action vectors, reward vectors, and terminals in the form of numpy
arrays from the transformed dataset that resulted from the aforementioned operations. The
Page 29 of 59
==PAGE:31==
4.3
Setup of an Environment without Customer Elasticity
action space was set to be continuous. This was done using the d3rlpy library class. Subclasses
named Episodes made up the MDP Dataset, and each Episode had numpy arrays with observa-
tions, actions, rewards, and terminals. The ensuing episodes followed a specific set of containers
as they travelled from a specific origin to a certain destination, with the number of days to
departure reducing as the episode went on. It is important to note that a considerable number
of episodes may have overlapped over time because of the way the dataset was organised. This
entails the end of this subsection and the training dataset is now ready to be fitted to the RL
algorithm.
4.3
Setup of an Environment without Customer Elasticity
A custom environment called PricingEnvironment in which the algorithm might be trained
was set up in order to examine the research questions stated in 1.3. This was produced with the
Python language’s gymnasium library [31]. This environment offers a framework for training and
assessing the reinforcement learning algorithm by simulating the dynamics of pricing decisions
over a series of episodes.
A standardised interface for interacting with different simulated environments is provided
by OpenAI’s Gym library, which is crucial for creating and testing reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms.
A gym setting consists of various essential elements.
The format and range of
possible states that the agent may encounter are defined by the observation space. These states
include single values, vectors, images, and more complex structures like Discrete, Box, Tuple,
Dict, MultiBinary, and MultiDiscrete.
The set of all possible actions the agent can take is
specified by the action space, which comes in two formats: Box for continuous actions and
Discrete for finite actions. The fundamental method is the step function, which uses the function
signature to provide the new state, instant reward, episode completion flag, and extra information
when the agent acts and the environment reacts.
The function signature provides the first
observation when the reset function resets the environment to its initial state, thereby initiating
a new episode. Gym environments ensure consistency and reproducibility in experiments by
facilitating the development and testing of RL algorithms across a variety of scenarios through
the provision of these standardised components.
The structure of the environment without
customer elasticity is as mentioned below.
4.3.1
Initialisation of the environment
Initial episodes for the PricingEnvironment class each represent a series of observations
pertinent to pricing decisions. Key components of the initialisation are as follows: the observation
space, a continuous space represented by a 21-dimensional vector with each dimension taking
values ranging from −1 × 1020 to 1 × 1020; the action space, a continuous space with possible
actions from (−∞, ∞), representing the increase or decrease in price and positions, where random
episodes are chosen from a list of random positions that the environment monitors and maintains
when the environment is reset.
Page 30 of 59
==PAGE:32==
4.3
Setup of an Environment without Customer Elasticity
4.3.2
Transitioning of states in the environment
Depending on the selected action, the step function advances the environment by one time
step. It carries out the subsequent tasks: the state update, in which the environment’s state
is modified to reflect the impact of the action on certain state vector constituents based on
the action executed and the current time step. The action updates the price of the container,
resulting in either an increase or decrease in price since the action may have a positive or negative
value; the reward calculation, where the reward is computed based on specific state variables;
the price is added to the action, which is a component of the RL state vector.
The value of the total_value_to_company is the reward if the condition that the booked_ffe,
which is a component of the RL state mentioned in 4.2, is greater than zero. If not, the reward
is zero. A multiple of the price and the booked_ffe makes up the total_value_to_company.
The termination of the episode occurs when the days_to_departure element of the state vector
equals zero, signifying the end of the episode. The output is where the function returns the new
state, the reward, a boolean indicating whether the episode is finished, a flag for truncation (set
to False), and an information dictionary containing the new state and reward. In addition, the
function determines whether the current time step is the last one in the episode and, in that
case, the episode is deemed to be over.
Plotted and displayed in Figure 3 are basic examples of how rewards change with time and
environment dynamics for a base price of 1,000 units when price increases occur at the start of
the episode, during the episode, and at the end of the episode by 100 units for an episode length
of 10 and a booking quantity of a single unit.
Figure 3: Cumulative rewards through the episode if prices are varied at the beginning, end and throughout
the episode.
Page 31 of 59
==PAGE:33==
4.4
Customer Demand-Price Elasticity using Linear Regression
4.3.3
Resetting of the environment
The reset function reinitializes the environment to a starting state. It selects a random
episode based on the random positions mentioned in 4.3.1 and sets the initial state to the first
observation of this episode. The base price for the episode is also set from the initial state’s 11th
element. This function ensures that the environment starts from a consistent and known state
for each new episode.
In conclusion, because the selected episodes are random, this environment gives the RL
agent a sense of stability while still facilitating exploration. Stability is ensured by the fact that
no bookings result in zero rewards, which incentivizes the agent to refrain from raising prices
needlessly. The results of various loss functions and reward functions are plotted and analysed
in a later section.
4.4
Customer Demand-Price Elasticity using Linear Regression
The MDP Dataset described in 4.2 was fitted with a linear regression model to ascertain the
impact of prices on the booking quantities to emulate a customer behaviour model. To acquire a
confirmation of the results, two models were fitted to determine whether the correlation between
the two variables held true in both scenarios.
The whole state vector included in the MDP Dataset was fitted with a single linear regression
model, however the values for searched_ffe, offers_rejected, and booked_ffe were left out. As a
result, all of the independent variables in the state vector indicated in 4.2 were present, with the
exception of the three previously stated. As a result, two new arrays were made, one including
all of the observations except the three previously stated variables, and the other containing all
of the booking quantities in the same sequence as the observations in the first array. Hence, the
dependent variable was the booking count and the independent variable or the feature was the
vector mentioned above.
An additional linear regression model was fitted, in which the number of bookings was the
dependent variable and the price was the independent variable. Once more, two arrays with
a single dimension each were made, and this dataset was also fitted with the linear regression
model.
This linear regression model was fit using the Python library sklearn [32] with the following
parameters of the function:
• fit_intercept: This variable was set to True, which tells the model whether to fit the
intercept also.
• positive: This variable forces the coefficients to be positive and this was set to False.
• n_jobs: The number of jobs to be used for computation were set to 3.
Page 32 of 59
==PAGE:34==
4.5
Environment Incorporating the Customer Elasticity model
4.5
Environment Incorporating the Customer Elasticity model
In order to comprehend the impact of this environment on the policy when the Reinforce-
ment Learning Algorithm is applied to it, the environment described in 4.3 was modified after
the Linear Regression model was fitted. A detailed explanation of the same is provided below.
A customised environment that derives from OpenAI Gym’s Env class is PricingEnvironment
class as mentioned in 4.3. In order to handle state transitions and episode handling in the environ-
ment, it specifies the action and observation spaces, initialises the environment with observation
episodes, and implements the step and reset functions.
4.5.1
Initialisation of the environment
The environment is initialized with the following attributes: the action space, which is
continuous and includes all possible values from (−∞, ∞), indicating if the price has increased
or decreased; the observation space, which is a continuous space with 21 dimensions, representing
the RL state vector; linear regression models, specifically model_12 and model_24, are trained
on the episodes to forecast bookings based on certain attributes, with model_12 forecasting
for an interval of 12 hours and model_24 for an interval of 24 hours. These models simulate
the market’s reactions to price changes; positions, which are random episodes selected during a
reset from a list of random positions that the environment maintains and tracks; and Beta (β),
initialized at 0.5, used to calculate demand using the dataset and the linear regression model.
This indicates that the value of the booking quantity calculated by the model and the existing
value in the dataset would receive equal weights. It can expressed formally like this:
booked_ffet+1 = β · booked_ffe in data + (1 −β) · booked_ffe prediction regression
(24)
4.5.2
Transitioning of states in the environment
The step function defines how the environment responds to an action taken by the agent.
The state is updated based on the action, the reward is calculated, and bookings are predicted us-
ing regression models. It computes the state variables using the following techniques mentioned.
The state update, previously discussed in 4.3, in which the environment’s status is updated
according to the action performed and the current time step. The action determines whether
the price, which is a component of the RL state vector, increases or decreases. Additionally,
using the previously specified fitted Linear Regression models, the parameters of the state listed
in 4.4 are used to estimate the booking quantities for the 12-hour and 24-hour intervals.
If the predicted values are less than zero, the booking amounts are assumed to be zero, and
the numbers are rounded to the nearest integer and this is the reward calculation, which is carried
out in accordance with the instructions in 4.3. The reward is zero if either the booked quantities
or booked_ffe are zero. If not, the reward is equal to the product of the booking quantities, the
price, and a few predetermined constants and this is equivalent to the total_value_to_company.
Page 33 of 59
==PAGE:35==
4.6
Training the Reinforcement Learning Algorithm using the default setup
As for the termination, an episode is deemed to have ended if the number of days until its
departure is zero. The output of the function, which returns the transitioned or the next state,
a boolean to indicate the end of the episode, and an information dictionary containing the
transitioned state and the reward.
4.5.3
Resetting of the Environment
Like what is described in 4.3, the reset function starts a new episode by choosing a random
point from the list of episodes and changing the environment’s state to that of the beginning of
that episode.
In conclusion, the environment encourages the RL agent to avoid selecting actions that are
trivially high because doing so results in less booked amounts. Additionally, selecting activities
that are trivially high reduces future predicted rewards, thus the agent must strike a balance
between stabilisation and exploration.
4.6
Training the Reinforcement Learning Algorithm using the default
setup
The Reinforcement Learning Algorithm (Implicit Q Learning) was prepared for training
using the MDP Dataset that was acquired by the techniques described in 4.2. The original
setup for the RL training, which made use of the d3rlpy package [29], comprised solely of
the algorithm’s default hyperparameters, modified only slightly. A detailed description of the
hyperparameters from the perspective of the d3rlpy library is mentioned as an additional reading
in Section 7.2.
For the primary purposes of this thesis, the hyperparameters in interest were τ (expectile in
d3rlpy [29]), actor and critic learning rates. The default τ value was 0.7, and the default actor
and critic learning rates were set to 0.0003. The default policy network architecture given by
the framework was a neural network with 2 hidden layers, each layer comprising of 256 neurons.
Initially, the mentioned parameters were used and loss functions were calculated: actor loss,
critic loss, value loss, and q loss were plotted and subsequently assessed. The average rewards
per epoch were also calculated and plotted and will be discussed in Chapter 5.
4.7
Exploration of alternate hyperparameter values
When evaluating the efficacy and efficiency of reinforcement learning algorithms, hyperpa-
rameters are essential. Hence, this thesis also investigates how different hyperparameters affect
IQL’s 3.4 offline pricing performance.
Specifically, this thesis looks into the impacts of the
hyperparameters mentioned below:
Page 34 of 59
==PAGE:36==
4.7
Exploration of alternate hyperparameter values
• Policy network architecture: The policy network’s ability to approximate complex func-
tions is determined by its structure. More layers and wider layers in a complex design
increase the danger of overfitting and increase computational overhead. Less complex ar-
chitectures with fewer layers are less likely to overfit, compute more quickly, but have a
smaller capacity for approximating complex functions [25].
• Expectile parameter (mentioned as τ in [15]): The percentile of the value distribution
that the strategy seeks to optimise is controlled by the expectile parameter, which has
an impact on how exploration and exploitation are traded off. Low expectile encourages
cautious actions, which lower the chance of overestimation, while high expectile increases
the risk of overestimation and promotes aggressive policy and thorough exploration [15].
• Actor and critic learning rates: The step size for updating the policy network is determined
by the actor learning rate. Reduced rates of learning improves tuning and stability, and
greater rates of learning, accelerates the convergence. This could result in overshooting and
instability. The value network (critic), which estimates the value function, is updated at a
pace determined by the critic learning rate. Reduced rates of learning enhances stability
and reduces significant oscillations. Faster value estimation updates are the result of higher
learning rates [33].
For the purposes of evaluating multiple policy architecture networks, a CustomEncoder
was built using the framework provided by the PyTorch library [34]. The custom encoder is
designed to process observations and extract relevant features for the learning algorithm. The
architecture may approximate complex functions since it is made up of completely connected
layers with ReLU activations to add non-linearity. To integrate the CustomEncoder into the IQL
algorithm, a CustomEncoderFactory was defined using the framework provided by the d3rlpy
library [29]. Multiple runs were performed to ensure reproducibility and robustness of results for
variation of all hyper parameters and various loss curves were plotted. Along with that, average
rewards per epoch were also plotted to understand the performance of the algorithm operating
under various hyperparameters. The results from these variations are discussed in Chapter 5.
Page 35 of 59
==PAGE:37==
5
Results and Discussion
All the results pertaining to answering the research questions that this thesis investigates
are presented in this chapter along with the necessary observations and interpretations.
5.1
Trends and Behaviour in the MDP Dataset
In order to fit the RL algorithm, the MDP (Markov Decision Process) dataset was created
using the framework provided by the d3rlpy library [29]. In essence, it is made up of the states,
rewards, terminals, and actions needed to train the RL agent. In the hopes of using some of the
MDP dataset’s underlying tendencies for future reward curve and loss function interpretation,
some statistical analysis was performed and results examined.
The MDP dataset usually consisted of an average of 7,800 episodes over various runs with
varying episode lengths. The graph shown in Figure 4a shows the length of all episodes for a
particular run of producing the MDP dataset which had 7,907 episodes. The average length of
episodes was determined to be 64 (63.58 rounded off to the nearest integer).
Additionally, the average prices per episode were calculated and presented, as Figure 4b
illustrates. To keep the prices confidential, the values on the Y axis are masked. The average
price is found to have very few outliers, and all prices typically fall within a range or band of
values.
Another analysis, which was carried out because of the size of the dataset and the random
sampling technique, was to determine the number of episodes with non-zero booking counts and
the average booking counts. 5973 episodes in the specific iteration of the MDP dataset creation
with 7,907 episodes had a non-zero booking count, meaning that 1,934 episodes had a zero
booking count, indicating that no bookings were made for the specific origin and destination
coordinates for the duration of the episode. The average booking counts for the entire dataset
was found to be 0.235, with 2723 episodes having an average booking count per episode value
to be greater than the average booking count of the entire dataset.
The environments which were setup using the MDP dataset for Implicit Q Learning to
be applied on, were simulated using actions set to 0, meaning that the agent would not be
doing anything, in order to find what the average reward is without any actions undertaken by
the agent. The average reward across all episodes for the environment without any customer
elasticity model was found to be around 32,000 which was the value obtained averaged across 3
iterations of the evaluation. Similarly, the same evaluation was conducted on the environment
which had the customer elasticity model incorporated in it, and the average rewards obtained
across 3 iterations was determined to be around 24,000.
Another graph was plotted as shown in Figure 4c, which shows the average booking counts
per episode in the MDP dataset. It can be seen that, like average prices, there are not many
Page 36 of 59
==PAGE:38==
5.1
Trends and Behaviour in the MDP Dataset
outliers or fluctuations and the values tend to lie between a range or band of figures.
For
confidentiality reasons, the Y axis values are not displayed.
(a) Length of individual episodes in the
MDP dataset
(b) Average price per episode in the
MDP dataset
(c) Average booking counts per episode
in the MDP dataset
Figure 4: Trends and observations in the MDP dataset
Two episodes were selected randomly from the MDP dataset in order to investigate the
movement of prices and the booking counts as the episode progressed. The prices and booking
count values have been masked for reasons of confidentiality. The graphs were plotted as shown
below.
(a) Prices of containers in an episode
(b) Booking counts in an episode
Figure 5: Movement of prices and bookings in an episode in the MDP dataset
It is evident that the average prices, average episode lengths, and average booking counts in
the MDP dataset fluctuate randomly and do not exhibit an upward or downward trend. Since
it depends on a lot of state-specific factors, it may not be possible to draw general conclusions
about an episode without using better statistical analyses to identify general underlying trends
across all episodes. Interpreting a few results, discussed in the following sections, was made
easier by analysing these trends.
Page 37 of 59
==PAGE:39==
5.2
Results from Training the Reinforcement Learning Agent without customer elasticity
5.2
Results from Training the Reinforcement Learning Agent without
customer elasticity
First, the MDP dataset was created as mentioned in the section 4.2 to reproduce the original
training setup by the shipping company. The MDP dataset was observed to have some particular
trends which were discussed earlier. The Reinforcement Learning agent was trained with the
default hyperparameters listed in 4.6 and simultaneously applied to the environment described
in 4.3. To ensure consistency in the results, this training was repeated three times, and reward
curves were plotted. Three training iterations, each for τ parameter values of 0.5, 0.7 (default
parameter as mentioned before) and 0.99 were carried out to ensure consistency in the results
and to acquire an understanding of how the τ parameter impacts the reward curves. Reward
curves, actor loss curves, Q loss curves, V loss curves and critic loss curves were plotted for
various values of τ.
The graphs shown below illustrate the average rewards per epoch for three runs each of
different τ values mentioned earlier.
(a) Average rewards vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Average rewards vs epoch for τ = 0.7
(c) Average rewards vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 6: Average rewards vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the environment
without customer elasticity
As seen in Figures 6a and 6b, it is evident that the average rewards tend to increase as
the RL agent does learn to generalise more as it experiences more states and thus, learns to
generalise. The occasional spikes in reward could just be due to the nature of the MDP dataset.
As mentioned before in 4.3, the episodes for evaluation are selected randomly across the entire
dataset and it has been shown that booking counts varied randomly and by considerable amount
of variations in some cases in the previous section. Since the reward is defined as being greater
than zero only if booking counts are greater than zero, the anomalous spike in rewards on
a few occasions could therefore be explained by the possibility that the episodes selected for
evaluation in that particular epoch contained high booking counts, which consequently led to
the high average reward. It is also noted that the reward values for τ = 0.99 are significantly
more noisy compared to the other parameter values.
To closely examine the effect of τ, an average for 3 runs for all values of τ was computed,
and plotted on a graph to investigate how τ influenced the performance of the algorithm. The
minimum of the average rewards are found to be around 43,000 and the maximum values around
405,000. The figure is displayed below:
Page 38 of 59
==PAGE:40==
5.2
Results from Training the Reinforcement Learning Agent without customer elasticity
Figure 7: Averaged values of 3 runs vs epochs for different values of τ indicating the relationship between
rewards and τ
Consider Lemma 1 mentioned in Chapter 3.4,
Vτ1(s) ≤Vτ2(s)
For τ values of 0.5 and 0.7, it can be said that the value of a particular state s ∈S for τ = 0.5
is less than or equal to the same state s for τ = 0.7.
Within the context of Equation 14, it can be said that with increasing τ, more weight is
given to positive differences between the terms in the right hand side of the Equation 14. With
the state value of a state s ∈S of τ = 0.7 being greater than or equal to τ = 0.5, this ends up
giving more prominence to giving incentive to higher values of the left term in the right hand
side of the equation and even trying to maximise the Q values for the state, thereby prioritising
larger Q values for the target network. This can be a factor for the increased average rewards
observed for τ = 0.7 compared to τ = 0.5.
Consider Lemma 2 mentioned in Chapter 3.4,
lim
τ→1 Vτ(s) =
max
a∈A s.t. π(a|s)>0 Q∗(s, a)
which indicates that with a larger value τ, a better approximation of the maximum of the Q
value function given a state and action, is provided. Thereby, it can be said that with increasing
τ, the RL agent tries to get the maximum rewards possible, which leads to higher rewards
with increasing τ. Therefore, as τ →1, the rewards increase by a significant magnitude. This
can be confirmed using Figure 7 where the average rewards for runs where τ was equal to 0.5
and 0.7 tend to converge around 110,000 and 125,000 respectively, but the average rewards are
significantly higher for runs where τ was equal to 0.99 around a magnitude of 400,000.
Page 39 of 59
==PAGE:41==
5.2
Results from Training the Reinforcement Learning Agent without customer elasticity
To understand the performance of the training of the RL agent, various loss curves were
plotted for all runs as indicated before and analysed. Some of the loss curves are shown in
this section and some are left as additional reading in the Appendix 7.3. First, the actor losses
which correspond to losses updating the policy neural network parameters ϕ were plotted in
Figure 8. It is evident from the Figure, that the loss curves tend to decrease for all values of τ.
This indicates that the policy network updating process was happening in a stabilized manner,
thereby signifying that the policy network parameters are close to convergence.
The critic losses corresponding to the losses updating the state value function network
parameters ψ, were plotted as shown in Figure 9. It can be seen that the critic losses decrease
over time while training, and reach a convergence which is not that stable, for values of τ equal
to 0.5 and 0.7. For critic losses for the highest τ value, it does not decrease and increases while
training progresses indicating some kind of overfitting or exploration issues of the agent.
(a) Actor losses vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Actor losses vs epoch for τ = 0.7
(c) Actor losses vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 8: Actor network losses vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the
environment without customer elasticity
(a) Critic losses vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Critic losses vs epoch for τ = 0.7
(c) Critic losses vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 9: Critic losses vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the environment
without customer elasticity
To examine the first research question mentioned in Chapter 1.3, the actions during the
evaluation of the environments was logged and analysed to examine whether the agent was
learning a policy which just increased the price. The averaged scaled actions for 3 runs where
each bar signifies the average for 4 epochs is shown below, where the action values have been
masked for confidentiality reasons:
Page 40 of 59
==PAGE:42==
5.3
Results from Exploring Alternate Hyperparameter values
(a) Actions vs epochs for τ = 0.5
(b) Actions vs epoch for τ = 0.7
(c) Actions vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 10: Actions averaged and scaled across 3 runs and 4 epochs vs end of epoch for different values of τ
after training the RL agent on the environment without customer elasticity
The average value of actions across the entire dataset was computed, and the actual value
is not written in this report for confidentiality reasons. The minimum values shown in the graph
were a multiple of 10 of the average actions in the dataset, accounting for an increase of 5% in
the average price of a container in the dataset. The maximum values shown accounted for an
increase of 16% in the average price (Both values are rounded off to the nearest integer). Hence,
the plots above show that, for lower values of τ, the agent simply learns higher actions over the
course of training. As previously mentioned, when τ values are very high, the agent attempts to
maximise the Q values, which results in very high actions because there is no penalty for price
increases in the environment. The agent is learning a trivial policy of raising prices if given a high
incentive to do so, according to this specific observation and the fact that the baseline rewards
without the agent doing anything, as indicated in the previous section, are 32,000. This can be
confirmed by examining Figure 6, which shows that the average rewards are much higher than
the baseline value, which indicates that the algorithm leads to a very high additional reward
in comparison with the baseline. This means that the training setup at the shipping company
overfits as it cannot generalise its actions for unseen states with a reasonably similar reward
function behaviour. Hence, additional investigation and different methods are required in order
to develop a more sensible policy since this setup learns a trivial policy.
5.3
Results from Exploring Alternate Hyperparameter values
The default policy network architecture used in the d3rlpy library was used to perform
all runs in 5.2. The policy network consisted of 2 hidden linear layers, each comprising of 256
neurons. Hence, it was necessary to study the effect of using simpler policy network architectures.
The reward function was plotted after computing average of 3 runs for simpler architectures
comprising of 16, 32 and 64 neurons with a single hidden layer for various values of τ as shown
in Figure 11. To investigate further about the performance of the algorithm for different policy
network architectures, the average time taken to train the agent for various policy network
architectures for the same hyperparameters was calculated and plotted in Figure 12.
It can be seen from Figures 11 and 12 that the performance of the algorithm in the context
Page 41 of 59
==PAGE:43==
5.3
Results from Exploring Alternate Hyperparameter values
of the average rewards per epoch is somewhat the consistent with what was seen with the
average rewards curves using the default policy network architecture in Chapter 5.2, but with
significantly less training times for all 3 different types of architectures with a single hidden layer.
(a) Averaged rewards for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network
(b) Averaged rewards for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 32 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network
(c) Averaged rewards for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 64 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network
Figure 11: Averaged rewards vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the
environment without customer elasticity for different policy network architectures
Figure 12: Averaged training times of multiple runs of different policy architectures examined
The actor loss curves averaged for three iterations of training the RL agent for all kinds of
policy network architectures were plotted to understand the nature of stability of training while
updating the policy neural network parameters.
(a) Averaged actor losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network
(b) Averaged actor losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 32 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network
(c) Averaged actor losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 64 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network
Figure 13: Policy network training (actor) losses vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the
RL agent on the environment without customer elasticity for different policy network architectures
Page 42 of 59
==PAGE:44==
5.3
Results from Exploring Alternate Hyperparameter values
It can be seen in the Figure 28 above, that the loss curves tend to converge for both τ values
of 0.5 and 0.75, which indicate that the algorithm has fitted the dataset to in terms of reducing
the loss functions. For τ = 0.99, it does show a decreasing trend, but is comparably high and is
very noisy. This indicates that the algorithm is either overfitting the dataset, or learning rates
are not stable for the loss curves to converge.
In the interest of time, learning rates were varied using the 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network architecture to see if the loss curves would converge and the effect of learning rates on
rewards. Both actor and critic learning rates were varied at the same rate and at the same time.
The learning rates used were 0.00015 and 0.0005, both higher and lower than the default learning
rates mentioned in 4.6. The average rewards were plotted for the lower and higher learning rates
as shown below:
(a) Averaged rewards for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network, for lower learning rates
(b) Averaged rewards for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network, for higher learning rates
Figure 14: Averaged rewards vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the
environment without customer elasticity for a 1 hidden layer, 16 neuron network with different actor and critic
learning rates
As it can be observed from Figure 15, average rewards at lower learning rates resemble
values in the previous section, while higher learning rates result in higher average rewards.
Higher learning rates may cause neural networks to update more quickly, which in turn speeds up
learning and adaptation. Additionally, since the overfitting of the model was demonstrated in the
previous section, it can be claimed that the model picks up the trivial policy more quickly. The
actor loss curves were plotted using the learning rates mentioned before for multiple iterations
in Figure 15 and the loss curves indicated stable training, evidenced by the decrease in loss for
lower values of τ.
(a) Averaged actor losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network, for lower learning rates
(b) Averaged actor losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network, for higher learning rates
Figure 15: Averaged actor losses vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the RL agent on
the environment without customer elasticity for a 1 hidden layer, 16 neuron network with different actor and
critic learning rates
Page 43 of 59
==PAGE:45==
5.4
Results from using Linear Regression to estimate customer elasticity
5.4
Results from using Linear Regression to estimate customer elas-
ticity
A Linear Regression model was fitted onto the dataset to determine the relationship between
the price and the booked quantities, as mentioned in 4.4. The following linear regression plot,
accounting for just the price in the state, demonstrates the correlation between the booking
quantities and price of the containers, with the X axis and Y axis values being masked due to
confidentiality reasons of the shipping company:
Figure 16: Simple Linear regression showing the relation between prices of container and booked quantities
As observed in Figure 16, there is a negative correlation between the price of containers and
the booking quantities indicated by the negative slope of the regression line. The value of the
slope cannot be mentioned due to confidentiality reasons. This means that, without considering
other factors in the state, if the price of the containers increase, customers tend to buy less.
Another Linear Regression model was also fitted, as mentioned in 4.4, taking all state
variables into account. Even in this case, it was determined that there is a negative correlation
between prices of container and booking quantities with a slope coefficient corresponding to
the price of containers in the state being negative, indicating again that there is a negative
correlation between booking quantities and prices. The slope coefficient value is not disclosed
due to confidentiality reasons.
5.5
Results from Training the RL agent with customer elasticity
The Reinforcement Learning agent was trained using the environment incorporating the
customer elasticity model, mentioned in Chapter 4.5. The average reward curves per epoch for
different values of τ were plotted again, to compare the performance of the algorithm with the
training of the agent without the customer elasticity model.
Page 44 of 59
==PAGE:46==
5.5
Results from Training the RL agent with customer elasticity
(a) Average rewards vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Average rewards vs epoch for τ =
0.75
(c) Average rewards vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 17: Average rewards vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the environment
with customer elasticity
Compared to the rewards mentioned in Figure 6, it is seen that the average rewards are
lower.
The rewards are increasing indicating the algorithm is fitting the dataset.
There is
also a smoothing seen in the curves which indicate it is close to convergence. The rewards are
also found to be loss noisy compared to earlier iterations of training. Considering the baseline
average reward across the entire MDP dataset without the agent doing anything to be 24,000 as
determined in 4, it can also be said that in initial stages, some iterations of the training lead to
lower rewards than the baseline value, but the agent does learn a policy which leads to additional
reward. To further understand the performance of the algorithm with regards to τ, the averaged
rewards for 3 runs for different values of τ were also plotted as shown in Figure 18.
Figure 18: Averaged values of 3 runs vs epochs for different values of τ indicating the relationship between
rewards and τ when the RL agent is trained with customer elasticity incorporated environment
In comparison to the averaged rewards plotted in Figure 7, the averaged rewards mentioned
in the Figure are lower. The lowest value in Figure 18 is lower than the lowest value in Figure 7
by around 45% (rounded off to the nearest fifth place) and the highest value in Figure 18 is lower
Page 45 of 59
==PAGE:47==
5.5
Results from Training the RL agent with customer elasticity
than the highest value in Figure 7 by around 40% (rounded off to nearest fifth place), since only
averaged rewards are considered. To account for the stability of training the policy network to
examine whether the algorithm is fitting the dataset in a stable manner, the actor loss curves
corresponding to each iteration of training was plotted as shown below.
(a) Actor losses vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Actor losses vs epoch for τ = 0.75
(c) Actor losses vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 19: Actor losses vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the environment with
customer elasticity
It can be seen from Figure 19, that the training is very stable with the smooth decrease
in loss functions for both values of τ = 0.5 and τ = 0.75. For τ = 0.99, the loss functions
generally decrease except for 1 run which might be considered an anomaly or an "unlucky"
training iteration, which is also reflected by a high amount of fluctuations and noisy reward
curve seen in Figure 17 for τ = 0.99.
The averaged scaled actions scaled to the same values as in Figure 10 for 3 runs where each
bar signifies the average for 4 epochs is shown below, where the action values have been masked
for confidentiality reasons:
(a) Actions vs epochs for τ = 0.5
(b) Actions vs epoch for τ = 0.75
(c) Actions vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 20: Actions averaged and scaled across 3 runs and 4 epochs vs end of epoch for different values of τ
after training the RL agent on the environment with customer elasticity
In the above figure, it can be seen that in comparison with Figure 10, the actions on average
are less in comparison with the actions where the RL agent is trained on an environment with
no customer elasticity. The actions determined after these iterations of training the RL agent,
were found to be stochastic or random in nature and not of an increasing nature as in Figure
Page 46 of 59
==PAGE:48==
5.5
Results from Training the RL agent with customer elasticity
10. One more notable finding is that the maximum averaged actions undertaken accounted only
for a 7% increase in the average price of the containers determined in the MDP dataset.
All these findings indicate that the overfitting aspect of the RL agent determined in 5.2 has
reduced, and the agent is not learning a trivial policy as highlighted in the previous sections.
In order to further confirm that the new policy learnt by the RL agent to price containers was
not trivial, an off-policy evaluation of the policies in the underlying policy networks generated
from earlier experiments were evaluated in the environment with the customer elasticity to see
if the new policies learnt performed better compared to the earlier overfitting policies. This
was performed using the FQE framework provided by the d3rlpy library [29], which performs
off-policy evaluation for continuous action space algorithms. The averaged reward values for 3
runs for different values of τ plotted in 18, were plotted against the rewards generated by the
overfitting policies in the customer elasticity environment over 20 epochs. For the purposes of
plotting these graphs, τ = 0.75 was excluded as the agent was trained for multiple iterations in
Chapter 5.2 using τ = 0.7, and it would be inappropriate to draw conclusions using different
values of τ. Hence, only τ = 0.5 and τ = 0.99 were used to perform this evaluation.
(a) Actions vs epochs for τ = 0.5 for overfitted policy and
customer elasticity policy
(b) Actions vs epochs for τ = 0.75 for overfitted policy
and customer elasticity policy
Figure 21: Averaged reward for multiple iterations obtained by the policy which used the customer elasticity
environment to train the RL agent and average rewards per epoch by evaluating the overfitted policy in the
environment incorporating customer elasticity
From the above Figure 21, it can be seen that by using the overfitted policy mentioned in
Chapter 5.2, the computed average rewards per epoch were lower than the average rewards per
epoch computed using the policy which was obtained using the environment incorporating the
customer elasticity model. This leads to the fact that the RL agent learns a better policy by
being exposed to the customer elasticity environment.
Additionally, it was of interest in this report, to see if the average rewards per epoch curve
would converge if trained for a longer time using more epochs of training. Due to time constraints,
only one iteration of the run with τ = 0.5 was performed with 30 epochs trained over 2 million
samples instead of the default value of 1 million used in previous sections of this report. The
average rewards were computed and displayed as shown below.
Page 47 of 59
==PAGE:49==
5.5
Results from Training the RL agent with customer elasticity
Figure 22: Average rewards per epoch for an extended iteration of training with 30 epochs and 2 million
samples for τ = 0.5
It is seen from the graph shown above that the rewards do converge, and using the new
environment which utilises the customer elasticity model, leads the agent to find a more sensible
policy.
In summary, this chapter discussed about the RL agent being trained for multiple iterations
with multiple environments, and the consequences of those iterations. The effects of a few hyper
parameters on the performance of the algorithm was also discussed.
Page 48 of 59
==PAGE:50==
6
Conclusions
This master’s thesis was concerned about the following research questions.
1) Will a Reinforcement Learning agent learn a trivial policy when evaluated against a simple
environment which has a high reward for high actions undertaken and what would be the effects
of some hyperparameters on this performance?
2) Can a simple customer elasticity model be learnt which gives the correlation between bookings
and prices of containers?
3) Will the Reinforcement Learning agent learn a sensible policy if evaluated against an envi-
ronment which incorporates the customer elasticity model?
To examine the first question, the RL agent was trained for multiple iterations using the
Implicit Q Learning Algorithm with multiple hyperparameter values to ensure robustness and
reproducibility of results. It was found that one hyperparameter τ influences the rewards in a
proportional way, indicating that higher τ values lead to higher average reward values. Also,
simpler policy architectures led to reduced training time, and higher learning rates led to conver-
gence faster, but at the cost of optimality of policy since the average rewards were abnormally
higher in comparison. Lower learning rates helped the algorithm perform almost at the same
level but increased training times.
It was also determined that the RL agent was learning to only increase the price as training
progressed which was evidenced by the fact that the actions being computed were very high, with
the minimum average actions computed being higher than the average actions in the dataset by
a factor of 10. The average rewards very also much higher compared to the baseline reward with
the minimum average reward computed being 100% higher than the baseline reward computed
for the entire dataset under the assumption that the action did not perform any action, or the
action was just zero. All these factors led to the conclusion that the Reinforcement Learning
agent, was in fact learning a trivial policy which just increased the price given a very high
incentive to increase the price and could not generalise unseen states very well.
To examine the second question, a Linear Regression model was fit onto the dataset, to
ascertain the correlation between booking quantities and prices of containers. There were two
models fit, one with the entire state variable as the independent and one model with just the
prices as the independent variable.
In both the cases, it was determined that there was a
negative correlation between prices of containers and booking quantities. This firmly concluded
and confirmed that the RL agent, evaluated against the simple environment was not able to
generalise and overfitted.
To examine the third question, the same setup used to examine the first question was used.
It was observed that the average rewards had reduced in comparison, but was still larger than
the baseline rewards. The minimum of the average rewards computed was less than the baseline
rewards and the average actions computed were lower than the average actions computed for the
RL agent trained without customer elasticity and did not have an increasing trend as training
progressed. The policy generated against the simple environment was evaluated against the
environment with customer elasticity and it was found to gain lower average rewards than the
Page 49 of 59
==PAGE:51==
policy learnt using the customer elasticity environment. Based on these results, it was concluded
that the Reinforcement Learning agent was learning a more sensible policy when an imaginary
customer was less likely to buy containers with more prices.
Based on these results, it can be said that the basic setup of the Implicit Q Learning
Algorithm to train a Reinforcement Learning agent does not generalise for all kinds of situations
sufficiently, as it learns a trivial policy when there is a very high reward for increasing prices
of containers. This can be corrected marginally by incorporating a customer elasticity model
which disincentivises the agent to set unrealistic prices, and having a reasonable reward function
in the environment which emulates what is present in the dataset. This also means that large
global anomalies cannot be picked up in an efficient manner without having a simulator which
could generate situations for these conditions, potentially leading to highly generic policies which
can achieve high rewards even in unseen states when a policy is learnt by the agent using these
unseen conditions.
Although some insights into the behaviour and performance of an Offline Reinforcement
Learning (RL) agent under different conditions have been provided by this thesis, there are a
number of directions that future research could take to improve knowledge and use of Reinforce-
ment Learning for the dynamic container pricing problem.
Future work could focus on incorporating more complex environments that more closely
resemble real-world situations (for example, COVID or 2008 financial crisis). These settings
might have more complex pricing schemes, fluctuating demand patterns, and dynamic customer
behaviour models. A more thorough assessment of the agent’s capabilities and assistance in
creating policies that are more appropriate for actual circumstances would result from analysing
the agent’s performance in these kinds of settings.Another area that needs more research is the
reward function’s design. One possible approach to improve reward function designs and make
them more in line with practical goals would be to penalise excessively high prices more severely
or include metrics related to customer satisfaction and retention over the long run in the reward
computation.
Page 50 of 59
==PAGE:52==
References
References
[1] A. P. M. Maersk.
[2] A. V. den Boer, “Dynamic pricing and learning: Historical origins, current research, and
new directions,” Surveys in Operations Research and Management Science, vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 1–18, 2015.
[3] A. Kastius and R. Schlosser, “Dynamic pricing under competition using reinforcement learn-
ing,” Journal of Revenue and Pricing Management, vol. 21, pp. 50–63, Feb 2022.
[4] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves,
M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, S. Petersen, C. Beattie, A. Sadik,
I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Kumaran, D. Wierstra, S. Legg, and D. Hassabis, “Human-
level control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol. 518, pp. 529–533, Feb 2015.
[5] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
second ed., 2018.
[6] E. Kutschinski, T. Uthmann, and D. Polani, “Learning competitive pricing strategies by
multi-agent reinforcement learning,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 27,
no. 11, pp. 2207–2218, 2003. Computing in economics and finance.
[7] N. B. Abhuit Gosavii and T. K. Das, “A reinforcement learning approach to a single leg
airline revenue management problem with multiple fare classes and overbooking,” IIE Trans-
actions, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 729–742, 2002.
[8] D. Vengerov, “A gradient-based reinforcement learning approach to dynamic pricing in
partially-observable environments,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 24, no. 7,
pp. 687–693, 2008.
[9] R. Rana and F. S. Oliveira, “Real-time dynamic pricing in a non-stationary environment
using model-free reinforcement learning,” Omega, vol. 47, pp. 116–126, 2014.
[10] B.-G. Kim, Y. Zhang, M. van der Schaar, and J.-W. Lee, “Dynamic pricing and energy
consumption scheduling with reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 2187–2198, 2016.
[11] K. Y. Lin, “A sequential dynamic pricing model and its applications,” Naval Research Lo-
gistics (NRL), vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 501–521, 2004.
[12] P. J. Ball, L. Smith, I. Kostrikov, and S. Levine, “Efficient online reinforcement learning
with offline data,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning
(A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho, B. Engelhardt, S. Sabato, and J. Scarlett, eds.), vol. 202
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1577–1594, PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023.
[13] A. Palm, A. Metzger, and K. Pohl, “Online reinforcement learning for self-adaptive informa-
tion systems,” in Advanced Information Systems Engineering (S. Dustdar, E. Yu, C. Salinesi,
D. Rieu, and V. Pant, eds.), (Cham), pp. 169–184, Springer International Publishing, 2020.
Page 51 of 59
==PAGE:53==
References
[14] R. Agarwal, D. Schuurmans, and M. Norouzi, “An optimistic perspective on offline rein-
forcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (H. D. III and A. Singh, eds.), vol. 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pp. 104–114, PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
[15] I. Kostrikov, A. Nair, and S. Levine, “Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-
learning,” 2021.
[16] A. G. Barto, “Chapter 2 - reinforcement learning,” in Neural Systems for Control (O. Omid-
var and D. L. Elliott, eds.), pp. 7–30, San Diego: Academic Press, 1997.
[17] Y. Aviv and A. Pazgal, “A partially observed markov decision process for dynamic pricing,”
Management science, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 1400–1416, 2005.
[18] W. F. Bauer, “The monte carlo method,” Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 438–451, 1958.
[19] T. Xie, D. J. Foster, Y. Bai, N. Jiang, and S. M. Kakade, “The role of coverage in online
reinforcement learning,” 2022.
[20] S. Levine, A. Kumar, G. Tucker, and J. Fu, “Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial, review,
and perspectives on open problems,” 2020.
[21] C. Lu, P. J. Ball, T. G. J. Rudner, J. Parker-Holder, M. A. Osborne, and Y. W. Teh,
“Challenges and opportunities in offline reinforcement learning from visual observations,”
2023.
[22] R. F. Prudencio, M. R. O. A. Maximo, and E. L. Colombini, “A survey on offline rein-
forcement learning: Taxonomy, review, and open problems,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems, pp. 1–0, 2023.
[23] H. Hasselt, “Double q-learning,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 23,
2010.
[24] Z. Kurth-Nelson and A. D. Redish, “Temporal-difference reinforcement learning with dis-
tributed representations,” PLoS One, vol. 4, no. 10, p. e7362, 2009.
[25] V. Francois-Lavet, P. Henderson, R. Islam, M. G. Bellemare, and J. Pineau, “An introduc-
tion to deep reinforcement learning,” Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, vol. 11,
no. 3â4, p. 219â354, 2018.
[26] M. E. Taylor, P. Stone, and Y. Liu, “Value functions for rl-based behavior transfer: A
comparative study,” in AAAI, vol. 5, pp. 880–885, 2005.
[27] V. Gómez, M. Chertkov, S. Backhaus, and H. J. Kappen, “Learning price-elasticity of smart
consumers in power distribution systems,” in 2012 IEEE Third International Conference on
Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), pp. 647–652, IEEE, 2012.
[28] X. Su, X. Yan, and C.-L. Tsai, “Linear regression,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Com-
putational Statistics, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 275–294, 2012.
Page 52 of 59
==PAGE:54==
References
[29] T. Seno and M. Imai, “d3rlpy: An offline deep reinforcement learning library,” Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 23, no. 315, pp. 1–20, 2022.
[30] T. Drabas and D. Lee, Learning PySpark. Packt Publishing Ltd, 2017.
[31] O. Gym and N. Sanghi, Deep reinforcement learning with python. Springer, 2021.
[32] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel,
P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,”
the Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[33] S. Levine and V. Koltun, “Guided policy search: deep rl with importance sampled policy
gradient,” in Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning 2013,
2013.
[34] S. Imambi, K. B. Prakash, and G. Kanagachidambaresan, “Pytorch,” Programming with
TensorFlow: solution for edge computing applications, pp. 87–104, 2021.
[35] X. Chen, Z. Owen, C. Pixton, and D. Simchi-Levi, “A statistical learning approach to
personalization in revenue management,” Management Science, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1923–
1937, 2022.
[36] N. Abe, P. Melville, C. Pendus, C. K. Reddy, D. L. Jensen, V. P. Thomas, J. J. Bennett,
G. F. Anderson, B. R. Cooley, M. Kowalczyk, et al., “Optimizing debt collections using
constrained reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 75–84, 2010.
[37] G. Theocharous, P. S. Thomas, and M. Ghavamzadeh, “Ad recommendation systems for
life-time value optimization,” in Proceedings of the 24th international conference on world
wide web, pp. 1305–1310, 2015.
[38] R. Khraishi and R. Okhrati, “Offline deep reinforcement learning for dynamic pricing of
consumer credit,” 2022.
Page 53 of 59
==PAGE:55==
7
Appendix
7.1
Offline Reinforcement Learning for Pricing
Recent and emerging literature outline the feasibility and efficiency of using Offline Re-
inforcement Learning for dynamic pricing of various products in various industries.
[35] in-
vestigated assortment optimisation and personalised pricing for airline seat reservations in a
single-period situation.
A little unrelated to pricing, but [36] estimated risk variables and predicted debt default
using offline reinforcement learning techniques. A Q-learning-based limited offline reinforcement
learning strategy for optimising debt collection through linear function approximation was de-
veloped and tested. In addition, the idea mentioned in [36] was put into practice for the New
York State Department of Taxation and Finance, expecting to save 100 million US Dollars over
the course of three years.
Fitted Q iteration, a traditional offline reinforcement learning technique, was employed
in [37] to optimise for several steps into the future or the lifetime value (LTV) of a client by
differentiating between two visits from the same user and two visits from distinct users. This
addressed both of these issues by suggesting the application of a range of off-policy assessment
methods that provide statistical assurances regarding the effectiveness of a novel approach.
When combined with various off-policy assessment strategies, the LTV optimisation algorithm
performed better than the greedy methods.
An introduction of a consumer credit pricing strategy that learns a sequential pricing policy
using model-free offline deep reinforcement learning is given in [38]. This methodology does not
rely on demand assumptions, which are frequently made in conventional pricing methods and can
lead to misspecification errors in unpredictable and non-stationary environments. Furthermore,
it extends credit pricing to the complete reinforcement learning problem, wherein present actions
can influence the environment’s future state. It is shown that this approach is able to learn an
efficient policy with only a static dataset, without any live interaction or price experimentation,
using both synthetic and real data on auto loans.
In summary, it is evident that offline reinforcement learning in operations research or revenue
management is used in the past and has proved to be effective in finding an optimal policy which
has helped create values for multiple organizations.
7.2
Hyperparameters involved in training the Reinforcement Learning
Agent
Following a description of the hyperparameters utilised in the original setup, a list of the
hyperparameters accessible in the library configuration is displayed below.
Page 54 of 59
==PAGE:56==
7.2
Hyperparameters involved in training the Reinforcement Learning Agent
Figure 23: Various hyperparameters available in the d3rlpy library for Implicit Q Learning
The hyperparameters used in the company setup with a brief description are mentioned
below:
• batch_size: Mini-batch size of 256 which decides how often to update parameters based
on the gradient of the loss function.
• gamma: Discount factor of 0.99 for future expected rewards given the current state and
action.
• observation_scaler: Using the statistics calculated from the training data, the Standard-
ObservationScaler is used to scale the observations to have zero mean and unit variance.
• action_scaler: Utilising the MinMaxActionScaler, which computes the minimum and max-
imum values from the training data and scales in accordance with them, actions are trans-
formed to a defined range. By doing this, it is ensured that the actions input into the
model fall inside a defined and consistent range.
• reward_scaler: Same as the observation_scaler, a StandardRewardScaler is used to scale
the rewards to have zero mean and unit variance.
This process is also called Z-score
normalisation.
• actor_learning_rate: 0.0003 is the value that is set as the learning rate for the actor
network, which is in charge of learning the policy, the function that associates states with
actions.
• critic_learning_rate: Sets the learning rate for the critic network to a value of 0.0003,
which is responsible for estimating the value functionâthe expected return of a state or
state-action pair.
• tau: Training is stabilised through the utilisation of target networks in reinforcement
learning.
The value tau, in this case, controls how frequently the target networks are
updated with a value of 0.005.
• n_critics: Number of critic networks that some algorithms for reinforcement learning use
which is set to 2. These methods reduce overestimation bias in value estimates by using
numerous critic networks, which enhances stability and speed.
• expectile: Hyperparameter τ in Implicit Q Learning mentioned in 3.4, which controls the
estimation of the expectile of a distribution, and is set to a value of 0.7 by default in the
library.
Page 55 of 59
==PAGE:57==
7.3
Various curves for training RL agent for various hyperparameters using different
environments
• weight_temp: The degree of unpredictability in the action selection process is managed by
this parameter, which is also known as the inverse temperature parameter. The strategy
is more predictable at lower temperatures when the inverse temperature is higher. On the
other hand, the policy becomes more exploratory when the inverse temperature is lower.
In the case of the d3rlpy library, it is set to 3.0 by default.
• max_weight: By limiting the occurrence of abnormally large updates that may result from
high advantage values, this parameter is crucial for stabilising training and is set to 100.0
by default.
7.3
Various curves for training RL agent for various hyperparameters
using different environments
(a) Value losses vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Value losses vs epoch for τ = 0.7
(c) Value losses vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 24: Value network losses vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the
environment without customer elasticity
(a) Q losses vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Q losses vs epoch for τ = 0.7
(c) Q losses vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 25: Q network losses vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the environment
without customer elasticity
Page 56 of 59
==PAGE:58==
7.3
Various curves for training RL agent for various hyperparameters using different
environments
(a) Averaged critic losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network
(b) Averaged critic losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 32 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network
(c) Averaged critic losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 64 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network
Figure 26: Critic losses vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the
environment without customer elasticity for different policy network architectures
(a) Averaged Q losses for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network
(b) Averaged Q losses for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 32 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network
(c) Averaged Q losses for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 64 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network
Figure 27: Q losses vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the
environment without customer elasticity for different policy network architectures
(a) Averaged value losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network
(b) Averaged value losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 32 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network
(c) Averaged value losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 64 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network
Figure 28: Value losses vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the
environment without customer elasticity for different policy network architectures
Page 57 of 59
==PAGE:59==
7.3
Various curves for training RL agent for various hyperparameters using different
environments
(a) Averaged critic losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network, for lower learning rates
(b) Averaged critic losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network, for higher learning rates
Figure 29: Averaged critic losses vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the RL agent on
the environment without customer elasticity for a 1 hidden layer, 16 neuron network with different actor and
critic learning rates
(a) Averaged Q losses for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network, for lower learning rates
(b) Averaged Q losses for 3 runs vs epoch
for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer policy
network, for higher learning rates
Figure 30: Averaged Q losses vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the
environment without customer elasticity for a 1 hidden layer, 16 neuron network with different actor and critic
learning rates
(a) Averaged value losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network, for lower learning rates
(b) Averaged value losses for 3 runs vs
epoch for a 16 neuron, 1 hidden layer
policy network, for higher learning rates
Figure 31: Averaged value losses vs epoch for 3 runs for different values of τ after training the RL agent on
the environment without customer elasticity for a 1 hidden layer, 16 neuron network with different actor and
critic learning rates
Page 58 of 59
==PAGE:60==
7.3
Various curves for training RL agent for various hyperparameters using different
environments
(a) Critic losses vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Critic losses vs epoch for τ = 0.75
(c) Critic loss vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 32: Critic losses vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the environment with
customer elasticity
(a) Q losses vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Q losses vs epoch for τ = 0.75
(c) Q losses vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 33: Q losses vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the environment with
customer elasticity
(a) Value losses vs epoch for τ = 0.5
(b) Value losses vs epoch for τ = 0.75
(c) Value losses vs epoch for τ = 0.99
Figure 34: Value losses vs epoch for different values of τ after training the RL agent on the environment with
customer elasticity
Page 59 of 59
