==PAGE:1==
Fostering Democratic Development
of
Digital Technologies
A tool for facilitating democracy in Danish municipalities’ work with digital solutions
==PAGE:2==
Fostering Democratic Development of Digital Technologies
A tool for facilitating democracy in Danish municipalities’ work with digital solutions
MASTER THESIS
MSc in Design and Innovation, Technical University of Denmark
AUTHORS:
Mia Hemmingsen - s183639
Josefine Schwab Rolver - s183652
Josefine Steinfurth - s183648
SUPERVISOR:
Associate Professor Michael Deininger, Department of Civil and Mechani-
cal Engineering (DTU Construct), Engineering Design and Manufacturing
Systems
CO-SUPERVISOR:
Head of Section and PhD student Anja Mie Weile, Tech4Civ, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science (DTU Compute)
PUBLISHED BY:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering (DTU Construct),
Koppels Allé, Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
GRAPHICS:
All figures of people are based on a file from Behance by Denis Shepovalov.
The graphics are modified by the design team.
WORK DISTRIBUTION: All three members of the design team have contributed equally to the entire
thesis project. The work distribution in appendix W shows who is the main
author of each chapter, but all members endorse the full content of the
report.
END DATE:
11th August 2024
WORD COUNT:
32,330
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been conducted as a part of the Technical University of Denmark in the DTU
Construct department. The thesis has been made in collaboration with the research section and
living lab Tech4Civ at the DTU Compute department. The thesis Fostering Democratisation of
Digital Technologies is the final assignment of the Design and Innovation Master’s programme,
with the start date 11/03 and end date 11/8 2024, and is nominated to 30 ECTS points.
We wish to thank our supervisor Associate Professor Michael Deininger, Department of Civil and
Mechanical Engineering, for great supervision throughout the thesis. Both the group supervision
and individual supervision sessions have been very valuable, especially when you reminded us
that we are the design experts, which gave us the confidence to choose a scoping for the project.
Thank you to our co-supervisor Anja Mie Weile, PhD student and Head of Section at Tech4Civ,
for supervision on the Tech4Civ vision and approach, and for your infectious excitement about the
project. Thank you to the Tech4Civ team for posing the project, for the collaboration on the thesis,
and for taking us in as a part of the team. Thank you for making the Tech4Civ network available to
us and for offering a great workspace for us. Thank you to Professor Jan Madsen, Head of DTU
Compute, for insights into DTU Compute’s work with Tech4Civ and feedback on the thesis.
Thank you to the network and collaborators: Århus Municipality: Thomas Andersen, Marie
Bregenov-Jensen, Marie Rørdam Fenger, Helle Rauch, Rikke Thomsen, and Tine Røno Bove.
Copenhagen Municipality: Lars Rachlitz. Frederikshavn Municipality: Jens Wolsing and Mogens
Kahr Nielsen. Sønderborg Municipality: Jannie Markussen and Bjarke Petersen. KL: Søren N.
Madsen. KOMBIT: Kristian Vengsgaard, Jens Kastenskov, and Inge Speiermann-Vognsen. DOLL
Living Lab: Ben Cahill and Clara Hvidt Røder. Gate 21: Morten K. Rasmussen. Thank you for
allocating time for interviews, actively participating in workshops, and giving constructive and
highly appreciated feedback, it would not have been possible to conduct the project without your
engagement, expertise, and excitement about the thesis. We hope you will have great use of the
tool we co-developed together.
We wish to thank our family and friends for their support throughout the thesis project. Lastly, the
members of the design team wish to thank each other for great team work and for a wonderful time
together.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
For the past half century, our society has become increasingly digitalised, and as digital technology
advances both new opportunities and complexities arise. The people who design digital technologies
have a lot of power and influence, and are not necessarily aware of how far the ripple effects of
their decisions may reach. This challenges democratic societies, as the power lies with the small
group of developers of digital technology, rather than with the people.
This thesis is written in collaboration with Tech4Civ, research and living lab section at DTU
Compute, whose vision is "ensuring inclusive, democratic, and open organisations and societies by
empowering citizens to understand and engage in the digital transformation". This thesis project
supports Tech4Civ’s vision by working with an effect driven approach to foster democracy in
Danish municipalities’ development of digital technology solutions.
This thesis investigates the complex societal problem that lies within the relations and networks
between digital technology, people, and society by doing primary and secondary research. The
primary research consists of interviews with 11 employees from four different Danish municipalities
and seven employees from organisations that work closely with municipalities. The secondary
research is gathered in a literature review, which presents key source’s perspectives on the impact
of digital technology on individuals, organisations, and society, its unintended consequences, and
how democracy plays a role in the digital transformation.
The design process of the project follows a modified combination of the N-model and SID, and
begins on the ’Complex System’ and ’Engineering levels’, as the starting point of the project was
democratisation in Danish municipalities, which are complex systems that are a part of democracy
in Denmark. The methods used in the project are mostly from the design field, and are supported
by Tech4Civ’s research and approach, which is most importantly incorporated in stakeholder
management and communication.
A tool that prompts digitalisation project groups in municipalities to engage in dialogues was
co-developed iteratively with relevant stakeholders, to promote democracy in the development of
digital solutions. The democratic values of inclusiveness and equality are encouraged by guiding
the group through three steps where they will step slightly out of their own expertise and see one
another as whole people, including both their emotions, their professional skills, and personal
competencies. The project groups are most often multidisciplinary, which can make communication
across the different professions’ terminology difficult and unequal.
Accomplishment of the desired effect of the tool was tested in two workshops with five of the
relevant stakeholders in each, and was determined to be successful. The user experience of the tool
was tested and iterated in collaboration with potential users. In addition, the tool will be presented
at the Sunrise conference.
The long-term impact of the tool will be seen in a cultural change in Danish municipalities, where
there is better communication across disciplines, the context of digital solutions will be thoroughly
considered in a holistic perspective, and users’ opinions will be included in decision making.
These changes indicate that a greater diversity of opinions are included in decision-making when
developing digital solutions, thus making them more democratic. This will lead to less resistance to
the implementation of new systems, increasing the success rate of digital systems. The unintended
consequences of the tool are also considered. The tool’s long term impact on the municipalities
will play a small, yet important part in fostering democratic development of digital solutions in
Denmark.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Reading guide
1
Glossary and translations
1
Introduction
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.1
Why democratisation of digital technology?
4
1.2
Tech4Civ as project owner
5
1.3
Partners and network
6
1.4
Personal motivation
8
2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1
The impacts of digital technology
11
2.2
Democracy in the context of digital technology
14
2.3
The thesis project’s field of research
16
Methodology
3
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1
Design process
19
3.2
Overview of methods used
23
3.3
Project management
25
3.4
Network and collaborator approach
26
==PAGE:6==
4
Fostering democracy in two parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Results
5
Presentation of empirical data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.1
Understanding the municipalities’ work with Smart City projects
32
5.2
Understanding the municipalities’ work with digital solutions
33
5.2.1
The steps of public procurement processes in Danish municipalities . . . . . . . . 35
5.2.2
The values, culture, and organisation: summarising all the interview data . . . . 38
5.2.3
The interviewees’ reactions to democracy in the development of digital solutions
43
5.2.4
Decisions made based on the interview data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Analysis and synthesis
6
Analysing the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.1
Translating and compromising the interview data
46
6.1.1
Understanding the municipal employees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.1.2
Understanding the municipal employees’ context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.2
Analysing the whole picture
54
6.3
Design requirements for the intervention
57
6.4
The initial brainstorm: one-way communication
57
6.5
The second brainstorm: dynamic communication
59
6.5.1
Testing the three interventions - a turning point
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7
Synthesising the intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.1
First workshop: Getting people to talk
63
7.1.1
Main conclusions of the first workshop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7.2
Second workshop: Getting people to talk AND reflect
67
7.2.1
Main conclusions of the second workshop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.3
Competitors on content and inspiration for mediation
70
7.4
From workshop to an interactive tool
72
The intervention
8
A walk-through of the tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
8.1
Why a dialogue tool for democracy in digital solutions?
75
8.2
The municipalities’ context for using the tool
76
8.3
A dialogue tool for democratising development of digital technologies 76
8.4
The user interface
84
==PAGE:7==
9
Implementation and impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
9.1
Implementation plan
86
9.1.1
The Sunrise Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
9.1.2
Testing with Århus municipality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
9.2
Success criteria
87
9.3
Long-term indicators of democracy and the intended effect
88
9.4
Recommendations for the client
89
9.5
Next steps for the tool
89
Discussing, reflecting and concluding
10
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
10.1
Biases in the project and research
92
10.2
The success of the tool
92
10.3
Democracy and dialogue
93
10.4
Design process
93
11
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
12
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
==PAGE:8==
1
Reading guide
This report is structured according to the IMRAD model, but has deviations to the structure due to
the iterative nature of design projects.
This report describes the thesis project performed by ’the design team’ (the Design and Innovation
Master’s students), which has followed a design process. Design processes are inherently iterative,
and the report structure will therefore not follow the IMRAD model strictly.
All text and figures in the report should be legible when printed. However, some of the text in
the appendices may be too small to read when printed, but can be enlarged in digital format. The
appendix is confidential and is therefore a separate file.
The report uses graphics to help the readability, including the icon shown below and boxes called
’Methodology’ and ’The design team’s understanding of the project’.
This icon is used to describe elements in the final tool.
Methodology
The boxes used for describing how the design team used methods in the thesis project.
The design team’s understanding of the project
These boxes will appear when the design team’s understanding of how to democratise the
development of digital technologies evolves. They will hopefully create a better reading
experience by helping the reader to follow the design team’s thoughts behind the work done
in the project.
Glossary and translations
This glossary contains terms in the report that are recurring and are not necessarily commonly
known, or terms where the design team’s definition in this particular context is relevant for the
understanding of the project. It is recommended to read the glossary before the report, and it can be
revisited as a guide.
Fostering democratisation
In this thesis project, ’fostering democratisation’ means
cultivating or advancing democratic ways of working.
Digital solution/system
A product that uses digital technology, eg. a chatbot (solu-
tion) uses AI (digital technology).
Digitalisation projects
Projects for the procurement of digital systems in munici-
palities.
Project group
The group that is assembled and tasked with the procure-
ment; developing the bid specification, doing market re-
search on potential suppliers, responsible for the bid solici-
tation, deciding who wins the tender, etc.
==PAGE:9==
2
Diverse teams
When diversity in project groups is mentioned in this report,
it refers to the diversity of profession or expertise, meaning
multidisciplinary teams.
Multidisciplinary
A group of municipal employees that have different profes-
sions, fields of expertise, or, more specifically to the thesis
project case, different levels of expertise within digital tech-
nologies.
Interdisciplinary
The work that is done includes knowledge and methods
from different fields of profession.
Bid specification
An official document containing the functionality require-
ments and usage criteria that the tenders must live up to and
will be evaluated on. The requirements and criteria deter-
mine the functionality and interface of the digital solution.
Functionality requirements
The ’must-have’ functions of the solution, including the
technical details, e.g. data types and input and output types.
Usage criteria
The criteria that determine the interface of the solution,
meaning how the user will interact with the system.
Below is a list of the translations from Danish to English, which the design team has made for the
purpose of the thesis project. Municipalities are complex organisations, and are very different from
country to country, making it difficult to translate the terms. The list is therefore merely of the most
used terms in this project, and are the design team’s chosen translation.
Udbudsprocess
=
Procurement process
Leverendør
=
Supplier
Bud
=
Tender (from a potential supplier)
Kravsspecifikation
=
Bid specification
Funktionelle krav
=
Functionality requirements
Non-funktionelle krav
=
Usage criteria
Gå i udbud
=
Bid solicitation
Fagområder
=
Municipal departments
Forvaltning
=
Administration department
==PAGE:10==
I
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.1
Why democratisation of digital technology?
1.2
Tech4Civ as project owner
1.3
Partners and network
1.4
Personal motivation
2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1
The impacts of digital technology
2.2
Democracy in the context of digital technology
2.3
The thesis project’s field of research
Introduction
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction
1.1
Why democratisation of digital technology?
The digital transformation brings a myriad of new opportunities and improvements to our daily
lives: we’re able to be in constant contact with loved ones, the amount of entertainment available is
virtually infinite, and detection of illnesses and diagnoses can be made earlier and more accurately
than ever before. Social media is one type of digital technology that has made an immense impact on
society. The tech giants who develop social media, such as Meta, who own Facebook and Instagram,
therefore have a huge social responsibility [1] [2]. The functions, interface, and algorithms designed
by Meta determine the use of the app and the information users are exposed to. In turn, those
factors determine the users’ actions, behaviour, and over time, culture and society [3] [4] [5] [6]
[7]. With the globalisation of social media, the companies which have a monopoly on it have a far
wider impact than companies did in the past [7].
The exponential growth of technology and global competition demand that companies must be quick
to adapt in order to keep up with technological development and rapid-shifting trends. The world
has become interconnected, and the pool of competitors has been widened significantly. Companies
can grow far bigger than ever before, and with improved communication across continents, new
organisational structures and ways of working have evolved [8] [9]. The societal impact of new
digital products does not have time to be thoroughly considered, and is nearly impossible to
test before their actual launch [10]. To combat this designer bias, there should theoretically be
diversity and inclusion of a wide variety of demographics and perspectives in the development of
digital technology products [6] [11] [12]. However, the immense variety of users, the fast pace of
development, and the tough competition all contribute to an environment where the opposite is true.
For this reason, cultivating democracy in the development of digital technologies is important.
In this thesis project, ’democracy in the development of digital technologies’ implies including a
group of people who represent the diversity of the end users, creating an inclusive environment for
them to voice their opinion, and valuing all voices equally in the development of digital technology
solutions.
All legal citizens of Denmark - a democracy - get an equally weighted vote in the election of their
political leader, which means that people of all demographics in the country, such as income level,
gender, race, education, etc. are represented in the election. Similarly, a democratic development of
digital technologies means that the demographic variety of the users should also be represented [6]
[11] [13].
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Tech4Civ as project owner
5
A lack of diversity in the development of products with a wide variety of users has proven many
times over to have serious societal consequences. One example is the design of car seat belts, which
until 2012 were only designed and tested based on crash test dummies that model the average male
body. Studies show that female drivers have a nearly 50% higher chance of serious injury in a car
crash than male drivers [14] [15]. There are many similar examples in other industries, and with
the broad influence of digital technologies, it is more important than ever to discuss how and by
whom they are designed.
This thesis project seeks to democratise the development of digital solutions in Danish munici-
palities. Seeing as democracy in the development of digital technologies is a concept that both is
affected by and has influence on all of society, it is relevant to investigate it in the context of the
public sector, specifically municipalities’ work with digital solutions [2] [4].
The report is divided into six parts and will cover: an introduction to the context and literature that
supports the topic; the methodology and approach the design team has had in the project; the results
of the primary research done; both analysis and synthesis of data to develop the intervention; a
presentation of the designed intervention; and finally, a discussion, reflection, and conclusion of the
thesis project.
1.2
Tech4Civ as project owner
The thesis project was given by Tech4Civ (abbreviation of Technology for Civilians), a section
at DTU Compute that acts as a research section and living lab. The section was founded by
PhD student Anja Mie Weile, Head of Section at Tech4Civ, and Professor Jan Madsen, Head of
Department DTU Compute. The vision of the section is:
"Ensuring open, inclusive, and democratic organisations and societies by empowering professionals,
citizens, legislators, public and private leaders, and employees to understand and engage in the
digital transformation and its impact on society". - Tech4Civ’s vision [16]
With the changes happening in our society, Tech4Civ claims that there is a need for more cross
collaboration between academia, business, and government institutions. There is a need to create a
shared language between the institutions in order to share the knowledge that each institution holds.
Each institution can contribute by doing more co-creation and improving their communication and
collaboration skills. Tech4Civ’s theory, which is created by Weile and Madsen, is illustrated in
figure 1.1.
The theory of the Anti-helix builds on the principle that opportunities arise when different disciplines
and sectors collaborate to merge their knowledge and competencies. In order to do so, individuals
must be willing to step slightly out of their own profession and onto unknown grounds.
One of the main topics of Tech4Civ’s research is the role that emotions play in the digital transfor-
mation. The changes brought on by the digital transformation will generate resistance on different
levels. In order to cope with the resistance, Tech4Civ argues that we must understand how emotions
are intertwined in the optimal use and development of digital technologies. It is important to
consider the person as a whole, which naturally includes emotions, not just the person’s profession.
The initial project given by Tech4Civ was very open, and Tech4Civ as project owners were open
to whichever direction the design team desired to take the project. The project was presented as
"an investigation of how the municipalities are currently driving the digital transformation as well
as what could help further this development e.g. development of a tool that could be utilised and
tested as a part of the further research into the area".
==PAGE:13==
6
Chapter 1. Introduction
Figure 1.1: The three modes of the Anti-helix, a model for innovation in the digital transformation
A more elaborate description of DTU Compute’s vision, Tech4Civ and the project description they
gave can be found in appendix A. Since there is no published theory on Tech4Civ’s research yet,
this section will act as the reference when the theory is mentioned throughout the report.
1.3
Partners and network
Danish municipalities
The main collaborators of the thesis project are the Danish municipalities of Århus, Sønderborg,
Frederikshavn, and Copenhagen. Denmark has 98 municipalities, with an average of 60.000
inhabitants as of the summer 2024. The main difference between public and private organisations
is that public organisations have a societal focus, while private organisations focus on the bottom
line and business. As part of the public sector, municipalities mainly work with finding solutions
to problems that occur in society, and private organisations work with innovation and economic
growth [17].
Municipalities’ main responsibility is to deliver central services, which includes driving digitisation,
to society in the best possible way. The municipalities are those who carry out digitalisation projects,
and therefore play a big part in how the national digitalisation strategies are implemented in society.
The municipalities are large organisations, most of them employing several thousand people with a
wide variety of professions [18] [19]. The municipalities are democratic organisations, that make
negotiation-based decisions [20].
Århus Municipality has been used as the example context for this thesis project. The Danish
municipalities are all structured differently, and the design team found it necessary to scope down
to one municipality as an example. Århus was chosen because it is the second largest municipality
in Denmark, the design team had the most contacts from Århus Municipality, and because they
are front runners on digitalisation projects [21]. The municipality is "magistratstyret" and has
six "diftsområder" (administrative departments): The mayor’s department, social relations and
employment, technology and environment, health and care, culture and citizen service, and children
and youth. Each of the departments contain sub departments including digitalisation, economy,
organisation, management, and many more [22]. Even though Århus Municipality is the example
==PAGE:14==
1.3 Partners and network
7
municipality for this project, it is highly relevant to include other municipalities in the research,
both to include their valuable perspectives and experiences, and to ensure that the intervention will
also fit their context.
Other relevant organisations
The thesis project focuses on how municipalities work with digital technologies, and also researches
the organisations who work closely with and influence the municipalities. The relevant organisations
that the design team had contact with are KOMBIT, KL, Gate21, and DOLL Living Lab.
KOMBIT is an IT organisation that is owned by the municipalities of Denmark. They are responsible
for the biggest procurement processes across the municipalities, and ensure modern and stable IT
solutions and digital infrastructure for Denmark. They have developed IT solutions such as Aula,
Borgerblikket, NewRefusion, and many more [23].
KL is the interest organisation of Denmark’s 98 municipalities, with the main purpose of ensuring a
strong local democracy. KL is responsible for maintaining the municipalities’ common interests, and
acts as a negotiation partner, knowledge centre, and forum for joint initiatives across municipalities
[24].
DOLL Living Lab is an organisation, which acts as a platform where companies and municipalities
can test the latest technologies, such as intelligent traffic and outdoor lighting solutions. The
organisation acts as neutral ground for bringing together the public and private sector to test their
solutions [25].
Finally, Gate21 is a partnership between municipalities, regions, companies, and research institutes,
that collaborate to solve climate problems through local actions [26].
The design team’s interaction with the network and collaborators
Tech4Civ has a broad network, which they have been so kind to make available to the design team
during the project. The network has been curious and eager to contribute and be collaborators in
the thesis project.
In 2022, the Tech4Civ team performed nine interviews with employees and leaders from the Danish
municipalities and relevant organisations, focusing on learning how municipalities work with Smart
City projects. Smart City is a term used to describe technologies and data analysis, that serve
the purpose of improving the quality of life for citizens, as well as ensuring economic growth by
optimising functions in the city. The interviewees from 2022 were thus relevant for the design team
to interview, as they are municipal employees who work with digitalisation. The Tech4Civ team
shared the contacts with the design team as a point of entry for collaboration with the network [27].
The design team got in contact with nine people from Århus Municipality, Gate 21, Frederikshavn
Municipality, Sønderborg Municipality, Kommunernes Landsforening (KL), KOMBIT, and DOLL
Living Lab. The contacts consisted of seven men and two women, who work as digitalisation
consultants, project leaders, section leaders, and one CEO. To ensure a more diverse network of
gender and professions, the initial contacts put the design team in touch with female colleges from
HR and finance. The network was expanded with another nine contacts from Århus Municipality,
Copenhagen Municipality, and Sønderborg Municipality. These contacts are insurance consultants,
project leaders, development consultants, special consultants, and information managers. See an
overview of the network in figure 1.2.
In the report there will be a distinction between ’network’ and ’collaborators’. The network
represents the contacts with whom there was an exchange of information in the initial phase of the
==PAGE:15==
8
Chapter 1. Introduction
project. ’Collaborators’ are those from the network who worked with the design team to achieve a
common goal by being involved in the co-development of the intervention [28]. Throughout the
project there have been three main points of contact with the network and collaborators:
• Initial interviews as a part of data collection in the system analysis
• Two workshops testing the content and effect of the tool with collaborators
• Final test of the user interface of the tool with selected collaborators
1.4
Personal motivation
The design team consists of three Design and Innovation students: Mia, Josefine, and Josefine,
who all have a background as B.Sc. in Engineering - Design and Innovation. In the Bachelor’s
and Master’s courses, the majority of the projects have used private organisations as case and
collaborators. As soon-to-be educated Design and Innovation Engineers, the design team believed
that it is highly important to be familiar with the public sector and Danish municipalities. Therefore,
a key motivation for the design team was to gain knowledge and experience on this area of Danish
society.
The topic of the thesis - democratising the development digital technology - was especially moti-
vating for the design team to work with now, due to the relevance in society and the changes that
we are currently facing. The immense impact of technology appears frequently in public debates,
the news, podcasts, literature, and more, showing the importance and relevance of research on this
topic.
With the project came the opportunity to work with the passionate Tech4Civ team at DTU Compute.
The big and interested network was motivating to work with and highlighted the importance of the
Tech4Civ vision and project purpose.
Lastly, the project gave the opportunity to work with new design processes and frameworks, which
the design team was very curious to experience working with. The design team saw it as a great
opportunity to learn more about working with an effect-driven approach rather than problem-driven,
and experimenting more with process and methods than in previous projects.
==PAGE:16==
1.4 Personal motivation
9
Figure 1.2: Overview of the network of collaborators in the thesis project
==PAGE:17==
2. Literature review
The impact of digital technology, its unintended consequences, and how democracy plays a role
have been researched throughout the thesis project. The literature review presents and gathers all
the key source’s points, and outline the thesis project’s field research.
Research has been done throughout the project in parallel with interviews and developing the
intervention, as the system analysis was done iteratively with system requirements. To structure the
search, an assumption dumption was made to delineate all previous knowledge the design team had
on the topic, and research questions were written based on the assumptions as something concrete
to answer. Below are the most relevant assumptions and research questions for the literature review.
The full overview of assumptions and research questions can be found in appendix B.
The main assumptions are:
• Some people are afraid of digital technology
• Municipalities are pressured to implement digital technologies due to societal trends
• We are not used to thinking about democracy in the context of digital technology
The main research questions are:
• How do digital technologies influence society?
• How can design, especially of digital technologies, be democratised?
• Which relationships exist between democracy, digital technology, and design?
Methodology
The research was done in several ways, the first of which was desk research in DTU FindIt
[29]. All the search strings and the number of results they gave are shown in appendix C.
The topic is difficult to search on, as if the search was too broad, such as "Technology AND
democracy", there were far too many results (more than 6.500). If the search string was
more specific to municipalities, such as "democracy AND technology AND municipality",
it only resulted in 3 articles. Moreover, most of the articles were disregarded, as they are
about digital voting platforms and forums for public debate, which are not relevant topics
for this thesis.
==PAGE:18==
2.1 The impacts of digital technology
11
To optimise the search, the DTU FindIt filter "Sort by relevance" was added to the search.
The articles presented in this search were discarded or selected based on their abstract.
The most relevant and interesting articles were saved. Furthermore, when reading the
selected articles, many of them also had referenced other relevant articles and books in
their bibliography, that the design team looked into. Lastly, some articles were found by
searching for a specific author, one of which was Professor Aasa Feragen, as the design
team knew that she has written articles that are of relevance to the thesis.
Research was also done on different platforms (podcasts, radio, news, debate programmes,
audio books) both in connection with understanding the societal trends in technology and in
connection with new findings throughout the thesis project. Lastly, a search was done in
a physical library, where the section with themes on digital transformation was found and
relevant parts of books were read.
2.1
The impacts of digital technology
In today’s society, digital technologies are part of almost everyone’s lives and are helpers in
everyday life for most citizens. The digitalisation that happens with the development of new digital
technologies is fundamentally different from digitisation, and it is important to distinguish between
these two terms. Digitisation translates an analogue process to a digital process, with the purpose
of optimisation. Digitalisation, on the other hand, introduces completely new processes, products,
and platforms, which creates new opportunities [30] [8]. Smartphones are the primary example of
the opportunities that are created by digital technology. They help us stay connected with friends
and family, the GPS helps us find the way to new places, we can find inspiration for new projects,
and much more. Digital technology has created great opportunities, not only for individual citizens,
but also in Denmark, where many processes in the public sector are becoming digital. The Danish
tax system is one example of how digital technology has optimised processes, and has reduced
errors and tax fraud [31]. Digital technology can help us process big data sets to find new patterns,
which can create value [8]. The list of opportunities is long and is expanding.
Literature, as well as popular science, supports and presents the paradigm shift that the development
of new digital technology creates [8][4][2][32][33]. Experts agree that digital technologies are
increasing in speed, growing exponentially, and creating great impacts on lives, organisations,
and society [8][32]. The digital transformation has with this paradigm shift brought new ways of
working and ways of distributing knowledge. Because digital technologies are network-based and
introduce new processes, they foster new business models, new roles for organisations, and connect
everyone across the world in a gigantic network of knowledge and information [8][2][9]. Many
organisations have shifted their focus to exploit the opening in the market that digital technology
has created. Organisations take advantage of these opportunities and make great efforts to keep up
with the rapidly developing market [33].
However, digital technology does not only bring opportunities. Gerald Kane describes that many
organisations often see more opportunities than threats for their organisation in the digital transfor-
mation. According to Kane the amount of opportunities and threats that new projects entail will be
equal, and it is therefore critical if organisations do not understand and manage the associated risks
[33]. The consequences span all societal levels, and impact both individual users, organisations,
and society, which will be elaborated in the following sections [9] [32] [33] [10].
==PAGE:19==
12
Chapter 2. Literature review
How digital technology changes society
Many sources focus on tech giants’ role in society and their power over citizens [1] [4] [3] [13].
In Denmark this is especially prominent in the news and public debates. Something that has a
noticeable presence in the news is public institutions’ use of AI-solutions. AI solutions can optimise
processes and free up employees for more critical tasks, but some experts claim that the solutions
are implemented too early, without making a proper risk analysis [34] [4]. Furthermore, popular
debate programmes include episodes such as "Skærmfri fremtid" (a future without screens) and
"Tech tager magten fra os" (tech takes the power away from us). They open up conversations about
how tech giants use data and prediction models for marketing purposes. Tech companies can now
predict behaviour on a personalised level, and use the information to promote their products [32]
[13] [7] [8]. Furthermore, they are challenging laws on privacy, transparency, and user rights, which
creates ethical dilemmas. The laws that the authorities are implementing on data collection affect
smaller companies as much as they do big companies, thus closing their window of opportunity,
even though that is not the intention. This illustrates the difficulties of different interests that need
to be considered and heard in the digital transformation [4] [3] [32] [13] [7].
There is a new digitalisation strategy for Denmark, which presents 25 initiatives that set the direction
for an "ambitious and responsible" digital transformation and development of digital solutions in
Denmark over the next 3 years. The strategy is as follows:
“Efficient use of data and new technology can, among other things, support the green transition,
counteract the labour shortage, ensure growth and export of Danish companies, and contribute
to raising the quality of the public sector’s service for the benefit of citizens and companies.” -
Denmark’s digitalisation strategy [35]
It also recognises the risks and uncertainty of digital technology. Security and responsible de-
velopment are top priorities, with DKK 61 million set aside for "clear framework conditions for
the development and use of artificial intelligence solutions". The state is working actively to
contemplate the risks of digital technology. However, this is a difficult task because digitalisation
creates new processes and ways of working, and the regulations and laws are constantly updated
in order to ensure that digital technologies live up to the Danish and European values of privacy,
transparency, and human rights [35]. Literature also supports these risks. Tech giants’ exploitation
of personal data is compromising the basic human right of autonomy, the freedom to choose without
the influence of other’s desires. Tech giants gain power through the massive amount of knowledge
they can gain from analysing the data they collect on people [36] [1] [13] [11]. Their main purpose
is to increase revenue, and it is this motive that creates a risky dynamic, because their focus is not
on people and the common good of society [32] [7] [3] [37].
Another consequence is the manipulation and misinformation that is made possible with the
introduction of digital solutions that enable easy editing of pictures and audio, such as deepfakes
[35][32]. “The speed, scope and impact of the technologies of manipulation may be difficult to
overcome as the pace of change accelerates.” [32]. The fear of deepfakes and misinformation
undermines social trust, further emphasising the complexities of the digital transformation we must
navigate in and the detrimental consequences of a decreasing societal trust [32] [38].
Digital technology in organisations
On the organisational level, digital technologies create many opportunities, and if you succeed in
keeping up with the trends, there are high rewards [9]. It is crucial for organisations to acknowledge
new ways of working in the digital age [9] [8]. For private businesses, following the old ways of the
industrialisation may lead to risks of failure or bankruptcy, because they cannot live up to the new
demands of the market [8]. But changing old ways of working to become more agile is not easy. It
==PAGE:20==
2.1 The impacts of digital technology
13
requires that the organisation and its employees constantly undergo change. In change management,
involvement and acknowledging employees needs is important, to have them on board, and to be
able to sustain the changes. Change management thus becomes a crucial factor to make sure all
relevant parties feel involved [20] [39].
Individuals’ interaction with digital technology
Succeeding in the volatile environment of the digital transformation is as much about the people
involved as it is about the technologies [33] [40]. It is about getting employees on board, getting
them motivated and excited about the new initiatives and ways of working, getting them excited
about improving their digital competencies, and understanding their concerns and emotions about
digital initiatives [40][41] [20]. When introducing digital initiatives, it is important to understand
the different beliefs employees have about the digital transformation [20] [42]. Some may be eager
to learn and engage in the initiates, while others may be more hesitant, or even actively resist [42].
Examples of factors that play a role in resistance are the change itself, a fear of the unknown factors
of technology, a fear of being inadequate after the change, and the fear of loosing their job [41] [43].
It is important to listen to the employees who feel this way, as they will have important perspectives
on the risks of the technology. Employees who are eager to be part of setting the direction for the
digital initiatives are important, too. They are the main driving force and bring the positive and
opportunistic views on the initiative [44].
Solberg et al. present 4 different types of "digital mindsets". The mindsets are based on two factors:
• their belief in their own abilities (fixed vs. growth)
• how they perceive external situational resources (zero-sum vs. expandable-sum)
The first factor regarding employees’ view on their own ability can span from fixed to growth.
People whose beliefs are fixed do not believe that their intelligence and abilities are able to evolve.
They believe that they are either good or bad at things, and that these attributes are inherent to them.
Learning a new skill can therefore be challenging if they are not instantly good at it. They fear to
look incompetent, and are therefore unlikely to ask for help when they need it. On the other end of
the scale is the growth belief. People with this belief find that their intelligence and abilities can be
improved. They will seek to grow and learn new skills, and view challenges when learning a new
skill as a positive sign of learning.
The second factor is employees’ view on the external resources that are available, and can span
from zero-sum to expandable-sum. People with a zero-sum belief see external resources as limited.
They believe that negotiations will always result in a winner and a loser, and that gains for one party
will result in losses for another. Accordingly, they have a more competitive nature. People with
expandable-sum belief view external resources as expandable, and that they provide opportunities
for all parties involved. They are optimistic and eager to cooperate to find solutions, rather than to
compete. The 4 digital mindsets are a combination of the beliefs within the two factors, and are:
• Fixed/zero-sum mindset: A person who is good at what they do, but not eager to learn new
skills, and who is more competitive than cooperative. This combination results in a feeling
that they cannot win in digital initiatives, often resulting in avoidance.
• Fixed/expandable mindset: A person who is good at what they do, but not eager to learn
new skills, and who is cooperative, often finding collaborators with the competencies that they
lack. This means they will get the benefits of new digital initiatives, but without engaging
with the technology itself.
• Growth/Zero-sum mindset: A person who will eagerly learn new skills, including using
new digital technologies, and who is competitive, believing that they must strengthen their
own position in order to "win", and are therefore strong forces in digital initiates.
==PAGE:21==
14
Chapter 2. Literature review
• Growth/expandable-sum mindset: A person who will eagerly learn new skills, including
using new digital technologies, and who is cooperative of nature and will help others when
they can, believing there are opportunities for everyone in new initiatives.
The four different mindsets are often all present in an organisation [42]. This creates situations where
different, sometimes opposing, views are present, and it is important to consider all perspectives in
new digital initiatives [42] [44] [40]. Digital initiatives result in different reactions, and resistance
can become apparent when the relevant people in the given context are not included in decision
making [6] [11] [13] [12] [20].
The impacts of the digital transformation on society, organisations, and individuals have been
presented above. They mainly revolve around how people interact with digital technologies’
implementation and use. However, the digital technologies themselves and their design are equally
relevant to understand, as they define the use [11] [6] [5].
The unintended consequences of the design of digital technology
Throughout history, scientists, engineers, and designers have sought to understand and develop
new things, their curiosity leading the way. This is the root of the development of new technology,
including digital technology [6]. But developing new digital technology puts great responsibility
on the developers to have ethics and their impact in mind [2] [5] [11] [45]. One example is the case
of AI-solutions for neuro-imaging. The solutions can accurately diagnose patients, but in some
cases have a bias that results in a better diagnosis of men than of women. Unfortunately, solving
this issue is not simple, due to the many variables in the diagnoses. It was shown that the bias is
connected to the data, both the quantity of data and the underrepresentation of women in the data the
solution is based on. It was also shown that in some cases better data quality alone did not solve the
bias. In one case, including more women in the datasets resulted in a worse model for diagnosing
women than the original model. In other cases, including more women in the datasets led to an
increased quality of diagnosis for both men and women. This shows that bias in AI-solutions do
not only depend on data quality and representation, but also on the code and models themselves
[46] [47]. Biases in digital technology result in a ripple effect throughout the system. It affects
both the individual who is wrongly diagnosed and the greater societal inequalities. This means
that the decisions made in the design of a given digital solution will inevitably create a domino or
ripple effect [11] [45] [5] [10]. As mentioned, this puts a great responsibility on the developers
of digital technology, because they are required to consider so many factors in order to design
equal and ethical systems [2]. It becomes apparent that it is not only the use and implementation of
digital technology that creates an impact, but that the digital solution itself may create unintended
consequences [11]. The developers become those who decide what is important in the context of
the digital solution [45] [6].
2.2
Democracy in the context of digital technology
The factors presented above all challenge democracy, and it is therefore important to critically
reflect on the impact of the development and selection of digital technology solutions.
The Cambridge Dictionary defines democracy as “the belief in freedom and equality between
people, or a system of government based on this belief, in which power is either held by elected
representatives or directly by the people themselves” [48]. The core principles of democracy are
thus freedom and equality. Expanding on this definition, the principles of democracy also include
human rights, participation, human development, and equality in decision-making; that everyone
can use their intellect and voice to contribute to common decisions [48] [49] [1][13]. In extension,
democracies should not be dominated by a small group of powerful people, but rather by motivated
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Democracy in the context of digital technology
15
and engaged citizens [13]. The principles of democracy apply across all levels of society, both on
national level, in organisations, and in smaller groups. A common denominator on the levels is that
democracy needs structure, eg. a political system, an election process, or a process that enables
people to express their opinions, to enable effective and equitable decision-making [13].
This thesis will have a focus on Danish municipalities, and it is therefore important to understand
what democracy means in an organisational context. The Cambridge dictionary defines democracy
in a workplace or management context as "a situation, system, or organisation in which everyone
has equal rights and opportunities, and can help make decisions" [48]. The expansion on democracy
above contain the underlying principles and values in the context of western democracy, which this
review and thesis report are based on.
It is crucial to look at democracy and its principles and values, especially as society develops in
the technological arena [13]. Experts believe that introducing digital technology into democracies
should be done with caution [4] [13] [7] [2] [1] [35] [36]. In extension, Bartlett explains how
democracy and technology are built on fundamentally different principles. Democracy is built on
mutual respect between people, and an assurance that others intend to contribute to the common
good when they speak their mind. Furthermore, democracy originates from a different era, a time
where public debate was limited to geographic location, and before information could be spread as
fast as it can now. People were therefore held accountable for their public utterances, and could not
be anonymous like they can now. Bartlett argues that digital technologies are based on contradictory
principles. It is network-based and decentralised, as information can spread so fast and far, and
decision-making no longer has geographical ties [7].
Revisiting the consequences of digital technology presented in the previous section, it is evident
why experts are worried. Looking at tech companies’ roles, it was presented how their exploitation
of data for marketing purposes challenges laws on privacy, transparency, and user rights. The use
of digital products slowly takes away the freedom of choice from users, whenever tech companies
change their policies to increase data collection [1] [4] [13]. This challenges the democratic values
of freedom of choice and human rights. Furthermore, the power that tech companies have gained
goes against the democratic principles of having a equitable power that is held by elected parties,
not a small group of powerful people. The citizens and their basic rights are no longer the main
focus.
Another democratic value, which digital solutions challenge, is trust. Denmark is the country with
the highest social trust [38]. However, with the introduction of deepfakes and the misinformation
that follows, this trust is slowly broken down [32] [50].
In extension, democracy is relevant to consider on organisational and individual levels, too. The
uncertainty and the different views that are part of digitalisation make it easiest to only include tech
enthusiasts in decision making, thus making everyone comply with their decisions [6]. However,
both the opportunistic and sceptical views on digitalisation are equally important, as inclusion is
directly linked to the democratic principle of participation [49]. Furthermore, there should be equal
opportunity for affected individuals to voice their opinion in a democratic organisation, or be fairly
represented [13]. In extension, if the people who are relevant for a given context are not included
in the development or selection of digital solutions, including selecting the right data and models
for the users of the system, the solution might have bias, furthering inequality. This is especially
relevant in public organisations, because they will often assist bureaucratic processes, politics, and
decision-making, which are crucial processes in Danish society. Because public organisations are
based on democratic principles and their processes are negotiation-based [20], replacing those
processes with statistics, data, and modelling will allow technology to have a greater voice than
that of the people [4] [6] [45]. The processes in digitalisation must be considered, in order not to
==PAGE:23==
16
Chapter 2. Literature review
change the fundamentals of democracy as we know it [2].
Summing up, even though technologies have great positive impacts on society, it is also important
to remember the risks and consequences, as they challenge the western democratic values [13] [7]
[1] [2].
Which measures are needed to democratise digital technology?
Scientists, engineers, and practitioners are already taking action to increase equality and let more
people have a voice in the development of digital solutions. Some argue that we need to go from a
technology-centred approach to a human-centred approach, where the technologies should support
human behaviour rather than replace it [6] [12] [51] [11]. A technology-centred approach results in
people changing their behaviour to fit the needs of technology, whereas a human-centred approach
supports and empowers people and their competencies [6]. A human-centred approach is thus more
democratic, as the power lies with the people rather than with technology.
One measure that is important when doing human-centred design is involvement of the users of
a digital technology. In this regard, the field of design is especially relevant, because it includes
a holistic perspective that looks at both direct and indirect users, giving them a voice through
co-development and participatory design [6] [12]. Specifically socio-technical design investigates
the system of people, artefacts, and how they interact before developing solutions, giving a thorough
understanding of the context of the solution [12] [10] [5]. This makes it possible to better foresee
possible effects of the design, decreasing the risks of unintended consequences [12]. The case of
biases in neuro-imaging shows how crucial it is to understand the context in which a new digital
solution will be implemented. An investigation of the context led the developers to understand the
paradoxes, one of which is that correcting for bias can result in lower accuracy for all diagnoses.
If the solution was only targeted men, the accuracy would be the most important factor, but the
balance of gender equality and accuracy increases the complexity drastically [46]. Ethical and social
argumentation may be the conclusive factors in the decision-making, thus showing the importance
of collaborating across disciplines in the development of digital technology solutions [11] [46].
To conclude, it is necessary that people with a broad variety of perspectives, backgrounds, and
mindsets collaborate in the development of digital technology, giving all relevant parties a voice.
This resonates with the principles of democratic organisations. Inclusion and participation will
make people feel heard and engage them in digital initiatives. This can further be increased if the
democratic values of social trust and respect are practised, as it will enable people to be part of the
solution on their own terms [6][13][12][20].
2.3
The thesis project’s field of research
The literature review examines technologies and their impact on society, organisations, and indi-
viduals. The concept of democracy has been investigated and expanded, including organisational
democracy, and the impact of digital technology and democracy have been linked. In extension,
the measures needed to develop more democratic processes and digital solutions were presented,
focusing on a human-centred approach.
This thesis report will elaborate and further investigate the layers, principles, and values of democ-
racy. It will investigate in detail how digitalisation happens in Danish municipalities. It is expected
that the societal forces described in the literature review will also be present in municipalities,
but on a smaller scale and slightly differently. Furthermore, the thesis recognises that democracy
in the development of digital technology is a broad and complex field. A Master thesis will not
diminish the forces of tech giants, but it will be a contribution together with many other’s attempts
==PAGE:24==
2.3 The thesis project’s field of research
17
to support democratic digitalisation in the public sector, and thereby democratise society with a
bottom-up approach. It is hypothesised that the Danish municipalities are technology-driven rather
than problem-driven, and that the users of their digital solutions are therefore subject to digital
technology, rather than the digital technology being helpers that empower the user. The thesis’ aim
is to understand the drivers of democratic processes and which barriers make digitalisation less
democratic than desired.
==PAGE:25==
II
3
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1
Design process
3.2
Overview of methods used
3.3
Project management
3.4
Network and collaborator approach
4
Fostering democracy in two parts . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Methodology
==PAGE:26==
3. Approach
3.1
Design process
The thesis project has followed an overall design process that is based on the N-model from the
M.Sc. Design and Innovation course Holistic Design of Engineering Systems, and draws on the
effect-driven principles from Social Implication Design. The design team has been process aware
throughout the entire thesis project, and the design process model has been iterated several times as
the project progressed and the team reflected. On figure 3.1 the design team can be seen working
on structuring the process.
Figure 3.1: The design team mapping out the whole design design process, including all the
methods and their purpose and outcome.
==PAGE:27==
20
Chapter 3. Approach
The N-model
The N-model represents a holistic design process from the M.Sc. Design and Innovation course
Holistic Design of Engineering Systems, see figure (figure 3.2) [52]. The process is divided into the
three overall phases shown across the top of the model; System Analysis, System Requirements,
and System Integration & Testing & Evaluation. Within the phases, the process moves up and down
the three levels in the left column; Engineering System level, Complex System Level, and Artefact
Level. The artefact level contains products and services, which are a part of a complex system
of other products and systems, interactions, business models, etc. The engineering level depicts
society, the large-scale socio-technical system, or "systems of systems" [10].
In the N-model, the problem and solution are co-evolved as the three levels are analysed, the artefact
is designed or re-designed, and the integration of the artefact is tested and evaluated on the complex
system and engineering levels. This iterative, co-evolving approach is used in the thesis project,
where system analysis and design requirements happen iteratively, as do design requirements and
the design, testing, and evaluation of the intervention [52].
However, the N-model is problem-driven and has its starting point on the artefact level, meaning
that it begins with either a product or service to be redesigned, or a user’s problem to be solved.
The thesis project is effect-driven rather than problem-driven, and the project had its starting point
on the Engineering and Complex system level, because the given project is given as an open
investigation of digitalisation in Danish municipalities. The N-model is therefore not directly
applicable to this thesis project, as there is no artefact or problem statement given.
Figure 3.2: The N-model [52]
Social Implication Design
Social Implication Design (SID) is a design approach that connects artefacts with large-scale social
problems [5]. The process begins with a phenomenon or social statement, then defines which
behaviour seeks to be changed or implemented, and lastly designs a product or service to do so (see
figure 3.3). It aims to make design more sustainable by working effect-driven to shape society with
interventions that all contribute to the common goal, rather than endless problem-driven product
design. Likewise, the thesis project was given as an effect (democratisation of the development of
digital technologies) on society, in context of Danish municipalities.
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Design process
21
However, in SID it is important that the designer is objective and does not affect the system until the
intervention is designed in the end, and this thesis project has had the opposite goal. A large part of
the thesis project has been to affect the network throughout the entire process by introducing the
collaborators to the topics within democratisation as they are co-evolved and co-defined. Moreover,
it has been known since the beginning of the thesis project that the final outcome would be a tool or
framework, which would not be the case if SID were followed strictly. SID is therefore not directly
applicable to the thesis project either.
Figure 3.3: The model for Social Implication Design [5]
The design process of the thesis project
Based on the arguments presented, a combination of the N-model and SID was used to structure
this thesis. The process begins on the Complex System and Engineering levels (figure 3.4), as
the starting point of the project was based on democratisation, a system of systems, in Danish
municipalities, a complex system. There was no artefact to analyse in the system analysis phase.
The orange lines on the process model visualise that there are overlaps and iterations between
the three phases and levels. The system analysis and defining the system requirements happened
simultaneously over a period of almost two months, and were mutually beneficial; an increased
understanding of the municipalities’ work allowed the team to define what democratisation means
in the context of digital technologies, and define how it can be fostered in digitalisation projects
in municipalities. In turn, that helped the team to ask more specific and relevant questions during
the interviews, which contributed to an even deeper understanding of the system. Similarly, the
design & testing & evaluation of the tool happened simultaneously with iterating the requirements
during the workshops and test meetings, which was done both to give the collaborators a sense of
ownership, and because of the experimental approach to the project.
The thesis project ends with the final intervention, a dialogue training tool, on the artefact level.
Testing and evaluation of the tool is done on the artefact level through user tests on the interface
and on the success criteria for the tool, but the desired effect of the intervention is to democratise
digitalisation projects in Danish municipalities. The effect will happen over a longer time period,
and is difficult to translate into measurable metrics. Therefore, indicators of the tool’s impact
beyond the time frame of the thesis project have been determined (see figure 3.5).
==PAGE:29==
22
Chapter 3. Approach
Having an effect-driven approach means that there has not been a search for problems in the system
or from the users, as would be done in other design frameworks, such as Double Diamond, as there
will always be a problem where it is looked for. The project starts with the conviction that the
municipalities do work democratically - but that there can be enablers and barriers that strengthen
or weaken the democracy in digitalisation project processes. The thesis project therefore works
with finding barriers rather than problems, and devise how barriers can be transformed into enablers
or desired effects.
Engineering level
Complex system level
Artefact level
System analysis
System requirements
Design & Testing 
& Evaluation
Indicators of impact
Figure 3.4: The design process for this thesis project
Literature review on 
democratisation in digital 
technologies
Analysing tender 
processes for digitalisation 
projects and the 
organisational structure of 
Danish municipalities
Defining democratisation 
in the context of digital 
technologies
Requirements for the 
intervention based on the 
context; digitalisation 
projects in municipalities
Table of requirements and 
criteria for the contents 
and the design of the tool. 
Test in workshops with 
participants from the 
network, and iteration of 
the tool’s content.
Definition of long-term 
indicators
Definition of long-term 
indicators
Iterative design and 
testing of the tool’s 
interface in meetings with 
individuals from the 
network
Engineering level
Complex system level
Artefact level
System analysis
System requirements
Design & Testing 
& Evaluation
Figure 3.5: The design process for this thesis project, including the content of each stage
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Overview of methods used
23
3.2
Overview of methods used
In the following section, the methods used throughout the thesis will be presented according to: a
short description of the method, its purpose, and which phase of the N-model it fits into. In this
section, the methods will be described without the context of the thesis project. Throughout the
thesis the methods will appear in light red "Methodology" boxes, where they are put into the direct
context of the thesis project.
Research questions, desk research, and literature review
Is a search for excising knowledge on a specific topic. The knowledge sources can be anything
from a book to a podcast. The purpose of desk research is to obtain a lot of knowledge on the
area before starting empirical data collection. Research questions are often formed to structure the
search. Research questions state the focus ares/problem that a desk research can be based. The
purpose of the questions is to ensure a structured search, and acts as the initial outline of a project.
Desk research is primarily conducted in the system analysis phase in the N-model, but as more
knowledge is gained on the topic, it can be beneficial to conduct more desk research in the design
& testing & evaluating the intervention phase [29].
Assumption dumption
Is conduced by writing down all assumptions on a specific topic. This is done to create a shared
understanding within a design team and can help with gaining new perspectives and create awareness
of preexisting biases. The method is mainly used in the initial phase of a project in the system
analysis, but can be used throughout project to ensure alignment within the design team [53].
KJ Technique
KJ Technique is an organisation of data or ideas in groups or categories. The purpose is to structure
a large amount of data into main findings. The method can be beneficial in many phases of the
N-model. In the initial phase it can be used to help defining the problem area, and later in the
process is can be used to structure brainstorms [54].
User Activity Cycle
User activity cycle (UAC) is used for identifying reoccurring user needs. The cycle displays which
phases or steps the user goes though in the given context, and where there is room for improvement.
The cycle defines the "pre", "during", and "post" use phases for the user. UACs are used in the
system analysis phase [55].
Flow diagram
Is a visualisation of different actions/options/decisions within a system. The purpose of flow
diagrams is to create an overview of an entire process, and thereby decide where to intervene. The
flow diagram is most suited for the system analysis phase for understanding factors that affect the
system flow [56].
Semi-Structured interviews
Semi-Structured interviews ia a method used for collecting qualitative empirical data, where the
interviewer is assisted by an interview guide, and thereby have an overview of the most important
questions to get answers to. In this type of interview there is room for flexibility and the goal is
to have more a conversation than strictly question-and-answer. The method is mostly used in the
system analysis phase [57].
==PAGE:31==
24
Chapter 3. Approach
Personas
Personas are fictive characters that represent different user groups, and the purpose is to give an in
depth understanding of the users. Personas are used for summarising the main characteristics of
users, and they can act as a boundary object when discussing the users. The persona will typically
have a name, some demographics such as age, and occupation, likes, and dislikes. Personas are
composed in the system analysis, but should be used in all the phases of the N-model [58][57].
Scenarios
Scenarios are a fictive summary of actual scenarios described by the users. The purpose is to create
a common understanding of the user’s context and they are used as a boundary object for discussing
a problem or situation. They can be used in communication both internally in a design team and for
external communication with the network. Like the personas, scenarios are composed in the system
analysis, but can afterwards be used in all phases [57].
Product design specification
The product design specification is a list of the requirements and criteria for a successful solution.
The requirements are the ’must-have’ elements for a solution, and criteria are ’nice-to-have’, and can
be used to choose between several viable concepts. The product design specification is developed
in the system requirements phase, but it can and should be iterated throughout the process and act
as a point of reference for the design team [59].
Brainstorming
When brainstorming the purpose is to generate as many ideas as possible. It is important not to be
critical about the generated ideas, as these will be sorted afterwards. Constrains can be added to
increase creativity. Brainstorming is used in the design phase of the N-model [60].
Prototyping
Prototyping is a visual representation of a concept, with the purpose of having a boundary object
for discussing and testing the concept, which contributes to external communication and internal
alignment on the concept. A prototype can be either a drawing, a physical or digital mock-up, and
can be functional or not. Prototypes are used in the design & testing & evaluation phase of the
N-model [61].
Workshop
In a workshop a group of people are gathered to work on a specific topic. The workshop often
has a facilitator who guides the workshop participants through the exercises. When designing a
workshop, it is important to have a clearly defined goal, which is also shared with the workshop
participants. Creating a workshop plan and allocating time to the different exercises is crucial for a
successful workshop. A workshop can be used in all the phases of the N-model, as the purpose can
vary depending on what’s necessary [54].
Fly-on-the-wall observation
For Fly-on-the-wall observation the user is observed in a specific situation, and their actions,
reactions, and behaviour is noted by the design team, without interfering or communicating with the
user, as to not affect anything. The method can be used either when collecting data in the system
analysis phase or in the design & testing & evaluation phase for observing the user’s interaction
with the intervention [62][54].
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Project management
25
Drivers and barriers
The method of finding drivers and barriers within a topic is to investigate which factors are hindering
the desired effect, and which factors enforce the effect. Drivers and barriers can be used to help
synthesise data or to define the system requirements [5].
Network thinking
The purpose of the network thinking method is to find overlapping data and discover connections
between data, that can lead to new understandings and conclusions of the data. The method is
primarily used for complex problems and is used in the system analysis and system requirements
phase [6][12].
Market analysis
A market analysis is a search for competitors to a solution. Through a market analysis is it possible
to get insights about the users of the solution and insights about what competitors that are already
present on the market. It is recommended that the market analysis is conducted early in the product
development phase, to ensure that time isn’t wasted on something that is already existing on the
marked. The method is used in the design phase of the n-model [63].
Usability testing
Usability testing is testing the user’s interaction with a digital user interface. The purpose is to
test the flow, navigation and how intuitive the solution is to use. The testing can be done both
qualitatively and quantitatively, depending on how the test is planned and which data needs to be
collected. The method is used in the design & testing & evaluation phase of the N-model [57] [54].
Lean - Build, Measure, Learn
The lean methodology for rapid building and testing of digital solutions. It consists of a continuous
cycle of building, testing, learning from the test, and re-building. The benefit of the method is that
is can be used early in the design process and hereby ensure early feedback on the solution before
too much is determined and developed. The method is used in the design & testing & evaluation
phase of the N-model [57].
3.3
Project management
A Gantt chart was produced in the beginning of the project to structure the process and allocate
time frames to each phase of the project (see appendix D). The project process was divided into
three main phases. The phases followed the N-model: System analysis, System requirements, and
Design & Testing & Evaluation. The phases acted as milestones for the design team, to ensure that
they were on track with the time plan.
As the project moved forward, the design team needed a more detailed time plan. A weekly plan
was therefore set up in Figma, see figure 3.6. The plan was easy to access and change according to
unexpected changes in the project. The plan contains different elements, which are colour-coded
according to the categories: interviews, analysis, synthesis, and development.
Throughout the entire thesis project, the design team has used the daily project manager technique.
Each week a group members was assigned as project manager. The project manager was responsible
for making a daily agenda, that was written either physically on a whiteboard or in the online
version which an example of can be be found in appendix E. Additionally, the project manager
was responsible for briefing the team on the agenda every morning and debriefing at the end of the
==PAGE:33==
26
Chapter 3. Approach
Figure 3.6: The weekly plan overview. The colours represent the different elements.
day. This served the purpose of giving the design team a good alignment on the work and a shared
understanding of the progress.
A big part of the project has been management of the network. This was the design team’s first
experience with such a big network, requiring keeping an overview of e-mail correspondence with
everyone in the network and scheduling meetings for the interviews, which at times was difficult
to keep track of. The design team therefore designed a table with all the network contacts, with
columns to mark when each person had been e-mailed, when a meeting was scheduled, when a
’thank you’ e-mail had been sent, whether they agreed to participate in more interviews, and when
the recording of the interview had been saved. The table can be seen in full in appendix F.
The design team’s main media for project management was a whiteboard, and an example of how it
looked most days is shown in figure 3.7.
3.4
Network and collaborator approach
The thesis project has applied a combination of traditional stakeholder management approach and
the stakeholder approach and culture from the Tech4Civ Section. The stakeholder management
includes managing both the whole network and the close project collaborators.
The design team has used traditional stakeholder management methods; organising, monitoring,
and aligning expectations with stakeholders [39]. This was done continuously throughout the
project through e-mails, phone calls, interviews, and keeping the network interested, aligned, and
motivated to continue the collaboration. It was important to establish two-way communication with
the network, so e-mails always include an open invitation to be curious about the project and not to
hesitate to reach out.
It is commonly known in stakeholder management, that it is important to build strong relations
and partnerships, but actually doing it can be difficult [39]. The Tech4Civ approach has supported
traditional stakeholder management by translating the management practices into concrete ways
of creating motivation, trust, commitment, and alignment with the network, thus forming strong
partnerships. The Tech4Civ approach is to have the mindset of "the person as a whole" and this can
be done by being transparent about expectations and showing acknowledgement and appreciation
of their contributions.
An example of the approach, was the first e-mail to each member of the network which included
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Network and collaborator approach
27
Figure 3.7: The design team’s whiteboard containing the time plan, network overview, workshop
planning and daily agenda
practical information; a description of the project, permission to access data from their Smart City
interview, and an invitation to participate in an interview with the design team. This is traditional
stakeholder management. The e-mail also included an acknowledgement of the receiver’s previous
contributions to Tech4Civ’s research ("Thank you so much for your participation in the Smart City
interview, which has been a fantastic contribution to several publications"). Furthermore, the e-mail
mentioned the possibility of the design team sharing the network’s contributions at a conference,
another acknowledgement of the importance of their collaboration. Acknowledgements of people’s
work make them feel appreciated, which gives them motivation to continue the collaboration [39].
These may seem like small acts, but it builds up the relationship, and the design team has never
before in their education experienced as engaged collaborators from the very beginning of a project
as in this one.
Another concrete action from the Tech4Civ approach is to prioritise spending time to get to know
the interviewee in the first interview, as well as letting the interviewee get to know the interviewer(s).
This creates an open and inclusive environment, where the interviewee feels comfortable sharing
their honest thoughts and opinions. In the first round of interviews, both the design team and
the interviewee told about their background and current work, and shared what they are most
passionate about in their work. Considering and telling others your passion recalls the feeling of
excitement and meaning that the work brings, and the design team and the interviewees often had
some passions in common.
==PAGE:35==
28
Chapter 3. Approach
Lastly, the design team were aware of how much they asked of each member of the network. The
design team did not wish to give the members of the network a feeling of wasting their valuable
time, so it was accommodated by making sure that the interviews were two-way contributions,
giving the interviewees new perspectives that they could actively use in their own work. The new
perspectives were given by presenting academic material from both the design field and from other
research fields, including, but not limited to, the Tech4Civ theory, giving them thought provoking
insights, introducing new concepts, and providing the language to talk about implicit aspects of the
culture in municipalities.
The approach presented above is the design team’s understanding of how the Tech4Civ approach
has supported stakeholder management in the thesis project. It is recognised that the approach and
methodology, which is researched, developed, and applied in the Tech4Civ Section, is much more
comprehensive.
Because Tech4Civ is the project owner, and has been the enabler of contact and communication with
the network, adopting Tech4Civ’s approach to stakeholder management team has naturally been
part of the design team’s work. Furthermore, the Tech4Civ team supported and provided guidance
for navigating communication with the network. The approach was learned and appropriated by
having daily contact and regular sparring with Tech4Civ.
==PAGE:36==
4. Fostering democracy in two parts
An important part of this thesis project is that it approaches and fosters democratisation of digital
technology in two ways;
1. Democratisation throughout the project
2. Democratisation through the intervention
Democratising the development of digital solutions is a big mission and a complex problem, and
one solution is unlikely to resonate with and affect all the municipalities’. It is often not possible to
solve complex problems with just one intervention, often more interventions and approaches are
needed [5]. Moreover, if the tool does not end up being used in the municipalities, there will at
least be some people in the municipalities who have some knowledge about the topic of the thesis,
and the intended effect will partially be reached.
From the initial interaction with the members of the network, the design team has focused on
explaining the topic of democracy in digital technologies, as a method of spreading knowledge and
awareness of democracy throughout the network. The purpose was to make the network aware
of the topic and give them the means to think and talk about it, so they would hopefully begin to
incorporate it in their own work. Therefore, if the intervention ends up not being used as indented,
the network will still have knowledge on democratisation of digital technologies. A thorough
explanation of how the design team fostered democratisation throughout the project is given in
section 5.2.3.
The design team also seeks to democratise the development of digital solutions with an intervention;
a dialogue tool for the Danish municipalities. The dialogue tool’s purpose is to foster democracy in
the development of digital technologies by supporting municipal employees in their approach to
engage in dialogues in digitalisation projects to make them open, inclusive, and giving all project
group members and equal voice. The tool guides the users through three main topics, wherein they
gain a holistic perspective on the context of the digital solution, consider different perspectives
and emotions the solution may evoke, and reflect upon how they approach dialogues. A thorough
presentation of the tool is given in section 8.3.
This approach of influencing the users during the development of the intervention fits well in
product adoption research in the article "User Experience Over Time: An Initial Framework -
Temporality of experience" [64]. The article explains how user experience of a product evolves over
time, and that the user moves through the three phases Orientation, Incorporation, and Identification.
In the orientation phase the user gets familiar with the product, and the usability is an important
==PAGE:37==
30
Chapter 4. Fostering democracy in two parts
Figure 4.1: The expected user experience over time, where the democratisation throughout the
project is assisting the intervention in moving faster to the Identification phase.
factor in this phase. In the second phase, incorporation, the user experiences functional dependency
and begins to realise the usefulness of the product. Finally, in the third phase, the user becomes
emotionally attached to the solution, as they begin to identify themselves with what the product
offers, and the user creates personal experiences with the product.
The goal of fostering democracy throughout the project is to make the user familiar with the concept
of democracy digital technology before they are introduced to the actual intervention. The act of
influencing and knowledge sharing with the collaborators throughout the project familiarises them
with the concept of the intervention, which means that they can move on to the incorporation phase
sooner, as the only orientation needed once the tool is launched is on the interface. Moreover, if
the collaborators have already begun to think about democracy in digital technologies in their own
work, they have already partially moved through the incorporation phase. The main aspect of the
incorporation phase will be using the tool in the intended way, but it will be easier as they have
been part of the process of developing the tool are therefore already know the purpose and are
familiar with the importance of the tool. Finally, the intended scenario is that the tool will move
to the identification phase, where it will play a part in the collaborators’ social interactions and
identity. A model of the phases is shown in figure 4.1.
==PAGE:38==
III
5
Presentation of empirical data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.1
Understanding the municipalities’ work with Smart City
projects
5.2
Understanding the municipalities’ work with digital so-
lutions
5.2.1
The steps of public procurement processes in Danish
municipalities
5.2.2
The values, culture, and organisation: summarising
all the interview data
5.2.3
The interviewees’ reactions to democracy in the de-
velopment of digital solutions
5.2.4
Decisions made based on the interview data
Results
==PAGE:39==
5. Presentation of empirical data
5.1
Understanding the municipalities’ work with Smart City projects
In 2022, Professor of Urban Innovation and Director of Edinburgh Napier University and Tallinn
University of Technology, Luca Mora, started investigating how municipalities all over the world
work with Smart City projects with a focus on leadership. Tech4Civ assisted Professor Mora in
executing interviews with the Danish municipalities. This data was the design team’s point of
entry to the project, and it helped gaining an preliminary understanding of the municipalities work
with digitalisation, before conducting interviews later in the process. The data was provided in
the form of eight online interviews, each 1-2 hours long with mainly project leaders from Danish
municipalities.
Methodology
The design team individually listened through all the Smart City interviews and wrote down
the main points on post-it notes in FigJam, see appendix G. Afterwards, the design team
conducted a KJ on the post-its from each of the interviews, see appendix H [54]. The
purpose of the method was to organise a large amount of data and make it easy to remember
and access later in the project.
The data gave the design team an overview of how the municipalities worked with Smart City
projects in 2022, but also an overview of the knowledge gaps, that had to be investigated further in
the interviews conducted in the thesis project.
The design team learned that the Smart City term is outdated and is not used as much now as
it was in 2022. Many mentioned that the term was too broad and was another way of talking
about IoT or AI solutions. This contributed to the design team’s definition of digital technology,
which is described in the glossary. The design team learned that the municipalities collaborate and
share knowledge among each other, often assisted by KL. However, there are 98 municipalities in
Denmark, who have many different ways of doing things.
The interviews also showed that the procurement process is the foundation for all projects in Danish
municipalities. The laws and rules for the competitive procurement process are in place to ensure
that the selection of a supplier is fair and democratic. The specification, containing the requirements
and criteria for the digital solution, is the main boundary object between the municipality and the
potential suppliers, and it is therefore essential that it is very specific and thoroughly considered. If
==PAGE:40==
5.2 Understanding the municipalities’ work with digital solutions
33
there are any vague areas in the specification, suppliers can add functions or features that are more
advanced than necessary, and charge more for the solution to increase their profit.
The municipalities often order "shelf" solutions, which are digital solutions developed by external
companies, that need little to no development from the municipality. The municipalities hardly
develop any solutions themselves. The two quotes below are from municipal employees regarding
procurement processes.
"It would be great to have some procurement process regulations that were more flexible in relation
to development during the process, so you don’t have to determine the solution so early in the
process."
"We [the municipality] don’t develop digital solutions from scratch, or not a lot, because we aren’t
big enough, so it doesn’t make sense to spend resources on developing new solutions, when other
municipalities have similar needs."
The design team learned that the implementation of digital solutions is difficult, as they sometimes
do not fit the use context well, and change management is required. There is a term, "pilot sickness",
which refers to the high degree of digital solutions that are never fully implemented. A municipal
employee stated that "I think that the high death rate of IoT projects is because it’s so difficult to go
from project to operation". It was expressed by several interviewees that there’s often a gap between
the functionality of the solution and the actual need in the municipality. Lastly, it was mentioned
that there is room for improvement in relation to user involvement in most municipalities.
One of the design team’s main takeaways from the Smart City interviews was an acquaintance with
the expressions and terms used in the municipalities. This allowed for the upcoming interviews to
be planned on a more informed basis, and made for easier and more confident communication with
the first seven interviewees, who were all municipal employees.
5.2
Understanding the municipalities’ work with digital solutions
Based on the analysis of the Smart City interviews described in the previous section, the design
team had a new understanding of how the municipalities work with digital technologies. This made
the design team aware of which gaps in knowledge they had, which were to be further researched
through interviews with the network.
Methodology
An assumption dumption was made to help the design team defining what should be
researched [53]. Research questions were made based on the collection of assumptions, in
order to confirm or deny them in the interviews (see appendix B).
The design team’s main assumptions were:
• Some technologies are not used because municipalities do not understand how to use them
• The technologies are not used because municipalities do not understand how they can adapt
them to fit into the given context
• Municipalities black-box technologies and see them as locked units. Therefore, the use is
adapted to the technology, not the other way around
• The utilisation of technology in municipalities can be improved. The methods of improve-
ment can be artefacts or human factors, eg. the technology radar, the competencies in the
municipality, availability of technology, knowledge sharing, the fact that people are ’afraid’
of technology
==PAGE:41==
34
Chapter 5. Presentation of empirical data
Research questions to be answered:
• What is KOMBIT?
• What is KL’s role?
• What are Smart City projects and are they relevant?
• How do municipalities find user needs and decide which technology to implement?
• Is there a continual partnership between the municipality and the owners/developers of the
technology? (Who is the owner?)
• Are there any specific municipalities that are further than others?
• How much is the technology worked with/changed from development to implementation?
• How many shelf solutions are procured and how many are developed on the basis user needs?
Furthermore, the design team designed an interview guide and conducted 18 interviews with the
network.
Methodology
The interview guide was designed with the purpose of achieving two things: learning and
sharing knowledge [57]. Firstly, a deeper and more context specific understanding of the
municipalities’ digitalisation project processes was needed, including an understanding of
the municipalities’ culture, employees, and values [20]. Secondly, the design team wished to
give the interviewees an introduction to the topic of the thesis, give them new perspectives
and reflections on how they work with digitalisation, thereby beginning to influence the
system to contribute to the desired effect (as described in chapter 4).
The online interactive whiteboard FigJam was used as a boundary object to map out the
digitalisation project processes together with the interviewee, where they could follow along
in how the design team was mapping out the process and what was being written.
As described in chapter 1.2, the thesis project is based on a new field of research on the
digital transformation. The design team was especially curious about the the Tech4Civ
Section’s research on how emotions can influence people in the digital transformation.
Thus, this topic was also included in the interview guide. A short introduction to research
within the field was given to the participants, after which a poem about digital transformation
and its impact on human beings was read aloud. The interviewee was then asked to share
their immediate thoughts and reaction to the poem. The purpose of reading the poem was to
spark a reaction, using it as boundary object, and thereby prime the interviewee to be aware
that emotions and reactions are part of their daily work with digitalisation. An English
translation of a passage from the poem is shown below to give an insight into the mood the
poem creates. The full poem in Danish can be found in appendix I.
A passage from the poem Digital Transformation by Anja Mie Weile:
When the world emerges in a binary system,
where beauty suddenly has to be painted by algorithms
Where you explain the bloodstreams as paved options
which open the cells while materialising my body
in an ungodly, mathematical web,
which transforms mortality into immortality
Where the eternity of life
unfolds in the letters AI, IoT and ML
==PAGE:42==
5.2 Understanding the municipalities’ work with digital solutions
35
which gradually impose a tyranny
I scream gently – trying to feel a zero
but feel nothing
...nothing but my own scream in a distant galaxy
a place where flesh and bone slowly disappear
Furthermore, the twofold approach to the project also affected how the interview guide was
designed. Tech4Civ’s approach to facilitation, where there is a focus on acknowledging
and empowering the interviewee. Their work is important, and there is a positive rebound
effect when it is acknowledged.
The interviewees were also given insights and contributions to their work, including new
perspectives and prompting reflection on their work with digital technologies, specifically
on democratic development of the digital solutions.
The full interview guide can be found in appendix J.
After the interviews, there was a lot of data to process and analyse. It was necessary to condense
the data and create a shared understanding of it, as not all design team members were present at
every interview.
Methodology
The data collected in the interviews is in audio form, and was converted to written format
using KJ technique, where all three design team members wrote notes on the interview on
separate post-its, and grouped them after the interview [54].
Based on the knowledge gained from the interviews, a user activity cycle (UAC) and flow
diagram were made with the purpose of presenting the data in an accessible way [55]
[56]. The UAC was used in a slightly modified way, as it does not only contain the user’s
reoccurring needs, but also the phases of procurement processes, as the full context of the
municipalities’ work with digitalisation projects is more important to understand than the
individual user’s needs in this case, as the intervention seeks to drive an effect on a higher
level, rather than solve one particular problem for a user.
All the KJs of the interview data and the conclusions of each interview (in purple boxes) can be
seen in appendix K.
5.2.1
The steps of public procurement processes in Danish municipalities
The 13 process flows, which were mapped in collaboration with each interviewee during the inter-
views (see appendix L), showed that their work with digitalisation projects are almost exclusively
public procurement processes.
The flows were condensed and summarised in a User Activity Cycle (UAC) and in a flow diagram,
shown in figure 5.2. The visual outline of the UAC is shown in figure 5.1, or see the full legible
version in appendix M. The UAC and the flow diagram both show the practical steps from how
projects are initiated to the implementation of the digital solution. The UAC shows the cyclic
nature of the procurement process of digital solutions, and the flow diagram shows when in the
procurement process defining decisions for the digital solution are made. The steps will be explained
in depth below.
==PAGE:43==
36
Chapter 5. Presentation of empirical data
Figure 5.1: User activity cycle: The procurement process of digitalisation projects in the munici-
palities. The text on this figure is not legible, but is included to show the overall flow. All text is
described in section 5.2.1
The interview data showed that digitalisation projects in the municipalities emerge because of
a push from EU regulations or Denmark’s digitalisation strategy, Danish signature projects, or
trends in technology. Signature projects are those that emerge because the Danish government or
organisations like KL put money aside for specific digitalisation projects. The interview data points
to that trends and laws often arise based on new developments in technologies. One interviewee
referred specifically to Silicon Valley as a place for development.
"Technologies are often developed in a vacuum, for instance in Silicon Valley." - Interviewee from
a Danish municipality
Digitalisation projects are generally initiated by management, either as an isolated trend-driven
project or as a project directly linked to the digitalisation strategy in the municipality. Some projects
are initiated by administrative departments in the organisation, who express a problem or need that
might be solved with a digital solution. If the project is technology driven, the next step is that a
project leader in the municipality searches for a case where the technology can be utilised. If such
a case is found, a project group is formed, which includes employees from different departments.
The IT or a digitalisation departments are always represented in the group, while the administrative
departments are only sometimes present. When they are not included in the project group, Excel
sheets or e-mails are used to communicate user needs from the administrative department.
The next step is to develop the bid specification, which consists of the requirements that suppliers
must live up to in order to be qualified to make a tender and the criteria that they will be evaluated on.
In some cases a user exploration may be conducted in parallel with determining the specification.
The specification is categorised in two groups: functionality requirements and usage criteria. The
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Understanding the municipalities’ work with digital solutions
37
Figure 5.2: The initiation, decisions, and steps in the procurement of digital solutions
functionality requirements consist of the technical details the solution has to live up to, e.g. data
types, input and output types, etc. The usage criteria are those that enhance the quality of a given
digital technology or system, e.g. safety and user experience. The functional requirements require
technical expertise to determine, as all systems must be able to be integrated into either the existing
infrastructure of the municipalities or occasionally in the IT infrastructure that all of Denmark
shares.
When the specification is determined, a market analysis is conducted. This is done with the purpose
of determining which, if any, suppliers can live up to the specifications. Big municipalities, such
as Århus, are often front runners on digital solutions, and have therefore experienced that there
simply were no suppliers that matched their specifications. They challenge the suppliers on their
solutions, but must most often iterate their bid specification to fit the suppliers on the market, and
try to accommodate their needs by integrating the advanced criteria later in the process.
==PAGE:45==
38
Chapter 5. Presentation of empirical data
The municipality then publishes a request for tenders in a bid solicitation. Based on the tenders,
2-4 suppliers are picked out to further investigate how and if they fit the project. The suppliers
present their tender at a meeting where the project group can ask questions they may have. Some
experience that employees may have difficulties asking the right questions in this type of sales
environment. The next step is that a supplier is chosen. As a part of forming the contract, the
municipality and supplier will in collaboration iterate the bid specification that may need adjusting
in the development and implementation phase. The municipalities do not see this as part of the
development of the solution, they rather understand development as the actual programming of
the solution. However, looking through the lens of design, the bid specification is part of the
development of digital solutions because it defines the final design.
Lastly, the interview data shows that the users of the digital solution, often municipal employees
in administration departments, must adapt to the digital system. The supporting quotes below are
from interviewees:
"We develop and adapt work methods, when deploying new technologies."
"The implementation is a long and cumbersome period of time, with a lot of adjustments and
questions about the solution."
After implementation of the solution, the system runs in the municipality for a set time, often three
to four years. Hereafter, the system must undergo a new procurement process. One interviewee men-
tioned that Århus municipality runs over 300 systems. This shows the immense volume of digital
systems, and thereby the amount of continuous work with digital technology in municipalities.
5.2.2
The values, culture, and organisation: summarising all the interview data
The interviews resulted in understanding the forces that are at play in municipalities’ work with
digitalisation projects. The data supports the hypothesis that the municipalities’ work is technology-
driven. It is often greater forces from the higher layers of society eg. strategy, trends etc. that
initiates new projects. About 80% of projects use existing solutions, but they all must go through
the bid process. The interviewees support this, and thereby the hypothesis of a technology-driven
organisation, but the data also shows the nuances of this statement. Digitalisation projects are
almost always initiated because the municipalities see an economic opportunity. Saving money and
resources is thus a huge driver in municipalities.
The interviewees furthermore state that it is difficult to put technologies into a context that is
fitting. Technology is like a new language that not everyone understands. Those who have technical
expertise are present in the municipalities, but there are also people with different professional
backgrounds, often administrative, who do not understand the same “language”. It can therefore
be difficult to have inclusive dialogues about digitalisation projects, because different levels of
understanding of technology and its terminology create a ’language barrier’ of sorts, and those who
are more fluent get the final say. In the municipalities, there is a lack of people who understand
both the technical language and the administrative terminology. The few people who have both
these skills can build the bridge between these groups of people, thereby creating solutions, that are
better fitted to the administrative departments who are often the users of the digital solutions. The
implementation of new digital systems is therefore often difficult, especially if the initiative goes
across several departments. The municipal employees experience difficulties with understanding
others from different professions and departments. In addition, even though the municipalities have
a rather technology-driven approach, the interviewees see the importance of understanding that
digital solutions bring value beyond the economic savings.
The municipalities share knowledge through organisations like KL, and initiatives are sometimes
==PAGE:46==
5.2 Understanding the municipalities’ work with digital solutions
39
deployed in more than one municipality. The requirements for the solution must become more
standardised if it needs to fit multiple municipalities.
Lastly, an important result from the interviews was the reactions to the poem. It became clear
that emotional reactions to digital technologies was new for almost all, but most found it relevant
in connection with the digitalisation projects and the implementation of digital technologies.
Especially scepticism toward digital technologies, was a theme that was mentioned as an important
subject to address. Feelings play a big role in the digital transformation and are a source of
resistance and clashes in collaboration in the municipalities.
In table 5.1, the results from the interviews are presented. The table includes categories that were
created when summarising across the interview data. The explanations are directly summarised
from the interviews, and are the opinions of municipality employees. The categories are supported
with a quote example.
Table 5.1: The categorisation of all empirical data, a description of
it, and quotes from the interviewees that support the statement.
Categorisation of em-
pirical data
Explanation
Quotes
The potential of digitali-
sation
The digitalisation brings with it a
lot of potential that can be utilised.
"There is a lot of potential in
digitalisation"
Change demands trust
Doing digitalisation projects cre-
ates change and it is important to
build trust between the parties that
engage in the projects, and to build
trust toward the digital solution to
anticipate resistance.
"Change creates resistance"
"Change demands that you
build trust"
"Standardisation
requires
change"
Scepticism of digitalisa-
tion
It is important to think critically
when doing digitalisation projects.
Digitalisation can bring a lot of in-
visible consequences. Some inter-
viewees expressed that technology
creates distance between people.
"Technology
has
invisible
consequences"
"Technology creates distance
between people"
"There will always be back-
lash, and that is what we are
experiencing right now"
The suppliers are sellers
The main goal for the suppliers is
to win the tender. This is impor-
tant to keep it in mind when they
submit their bids. It is important
to be critical and to ask the right
questions.
"The supplier’s main goal is
to sell"
Technology is developed
in a vacuum
Technologies are often developed
without the context around the use
in mind. This creates a gap be-
tween the solutions and the actual
user needs.
"Technology is developed in
one place and then it has to
fit into a completely different
place and context."
==PAGE:47==
40
Chapter 5. Presentation of empirical data
The needs of the munici-
palities
The municipal employees’ needs
should drive the digitalisation
projects. Standardisation and shelf
solutions can overrule user needs,
but can also sometimes bring new
and unexpected value.
"You ask for x, y, z, and then
you might get x, y, 1, 2, 4
[about shelf solutions]."
"When we buy shelf solu-
tions, we sometimes get solu-
tions that only partially solve
the problem,
so in some
cases it would be beneficial
if we could develop more our-
selves."
"The advantage of the shelf
solutions is that they are
tested. However, this means
that you can get solutions that
you have to adapt to, and that
entails a lot of organisational
work."
Emotions in the bid spec-
ification
Emotions do not have a place in the
development pf digital technolo-
gies or in the selection of technolo-
gies
"Maybe emotions could be
part of the usage criteria when
we do projects"
Economic savings is a
driver
Projects arise because there is an
economic gain and qualitative val-
ues are often not enough to initi-
ate projects. Specific or distinct
requirements are expensive to re-
quest, because suppliers cannot
live up to them.
"The business cases are often
based on saving money."
"The
qualitative
improve-
ments are not always good
enough, it is often preferred
to see resource savings"
Regulation
Regulations and laws can inhibit
creativity, yet at times and through
the right organisations, digital tech-
nology solutions can also shape the
regulations.
"There are some regulations
today that stop us from using
AI to its full potential."
Democracy in procure-
ment processes and ne-
gotiations
Municipalities are organisations
that are based on negotiation pro-
cesses that make the municipalities
democratic. Furthermore, the pro-
curement process ensures that all
relevant suppliers get a chance to
submit a bid and have the opportu-
nity to win the tender.
"If the bid specification is too
narrow, it’s bad for the com-
petition, as it then often only
fit a few suppliers."
==PAGE:48==
5.2 Understanding the municipalities’ work with digital solutions
41
Competencies in digitali-
sation projects in munic-
ipalities
Technology is a new language and
municipalities do not always know
what to require within the domain.
There is a lack of competencies
around putting technologies into
the municipal context.
Further-
more, it is important, yet rare, that
people possess both the technical
and social skills necessary to build
bridges between technical experts
and users.
"We are lacking competencies
in relation to implementation,
there’s a need for business
models that we can’t make."
"We do not develop new tech-
nologies, we develop new
workflows."
Technology trends
The technology trends drive dig-
italisation projects in the munici-
palities. People talk about "pilot
sickness", where pilot projects are
set in motion because they are us-
ing a trendy technology, yet never
make it to implementation.
"I experience a lot of ’pilot
sickness’, where projects are
initiated due to a trendy tech-
nology"
Society changes rapidly
It is hard to follow the rapid techno-
logical development. The broader
perspectives are often lost, because
everything moves so quickly.
"It is, after all, a social change
that is happening, and I can
choose to be on board or not.
But I won’t get anywhere if
I’m not."
The design process
It’s necessary to create a better
structure for the design process in
the municipalities. Currently there
is no structure for innovation pro-
cesses.
"We don’t have a very strict
design process that we follow
and it is something that we
would like to improve".
"We are developing a new
tool to make sure that the mu-
nicipalities spend more time
in the problem space".
People need to meet one
another in dialogues
The municipalities talk about the
importance of meeting one another
in dialogues in order to talk across
different fields of expertise and cre-
ate common understandings
"Reality is created in dia-
logues. We all have our own
reality and we need to find a
common reality though dia-
logues."
"It is important to be good
at speaking up when there is
something you do not under-
stand."
==PAGE:49==
42
Chapter 5. Presentation of empirical data
Technology fear
There is a lack of technology
knowledge in the municipalities,
and this creates fear and insecurity.
Interviewees express that technol-
ogy can be frightening if you don’t
understand it.
"How can you be anything but
scared when your hear that
poem?"
"Especially in the health sec-
tor, there’s an attitude that
welfare technology is a bar-
rier for the staff to carry out
their work"
"Many get the feeling that
technology pushes them out
[of their jobs]."
"AI causes a gush of emo-
tions."
Technology knowledge
Knowledge about digital technolo-
gies creates more trust in the tech-
nologies, and sometimes also be-
tween people.
"There are many misplaced
feelings about AI. If peo-
ple understood that it is not
actually intelligent, but just
one big calculator, then I be-
lieve that they wouldn’t be so
afraid"
The value of digitalisa-
tion
Optimisation is often the main fo-
cus, but it is equally important to
understand other values, that the
digitalisation can bring. Digitali-
sation should not happens for the
sake of digitalisation.
"It is important to explore the
opportunity space for tech-
nologies as well, as risks are
often the only focus"
"You shouldn’t do digitalisa-
tion projects just to digitalise,
there has to be a higher pur-
pose."
"We have to decide how far
we want to go with digitali-
sation. Just because you can,
doesn’t mean you should."
Technology
increases
complexity
Interviewees explain how it is of-
ten forgotten how much complex-
ity new digitalisation projects cre-
ate. There are a lot of problems
that are generated because of tech-
nology, even though it also solve a
many problems.
"Today we benefit a lot from
technology,
but the more
technology we implement,
the more complexity is in-
creased".
Help those without tech-
nology knowledge
Interviewees explain how part of
their job is to explain and help non-
technical people to better under-
stand new digital technologies.
"We need to make people un-
derstand the extent to which
technologies can help them in
their everyday lives."
"Technology can elevate their
competencies and it doesn’t
always come out that way."
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Understanding the municipalities’ work with digital solutions
43
The procurement pro-
cess
The procurement process takes a
lot of time and effort. It is a a pro-
cess that requires many resources.
"When the system finally
works, then it has to go
though the procurement pro-
cess again"
"The projects never really
stop. There is always a need
for new solutions and up-
dates."
"There are 300 IT systems
and they all have to be so-
licited, which takes a lot of
time."
Multidisciplinary collab-
oration is difficult
It is difficult to collaborate across
departments. There are many ways
of doing projects, and everyone
wants to do it their own way. How-
ever, when the collaboration works,
it can create both quantitative value
(eg. money and time) and quali-
tative values (better collaboration,
culture, well-being).
"Everything is done in 98 dif-
ferent ways in the municipali-
ties."
5.2.3
The interviewees’ reactions to democracy in the development of digital solutions
The interviewees reacted well to the approach of two-way knowledge sharing during the interviews
and they were engaged and reflected on how they work with democracy in the development of
digital solutions. Below are a few quotes that show some of these reflections.
"It is quite amazing that people at DTU are thinking these thoughts [...], because i think they are
super important. And I sometimes also think about these things in my work, which revolves so much
around technologies. Like, what would happen if we removed all technologies? [...] If we took
technologies out of the equation, we might solve some of the problems we’re currently trying to
solve with technologies."
"[The poem] is very dystopian and thought-provoking."
"You cannot separate humans and technology. Technology is not just a tool like a hammer, it has
become the work itself in the municipalities."
"I think it sounds super exciting, and you are definitely grasping a field where we have room for
improvement."
This confirmed the design team’s direction with the project and that the desired effect of fostering
democracy throughout the project was already happening at this point.
5.2.4
Decisions made based on the interview data
Based on the data, two decisions were made in order to scope down the project. Firstly, it was
decided that the project would only focus on digital solutions for internal use in municipalities.
Up until this point, the design team had explored municipalities’ work with digital solutions for
both internal and external use, and had seen opportunities in both. However, it would be too broad
of a scope, so based on the direction that the data was pointing and the fact that the design team
==PAGE:51==
44
Chapter 5. Presentation of empirical data
had much more data on the internal systems, it was chosen to focus on the internal procurement
processes. Secondly, it was decided that the main focus would be on cross disciplinary projects,
as the data shows that these have the most difficulties with collaboration and therefore experience
resistance from each other.
Furthermore, the bid specification is where all requirements and criteria for the digital solution are
defined. It is therefore constitutional for the design, and thus for the use of the digital solution,
see figure 5.3. The bid specification lays the foundation for the contract with the chosen supplier,
which is legally binding for the agreed period of time (usually 3-4 years). A tool for democratising
the development of digital solutions in the municipalities will therefore have the greatest impact
before the conclusion of the bid specification.
Figure 5.3: The processes of scoping a new digitalisation project defines the bid specification,
which defines the use of the digital solution.
This concludes the presentation of the interview data, and the next part will dive into how it was
analysed and synthesised.
==PAGE:52==
IV
6
Analysing the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.1
Translating and compromising the interview data
6.1.1
Understanding the municipal employees
6.1.2
Understanding the municipal employees’ context
6.2
Analysing the whole picture
6.3
Design requirements for the intervention
6.4
The initial brainstorm: one-way communication
6.5
The second brainstorm: dynamic communication
6.5.1
Testing the three interventions - a turning point
7
Synthesising the intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.1
First workshop: Getting people to talk
7.1.1
Main conclusions of the first workshop
7.2
Second workshop: Getting people to talk AND reflect
7.2.1
Main conclusions of the second workshop
7.3
Competitors on content and inspiration for mediation
7.4
From workshop to an interactive tool
Analysis and
synthesis
==PAGE:53==
6. Analysing the data
6.1
Translating and compromising the interview data
With all of data collected during the interviews, the design team needed to build an understanding
of the opportunities and problems in the municipalities’ work with digitalisation projects. It is
necessary to understand both the people and the context of how they interact and work, in order
to define a desired effect of the intervention. This section will present an analysis of the relevant
municipal employees as personas, and will describe the context of their work with user scenarios.
Methodology
The interviews showed that there are different types of people that engage in digitalisation
projects in the municipalities. The persona method was chosen to communicate the general
types of people, as well as to make sure that the different needs and perspectives of the
potential users of the intervention were analysed and included [57] [58].
The personas were created based on the interview data in combination with storytelling for
communication purposes. Both the interviewees and the people they talked about in the
interviews were analysed and are represented in the personas. The personas were created by
using the previously shown network overview and by grouping the network persons based
on different characteristics.
Further in the report, the personas are used to make quotes anonymous, and the persona that
best represents the given interviewee will be used.
Four personas were created: Optimisation Owen, Technical Tim, Well-Being Wendy, and Relation-
ship Robin.
6.1.1
Understanding the municipal employees
Firstly, there was a clear distinction between technical and non-technical people. Those with a
technical background and job title, had an optimistic approach toward technologies. On the other
hand, people whose main job function was not technology related were more critical about digital
technologies. Both of these perspectives were equally important to bring into the solution and was
base for two personas. However, it was needed to distinguish and get perspectives on what kind of
mindset the people had. The interviewees talked about two different types of people; those who are
==PAGE:54==
6.1 Translating and compromising the interview data
47
open to learning, who are curious, and those who like to be experts on their field and not expand too
much out of were they are comfortable. These two types of mindsets, which also were presented
in the literature review, will be refereed to as growth and fixed mindsets [42]. Lastly, because
the response on including emotions had been positive, it was decided that these were important
to include in the personas. Again, two ends of the spectrum showed; some had many reflections
on how emotions is part of the digital transformation, and some did not have as many. This will
be called emotional intelligence, though recognising that it does not correspond directly to the
well-known term explained by authors such as Daniel Goleman.
Based on the three parameters: technical skill, mindset and emotional intelligence, the four personas
were created, with a belonging bio, list of pains and passions.
Optimisation Owen is a technical expert and an IT project leader, see figure 6.1. He is optimistic
about digitalisation. He likes how digital technologies can help optimise processes and has a focus
on standardising technological solutions across departments, because it will save resources in future
technological projects. Owen is a data geek, and likes when decision-making can be supported
by data. He likes to learn new things, and has quite a growth oriented mindset, especially within
the technical domain, but he is also open and curious about other domains, if it is relevant for his
work. He leads a technical team, who appreciates the combination of competencies within both
leadership and technical know-how. When he works with people who are more critical and averse
to technology, he always wants to get them on board with digitalisation. He can have a hard time
getting his point across in these conversations, because he can forget to listen to others’ concerns
when he is excited about the digitalisation project at hand.
If asked about emotions, Owen can reflect and will also in his leadership take on the task to meet
people with empathy. He is open to reflecting on emotions as part of digitalisation projects, but is
not sure how, where, and when it could be relevant.
Relationship Robin is a cross-collaborator expert, see figure 6.2. Her job title is development
consultant. In digitalisation projects her role is to make sure that all needs are heard, and she has
an understanding of both the technical requirements and the user needs. She has relatively high
technical skills, but is not an expert. She needs the technical skills when she acts as a mediator
between the technical and administrative departments. She loves when people are open and want to
engage in dialogues around the compromises that need to be made in digital technology projects.
Robin thinks digitalisation can make a lot of sense, yet she is quite aware of how it might effect
the organisation when systems or digital technology solutions are implemented. Robin loves to
learn new things, she has a growth mindset, and likes that part of her job is to learn the different
departments’ ways of working, their tasks and a little about their different areas of expertise. Robin
likes to be the mediator, but she sometimes feels she becomes a bottleneck in the development.
Furthermore, she wants to find solutions where everyone’s needs are met, however this is not always
possible in complex and democratic processes.
Robin is reflected about her emotions. She thinks that you need to recognise and understand
emotions as part of digital technology projects, because they can reveal important user needs, and
make projects more holistic in their perspective.
Technical Tim is a an IT employee and a technical expert, see figure 6.3. He likes to know what
he knows, and to be an expert on his own field. In his daily work he helps to set up new systems,
he works in the back end of systems and supports when there are problems with registration of
new users, changing access permissions. He also works on the technical details of getting internal
systems to work together. Tim has a more fixed mindset and likes to deep dive in technical issues
to solve them. He likes to learn others about how he works, and show his expertise. He sometimes
==PAGE:55==
48
Chapter 6. Analysing the data
Figure 6.1: Description of Optimisation Owen
Figure 6.2: Description of Relationship Robin
==PAGE:56==
6.1 Translating and compromising the interview data
49
has trouble explaining his tasks and work to people who are outside his field. He does not believe
he can expand his understanding of other expertise fields, but instead that those within those fields
should be representatives and keep their own expertise. He thinks it is difficult when he has to
work together with people outside his own field, because he can have a hard time communicating
with them. In his daily work he does not consider how important his tasks are, and how it affects
upwards in the organisation. He does not actively consider digitalisation, but if asked likes how it
can optimise workflows in IT-systems. If asked, Tim will have a hard time to express how he feels,
and for him emotions are not essential in technical projects, because the projects in his opinion are
just about programming for the right and logical functions the system requires.
Figure 6.3: Description of Technical Tim
Well-being Wendy is a human expert. Her job title is HR consultant, see figure 6.4. Her daily
work includes employee well-being, hiring, change management and competence development.
She likes to support her the organisation and its employees, using her HR profession. Wendy likes
when meetings happen in person, because she can then better judge the situation at hand. Her
technical skills are limited, as it is not a core part of her profession. She likes the systems she is
familiar with, and fears that she soon has to use a new system. She has a more fixed mindset, and
is afraid that she will fall behind if a new system is introduced. She fears that her competencies
are lost in the fast changing technological development, where the municipalities are constantly
developing and introducing new digital systems. Wendy has recently been part of the development
of a digitalisation project. She was happy to be included, but also worried about the changes it
will bring. She generally had difficulty understanding the the technical experts’ explanations, and
was not comfortable asking for clarification. She felt that she could have added more value to the
project if she’d had the courage to speak her mind.
Wendy is used to talking about emotions in her work. Especially when working with change man-
agement tasks, she will have dialogues with colleagues about how they are affected by the changes
at hand. She thinks this is important in digitalisation because it includes change management.
However, it can sometimes be hard to say it out loud, because it is often the technical experts who
==PAGE:57==
50
Chapter 6. Analysing the data
are running the projects, and she is not sure how to open up the conversation.
Figure 6.4: Description of Well-Being Wendy
The personas show how the design team analysed the interview data to use it as basis for the work
going forward. Optimisation Owen, Relationship Robin, Technical Tim, and Well-being Wendy
show the most important perspectives. It also shows how some interests are contradicting, which
creates tension and misunderstanding when collaborating in a digitalisation project. It is important
to note that it might seem like having a growth mindset and being positive towards technology is
’better’. However, this thesis seeks to be objective and recognises that all types of mindsets are
valid in the digital transformation.
6.1.2
Understanding the municipal employees’ context
User scenarios were used to align and validate the design team’s understanding of the user context.
Methodology
In order to scope the project, the design team chose to look for problems. Because several
interviewees had given examples of scenarios where problems occur in the digitalisation
projects, the user scenario method was chosen [57]. The project seeks to be effect-driven,
so the design team in general does not attempt to look for problems, but it was chosen at
this point in the project in order to understand the context and validate the design team’s
understanding, and will later be translated into effects. The user scenarios were used to
build concrete examples of where barriers to a democratic process might occur, as well as
the problems these barriers lead to.
Five user scenarios were created in total, and they are each described in this section. The scenarios
attempt to depict the different views of the different users, and how their perspectives and ways of
working may clash, even though it is not the intention of anyone involved.
==PAGE:58==
6.1 Translating and compromising the interview data
51
Misalignment in the project group
The first scenario revolves around the supplier’s presentation of their tender, see figure 6.5. When
asking questions after the presentation, both Technical Tim and Well-being Wendy desire certain
functionalities of the solution. However, they do not understand what each other are saying, causing
confusion. The lack of alignment and understanding of requirements from both the technical
and administrative (user) side will affect the selection of a tender, and thus have implications
later for both the technical team and for the users. Moreover, if the bid specification is not clear
enough, the supplier might try to take advantage by adding more features and demanding more
money for the solution.
Figure 6.5: Misalignment in the project group
Technical terminology as a barrier
The second scenario revolves around a new system which is implemented, see figure 6.6. Well-
being Wendy is missing a critical feature. The feature has been taken out because a different
technical criteria was valued higher when choosing the tender. Relationship Robin explains the
technical feature to Well-being Wendy, who does not understand why her need in relation to her
job was not prioritised. Additionally, she feels inadequate because she does not feel like she
has the competencies to understand the explanation Relationship Robin gives. On the other hand,
Relationship Robin finds that she needs more time to properly explain the situation, because she
cannot avoid the technical explanations, so she ends up feeling inadequate. Had Well-being Wendy
had the chance to voice her opinion before the decision was made, the problem would not have
occurred.
Figure 6.6: Technical terminology as a barrier
==PAGE:59==
52
Chapter 6. Analysing the data
Technology optimism vs. scepticism
The third scenario is in the initiation of new project, getting support in the organisation, see figure
6.7. Optimisation Owen is super excited about this new initiative, he is the team lead and presents
the new initiative at a meeting trying to get support from Well-being Wendy and the rest of her
team. Well-being Wendy is hesitant because she fears that she cannot learn a new system, thus
fearing to loose her professional competencies. Owen picks up on the hesitation, and doubts if he
explained it badly. The initiative is dropped because of the resistance early on, as neither Owen or
Wendy had the confidence or opportunity to articulate their views and concerns. The values of the
initiative are thus lost in the lack of understanding and dialogue.
Figure 6.7: Technology optimism vs. scepticism
Functionalities’ impact on workflow
Well-being Wendy is using a new system, which is a replacement for an old one, see figure 6.8. She
detects that a critical function for her job is missing. This creates a serious and urgent problem for
her, and she goes to Technical Tim. Unfortunately, all problems are currently ending up at the IT
department. There is a tendency that everyone thinks highly of how much can be fixed with a new
digital solution. The technical team do not have time to help Wendy, who is stuck waiting, without
being able to continue her job. The digital solution thus ends up costing time and resources
because the system does not include the functionality Well-being Wendy needs.
Who should adapt - users or technology?
The last scenario is a case of standardisation, see figure 6.9. Well-being Wendy is learning how
to use the new digital system. However, the interface is completely different, and she cannot find
the functions she usually uses. She cannot navigate the system and therefore turns to Optimisation
Owen to understand why the system looks like it does. Optimisation Owen explains how the
municipality saves money by doing projects that are standardised across the municipalities.
Well-being Wendy struggles with learning to use the new system, but must adapt her workflow to
the new system.
Concluding all the scenarios
To conclude, the five scenarios show different types of problems, but all have sub problems hidden
within them. Looking back at our initial hypothesis: "The municipalities are technology-driven
==PAGE:60==
6.1 Translating and compromising the interview data
53
Figure 6.8: The importance of functions in digital systems
Figure 6.9: Who should adapt - users or technology??
and the users have to adapt to the technology rather than the other way around, because the
municipalities are missing the technical competencies.", it becomes clear that it is not a missing
technical understanding which is the root cause. The municipalities do have the technical expertise
to adapt the digital solution, however there is a lack of understanding between the technical and
the non-technical that need to be part of developing the solution. The scenarios also show the
complexity of the project, and how a democratic process will consist of a combination of problems
that may or may not be interrelated. The design team began to understand that the barriers and
enablers for a democratic process in the municipalities are network based. Therefore it cannot be
depicted in one single scenario, and thus found the need to further analyse the data with a systems
thinking approach. This will be presented after a small description of the feedback that the team
got from the municipalities on the user scenarios.
Feedback on the user scenarios
The five scenarios were sent to three selected project collaborators, with the purpose of validating
the user scenarios. The collaborators were selected based on their enthusiasm in the project as well
as their professional background, to get as broad a response variety as possible. The scenarios were
sent via e-mail and included five questions for feedback.
The design team received feedback from 2 collaborators, that both wrote that the scenarios were
==PAGE:61==
54
Chapter 6. Analysing the data
relevant, and are present in the Danish municipalities. Examples from their feedback are: "I’m sure
they exist" and "Yes, the users can have the feeling of not understanding what is being said when
talking to IT". All of the questions and feedback can be read in appendix N.
6.2
Analysing the whole picture
In the following section the analysis of the data with a holistic perspective will be presented. It will
elaborate on how the scope of the thesis project was narrowed and which effects are most important
in order to democratise the development of digital solutions in municipalities.
With such a complex topic and so much data, it’s difficult to analyse and find the connections
across different sources, so each group member used a different method to analyse the data. But
understanding other members’ thought processes can be difficult, so the analysis was not linear, and
many conversations within the design team were had to reach a common understanding [65]. The
three methods below give the closest approximate description of the how the data was analysed, but
all of the work done is shown in appendix O.
Methodology
Holistic perspective
All the categories that are presented in table 5.1 are the main results across all the interviews.
These categories were created on separate post-its and were gathered and divided into three
levels inspired by the levels in the N-model and SID, but adapted to the context of the thesis
project [52] [5]. The levels are:
• Societal landscape: steady-state laws and tendencies beyond the municipalities, that
cannot be changed by a singular intervention
• Organisation and culture: within the municipalities, that can be influenced indirectly
by an intervention
• Individuals’ mindset and emotions: that can be directly influenced by an intervention
The post-its on each level were then grouped based on either similarity or directly conflicting
statements, and the groupings were given titles. Connections were made between groupings
on the different layers based on which influence each other, eg. which mindsets and emotions
influence the culture in the municipalities, or which factors in the societal landscape affect
the municipalities as an organisation. The connecting lines were explained with additional
text to form cohesive causes and effects that move across all three levels.
Drivers and barriers
To find the drivers and barriers of democratic development of digital solutions, a prompt was
created to keep in mind when going through all of the conclusion post-its [5]. The prompt is
as follows:
What are the drivers and barriers for working with digitalisation projects in a democratic
manner in the municipalities?
All of the conclusion post-its were read through, and statements were created and marked
with a star icon for drivers, a lightning bolt icon for barriers, or both for those that are
paradoxical.
==PAGE:62==
6.2 Analysing the whole picture
55
Network thinking
Lastly, an overview inspired by network thinking was created. In the overview all of the
post-its with conclusions were connected in a large system with arrows that represent which
subsystems lead to larger systems, and thereby discover new layers of meaning in the data
[6] [12]. In order to remember the reasoning behind the connections between the categories,
extra notes were added in red and blue post-its.
The three methods mentioned above all resulted in similar analyses of the data, but with slightly
different nuances. The following section will present the final analysis based on the three methods.
Each part of the analysis will be described by presenting data followed by the design team’s
analysis, and lastly translated into a design action.
A clear reoccurring pattern in the interview data is that digitalisation creates complexity. The
interviewees expressed that defining the value of digital solutions beyond what can be measured
quantitatively is extremely important, but often forgotten. Through the analysis, it became clear that
municipalities have difficulties with discussing all complexities when initiating new projects. It is
difficult to get a holistic perspective of the context of the digital solution. The analysis showed that
the individual, organisational, and societal levels of the context are interrelated, which is important
to consider in digitalisation projects.
The variety of interviewees has made it possible to understand all of these complexities and combine
them in one picture that shows how all relevant parties, both users and digitalisation teams, have
needs that must be fulfilled. Referring to the personas, Well-being Wendy is the user perspective,
Technical Tim represents the technical requirements of data, Optimisation Owen has the technical
and strategic views on standardisation and IT infrastructure, and lastly, Relationship Robin has the
more strategic view on connecting the national strategies to municipality projects.
On the individual level, Wendy is subjected to using new digital systems, which does not always
support her workflow and competencies because she rarely is included in the development of the
digital systems, and when she is, she often does not feel heard in the decision making. The decision
making is often ruled by Owen in the digitalisation department, who must ensure that the digital
system complies with the IT infrastructure, meaning that data may need to be in a certain format or
be encoded in a certain way in order for it to be used across systems in the municipality. These
restrictions affect the functionality of the system, which affects how Wendy interacts with the
system, and by extension, her job. If the system restricts or changes Wendy’s job, she feels that
her profession and value as an individual are not appreciated. Wendy is not always aware of the
reasoning behind the restrictions, either because she does not understand the technicalities, or
because Owen does not think it is necessary to explain it. The interaction between Wendy and
Owen is not always mediated sufficiently, creating a barrier to understanding and talking about
their opposing interests.
On the societal level there is a push for digitalisation, for example through the digital strategy and
signature projects. Denmark is a front-runner on the digital transformation and the ministries need
to constantly adapt laws to make sure the development happens ethically. The national digitalisation
means that digital initiatives are inevitable in municipalities, and it is important that municipal
employees understand how these national forces will have an influence on them and their work
with digital solutions. This means that employees like Wendy cannot avoid interaction with digital
systems, and if she can begin to understand that digital initiatives are not only a wish from the
digitalisation departments, but are rather a societal force, she can begin to take part in the digital
transformation. This will help Wendy to have an influence on the development of digital solutions,
==PAGE:63==
56
Chapter 6. Analysing the data
so they increasingly will support her competencies rather than replacing or inhibiting them.
Based on this part of the analysis, the design team formulated the design action that the municipal-
ities wish to be supported in understanding the holistic perspective of different views and opinions,
and need a tool for mapping the complexities that arise due to the interdependencies between
individual, organisational, and societal levels.
Another important analysis is of people’s emotions. The data shows that emotions are a reoccurring
theme, that many think is important. The interviewees stated that digital technologies can lead to
fear, feelings of inadequacy, optimism, and joy [41]. The analysis presented with the personas
and scenarios show how there are different types of reactions to the digital transformation, and
combining these insights with literature on mindsets shows the two key attitudes towards technology,
optimism and scepticism, and that the discrepancy between them can cause division. Most people
understand both the expanse of the potential values of digitalisation and that there are potential
risks and important ethical deliberations. However, the logical understanding of potential values
and risks does not rule out emotional responses, and they are difficult to express, especially in a
professional setting. Unspoken feelings of fear and frustration create an invisible barrier between
people, and intensify the opposition between them. Literature states that being able to express
emotions can help us understand ourselves and others, thus enabling us to better engage in dialogues
and reduce the barriers between people with different mindsets [66]. Two important factors that can
support dialogues about emotions are curiosity and psychological safety, which are the grounds for
speaking openly without feeling judged [67]. This analysis was translated into the design action:
the municipalities want to be made aware of and talk about emotions in digitalisation projects.
A last important analysis is founded in the data that shows how several interviewees believe
that the fear of digitalisation is rooted in a lack of understanding of how the technology works.
Owen and Tim tend to have the opinion that they must ’help’ Wendy, who does not understand
technology. Analysing this statement through the lens of democracy, it is a critical statement
because viewing their role as ’helping’ rather than ’needing to understand each other’ shows
that Owen and Tim unintentionally view and talk about technological expertise as more worthy
than other professions. This creates a hierarchy where Owen and Tim have a louder voice in
the development of digital solutions than Wendy. It can therefore be difficult to have inclusive
dialogues about digital technologies, because different levels of understanding of technology and
its terminology create a ’language barrier’ of sorts, and those who are more fluent get the final
say. It is therefore important for equality in the development of digital solutions that Owen, Tim,
and Wendy gain an understanding of each other’s language that is sufficient enough that they are
able to engage in a dialogues as equals. If the technological perspective is seen as more important
than the user’s, digital initiatives become technology-driven rather than human-centred. The design
team therefore formulated the design action: Perspectives from different disciplines should be
considered fairly and weighted equally in dialogues about digital initiatives.
To conclude the analysis, the three most important design actions to drive the effect of democracy
in the development of digital solutions in municipalities are:
• Mapping complexities: The municipalities want to be supported in understanding the
different views and perspectives, and need a tool for mapping the complexities that arise due
to the interdependences between individual, organisational, and societal needs of the digital
transformation.
• Awareness of emotions: The municipalities want to be made aware of and be able to talk
about emotions in digitalisation projects.
• Considering different disciplines as equals: Perspectives from different disciplines should
be considered fairly and weighted equally in dialogues in digitalisation projects.
==PAGE:64==
6.3 Design requirements for the intervention
57
6.3
Design requirements for the intervention
Moving forward from the three defined design actions, the design team defined the requirement
specification for the intervention.
Methodology
The purpose of the requirement specification is ensuring the development of an intervention
with the desired effect. The specification consists of requirements (the must-haves for the
intervention), and criteria (the nice-to-haves for the intervention) [59], as well as comments
that elaborate on the requirements or criteria if necessary. The requirement specification
was divided into three categories: content, context, and design.
The full requirements specification, including requirements, criteria, and comments, can be found
in appendix P.
The defined requirements for the content, context, and design of the intervention are listed below.
The intervention must:
Content:
• Support and guide a dialogue that includes both the technology optimists and sceptics.
• Have a low entry barrier - allowing everybody to participate.
• Facilitate psychological safety for the participants using the tool.
• Make people question what a success is and draw attention to aspects other than economy
and time savings
• Create curiosity with no shame - all the participants should feel safe enough to ask "stupid
questions".
• Ensure that the participants are seen by one another as emotional beings, not only their
professions.
• Support the participants’ existing competencies.
Context:
• Create a new dialogue and reflection every time the tool is used.
• Fit into the existing processes in the municipalities.
Design and layout:
• Be easy for the owner/facilitator to bring with them.
• Be hard to overlook and prompt the participant to want to use and try it.
• Be robust and last for many years.
The content and context requirements were based on the analysis. The design and layout require-
ments were to a higher degree based on the fact that the intervention should be based on the
principles of product design [68]. The thought was that the layout and physical design of the tool
should support the content.
6.4
The initial brainstorm: one-way communication
After creating the design requirements for the intervention, the design team needed to validate
the analysis so far. According to the N-model, creating solutions and concepts can help scope the
project and aid in better understanding the problems the project aims to solve. It was therefore
==PAGE:65==
58
Chapter 6. Analysing the data
decided to develop prototypes of early concepts, in order to provoke pros and cons for the concepts,
as a basis for iterating the scope of the project [69]. This was done with a brainstorm.
Methodology
The purpose of this brainstorm was to translate the requirements into concepts to validate
the analysis so far and align the understanding of the requirements within the design team
[60]. The design team found this brainstorm very challenging and struggled with creating
ideas. Different constrains were added to the brainstorm to increase the creativity, which the
design team found helpful. Among others, the design team agreed to be uncritical about the
ideas and the brainstorm was inspired by a negative brainstorm.
The brainstorm resulted in numerous ideas, a few of these are presented below:
1. A slidebar on the back of a laptop: A slidebar with a happy smiley on one end and a sad
smiley on the other end, to communicate the mood of the person working on the laptop.
2. The task hats: Hats designed for meetings, where each hat contains a task, such as being the
’optimist’ about everything in the meeting.
One of the important insights, which was achieved doing the brainstorm was that most ideas would
not lead to a dialogue, but were rather tools that led to one-way communication. Taking the slidebar
as an example, it will display the user’s mood, but does not initiate the in depth conversation the
design team were aiming for. The slidebar concept displays the information that would otherwise
be the topic of conversation, and it is assumed that others will understand how to behave according
to their needs. However, it does not enable a mutual understanding and dialogue, even though a
requirement of the tool was to support and guide a dialogue. The design team, thus developed a
new understanding of the term dialogue. It needs to be two way communication, as this will enable
better understanding between employees with different backgrounds.
This complies with change management theory, which describes how a dynamic dialogue between
the relevant parties, see figure 6.11, have a higher chance of getting people involved and on board
in new initiatives [70], while one-way communication will rather force employees to change, thus
creating resistance, see figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: The transmission model describes one-way communication [71]
==PAGE:66==
6.5 The second brainstorm: dynamic communication
59
Figure 6.11: The social construction model describes a dynamic form of communication [71]
The design team’s understanding of the project
To overcome the barrier of the inequality between technology experts and those who are not,
the dialogue between them should not be one-way, but should be dynamic so both parties
are heard.
6.5
The second brainstorm: dynamic communication
Based on the insights from the first brainstorm and the design team’s new understanding of dialogue
as dynamic communication, a new brainstorm was conducted. Because the design team had felt the
initial brainstorm was difficult to conduct, they revisited their analysis, making more clear what
topics to brainstorm on.
Methodology
The concepts were developed by conducting a brainstorm based on the requirements as well
as the analysis, creating one concept for each of the three most important analytical findings:
mapping complexities, awareness of emotions, and considering different disciplines as
equals. A prototype of each of the three concepts was then developed.
The three interventions that were developed and created prototypes of are: The heart (from
awareness of emotions), Terminology cards (from considering different disciplines as equals) and
Value and complexity discs (from mapping complexity). The interventions are described below and
the text in the figures is in Danish, as the interventions are for Danish municipalities.
The heart - the person as a whole
The heart concept is a digital solution meant for online meetings. The heart appears in the beginning
of a meeting with a small exercise that prompts the participants to talk about something besides
their profession. Every 15 minutes of the meeting, the heart will appear and prompt the participants
to remember that they are emotional beings, see figure 6.12. The purpose of the heart is to ensure
that participants are seen by one another as whole people, including their emotions, and not only
their professions.
==PAGE:67==
60
Chapter 6. Analysing the data
Figure 6.12: The heart concept. Left: The exercise in the beginning of the online meeting. Right:
The reminder during the meeting
Terminology cards - better communication
The terminology cards are physical cards that can be used alone for practice or during meetings for
support. The cards display a profession-specific term on one side and its definition on the back. The
cards will act as boundary objects during multidisciplinary meetings, see figure 6.13. The purpose
of the terminology cards is to increase the understanding of terminology from professions other
than one’s own, and thus be able to participate in dialogues on that topic.
Figure 6.13: The terminology cards. Left: Side 1 with the term. Right: Side 2 with the explanation.
Value and complexity discs - holistic perspective
The holistic perspective concept consists of two plastic discs that can be flipped to create four
different combinations. One disc has values and consequences of a digital solution, and the other
has long and short term factors. Together they create the holistic view on a digital solution. They
should be used in physical meetings where a new digital solution is being discussed. The purpose of
this concept is to ensure dialogue and consideration of a digital solution’s impact on the surrounding
context, see figure 6.14.
==PAGE:68==
6.5 The second brainstorm: dynamic communication
61
Figure 6.14: Value and complexity discs. Left: Disc 1: Long- and short-term work tasks, organisa-
tion, and society. Right: Disc 2: Value and complexity on social, environmental, and economic
sustainability
6.5.1
Testing the three interventions - a turning point
The aim of creating the three interventions was to present and test them in a workshop with the
network. Before the actual workshop, the design team tested the workshop setup by presenting the
concepts to the thesis supervision team (the thesis supervisor and the other groups he supervises;
three Bachelor project groups and two other Master thesis groups). The design team thus planned
the workshop prior to the supervision meeting.
Methodology
The workshop was created in Google Slides, and included a small introduction to the project
and a presentation of the three concepts. The workshop slides were presented during the
supervision meeting to test both the communication of the concepts and the structure
of the workshop. This proved to be important, as the feedback on the presentation was
surprising and had a bigger impact on the further process than imagined.
The supervision was a huge turning point for the design team, who had an important realisation.
The supervision presentation made it clear that the design team had tried to create interventions
that are far too simple. Firstly, it is important to remember that democracy is an Engineering level
concept, a "system of systems" [10], and one artefact cannot make all the municipalities’ work
with digital technologies democratic. Democratisation does not happen over night, it is something
that begins with individuals, over time becomes a culture, and many systems and laws must be
structured to comply. The tool is supposed to be a part of a larger process and it is therefore alright
to ask the users of the intervention to allocate extra time to use the intervention. The three concepts
were thus too simple and did not have the desired impact.
Secondly, the design team learned that the three topics cannot be separated, as was attempted
with the three concepts. The data and system analysis show that all three elements play a part
in contributing to democratisation of digital technology, and they should all be combined in one
intervention. The supervisor reminded the design team that they have become the experts on
this particular topic, and are allowed to make an informed decision on behalf of the users. The
==PAGE:69==
62
Chapter 6. Analysing the data
municipalities had already given their input to the project and now it was up to the design team as
experts within the design field, to synthesise this into a tool.
The design team realised that by brainstorming and creating concepts, they had used a product
design approach to attempt to create products that would be appealing to use, but should rather
focus on knowledge sharing. This realisation changed the approach in the rest of the design process;
rather than brainstorming and choosing the ’best’ idea, the design team would synthesise all of
their knowledge gained on the context and the users. Because of this shift away from a product
development approach, the two requirements regarding the physical design (be hard to overlook
and prompt the participant to want to use it and be robust and last for many years, were discarded.
Lastly, in the supervision meeting the concept terminology cards was questioned in regards to who
would be qualified to fill out the cards with the technical terms. It became clear that the design team
did not have the expertise to be those who could create terminology cards. Instead, what designers
are experts in is methodologies, facilitation, and setting a frame. The design team thus had a shift
in their understanding; it was not as much the language in itself that they could support, but rather
a facilitation of dialogues where employees with different backgrounds feel equal, and have the
curiosity to attempt to understand each other, thereby gaining a greater understanding of each
other’s terminology. The hypothesis was that facilitating a dynamic dialogue where understanding
each other was the focus would create a shared narrative for technical and non-technical people
rather than create an "us against them" dynamic.
Based on these learnings, the design team proceeded to develop a dialogue tool, which combines
the three design actions (mapping complexities, awareness of emotions, and considering different
disciplines as equals, which will from now on be referred to as ’shared narratives’), instead of three
separate products.
The design team’s understanding of the project
To strengthen dialogues within project groups, the group members with different professions
must have a shared narrative of the project. Considering the holistic perspective of the
context for the digital solution and openly talking about the potential emotional consequences
will contribute to creating a shared narrative in the group, who will work towards a common
goal.
==PAGE:70==
7. Synthesising the intervention
7.1
First workshop: Getting people to talk
Based on the learnings from the analysis and prototyping, the design team developed an intervention
in the form of a workshop, with the aim of getting the participants to talk about the three topics. As
a part of developing the workshop, the topics evolved and their names were changed to:
• Mapping complexity: Value and consequences
• Considering different disciplines as equals: Shared narratives
• Awareness of emotions: Emotional response to technology
The development of the content consisted of translating the analysis to questions that would
prompt the intended dialogue, thereby getting people to talk. The design team chose to create the
intervention in the format of a workshop so solely the content could be tested before the actual tool
was designed.
All 18 members of the network were invited, and a total of 10 people attended workshops and
became collaborators. The invitation to the workshop contained an overview of the agenda, the
purpose of the workshop, and what the participants would gain from participating. Furthermore, a
page of information about the thesis and the poem from the first interviews was shared with the
participants to remind them of the excitement most of them had during the interviews. They were
invited by Outlook invitation with an attached pdf, which can be seen in appendix Q.
The design team planned two separate online workshops and the project collaborators were divided
into two groups. The groups were divided so each workshop contained the most possible diversity,
aiming to represent each of the personas in both groups.
Methodology
The design team used the methods and tips taught in the DTU course Staging co-creation
and creativity when planning the workshop. It followed the overall structure of 1) create
comfort, 2) stage discussion, and 3) develop together [72] [54]. Creating comfort was staged
by a greeting from the design team, followed by a presentation round where each participant
briefly presented themselves, their job, and their passion. The staging of discussion happened
through the testing of the content, and finally the participants were part of developing the
tool, by giving feedback.
==PAGE:71==
64
Chapter 7. Synthesising the intervention
The workshop was structured as follows:
1. Introduction to democratic development of digital solutions
2. Introducing the content of the tool: the focus areas and case for the workshop
3. Using the tool: alternating between presenting theory and giving prompts for the case
4. Feedback session
The four steps of the workshop will be explained in further detail below, and the entire slide deck
from the workshop can be found in appendix R.
1. Introduction to democratic development of digital solutions
An important part of the workshop was a thorough introduction to democratic development in
digitalisation. How democracy and digital technology are intertwined is important to emphasise,
as it is a relatively new topic, and is not common knowledge within Danish municipalities. The
introduction presents how big a change that is happening in society, highlighting the importance
of the tool. The presentation, included quotes from theoretical sources, which the design team
explained. Further information about the theory can be found in the literature review in chapter 2.
The introduction was presented using Google Slides, and an example of the layout can be seen in
figure 7.1.
The workshop participants also were presented for the scoping of the thesis project:
The design team’s understanding of the project
Everyone who interacts, directly or indirectly with the solution, must be part of the dialogue
and thereby have a voice in the development of digital solutions. Not one representative’s
needs should be more important, but instead the common interest should be given the most
weight. (Inspired by Daalhuizen J. 2022)
Figure 7.1: Part of a slide from the workshop: introduction to the implosion of technology
2. Introducing the tool: the focus areas and case for the workshop
The workshop participants were introduced to the three defined focus areas. Both a theoretical basis
and quotes from the interviews, were presented as seen in figure 7.2.
A fictive case was then presented, which was the example case throughout the workshop. The case
had to be a realistic digitalisation project that all the participants could imagine being a part of. The
case is as follows:
==PAGE:72==
7.1 First workshop: Getting people to talk
65
Figure 7.2: Part of the slide about the three focus areas from the workshop
Generative AI in municipalities: The management in your municipality wants all municipal
employees to benefit from a chatbot like OpenAI’s popular ChatGPT in their daily work. It must
have access to all the municipality’s data, so that employees can ask municipality-specific questions
about e.g. holidays, events, statistics, correct comma errors in an e-mail, etc.
You are the selected project team, which has been tasked with providing the chatbot.
3. Using the tool: alternating between presenting theory and giving prompts for the case
In this part of the workshop, the participants tested the content of the intervention, acting as a
project group for the case presented above. For each of the three focus areas, there is a slide with
interview quotes, theory, and literature on the topic, Empirical basis (left in figure 7.3), followed by
a slide with questions to prompt a conversation about the case, Case context (right in figure 7.3).
Each of the three focus areas follow the structure, which is also shown in figure 7.3.
The Empirical basis slides were facilitated by the design team, after which the Case context slide
was briefly introduced, and the design team muted their microphone to observe the conversations
that the questions prompted.
Figure 7.3: Left: The slide with interview quotes, theory, and literature. Right: The case context
slide with prompt questions
The goal of presenting each of the three topics is as follows:
The value and complexity topic introduces the participants to holistic design theory, which demon-
strates how all products and systems affect the artefact, complex system, and engineering levels, and
shows how the theory in this case translates to individuals, the organisation, and society [52][10].
This will help them to connect the theory to their daily work, and therefore better understand the
significance of the topic. There are separate slides for focusing on values and consequences, forcing
the participants to think of both effects on each of the levels. The prompt questions are:
==PAGE:73==
66
Chapter 7. Synthesising the intervention
• What should the solution be able to do? What are the long- and short-term values/consequences
of the solution? Which types of value might there be (consider social, environmental and
economic)?
• Who will use the solution (there may be more than one) and for what?
What is the
value/consequence for the individual employee?
• What is the value/consequence for the municipality as an organisation?
• What is the value/consequence outside of the municipality (collaboration with other munici-
palities and the private sector, society)?
The purpose of the shared narratives topic is to introduce the participants to narrative theory and the
impact of shared narratives. Starting a conversation about what their narrative of the digitalisation
project is, will make them think about who is a part of the narrative, and how to include those who
are not (silent actors) in the best way possible [73]. The prompt questions are:
• Have we spoken on behalf of others? Have all user groups been given a voice in this dialogue?
• How would you present this solution to users? Have you made sure to present both the values
and consequences of the solution?
• What is the best way to engage in a dialogue with sceptical users?
• Should any changes be made to the solution based on this talk?
The purpose of the emotional response to technology topic is to make the participants aware that
emotions are a big part of any human being, and cannot be separated from who we are at work.
They are therefore important to consider in digitalisation projects, and this part of the workshop
attempts to ’break the ice’ and give the participants prompts to guide the conversation. The prompt
questions are:
• Which emotions might arise as a result of the solution?
• What does it take to create space for emotions without logical justification?
• How does having space for emotions affect the development of the solution?
4. Feedback session
After the three steps the design team facilitated a reflection round, where the participants were
thanked for their individual contributions, and could provide feedback on the content. The feedback
is presented in the following section.
7.1.1
Main conclusions of the first workshop
It was evident that the theory and prompts for Values and consequences had the intended effect,
and the participants had an interesting conversation on the topic. The participants jumped into
the conversation immediately, and discussed topics spanning from EU regulations to the intended
users, how they could be included, and which difficulties are often encountered in digitalisation
projects. The participants contributed by sharing experiences and knowledge from their own
organisation. Because of the diversity in the group this gave many different perspectives, and the
holistic perspective became apparent to them. The participants quickly established a polite culture
of letting each other speak. If one participant had been quiet for a while, other participants often
asked them directly, ensuring that everyone had the opportunity to give their input.
Shared narratives, however, did not create the desired effect during the workshop. The participants
did not talk about the shared narrative or which perspectives were a part of their narrative. They
more or less continued the conversation from Value and consequences. The topic needed further
work in order to fulfil the purpose.
As expected, the participants found it difficult to talk about emotions. After the presentation of
==PAGE:74==
7.2 Second workshop: Getting people to talk AND reflect
67
theory and prompts, the participants were silent for the first time. It took some time to get the
conversation going, but eventually the participants did talk about the emotions they believed would
be involved in a digitalisation project. Even though it was a difficult topic, there is no doubt that
they found it interesting and relevant:
"It’s important that the part about emotions is taken seriously, because it can bring a
lot of value to the project [...], it’s really interesting to include it in the development of
a digital solution."
"All the talk these days about how AI can take over our jobs worries me, and it’s
caused me to feel a resistance towards technology in general." - Well-being Wendy
"AI is increasing how efficiently people can work, especially the younger generation,
and it can make people who aren’t used to using AI insecure and afraid of being left
behind." - Optimsation Owen
The design team ended the workshop with asking the participants to validate the analysis: the inter-
vention would have the biggest democratisation effect in the development of the bid specification in
procurement processes. When discussing this with the workshop participants, one said that "The
better a start you can get to a project, the better the rest of the project will be". Another participant
said "The procurement process is very rigid, and there isn’t much room for emotions".
The design team saw the first comment as a validation and the second comment as an argument for
why the intervention would have the greatest impact in the development of the bid specification for
digital solutions.
To conclude the value and complexities and emotional response to technology created the intended
effect, and shared narratives did not. Also, the design team’s decided context for the tool was
validated.
7.2
Second workshop: Getting people to talk AND reflect
The design team wished to improve the Shared narratives topic, and had a long discussion about
how the first workshop had played out, which gave them a breakthrough: the workshop participants
must reflect on how they engaged in the conversations they’d had.
Talking about ’shared narratives’ as a concept is too abstract, and it should rather be about reflecting
on their own conversations. The intent of the topic is to make it explicit that when engaging in
dialogues, the participants should acknowledge what each other say, making everyone feel heard.
The order of the three topics in the tool was therefore changed so first two steps will now prompt
the dialogue, which the participants will reflect on how they approached in the third step:
1. Value and consequences
2. Emotional response to technology
3. The influence of dialogues (formerly shared narratives)
==PAGE:75==
68
Chapter 7. Synthesising the intervention
In tact with the development, the prompt questions in The influence of dialogues were changed to
prompt reflection. Two of the questions that were changed are:
How would you present this solution to the
user group? Did we include both values
and consequences in the presentation?
⇒Were any compromises made during your dia-
logue? Which were made, and how was it de-
cided which perspective is the most important?
What is the best way to engage in a dialogue
with sceptical users?
⇒How can engaging in dialogues improve under-
standing between people with different opinions
and feelings?
The new version of the slides for the topic is shown in appendix S.
Reflecting and being process aware in this context complies with the theory of double loop learning.
The principles of double loop learning (see figure 7.4) is to go back to one’s intentions, assumptions,
beliefs, and values when actions do not result in the expected outcome - the orange arrows - whereas
in single loop learning, you simply try again and hope for a different outcome - the turquoise arrow.
Figure 7.4: The tool seeks to get the participants to do double-loop learning
The topics Values and complexity and Emotional response to technology guide the participants in
conversations that they are already somewhat aware of, but do not currently express openly, thus
advancing their current work. They are both important topics to make explicit, but the conversations
will be specific to the project at hand. The goal of the topic The influence of dialogues is to make
the participants themselves learn the importance of dialogues and become process aware of the
effect dialogues have on projects, which is a learning that will be applicable in other project groups.
If successful, this will create a displacement in the culture [74]. This is essential for the long-term
effect of the tool, as the goal is to not only improve democratisation of individual digitalisation
projects, but to shift the culture within the organisation to become more open, inclusive, and
democratic through their dialogues.
The discussions when iterating the tool showed that there was a notable misalignment in the design
team’s understanding of the purpose of the tool. The purpose became clearer during the second
iteration and was made explicit in the second workshop as:
The purpose of the tool is to prompt a dialogue. Friction may be part of it and allows for
compromises to be made, whilst everyone still feels heard. Everyone should have a voice when
deciding the common good.
To test the changes made based on the first workshop, am updated second workshop was conducted
a few days after the first.
==PAGE:76==
7.2 Second workshop: Getting people to talk AND reflect
69
7.2.1
Main conclusions of the second workshop
The results of Value and consequences and Emotional response to technology were again successful
and the slides worked as intended. The response to the new topic, The influence of dialogues, was
very good, and the participants were excellent at reflecting and being process aware. Based on the
second workshop as a test, it can be concluded that the topic was conveyed successfully, and had
the desired effect. The quotes below are samples of when the participants expressed their thoughts.
"These are some great questions, we often talk on behalf of others and forget to listen
to what they are actually saying." - Relationship Robin
"I think it’s great to see the dialogue we just had from an outside perspective. This kind
of dialogue usually doesn’t happen in my organisation, so it’s great to introduce it." -
Technical Tim
"It’s a great idea to talk about feelings in the beginning of a project, because if you
don’t, it will affect you later." - Optimisation Owen
Besides the direct statements from the workshop participants, two specific scenarios clearly showed
how the participants revisited some of their previous discussions and intentions, thereby doing
double loop learning. A sketch of one of the scenarios from the workshop is shown in figure 7.5.
During the second step of the tool Emotional response to technology, Technical Tim mentioned
that he thinks people are unnecessarily afraid of AI, and that there’s no reason for it, since AI is
just a big calculator. This comment did not resonate well with the other participants, and they
continued talking about something else. When the participants reached The influence of dialogues,
Relationship Robin brought up Tim’s comment again and mentioned that in her opinion, the group
had not reacted amply to Tim expressing his opinion. Her mentioning of it again clearly made Tim
feel heard, and the other participants nodded in agreement.
A second scenario, that clearly depicts a successful double loop learning in The influence of
dialogues, is a reflection from a participant, who initially stated that one of her passions is to
optimise digital processes. However, when reflecting on the dialogue she expressed: "Actually,
when I think about it, my passion is not optimisation. What I’m actually passionate about is to
support human value. For instance if we can optimise a process so school teachers can spend more
time with their students and less time on paperwork." It shows her going back and reflecting on her
intentions in the dialogue, i.e. double loop learning.
The main conclusions and the quotes show that besides testing the content of the workshop, the
participants were able to apply the concepts to themselves and their own work. This shows how the
design team had thus successfully influenced the participants, as part of their twofold approach to
both influence through the project and with the final intervention. Through the workshop and the
successfully experiences the participants had had, they would move from the Orientation phase and
into the incorporation phase in the model of the expected user experience over time, see figure 4.1.
==PAGE:77==
70
Chapter 7. Synthesising the intervention
Figure 7.5: Left: During Emotional response to technology, Tim mentions his feelings towards AI,
and the other participants continued the conversation without responding to Tim’s comment. Right:
Later, in The influence of dialogues, Relationship Robin refers back to Tim’s comment, and he feels
heard.
The design team’s understanding of the project
To democratise the development of digital solutions in digitalisation project groups, the
group must firstly engage in a dialogue about the holistic perspective of the context for the
digital solution and the potential emotional consequences of the digital solution, and then
reflect on how they engaged in the dialogue, thus learning the importance of dialogue.
Based on the successful testing of the content of the solution, the design team iterated on the design
requirements. They are presented in appendix T. Furthermore, the design team started designing
the whole solution, as up until this point only the content had been determined. The design was
started by conducting a market analysis.
7.3
Competitors on content and inspiration for mediation
The content of the intervention consists of theory and prompt questions, and is at this point
developed to satisfaction, and must be put into the format of a tool. The design team decided to
conduct a market analysis.
Methodology
The purpose of the market analysis was twofold [63]. Firstly, the design team wished to
search for dialogue tools on the market, to ensure that nothing similar exists. Secondly,
the design team used the market analysis to find inspiration for the final design of the tool.
The search was conducted on Google, and the findings are divided into competitors and
inspirational solutions.
All the solutions found during the market analysis can be found in appendix U. The solutions are
all dialogue tools, and they cover a range of different industries. The tools are: DDC’s "Digital
ethics compass", KL’s "Teknologiradar", "Byggeriet samfundsansvar dialogværktøj", FOA’s "Di-
==PAGE:78==
7.3 Competitors on content and inspiration for mediation
71
alogværktøj", "Dialogvørktøj om erhvervesparathed hos unge", "Kendt teknologi på nye måder",
"Dialogværktøj til implmentering", "Dialogværktøj til digitalisering og psykisk arbejdsmiljø", and
Kombit’s "Innovationsspil". In the section below a selection of the most relevant competitors and
inspirational solutions will be presented.
The inspirational tools
The majority of the tools that were found are digital. The design team found many of the features
that a digital solution offers useful. A digital solution will make the tool more accessible, and the
users will easily be able to share it with others who might be interested. This is especially desirable
for this tool in particular, as the design team wishes to spread awareness of democratisation in
digital technologies. The design team therefore decided that the tool will be digital, either as an
interactive webpage or a digital pdf file.
Through the market analysis, the design team learned the difference between presenting the user to
everything at once vs. guiding the user through steps. Some of the tools are good at providing an
easy overview for the user, with the option of reading more in drop-down menus. Others present
everything at once, making the tool overwhelming. The approach of guiding the users through the
main steps and providing the option to read more in drop-down or pop-up menus was chosen.
Additionally, the design team clearly saw the benefits of visually pleasing tools, that include
illustrations and graphic features. These tools are more intriguing and appealing to use. Lastly,
some of the tools contain a facilitator guide/user guide, that elaborates on how the tool should be
used. They are a good supplement to the tool itself, and it’s useful to be able to look for more
information while using the tool.
The competitors
The design team didn’t find any direct competitors in the market analysis. Some tools contain
similar elements, but none have the same approach or purpose.
The three most notable competitors are: "Dialogværktøj: Digitalisering og psykisk arbejdsmiljø",
"Dialogværktøj til implementering", and "Digital ethics compass".
• The tool "Diglogværktøj: Digitalisering og psykisk arbejdsmiljø" developed by BFA, has the
purpose of discussing the psychological work environment during digitalisation, and is thus
a competitor on the topic Emotional response to technology. There are 12 questions about
this within the areas The core task, professionalism, implementation, and relationships. The
users are presented with three questions within each of the areas.
• The tool "Dialogværktøj til implementering" developed by Videnscenter for velfærdste-
knologi Vest Danmark, has the purpose of discussing the perspectives in an implementation
process within welfare technology and is thus a competitor on the topic Values and Con-
sequences. There are are 21 questions that have to be discussed on the Strategic level (the
middle managers), Strategic operational level (ambassadors), and Operational level (teachers
and students). The user is presented with questions about quality, need, effect, capacity,
human characteristics, and more.
• The tool "Digital ethics compass" developed by Danish Design Center, serves the purpose
of asking the right questions to ensure to create ethical digital products and i thus partly a
competitor on the topic Values and Consequences. The compass can be used both as a check
list or as a 1-3 day workshop.
It can be concluded that none of the competitors touch upon the topic of democratisation of
digitalisation projects. The competitors partly ask some of the same questions that the design
==PAGE:79==
72
Chapter 7. Synthesising the intervention
team’s tool addresses, but they do not contain all the tree topics (the holistic perspective, emotional
response to technology, and the impact of dialogues). The holistic perspective with questions about
values and consequences are the ones that appear the most in other tools. Questions about emotions
are mostly absent, and the closest questions are the ones from the ethics compass. Finally, it can be
concluded that none of the tools address the impact of dialogues, nor practice double loop learning.
This leaves the design team’s tool in a strong position on the market, as it serves a purpose that
differs from any other tool that was found.
7.4
From workshop to an interactive tool
The workshops showed the design team that the desired effect of the tool can be reached, but the
work is not finished yet. The tool should be able to create the same effect in teams across all of
Denmark’s municipalities without being facilitated by the design team. The presentation slides of
the three topics from the workshop were used as a starting point for the final tool, which were then
elaborated upon based on the tests as described in this section.
The first full iterations of the tool will not be shown in the report, but a full walk-through of the
final tool is provided in section 8.3.
Methodology
The first iteration of the interactive tool was created in the prototyping program Figma,
which was used because it’s possible to make the prototype interactive. This is beneficial, as
the users are able to test the interface by navigating through the tool themselves, not being
influenced by the design team’s guidance.
The tool was tested in an online meeting with one of the collaborators, where a link to
the prototype was shared so they could navigate through the tool themselves. They were
encouraged to say aloud their immediate thoughts about both the interface and the content
of the solution, as well as to explain their understanding of the information and prompts
given in the tool.
The interface of the tool was iterated based on the first test, and then tested again with two
other collaborators [57]. Between the second and third tests the tool was not iterated, as to
find out if the test persons mentioned any of the same things.
The tool was then iterated one final time based on the collected feedback and observations
of how the collaborators navigated the tool.
The starting point for structuring the tool was the three case slides from the workshop. Consistency
is important for the user experience, so the format of each topic page is therefore the same, and
there is an explanation of the setup in an introduction page so the user know what to expect.
The collaborators all mentioned that a good description of every topic is necessary, as well as a
strong introduction to the importance of democratic development of digital solutions in the public
sector. The collaborators think that the topics are important, interesting, and relevant in the context
of their work, so it is imperative to provide the user with all the information and theory they need,
rather than to simplify the information too much. During the development of the tool, the design
team therefore kept in mind that the topic of democracy is big and complex, and product design
principles of making information as condensed and easy to skim as possible do not apply in this
tool.
==PAGE:80==
7.4 From workshop to an interactive tool
73
As the goal of the tool is to encourage a constructive dialogue, introductory theory on the difference
between the mindset in dialogues and in discussions was added. It includes examples such as
dialogue mindset: "The goal is common understanding" vs. discussion mindset: "The goal is to
win the argument". The user is thus primed with the type of mindset that will create an open and
inclusive environment.
The collaborators said that they needed the questions in Value and consequences and Emotional
response to technology to be more specific than they were in the workshop in order to understand
how to answer them. The questions were discussed in depth between the design team and the
first test person, to ensure that they were understandable and tangible in the next iterations. They
have been developed significantly from those in the workshop, and are now easier for the user to
understand.
The design team decided to add examples in the tool to guide the users if they need help starting a
conversation. The examples are based on the interview data, to ensure that they are relevant in the
municipal context and relatable for the collaborators.
Lastly, it took several iterations to structure a strong introduction in the tool. One of those who
tested the tool gave the advice to think of it like a board game, where you usually on the cover to
find the number of players, age group, and approximate time for one game, in order to decide if the
game is suitable to play at the moment. Similarly, the potential user of the tool should quickly be
able to judge if it is relevant to use in their team, who should be invited to the meeting where it will
be used, and how much time should be set aside for it.
==PAGE:81==
V
8
A walk-through of the tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
8.1
Why a dialogue tool for democracy in digital solutions?
8.2
The municipalities’ context for using the tool
8.3
A dialogue tool for democratising development of digi-
tal technologies
8.4
The user interface
9
Implementation and impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
9.1
Implementation plan
9.1.1
The Sunrise Conference
9.1.2
Testing with Århus municipality
9.2
Success criteria
9.3
Long-term indicators of democracy and the intended
effect
9.4
Recommendations for the client
9.5
Next steps for the tool
The intervention
==PAGE:82==
8. A walk-through of the tool
8.1
Why a dialogue tool for democracy in digital solutions?
The interview data, the secondary data, Tech4Civ’s research, and the knowledge gained throughout
doing the project all contribute to the decision to develop a dialogue tool as the intervention. The
context of the tool’s use, the users, owners, and the optimal setting to create the desired impact
will be described before the actual tool is presented in depth, but first a few words to outline how a
dialogue tool will play a part in democratising digital technology:
The given project was to democratise digital technologies, but as mentioned many times by now,
the design team has scoped the desired effect of the intervention to democratise the development
of digital solutions in Danish municipalities, which happens in the form of defining the bid
specification. For this reason, the intervention will be in the conversations that are had when
the project group defines the bid specification. Based on their system analysis, the design team
has determined that improving the group’s dialogic skills will create more inclusive, open, and
psychologically safe dynamics in the project group.
Improving dialogues in digitalisation project groups will contribute to more diverse opinions being
included in the development of the requirements and criteria for the solution. This is not to say
that everyone is right all the time, or that every opinion is necessarily relevant to include in the
bid specification, but rather that everyone is listened to, and all opinions and thoughts are taken
seriously into consideration.
To connect this back to the original project description of democratising digital technologies, the
reason for ensuring a democratic development of the bid specification for digital solutions is that
it determines the tenders, which supplier is chosen, and the details of the contract made with the
supplier. The functionalities and interface affect how the user interacts with the system, and hence
how they perform their work. If the users’ needs and the value of their work are represented in the
meetings where the requirements and criteria are created, there will be a far greater chance that
the system will support the user in their work. If the foundation for the system is laid without an
understanding and consideration of the user and the given context, there is a risk that the system will
dictate how the user performs their work, which may lead to feelings of incompetence, frustration,
and a fear of change over time. This contradicts the whole point of digitalisation, which should be
to help people by supporting their work and allowing more time for the unique skills that only us
humans have.
If more municipal employees experience that digital technologies support their work and emphasise
==PAGE:83==
76
Chapter 8. A walk-through of the tool
their value, it will affect the culture and generate a generally positive attitude towards digitalisation
projects. The long-term indicators on the organisational and societal level of democratising the
development of digital solutions will be revisited and described in more detail later (section 9.3).
Tech4Civ’s theory states that people must ’leave a little of their own profession behind’ in cross
disciplinary collaboration in order to be open and inclusive to other’s perspectives. What this means
is that people must attempt to step out of their expertise and see one another as whole people,
including both their emotions, their professional skills, and personal competencies. The dialogue
tool complies with Tech4Civ’s theory and vision by prompting the users to consider how others
will be affected by the digital solution, both in their work and emotionally, thus requiring the user
to imagine themselves in someone else’s place. The tool also requires the user to reflect on how
they approach others in conversations, which will help to build trust and mutual respect, a much
better method to achieve common goals than competing to appear the most competent or important.
8.2
The municipalities’ context for using the tool
The goal of the tool is to create open and inclusive dialogues about digitalisation projects, which
will contribute to fostering democratisation of digital technologies if it happens throughout the
given projects. Moreover, the 80/20 rule of design states that "80% of the outcome is determined in
the first 20% of the process" [75]. Applying this to the tender process in municipalities, the most
impact will be made on the final outcome of the digitalisation project before the first version of the
requirements specification is finalised. For these reasons, the design team recommends that the tool
is used as early as possible in the digitalisation project, in order to ensure that the ’democratisation’
effect is actually translated into the digital technology solution, and to give the best prerequisites
for good collaboration in the project team.
The setting for using the tool should preferably be a physical meeting with everyone from the
project group present. Being in a room together allows people to pick up on each others’ non-verbal
communication, and looking other people in the eyes allows more trust to be built.
Users
The intended users of the tool are members of the project group for a digitalisation project in a
Danish municipality. These project groups are often comprised of employees from different depart-
ments in the municipality, and are often multidisciplinary. They usually include a representative
from the digitalisation team (Optimisation Owen) and a representative from the administration
department where the digital solution will be implemented (Well-Being Wendy). Beyond that, there
may be a mediator (Relationship Robin), an IT expert (Technical Tim), and a legal representative.
Owners
The owners of the tool will be the thesis project collaborators, as they have co-developed the tool
with the design team, and therefore have a thorough understanding of the tool’s goal and content,
as well as a sense of ownership. The fact that most of the collaborators have positions as leaders,
they will have a big influence on enforcing the use of the tool. They can use the tool in their own
teams and the digitalisation projects they are involved in, and have the option to act as facilitators.
They can also recommend the tool to other project groups where they think it might be relevant,
and can act as advocates for the tool among their colleagues.
8.3
A dialogue tool for democratising development of digital technologies
The content of the pages in the tool are explained in this section, as well as the design team’s
reasoning for the design decisions and how the user will be impacted throughout.
==PAGE:84==
8.3 A dialogue tool for democratising development of digital technologies
77
The design team recommends the reader to become acquainted with the interactive tool before read-
ing the full description by opening this link: https://www.figma.com/proto/GD2kLE1HUlxlPIZSwGtOpC/
Grafik-til-speciale-hos-Tech4Civ?node-id=0-1&t=90Qs5HtRSCf9Bw7i-0&scaling=min-zoom&
content-scaling=fixed&starting-point-node-id=134%3A659
Screenshots of the full tool can be found in appendix V.
This icon will be used to mark direct translations from the tool.
Introduction
There are four introductory pages, that give users an insight into whether the tool is relevant for
them, states why the tool should be used, for which projects it is relevant, and how to use it.
Figure 8.1: The four introductory pages; Overview, why the tool should be used, which projects the
tool is relevant for, and how to use the tool
Overview of the intended use (figure 8.1, top left): Beneath the icons it says who should participate
(3-7 people in a digitalisation project team), the setting (1 hour in a physical meeting), and when it
is relevant (in the beginning of digitalisation projects in municipalities).
The process bar gives the user an overview of all the steps that are involved in using the tool.
Why the tool should be used (figure 8.1, top right): states that the tool guides and supports a
strong collaboration in the digitalisation project team, and that it does so with two main goals:
1. Prompting reflection and dialogue about topics that are particularly important for digital-
isation projects. The first topic is a holistic perspective on the values and consequences of
digitalisation for individuals, organisations, and society. The second is emotional reactions to
technology, and how they can be expressed and embraced.
2. Establishing a constructive dialogue in the project group. This is done by teaching the
difference between a dialogue and a discussion, and facilitating a reflection within each user of
how they approach other’s perspectives and feelings.
==PAGE:85==
78
Chapter 8. A walk-through of the tool
Below that, there is a paragraph that explains how the tool contributes to democratisation:
By using the tool, the users will help to make the voices of the different disciplines within
the project group more equal, and thus increase diversity in the digital transformation. This is
important for our society right now, as we face a major technological change, and dialogues in
the development of digital technologies play a big role in their outcome. The tool contributes to
democratising digital technologies because it facilitates more open, inclusive, and democratic
dialogues in Danish municipalities.
This will make the reader aware that democratisation is necessary in the development of digital
technologies, and gain a sense of responsibility in contributing to democratisation in their own
work. This will motivate them to spend the time and dedication to use the tool.
Which projects the tool is relevant for (figure 8.1, bottom left): Should give the reader an easy
way to judge whether the tool is relevant for them to use. The text in the box reads:
The tool is intended to be used in a current and newly started digitalisation project in a Danish
municipality, which you are currently working with in a project group. It is your own digitalisa-
tion project, which will be the case for using the tool.
The tool is particularly relevant for digitalisation projects which:
• Bring about a change in one or more tasks or structures for employees in the municipality
• Require multidisciplinary collaboration
• Are included in the municipality’s digitalisation strategy
Before using the tool, everyone in the project group must be familiar with the digitalisation
project’s description. The tool will have the greatest influence on democratisation when it is
used before the bid specification is determined, but can possibly be used later in the project
process to strengthen a project team’s dialogic skills.
If the group does not currently have a project for which the tool would be relevant to use, or if they
wish to use the tool for learning with a different case than their own, a fictional case is provided
that they can use in stead, read the case in the full presentation of the tool, appendix V. The case is
that same that was provided for the workshops.
How to use the tool (figure 8.1, lower right): Gives the user a guide to how the page for each step
is structured. The introductory text at the top says:
The tool will guide you through three steps, which each contain an introduction, theory,
questions and an example. Don’t rush through each step, and try to allow for silence before
moving on to the next question. Below on the left is an example of how the pages are set up.
On the right is the intended scenario for use of the tool.
The set-up of the pages are that there is an introductory text, a "read more" link that opens a pop-up
window with supporting theory, and a "Tal om" ("Talk about") speech bubble that indicates the main
instruction for that step. The light grey box gives some elaboration on the topic, and the turquoise
box contains one or several questions to be answered. Below the boxes are an icon and "example"
link, which opens a pop-up window with further explanation, guiding questions, or examples of
what to talk about to spark a conversation. As mentioned, the intended context for using the tool is
in a physical meeting, where the tool is displayed on a screen visible to everyone, as visualised in
the illustration.
The pop-up windows with theory are not shown in the figures in this section, but can be read in the
==PAGE:86==
8.3 A dialogue tool for democratising development of digital technologies
79
tool in the link to Figma. All the theory is also mentioned in the literature review.
Step 1: Opposing interests
Hvilken gavn vil medarbejderne få af digitaliserings-
projektet? (prøv at tænke ud over tid og penge)
Hvilken stuktur- og kulturændring vil den digitale 
løsning medføre? 
TRIN 1: DE MODSATRETTEDE INTERESSER
Digitaliseringen kan rigtig meget, og er et blandt andet nøgleredskab til at effektivisere, men det medfører også kompleksitet og forandring, som 
kan være en årsag til modstand. Derfor er det vigtigt at overveje hvem og hvordan forandringerne vil påvirke.  De tre kategorier nedenfor dækker 
over forskellige kontekster, hvor en digital løsning vil påvirke kommunen.
                    Tal om de værdier og konsekvenser, som digitaliseringsprojektet vil have for hver af de tre kategorier,  
                    og svar på de tilhørende spørgsmål.
Den individuelles arbejdsopgaver og faglighed
Værdien af digitale løsninger kan blive overskygget af 
frygten for forandring og de konsekvenser der følger. 
Det kan imødekommes ved at sætte ord på den 
egentlige værdi af løsningen, som er mere end 
effektivisering.
Kommunens/afdelingens struktur og kultur
Nye digitale projekter kræver forandring og 
samarbejde på tværs af organisationen. Her har IT-
afdelingerne og de administrative afdelinger ofte 
forskellige behov og perspektiver.
Digitalisering af samfundet
Digitaliseringsprojekter er ofte en del af en større 
strategi, der påvirker hvilken retning man vælger 
at gå. Standardisering af IT projekter gør, at vi kan 
være mere effektive og dele viden og systemer på 
tværs i Danmark.
Hvordan påvirkes samfundet af denne 
digitalisering? 
TILBAGE
TRIN 2
TAL OM:
Eksempel: Menneskelig værdi
Eksempel: Kulturændring
Eksempel: Standardisering
Læs mere
Oversigt
Hvorfor
Hvornår
Hvordan
Teori
Trin 1 
Trin 2 
Trin 3 
Værktøjet
Opsummering af læringer
DIALOG ELLER DISKUSSION?
DISKUSSION
Overbevisning - det handler om at vinde
Jeg har det rigtige svar 
Jeg holder kortene ind til kroppen
Jeg tager ikke hensyn til hvordan du har det 
Ref: Kristiansen, M., B,och-Polusen, J., Dialog og dialogiske kompetancer - en ny for m for magt?, 2003.
Værktøjets formål er at skabe rammerne for at komme omkring nogle vigtige emner i en konstruktiv dialog. Før vi dykker ned i emnerne, er der her en 
definition af hvad en dialog er, i modsætning til en diskusison. Læs definitionerne og hav dem i mente når i snakker om projektet i værktøjets trin.
INTRODUCERENDE TEORI:
DIALOG
Fælles undersøgelse 
- det handler om at undersøge
Tilsammen kan vi finde en god løsning - vi deler 
kompetancer og erfaringer
Jeg fremlægger min tvivl på dine og mine synspunkter
Vi skaber et trygt undersøgelsesrum, hvor det er 
OK at “dumme” sig
TILBAGE
TRIN 1
Oversigt
Hvorfor
Hvornår
Hvordan
Teori
Trin 1 
Trin 2 
Trin 3 
Værktøjet
Opsummering af læringer
Figure 8.2: Step 1: Opposing interests frames from the tool
The first page the users are introduced to in the actual tool, is a theory page that shows the
differences between approaching a conversation as a dialogue and a discussion, figure 8.2 top left.
The translation of the two definitions is show in figure 8.3. The users will be introduced to the
difference between dialogues and discussions, and are given the theoretical knowledge of what
mindset to have to create a dialogue, to support them in the three upcoming steps.
Figure 8.3: The difference between the mindset in dialogue vs. discussion
The first step of the tool, "Opposing interests", shows the three levels that are impacted by digital
solutions, inspired by the three levels in the N-model (figure 8.2, top right). The users are given an
explanation of the three levels and prompted with a question for each.
The descriptive text is:
==PAGE:87==
80
Chapter 8. A walk-through of the tool
Digitalisation brings many possibilities, and is, among others, a key tool to optimise resources,
but it also entails complexity and change, which can be a source of resistance. It is therefore
important to consider who and how that will be affected by the changes. The three categories
below cover different contexts where a digital solution will affect the municipality.
The "Tal om" prompt tells the users to discuss values and consequences that the digitalisation
project will have for each of the levels, and to answer the question for each level. The levels, their
description, question, and examples are as follows:
Individuals’ tasks and profession
The value that digital solutions bring can be overshadowed by the fear of change and the
consequences that follow. This can be accommodated by expressing the value of the solution
beyond optimising.
What benefit will the employees gain from the digitalisation project? (try to think beyond time
and economics)
Example: If we wish to streamline a manual process for a school inspector with a digital
solution, the real value is that the school inspector gets more time to walk the school’s corridors
and have contact with the children.
The municipality/the department’s organisation and culture
New digitalisation projects require change and collaboration across the organisation. Here, the
IT departments and the administrative departments often have different needs and perspectives.
Which structural and cultural changes will the digital solution bring about?
Example: There is increasing talk about the quantity and length of meetings, and digitalisation
can be a method to cutting down on the number of meetings. But even if the concrete outcome
of the meetings does not always seem to be valuable, meeting physically and looking each other
in the eye can strengthen social togetherness and increase social trust. Avoiding meetings can
therefore result in less community and trust in a workplace.
Digitalisation of society
Digitalisation projects are often part of a larger strategy that influences the direction for the so-
lution. Standardisation of IT projects means that we can be more efficient and share knowledge
and systems across Denmark.
How will society be impacted by this digitalisation project?
Example: In Denmark, there is a lot of standardisation across the municipalities in order to
create better coherence and cross-functional solutions. Standardisation means that solutions
are not tailored to a specific workplace, user type, profession, etc. This means that employees
will have to adapt their work to the technology, which can result in employees feeling that their
profession is being lost.
The users will become aware of the three levels and of how broad the impact of a new digital
solution can be. They will have to think of how their work impacts others, forcing them to put
themselves in other’s place and imagine the impact. They will also have to think of the long-term
influence of the digital solution, and how it fits into the societal perspective. Prompting them to
discuss both values and consequences for each level will give them a more holistic perspective on
the system they are influencing, and give those who represent different professions and expertise
==PAGE:88==
8.3 A dialogue tool for democratising development of digital technologies
81
the opportunity to contribute with their perspective. E.g. employees from the administrative
departments sometimes do not get the opportunity to give much input in these types of projects
because they aren’t experts in IT. With all three levels present, they will be the experts on the
’Individual’s tasks and profession’.
Step 2: Reactions to technology
Step 2 in the tool is about our emotional reactions to technology. It consists of two parts with two
prompt questions each, and supporting examples, see figure 8.4.
Hvilke følelser kan opstå som resultat af 
løsningen?
Vi møder ikke mennesket, hvis vi forlanger en logisk 
forklaring på deres følelser. Og vi føler os ikke set, 
når andre bortforklarer vores følelser med logiske 
argumenter.

Hvad skal der til for at have rum til følelser uden 
logisk begrundelse? 
1.
Følelser kan være en del af forklaringen på de reaktioner der opstår som 
følge af nye digitaliseringsprojekter. Når vi får sproget for følelser, bliver 
det lettere at arebjde med den modstand der kan opstå.

Hvilke nye perspektiver kan det give at kunne sætte nye ord på de 
reaktioner der kan opstå?
Hvad betyder det for løsningen, hvis følelserne bliver taget i betragtning i 
udviklingen?
2.
Når vores arbejdsopgaver ændres, påvirkes vi ikke kun fagligt, men også følelsesmæssigt. Derfor fylder følelser også i den digitale transformation, og 
der skal være plads til dem i dialogen om digitaliseringsprojekter. Det kan være svært at snakke om følelser i en professionel sammenhænge, og især 
om teknologi fordi det for nogle kan virke helt uforståeligt, at noget så logisk kan påvirke mennesker forskelligt. 
Spørgsmålene i dette trin skal åbne op for snakken om vores følelsesmæssige reaktioner på digitale løsninger. 
TRIN 2: REAKTIONER PÅ TEKNOLOGI
- FØLELSERNE BULDRER
TILBAGE
TRIN 3
Eksempel: Sæt ord på reaktioner
Eksempel: Logisk begrundelse og følelser
Læs mere
TAL OM:
Oversigt
Hvorfor
Hvornår
Hvordan
Teori
Trin 1 
Trin 2 
Trin 3 
Værktøjet
Opsummering af læringer
Figure 8.4: Step 2: Reactions to technology. The two pop-ups to the right are the examples, the top
is ’Express emotional reactions’, and below it is ’Emotions aren’t logical’
The description under the title of the page explains how emotions fit in to digitalisation projects in
municipalities, which is a connection that many people wouldn’t normally think of. The text reads:
When our work tasks change, we are not only affected professionally, but also emotionally.
Therefore, emotions also play a role in the digital transformation, and there must be space to
express them in dialogues about digitalisation projects. It can be difficult to talk about emotions
in a professional context, and especially when the topic is digital technology, because for some
it can seem completely incomprehensible that something so logical can affect people differently
emotionally.
There are two main components in talking about emotional reactions to technology; accepting that
feelings aren’t always logical (point 1), and finding the right words to communicate our feelings
with others (point 2).
Point 1 and the two prompt questions are as follows:
We don’t allow for other’s emotional reactions if we demand a logical explanation of their
feelings. And we don’t feel accepted when others disregard our feelings because they aren’t
’logical’.
Which emotions might the digital solution provoke?
What must we do to accept other’s feelings without logical reasoning?
The example belonging to point 1 shows two ways of handling the same scenario, one where
feelings are disregarded because they’re statistically unlikely, and the other where a conversation is
==PAGE:89==
82
Chapter 8. A walk-through of the tool
opened up. The speech bubbles read:
Example 1:
Person A: "I’m petrified of flying!"
Person B: "Don’t be! It’s actually far more likely that you’ll die in a car accident."
Person A [thinks]: I’m still very anxious...
Example 2:
Person A: "I’m petrified of flying!"
Person B [thinks]: That doesn’t make any sense...
Person B: "I don’t share that fear, but it sounds very unpleasant! Can you tell me more about
how you feel, so I can help you out on the trip?"
The examples are quite exaggerated and caricatured, but the reader should become aware of how
they respond to other’s reactions in different settings, even though an emotional reaction in that
case seems foreign to them. It will nudge them to be curious about others, rather than making
assumptions without merit.
Point 2 in this step is about being able to communicate our feelings to others. The description and
two prompt questions are:
Emotions can be an underlying reason for resistance to new digitalisation projects. If we had the
language to describe our feelings better, it would be easier to identify the source of resistance
to technology.
What impact might it have on the digital solution if emotions are taken into consideration in the
development?
Which new perspectives on reactions to technology arise from having the vocabulary to describe
emotions?
The example for this part comes from Brené Brown’s research on emotions, which shows that
the most mentioned emotions are happy, sad, and "pissed off" [66]. Brené Brown lists 87 human
emotions, and argues that we’ll create deeper connections and understanding of ourselves and
others if we can describe our emotions with more nuance than just those three words. It will make
the user imagine how the digitalisation project will affect others, causing them to step out of their
own role and empathise. The example provides a list of 17 different feelings and reactions.
The list of emotions and reactions will inspire and help the users to describe their emotions more
precisely, and perhaps even be able to better identify their own feelings and the reason for their
reactions. The list is far from exhaustive, but should contain feelings that resonate with the users,
and spark curiosity to learn more. Overall, this step has the goal to introduce the concept of
emotions in the digital transformation to the users, and gives prompts to help them break the ice in
this sensitive topic.
Step 3: The influence of dialogues
The third and final step of the tool consists of three questions about the conversations that have
been had in step 1 and 2, and is shown in figure 8.5.
The description reads:
Dialogues are especially important in multidisciplinary collaboration, which digitalisation
projects in municipalities mainly are. Dialogues require that you approach others with curiosity
==PAGE:90==
8.3 A dialogue tool for democratising development of digital technologies
83
- PÅ SAMARBEJDE I DIGITALISERINGSPROJEKTER
Dialoger er især vigtige i tværfagligt samarbejde, hvilket digitaliseringsprojekter i kommuner hovedsageligt er. Dialoger kræver at man 
imødekommer hinanden med nysgerrighed og åbenhed. Det vil sikre at flere personers perspektiver bliver inkluderet på tværs af kompetencer, 
erfaringer og hierarki. I dialoger indgår man i en fælles undersøgelse som sikrer, at flere får en stemme i udviklingen af digitaliseringensprojekter. 
I Trin 3 skal i reflektere over den dialog i netop har haft i Trin 1 og 2. 
eh Hvordan har vi talt på vegne af de aktører, som påvirkes af digitaliseringsprojektets løsningO
ch Hvordan har vi skabt et rum, hvor det er trygt at sige sin mening og snakke om følelserO
fh Hvad gjorde vi for at sikre, at vi indgik i en dialog fremfor en diskussion i Trin 1 (De modsatrettede 
interesser) og Trin 2 (Reaktioner på teknologi)?
TRIN 3: DIALOGENS INDFLYDELSE
TILBAGE
OPSUMMERING
TAL OM:
Læs mere
Eksempel: Dialog eller diskussion
Oversigt
Hvorfor
Hvornår
Hvordan
Teori
Trin 1 
Trin 2 
Trin 3 
Værktøjet
Opsummering af læringer
Figure 8.5: Step 3: The influence of dialogues
and open mindedness. This will ensure that the perspectives of people with different competen-
cies and professions are included. Dialogues should be a joint investigation, resulting in more
people having a voice in the development of digitalisation projects.
The main prompt of this step is that the users must reflect upon step 1 and 2, and the three questions
to help them doing so are:
1. How have we spoken on behalf of those actors who will be affected by the digital solution?
2. How have we created an environment where it feels safe to express opinions and feelings?
3. What did we do to create a dialogue rather than a discussion in steps 1 and 2?
The goal is to prompt the users to revisit their conversations in the first two steps, and reflect on both
how they approached others, and how the others contributed to the environment that was created.
The questions are purposely phrased as "we", so the users will have a sense of being a group who
work together towards common goals, and not individuals who have done a good or a bad job of
creating a constructive dialogue.
Reflection will make the user themselves learn the importance of dialogues and the effect they
have on projects. That learning will be applicable in other project groups, too. This is essential for
the long-term effect of the tool, as the goal is to not only improve democratisation of individual
digitalisation projects, but to change the culture within the organisation to become more open,
inclusive and democratic.
Summing up
The last page congratulates the group on having completed all three steps of the tool, and gives a
summary of what they have been through, and a statement about how they have played a part in
fostering democratisation in digital technologies.
In the grey box is a list of four points that read "You have now:"
• Critically reflected on the value and consequences of your digitalisation project for: the
individual’s work tasks and profession, the municipality/the department’s organisation and
==PAGE:91==
84
Chapter 8. A walk-through of the tool
DU HAR NU GENNEMFØRT DIALOGTRÆNINGEN!
TILLYKKE!
) Kritisk reflekteret over jeres digitaliseringsprojekts værdi og konsekvenser for: den individuelles arbejdsopgaver og 
faglighed, kommunens/afdelingens struktur og kultur, samt for digitalisering af samfundet.7
) Snakket om de følelsesmæssige reaktioner, der er involveret i jeres digitaliseringensprojek0
) Lært om forskellen på en dialog og diskussion; at dialog er et redskab når man arbejder med problemer der kræver 
tværsfagligt samarbejde.7
) I har lært hvordan i selv indgår i dialoger, samt fået redskaber til at styrke jeres dialogiske kompetancer. 
I har nu:
 Men vigtigst vil i efter brugen af værktøjet være en del af at fremme en 
åben, inkluderende og demokratisk udvikling af digitale teknologiløsninger i 
danske kommuner, så flere får en stemme i den digitale transformation. Det 
er derfor vigtigt at i tager disse perspektiver og læringer med jer og bliver 
forkæmpere for demokratiet! 
TILBAGE
Oversigt
Hvorfor
Hvornår
Hvordan
Teori
Trin 1 
Trin 2 
Trin 3 
Værktøjet
Opsummering af læringer
Figure 8.6: Summarising the learnings from using the tool
culture, as well as for the digitalisation of society.
• Talked about the emotional reactions that the digitalisation project might provoke
• Learned the difference between a dialogue and a discussion; dialogues are a tool when
working with problems that require multidisciplinary collaboration
• Learned how to create a dialogue and been given tools to strengthen your communication
skills
The turquoise box below it reads:
But most importantly, after using the tool, you will be part of promoting an open, inclusive and
democratic development of digital technology solutions in Danish municipalities, so that more
people have a voice in the digital transformation. It is therefore important that you take these
perspectives and learnings with you and become advocates of democracy!
This finalises the walk-through of the tool and in the next section the thoughts behind the user
interface will be described.
8.4
The user interface
In this section, the arguments and reasoning behind the design of the user interface are presented.
Methodology
The interface of the tool has been designed based on user experience (UX) principles, as
well as on the feedback from the user tests. For the designing of the User interface, the
Build-Measure-Learn cycle was used [57]. The benefit of the method is that you can build
something early in the process, quickly test it and learn from it. Hereby a great user interface
can quickly be produced.
The user does not have the option to jump straight to any particular page, but can only navigate
back and forth one page at a time. This is beacuse, the three steps of the tool have been designed
==PAGE:92==
8.4 The user interface
85
purposely in the given order, and will not have the same effect if any step is skipped or done in a
different order. Also the introduction pages contain important information, which the user must not
skip.
From the tests it is evident that the user wishes to be informed about when the actual tool begins
after the introduction pages, that there is only one main page per step, and when they are finished
with the tool. A process bar was therefore added. It includes the introduction and summary pages
as well, so the user can always see how far they are. Moreover, the "next" buttons when the tool
begins are called "Step 1", "Step 2" and "Step 3", so the user is aware that they should only click it
when they are finished with the current step.
Although they are not included in the figures in section 8.3, there are transition pages that make
it clearer to the user when they go from the introduction part to the tool’s steps, and from the
tool’s steps to the summary. They can be seen in the full display of the tool in appendix V. A test
participant had the following statement about the structure of the solution:
"The tool will be used in a different type of meeting from what we are used to, so it’s
very important that it has a good structure and a clear instruction." - Optimisation
Owen
The test participants mentioned that the experience is improved when there is consistency between
the steps, so they can recognise the format and better focus on the content of each step. There is
therefore a page in the introduction that shows the format and explains the icons, and the main page
of each step is set up in that same format. The example pop-ups and the theory pop-ups have their
respective colour of background, so it is easy to recognise which type of content to expect. Also,
there is a turquoise speech bubble icon that says "Tal om" ("talk about"), which draws attention to
the main prompt of that step.
As mentioned, there is one main page for each step, but the user can optionally click "read more",
which opens a pop-up window with theory, and "example", which opens a pop-up window with
further explanation and an example. The windows are purposely pop-ups that are a bit smaller than
the full page, so the user can still see the main page behind it. This makes it much easier to navigate
in the tool, and simplifies it because there only has to be one page for each of the three steps. A test
participant mentioned the following about the examples:
"I really like the example with the fear of flying, as it gives a great explanation, and the
same goes for the examples of the different emotions that can arise in digitalisation
projects." - Relationship Robin
==PAGE:93==
9. Implementation and impact
The thesis project ends with the dialogue tool being ready to launch in the municipalities. Both the
content and the interface have been tested and evaluated during its development, but the tool has
not been tested in full in the intended context. This section will present what will happen after the
end of the thesis project, including an implementation plan, a description of the presentation of
the tool at a conference, how to test the tool, its (immediate) success criteria, and the long-term
indicators of its impact on the municipalities and society.
9.1
Implementation plan
The implementation plan determines how the project will further be executed and contains the
future goals in order to ensure a successful project. The implementation plan can be seen on figure
9.1. The plan starts in august 2024 and ends in 2025 and contain sevens steps. The first two steps
are for handing in the thesis project and defending the thesis. Besides this, the plan contains two
main steps: The sunrise conference and testing with Århus municipality.
The main purpose of the conference is to create awareness about the tool. The conference partic-
ipants are all relevant stakeholder for the tool, so spreading the word and making them curious
about using the tool in their own contexts is a top priority. The main purpose of the test with Århus
Municipality is to observe the tool in it’s intended use context with an actual digitisation project
team.
Figure 9.1: The implementation plan for the tool.
==PAGE:94==
9.2 Success criteria
87
9.1.1
The Sunrise Conference
As a part of Tech4Civ the design team has been so fortunate to have been offered at spot at the
Sunrise conference - Samskabelse af grønne socio-tekniske innovationer med fokus på styrring
og ledelse (Co-development of green socio-technical innovation with a focus on management
and leadership). The conference is an collaboration between DTU and RUC. The conference has
the keynote speakers: Professor Jacob Tørfting from Roskilde University, Professor and Head of
Department Jan Madsen and ph.D. student Anja Mie Weile. Afterwards eight different groups
will present their research, including the design team. The conference will for the deisgn team
act as the enabler for promoting the tool. The presentation will take form, first as an elevator
pitch and afterwards a poster session of 2*10 min. The design team is very thrilled to have this
opportunity and is looking forward to presenting the work and receiving feedback from the different
stakeholders at the conference.
9.1.2
Testing with Århus municipality
Following the conference, an iteration of the tool will be made based on the received feedback.
A collaborator working in Århus Municipality was eager to help with testing the tool with her
digitalisation team in "Borgmesterens afdeling". The test and success criteria will be described
below.
The next step of the implementation is to test with a different municipality than Århus to sufficiently
test and evaluate the tool.
9.2
Success criteria
For defining the success criteria the design team used the previously defined design requirements.
With the design requirements setting the frame for what a successful solution should do, it was
possible to define the success criteria by making the most important requirements measurable. The
success criteria described in this section are solely on the artefact level, meaning the success criteria
for the use of the tool. The success criteria for the Complex and Engineering levels are long-term
and cannot be measured directly. It requires indicators to judge if the tool has had the desired effect,
and they are described in the section, 9.3.
The overall success criteria of the tool are if it prompts the participants to have a dialogue about:
• Both values and consequences for the affected actors (including the entire system and
network of actors), touching upon each of the the levels; individual task and profession, the
municipality/the department’s organisation and culture, and society.
• Feelings that can arise in relation to the digitalisation project
AND
• If the participants reflect on if/how they have created a dialogue in stead of a discussion
A protocol for testing the success of the tool was created. It includes two hypotheses about the
result of using the tool, a setup for the test, and a table of yes/no questions, that the observer of the
test can fill out.
The hypotheses are:
1. Guiding the participants through these three designed steps will create an open and inclusive
environment, where the participants feel comfortable to share their thoughts and feelings.
2. Presenting the definitions of dialogue and discussion will create awareness for the participants
of how to engage in the dialogue/discussion about the possibly conflicting perspectives in
==PAGE:95==
88
Chapter 9. Implementation and impact
step 1 and 2.
Setup for the observation:
1. A physical meeting is arranged by one of the owners of the tool (often a project leader), where
the invited participants are the members of a project group for a new digitalisation project
in a Danish municipality. The meeting should be arranged when the project is defined (and
the project group are briefed), but before the project group has developed the requirement
specification.
2. One member of the design team will participate in the meeting as a passive observer. They
will mark “Yes” or “No” for each of the questions in table shown below.
Do the participants:
Yes
No
Mention at least one value or consequence for individuals’ tasks and profes-
sion?
Mention at least one value or consequence for the municipality/the depart-
ment’s organisation and culture?
Mention at least one value or consequence for digitalisation of society?
Name at least one potential feeling of at least one of the affected actors as a
result of the digitalisation project’s solution?
Reflect upon the dialogue they have had?
Give every participant the opportunity to contribute in each of the three
steps?
The tool will be successful if all answers are yes.
9.3
Long-term indicators of democracy and the intended effect
As mentioned, the tool in itself can be tested and the success can be measured, but whether it
contributes to democratisation of digital technologies in the municipalities and in Danish society,
can only be theorised. This section will describe which factors the design team sees as indicators
of how (and if) the tool has contributed to democratisation, but it cannot be tested, as there are a
myriad of variables in the complex system of the context, and it can therefore not be deduced which
particular effect that this tool has caused.
Moreover, the design team does not wish that this tool is the sole contributor to democratising
digital technologies, but rather that it will work towards the common goal in collaboration with
many other interventions. Rune Lykkeberg, a Danish author and editor-in-chief of the newspaper
Information, writes that "All the little conversations in society are connected to the big public
conversation." The tool influences the ’little conversations’, which play a part in one of the complex
systems in the grand system of systems that constitutes the big conversation in society.
For this thesis project, the complex system level has been defined as municipalities, including their
culture, collective values, and organisational structure. The indicators that the design team sees as a
sign of success of the tool on the complex system are that in approximately 5-7 years:
• The tool will no longer be used in the municipalities, but will have contributed to a cul-
tural change; it will be ’normal’ and acceptable to talk about emotions in the context of
digitalisation projects.
==PAGE:96==
9.4 Recommendations for the client
89
• There will be more diversity in the digitalisation project groups. The tool will have brought
awareness that it is not sufficient to assume the impact of digital solutions on others, and
there must be representatives from different professions that can accurately give different
groups an equal voice. There will no longer be the collective attitude that the "digitalisation
team always gets the final say".
• Implementation of the digital solutions will be easier because it is designed with the value of
the user’s profession in mind. This will make the user feel valued and appreciated, and the
change will not seem as overwhelming or overpowering.
• There will be less "pilot-sickness", as the holistic perspective of digitalisation projects will
be considered, meaning that projects that have too many consequences in relation to value
will not be commenced.
The indicators on the engineering level are more abstract, and therefore even more difficult to
imagine. If the indicators on the complex system level all happen as laid out above, this will still only
be one of many systems that affect democracy in digital technologies in Denmark. Therefore, all the
design team can say is that if the complex system of digitalisation projects in Danish municipalities
becomes more democratic as intended, it will help to push in the direction of democratisation of
digital technologies in Denmark.
9.4
Recommendations for the client
In combination with the implementation plan, the design team has constructed a list of recommen-
dations for the two clients of the project: Tech4Civ and the municipalities.
The main recommendations for Tech4Civ is to remember, that they are the theory experts and that
the municipality are the context experts. Tech4Civ should thus have the responsibility to keep
updating the tool, based on their new theoretical findings in the research sections. Furthermore,
Tech4Civ are the main owners of the tool and they should maintain the role of being the network
facilitators and tool owners. As tool owners Tech4Civ is expected to further share the tool with
relevant stakeholders and ensure that it’s journey is continued after the design team finishes the
thesis project.
The main recommendation for the municipalities is to remember that they play a huge role in
ensuring a democratic development of digital technologies. It is important that they take this role
seriously and remember their responsibility in their further work. Furthermore, the municipalities
have to be curios about using the tool and never worry about using the tool wrong. The tool will
always bring valuable perspectives to a project, so it can not be used incorrectly. They have to see
themselves as the experts in the tool. We set the frames for the tool, but they have absolute control
of what there has to be talked about for their project specifically. Lastly, the municipalities can
benefit from bringing employees with very different opinions and mindsets to use the tool.
9.5
Next steps for the tool
There are three main aspects, that the design team would further research on: the theory in the
solution, the creation of a facilitation guide for the tool and the connection to the SDGs.
The theory slides in the dialogue tool are part of the further work plan, to finalise their content and
do further research on sources. The theory slides are viewed as bonus slides for participants, so it
was not a priority to make these completely done, as the prompt questions and the design of the
tool was more important for the overall use and test of the tool. Especially the theoretical basis on
emotions and dialogue, that are outside the field of design, would benefit from a more elaborate
==PAGE:97==
90
Chapter 9. Implementation and impact
basis, possibly including experts of the fields. Therefore the further development of the theory
slides will need more research.
It has been a part of the initial plan to develop a small guide/booklet to support the dialogue tool.
This guide is primarily meant for the tool owners, who are expected to be the ones facilitating the
use of the tool. In the guide the tool owners will be able to read more about how to use the tool,
how to engage participants, expanded theory on the different steps and tips on how to use the tool
most optimally. The purpose of the booklet is to give the owners a place to look for answers and to
make them feel competent and safe in facilitating the use of the tool. Finally the design team in
the further work wishes to enhance the tools connection to the SDG 11 - Make cities and human
settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. The connection to the SDG will for some
make the tool more reliable and understand the impact in a broader perspective [76].
==PAGE:98==
VI
10
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
10.1
Biases in the project and research
10.2
The success of the tool
10.3
Democracy and dialogue
10.4
Design process
11
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
12
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
Discussing,
reflecting and
concluding
==PAGE:99==
10. Discussion
In this discussion, the design team will touch upon the following topics: the biases in the project,
the success of the tool, critique of democratisation and dialogue, and finally a process discussion.
10.1
Biases in the project and research
The design team’s point of entry to the project was interviews with the network. With the interviews
forming the initial understanding of the project, there is a risk that the design team was biased
during the interviews. The first six interviews were with men with technical backgrounds, and there
is a risk that these uniform perspectives affected the design team’s further research. Furthermore,
these interviewees yielded in contact to the rest of the network, meaning that the first interviewees
determined who would be relevant for the project, which may have further contributed to the bias.
The thesis project was given by and has been conducted with Tech4Civ’s approach to stakeholder
management and communication, which has biased the design team’s work, and it should be kept
in mind that Tech4Civ’s research is not yet published. Nonetheless, their work has been recognised
in the academic environment and the network’s reaction to the Tech4Civ approach has been very
positive, and it has created motivation for working with that mindset.
10.2
The success of the tool
Earlier in the report the long-term indicators of the success of the project has been discussed.
However, it is equally important to discuss the potential unintended consequences of the tool.
Firstly, it is important to mention the risk of the tool not being used at all. The design team has tried
to overcome this challenge by spreading knowledge and theory about democratisation throughout
the project, but since the topic is quite abstract, complex, and has not been applied in practice yet, it
could quickly be forgotten. If the tool is used once and then forgotten, it will be challenging and
time consuming for the owners to bring back the excitement and engagement.
A second unintended consequence is that only a certain group of people in the municipality will
use the tool. An example could be that only the technical employees or the employees with high
ranking positions use the tool. If this is the case, the use of the tool could result in creating more
distance between the different groups of employees, and thereby create an echo chamber. It is
therefore highly important that the tool is used by a diverse group of employees.
Lastly, it is important to mention that in order to democratise the development of digital solutions,
==PAGE:100==
10.3 Democracy and dialogue
93
more initiative is required. The intervention is just one out of many actions or interventions needed
in order to reach the overall goal. The design team has only been able to influence a small fraction
of municipal employees in Denmark, and for the development of digital solutions to actually be
democratised, there must be other interventions that push towards the same effect[5].
10.3
Democracy and dialogue
In relation to the success of the tool it is important to touch upon the main topics of democracy and
dialogue.
Democracy was a part of the project description, so it was never questioned. Therefore, alternative
approaches to making digital technologies more inclusive were not explored. The design team
agrees with the fact that the foundation of democracy makes it a fitting approach, but it is important
to be aware that there could be alternative approaches that would bring different perspectives and
directions to the project.
As the design team approached the project with conducting interviews, the research on democracy
happened later in the process. The design team had a basic understanding of democracy, as they
have all grown up in Denmark, a democratic country, and therefore only made a superficial research
on it in the beginning of the project. However, democracy is a complex topic with many facets, and
looking back now, it could have been beneficial to conduct a thorough literature research earlier in
the process.
The tool suggests dialogue as the main tool for ensuring democratisation in the given context.
Nevertheless, the design team is aware of the fact that dialogue is not the only right approach.
The book Dialog og magt i organisationer mentions that dialogues should not be forced. When
convincing someone that dialogue is the right tool to use, it is important to maintain a dialogue,
and not to use discussion to convince others to use dialogue. When one gets too excited about
dialogue and its benefits, it must be kept in mind that everyone may not share that opinion. Love is
blinding, and the same goes for dialogue [77]. To summarise, it is important to reflect upon the
use of dialogue, and not to forget to consider alternatives. Moreover, dialogue is not something
that is learned immediately after using the tool. Learning how to engage in dialogue and using
it in everyday work takes time and a lot of practice. A dialogue is only likely to be successful if
everybody in the conversation is engaged, because as soon as one member starts discussing, it can
be very difficult to stay calm and remember to be open and understanding.
10.4
Design process
As the starting point for the thesis project, the design team did not receive a problem, but rather
the task of investigating how to democratise technologies in Danish municipalities. The people in
the municipalities had not requested the thesis and the tool, and most had not even considered the
meaning of democracy in work with digital technologies. The effect-driven approach was different
for the design team. The divergent and converging approach from the Double Diamond model had
almost always been applicable in previous design projects. However, the double diamond is meant
for product design, and was not applicable to this thesis project, which is about synthesising all
knowledge and sharing it in the form of a tool, which is also different from a product that solves a
specific user need or improves a system.
Working with an effect statement was also a new experience for the design team, and it came with
both challenges and benefits. The design team spent a large amount of time in the system analysis
phase on the complex and engineering level. The design team struggled with choosing a direction
to take the project. In this phase, the design team was overloaded with information, and often
==PAGE:101==
94
Chapter 10. Discussion
had different understandings of the leanings from all the different sources they had. A long time
was therefore spent on aligning understandings and leanings. Even though this phase was time
consuming and felt tedious, it was beneficial that such a broad and holistic perspective was kept for
so long, because it ensured that many different areas within the topic were investigated.
The aforementioned information overload was mainly present in the literature search and the initial
interviews with the network. The literature search revolved around the topic of democratisation,
digital technologies, municipalities, and dialogue, which are all four very big topics. With the SID
approach, the scope of the project was very broad in the beginning and the design team had no
specific direction, which made the literature search very broad and challenging to be satisfied with.
This made it hard to narrow down the search, and each source gave many new references that also
seemed important to read. Furthermore, a systematic literature review was not conducted, as the
understanding of the nuances in the topic of the thesis evolved throughout the project. Also, had
a further literature review been conducted after the development of the tool, it would have been
possible to make a more in depth search of those topics.
The design team conducted a total of 20 interviews, which were about 1-1.5 hours long, and all
resulted in a huge amount of data to process and synthesise. The design team has never before
worked with this quantity of data, and ensuring that all the important points were included and
remembered was challenging at times. Looking back, fewer interviews could also have been
acceptable, as many points started to be repeated in the interviews, but the design team did not want
to cancel any of the interviews they had asked for, or say no to new contacts that could be relevant
for the project. Even though, the big amount of data has been overwhelming, a benefit of working
with the municipalities, has been their openness and interest in sharing their knowledge knowledge.
The network has been very open about sharing their experiences, which has been great.
Most of the methods used in the thesis project are ones that the design team has used several times
during the Design and Innovation Master’s programme. Having used the methods this many times,
the design team often used the methods implicitly, without directly choosing a particular method or
discussing how it should be used. This has both had positive and negative effects. The negative
effects are that there a few times have been misunderstandings within the team, who have had
different approaches and ways of using the methods. However, these misunderstandings have later
lead to great results, as the different understandings have brought different results and perspectives
with it. A positive effect of using the methods implicitly was being able to work efficiently and use
the methods specifically for the context of the project. Furthermore, having a shared familiarity
with the methods has made it easy to talk about and reflect on the use of methods with a common
language. This is especially related to Actor-Network Theory, where the design team has used many
of the terms throughout the entire project, with a thorough shared understanding of the meaning,
resulting in conversations on a high level.
==PAGE:102==
11. Reflection
This section will reflect upon the design team’s learnings throughout the project based on their
personal motivation outlined in the beginning of the thesis and the official learning objectives.
Learnings based on personal motivation
A part of the design team’s personal motivation was to gain knowledge and experience on how the
Danish municipalities work. The design team has obtained new knowledge about digitalisation
projects in the municipalities, the procurement process, and an understanding of the roles and
mindset of municipal employees. Furthermore, the design team has learned about the public sector
and its role in Danish society. This learning is something that the design team will take with them
in their further work as designers and when considering their first jobs as design engineers.
Another motivation for the design team was to have more focus on being process aware. This
included trying new design methods and approaches and adapting and combining different methods.
The design team gain a lot of new knowledge from this and especially the effect driven approach
of SID has been challenging, but motivating to work with. With the project process being a
combination of SID and the N-model, the development of the intervention has been designed
iteratively and therefore the explanation of the process hasn’t been as straight forward as in previous
projects following e.g. the Double Diamond model. This has forced the design team to be very
aware of how the process and arguments were articulated, which has been a great learning and
increased their process awareness.
Through the project the design team has worked with a bigger network than in any previous project.
This resulted in the need for a more focused and structured stakeholder management, which the
design team learned a lot from, and will without doubt be a useful skill to have in the future.
Lastly, the design team has worked with a topic that is current in the news, debates, articles,
podcasts, and more, which has been motivating because it is something that everyone can relate to
and affects all of society. Navigating the huge amount of discussion and inputs has been challenging,
but is has also reinforced the impact and value of the project and therefore motivated the design
team to work with it.
==PAGE:103==
96
Chapter 11. Reflection
Fulfilment of the learning objectives
The learning objectives (LO) were created before the thesis project commenced, and when and how
they were fulfilled will briefly be described below. Teh learning objectives are:
1. Identify and define a complex societal need within the municipalities’ work with new
technologies.
2. Evaluate, transform and integrate design methods to fit the context of the project and munici-
palities.
3. Apply the N-model’s holistic approach to the project.
4. Navigate the needs and interests of various stakeholders within the municipalities, KL, DTU
Compute, etc., and use these for re-framing challenges and understanding the effect of the
project.
5. Development of one or more interventions that address democratisation of technology.
6. Plan, test, and validation of intervention(s) with relevant stakeholders at event.
7. Reflection upon the progress of the project and the quality of the intervention(s).
8. Transfer technology knowledge and its impact on society into the design project.
9. Communicate the complex project throughout the interaction with stakeholders, the interven-
tion(s), report, and presentation.
Reflecting on the thesis project, it is safe to say that the learning objectives have been fulfilled. LO
1 was reached in the system analysis phase. LO 2 was done throughout the project, as the design
team reflected upon the process and chosen methods, as well as how to adapt them to the project at
hand. This also relates to LO 3, as the N-model was followed, but also modified and combined
with the SID model to fit this project. A large part of the project consisted of interaction with the
broad network of collaborators and the Tech4Civ section at DTU Compute, fulfilling LO 4. The
design team has developed a dialogue tool as the intervention to foster democratisation of digital
technologies in Danish municipalities, as stated in LO 5. The design team has planned tests and
validation of both the content of the intervention and of the design of the final tool in workshops
and meetings with collaborators from the network, fulfilling LO 6. LO 7 has been done throughout
the entire project, as the design team has been process aware from beginning to end. LO 8 has
been reached by synthesis of the data from the interviews and the desk research, which has applied
literature, popular science and media to the context of the collaborating municipalities. The last
LO has partially been reached by successfully communicating the topic of democratising digital
technologies to the project collaborators and by designing the tool. It is yet to be determined how
well the project has been communicated in the report and in the presentation at the thesis defence.
==PAGE:104==
12. Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to foster a democratic development of digital technologies by
creating a tool for facilitating democracy in Danish municipalities’ work with digital solutions.
The approach for fostering democratisation has been twofold with a democratisation throughout
the project and a democratisation with the tool. The thesis has been conducted in a partnership
with Tech4Civ and the investigation of the topic has been done in collaboration with the Danish
municipalities and relevant collaborating organisations, being an extensive network of 18 people.
The design process followed a modified N-model with inspiration from SID, starting with a System
Analysis, System Requirements, and finally Design & Testing & Evaluation. In the system analysis
the design team investigated the individual users of the intervention, the culture and organisation
around the users, and the societal regime in Denmark. Afterwards, the system requirements were
determined, defining the requirements and criteria for the intervention on all three levels, and finally
the intervention was designed as a dialogue tool, and tested with the use of Figma and workshops.
With the process following the N-model, the system analysis, design of the requirements for the
intervention, and the development of the intervention and testing happened iteratively.
The dialogue tool cultivates democracy in digital technologies by ensuring more diversity and
equality in the development of bid specifications, which in turn determine how the digital systems
are designed. Currently, there is a tendency that those who have most expertise in IT and technology
have the biggest say in developing the requirements and criteria for new digital solutions, and the
users and the context around them is not adequately considered. The result is a contribution to
change fatigue, resistance in the implementation of new systems, and a fear of technology’s impact
on our society. The intervention that has been designed is a tool that is used by project groups
before or during the development of the bid specification in a digitalisation projects, which guides
the group through three steps: Opposing interests, Reactions to technology, and The influence of
dialogues. The goal of the tool is to prompt the users to consider the holistic perspective on the
context surrounding the digital solution, to be open to other’s feelings towards technology, and to
reflect on how their dialogues affect the openness and inclusiveness in the group, a learning that
will be applicable in their future projects. The effect of the three steps is to prompt conversations
where the participants are all able to contribute equally, and no profession or expertise is valued
higher than others.
Accomplishment of the desired effect of the tool was tested in two workshops with five municipal
employees in each, and was determined to be successful in the second workshop. The response to
the three steps in the tool was positive, and the participants expressed insightful reflections on the
==PAGE:105==
98
Chapter 12. Conclusion
dialogue they’d had and that the tool would bring valuable perspectives to their projects. In addition,
the final design of the tool was deemed user friendly and comprehensible in three separate user tests.
The final testing of the dialogue tool will be performed at the Sunrise Conference on the 28th of
August. It can be concluded that the democratisation throughout the project has been successful, as
the project collaborators have been curious about the topic and eager to implement the knowledge
given by the design team in their own work, which was clearly shown in the workshops.
Fostering a democratic development of digital technologies is a big goal and the design team’s
project is just one out of many necessary actions. Apart from the direct success of the tool, the
desired long-term effect of the tool is not possible to measure now. The anticipated long-term
impacts of the intervention were determined by the design team as a cultural change in procurement
processes in municipalities. If the tool is used as intended, the holistic context of how new digital
solutions will affect individuals, culture in the organisation, and society will be considered. Users’
emotions will be talked about openly, there will be less resistance to the implementation of new
systems, and thereby a greater success rate of digital systems. The dialogue tool’s long term impact
on the municipalities will play a small, yet important part in fostering democratic development of
digital solutions in Denmark.
==PAGE:106==
Bibliography
[1]
Rune Lykkeberg. Langsomme Samtaler: Om vejene fra katastrofe, kriserne og vreden til en
bedre verden. Informations Forlag, 2022.
[2]
Raúl Carneiro, Patrícia Silva, and Gonçalo Paiva Dias. Digital platforms transforming local
democracies. IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–4.
[3]
Danmarks Radio. Debatten: Skærmfri fremtid? URL: https://www.dr.dk/drtv/se/
debatten_-skaermfri-fremtid_450143 (visited on 07/26/2024).
[4]
Danmarks Radio. Deadline: Tech tager magten fra os. URL: https://www.dr.dk/drtv/
episode/deadline_-tech-tager-magten-fra-os_463911 (visited on 07/18/2024).
[5]
Nynke Tromp and Paul Hekkert. Designing for society: Products and services for a better
world. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2018.
[6]
Donald A. Norman. Design for a better world: Meaningful, sustainable, humanity centered.
MIT Press, 2023.
[7]
Jamie Bartlett. The People Vs Tech: How the internet is killing democracy (and how we save
it). Random House, 2018.
[8]
Jan Damsgaard. Den digitale omstilling. eng. Jurist- og Økonomiforbundets Forlag, 2015,
p. 196.
[9]
Søren Schultz Hansen and Jan Horsager. Digitaliseringens paradokser : 12 virksomheders
erfaringer med hastig forandring. Jurist- og Økonomforbundets Forlag, 2017.
[10]
Olivier L. De Weck, Daniel Roos, and Christopher L. Magee. Engineering systems: Meeting
human needs in a complex technological world. Mit Press, 2011.
[11]
Daniel Russo et al. “Generative AI in Software Engineering Must Be Human-Centered: The
Copenhagen Manifesto”. In: Journal of Systems and Software 216 (2024).
[12]
Chris W. Clegg. “Sociotechnical principles for system design”. In: Applied ergonomics 31.5
(2000), pp. 463–477.
[13]
Douglas Schuler. “Can Technology Support Democracy?” eng. In: Digital Government:
Research and Practice (2020). DOI: 10.1145/3352462.
==PAGE:107==
100
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[14]
D. Bose, M. Segui-Gomez, and J. R. Crandall. Vulnerability of Female Drivers Involved in
Motor Vehicle Crashes: An Analysis of US Population at Risk. URL: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3222446/ (visited on 08/07/2024).
[15]
C.C. Perez. Invisible Women: Data Bias in a World Designed for Men. ABRAMS, 2019.
ISBN: 9781683353140. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=GdmEDwAAQBAJ.
[16]
Anja Mie Weile. Tech4Civ description. 2024. URL: https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
collaboration/tech4civ (visited on 08/07/2024).
[17]
Djøf. Skift mellem offentlig og privat. URL: https://services.djoef.dk/r- aa-
dgivning/jobsoegning/n-ae-ste-skridt-i-karrieren/skift-mellem-offentlig-
og-privat.aspx (visited on 08/08/2024).
[18]
Folketinger. Kommune. 2024. URL: https://www.ft.dk/da/leksikon/Kommune (visited
on 08/01/2024).
[19]
Jørgen Christensen, Jørgen Elklit, and Peter Christiansen Munk. Kommunerne i Danmark.
2022. URL: https://trap.lex.dk/Kommunerne_i_Danmark (visited on 08/02/2024).
[20]
André Schaminée. Designing With and Within Public Organizations: Building Bridges
between Public Sector Innovators and Designers. eng. Laurence King Publishing, 2019.
[21]
Aarhus. Aarhus Kommune Smart Aarhus Strategi. 2023. URL: https://aarhus.dk/
demokrati/planer-og-politikker/oekonomi-og-administration/digitalisering
(visited on 07/09/2024).
[22]
Århus kommune. Organisationen, få overblik over driftsområderne. 2024. URL: https:
//aarhus.dk/om-kommunen/sociale-forhold-og-beskaeftigelse/organisation
(visited on 08/02/2024).
[23]
KOMBIT. Kommunal digital bevaegelse. 2024. URL: https://kombit.dk/om-os (visited
on 07/09/2024).
[24]
KL. KL’s organisation. 2024. URL: https://www.kl.dk/om-kl/kl-s-organisation#
mission-bd (visited on 07/09/2024).
[25]
DOLL. DOLL focus areas. 2024. URL: https://doll-livinglab.com/focus-areas/
(visited on 07/09/2024).
[26]
Gate21. Gate21 saadan arbejder vi. 2024. URL: https://gate21.dk/saadan-arbejder-
vi/ (visited on 07/09/2024).
[27]
TWI. What is a smart city - Definitaions and Examples. 2024. URL: https://www.twi-
global.com/technical- knowledge/faqs/what- is- a- smart- city (visited on
08/01/2024).
[28]
Medium PP-Writers - Good Vibes Club. The Importance of Networking and Collabora-
tion Building Relationships and Partnerships for Success. 2023. URL: https://medium.
com/good-vibes-club/the-importance-of-networking-and-collaboration-
cafebfed580d (visited on 08/05/2024).
[29]
Dagny Valgeirsdottir et al. Desk Research. URL: https://universaldesignguide.com/
method/desk-research/ (visited on 08/09/2024).
[30]
Rikke Andreassen, Connie Svabo, and Rasmus Rex Pedersen. “Digitale liv: Brugere, plat-
forme, selvfremstillinger”. In: DigitaleLiv (2020).
[31]
Skattestyrelsen. Den digitale årsopgørelse. URL: https://sktst.dk/personskat/
arsopgoerelsen/den-digitale-aarsopgoerelse (visited on 07/30/2024).
[32]
Janna Anderson and Lee Rainie. Many tech experts say digital disruption will hurt democracy,
pew research center (2020). 2020. URL: https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/
2020 / 02 / 21 / many - tech - experts - say - digital - disruption - will - hurt -
democracy/#:~:text=Some%2049%25%20of%20these%20respondents,change%
20in%20the%20next%20decade. (visited on 07/22/2024).
==PAGE:108==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
101
[33]
Gerald Kane. “The technology fallacy: people are the real key to digital transformation”. In:
Research-Technology Management (2019), pp. 44–49.
[34]
Alexander Hecklen and Emil Ingvorsen. Hemmelige AI-skattekontroller sat i gang uden
tjek af konsekvenser. 2024. URL: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/penge/hemmelige-
ai- skattekontroller- sat- i- gang- uden- tjek- af- konsekvenser (visited on
09/08/2024).
[35]
Digitaliserings- og Ligestillingsministeriet Regeringen. “Danmarks Digitaliseringsstategi:
Ansvar for den digitale udvikling”. In: DANMARKS DIGITALISERINGSSTRATEGI (2023).
[36]
Joanna Kavenna. “Shoshana Zuboff: ‘Surveillance capitalism is an assault on human auton-
omy’”. In: The Guardian (2019).
[37]
Vincent F. Hendricks and Camilla Mehlsen. Hvordan bliver vi digitalt dannede? Informations
forlag, 2018.
[38]
Gert Tinggaard Svendsen. Tillid. Aarhus Universitetsforlag, 2012.
[39]
Joana Geraldi et al. Doing Projects. A Nordic Flavour to Managing Projects. und. publisher
= Publisher, 2017.
[40]
Forbes. The key to digital transformation is people. URL: https://www.forbes.com/
sites/forbestechcouncil/2023/09/18/the-key-to-digital-transformation-
is-people/ (visited on 08/08/2024).
[41]
Maja Przystał. Fear of Digital Transformation: Why Do We Feel It, and How to Overcome
It? URL: https://archdesk.com/blog/fear-of-digital-transformation-why-
do-we-feel-it-and-how-to-overcome-it/ (visited on 08/08/2024).
[42]
Elizabeth Solberg, Laura E.M. Traavik, and Sut I. Wong. “Digital Mindsets: Recognizing
and Leveraging Individual Beliefs for Digital Transformation”. eng. In: California Man-
agement Review 62.4 (2020), pp. 105–124. ISSN: 21628564, 00081256. DOI: 10.1177/
0008125620931839.
[43]
Maja Przystał. 5 ways fear can derail your digital transformation strategy. URL: https:
//enterprisersproject.com/article/2022/7/digital-transformation-fear-
derail-strategy (visited on 08/08/2024).
[44]
Stephanie Welsh. Digital transformation: 4 kinds of people crucial to success. URL: https:
//enterprisersproject.com/article/2019/9/digital- transformation- 4-
crucial-roles (visited on 08/08/2024).
[45]
K. Crawford. The Atlas of AI: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial Intel-
ligence. Yale University Press, 2021. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=
KfodEAAAQBAJ.
[46]
Sune Holm et al. “Bias in context: What to do when complete bias removal is not an option”.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120.23 (2023).
[47]
Eike Petersen et al. “The path toward equal performance in medical machine learning”. In:
Patterns 4.7 (2023).
[48]
Paola Trimarco. “The Cambridge International Dictionary of English”. In: Dictionaries:
Journal of the Dictionary Society of North America 19.1 (1998), pp. 254–257.
[49]
United Nations. Democracy, United Nations. URL: https://www.un.org/en/global-
issues/democracy (visited on 07/19/2024).
[50]
Danmarks Radio. Mette Deep Fake Frederiksen. URL: https://www.dr.dk/lyd/p1/p1-
debat/p1-debat-2024/p1-debat-mette-deep-fake-frederiksen-11162401183
(visited on 08/09/2024).
[51]
Madeleine Akrich. “The de-scription of technical objects”. In: Shaping technology/building
society. Studies in sociotechnical change (1992), pp. 205–224.
[52]
Josef Oehmen. “The N-Model”. In: 42090 Holistic Design of Engineering Systems (2023).
==PAGE:109==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[53]
Dagny Valgeirsdottir et al. Universal Design Guide, Assumption dumption. 2023. URL:
https://universaldesignguide.com/method/assumption-dumption/ (visited on
07/22/2010).
[54]
Bella Martin and Bruce Hanington. Universal Methods of design - 100 ways to research
complex problems, develop innovative ideas and design effective solutions. Quarto Publishing
Group USA, 2012.
[55]
Tim McAloone, Daniela Pigosso, and Marina Pieroni. “41073 Development og product and
service systems, Week 3 - Analysing the user activity cycle”. In: PSS (2023).
[56]
SlickPlan. Flow diagram guide (7 types of flowcharts + definitions). 2024. URL: https:
//slickplan.com/diagram/what-is-a-flow-diagram (visited on 07/23/2010).
[57]
Annemiek GC van Boeijen, Jaap Daalhuizen, and Jelle Zijlstra. Delft Design Guide, Per-
spectives, models, approaches and methods. Bis Publisher, 2013.
[58]
Dagny Valgeirsdottir et al. Universal Design Guide, Persona. 2023. URL: https : / /
universaldesignguide.com/method/personas/ (visited on 07/22/2010).
[59]
Dagny Valgeirsdottir et al. Universal Design Guide, Product Design Requirements. 2023.
URL: https://universaldesignguide.com/method/product-design-specification-
pds/ (visited on 07/22/2010).
[60]
Dagny Valgeirsdottir et al. Universal Design Guide, Brainstorm. 2023. URL: https://
universaldesignguide.com/method/brainstorming/ (visited on 07/22/2010).
[61]
Dagny Valgeirsdottir et al. Universal Design Guide, Prototyping build. 2023. URL: https://
universaldesignguide.com/method/prototyping-build/ (visited on 07/22/2010).
[62]
Dagny Valgeirsdottir et al. Universal Design Guide, Fly On the Wall Observation. 2023.
URL: https://universaldesignguide.com/method/fly-on-the-wall/ (visited on
07/22/2010).
[63]
Legal questions. Markedsanalyse - Hvad er en markedsanalyse. 2024. URL: https://
www . legaldesk . dk / erhverv / selskabsstiftelse / markedsanalyse (visited on
08/05/2024).
[64]
Evangelos Karapanos et al. User Experience Over Time: An Initial Framework. URL: https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/1518701.1518814 (visited on 08/01/2024).
[65]
Claus Thorp Hansen, Kees Dorst, and Mogens Myrup Andreasen. “Problem formulation as
a discursive design activity”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Engineering Design (2009). Ed. by J. Clarkson et al., pp. 145–156.
[66]
Brené Brown. Atlas of the heart: Mapping meaningful connection and the language of
human experience. Random House, 2021.
[67]
Mckinsey & Company. What is psychological safety? URL: https://www.mckinsey.com/
featured- insights/mckinsey- explainers/what- is- psychological- safety
(visited on 08/08/2024).
[68]
William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, and Jill Butler. Universal Principles of Design. 100
Cummings Center, Suite 265: Rockport Publisher, 2010.
[69]
H. Rhinow, E. Köppen, and C. Meinel. “Design Prototypes as Boundary Objects in Inno-
vation Processes”. In: From Proceedings of the 2012 Int. Conf.on Design Research Society
(DRS 2012) (2012), pp. 1–9.
[70]
Jeffrey D. Ford and Laurie W. Ford. “The Role Of Conversations in Producing Intentional
Change in Organizations”. eng. In: Academy of Management Review 20.3 (1995), pp. 541–
570. ISSN: 19303807, 03637425. DOI: 10.5465/amr.1995.9508080330.
[71]
Melanie Kreye. “Managing organisational change”. In: Internal reading material for course
42543 – Systemic management of Change and Transitions, at DTU Management (2020).
[72]
Dagny Valgeirsdottir. “Staging Cocreation & Creativity”. In: 38110 Staging co-creation and
creativity (2023).
==PAGE:110==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
103
[73]
Adele E Clarke, Susan Leigh Star, et al. “The social worlds framework: A theory/methods
package”. In: The handbook of science and technology studies (2008), pp. 113–137.
[74]
Michel Callon. The sociology of an actor-network: The case of the electric vehicle. Springer,
1986, pp. 19–34.
[75]
Neumann Monson Architects. When to Make Changes to a Design: The 80/20 Rule. 2022.
URL: https://neumannmonson.com/blog/when-make-changes-design-80-20-
rule#:~:text=While%20some%20changes%20may%20fit,first%2020%25%20of%
20the%20process. (visited on 07/17/2024).
[76]
United Nations - Department of Economic and Social Affairs. SDG 11 - Make cities and
humans settlements, inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. 2024. URL: https://sdgs.
un.org/goals/goal11#overview (visited on 08/01/2024).
[77]
Helle Alrø and Marianne Kristiansen. Dialog og magt i organisationer. Aalborg Univer-
sitetsforlag 2004, 2004.
