==PAGE:1==
Testing equivalence-congruent
checkers via equivalent mutants
Master’s Thesis in Computer Science and Engineering
Author:
Supervisor:
Arianna Bianchi
Alberto Lluch Lafuente
Kongens Lyngby, 19 July 2024
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents an innovative approach for testing newly developed formal
verification algorithms, by exploiting semantic equivalences. Our focus is on
model checkers that lack an implementation reference oracle. Model checkers
are pivotal in formal verification, yet ensuring their accuracy poses significant
challenges. Algorithms that have been used for decades could present errors due
to e.g. manual testing and false positives.
We propose an automated testing framework to test a model checker’s congru-
ence property w.r.t. semantic equivalence relations. In simple words, we verify
that equivalent inputs produce equivalent outputs across different common sub-
procedures of the model checker. These sub-procedures include formula simpli-
fication, automaton translation, satisfiability checking, and model checking.
Additionally, we introduce a novel method for generating inputs for our test-
ing framework. This method produces a significant amount of formulas and
equivalents given a specific grammar and set of equivalence axioms, ensuring
the framework’s reliability and robustness.
Furthermore, we experimented with using the testing framework on two addi-
tional relations besides semantic equivalence: isomorphism and equality. This
experiment enabled us to identify equivalent mutants that are non-reducible and
resistant to certain sub-procedures. These mutants are used as further inputs
to the testing framework, enhancing its robustness.
We conducted tests on state-of-the-art tools including Spot [14] (and various
versions), Spin [22], Black [41], CTL-sat [37], and Prism [36].
Our results highlight the effectiveness of our approach in ensuring the correctness
and reliability of model checkers, with the tools passing 100% of our tests w.r.t
semantic equivalence. Our method successfully generates a significant number
of semantically equivalent non-reducible mutants, increasing the robustness of
our testing framework. The research contributes to the dependability of formal
verification tools.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Alberto Lluch
Lafuente. His guidance and support throughout this journey have been invalu-
able. He was always available for weekly update meetings and helped me stay
on track when I tended to digress. His feedback was consistently more than
I asked for, even during the busiest times, significantly enhancing the value of
this thesis.
My mentor, Daniel Eggert, has been an essential part of my final year in the
Master’s program. His advice was crucial both for my thesis and for navigating
the job market in the meantime. He offered me a professional perspective that I
am honoured to have received, and I deeply appreciate all his guidance through
this journey.
I would like to thank my family.
My mom and sister provided unwavering
support, advice, and constant help, as always. A special thanks goes to my
dad. During the first half of my Master’s, he supported me with his words, and
from the second half, he suddenly started supporting me silently from above, for
God’s will. Even though he is not here anymore, his support is still the loudest
of all.
Last but certainly not least, my friends and the CAYAC group.
They were
always ready for encouraging me throughout the course of this thesis. In par-
ticular, I am thankful to Fr Daniel for his availability, willingness to help, and
readiness to listen to me and the challenges life brought my way during these
months.
==PAGE:5==
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
How to test a model checker by exploiting equivalences? . . . . .
6
1.2
How to generate temporal logic formulas for our testing framework?
9
1.3
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Preliminaries
14
2.1
Temporal Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.1
Linear Temporal Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.2
Computation Tree Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Automata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Basic Concept of Model Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4
SAT Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Modularization Testing Approaches
27
3.1
Formula Simplification Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.1
Test Spot Simplification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Automaton Translation Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.1
Test Spot Translator and Spot vs Spin Translators . . . .
39
3.3
SAT Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3.1
Test Spot, Black and CTL-SAT tools . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4
Checking Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4.1
Test Spot Model Checking and Prism Model Checking . .
51
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
4
Pipeline for Generation of Formulas and Mutants
54
4.1
Generation of Temporal Logic Formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.1.1
LTL Formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.1.2
CTL Formulas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2
Generation of Equivalent Mutants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2.1
Equivalent LTL Mutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2.2
Equivalent CTL Mutants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Conclusion
62
5.1
Limitations and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A Appendix
67
A.1 Disclaimers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2 GitHub Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Bibliography
70
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Testing is essential for maintaining high software quality. It is the process of
executing a program or a system with the intent of finding errors and bugs,
and the goal is to verify that the software meets its specified requirements and
performs as expected [35]. Software Model Checking is a formal verification
technique used to prove the correctness of a program, for specified properties
of interests. In detail, it consists of a given program M and a safety property
φ, and the goal is to verify whether the property φ holds in all the executions
of M. This technique is implemented by model checkers, which are software
applications, or tools, complex and highly optimized, and as such they require a
correct implementation to guarantee the reliability of the result. However, like
all software, model checker tools could contain bugs, and give wrong verification
results, even for simpler programs [43].
Errors can be catastrophic for safety-critical software (e.g. aerospace, aviation,
railway signalling systems etc.) [43]. Recently there have been found errors with
algorithms that have been used for decades by model checkers. For instance,
Siegel et al.[39] discovered a gap in the combination of on-the-fly and partial
order optimization algorithms, which are widely used algorithms in model check-
ers, and shows that the combination of these two algorithms is not sound. Other
works explain the presence of errors in the system model or the formal specifi-
cation. Such errors may not be detected when the answer of the model-checking
tool is positive: while a positive answer does guarantee that the model satisfies
the specification, the answer to the real question, namely, whether the system
has the intended behaviour, maybe different [29].
Testing of model checkers is not a widely investigated area, and only a few prior
works exist that systematically validate the overall correctness and reliability of
model checkers formally and exhaustively. Zhang et al. [43] tests some state-
==PAGE:9==
2
Introduction
of-the-art model checkers, however, no prior work has been done for testing a
model checker exposed to the following scenario:
We consider the scenario of a newly developed model checker that is unique in
its domain. In other words, there are no existing model checker tools that ad-
dress the same problem, and we expect to encounter several challenges. Firstly,
there is no oracle for referencing a standard implementation and ensuring the
correctness of the model checker’s behaviour. This scenario makes it difficult
to validate our results and compare them against established benchmarks. Sec-
ondly, developing manual tests could be tedious and not feasible since many
flaws could escape the manual tests, leading to an incorrect verification result.
Moreover, manual testing requires time, and the input specifications of model
checkers could be complex and non-trivial to compute manually. Model checkers
are designed to explore a potentially vast number of states and transitions in a
system, making manual testing impractically complex.
In addition to the methods discussed, it is possible to develop a fully formalized
tool using a proof assistant such as Coq [42] or Isabelle [33]. While this approach
offers rigorous formal verification, it is often a labor-intensive and tedious pro-
cess. An alternative strategy involves the use of certificates for verification, as
illustrated in works like Namjoshi’s paper[32] on certified model checking. Gen-
erating certificates provides a proof validation of the model checker’s output,
however, the process of generating certificates can be complex and computa-
tionally intensive.
On the other hand, automated testing offers efficiency, but does not assure
correctness. For instance, with a random input specification φ and model M,
determining the correct outcome of M |= φ becomes uncertain, because of the
lack of a definitive oracle to verify the correctness of the outcome. Hence a new
testing technique must be found to fill the gap.
In this thesis, we investigate the technical potential of testing a model checker
by exploiting semantic equivalences. It is important to note that model check-
ers combine several formal verification procedures, such as minimization, SAT
solving, automata translation etc. By testing these procedures, we effectively
evaluate the overall functionality and reliability of the model checker.
We create an equivalence-based testing framework, as described in section 1.1.
In this framework, we consider two sets A and B, each equipped with their own
equivalence relations, RA and RB. We can generate two elements φ, φ′ ∈A
that are RA-equivalent, such that φ RA φ′. We consider a total function P :
A →B that maps elements of A into elements of B, such that P(φ), P(φ′) ∈
B.
Now we establish the congruence property, for which the function P is
considered congruent w.r.t the relations RA and RB, and we assume that the
==PAGE:10==
3
implementation of RA and RB is correct. In other words, if two elements in set
A are RA-equivalent, then their mapping in set B, which is P(φ) and P(φ′) will
also be RB-equivalent. Our testing framework aims to test the implementation
of P using the congruence property of P, by checking whether P preserves the
RB-relation, hence P(φ)RBP(φ′).
An example of a mapping function is the automata translation function, which
maps an LTL formula into an automaton. In this case, φ and φ′ are two LTL
formulas, and the P function is the translation function which takes as input the
two formulas and translates them into two automata. The relation RA is the
semantic equivalence of two LTL formulas, and RB is the semantic equivalence
of two automata. According to the congruence property, P is congruent w.r.t
both relations RA and RB, and we assume the two relations are correct. Our
framework tests the implementation of the translation function P by check-
ing whether P preserves the congruence property, and produces semantically
equivalent automata.
The testing framework provides a structured way to test whether the verification
process of a typical model checker preserves the equivalence relation of elements
as they are mapped from one set to another.
Our main assumption is that the mapping function preserves the equivalence
relation. In the case it doesn’t, we obtain a failure test, meaning there is an
issue in the mapping function, which could lead to bugs in the model checker.
As an example, if we feed a model checker twice with two equivalent temporal
logic formulas and the same model for both runs, we expect the verification
result of the two runs to be congruent, due to the congruence property of the
mapping function.
This approach provides consistency and correctness in the implementation of
model checkers. We conjecture that it can uncover a range of potential bugs in
systems which involve transformations or mappings between different represen-
tations, or within a single representation.
A model checker is typically built by integrating several formal verification pro-
cedures.
To validate our approach, we instantiate our idea on four distinct
modules, each representing a procedure of a typical model checker. The mod-
ules are illustrated in Figure 1.1 from 1 to 4, as follows: (1) The Simplification
Formula Module, The Automaton Translation Module, The Checking Module,
The Sat Module.
We utilize our testing framework to evaluate the congruence property of each
module by instantiating the inputs, relations, and mapping functions according
to the module’s functionality. The inputs used to instantiate these modules are
==PAGE:11==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.1: The four modules of a model checker that we test by exploiting
equivalences.
linear temporal logic (LTL) formulas, computation tree logic (CTL) formulas,
and automata.
Below, we provide a more detailed explanation of how we instantiate the mod-
ules. For the simplification module (1) we focus on testing with two types of
temporal logic formulas, LTL and CTL. For the translate module (2), we decided
to use LTL formulas and Büchi automata, as it is the standard representation
for automata that most of the model checker tools support. For the checking
module (3) we use the model checking algorithm of spot, ltgba, spin and prism
model checker tool.
For the sat module (4) we decide to do LTL and CTL
satisfiability checking. Our approach is not intended to test existing formal ver-
ification tools, but rather to provide a means to test newly developed model
checkers that lack an oracle for implementation reference. We test over existing
tools as we consider them as benchmarks for our approach, since these tools are
widely used and already tested.
In order to use our testing framework to test the four modules, we require input
cases for each module.
This thesis presents an effective and straightforward
==PAGE:12==
5
methodology for generating a large number of equivalent temporal logical for-
mulas. We utilize the rewriting logic system Maude [40] to generate temporal
logic LTL and CTL formulas, along with their respective mutants, based on
equivalence axioms. This approach for generating formulas and mutants can be
extended to other logics, but in this thesis we consider only those two.
Main Contributions
The main contributions for this thesis are the following.
More details will be included in Section 1.1 .
• Developed an automated testing framework for model checkers.
This
framework uses semantic equivalences to verify the congruence property of
different sub-procedures of a typical model checker, w.r.t semantic equiv-
alence relation. In other words, it checks that equivalent inputs produce
equivalent outputs across the four modules we identified.
• Tested four key modules in a typical model checker. Tests were created for
the Formula Simplification, Automaton Translation, Satisfiability Check-
ing, and Model Checking modules, covering crucial components of the
model checkers’ verification process. The test of these four modules as-
sesses the overall correctness of a model checker.
• Identified non-reducible mutants, resistant to specific sub-procedures of a
model checker. We experimented with the relations of isomorphism and
equality, which allowed us to identify framework’s outputs which are non-
reducible and resistant. These mutants are used for further testing other
modules. For example, testing the simplification module of Spot generates
outputs which are resistant to the simplification function of Spot, and
we use these outputs as inputs to the Translate module. This approach
enhances the robustness of the testing process.
• Introduced an innovative method for formula and equivalent mutants gen-
eration. The method generates all possible formulas and their equivalents
using a specific grammar and set of equivalence axioms, ensuring compre-
hensive testing coverage and robustness.
• Conducted extensive experimental validation.
State-of-the-art tools in-
cluding Spot, Spin, Black, CTL-sat, and Prism were tested.
• Validated the correctness and reliability of model checkers, contributing
to the dependability of formal verification tools. We tested several tools,
identifying resistant mutants, enhancing the robustness of our approach.
And lastly, the framework and the pipeline generation are scalable since
they can scale up to different domains.
==PAGE:13==
6
Introduction
1.1
How to test a model checker by exploiting
equivalences?
As mentioned earlier in Chapter 1, suppose a new model checker has been
developed for a specific problem domain without any existing model checker
addressing the same problem. How do we test a model checker in this scenario?
Several testing challenges may arise, as explained above in Chapter 1.
Research Question.
In this thesis, we focus on exploiting equivalences to
test a model checker. In particular we focus on the following research question:
RQ1. How do we exploit equivalences to test a model checker?
A model checker is built by combining several formal verification procedures
(e.g., state space exploration, counter-example generation), which are essential
for the goal of a model checker, which is verifying a model with a formula,
M |= φ. When a bug is found in a model checker, it is often unclear which
specific procedure caused the error due to incorrect implementation.
There-
fore, it is crucial to test all the sub-procedures involved in the model checker.
Implementing a systematic approach ensures that testing is methodical and re-
peatable, using equivalences in a structured manner to guarantee consistent and
reliable results. The answer to RQ1 is outlined in the following section.
Contribution to RQ1.
In order to address the first research question, on
how to test a model checker by exploiting equivalences, we propose the following
framework:
Congruence Property
Let A and B be sets equipped with equivalence re-
lations RA and RB, respectively.
Let P : A →B be a total function that
maps elements of A into elements of B and that is congruent w.r.t the relations
RA, RB, i.e. for all φ, φ′ ∈S:
φ
RA
φ′
⇓
P(φ)
RB
P(φ′)
==PAGE:14==
1.1 How to test a model checker by exploiting equivalences?
7
For instance, A could be the set of LTL formulas, B could be the set of Booleans,
RA could be LTL equivalence, RB could be equality and P could be a satisfia-
bility decision procedure. Further examples of the congruence property will be
discussed in Chapter 3.
Testing using the congruence property
Our main testing framework con-
sists of testing the implemenation of P via the congruence property of P. More
precisely, we assume that the implementation of RA and RB is correct and that
we can generate two RA-equivalent inputs for P. We then test P by checking
whether P(φ) RB P(φ′).
The congruence property refers to the preservation of a relation. For exam-
ple, if two LTL (Linear Temporal Logic) formulas are semantically equivalent,
simplifying them using the same simplification function should produce two
new formulas that are also semantically equivalent. This property ensures that
transformations or optimizations do not alter the fundamental correctness or
behaviour of the systems being analyzed.
This technique doesn’t require an oracle, as each of our tests takes as input
two equivalent elements of a set and produces two equivalent results, which are
then compared against each other. If the results match, our test confirms that
the function under test P preserves the equivalence relation, otherwise, a bug is
found.
To systematically generate tests for exploiting equivalences within a model
checker, and to validate our testing framework, we present four modules, each
representing a critical component of the model checker’s verification process.
The four modules are illustrated in Figure 1.1 from 1 to 4:
• (1) The Simplification Formula Module, which simplifies a temporal logic
formula using specific rules
• (2) The Automaton Translation Module, which translates a temporal logic
formula into an automaton
• (3) The Checking Module, which verifies whether a module is satisfied by
a given property
• (4) The Sat Module, which checks whether a given input is satisfiable or
not
We instantiate the testing framework section 1.1, explained before, for each
module, by adapting the input domain, the relation type and the mapping
==PAGE:15==
8
Introduction
function according to the module’s functionality. We assume that we already
have all the equivalent input cases of the framework (temporal logic formulas
and automata), as it is part of the second research question Section 1.2, how
to generate them. In Table 1.1 we show for each of the modules, which are the
values that instantiate our framework.
A
RA
B
RB
P
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
≡LT L
simplify
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
=LT L
simplify
fLT L
≡LT L
AAut
≡Aut
translate
fLT L
≡LT L
AAut
=Aut
translate
fLT L
≡LT L
AAut
∼=Aut
translate
AAut
≡Aut
AAut
=SAT
checkingspot
MMod
=LT L
fLT L
=SAT
checkingprism
MMod
=CT L
fLT L
=SAT
checkingprism
fLT L
=LT L
fLT L
=SAT
sat
fCT L
=CT L
fCT L
=SAT
sat
Table 1.1: The values to instantiate the framework within the four modules.
The ≡relation denotes semantic equivalence, = indicates syntactic equality and
∼= represents isomorphism.
We define, as explained in the following chapter
Chapter 2, that a relation is defined as a subset of the cartesian product of a
set, hence RA ⊆A × A and RB ⊆B × B. For example, ≡LT L means that the
semantic equivalence is between two LTL formulas.
The table is divided horizontally into four sections, which correspond to the
four modules we proposed: the simplify function is the one implemented by
the simplification module (1), the translate function is implemented by the
automaton translation module (2), the checking function by the checking module
(3) and the sat function by the sat module (4).
For example, referring to the first row of the table, the simplification module
(i) takes as input all couple of equivalent LTL formulas, from the set A and
B containing all the LTL formulas fLT L. The relations RA and RB define two
semantic equivalence relations within the two sets of LTL formulas ≡LT L, and P
is the simplification function that simplifies LTL formulas simplify. Our testing
framework tests the congruence property of the simplify function and assesses
whether it preserves the RB relation. The testing framework is instantiated as
follows:
==PAGE:16==
1.2 How to generate temporal logic formulas for our testing
framework?
9
For all φ, φ′ ∈fLT L :
φ
≡LT L
φ′
⇓
simplify(φ)
≡LT L
simplify(φ′)
Each of the row is instantiated and explained in detail in Chapter 3, where
we also provide the results of our tests. Following this approach, we generate
repeatable tests and offer a structured method to guarantee consistent results.
1.2
How to generate temporal logic formulas for
our testing framework?
In the above-mentioned framework section 1.1 we have two input variables φ
and φ′ which belong to the set S, which is the set of all temporal logic formulas
and automata.
Research Question
To run our testing framework we need input cases which
guarantee the semantic equivalence.
RQ2. How to generate semantically equivalent LTL and CTL
formulas?
Specifically, we need to generate temporal logic formulas and equivalent mu-
tants, using the set of equivalence axioms of the respective grammar.
Note
that we don’t need to investigate an approach to generate automata because we
derive them from the formulas. In this research question, we want to provide
an automatic testing methodology, to systematically generate a large number of
input cases with a wide range of complexity, from simple to complex. Therefore,
according to these requirements, we want to design a robust methodology for
generating temporal logic formulas and equivalent mutants.
Moreover, a scalable approach would generate formulas and mutants which are
adaptable to the user’s requirements, allowing for flexibility in terms of the
length and depth of the formula. In other words, we want to have full control
==PAGE:17==
10
Introduction
of the generation process, so that we can implement diverse tests with diverse
requirements.
The answers to each of the research questions are outlined in the following
section.
Contribution
To address the research question of how to generate inputs for
our framework, we introduce an approach which builds formulas starting from
a set of atomic propositions and the specification of a grammar.
On top of
these formulas, we generate mutants according to a set of equivalence axioms.
We introduce a pipeline for generating LTL and CTL formulas in Chapter 4.
Both two types of temporal logic formulas are built with the same approach,
but different grammar and equivalence axiom definitions. The grammar for the
LTL is specified in Section 2.1.1, and for CTL in Section 2.1.2. The mutants
are generated according to the respective sets of equivalence axioms, listed in
subsection 4.2.1 and subsection 4.2.2.
We utilize the rewriting logic system Maude [40] to generate formulas and their
mutants by specifying the atomic propositions, grammar, and set of equivalence
axioms within the system. Maude operates based on matching rules, incremen-
tally constructing formulas and mutants. The tool includes built-in functions,
such as the search() function, which enables the exploration of all possible
combinations within a specified system from a given initial state.
For formula generation, the search function allows the specification of a depth
parameter, which defines the maximum number of nested logical operators in a
formula, representing its syntactic complexity. Similarly, for mutant generation,
the search function uses the depth parameter to indicate the maximum number
of equivalence axioms that can be applied to a single formula.
Our approach systematically generates formulas and equivalent mutants with-
out incorporating any random factors.
The generation process is automatic
and repeatable, ensuring that the same inputs and conditions will consistently
produce identical results. This consistency guarantees reliable and uniform out-
comes across different runs, provided the conditions remain the same.
Due to the need to explore all state spaces of the logical operators, the generation
process can be time-consuming. Therefore, we have set the depth of the formulas
to 4, generating all possible formulas with up to 4 nested logical operators.
For instance, let’s consider a trivial formula and mutant generation. We start
with the set of atomic propositions {a} and the LTL grammar (see Section 2.1.1).
==PAGE:18==
1.3 Related work
11
Let’s consider the set of equivalence axioms as:
¬Xφ ≡X¬φ
Fφ ≡φ ∨XFφ
The formula generation function generates a list of formulas up to a certain
depth. We pick two random formulas:
φ1 = ¬XFa
φ2 = GFXa
The mutant generation approach matches axioms to formulas and generates one
mutant. In this case, the first equivalence axiom matches φ1, hence the mutant
generated from φ1 is:
φ′
1 = X¬Fa
The second equivalence axiom matches φ2, resulting in the mutant:
φ′
2 = G(Xa ∨XFXa)
Another example of the generation of an LTL formula is illustrated in Figure 4.3.
To ensure precise error localization, we decided to apply only one equivalence
axiom per formula when creating mutants. This approach allows us to identify
both the error and the specific axiom that caused the model-checking function-
ality to fail. If we applied a chain of equivalence axioms to construct equivalent
mutants, it would be challenging to trace back to the root cause of any error.
1.3
Related work
The focus of this project is to provide a methodology for testing a newly devel-
oped model checker by exploiting equivalences, aiming to assess the correctness
of four sub-procedures of a model checker, with the possibility of finding bugs or
errors. One of these sub-procedures is the satisfiability check module, commonly
used by model checkers. Previous work in model checking, as detailed by [8], in-
troduces a robust approach called Janus for finding incompleteness bugs in SMT
solvers. This novel approach mutates the SMT formula with local weakening
and strengthening rules that preserve the formula’s satisfiability. The resulting
==PAGE:19==
12
Introduction
formulas serve as test cases to identify incompleteness bugs, which occur when
the SMT solver unexpectedly returns unknown.
In our work, we use a similar approach by mutating existing formulas with
equivalence axioms and using these mutants as test cases in our testing frame-
work. The paper emphasizes verifying that transformations and optimizations
do not alter the fundamental correctness of the systems being analyzed, which
is a concept that we follow in our thesis.
There are various significant previous works by researchers assessing the correct-
ness of SAT solvers, SMT solvers, and other satisfiability tools. For this reason,
in this thesis, we extend our approach beyond this domain to explore broader
areas such as formula simplification, LTL-to-automata translation, and model-
checking algorithms. Furthermore, our approach is applicable beyond model
checking to any tools that perform transformations or optimizations, ensuring
they preserve the intended semantics and correctness properties.
There exist previous works that leverage equivalence checking tests (widely)
used in model checker testing approaches, as they provide an effective form
of verification [27] and can systematically reduce the testing effort while still
achieving significant coverage [17]. For instance, Khun et al. [27] demonstrate
the use of equivalence class value match tests to detect certain classes of errors
without relying on conventional test oracles. This paper is particularly inter-
esting as it provides a new approach which exploits equivalences to test tools
without an oracle, which is the same concept that we use in the thesis. The
paper exploits the equivalence property of equivalence classes by allowing any
value from a class to be substituted for another value from the same class, and
then checking if the results match the expected outcomes. If the results vary
where they should not, then equivalence classes have not been defined correctly,
and must be fixed before developing unit tests, or a coding error may have been
discovered. Our approach, similar to the one described in the referenced paper,
involves generating a pair of equivalent inputs for the testing framework and
comparing their outputs. Any inconsistencies in the results are reported as po-
tential errors. This method leverages the principle of equivalence to ensure the
reliability and correctness of the model checker, as described in the paper.
There exist few methods for testing without the presence of an oracle. These
methods include metamorphic tests, partial oracles, and assertions in the code.
The first approach transforms test data and checks for conformance to these
relations. For example, cos(x) = cos(x+180) and the output of a cosine function
for x would be compared with the output for x+180 to detect errors. The second
approach relies on specifications relating test inputs to outputs, and the last
ensures properties are maintained during execution. While these methods are
valid when there is no oracle, they are not widely investigated topics and focus
==PAGE:20==
1.3 Related work
13
on specific domains, not covering the domain of semantic equivalences. This is
where our approach comes in with a different solution.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Preliminaries
In this chapter, we introduce basic concepts that are needed in order to under-
stand the thesis. We explain what is temporal logics, the types of temporal logic
that we use in the thesis, what is an automaton and the types of automaton,
basic concepts of model checking, what are relations between two elements and
the types of relations.
2.1
Temporal Logic
Model checkers takes as inputs a system and its specifications. These specifi-
cations, expressed in temporal logic, are formal statements that describe the
desired properties or behaviour of the system [9].
To understand how these
specifications are built, we need to understand what is temporal logic and its
different types. Temporal logic is a system of rules and symbolism, which rea-
sons about time and temporal ordering of events [11]. It is widely used in the
field of Computer Science, particularly in Formal Verification and Model Check-
ing, which allows for verifying the correctness of hardware and software systems
concerning their temporal behaviours. There exist different types of temporal
logic, for example, LTL, CTL, PCTL, CTL* etc.
In this project, we mainly use LTL and CTL for conducting tests. For every
temporal logic formula, it is crucial to distinguish between syntax and semantic
[6] in order to understand the difference between equivalence and equal proper-
ties. In this project, we consider the equivalence property between two formulas
as the semantic equivalence, and the equality property as the syntactical equiv-
alence, or syntactic equality.
==PAGE:22==
2.1 Temporal Logic
15
2.1.1
Linear Temporal Logic
Linear temporal logic is an extension of propositional logic, that introduces
temporal connectivities which allows for reasoning about the order of events
over time. LTL operates over linear sequences of states, called paths, which
represent possible executions of a system. Each path is an infinite sequence
where each state follows the previous one in a single line, without branching.
Syntax
Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) is a type of temporal logic, where time is consid-
ered a linear sequence of states. Given a set of atomic propositions, the syntax
of an LTL formula is composed of atomic propositions, boolean connectivities
and temporal operators (also called modalities). Formulas are formed according
to the following grammar:
φ ::= p
Atomic proposition
| ¬φ
Negation
| φ1 ∨φ2
Disjunction
| φ1 ∧φ2
Conjunction
| Xφ
Successor
| Fφ
Eventually
| Gφ
Always
| [φ1Uφ2]
Until
The set of atomic propositions is not defined, because it follows the context
in which the formula is used.
We will define it later when we explain how
we generate the formulas and mutants in Chapter 4.
The unary operators
are ¬φ, Fφ, Xφ, Gφ and the binary operators are φ1 ∧φ2, φ1Uφ2. Using the
Boolean connectives ∧and ¬, the full power of propositional logic is obtained.
For example, →, ↔, ⊕are derived as follows:
φ1 →φ2
def
≡
¬φ1 ∨φ2
φ1 ↔φ2
≡
(φ1 →φ2) ∧(φ2 →φ1)
φ1 ⊕φ2
≡
(φ1 ∧¬φ2) ∨(φ2 ∧¬φ1)
...
==PAGE:23==
16
Preliminaries
Semantic
Over words: An ω-word σ ⊆(2AP )ω is an infinite sequence of symbols over the
alphabet 2AP , which is the power set of AP (which includes the empty set), and
AP is the set of all atomic propositions [6] [38]. Here, for σ = ω1ω2ω3ω4 . . . ⊆
(2AP )ω and σ[j . . .] = ωjωj+1ωj+2ωj+3 . . . is the suffix of σ starting in the
(j+1)st symbol ωj. LTL formulas are interpreted on a ω-words over the alphabet
2AP , and the satisfaction relation σ |= φ, where φ is an LTL formula over AP,
is described as follow:
σ |= true
σ |= p
iff
p ∈ω0
(i.e., σ |= p)
σ |= φ1 ∧φ2
iff
σ |= φ1 and σ |= φ2
σ |= φ1 ∨φ2
iff
σ |= φ1 or σ |= φ2
σ |= ¬φ
iff
σ ̸|= φ
σ |= Xφ
iff
σ[1 . . .] = ω1ω2ω3 . . . |= φ
σ |= Fφ
iff
∃j ≥0. σ[j . . .] |= φ
σ |= Gφ
iff
∀j ≥0. σ[j . . .] |= φ
σ |= φ1Uφ2
iff
∃j ≥0. σ[j . . .] |= φ2 and σ[i . . .] |= φ1, for all 0 ≤i < j
A state s of a transition system TS = (S, Act, →, I, AP, L) satisfies a formula φ
if all executions from s satisfy the formula. Therefore, we say that a transition
system TS satisfies a formula φ if all its initial states satisfy the formula φ:
TS |= φ
iff
∀s ∈I.s |= φ
Definitions
Two LTL formulas are equivalent if for every possible infinite sequence of states
(trace), both the two formulas yield the same truth value at every position
within the sequence.
Definition 2.1.1. (LTL equivalence) LTL formulae φ and ϕ are equivalent,
denoted as φ ≡ϕ, if Words(φ) = Words(ϕ).
Two LTL formulas are syntactically equal if the sequence of symbols between
two formulas is the same.
Definition 2.1.2. (LTL equality) LTL formulae φ and ϕ are equal, denoted
as φ = ϕ if and only if φ and ϕ are composed of precisely the same symbols in
precisely the same order.
==PAGE:24==
2.1 Temporal Logic
17
In this project, we will use these concepts very often.
2.1.2
Computation Tree Logic
Computation Tree Logic is an extension of propositional logic. While LTL oper-
ates over linear sequences of states, or paths, representing possible executions of
a system, CTL is a branching-time temporal logic that allows expressing prop-
erties over tree-like structures of computation paths.
We will give examples
below.
Syntax
CTL has a two-stage syntax where formulas are classified into state and path
formulas, the first evaluated at a single state and expressing assertions over the
atomic propositions in the states, and their branching structure through path
quantifiers, and the last expressing temporal properties of paths. The syntax of
CTL combines state formulas and path formulas using temporal operators and
branching structures, with the following grammar:
State Formulas:
ϕ ::= p
Atomic Prop.
| ¬ϕ
Negation
| ϕ1 ∨ϕ2
Disjunction
| ϕ1 ∧ϕ2
Conjunction
| ∃φ
For All
| ∀φ
Exists
Path Quantifiers:
φ ::= p
Atomic Prop.
| Xϕ
Successor
| Gϕ
Always
| Fϕ
Eventually
| [ϕ1Uϕ2]
Until
Where φ is a path formula, and ϕ is a state formula.
CTL uses these two
concepts:
Path quantifiers allow us to express properties that hold along different paths
(branches):
==PAGE:25==
18
Preliminaries
• ∀: For all paths starting from the current state.
• ∃: There exists at least one path starting from the current state.
Linear-time operators - the same for LTL:
• X: Next (the property holds in the next state).
• F: Future (the property holds at some future state, eventually).
• G: Globally (the property holds in all future states, always).
• U: Until (the first property holds until the second property becomes true).
As described by the grammar, every linear temporal operator has to be preceded
by a path quantifier. For example, a valid CTL would be:
φ = ∃X(p) −There exists a path such that in the next state, p holds.
where the linear temporal operator X (next) is preceded by the path quantifier
∃(exists).
Semantics
We introduce some notions first. For a state s we define the set of all paths
starting from s, as the set of all maximal executions starting from s:
Paths(s) = {s0, s1, s2, . . . | s0 = s and si →si+1}
For a path π = s0, s1, s2, . . . we define the ith state by:
π[i] = si
and the prefix starting at the ith state:
π[i . . .] = si, si+1, . . .
==PAGE:26==
2.1 Temporal Logic
19
The satisfaction relation for state formulas is described as:
s |= p
iff
p ∈L(s)
s |= ¬ϕ
iff
not s |= ϕ
s |= ϕ1 ∧ϕ2
iff
(s |= ϕ1) and (s |= ϕ2)
s |= ϕ1 ∨ϕ2
iff
(s |= ϕ1) or (s |= ϕ2)
s |= ∃φ
iff
π |= φ for some π ∈Paths(s)
s |= ∀φ
iff
π |= φ for all π ∈Paths(s)
Where L(s) is the labelling of s.
The satisfaction relation for path formulas is defined as:
π |= Xϕ
iff
π[1] |= ϕ
π |= Fφ
iff
∃i ∈N.π[i] |= φ
π |= Gφ
iff
∀i ∈N.π[i] |= φ
π |=CT L φ1Uφ2
iff
∃i ∈N.(π[i] |=CT L φ2 ∧∀0 ≤j < i.π[j] |=CT L φ1)
where for path π = s0s1s2 . . . and integer i ≥0, π[i] denotes the (i + 1)th state
of pi, i.e., π[i] = si.
CTL formulae are interpreted over the states and paths of a transition system
TS. For example, the formula ∀φ is valid in state s if and only if all paths
starting in s satisfy φ. And the formula ∃φ is valid in state s if and only if there
exists some path starting in s that satisfies φ.
As for LTL, the transition system TS satisfies CTL formula φ if and only if φ
holds in all initial states of TS:
TS |= φ
iff
∀s ∈I.s |= φ
Definitions
First, we introduce the notion of satisfaction set, as the set of states that satisfy
the formula:
sat(φ) = {s | s |= φ}
==PAGE:27==
20
Preliminaries
which we use to define the equivalence relation of two CTL formulas.
Definition 2.1.3. (CTL equivalence) CTL formulae φ and ϕ are equivalent,
denoted as φ ≡ϕ, if sat(φ) = sat(ϕ) for all transition systems TS over the set
of atomic propositions AP. Therefore, φ ≡ϕ if and only if for any transition
system TS we have that TS |= φ iff TS |= ϕ.
Two CTL formulas are syntactically equal if the sequence of symbols between
two formulas is the same.
Definition 2.1.4. (CTL equality) LTL formulae φ and ϕ are equal, denoted
as φ = ϕ if and only if φ and ϕ are composed of precisely the same symbols in
precisely the same order.
In this project, we will use these concepts very often.
2.2
Automata
In this project, we focus on typical instances of relations, as depicted in Ta-
ble 1.1. We explain more deeply what is a relation and its properties.
There exist several types of automata, according to the logic used.
In this
thesis we focus on LTL, therefore we need an automata-theoretic version of the
formula, which is commonly expressed with the Büchi automaton.
Finite automaton and Büchi automaton have the same syntax, but different
semantics. The former accepts a word w if and only if there is a computation
for w in A that ends in a final state (operates on finite strings). The latter
accepts a word w if and only if there is a computation¹ for w in A that visits
final states infinitely often (operates on inifite strings).
Definition of Büchi Automaon
In the context of automata theory, a Büchi
automaton is formally defined as a quintuple:
A1 = (Q1, Σ1, δ1, q1, F1)
where:
• Q1: A finite, non-empty set of states.
==PAGE:28==
2.2 Automata
21
• Σ1: A finite, non-empty set of input alphabets.
• δ1: Q1 × Σ1 →Q1 is a function, called the transition function of A1.
• q1: An element of Q1, called the initial state of A1.
• F1: A set of accepting states, F1 ⊆Q1.
and the language accepted by this automaton is {L(A1) = σ | there is a run ρ
over σ} such that inf(ρ) ∩F ̸= ∅, where inf(ρ) is the set of states of Q which
is visited infinitely often.
A language L ⊆Σω is said to be ω-regular if it is accepted by some Büchi
automaton [28]. For example, the automaton
accepts all infinite words over {a, b}. Specifically, every a is followed at any time
by a b.
A deterministic Büchi automaton has the uniqueness property of transitions, as
for each state and input symbol, there is exactly one transition to another state,
while in a nondeterministic case, the automaton can choose between multiple
transitions, allowing it to "guess" a path that leads to acceptance. The deter-
ministic automaton is simpler but less expressive than the nondeterministic one
because it cannot recognize all w-regular languages, while the nondeterministic
one is more complex but more expressive since it can recognize all w-regular
languages.
Therefore, in a non-deterministic Büchi automaton, the transition function δ is
replaced with a transition relation △that returns a set of states, and the single
initial state q1 is replaced by a set I1 of initial states. Generally, the term Büchi
automaton without qualifier refers to non-deterministic Büchi automata
What is a Relation
A relation R on a set of LTL formulas Φ is a subset of
the Cartesian product Φ × Φ. This means:
R ⊆Φ × Φ
==PAGE:29==
22
Preliminaries
The Cartesian product Φ × Φ consists of all ordered pairs (φ, ψ) where φ ∈Φ
and ψ ∈Φ. Mathematically:
Φ × Φ = {(φ, ψ) | φ ∈Φ and ψ ∈Φ}
For example, consider a set of atomic propositions AP = {p, q, r} and a set of
LTL formulas Φ constructed from AP:
Φ = {p, q, r, ¬p, p ∧q, Xp, Fq, Gr, pUq}
The Cartesian product Φ × Φ would include all possible ordered pairs of these
formulas. For example:
Φ × Φ = {(p, p), (p, q), (p, r), (¬p, Xp), (Fq, Gr), (pUq, p ∧q), . . .}
A relation R on Φ could be:
R = {(p, Xp), (q, Fq), (r, Gr)}
RA is an equivalent relation when the LTL formulas of the ordered pairs are
equivalent to each other, according to definition 2.1.1
What is an equivalent relation? An equivalence relation on a set X is a subset
of X ×X, i.e., a collection R of ordered pairs of elements of X, satisfying certain
properties. Write " x R y " to mean (x, y) is an element of R, and we say " x is
related to y ", then the properties are
1. Reflexive: a R a for all a ∈X,
2. Symmetric: a R b =⇒b R a for all a, b ∈X,
3. Transitive: a R b and b R c imply a R c for all a, b, c ∈X,
where these three properties are completely independent, other notations are
often used to indicate a relation, e.g., a ≡b [2].
Equivalent Automata
Two automata are said to be equivalent if they accept
the same language. Specifically, if A1 and A2 are two automata, then A1 is
equivalent to A2 if L(A1) = L(A2) [1]
==PAGE:30==
2.2 Automata
23
For example, let’s consider two state-based Büchi automata Figure 2.1a and
Figure 2.1b. The first automaton has two states, while the second has three
states. Consequently, the number of transitions differs between them. However,
both automata accept inputs that eventually contain a at least once, after which
any sequence of inputs is accepted. Despite their structural differences, both au-
tomata recognize the same language. This can be proven through an emptiness
check: verifying that the intersection between the negation of the language of
the first automaton and the language of the second automaton is empty, hence
¬L(a) ∩L(b) = ∅, and vice versa, checking that the intersection between the
negation of the language of the second automaton and the language of the first
automaton is empty, hence hence ¬L(b) ∩L(a) = ∅
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: Equivalent automata for F(a).
Isomorphic Automata
Two automatons A1 = (Q1, I1, δ1) and A2 = (Q2, I2, δ2)
are said to be isomorphic if there exists an ordered pair (f1, f2) of one-to-one
functions (also called bijective function) such that f1 maps Q1 onto Q2, f1 maps
I1 onto I2, f1(δ1(q, u)) = δ2(f1(q), f2(u)), for all q in Q1 and u in I1, f1 maps
q1 into q2, and f1 maps F1 into F2. Thus, two automatons are isomorphic if one
can be obtained from the other by renaming its states and inputs. The ordered
pair (f1, f2) is called an isomorphism of A1 onto A2 [25].
For example, let’s consider two state-based Büchi automata Figure 2.2a and
Figure 2.2b. The labelling of the states is different. However, there is a one-to-
one mapping between their states and transitions, as both automata have the
same structure. Therefore the two automata are isomorphic.
==PAGE:31==
24
Preliminaries
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: Isomorphic automata for F(a).
Equal Automata
Two automata A1 and A2 are equal (or structurally equal)
if they are identical in every aspect:
Q1 = Q2
δ1 = δ2
q1 = q2
F1 = F2
Equal automata means that both automata have the exact same set of states, the
same transition function, the same initial state, the same set of accepting states,
and the same labelling for states and transitions. This is a stricter condition
than language equivalence, where the focus is on whether the automata accept
the same language.
2.3
Basic Concept of Model Checking
A model checker typically takes as input a state machine-based model, or au-
tomaton, of a system and a temporal logic property.
It then systematically
traverses the model’s state space to verify whether the property holds true in
all states. This means that the model checker visits all the reachable states
of the automaton, and verifies for each of these states whether the temporal
logic property is satisfied. If a state fails to satisfy the property, the model
checker generates a trace, known as a counter-example. This trace consists of
a sequence of states, starting from the initial state and leading to the state
where the property is violated [20]. The counter-example vividly illustrates the
property violation by the automaton. This process of model checking using au-
tomata theory is illustrated in Figure 2.3. First, it verifies whether a high-level
model M satisfied a linear temporal logic formula φ. The process begins with
generating a state graph from the high-level model, which is then converted into
a state graph automaton AM representing all possible behaviours of the model.
==PAGE:32==
2.3 Basic Concept of Model Checking
25
Concurrently, the LTL formula φ is translated into an automaton for its nega-
tion, resulting in A¬φ. The synchronous product of AM and A¬φ is computed
and produces a product automaton that represents behaviour possible in the
model that violates the property. An emptiness check is then performed on the
language of the product automaton to determine if there are any such violating
behaviours. If the language is empty, the model M satisfies the property φ. If
not, a counter-example is generated. [3] [18] where the property is expressed
with an LTL formula, then the model checker transforms the negation of this
formula into an automaton, and it builds the product of that automaton with
the automaton of the model and checks this product for emptiness [3] [18].
Figure 2.3: The automata-theoretic approach to LTL model checking
Formally, the (abstract) model of the system in question is defined as M, and
the logical formulas as ϕ. What the model checkers do, is to verify whether M
satisfies ϕ, abbreviated M |= ϕ [31].
In the context of linear temporal logic, model checking is a state-space-based
method which checks whether all infinite execution sequences that can be ex-
tracted from the state-space graph (model) satisfy the temporal logic formula.
Equivalently, it checks whether none of these sequences falsifies the formula [19].
Unlike LTL model checking, described above, CTL model checking typically
involves recursively evaluating the CTL formula over the state graph.
The
model checker evaluates sub-formulas of the CTL formula starting from the
innermost sub-formulas and working outward, using a fixpoint calculation to
determine the set of states satisfying each sub-formula.
==PAGE:33==
26
Preliminaries
2.4
SAT Problem
SAT, or Satisfiability, is a fundamental concept in computer science and mathe-
matical logic, which is applied in various fields, such as AI, optimization, auto-
mated theorem proving etc. It refers to the problem of determining whether
there exists an assignment of truth values to variables that makes a given
Boolean formula true. For example, consider the CNF (Conjunction Normal
Form) Boolean formula (x1 ∨¬x2) ∧(¬x1 ∨x3). The task is to determine if
there exists an assignment to x1, x2, and x3 that makes the formula true. One
satisfying assignment is x1 = true, x2 = false, x3 = true.
An SAT Problem determines whether there is an assignment of truth values
(true or false) to the variables of a given boolean formula, such that the entire
formula evaluates to true. The SAT problem was the first problem proven to
be NP-complete, according to Cook’s Theorem, meaning it is at least as hard
as any problem in NP (nondeterministic polynomial time), and any problem in
NP can be reduced in polynomial time by a deterministic Turing machine to
the Boolean satisfiability problem [10]
An SAT Solver is an algorithm designed to solve SAT problems efficiently. Mod-
ern SAT solvers use a variety of techniques, including backtracking, conflict-
driven clause learning (CDCL), and heuristics. In the thesis, we test various
SAT solvers, such as Black-SAT, CTL-SAT, and the Spot tool’s SAT function.
We focus on two types of temporal logic, LTL and CTL. LTL and CTL formulas
are satisfiable or unsatisfiable based on the presence of a model or not. We
consider the definitions below:
LTL and CTL satisfiability
An LTL formula φ is satisfiable, denoted as
SAT(φ) if the model of the formula Mod(φ) is non-empty.
In other words, we are looking for a model, which is an infinite sequence of
states (or words) σ such that σ |= φ, meaning Mod(φ) ̸= ∅. For example, the
LTL formula considers the LTL formula φ = GFp, which means eventually p
will be true infinitely often. This formula is satisfiable if there exists an infinite
sequence where p is true at infinitely many points.
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3
Modularization Testing
Approaches
In this chapter, we describe the implementation of the four modules introduced
in Chapter 1. We then test each module by applying our testing framework
section 1.1 to verify whether the congruence property of the relations under test
is maintained. The four modules are explained as follows:
(1) Formula Simplification Module: It takes two semantically equivalent
LTL formulas, φ and φ′, as inputs and returns the two simplified for-
mulas. We test this module by verifying that the simplification process
preserves the semantic equivalence property, ensuring that the two simpli-
fied formulas remain semantically equivalent. Additionally, outside of our
framework, we explore the equality relation and use the tests generated
based on this relation to create mutants resistant to simplification, which
serve as input to the next module.
(2) Automaton Translation Module:
The framework for this module
takes two semantically equivalent LTL formulas as input and translates
them into two state-based Büchi automata. We test whether the semantic
equivalence relation is preserved during the translation process, ensuring
that the two resulting Büchi automata remain semantically equivalent.
Additionally, we experiment with two other relations—equality and iso-
morphism—outside of the framework. The results of the isomorphism test
serve as input to the checking module. This module is implemented using
two different configurations: the first tests a single translator, and the
second compares the results of two different translators.
(3) SAT Module: It takes as input two semantically equivalent LTL or CTL
==PAGE:35==
28
Modularization Testing Approaches
formulas and checks whether the satisfiability functions preserve the sat-
isfiability equivalence relation.
(4) Checking Module: For a pair of automata translated by two different
translators, we run the model checking algorithm to test whether it pre-
serves the satisfiability equality relation of the automata against the same
model.
Specifically, we first run the model checker algorithm with the
automata translated by Spot, then with the automata translated by Spin,
and compare the verification results for congruence. Additionally, we con-
duct tests using benchmark models rather than a constant model created
by us.
Implementation and tools used
In Table 3.1 we present the temporal logics
and tools utilized for testing each module. For instance, the formula simplifica-
tion module, detailed in the first row of the table, employs LTL as its temporal
logic. In this case, our testing framework inputs LTL formulas, using Spot as the
tool under test. Specifically, we assess Spot’s built-in LTL formula simplification
function to evaluate the congruency property according to our framework.
We test the implementation of Spot across all modules: in module (1) the Spot’s
simplification function, in module (2) the Spot’s LTL-to-Automaton translation
function, in module (3) the Spot’s LTL satisfiability function, and in module
(4) the Spot’s model checking algorithm. Spot is a high-performance and ro-
bust framework tailored for handling and manipulating LTL formulas. It can
be considered an industrial quality tool, in comparison to other tools, such as
LTL2AUT, TMP, Wring, LTL2Buchi, Modella, LTL2BA, LTL→NBA [26] to
manipulate temporal logic formulas. We can consider the Spot model checker
tool as a benchmark for our implementation because it provides reliable results
and allows us to assess the correctness of our tests, without the expectation
of encountering any bugs. Additionally, for modules (2) and (3), we use the
Spin tool to compare results from different translators (i.e. Spin and Spot) and
model checker algorithms (i.e. Spin and Spot). For module (3), we test Black
and CTL-SAT tools for LTL and CTL satisfiability, and for module (4), we test
the Prism model checker for both the LTL and CTL model checking algorithm,
and Spot vs Spin model checking algorithm for LTL.
For each of these modules and tools, we instantiate a testing framework, which
we explain in detail in the following sections. We assume we already have all
the semantic equivalent formulas, as we will describe their generation process in
Chapter 4.
==PAGE:36==
29
Module
Temporal Logic
Tool
Formula Simplification
(1)
LTL
Spot [14]
Automaton Translation (2)
LTL
Spot [14]
Spin [22] vs Spot [14]
Sat (3)
LTL
Spot [14]
Black [41]
CTL
CTL-SAT [37]
Checking (4)
LTL
Prism [36]
Spot [14] vs Spin [22]
CTL
Prism [36]
Table 3.1: Type of logic and tools used for each module.
Input cases for testing
To test the frameworks, we generate semantically
equivalent but syntactically different mutants, and the quantity of formulas and
mutants is described in Table 3.2. We limit formulas to a maximum depth of
four because deeper formulas become too complex, causing timeouts with the
tool we use for the assessment of the equivalences. For example, deeper formulas
and their mutations would lead to errors like Error running command:./ctl-sat:
The operation timed out. We prefer keeping the formulas short and ensuring
the correct equivalence relation between formulas and mutants, rather than
generating large formulas without checking whether the formulas and mutants
are equivalent. Moreover, research [24] indicates that systematic testing within
a small scope is more effective than generating fewer and larger test inputs.
We introduce the formula generation process at a high level to explain why
we use a specific number of inputs for testing our framework. However, the
formula generation process is covered in more detail in Chapter 4. In the formula
generation process, we generate all possible formulas within a specified grammar,
as described in Section 2.1.1 and Section 2.1.2, up to depth 4. The depth is
a parameter input by the user, and in the case of depth = 4 the formula is
constructed by nesting the operator’s grammar four times.
For example, if
depth = 2, and the atomic proposition p, we nest two times, first iteration we
select ¬, hence φ = ¬p and second iteration select X, and we obtain φ = ¬Xp.
The mutants are constructed following this approach: there is a list of equiv-
alence axioms. When a formula matches one of these axioms, it generates an
==PAGE:37==
30
Modularization Testing Approaches
equivalent mutant.
Specifically, one formula can generate multiple mutants,
according to how many axioms are matched, but one mutant derives from the
application of one single axiom. This approach allows us to identify which spe-
cific axiom led to the detection of a bug if found, enabling precise backtracking.
If we were to apply a chain of axioms to a single formula, it would be challenging
to determine which axiom was responsible for the bug. For example, if we have
this formula φ := ¬G¬(p), where p is an atomic proposition, and among all the
equivalence axioms that we are using in the thesis, there are three that match
the formula φ:
Duality Law 3(left-right):
¬G(M)
≡axiom
F¬(M)
Duality Law 2(right-left):
¬F(M)
≡axiom
G¬(M)
Idempotency Law 2(right-left):
GG(M)
≡axiom
G(M)
where M is a variable that substitutes some element of the formula, and left-right
means match the left formula of the axiom and write it into the right formula.
Then we can apply the axioms to the formula and obtain three mutants of the
original formula:
• Duality Law 3
¬G(¬p)[M = ¬p]
Duality Law 3
−−−−−−−−−→F¬(M) = F¬¬(p) := φ1.
• Duality Law 2
¬G¬(p)[M = p]
Duality Law 2
−−−−−−−−−→
¬¬F(M) = ¬¬F(p) := φ2
• Idempotency Law 2
¬G¬(p)[M = ¬p]
Idempotency Law 2
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
¬GG(M) = ¬GG¬(p) := φ3
which are semantically equivalent and syntactically different from the original
formula. Therefore from one formula we obtained 3 mutants, and we consider
we obtained 3 pairs of formula-mutant, which then are:
First pair:
(φ, φ1)
hence
−−−→
(¬G¬(p) , F¬¬(p))
Second pair:
(φ, φ2)
hence
−−−→
(¬G¬(p) , ¬¬F(p))
Third pair:
(φ, φ3)
hence
−−−→
(¬G¬(p) , ¬GG¬(p))
If a formula has 5 mutants, it means that 5 axioms matches the formula.
==PAGE:38==
3.1 Formula Simplification Module
31
Therefore, Table 3.2 shows the overall number of formulas and the overall num-
ber of mutants generated by the formulas. Then we can derive each pair of
formulas and mutant.
Type of Logic
Number of
Formulas1
Number of
Mutants2
Number of
Pairs3
LTL
5,319
15,714
83,582,766
CTL
21,174
86,544
1,832,482,656
Table 3.2: Input Specifications for LTL and CTL
We run the tests on a MacBook Pro 16-inch (2019), with 6-core Intel Core i7
processor, Base clock speed of 2.6 GHz, Turbo Boost up to 4.5 GHz, 16 GB
RAM and Darwin Kernel Version 23.5.0.
All the code for this thesis is documented in a GitHub repository [7]. You can
access, test, and reproduce the experiments to achieve the same results. The
repository includes comprehensive instructions and scripts to ensure repeatabil-
ity and validation of the findings.
3.1
Formula Simplification Module
A typical model checker takes a model and a formula as input. One of the initial
steps it performs is processing and minimizing the formula for performance op-
timization. The placement of the simplification module within a model checker
is shown in Figure 3.1. This module accepts two semantically equivalent LTL
formulas, simplifies them, and returns two simplified LTL formulas.
We ex-
amine whether this simplification function preserves the congruence property
with respect to semantic equivalence. Specifically, we test whether the simplify
function produces two semantically equivalent formulas.
3.1.1
Test Spot Simplification
We employ Spot [14] as an LTL formula manipulating tool and we use its built-
in simplification function, which simplifies a formula using specified rules. These
rules are predefined by the tool, such as removing useless terms and operators,
moving the X operators to the front of the formula, and moving the F operators
to the front of the formula. Additionally, the Spot tool allows for a wider range
==PAGE:39==
32
Modularization Testing Approaches
Figure 3.1: Simplification module, highlighted in yellow, within the context of
a typical model checker.
of simplification options, specifically 9 options, with 29 = 512 ways of evaluating
each formula. The Spot tool allows for controlling which simplification options to
enable and which to disable. We test the simplification function by activating
all of the simplification options, as it is the default setting of Spot, and we
want to check whether Spot achieves a unique irreducible form of the formulas.
For our tests of this module, we activate the unabbreviate function [16], in
order to obtain simplification functions with the logical operators X, F, G, U, &, |
and exclude the logical operators of M, W, Xor, ↔, →. The exclusion of these
operators does not affect our findings, as for the sake of verification we tried to
test the formulas with these operators included. The testing framework we use
for the simplification module is the following.
Congruency Property of Simplification Module
Let A and B be the
sets of LTL formulas, equipped with equivalence relations RA ⊂{≡LT L}, the
semantic equivalent of two LTL formulas, and the relation and RB ⊂{≡LT L
, =LT L}, the semantic equivalent and syntactic equality over two LTL formulas.
Let P be the Spot’s simplification function simplify that maps elements of A
into elements of B, and that is congruent w.r.t the relations RA and RB, i.e. for
all LTL formula φ, φ′ ∈S
==PAGE:40==
3.1 Formula Simplification Module
33
φ
RA
φ′
⇓
simplify(φ)
RB
simplify(φ′)
The spot simplification function takes a pair of formulas and mutants, which
are related to each other by the semantic equivalence relation, and returns two
simplified formulas. The sets and relations are described in Table 3.3.
A
RA
B
RB
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
=LT L
Table 3.3: The relations used in the testing framework for the simplification
module.
We explain the table row by row as follows:
Checking Simplification Preserves Semantic Equivalence
In the first
line of Table 3.3, we are checking the implementation of the simplify function
via the congruence property of the function w.r.t the semantic equivalence re-
lation. Specifically, given that RA and RB are correct, we test whether each
result of simplify(φ) is semantically equivalent with simplify(φ′), given that
φ is semantically equivalent with φ′. The testing framework is then instantiated
as follows:
For all φ, φ′ ∈fLT L:
φ
≡LT L
φ′
⇓
simplify(φ)
≡LT L
simplify(φ′)
For example, consider the pairs of LTL formula φ and mutant φ′ as:
• φ := F(a) & GF(a) which means: a must eventually be true and it must
always be the case that a will eventually be true in the future.
==PAGE:41==
34
Modularization Testing Approaches
• φ′ := F(a) & FGF(a) which means: a must eventually be true, and there
must be a future moment from which point a will always eventually be
true.
The simplify function returns two simplified forms:
• simplify(φ) := GF(a)
• simplify(φ′) := GF(a)
Both simplified formula and mutant mean that it is always the case that even-
tually a will be true, demonstrating the semantic equivalence of the simplified
formulas.
We explain how these formulas are implemented in our testing framework as
follows:
φ := F(a) & GF(a)
≡LT L
φ′ := F(a) & FGF(a)
⇓
simplify(F(a) & GF(a))
≡LT L
simplify(F(a) & FGF(a))
⇓
GF(a)
≡LT L
GF(a)
We run our testing framework on 5,319 LTL formulas and 15,714 semantically
equivalent but syntactically different mutants, resulting in a total of 83,582,766
pairs of formulas and mutants that we test. This test is conducted across several
versions of Spot [14]: 2.9.8, 2.10.1, 2.10.2, 2.10.4, 2.10.6, 2.11.1, and 2.12.
As expected, we found that the simplify function preserves the semantic equiv-
alence relation for each pair of formulas and mutants, over each version of Spot.
This means that for all 107,989,386 pairs, for each version of Spot, the simplify
function preserves the semantically equivalent relation of the simplified mutants.
This is an expected result because Spot is a solid library which is well-tested
and focused on the manipulation of LTL formulas.
Checking Simplification Preserves Syntactic Equality
In the second
line of Table 3.3, we explore the equality relation that goes beyond the scope of
our thesis, but that is useful for our testing purposes. We repeat the experiment
we did above in Section 3.1.1, but we test for the congruence property w.r.t the
syntactic equality relation. Specifically, we test whether given a ≡LT L-pair of
==PAGE:42==
3.1 Formula Simplification Module
35
formula and mutant, the congruency property of the simplify function is pre-
served w.r.t to =LT L-equality relation. Suppose the spot simplification function
does not guarantee a unique irreducible form of the equivalent formulas.
In
that case, it may have an impact on subsequent automata construction, po-
tentially leading to different computations and outcomes. For instance, if Spot
guarantees a unique irreducible form, two syntactically different and semanti-
cally equivalent formulas are always simplified to the same syntactically equal
form. However, if Spot doesn’t guarantee the unique irreducible form, the two
simplified formulas may not be syntactically equal. In this case, we can gener-
ate formulas which are resistant to simplification, and use them for our testing
purposes of the next module Section 3.2.
The testing framework is then instantiated as follows:
For all φ, φ′ ∈fLT L:
φ
≡LT L
φ′
⇓
simplify(φ)
=LT L
simplify(φ′)
For example, if we use this pair of formula and mutant:
• φ := c U (c | a)
• φ′ := (c U c) | (c U a)
we verify the congruence property of Spot’s simplification function over syntac-
tically equal relations, we obtain the following results:
φ := (c U (c | a))
≡LT L
φ′ := ((c U c) | (c U a))
⇓
simplify(c U (c | a))
=LT L
simplify((c U c) | (c U a))
⇓
a | c
̸=LT L
c | (c U a)
We notice that the simplification function doesn’t always return a unique ir-
reducible form of the simplified formulas, and doesn’t satisfy the congruence
property w.r.t the equal relation, as a | c ̸=LT L c | (c U a).
==PAGE:43==
36
Modularization Testing Approaches
Another interesting example we obtained is the following. We use the following
pair of formula and mutant:
• φ := !F(a) | G(a)
• φ′ := G!(a) | G(a)
we verify the congruence property of Spot’s simplification function w.r.t syntac-
tically equal relation and we obtain the following results:
φ := !F(a) | G(a)
≡LT L
φ′ := G!(a) | G(a)
⇓
simplify(!F(a) | G(a))
=LT L
simplify(G!(a) | G(a))
⇓
G(a) | G!(a)
̸=LT L
G!(a) | G(a)
Also in this example, we notice that the simplification function doesn’t always
return a unique irreducible form of the simplified formulas, and doesn’t satisfy
the congruence property w.r.t the equal relation.
However, in this example,
we notice that the two results differ according to the order of the right and left
sides of the OR logical operator, instead of returning a completely different form
as in the previous example. We run the testing framework mentioned above
on 5,319 LTL formulas and 15,714 semantically equivalent but syntactically
different mutants, resulting in a total of 83,582,766 pairs of formulas and mutants
that we test. This test is conducted across several Spot versions: 2.9.8, 2.10.1,
2.10.2, 2.10.4, 2.10.6, 2.11.1, and 2.12.
Specifically, among 83,582,766 pairs of formulas and mutants, 0.42%, hence 132
formulas, do not result in a unique irreducible form after simplification, while
0.58% are always simplified to a unique form. These results are consistent across
all seven versions of Spot that we tested.
Why equality relation is important
We found that the simplify function
doesn’t preserve the congruence property w.r.t the equality relation, across each
version of Spot that we test.
This is not to be considered an error of the
tool, instead, it’s an interesting property that we can use to generate formulas
resistant to the simplification process to test other components of the model
checker. We use these formulas in the next chapter, for testing the translate
module using formulas resistant to the simplification process.
==PAGE:44==
3.2 Automaton Translation Module
37
3.2
Automaton Translation Module
When dealing with temporal logic properties, a typical model checker imple-
ments a translation function, which is located as shown in Figure 3.2 in a typi-
cal model checker. For example, a linear temporal logic formula (LTL) may be
translated into a Büchi automaton or a computation tree logic (CTL) may be
translated into tree automata, etc. For this module, we consider only the linear
temporal logic, therefore the translate function takes LTL properties as input
and translates them into automata.
We investigate whether the translation
function of this module preserves the congruence property w.r.t the semantic
equivalence relation. Additionally, we explore two other relations: the equality
and isomorphism of automata. The automata derived from the tests conducted
with these two relations will serve as input for our next module.
Figure 3.2: Translation module, highlighted in yellow, within the context of a
typical model checker.
We implement the testing framework for the LTL-to-automata translator mod-
ule as follows:
Congruency Property of Translate Module
Let A be the sets of LTL
formulas, and B be the set of all state-based Büchi automata, both equipped
with equivalence relations RA ⊂{≡LT L} the semantic equivalence between a
pair of LTL formulas and LTL mutants, and the relation and RB ⊂{≡Aut, =Aut
, ∼=Aut} the semantic equivalence, syntactic equality and isomorphism relation
==PAGE:45==
38
Modularization Testing Approaches
between two state-based Büchi automata. Let ltl2aut be an LTL-to-automata
translation function that maps elements of A into elements of B, and that is
congruent w.r.t the relations RA and RB.
Then for all LTL formula φ, φ′ ∈A:
φ
RA
φ′
⇓
ltl2aut(φ)
RB
ltl2aut(φ′)
The testing framework takes two semantic equivalent LTL formulas and trans-
lates them into two state-based Büchi automata. We test the ltl2aut translate
function, by checking whether it preserves the congruence property w.r.t RA
and RB. In other words, we test whether the Büchi automata generated by
ltl2aut are semantically equivalent, given that the pair of input is semantically
equivalent. Moreover, as mentioned above, we experiment with the relations of
isomorphism and equality of automata. The sets and relations with which we
instantiate the framework are defined in Table 3.4, and we will discuss them in
the following sections.
A
RA
B
RB
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
≡Aut
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
∼=Aut
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
=Aut
Table 3.4: The relations used in the translation module.
To increase the robustness of the proposed framework, we test it through two
different configurations, which differ from the translation function used. We
therefore derive the two configurations from the framework, where x and y
stand for which translate function we use, and we obtain:
φ
RA
φ′
⇓
ltl2aut_x(φ)
RB
ltl2aut_y(φ′)
where x and y are:
==PAGE:46==
3.2 Automaton Translation Module
39
1. x = Spot, y = Spot: the first configuration uses one translation function,
the Spot’s translation function, to translate both the formula φ and the
mutant φ′.
2. x = Spot, y = Spin: the second configuration uses two translation func-
tions, the Spot and Spin’s translation functions, to translate both the
formula φ and the mutant φ′ respectively.
By doing so we can test the congruency property of Spot’s translate function in
the first configuration, and the congruency property of Spot’s translate function
against Spin’s translate function, for a more robust approach, in the second
configuration.
In the following section, we instantiate the testing framework according to the
two configurations explained above, and each of the configurations for each
relation of Table 3.4, and we show examples.
3.2.1
Test Spot Translator and Spot vs Spin Translators
In this section, we detail the framework’s input for both Spot’s configuration
and the Spot vs Spin configuration. Next, we instantiate the framework for each
relation in Table 3.4, using variables x and y as placeholders for the translator
types, and show examples. Finally, we report the results.
Input for Spot Configuration
We test the first configuration by using pairs
of formulas and mutants that are resistant to the simplification process. We de-
rive these formulas from Section 3.1.1. The translation function employs the
simplification of the LTL formulas before translating the formula into an au-
tomaton, and we can’t deactivate this process in Spot. Translating two seman-
tically equivalent formulas, which the simplified form turns into two syntactically
equal formulas, would result in a useless test. Specifically, it is like testing the
framework twice with the same formula, without providing any variation or dif-
ference to analyze, making the test trivial and uninformative. An example of a
pair of formula and mutant resistant to the simplification is Section 3.1.1 and a
pair of formula and mutant which we discard as input is Section 3.1.1. In total
we have 132 formulas resistant to the simplification process, forming 66 pairs of
LTL formula - mutant to input to the testing framework. Therefore we run the
tests 66 times.
==PAGE:47==
40
Modularization Testing Approaches
Input for Spot vs Spin Configuration
We test the second configuration
using all the formulas and mutants generated by our approach explained in
Chapter 4. Since we input only one formula into the framework, we have φ = φ′.
This formula is processed through two different translators: Spot and Spin.
The primary difference between the simplification processes of these tools lies
in their objectives. Spot aims to minimize the formula to a non-reducible form
for optimization, as it generates the automata first and then performs model
checking. It performs various simplifications based on the equivalence axioms
specified, as detailed in Section 3.1.
In contrast, Spin does not focus on applying equivalence axioms as in Spot,
but it simplifies the formula to optimize and standardize it to make its struc-
ture easier to process it by the on-the-fly translation algorithm, performing
automata translation and model checking simultaneously. For instance, Spin
performs structural simplifications by ensuring conjunctions (AND) and dis-
junctions (OR) are right-associated, simplifying the formula’s tree structure for
easier processing and comparison. It also transforms formulas into canonical
forms, making them more efficient to handle during the model checking process.
Spin pushes negations down to the atomic propositions using logical equiva-
lences, converting the formula into Negation Normal Form (NNF), and works
on redundant subformulas [23].
We enabled verbose mode in Spin and tracked the formula’s structure after
simplification, right before the automata translation and model checking stages.
Comparing the results of Spot and Spin, we found that out of 21,033 formulas
and mutants, 11,340 had different simplification forms between the two tools,
while 9,693 were simplified to the same formula.
Despite some formulas are simplified to the same form by both translators, we
used all the inputs for testing. We want to test a translation function against
another translation function, hence we don’t need to differentiate the input
formulas. Moreover, two different translators are likely to generate two different
automata from the same formulas, as shown also in [13].
We ran 21,033 formulas, from which 5,319 formulas we derived 15,714 mutants.
Therefore we run 107,718 tests, over all formulas and mutants, corresponding
to 107,718 pairs of formulas and mutants. Each formula generates an automa-
ton, therefore we compare 107,718 pairs of automata derived from the pairs of
formulas and mutants.
1. Checking Translation Preserves Equivalence Relation
We aim to
test the congruency property of the translate function w.r.t the semantic equiv-
==PAGE:48==
3.2 Automaton Translation Module
41
alence relation. Specifically, given that RA ⊆≡LT L and RB ⊆≡Aut are correct,
we test whether the automata generated by the translation function are seman-
tically equivalent to each other, given that the input formulas are semantically
equivalent. The testing framework is then instantiated as follows:
For all φ, φ′ ∈fLT L:
φ
≡LT L
φ′
⇓
ltl2aut_x(φ)
≡Aut
ltl2aut_y(φ′)
2.
Checking Translation Preserves the Isomorphism Relation
We
repeat the previous experiments, but we check whether the translate function
preserves the isomorphism relation, given two semantically equivalent formulas
as input. The framework is instantiated as follows:
For all φ, φ′ ∈fLT L:
φ
≡LT L
φ′
⇓
ltl2aut_x(φ)
∼=Aut
ltl2aut_y(φ′)
As explained above Section 3.2, we recall that the first configuration uses one
translator for both formulas, hence ltl2aut_spot(φ), ltl2aut_spot(φ′) while the
second configuration uses two translators, ltl2aut_spot(φ), ltl2aut_spin(φ′).
3. Checking Translation Preserves Equality Relation
We repeat the
experiment we did above, but this time we test the translation function w.r.t
the equality relation. Specifically, given that RA ⊆{≡LT L} and RB ⊆{=LT L
} are correct, we test whether the output of the translate function preserves
the syntactic equality relation of the generated automata, given as input two
semantically equivalent formulas. The testing framework is then instantiated as
follows:
==PAGE:49==
42
Modularization Testing Approaches
For all φ, φ′ ∈fLT L:
φ
≡LT L
φ′
⇓
ltl2aut_x(φ)
=Aut
ltl2aut_y(φ′)
We run the frameworks for both configurations, and we report the results in
Table 3.5. We added one relation more, the non-isomorphism relation ̸∼=Aut
which is obtained by removing the set of isomorphic automata from the set
of all automata. We need these automata as they will serve as inputs to the
checking module Section 3.4.
Now we discuss the results for each relation and each configuration.
RB
Spot
Spot vs Spin
≡Aut
100%
100%
∼=Aut
100%
37.43%
=Aut
100%
0%
Table 3.5: The percentage of generated automata that preserves the relations,
for two different configurations.
Semantically Equivalence Relation
As reported in Table 3.5, the semantic
equivalence relation ≡Aut is preserved both by the Spot translator and by using
Spot and Spin translators. This means that the generated automata are always
semantically equivalent, for all input pairs of formulas and mutants.
For example, let’s consider one specific run of our framework for the first con-
figuration with Spot, and as input these two formulas:
φ = c U (b | c),
φ′ = (c U c) | (c U b)
which are semantically equivalent, and resistant to the simplification process,
such that the simplified form is not syntactically equal:
φsimpl = b | c,
φ′
simpl = c | (c U b)
==PAGE:50==
3.2 Automaton Translation Module
43
then the Spot’s translate function maps the two formulas φ, φ′ into two seman-
tically equivalent state-based Büchi automata, as depicted in Figure 3.3, where
the two automata are semantically equivalent, and in this case even structurally
equal.
(a) φ = c U (b|c)
(b) φ′ = (c U c)|(c U b)
Figure 3.3: Automata generated for both φ and φ′
We provide an example of a ran of the framework for the second configuration of
Spot vs Spin. Let’s consider the formula φ = XF(a), which we use as input to
both translators. Figure 3.4 shows the formula translated with Spot and Spin.
(a) Spot’s Büchi automata for φ =
XF(a).
(b) Spin’s Büchi automata for φ =
XF(a).
Figure 3.4: Automata generated from φ = XF(a) with Spot (a) and Spin (b)
translators.
These two automata are semantically equivalent because they recognize the same
language, which includes sequences where from the second position onward,
there is always an a eventually.
Isomorphism Relation
As explained in Section 2.2 two automata are iso-
morphic if there is a one-to-one correspondence between the states and the tran-
sitions of two automata. In simple words, the automata preserve their structure.
==PAGE:51==
44
Modularization Testing Approaches
For all tests over the non-reducible semantically equivalent pairs of formula and
mutants, which we derived from the simplification module Section 3.1, 100% of
the generated automata by Spot are isomorphic, hence none is non-isomorphic.
This means that when Spot processes these equivalent formulas, the resulting
automata not only recognize the same language but also have the same struc-
ture.
In contrast, when using the Spot vs Spin configuration, only 37.43% of the pairs
of automata generated from the same formulas are isomorphic. This indicates
a significant difference in the structural similarity of the automata produced by
Spot vs Spin compared to Spot alone. Consequently, 62.57% of the pairs of
automata generated by Spot vs Spin are non-isomorphic, meaning they do not
preserve the same structure even though they recognize the same language as
the previous experiment shows.
Equality Relation
As for isomorphism, Spot’s translation function preserves
the equality relation for each pair of formulas and mutants tested. This means
that the generated automata are always structurally equal. For example, in
the previous example, we give as input two semantically equivalent formulas
and we obtain two structurally equal automata Figure 3.3.
We notice that
even though Spot doesn’t guarantee a unique non-reducible form in the sim-
plification module, it can minimize the formula further during the translation
process and guarantee structurally equal automata. On the contrary, Spot’s and
Spin’s translate functions, given as input the same formula for both functions,
produce automata which are always structurally different. We demonstrate it
with the previous example where the two automata illustrated in Figure 3.4 are
two structurally different automata, even though the input formula to both is
syntactically equal, and they recognize the same language.
Automata Format
The automata format we use in this project is the Hanoi
Omega-Automata (HOA) format [4]. It is a format for ω-automata that supports
generic acceptance conditions, and it allows for easier and faster comparison
between tools. The GitHub page is [5]. The HOA format is supported by both
Spot and Prism. For the other tools that do not use this format, such as Spin,
we use the Spot feature to convert a never-claim format into an HOA format.
We use the function are_equivalent of Spot to check whether two automata
recognize the same language, hence they are equivalent. are_isomorphic for
isomorphism.
==PAGE:52==
3.3 SAT Module
45
3.3
SAT Module
The SAT (Boolean Satisfiability) function is widely used across various fields. In
requirements engineering, it ensures consistency and traceability. Model check-
ers utilize it for property verification and state space exploration. Formal veri-
fication employs SAT for validating hardware and software correctness. It also
aids in optimization, artificial intelligence, cryptography, circuit design, bioin-
formatics, and game theory, solving complex logical constraints efficiently. It
is a function that is commonly implemented by model checkers, but it is not
necessarily present in all. Therefore, we test it as it is a function used in model
checkers that could be used as a filter approach: if the SAT function returns the
formulas as UNSAT, the formula is discarded regardless and it doesn’t undergo
any further process, such as the simplification, or translation processes.
We represent the SAT module as a component outside of a model checker im-
plementation, as shown in Figure 3.5, highlighted in yellow module.
Figure 3.5: SAT module in yellow, within the context of a model checker.
We test the SAT function with two types of logic: LTL and CTL. We test
the Spot’s [14] and Black [41] SAT function with LTL, and CTL-SAT[37] SAT
function with CTL.
We instantiate the test formula as follows:
==PAGE:53==
46
Modularization Testing Approaches
Congruency Property of SAT Module
Let A be the sets of LTL formu-
las and CTL formulas, and B be a three-valued logic set, both equipped with
equivalence relations RA ⊂{≡LT L, ≡CT L}, either the semantic equivalence be-
tween two LTL formulas and two CTL formulas respectively, and the relation
RB ⊂{=SAT }, the satisfiability equality relation, based on the three-valued
logic equality [12], whose truth table is expressed in Table 3.7. Let sat be a
satisfiability function that maps elements of A into elements of B, and that is
congruent w.r.t the relations RA and RB.
Then for all LTL, CTL formula φ, φ′ ∈A:
φ
RA
φ′
⇓
sat(φ)
RB
sat(φ′)
The framework tests the implementation of the satisfiability sat() function via
its congruence property w.r.t the satisfiability equality relation, across both LTL
and CTL. Specifically, given that RA and RB are correct, we test whether the
results of the sat(φ) and sat(φ′) match accordingly to the truth table expressed
in Table 3.7 and therefore preserves the tree-valued logic equality relation when
given as input two semantically equivalent formulas. The satisfiability function
returns a value among {True, False, Unknown}. For example, if both functions
return True, the satisfiability equality relation, denoted as =SAT , returns True.
If the first function returns True and the second False, =SAT returns False, and
so on.
The sets and relations are defined in Table 3.6. In the following sections, we
instantiate the framework for each row of the table
A
RA
B
RB
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
=SAT
fCT L
≡CT L
fCT L
=SAT
Table 3.6: The relations used in the SAT module.
==PAGE:54==
3.3 SAT Module
47
=sat
SAT
UNSAT
UNKNOWN
SAT
T
F
T
UNSAT
F
T
T
UNKNOWN
T
T
T
Table 3.7: The equal relation for SAT.
3.3.1
Test Spot, Black and CTL-SAT tools
We test two different tools for two different logics. For LTL we test the satis-
fiability function of Spot and Black, and for CTL the satisfiability function of
CTL-SAT tool.
We run the tests over all the formulas and mutants we generate in Chapter 4.
The quantification of the formulas and mutants are described in Table 3.2.
Therefore we run the test for each of the 83,582,766 pairs of LTL formula -
mutant, and 1,832,482,656 pairs of CTL formula - mutant.
Checking LTL Sat Preserves Satisfiability Equality Relation
In the
first line of Table 3.6 we are testing the implementation of the LTL satisfiabil-
ity function via the congruence property of the function w.r.t the satisfiability
equality relation. The framework is instantiated as follows:
Then for all LTL formula φ, φ′ ∈A:
φ
≡LT L
φ′
⇓
sat(φ)
=SAT
sat(φ′)
The framework takes two LTL semantically equivalent formulas and gives each
of these formulas to the satisfiability function. The outputs of sat(φ) and sat(φ′)
are then compared according to the truth table expressed in Table 3.7.
For example, consider two LTL semantically equivalent formulas:
φ = ¬FF(a) ∨¬F(a),
φ′ = G¬(a) ∨¬F(a).
==PAGE:55==
48
Modularization Testing Approaches
When we run the satisfiability function sat(φ) and sat(φ′) using both Spot
and Black [41] tools, we obtain SAT for φ and SAT for φ′.
According to
Table 3.7, this result is True, indicating that the satisfiability function preserves
the satisfiability equality relation.
We tested the LTL satisfiability function of both the Spot and Black tools.
Our framework was run on all 83,582,766 pairs of formulas and mutants. As
expected, the LTL satisfiability function preserved the satisfiability equality
relation for all pairs across both tools.
Checking CTL Sat Preserves Satisfiability Equality Relation
We re-
peat the previous experiment using the CTL logic instead. Therefore we are
testing the implementation of the CTL satisfiability function via the congruence
property of the function w.r.t the satisfiability equality relation. The framework
is instantiated as follows:
Then for all CTL formula φ, φ′ ∈A:
φ
≡CT L
φ′
⇓
sat(φ)
=SAT
sat(φ′)
We use a CTL satisfiability tool implemented by Nicola Prezza [37], which is a
tool providing the functionality of checking the satisfiability of CTL formulas.
For example, consider two CTL semantically equivalent formulas:
φ = ∃X(c ∨c),
φ′ = ¬(∀X¬(c ∨c)).
When we run the satisfiability function sat(φ) and sat(φ′) using CTL-SAT
tool, we obtain SAT for φ and SAT for φ′. According to Table 3.7, this result
is True, indicating that the satisfiability function preserves the satisfiability
equality relation.
Our framework was run on all the 1,832,482,656 pairs of CTL formula - mutant.
As expected, the CTL satisfiability function always preserves the satisfiability
equality relations for all the pairs.
==PAGE:56==
3.4 Checking Module
49
3.4
Checking Module
The core component of a model checker is the model checking algorithm, which
verifies whether a given model of a system satisfies a specified property, typically
expressed in temporal logic, e.g. LTL or CTL. In this thesis, we refer to the
model checking function as the checking function. In Figure 3.6 we show where
the checking module, responsible for implementing the checking function, is
located within a model checker.
Figure 3.6: Caption
We test whether the model-checking algorithm preserves the congruency prop-
erty w.r.t the satisfiability equality relations, according to Table 3.8. The rela-
tions with which we instantiate the framework are the same used in the SAT
module Section 3.3.
A
RA
B
RB
fLT L
≡LT L
fLT L
=SAT
fCT L
≡LT L
fCT L
=SAT
Table 3.8: The relations used in the SAT module.
Typically, a model-checking algorithm works by taking as input a model (or
transition system) and a temporal logic property and then verifying whether
the temporal logic property satisfies the model.
==PAGE:57==
50
Modularization Testing Approaches
For example, Figure 3.7 represents a model expressed as a transition system.
We want to verify the LTL property ∀(BU¬B) which means that globally (at all
Figure 3.7: Caption
times), proposition B holds until ¬B becomes true. We can say that the module
satisfies the property because in State0, State1, and State2, ¬B is always true,
so the property trivially holds, and in State3, B holds until a transition to
State2 (where ¬B becomes true), satisfying BU¬B
Congruency Property of Checking Module
Let A be the sets of state-
based Büchi automata, and B be a three-valued logic set, both equipped with
equivalence relations RA ⊂{≡Aut} the semantic equivalent between two state-
based Büchi automata, and the relation RB ⊂{=SAT } satisfiability equality
relation, according to Table 3.9.
Let M be a model.
Let P be a checking
function that maps elements of A into elements of B, and that is congruent
w.r.t the relations RA and RB.
Then for all state-based Büchi automata formula Aut, Aut′ ∈A:
Aut
RA
Aut′
⇓
model_checking(M, Aut)
RB
model_checking(M, Aut′)
Given two equivalent automata, we test whether the model checker algorithm
preserves the equal sat =sat relationship of the result after the verification pro-
cess of the model and formula. The equivalent relationship is described in Ta-
ble 3.7. It is preserved only when both the results of the verification process are
congruent or when at least for one input the result is not determined.
==PAGE:58==
3.4 Checking Module
51
=sat
T
F
?
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
?
T
T
T
Table 3.9: The equal relation for SAT.
3.4.1
Test Spot Model Checking and Prism Model Check-
ing
We test the model-checking algorithm using Spot for LTL and Prism for LTL
and CTL.
Test Spot Model Checking Algorithm
Testing Spot model checking al-
gorithm, by inputting semantically equivalent and non-isomorphic automata
generated by Spot and Spin translators. These inputs are retrieved from the
Translate Module, as explained previously. The model checking algorithm ver-
ifies whether a constant model M satisfy the two automata AutSpot, Aut′
Spin,
generated by Spot and Spin. The results of the model checking algorithm is
then compared and any discrepancies in the results, such as one formula veri-
fied true while the other verified false, may indicate potential inaccuracies with
the model checker, necessitating further investigation. Therefore the formalized
framework that we use is:
Then for all state-based Büchi automata formula Autspott,Aut_spin ∈A:
Autspot
≡LT L
Autspin
⇓
model_checking(M, Autspot)
=SAT
model_checking(M, Autspin)
Spot implements a function for language containment, which we use for doing
model checking within two automatons. We check whether the first automaton
is contained in the second automaton, obtaining a result of True or False. If
the result is False, we have spotted an error in the model checker algorithm
because the language containment between two equivalent formulas will always
result in a True answer. If two automata are equivalent, they accept the same
language, implying mutual language containment: the language recognized by
==PAGE:59==
52
Modularization Testing Approaches
the first automaton is contained within the language recognized by the second
automaton, and vice versa. In other words, the model checking algorithm that
spot uses is the language containment, which could be formally expressed as
AutM ⊆AutSpot
=SAT
AutM ⊆Aut′
Spin
in the framework.
The model that we use is G(a →Xb) & F(b →Xa) and we consider it a constant
model for our tests for the checking module.
We run the model-checking algorithm for 13,161 formulas LTL, which are the
non-isomorphic automata retrieved from the previous module.
As expected,
the model-checking algorithm preserves the satisfiability equality relation. We
notice that we are using a simple model M and the formulas are relatively
simple, hence we don’t get the result Uknown, but only True and False.
We can test this framework only for LTL since the automata are generated with
LTL formulas and Spot is a platform for LTL manipulation.
Test Prism Model Checker
To overcome the simplification process of for-
mulas, where two semantically equivalent formulas are simplified to the same
syntactic formula, we test the PRISM model checking algorithm by using two
different translators: ltl2dstar (using ltl2ba as the LTL-to-NBA tool) and Ra-
binizer 3 (which generates generalized Rabin automata). For the same reason of
Section 3.2, we test our framework with one formula, hence φ = φ′, resulting in
two different automata generated the two translators. We can then test PRISM
model checker, which takes as input the automata translated by the two differ-
ent translators and verifies them against a constant model, which we already
used in the previous experiment. We then assess whether the model checking
function preserves the congruency property concerning the satisfiability equal-
ity according to Table 3.7. We specify the translators because PRISM does not
allow direct input of an automaton, therefore we input the formulas that are
then translated with the two translators.
Then for all state-based Büchi automata formula Aut, Aut ∈A:
Aut
≡LT L
Aut′
⇓
model_checking(M, Aut)
=SAT
model_checking(M, Aut′)
==PAGE:60==
3.4 Checking Module
53
To run a test we invoke the PRISM executable, which takes a few seconds to
run for each test.
In total, we run 21,033 tests for the LTL, as the sum of
the LTL formulas (5,319) and LTL mutants (15,714) we generate in our gener-
ation approach Chapter 4, and 107,718 tests for the CTL, for the sum of the
CTL formulas (21,174) and CTL mutants (86,544). Moreover, we experimented
by testing our generated formulas on models coming from the benchmarks of
PRISM. These models are available in the folder of PRISM when downloaded.
We adapted our formulas with the atomic proposition specified in the model. For
each test, with both the constant model and the benchmark model, PRISM pre-
serves the equivalence satisfiability relation. We notice that we never encounter
an UNKOWN verification result, with the tests that we performed. For each
test, the model-checking algorithm produces either TRUE or FALSE. This
could be correlated to the low complexity of the models and the formulas.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4
Pipeline for Generation of
Formulas and Mutants
In this chapter, we describe our approach for generating formulas and mutants
in LTL and CTL. We developed a pipeline, as illustrated in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Pipeline for generation of formulas and mutants.
Firstly, we specify the type of logic to use, in this thesis, we focus on LTL
and CTL. On top of that, we provide a depth, which represents the number of
nested logical operators in the formula. For example, a depth of 4 will generate
formulas from depth 1 up to depth 4. We pass this information to the module
that generates formulas, which is built in Maude[40], a rewriting logic system,
which we will explain later. It works by specifying a grammar, and then Maude
writes all possible formulas within that grammar, up to the depth we specified.
After these steps, we obtained a list of all the possible formulas generated within
the grammar.
Next, these formulas are input to the module responsible for generating equiv-
alent mutants. This module is written in Maude[40] as well and works by spec-
==PAGE:62==
4.1 Generation of Temporal Logic Formulas
55
ifying the temporal logic’s set of equivalence axioms, instead of the grammar.
The output of this module is a list of semantically equivalent mutants derived
from each formula. Each mutant is syntactically different from each other and
from the formula from which is generated. The original formulas and the mu-
tants undergo a filtering process. This step eliminates formulas that have no
equivalents and mutants which are duplicated.
After filtering, we obtain the refined formulas and mutants, highlighted in red
and green respectively. A sanity check is then performed as the last step, to
further verify whether the mutants are correct equivalent mutants. If the sanity
check passes, the formulas and mutants can be used for testing the frameworks,
as explained in Chapter 3. The pipeline generates repeatable outputs, meaning
that every repeated run of the generation always generates the same formulas.
As mentioned above, we employ this pipeline for generating LTL and CTL
formulas and mutants, however, the generation module of formulas and mutants
can be expanded to accommodate other types of logic.
4.1
Generation of Temporal Logic Formulas
There are many randomic solutions for creating formulas, for example, the ran-
dltl command-line tool of Spot. This tool generates random LTL formulas and
allows for specifying the atomic propositions and the operators to use [15]. How-
ever, we want to develop a systematic approach to cover all the possible formulas
from a specific grammar, to guarantee a higher coverage, and with flexibility in
the depth of the formula. Therefore we employ our methodology which uses
the Maude System [40] as a rewriting logic system for generating formulas and
mutants. Maude is a high-performance reflective language and system that sup-
ports both equational and rewriting logic specifications. It provides a highly
expressive formalism suitable for a wide range of applications without compro-
mising performance [30] [40]. Maude allows the specification of rules to match
and rewrite and offers several algorithms for analyzing the system, which we
will utilize in the pipeline.
In our approach for generating formulas, we define a grammar and use the Maude
System’s rewriting logic to construct formulas. We start with a fixed variable M
and traverse the state space of the grammar using Maude’s search() function,
which employs a Depth-First Search (DFS) algorithm. This function systemati-
cally generates all possible formulas within the defined grammar, allowing us to
specify a depth parameter to control the number of levels in the DFS traversal,
which corresponds to the depth of the formula.
==PAGE:63==
56
Pipeline for Generation of Formulas and Mutants
In the following sections, we provide a detailed description of the grammar
and methodology, and we illustrate the process of formula construction with
an example. The code we developed is located on GitHub[7], as described in
Section A.2.
4.1.1
LTL Formulas
We specify the grammar used in the generation of LTL formulas in Section 2.1.1,
where p is the set of atomic formulas and ranges over {a, b, c} in this thesis.
Starting from a variable m, we use the search() function of Maude to traverse
the state space of the formula generation. The main idea of the search function
is to gradually build a tree until a depth is reached. Figure 4.2 illustrates the tree
generated by the search function based on the grammar we specified. For every
unary operator, the algorithm rewrites the variable m with an element from
the grammar, and for every binary operator, the algorithm has two possibilities
more to rewrite the variables m1 and m2 with elements from the grammar. Due
to this behaviour, the number of outputs of the algorithms is exponential to the
depth of the formula. If the depth is one, the generated formulas are 3, as the
number of atomic propositions. If the depth is 2, the generated formulas are
99, with 3 there are 2098 formulas, with 4 there are. The formula size grows
exponentially, as shown in Table 4.1.
Depth
Number of Formulas
LTL
CTL
0
0
0
1
3
3
2
24
36
3
315
687
4
7,194
22,344
5
252,645
1,110,723
Table 4.1: The number of formulas by depth for LTL and CTL.
An example of the formula generation process step by step is shown in Figure 4.3.
The depth column indicates the level of depth in the generation process. Each
row, from top to bottom, represents an always deeper level in the formula’s
construction. The formula column shows the formal notation of the formula at
each depth level, and the graphical representation of the formal formula aside.
We always start from a variable m, which is the variable that is rewritten at
==PAGE:64==
4.1 Generation of Temporal Logic Formulas
57
Figure 4.2: Tree structure of the search algorithm for building LTL formulas.
Figure 4.3: Example of formula’s generation step by step, until depth 5.
any step. The first iteration (depth = 1) starts with the variable m, which is
then replaced by an atomic proposition. In the second iteration (depth = 2) the
algorithm selected the operator X resulting in Xm as the formula. In the third
iteration (depth = 3) the operator G has been chosen, and the variable m is
replaced by this operator, resulting in XGm, and so on. When a binary operator
is selected, such as & (depth = 3), it opens up the path to tree outputs: rewriting
rules only for the left operator, only for the right operator and for both operators.
Now we have a formula which has two variables to be rewritten, m1 and m2, and
for each of these operators, the algorithm sequentially rewrites them according
==PAGE:65==
58
Pipeline for Generation of Formulas and Mutants
to the process just described. Therefore, the process of generating formulas is
exponential to the depth specified.
4.1.2
CTL Formulas
We recall from subsection 2.1.2 that formulas in CTL are built from path quan-
tifiers and state formulas. The path quantifiers are ∀, meaning for all paths, and
∃, meaning for some paths. The modal operators are X (next time), F (eventu-
ally), G (always), and U (until). The approach for generating CTL formulas is
the same employed for the generation of LTL formulas in subsection 4.1.1, with
the difference of the grammar specified, since CTL requires a different grammar
than LTL. We specify the grammar used in the generation of CTL formulas in
Section 2.1.2, where p is the set of atomic propositions, in this thesis ranges
among {a, b, c}
As for the LTL approach, we represent the tree structure built by the search()
function during the generation of formulas.
The boolean op element in the
picture stands for the boolean operators, which are ∧, ∨, ¬, that for space issues
we couldn’t list them all, but the concept is the same as described for LTL.
Figure 4.4: Tree structure of the search algorithm for building CTL formulas.
4.2
Generation of Equivalent Mutants
Both LTL and CTL have their own sets of equivalence axioms. We apply one
axiom to a formula and obtain a semantically equivalent mutant, and the formula
and mutant are syntactically different. We use a set of equivalence axioms that
==PAGE:66==
4.2 Generation of Equivalent Mutants
59
we obtained from [6] and [11]. The set of equivalence axioms of LTL is sound as
any formula derived using these axioms is valid in all models of LTL, reflecting
the correctness of derivations. Moreover, this set of axioms is complete, as every
formula that is valid in all models can be derived using this set.
On the other hand, CTL’s equivalence axioms’ set is sound, as any formula
derivable using these axioms is true in all models of CTL, but it’s not complete,
as there exist formulas in CTL that might not be derivable using this set of
equivalence CTL axioms.
One reason for this is the branching structure of
CTL, which complicates the logic compared to LTL.
Sanity Check of Equivalences
For the sake of verifying our implementa-
tion, we test whether the formulas and the mutants we created are effectively
equivalent. We employ Spot’s built-in function spot::are_equivalent, which
accepts two LTL formulas and verifies their equivalence.
On the other hand, for the equivalence verification of two CTL formulas, we
use the CTL-SAT Solver tool accessible on GitHub [37].
Two formulas are
considered equivalent if !(f ⇐⇒g) yields a UNSAT result.
Our methodology verifies that all the mutants are equivalent to their respective
original formulas. The code is available on GitHub in Section A.2.
4.2.1
Equivalent LTL Mutants
The generation of equivalent mutants is similar to the generation of formulas,
as we employ Maude. What differs is that we don’t specify a grammar as rules,
but a set of equivalence axioms as rules. We previously generated formulas, and
now we build mutants on top of them. The equivalence rules we apply to the
LTL formulas to obtain equivalent mutants are the following:
==PAGE:67==
60
Pipeline for Generation of Formulas and Mutants
Duality Law:
¬Xφ
≡
X¬φ
¬Fφ
≡
G¬φ
¬Gφ
≡
F¬φ
Idempotency Law:
FFφ
≡
Fφ
GGφ
≡
Gφ
φ U (φ U ϕ)
≡
φ U ϕ
(φ U ϕ) U ϕ
≡
φ U ϕ
Absorption Law:
FGFφ
≡
GFFφ
GFGφ
≡
FGGφ
Expansion Law:
φ U ϕ
≡
ϕ ∨(φ ∧X(φ U ϕ))
Fϕ
≡
ϕ ∨XFϕ
Gϕ
≡
ϕ ∧XGϕ
Distributive Law:
X(φ U ϕ)
≡
(Xφ) U (Xϕ)
F(φ ∨ϕ)
≡
Fφ ∨Fϕ
G(φ ∧ϕ)
≡
Gφ ∧Gϕ
We implement the equivalences both from right to left and vice-versa from left
to right.
Write an example of how to construct equivalent mutant
4.2.2
Equivalent CTL Mutants
The methodology of generating mutants in CTL is the same employed for gen-
erating LTL mutants. What differs is the difference in the equivalence rules.
The equivalence rules for CTL are shown as follows:
Duality laws for path quantifiers:
∀Xφ
≡
¬∃X¬φ
∀Fφ
≡
¬∃G¬φ
∃Xφ
≡
¬∀X¬φ
∃Fφ
≡
¬∀G¬φ
∀(φ U ϕ)
≡
¬∃(¬ϕ U (¬φ ∧¬ϕ)) ∧¬∃G¬ϕ
≡
¬∃((φ ∧¬ϕ) U (¬φ ∧¬ϕ)) ∧¬∃G(φ ∧¬ϕ)
≡
¬∃((φ ∧¬ϕ) W (¬φ ∧¬ϕ))
==PAGE:68==
4.2 Generation of Equivalent Mutants
61
Expansion laws:
∀(φ U ϕ)
≡
ϕ ∨(φ ∧∀X∀(φ U ϕ))
∀Fφ
≡
φ ∨∀X∀Fφ
∀Gφ
≡
φ ∧∀X∀Gφ
∃(φ U ϕ)
≡
ϕ ∨(φ ∧∃X∃(φ U ϕ))
∃Fφ
≡
φ ∨∃X∃Fφ
∃Gφ
≡
φ ∧∃X∃Gφ
Distributive laws:
∀G(φ ∧ϕ)
≡
∀Gφ ∧∀Gϕ
∃F(φ ∨ϕ)
≡
∃Fφ ∨∃Fϕ
We implement the equivalences both from right to left and vice-versa from left
to right.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
The first research question - as described in Chapter 1- assumes a new model
checker has been developed for a specific problem domain without any existing
model checker addressing the same problem.
The first research question is:
RQ1: How do we exploit equivalences to test a model checker?
As an answer to RQ1, we have explored a novel approach to testing formal
verification tools, with a focus on model checkers, by leveraging semantic equiv-
alences. Our methodology focuses on ensuring the reliability and correctness of
model checker implementations through a structured framework that tests var-
ious sub-procedures, including Formula Simplification, Automaton Translation,
Satisfiability Checking, and Model Checking.
The core of our framework lies in the congruence property, which allows us to
verify that equivalent inputs produce equivalent outputs across different stages
of the model checker. By applying this property, we have systematically vali-
dated the behaviour of the model checker modules, ensuring that each transfor-
mation or simplification step preserves the intended semantic relationships. In
Table 5.1 we report our findings, for each module. Each tested function pre-
served the relation under test, achieving a 100% score of the number of pairs
that preserved congruency property.
The test on the Simplification Module with Spot tool and the equality relation
achieved a score of 0.58%, which doesn’t affect the correctness of the tests,
but proves that Spot doesn’t guarantee a unique form for simplified formulas.
Hence, we can identify mutants resistant to the minimization.
We then use
these mutants as input to the next module. The same concept is applied for the
isomorphic relation of the Spot vs Spin configuration, in the translate module.
The non-isomorphic automata derived from the tests, 37.43% among all tests,
==PAGE:70==
5.1 Limitations and Future Work
63
are resistant to simplification, as they express the same formula but with two
different representations, and will serve as input to the checking module. On the
other hand, the equality relation tested with Spot vs Spin configuration yields
automata which are all not equal, meaning that the translators always produce
different automata.
To run our testing framework we need input cases, specifically pairs of formulas
and mutants, which guarantee semantic equivalence.
Therefore we pose the
second research question: RQ2: How to generate semantically equivalent LTL
and CTL formulas?
As an answer to RQ2, we have developed a methodology for generating a large
number of formulas LTL and CTL and a large number of semantically equiv-
alent mutants given our formulas. We developed a pipeline that starts from a
specific grammar and set of equivalence axioms, then generates a huge amount
of temporal formulas and equivalences, according to a specified depth of the
formulas.
The value of depth is set to 4 because we encounter a bottleneck issue in the
CTL-SAT tool when verifying the equivalence between formula and mutant,
when the depth is higher than 4. Using another CTL solver might solve the
bottleneck issue, and this could be addressed as future work. The generation of
formulas and mutants grows exponentially.
By generating a large number of semantically equivalent but syntactically dif-
ferent formulas and mutants, we have been able to thoroughly test the various
modules and confirm their adherence to the congruence property. This method
not only provides a rigorous testing mechanism, but also enhances the overall re-
liability of model checkers, especially in scenarios where traditional Oracle-based
testing methods are infeasible.
5.1
Limitations and Future Work
Building upon the findings and methodologies developed in this thesis, several
ways for future research and development can be explored to enhance and extend
the testing framework for model checkers. These directions aim to improve the
robustness, efficiency, and applicability of the framework to a wider range of
logical systems and practical scenarios.
While this thesis primarily focused on Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) and Com-
putation Tree Logic (CTL), extending the framework to other temporal logics
==PAGE:71==
64
Conclusion
Module
Number of
Test
Tools
Relation
Result
Simplification (1)
83,582,766
Spot (LTL)
≡LT L
100%
=LT L
0.58%
Translate (2)
132
Spot (LTL)
≡Aut
100%
=Aut
100%
∼=Aut
100%
107,718
Spot vs Spin (LTL)
≡Aut
100%
=Aut
0%
∼=Aut
37.43%
SAT (2)
83,582,766
Spot (LTL)
=SAT
100%
Black (LTL)
=SAT
100%
1,832,482,656
CTL-SAT (CTL)
=SAT
100%
Checking (2)
13,161
Spot (LTL)
=SAT
100%
1,033
Prism (LTL)
=SAT
100%
107,718
Prism (CTL)
=SAT
100%
Table 5.1: Summary of results obtained from our investigation.
==PAGE:72==
5.1 Limitations and Future Work
65
and formal verification methods presents a valuable opportunity.
For exam-
ple, we could extend the approach to handle probabilistic systems, hence using
PCTL (Probabilistic Computation Tree Logic).
Other ways for extending the thesis could be testing using other types of RA
and RB relations. For example, we could test whether the functions preserved
the ≤relation, instead of considering as main relation only the ≡relation. Or
other types of relations such as partial orders could be investigated.
We didn’t implement any coverage test of our approach, for time reasons. This
could be a future work which would enhance the reliability of our approach,
help find areas that the tests don’t cover, and integrate them as a consequence.
In the thesis, we have selected four modules, as they are the principal sub-
processes within a typical model checker. But more sub-processes can be found
and tested. For example the model construction, the state space generation, the
counter-example generation, and the optimization techniques. These are just a
few which involve a typical model checker. Our approach can be tailored to any
formal verification tool which allows the specification of equivalence axioms.
Lastly, in the project we exploit equivalences on formulas. A future work which
would thoroughly test the model checker is to exploit the equivalences on the
models.
Building on the findings and methodologies developed in this thesis, several
avenues for future research and development can be explored to enhance and
extend the testing framework for model checkers. These directions aim to im-
prove the robustness, efficiency, and applicability of the framework to a broader
range of logical systems and practical scenarios.
While this thesis primarily focused on Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) and Com-
putation Tree Logic (CTL), extending the framework to other temporal logics
and formal verification methods presents a valuable opportunity. For example,
the approach could be adapted to handle probabilistic systems using Probabilis-
tic Computation Tree Logic (PCTL).
Additional extensions could involve testing with different types of RA and RB
relations. For instance, instead of primarily considering the ≡relation, we could
test whether the functions preserve the ≤relation or other types of relations
such as partial orders.
Coverage testing of our approach was not implemented due to time constraints.
This could be an area for future work, enhancing the reliability of our approach
by identifying and integrating areas that the tests do not cover.
==PAGE:73==
66
Conclusion
In this thesis, we selected four modules as the principal sub-processes within
a typical model checker. However, more sub-processes can be identified and
tested, such as model construction, state space generation, counter-example
generation, and optimization techniques. Our approach can be tailored to any
formal verification tool that allows the specification of equivalence axioms.
Finally, this project exploits equivalences on formulas. A future direction for
thoroughly testing the model checker would be to exploit the equivalences on
the input models models of model checkers.
==PAGE:74==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Disclaimers
I employed ChatGPT [34] to rephrase my sentences for enhanced readability
and to correct grammatical errors. I reviewed and verified the rewritten sen-
tences for accuracy. Additionally, I used Grammarly [21] to assist with grammar
corrections throughout the writing process. Majority of the pictures are created
with Miro Board and Draw.io tools for designing.
A.2
GitHub Project
This section describes the organization of the project’s folders and files.
The GitHub project is located in the repository master-thesis-2024.
The
repository is composed by the generate/ folder which contains all the code
for generating formulas and equivalent mutants, by running the executable file
execute_generation_pipeline.py. Then we have one folder for each module:
A_simplification_module,
B_aut_translation_module, C_SAT_module, D_checking_module. Each folder
contains an executable file execute.sh which runs the complete code for the
module.
Below the structure of the folders, available on GitHub.
==PAGE:75==
68
Appendix
thesis_RQ1_RQ2
generate/
output/
formulas_LTL.txt
mutants_LTL.txt
filtered_mutants_LTL.txt
formulas_CTL.txt
mutants_CTL.txt
filtered_mutants_CTL.txt
maude/
generate_formula_LTL.maude
generate_mutant_LTL.maude
generate_formula_CTL.maude
generate_mutant_CTL.maude
execute_generation_pipeline.sh
ctl-sat.sh
generate_formula.py
generate_mutant.py
sanity_check_LTL.py
readme.md
A_simplification_module
B_aut_translation_module
C_SAT_module
D_checking_module
==PAGE:76==
A.2 GitHub Project
69
thesis_RQ1_RQ2
generate
A_simplification_module
execute.sh
output/
simplification.cc
test_equal_LTL.py
test_equivalent_LTL.py
readme.md
B_aut_translation_module
execute.sh
files/
test_check_equiv_isomorph.cc
test_spot_spin_compare.cc
gen_spot_spin_automata.py
readme.md
C_SAT_module
execute.sh
spot_tgba_SAT.cc
test_sat_CTL_prezza.py
test_sat_LTL_black.py
test_sat_LTL_spot_spin.py
test_sat_LTL_spot.py
readme.md
D_checking_module
files/
execute.sh
prism.sh
test_contain_checking_spot.cc
readme.md
readme.md
prism-examples
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1] Equivalent automata. https://planetmath.org/equivalentautomata.
[2] Equivalence relation – from wolfram mathworld.
https://mathworld.
wolfram.com/EquivalenceRelation.html.
[3] D. Poitrenaud A. Duret-Lutz. Spot: An extensible model checking library
using transition-based generalized buchi automata. Conference: Modeling,
Analysis, and Simulation of Computer and Telecommunications Systems,
2004. (MASCOTS 2004). Proceedings. The IEEE Computer Society’s 12th
Annual International Symposium on, November 2004.
[4] Tomáš Babiak, František Blahoudek, Alexandre Duret-Lutz, Joachim
Klein, Jan Křetínský, David Müller, David Parker, and Jan Strejček. The
hanoi omega-automata format. In Daniel Kroening and Corina S. Pasare-
anu, editors, Computer Aided Verification, volume 9206 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 479–486. Springer International Publishing, 2015.
[5] Tomáš Babiak, František Blahoudek, Alexandre Duret-Lutz, Joachim
Klein, Jan Křetínský, David Müller, David Parker, and Jan Strejček.
The hanoi omega-automata format, 2015. URL https://adl.github.io/
hoaf/.
[6] Christel Baier and Joost-Pieter Katoen. Principles of Model Checking. MIT
Press, 2008.
[7] Arianna Bianchi. Formula-generator. https://github.com/AriannaBi/
Formula-generator.
[8] Mauro Bringolf, Dominik Winterer, and Zhendong Su. Finding and un-
derstanding incompleteness bugs in smt solvers. In 37th IEEE/ACM In-
ternational Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’22),
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
pages 1459–1470, 2022.
URL https://testsmt.github.io/papers/
bringolf-winterer-su-ase22.pdf.
[9] Edmund M Clark. Model Checking. International Conference on Founda-
tions of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, 2006.
[10] Wikipedia
contributors.
Cook–levin
theorem.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cook
[11] Wikipedia
contributors.
Temporal
logic.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Temporal_logic, 2023.
[12] Wikipedia
contributors.
Three-valued
logic.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-valued_logic, 2024.
[13] Christian Dax, Jochen Eisinger, and Felix Klaedtke. Mechanizing the pow-
erset construction for restricted classes of ω-automata. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, 2007. accepted for publication.
[14] Alexandre Duret-Lutz. Spot: a platform for ltl and -automata manipula-
tion. https://spot.lre.epita.fr/.
[15] Alexandre Duret-Lutz, Alexandre Lewkowicz, Amaury Fauchille, Thibaud
Michaud, Étienne Renault, and Laurent Xu. Spot 2.0 — a framework for
ltl and ω-automata manipulation. In ATVA 2016, 2016.
[16] Alexandre Duret-Lutz, Alexandre Lewkowicz, Aur’elien Fauchille, Thibaud
Michaud, Etienne Renault, and Laurent Xu. Spot: an extensible model
checking library using transition-based generalized büchi automata. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Verification, Model Check-
ing, and Abstract Interpretation (VMCAI 2016), pages 122–129, 2016.
[17] Robert Fey. Leveraging equivalence classes for testing with tpt. Synopsys
Blog, 2023.
[18] Paul Gastin and Denis Oddoux. Fast ltl to büchi automata translation. In
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Concurrency Theory
(CONCUR), pages 1–17. Springer, 2001.
[19] Rob Gerth, Doron A. Peled, Moshe Y. Vardi, and Pierre Wolper. Sim-
ple on-the-fly automatic verification of linear temporal logic. In Protocol
Specification, Testing and Verification, 1995.
[20] Franz Wotawa Gordon Fraser. Using model-checkers for mutation-based
test-case generation, coverage analysis and specification analysis.
IEEE
Xplore, 2006.
[21] Grammarly. The ultimate guide to grammar. https://www.grammarly.
com/grammar, 2024.
==PAGE:79==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[22] Gerard J. Holzmann.
What is spin?
https://spinroot.com/spin/
whatispin.html.
[23] Gerard J. Holzmann and the Spin developers. Spin model checker. https:
//github.com/nimble-code/Spin, 2024.
[24] Daniel Jackson and Craig A. Damon. Evaluating the small scope hypoth-
esis. SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes, 21(3):265–277, 1996.
[25] J. ROBERT JUMP. A note on the iterative decomposition of finite au-
tomata. In INFORMATION AND CONTROL 15,, pages 424–435, 1969.
[26] Moshe Vardi Kristin Y. Rozier. Ltl satisfiability checking. International
Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer 12(2):123-137, August
2007.
[27] D. Richard Kuhn, Raghu N. Kacker, Yu Lei, and Jose Torres-Jimenez.
Equivalence class verification and oracle-free testing using two-layer cov-
ering arrays. In 2015 IEEE Eighth International Conference on Software
Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops (ICSTW), pages 1–4, 2015.
[28] Ravi Kumar.
Lecture 7:
Büchi automata.
https://www.cmi.ac.in/
~kumar/words/lecture07.pdf.
[29] Orna Kupferman and Moshe Y. Vardi. Sanity checks in formal verification.
In CONCUR 2006–Concurrency Theory, volume 4137 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 37–51. Springer, 2006.
[30] Steven Eker Patrick Lincoln Narciso Martí-Oliet José Meseguer
Car-
olyn Talcott Manuel Clavel, Francisco Durán. The maude 2.0 system. In
Rewriting Techniques and Applications, page 76–87. SpringerLink, 2003.
[31] Markus Müller-Olm, David Schmidt, and Bernhard Steffen.
Model-
checking: A tutorial introduction. In Agostino Cortesi and Gilberto Filé,
editors, Static Analysis, volume 1694 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 330–354. Springer, 1999.
[32] Kedar S. Namjoshi. Certifying model checkers. In Computer Aided Ver-
ification, 13th International Conference, CAV 2001, Paris, France, July
18-22, 2001, Proceedings, pages 2–13, 2001.
[33] Tobias Nipkow, Lawrence C. Paulson, and Markus Wenzel. Isabelle/HOL
- A Proof Assistant for Higher-Order Logic. Springer, Berlin, New York,
2002.
[34] OpenAI. Chatgpt, 2024. URL https://chatgpt.com.
[35] Jiantao Pan. Software testing. Course Report 18-849b Dependable Em-
bedded Systems, Carnegie Mellon University, 1999. Spring 1999.
==PAGE:80==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[36] David Parker. Prism - probabilistic symbolic model checker. https://www.
prismmodelchecker.org/, 2024.
[37] Nicola Prezza.
Ctl sat solver.
[https://github.com/nicolaprezza/
CTLSAT, 2013.
[38] Salvatore La Torre Rajeev Alur. Deterministic generators and games for
ltl fragments. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, 2002.
[39] Stephen F. Siegel. What’s wrong with on-the-fly partial order reduction.
The Journal of Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy, 21(9), September
2001.
[40] Maude Team. Maude overview, 2024. URL https://maude.cs.illinois.
edu/w/index.php/Maude_Overview.
[41] The Black SAT Solver Development Team. Black: The sat-based ltl model
checker, 2024. URL https://github.com/black-sat/black.
[42] The Coq Development Team. The coq proof assistant. https://coq.inria.fr/,
2024.
[43] Chengyu Zhang, Ting Su, Yichen Yan, Fuyuan Zhang, Geguang Pu, and
Zhendong Su. Finding and understanding bugs in software model check-
ers. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering, pages 763–773. ACM, 2019.
