==PAGE:1==
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU
regulations
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Anne Birgitte Lillelund
&
Carina Heller Bunde
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Created with AI, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Brovej,
Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months, from January 17th to July 17th, 2024,
at the Section DTU Sustain, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. This thesis was composed by two authors: Anne
Birgitte Lillelund and Carina Heller Bunde and covers 35 ECTS points.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of environmental engi­
neering, environmental chemistry, risk assessment, and statistics.
Anne Birgitte Lillelund ­ S183848
Signature
Date
Carina Heller Bunde ­ S223107
Signature
Date
ii
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
17.07.2024
17.07.2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Understanding chemical data gaps and data requirements under different chemical regu­
lations is critical in enhancing decision­making tools and ensuring a safe use of chemicals.
Data gap filling methods are key in overcoming data gaps in chemical hazard data. Es­
pecially in silico methods such as QSARs play an important role in addressing these data
gaps in a time­ and cost­efficient way, with the potential of reducing the need for conduct­
ing animal testing.
This study provides a description of current approaches listed by regulators as well as
an overview of data requirements of five different regulations: REACH (1908/2006), CLP
(1272/2008), PPP (1107/2009), FCM (1935/2004), and BP (528/2012). The REACH reg­
ulation was used as a baseline. Furthermore, a comparison of predictions of different
QSARs models was conducted on three selected parameter within the categories of:
physicochemical properties (Kow), environmental fate (BCF), and ecotoxicity (EC50; both
acute and chronic effects), were selected.
The study found that the models for the simplest parameter, Kow, had the overall best
performance, followed by those for BCF. Only a few outliers were found in the models
for these two parameters, while the models for both acute and chronic EC50 had many,
resulting in poor model performance in general. However, the OPERA model, which
was used to predict both Kow and BCF, had reliability issues due to unrealistically well
fitting prediction located on the 1:1 line. The best performing models were AlogP, EPI
Suite™BCFBAF, and TRIDENT for Kow, BCF, and EC50 (both acute and chronic), re­
spectively.
The provided recommendations from this study, relevant for policy makers, is a) an ex­
tended study, using the systematic approach followed in this study on larger chemical data
sets, more regulations and testing more data gap filling methods and models, b) refor­
matting the chemical data reporting, by developing a comprehensive chemical database
including all chemical regulation and data requirements, to enhance transparency and
uniformity of chemical data. This would also provide an automatic control at chemical
data registration ensuring no submission can be approved unless all required data is pro­
vided. Due to small data sets and reliability issues, specific recommendations for the
selected parameter could not be drawn based on model performance results. Thus, this
study provides a starting point for future research, setting the stage for additional effort
to systematically cover all relevant chemicals, models and approaches, regulations, and
parameters for improving data gap filling in regulatory risk assessment of chemicals in the
EU.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Anne Birgitte Lillelund, MSc Environmental Engineering, DTU
&
Carina Heller Bunde, MSc Environmental Engineering, DTU
Creators of this thesis.
In writing this thesis, we have received a great deal of support and assistance. We would
first like to thank our supervisors:
Peter Fantke, Former professor and head of section at Quantiative Sustainability Assess­
ment at Technical University of Denmark, Main supervisor
&
Xenia Trier, Associate professor at the Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences
at University of Copenhagen, External co­supervisor
&
Kerstin von Borres, Ph.D. student in Quantitative Sustainability Assessment (QSA) at
the Danish Technical University, Co­supervisor
who have guided us throughout this project. Your expertise has been invaluable through­
out the process. We thank you for your patient support and for the opportunities to do this
research project.
Additionally, we would like to thank:
Stefanie Kieninger, academic employee at the Institute for Environmental and Resource
Technology at Technical University of Denmark
for helping in trouble­shooting and solving MF­LOGP and QSAR SSD Toolbox scripts.
Susan Anyango Oginah, Postdoc at Technology at Technical University of Denmark
for extracting database information.
Finn Pedersen, former employee of ECHA, REACH Expert
with the participation of an interview. We thank you for sharing your expert knowledge on
REACH.
Emma Westerholm, researcher at Kemikalieinspektionen (KEMI)
and the PARC initiative for inviting us to join the PARC Work package 6 Workshop in
Stockholm April 2024.
Emilio Benfenati, Head of the Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Toxicology at
the Mario Negri Institute
for your expertise in understanding Meylan QSAR model.
And lastly, a thank you to
Stig Irving Olsen, Lecturer at Institute for Environmental and Resource Technology at
iv
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:7==
Technical University of Copenhagen, Administrative Supervisor
for stepping in as our official DTU supervisor at the last stage of the project.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction and Background
1
1.1
Chemical Pollution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Data Gap Filling Compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Data Gap Filling Methods (DGFM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Aim and Objectives
11
3
Methods
13
3.1
Sample Selection of Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Selected Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Models Used in This Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Data Curation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Dissociation Correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.6
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.7
Interview with Finn Pedersen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Results
29
4.1
Requirements of Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2
The Octanol­Water Partition Coefficient (Kow) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3
The Bioconcentration Factor (BCF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.4
Chronic Effective Concentration (EC50) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.5
Acute Effective Concentration (EC50) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5
Discussion
55
5.1
Reliability of Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.2
Approach Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5.3
Policy Implications and Future Research Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
vii
==PAGE:10==
6
Recommendations
67
7
Conclusion
69
References
73
A Other Data Gap Filling Methods
83
A.0.1
Read­across
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.0.2
In vitro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
B Data Methods in REACH (ECHA CHEM)
84
C Data Requirements in Regulations
89
D Elaborated Descriptions of Implemented Models
99
D.1 EPI Suite: BCFBAF & KOWWIN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
D.1.1
KOWWIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
D.1.2
BCFBAF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
D.2 CompTox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
D.2.1
OPERA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
D.2.2
TEST
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
D.3 VEGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
D.3.1
MEYLAN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
D.3.2
AlogP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
D.3.3
MlogP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
D.3.4
IRFMN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
D.4 TRIDENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
D.5 MF­LOGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
D.6 QSAR SSD Toolbox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
E
EC50
108
F
Outliers from Kow Models
110
G Overview of data points in superclasses
112
H Outliers from BCF Models
115
I
Python Code Edits
119
I.1
MF­LOGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
I.2
QSAR SSD Toolbox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
J
Interview Questions
124
viii
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction and Background
Chemicals are all around us. Chemicals are in the shampoo you used in the morning
shower, the clothes you decided to wear, the furniture you are currently sitting on ­ just
to name a few. We are exposed to many different chemicals everyday. As consumers,
we may be able to take certain precautions to the exposure of chemicals by choosing our
purchases carefully, but will the exposure of chemicals ever really be our choice in a world
full of synthetically produced chemicals?
1.1
Chemical Pollution
Chemicals in the broadest sense have always been around. For centuries, natural chem­
icals have been harvested and utilised. From the ancient civilisations, plants has been
used for medicinal purposes, dyes, paints and more. Even the practice of alchemy to
produce synthetic chemicals has been around since the first centuries AD [1]. The mod­
ern understanding of synthetic chemical dates back to the industrial revolution. The pe­
riod from 1850 up to the first World War influenced the development of technology and
economics hugely with development of pharmaceuticals, explosives, fertilisers etc. and
would continue to impact every living organisms for the decades to come [2]. There are
chemicals in everything around us, and new chemicals are being developed every day
potentially enhancing the anthropogenic pollution from chemicals proving a perilous situ­
ation [3].
The use of chemicals, however, can have a dark side. According to the World Health
Organisation (WHO), 2 million lives were lost globally in 2019 due to exposure of certain
chemical groups, namely pesticides, lead, and occupational particles among others. In
Europe alone, a total of 269,500 deaths that year were attributed to chemical exposure.
The production of chemicals in 2017 mounted to 282 million tonnes for industrial chemicals
in the EU alone. Worldwide, the WHO reports an annual estimation of 193,000 deaths
from accidental poisonings from chemicals. The injured party predominantly children and
young adults [4]. The European Environment Agency (EEA) also reports estimations of
6% of illnesses and 8% of deaths, globally, which can be pinned on chemical pollution,
with a potential of increasing numbers as only a small amount has been taken account for
in terms of health effects [5]. Put in economic terms, a study found that lead exposure in
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
1
==PAGE:12==
2019 had a global cost of U.S. $6.0 trillion, corresponding to 6.9% gross domestic product
(GDP) [6].
When reviewing history, the human race is no stranger to chemical disasters. ’The dirty
dozen’ [7] is a great example of this, to which, even more chemicals have been added to
the list as time has gone by. Will we ever learn from our mistakes? Current issues today
regarding chemical pollution relates to challenges when not following the precautionary
principle and, thus, regulation is needed.
1.2
Regulations
Knowledge of potential dangers from cer­
tain chemicals appears back in the late
1800s, where issues such as water and air
pollution as well as the discharge related
to chemical production were discussed in
public. The widespread health problems
related to increased air and water pollution
from the chemical industry lead to the ini­
tial regulatory measures of the chemical in­
dustry in the late 1800s and early 1900s
[2].
In the following section we will dig into what
is done to secure safe use of chemicals
through chemical risk assessment, as well
as describe the five regulations that are in­
vestigated in this study with the focus of
what the regulations cover, which chemi­
cal spaces they apply to and how the reg­
ulations differ from each other.
Chemical risk assessment is a valuable part of regulatory frameworks because it serves
as a scientific basis for the decision­making. It addresses the potential hazards and risks
from the exposure to a given chemical through the following four steps:
1. Hazard identification
2. Hazard characterisation
3. Exposure assessment
4. Risk estimation
2
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:13==
The hazard identification is carried out
through toxicological tests, followed by a
hazard characterisation of the potential
health effects from the exposure of the
chemical in question. Then, an exposure
assessment is made which, as the name
suggests, requires data obtained from ex­
posing the population group to the chem­
ical.
As the final step, a risk estima­
tion is made to compare the exposure re­
sults with existing health­based guidance
values [8].
Typically, authoritative inde­
pendent committees of scientific experts
such as the European Chemicals Agency
(ECHA) and the European Food Safety
Authority (EFSA) are the administrators of
chemical risk assessments [9].
As illus­
trated in Figure 1.1 only a small portion
of the total amount of chemicals that sur­
round us are regulated, emphasising on the need for more risk assessments and therefore
data on chemical compounds.
Figure 1.1: ”The unknown territory of chemical risks”. Reproduced from the EEA [5].
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
3
==PAGE:14==
Risks are an accommodation of hazard
and exposure of a chemical compound.
This study will focus on the first step of
the chemical risk assessment, namely the
hazard identification. More specifically this
study focus on the presence of data gaps
and what methods are used and available
to fill these gaps.
Hazard data involve
information that are relevant in the reg­
istration and authorisation phase and in­
clude physicochemical data, toxicological
and eco­toxicological information.
This study investigates five regulations
containing report guidelines on industrial
chemicals, biocidal products, pesticides,
and substances within food contact and
the labelling and classification of chemi­
cals.
The focus of this thesis has been
on the REACH regulation, which has, thus,
been used as a point of reference when comparing data requirements and data gap filling
methods recommendations across regulations. An overview of the mentioned regulations
can be viewed in Table 1.1.
These regulations were selected as they are believed to cover most chemicals on the
European market. Moreover, when identifying data gaps in chemical dossiers, REACH
(ECHA CHEM) was used as a starting point with potential for future research because it
covers a wide range of chemicals across various industries.
The question is, how do the regulations overlap and how do they differ from each other
in terms of data requirements and recommended DGFM (see Table 1.2). The five regu­
lations investigated in this study cover a broad range of chemical spaces, with a specific
focus area of each regulation. The regulations all aim at protecting human health and
environmental protection against potential risk associated with use of chemicals. Where
the regulations differs is in their scope of chemical spaces they cover. Overall the regula­
tions differ in the requirements, processes and assessments. In relation to data gaps and
data gap filling the regulations differ in the amount of details provided in the regulations
in handling data gaps as well as what methods to use.
4
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:15==
Table 1.1: Overview of regulations used in this study.
Regulation Name
Abbreviation
Regulation No.
Authority
Chemical Space(s)
Registration, Evaluation,
Authorisation, and
Restriction of Chemicals
REACH
1907/2006
ECHA
Industrial chemicals
Classification, Labelling,
and Packing of
Substances and Mixtures
CLP
1272/2008
ECHA
All
Plant Protection Products
PPP
1107/2009
EFSA
Pesticides
Food Contact Materials
FCM
1935/2004
EFSA
Chemicals used in
food contact materials
Biocidal Products
BP
528/2012
EFSA
Preservatives,
disinfectants,
and repellents
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
5
==PAGE:16==
The next section elaborates on where data gaps are identified and dives deeper into the
existing methods to fill the data gaps.
1.3
Data Gap Filling Compliance
Many regulations in the EU require robust and reliable chemical information. The chemical
information that is available however include data gaps. Currently a vast range of chemi­
cals already on the market lacks reported data [10]. The lack of data influence the tools for
decision making in relation of chemicals within e.g., sustainability­ and risk assessments
and inevitably points out the need for regulating chemicals following the precautionary
principle [10]. In order to harmonise and streamline both chemical data, and reporting
across regulations, these data gaps needs to be filled with appropriate methods. There
are currently different methods for filling these data gaps, however, currently there a no
overview of these methods, and the data requirements each regulation requires. This
overview is urgently needed to support the harmonisation of chemical regulations across
EU legislation. This thesis will provide an overview and initial results of methods to be
used for ground research in future projects within this subject.
Since 2018, ECHA has reported a yearly evaluation of compliance assessment checks of
inspected registered substances, identifying data gaps in the reported dossiers. From the
reports, the parameters with most non­compliant requests are pre­natal development tox­
icity, mutagenicity/genotoxicity, reproduction toxicity, long­term aquatic toxicity, repeated­
dose toxicity, other environment, biodegradation [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. The concerns
identified in the last five years of reporting show a consistency in the lacking information
of hazards are related to toxicological information on human health as well as ecotoxico­
logical information on environmental hazards.
Data gaps are mainly found in the categories of toxicology (in humans) and ecotoxicology
(environment). Parameters within these categories are known to be more complex than
e.g. physicochemical parameters, which can be/is due to their biological nature/impacts.
In the cases of the food additives, maltitol and sorbitol, EFSA has in 2023 specifically
requested data on genotoxicity [16, 17], which can serve as an indicator of lack of data in
this area especially.
Several studies has identified data gaps or insufficient quality of data that were reported
under the REACH regulation. In late 2023, over 3500 biocidal products registered in
REACH were checked for their compliance with their legal requirements. It was found
that 37% of these biocides did not meet the requirements, whereof 18% involved funda­
mental requirements and the other 19% consisted of minor deficiencies [18]. Similarly,
in late 2022, a report by ECHA identifies one in four substances, which were retrieved
from waste, were found to not be compliant in regard to REACH’s requirements [19]. Fur­
thermore, the study identifies lack of alternative testing methods when new tests were
6
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:17==
needed. The implementation of the REACH regulation required millions of additional an­
imal testing in order to fulfil the reporting requirements of the REACH regulation to clarify
the substances biological effects. The toxicological data were expected to come from al­
ternative methods of testing, but in most cases ended up filled by outdated data from older
studies, that did not meet the current testing requirements. Additionally, the study found
that the read­across method were most used, although not always applicable as singular
method for validity for toxicological tests or directly applying ”data waiving” where data
was absent [20]. These findings correspond to the study of this thesis, where researching
various substances and their reported data, we found read­across as well as data filling
from ’handbooks’ as most common methods for filling data gaps and where no data were
reported very often ’data waiving’ were applied instead.
”Some hazard data can be waived by stating that these data are not necessary
as there is no exposure to the chemical in the way that it is utilised.”
— Finn Pedersen
Data gaps and methods used to produce data are important to study, for evaluating where
potential hazards are overlooked and in need of careful and improved study with multiple
tests methods for cross reference. An example of possible insufficient quality of data, is
in the toxicological category, where the current assessment for the potential hazard of a
chemical substance is generally produced using in vivo testing on rodents. Which are
studies that have been questioned for their comparability to human toxicity. Instead it is
proposed that in vitro and in silico testing methods should be more widely implemented
in the substance reporting [21].
There are different methods for filling these data gaps, however, currently there a no
overview of these methods, and the data requirements each regulation requires. This
overview is urgently needed to support the harmonisation of chemical regulations. It is
however, a trend in all regulations that contain information on the matter of data gaps and
data gap filling, the information providing is general. The regulations overlap in relation to
the emphasis on avoiding data gaps as well as avoiding use of in vivo experiments when
no sufficient data is available. Table 1.2 provides an overview of alternative methods to
animal testing mentioned in each regulation. Where the regulations also differ, are in the
data requirements as presented in the Results section.
From the guidelines investigated the following methods were proposed as alternatives to
animal testing when data was absent or of insufficient quality: in vitro and in silico (such
as QSAR and read­across). Advantages to these methods are also their time­ and cost­
efficiencies. The following sections expands on the different methods for data gap filling
proposed in the regulations.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
7
==PAGE:18==
1.4
Data Gap Filling Methods (DGFM)
Data gap filling methods, hereafter referred to as DGFM in this thesis, are methods used
where data is missing. A data gap is in this thesis defined as a data requirement in a given
regulation (in this study, only for REACH), for which data has not been reported at all or
submission reports are considered non­reliable, rendering the data unusable. In cases
where the data requirement has been waivered, it is not considered a data gap. Multiple
data gap filling methods exist such as in vitro and in silico approaches that include read­
across and QSARs. Data gap filling methods will hereafter in the thesis be referred to as
DGFM.
Table 1.2 provides an overview of the DGFMs mentioned in the regulations. As seen in
the table, the QSAR method and read­across methods are recommended in most or all
of the regulations that mentions DGFMs. The CLP regulation does not mention DGFMs
and are thus not included in the table.
Table 1.2: Overview of data gap filling methods mentioned in each regulation.
Data gap
filling method
Regulations
REACH
Regulation
(EC) 1907/2006
Plant Protection
Products Regulation
(EC) 1107/2009
Food Contact
Regulation
(EC) 1935/2004
Biocidal Products
Regulation
(EU) 528/2012
QSAR/SAR
x
­
x
x
Read­across
x
x
x
x
In­vitro testing
x
x
­
x
In­silico
­
x
­
­
The most common approach for filling data gaps in registration of substances is the
method of ”read­across”. The read­across method consider similarities in structure, metabolism
and toxicity. The method rely on the best source identified, if sufficient similarity is estab­
lished, and adopts the source substance quantitative assessment for the target substance
[22]. Another approach to gain data on a substance is through experimental testing. In
vitro is a method testing the substance performed in a petri dish. For testing certain toxi­
cological properties, ECHA named the in vitro method the default testing method in 2016
[23]. Elaborated definition on read­across and in vitro is available in Appendix A.
The focus of this study is on using QSARs as DGFM, the section below give an introduc­
tion to QSAR. Quantitative Structure­Activity Relationship (QSAR) is based on the
assumption that similar compounds will have similar chemical and biological activities.
The approach consists of mathematical models which utilise the chemical structure of a
compound to predict its physicochemical and biological properties as well as its environ­
mental fate. However, while it may be useful for some properties, QSAR is known to be
8
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:19==
less suitable in terms of accuracy when it comes to more complex toxicity properties and
should, therefore, be used with caution [24].
Figure 1.3: Simplified QSAR workflow. Reproduced from Pradeep, 2017 [25].
QSARs are generally well for predicting physicochemical properties of a chemical, whereas
complex biological properties QSARs have limited prediction accuracy. The limitations of
the QSARs approach for filling data gaps are further elaborated in the discussion section.
However, the use of DGFMs do have their limitations as described by Finn Pedersen:
”One of the reasons why ECHA concludes that data is missing is that the
documentations behind the utilised QSAR or read­across are either insufficient
or non­existing, also in context of determining whether a chemical is within the
applicable domain.”
— Finn Pedersen
Therefore, the results derived from these models cannot be validated unless sufficient
documentation exists, providing an important limitation to the use of data gap filling meth­
ods.
This thesis will provide an overview and initial results of methods to be used for ground
research in future projects within this subject. The overall objectives of this study are
to 1) examine various data gap filling models and to identify limitations associated with
each model and the approach of DGFMs in general, and 2) suggest viable approaches to
harmonise the regulatory requirements with the use of QSARs as data gap filling method
when addressing data gaps in chemical risk assessment. The following section elaborates
on the hypothesis and research questions investigated in this study.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
9
==PAGE:20==
10
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:21==
2
Aim and Objectives
The main hypothesis this study investigates is:
The integration of data gap filling methods in chemical hazard assessment
offers a time­ and cost­efficient approach that can reduce or replace animal
testing in EU regulatory context, but the accuracy is influenced by the type and
complexity of parameters as well as the complexity of chemicals predicted and
highly dependent on existing experimental data.
In order to answer this hypothesis, the following objectives will be carried out:
• Provide an overview of different aspects of data reporting in dossiers and require­
ments across EU regulations.
• Develop and conduct interview a representative from a regulatory authority.
• Conduct an in­depth analysis of selected set of chemicals and parameters, based
on the following criteria for chemicals.
• Comparison of data gap filling models by statistical analysis.
• Make recommendations on possible harmonisation of data gap filling models in
chemical risk assessment across EU regulations.
The criteria for selecting a representative set of chemicals were the following: organic,
non­mixtures, cover a range of chemical classes and applications as well has having
DGFMs used in chemical report data.
The criteria for selecting the parameters were: they had to contain a numerical value,
availability of experimental data reported in dossiers as well as covering physicochemical
properties, environmental fate and ecotoxicity.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:23==
3
Methods
The following section provides a description of the process and tasks accomplished in this
study.
3.1
Sample Selection of Chemicals
To prioritise what parameters to investigate, as well as identify data gaps in chemical haz­
ard data, a selection of 18 chemicals were assessed as sample set. With the sample
selection, the aim was to answer the following hypothesis:
The sample selection serves well as a representation/snapshot of the large collection of
organic chemicals for the different models. Additionally the purpose of this sample selec­
tion was to provide a snapshot of a range of different chemicals. The sample selection is a
representation of the larger data sets used in this study where the sample compounds are
highlighted as examples in the results section, to show how well the different models per­
form. The criteria for the selection was that the chemicals were organic, mono­constituent
substance (non­mixtures) with a mix of available experimental data and documentation
for use of data gap filling methods (such as read­across or QSAR). Furthermore, it was
important to ensure that the range of chemicals were covered by either or both regulators
The European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) and European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)
for diversity. For simplicity, this study focused on the data requirements by the REACH
regulation as baseline. Further down, where the other regulations, investigated in this
study, data requirements were compared to the data requirements of REACH.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
13
==PAGE:24==
Table 3.1: Overview of compounds in the sample set. Main application purpose is based
on public registered data from ECHA [26], PPP database [27], BP database [28], CLP
[29], FCM plastic material regulation 10/2011 [30].
14
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:25==
In the process of selecting the sample chemicals, there were several steps and obstacles
to follow and overcome. Initially, chemicals were chosen from the ECHA’s Registered
substances [31] by choosing compounds with the highest production tonnage as these
chemicals would have the highest reporting requirements. As many of these top sub­
stances were either mixtures, similar to each other, or old well­documented substances,
a lot of them had to be excluded. The goal was specifically to find compounds that had
included DGFMs to fill missing hazard data, in order to first replicate the results using
documented QSAR models. Biocidal compounds were specially found from a list of com­
monly used biocides in order to ensure to include chemicals covered by the BP regulation
[32]. Table 3.1 shows an overview of the selected 18 chemicals, what superclasses they
adhere to using ClassyFire, the compounds main application purposes as reported in
ECHA, and under which of the five regulations investigated in this study, the chemicals
are registered.
The FCM Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 itself does not provide a detailed list of all chem­
icals specifically regulated or authorised for use in food contact materials. Instead, it sets
out the general framework and principles that all food contact materials must comply with,
which include not endangering human health or causing an unacceptable change in the
composition of the food.
While researching different types of chemical candidates to be used in this sample se­
lection along with the data gap filling methods used upon them, the following hypothesis
was established: Data gaps primarily exist in human toxicology and ecotoxicology and
are commonly filled by methods such as read­across and QSAR.
3.2
Selected Parameters
The selected parameters chosen for further investigation is based on the initial analysis
identifying data gaps use of DGFMs in chemical dossiers as demonstrated in Table B.1
in the appendix. Data requirements are comprehensively listed within the REACH, PPP,
BP and FCM regulations as illustrated in Table 4.2 in appendix.
Three different parameters was selected and investigated in this study: the octanol­water
partition coefficient (Kow), the bioconcentration factor (BCF) in fish, and the half­maximal
effective concentration (EC50) in fish in terms of both chronic and acute effects. The
parameters were selected based on the availability of reported experimental data from
registration dossiers, as well as the parameter type so the data could be quantitatively
assessed as documented in Table B.2 and Table B.3. Thus only numerical value reported
were used ­ instead of classification which is commonly used in human toxicology. Origi­
nally, human toxicology was of most interest, since it was found that many of the data gaps
appeared in toxicological information. However, it was found that the numerical values
were ’hidden’ behind classifications (e.g. carcinogenicity), where the full reports behind
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
15
==PAGE:26==
the classifications were not publicly available. Therefore, parameters within environmen­
tal fate, ecotoxicity, and physicochemical parameters (represented by BCF, EC50, and
Kow, respectively) were chosen instead. If this research were to be extended, it would be
recommended to get full disclosure of the chemical reports, that are not publicly available.
This would quantify the parameters otherwise reported in classifications. This would en­
able the possibility of studying the current DGFMs ability to predict parameters of human
toxicological concern.
The division of the compounds into super class is done to better identify the compounds.
The ClassyFire classification system has been used to identify the classes [33]. However,
in order to conclude on the substances based on their classes the use of subclasses
would be are more comprehensive presentation. The finer division into subclasses has
the disadvantage though, using ClassyFire not all chemicals has assigned a subclass.
Table 3.2 give an overview of how many classes are within each of the three parameters.
Table 3.2: Classification overview of unique superclasses, classes, and subclasses for
the compounds included in this study. The EC50 parameter is divided into chronic and
acute effects.
Parameter
Superclasses
Classes
Subclasses
Kow
23
227
394
BCF
12
62
109
EC50 (chronic)
14
59
95
EC50 (acute)
15
55
77
Below section provides a description of the selected parameters. The octanol­water
partition coefficient (Kow; sometimes denoted by P ) is defined as the concentration
ratio of a substance in a mixture octanol and water as solvents as defined in Equation 3.1.
As these solvents are immersible, it is an expression for the behaviour of a substance in
terms of its distribution between octanol (lipids/fatty tissue in organisms) and the aqueous
phase (water) [34]. Thus, it can be used to the bio accumulative potential of a compound
[35].
Kow = Coctanol
Cwater
(3.1)
where Coctanol and Cwater denote the concentration of a given chemical in octanol and
water, respectively. As seen by Equation 3.1, a higher Kow indicates a more hydropho­
bic/lipophilic substance while a lower Kow indicates a more hydrophilic substance [36].
Currently, OECD has three guidelines for experimental approaches to determine Kow for
chemicals, namely no. 107 (shake flask method) [37], no. 117 (high­performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) method) [38], and no. 123 (slow­stirring method) [39].
Most often, one mentions the logarithmic value of Kow rather than the numerical one
16
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:27==
because the values span multiple orders of magnitude, usually from ­3 (very hydrophilic)
to 10 (extremely hydrophobic) on log­scale. [40]. While there is no hard threshold for Kow
regarding hydrophilic vs. hydrophobic compounds, some studies mention soft thresholds
of log Kow > 1 as hydrophobic/lipophilic and log Kow < 1 as hydrophilic [41], or log Kow >
0 as hydrophobic/lipophilic and log Kow < 0 as hydrophilic [42]. Judging directly from
Equation 3.1, log Kow = 0 corresponds to Kow = 1, which would then translate to an
even distribution of the chemical between the phases. Thus, compounds with log Kow
values around these thresholds are likely of amphiphilic nature with both hydrophobic and
hydrophilic groups such as surfactants. It is difficult to accurately measure the octanol­
water partition coefficient for this type of compounds as they tend to collect at the interface
of the two phases rather than dissolving into them. Because of this, the Kow cannot
be measured by following the OECD guideline no. 107 anymore [43]. Due to this, the
following hypothesis was stated:
The Kow of highly hydrophobic or hydrophilic compounds is predicted more accurately
than for compounds that lie in­between, known as surfactants.
The bioconcentration factor (BCF) describes the equilibrium between the concentration
of a chemical contaminant within an organism and its surrounding environment. The
BCF of an organism is, thus, affected by both the uptake rate and removal rate from
the organism. At steady­state conditions where first order kinetics is assumed, the BCF
can be expressed as follows:
BCF = Corganism
Cwater
= k1
k2
(3.2)
where Corganism and Cwater are the chemical contaminant concentration in the organism
and water, respectively, and k1 and k2 are the first order uptake and removal rate con­
stants, respectively [35]. While this equilibrium may be reached for smaller, fast­growing
organisms, it is usually not the case for fish [44], which, in turn, therefore poses a great
problem if the contaminant is both classified as bioaccumulative (B­) and toxic (T­) ac­
cording to the criteria of the REACH regulation [45].
BCF is often mistakenly viewed as a constant. This is not the case, as it depends on vari­
ous biological and environmental conditions in addition to its dependence on the octanol­
water partitioning coefficient, Kow, for organic compounds [44]. Thus, both of these pa­
rameters can be used in the assessment of the bioaccumulation properties of a com­
pound. According to the REACH regulation [45], substances fulfil the criterion for bioac­
cumulative (B­) at BCF > 2000 L/kg and for very bioaccumulative (vB­) at BCF > 5000 L/kg.
According to the CLP regulation [46], a substance has the potential to bioconcentrate if
BCF in fish ≥500, or log Kow ≥4 if BCF is not available.
The relationship between the bioconcentration factor (BCF) and the octanol­water parti­
tioning coefficient (Kow) has been described in numerous ways. Two common correlations
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
17
==PAGE:28==
are as follows [47, 48, 49]:
log BCF = 0.85 · log Kow −0.70
(Veith et al. (1979))
(3.3)
log BCF = log Kow −1.32
(Mackay et al. (1982))
(3.4)
It should be noted, though, this type of correlations generally is only valid for unionisable
compounds with a molecular weight of less than 700 g/mol and a log Kow of less than 6
[35]. For a compound with a BCF of 5000 L/kg as the criterion for being very bioaccu­
mulative, the corresponding value for log Kow would be 5.18, which falls within the given
validity criterion. The general form of these equations is:
log BCF = a log Kow + b
(3.5)
Since BCF is an equilibrium between the organism and its surrounding environment, its
related testing methods consider biological aspects as well, while those of Kow do not.
Hence, the following hypothesis is established:
The BCF is a better parameter for predicting the environmental fate of organic compounds
in terms of model performance.
The parameter EC50 denotes the effective concentration required to obtain a given
effect on half a population size. In aquatic toxicity, this could be e.g. fish, daphnia, or
algae. In this study, EC50 is investigated with mortality as effect in fish; essentially, LC50,
i.e. the lethal concentration it takes to kill half the population [35]. While LC50 falls within
acute toxicity per definition, this study will investigate both acute and chronic EC50 for
fish. As proposed by Aurisano et al. 2019 in Table 1 [50], the cut­off values for acute and
chronic EC50 for fish used in this study are ≤7 days and > 7 days, respectively.
According to the European Commission (EC), there are two OECD test guidelines and one
guidance document for acute fish toxicity and three for chronic fish toxicity in existence.
For chronic fish toxicity, there is OECD test guideline no. 210 (fish, early­life stage toxicity
test) [51], no. 212 (fish, short­term toxicity test on embryo and sac­fry stages) [52], and no.
215 (fish, juvenile growth test) [53]. However, since no. 212 and 215 only cover embryonic
or juvenile life stages, they may not be suitable when testing chronic fish toxicity. For acute
fish toxicity, there is OECD test guideline no. 203 (fish, acute toxicity test) [54] and no.
236 (fish embryo acute toxicity test) [55]. Furthermore, OECD guidance document no.
126 (threshold approach for acute fish toxicity) [56] is mentioned [57].
It is important to note, that the three parameters investigated are used as a representa­
tive for the hazard data categories; physicochemical properties, environmental fate and
ecotoxicology. Other parameters used in regulations might require different methods of
data gap filling. The three selected parameters are simply examples of those included
in regulations, as there are many others, for which other types of DGFMs might be are
required.
18
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Models Used in This Study
While several DGFMs exist, this study focused only on QSAR models. Figure 3.1 shows
an overview of the different types of DGFMs along with subtypes within QSAR.
Figure 3.1: Overview of data gap filling methods. In vitro and read­across methods are
not investigated in this study.
Publicly available prediction models have been integrated in this analysis for multiple
chemical parameters.
The models implemented in this study along with their model
types and estimation domains are shown in Table 3.3 and include the following QSARs
EPISuite™, OPERA, T.E.S.T., MEYLAN, AlogP, MlogP, IRFMN, TRIDENT, MF­LOGP,
and QSAR SSD Toolbox. Elaborated documentation of the different models can be found
in Appendix D.
Quantitative Structure­Activity Relationships (QSARs) are widely used in filling out data
gaps, as they predict parameters such as toxicity, biological and other properties of a
chemical compound. Within the QSAR methodology, multiple models exist, which have
different features and algorithms in their predictions based on what the models empathise
on.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
19
==PAGE:30==
Table 3.3: Overview of models used in this study.
Model Software
Hub
Model Name
Parameter
Type
Estimation Domain
EPI Suite™
BCFBAF [58]
BCF
Multivariate Linear
Regression (MLR);
mechanistic
first principles
Organic compounds;
no universally
accepted definition
of model domain.
OECD QSAR
Toolbox
(EPI Suite™)
KOWWIN [59]
Kow
Multivariate Linear
Regression (MLR)
Organic compounds
CompTox
OPERA [60, 61]
Kow
K­Nearest
Neighbour (KNN)
Heterogeneous organic
compounds
OPERA [60, 62]
BCF
K­Nearest
Neighbour (KNN)
Heterogeneous organic
compounds
TEST [63]
BCF
Consensus
Not mentioned
VEGA
MEYLAN [64]
BCF
Multivariate Linear
Regression (MLR)
Organic compounds
ALogP [65]
Kow
Multivariate Linear
Regression (MLR)
Organic compounds
MlogP [66]
Kow
Multivariate Linear
Regression (MLR)
Organic compounds
IRFMN [67]
Acute EC50
Random Forest
(RF)
Organic compounds
­
TRIDENT [68]
Acute/
chronic EC50
Transformer­based
Deep Neural
Network (DNN)
Not mentioned
­
MF­LOGP [69]
Kow
Random Forest
(RF)
Organic compounds
­
QSAR SSD
Toolbox [70]
Acute EC50
Artificial Neural
Network (ANN)
Organic compounds
20
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:31==
By implementing said models, the following hypothesis was established: Data gap filling
methods can fully or partially replace animal tests to make predictions of chemical hazard
data.
Models were selected in such a way that traditionally used QSAR, e.g. linear regression
models, were included, while also selecting more novel approaches, involving machine
learning, were included. It was interesting to test whether the machine learning models
would perform better than the more traditional models as this was our hypothesis. In
Table 3.4, an overview of model statistics for each model is shown as found in the model
documentations.
Note the distinction between OECD QSAR Toolbox and QSAR SSD Toolbox. The
former of the two refers to the software hub from OECD, containing several QSAR
models from different sources, whilst the latter of the two refers to the machine
learning model for the estimation of EC50 by Song et al. [70].
Table 3.4: Overview of model statistics based on the documentation of the individual
model.
Model Name
Parameter
Equation
n
R2 *
SD**
MAE***
RMSE****
BCFBAF [71]
BCF
Equation D.2
35
0.634
0.538
0.396
­
Equation D.4
396
0.792
0.511
0.395
­
KOWWIN [59, 71]
Kow
Equation D.1
2447
0.982
0.217
0.159
­
OPERA [60, 61]
Kow
­
10,537
0.86
­
­
0.67
OPERA [60, 62]
BCF
­
626
0.85
­
­
0.53
TEST [63]
BCF
­
­
0.754
­
0.523
0.670
MEYLAN [64]
BCF
Equation D.2,
Equation D.4
516
0.80
­
­
0.55
AlogP [65]
Kow
Equation D.6
9,834
0.932
­
­
­
MlogP [66]
Kow
Equation D.7
9,961
0.73
­
­
0.96
IRFMN [67]
EC50 (O.
latipes)
­
264
0.72
­
­
0.75
TRIDENT [68]
EC50 (fish)
­
52,666
0.692 = 0.48
­
­
0.56
MF­LOGP [69]
Kow
Equation D.8
18,091
0.83
0.52
0.77
QSAR SSD
Toolbox [70]
EC50 (C.
variegatus)
­
141
0.66
­
­
­
EC50 (L.
Macrochirus)
­
263
0.72
­
­
­
EC50 (O.
Mykiss)
­
362
0.75
­
­
­
EC50 (O.
latipes)
­
371
0.54
­
­
­
EC50 (P.
promelas)
­
621
0.71
­
­
­
* R2 = correlation coefficient; ** SD = standard deviation; *** MAE = mean absolute error; **** RMSE = root
mean square error.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
21
==PAGE:32==
3.4
Data Curation
Multiple challenges occurred both in regard to collecting and processing experimental
data from renowned chemical databases. Lack of uniform reporting or human errors in
databases were identified, and resulted in changes of what experimental databases ap­
plied in this study. Limitations identified in data processing also include different input
requirements, that caused unnecessary steps when harmonising the data output in rela­
tion to model performance.
Differences in output format include, difference in units, causing possible uncertainty dur­
ing conversion. Some models such as OPERA, VEGA and TRIDENT e.g., only takes
SMILES as inputs ­ and returns only the SMILES that the model could recognise. Without
a software to identify a chemical based on SMILES only, to convert to other collectively
recognised chemical identification formats such as CAS numbers, this further complicates
the data processing, resulting in possible errors in identification. Implementing machine
learning models, where only code was available issued challenges in implementing the
code. It is uncertain how this have affected the overall results, nevertheless it is a point
to have in mind when analysing the results, as well as a point for possible future improve­
ment. Furthermore, obtaining the application domain (AD) quantitatively for the models
were equally challenging, hence resulting in, only the OPERA is tested for the influence of
AD in model prediction. The models different applicability domains, determines for what
chemical structures and space the models are valid. This domain is characterised by the
training sets, in which the models are trained. The application domain is an important
factor as it is closely related to the uncertainty of a models predictions and is a factor that
is investigated in the comparison of models in the results section.
For the QSAR SSD Toolbox, there were especially a lot of issues in the implementation.
For one, the documentation did not clearly state, in which unit the output was given, which
made it difficult to use. Most of the data points were out of applicability domain, which
might have caused errors.
The code itself could not run on a Windows computer due issues when attempting Ten­
sorflow package. As recommended in the documentation, a Linux computer was used
instead, on which the script was successfully run. The script to run all species (models) at
once, however, did not work. Instead, a for­loop was created to run the input chemicals
(SMILES) over all the models. The QSAR SSD Toolbox contains eight different models
(species), of which five are fish species and three are crustaceans (one of these is just
called ’Other Waterfleas’. The script that was used to run all models at once can be seen
in section I.2. A more elaborated explanation of issues regarding this model can be found
in Appendix D.
The MF­LOGP model also model caused many issues. First of all, it should be mentioned
that the model can only make predictions for chemicals with certain elements: C, H, N,
22
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:33==
O, S, P, F, Cl, Br, and I. One of the issues was: If the input contained molecular formulas
consisting of other elements than these (or an amount that exceeded 10), the code would
return ”Incompatible Formula”. Though, it would not tell you where in the input the error
had occurred. Therefore, it leaves the user to ensure correct input for the script behind
this model to work.
Furthermore, the script for this model contained several limitations. One limitation for
the script when running the code was that it only checked for the number of elements.
Above 10 elements gives an error, and below 10 elements makes it run the code and
fills out any ”missing” elements from the data set. The line in the code, which defined
”elements” as a variable was copy­pasted to line 114 for the ”else” statement in the file
’MFLOGP_Run_Code.py” (see Appendix I.1). Otherwise, code did not work for *exactly*
10 elements, which is what the ”elements” variable contains. The code gave no error if
any of these elements were replaced by different elements, i.e. if random elements were
inserted, the code would still run despite wrong predictions for such elements. Therefore,
this leaves a great responsibility to the user of this model to ensure that the input is correct.
Otherwise, to error­proof this code, modifications would be needed to test for specific
elements rather than only the number. Another suggestion to ”optimise” the code would be
to define the ”elements” variable in the beginning of the script rather than in ”if”­statements
as this variable seems to be used in the same way across the whole script, no matter the
input.
As machine learning models are usually defined by their applicable domains, the following
hypothesis was constructed:
Removing data points that fall outside of the applicable domain (AD) increases the R2 and
decreases the RMSE of the individual model.
Table 3.5 provide an overview of experimental data points that were available for the three
selected parameters. The overview show the difference in available experimental data,
where the aquatic toxicity data (EC50) has only a few experimental data points. Whereas
the simpler parameter of Kow as a substantial amount of data points. The data points for
Kow include experimental data from two data bases, DrugBank and EPI Suite.
Table 3.5: Overview of available experimental data points for each parameter, on which
this study has been conducted.
Parameter
Experimental data points available
Kow
11868
BCF
806
EC50 (chronic)
273
EC50 (acute)
318
Initially, data for EC50 was curated from an old data bank. The data bank did not contain
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
23
==PAGE:34==
much data on chronic EC50 and generally more on acute EC50. After looking deeper into
the database, it was discovered that some of the exposure durations (’HarmonizedExpo­
sureDuration.d.’) did not correspond to any real­time values. When checking individual
data sources, some values listed for EC50 were given in days, but in reality, these were
in hours. Some other values were not found in the data source at all, and some, though
stated as chronic data, was, in fact, acute data. Because of multiple errors found in this
data bank, it was concluded to be inadequate. Experimental data for EC50 was instead
acquired from the ECOTOX Knowledgebase [72] by using the search criteria listed in
appendix Appendix E. Chronic EC50 was assumed for data with an ’Observed Duration
Mean’ of > 7 days and acute EC50 was assumed for data with that of ≤7 days. It should be
noted that the output field ’Exposure Duration (Days)’ was also available. However, since
most of these rows were empty and the number of days were the same as for the out­
put field ’Observed Duration Mean’ with few exceptions, ’Observed Duration Mean’ was
used instead of ’Exposure Duration (Days)’ to classify the measurements as either acute
or chronic. In the cases where the ’Exposure Duration (Days)’ deviated from ’Observed
Duration Mean’, it was seen to be 1­2 days in difference and, therefore, it should not have
an impact on the classification. Furthermore, EC50 values with units that differed from AI
mg/L were systematically discarded for both acute and chronic measurements and, thus,
not included in the calculation of the geometric means. This action was taken as it was not
possible to convert these units and, thereby, create a fair comparison between measure­
ments. In the extracted experimental data, there were several columns for concentrations
(EC50 values). For the chronic EC50, only the column ’Conc 1 Mean (Standardised)’ was
used to calculate the geometric means. The columns ’Conc 2 Mean (Standardised)’ and
’Conc 3 Mean (Standardised)’ were not used as the latter was empty and the former only
contained data for inorganic or unknown types of chemicals. For the acute EC50, the col­
umn ’Conc 3 Mean (Standardised)’ was also empty and, therefore, excluded. However,
in a few cases, there was both data in column ’Conc 1 Mean (Standardised)’ and ’Conc
2 Mean (Standardised)’. Due to this, these data were combined when calculating the
geometric mean for the acute EC50.
When initially plotting the predicted data for EC50 against the extracted experimental data,
issues appeared. After trouble­shooting, it was discovered that the ’Delimited’ output
from the ECOTOX Knowledgebase [72] had formatting issues when importing to Excel
in the sense that the decimal separator had been removed for some values. The error
occurred for values with lots of decimals, resulting in very large values, up to 3.4 · 1010.
Luckily, using either the ’Excel (Condensed)’ or ’Excel (Full)’ outputs resolved this issue,
but unfortunately, it had already been a time consuming task, when setting up the Excel
sheets and making the associated, various formulas work, which had to be redone.
24
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:35==
3.5
Dissociation Correction
When dealing with Kow for ionisable compounds, some challenges can occur. When
receiving the value for Kow, it may not be for the neutral compound (as assumed), but in­
stead for the compound in its dissociated form (conjugated acid or base). Because of this,
the most outlying compounds in the models for Kow were corrected for their dissociation
where applicable.
According to the documentation of the scientific consensus model USEtox 2.0, for char­
acterising the chemicals impact on toxicity and ecotoxicity [73], the following equations
can be used for this correction to obtain the apparent octanol­water partition coefficient,
Kow,app,pH7, at pH = 7 for when pKa,loss ≤pKa,gain or pKa,loss > pKa,gain, respectively:
Kow,app,pH7 =
(
1
1 + 10pKa,loss−7 + 107−pKa,gain · Kow
)
+
(
1
1 + 107−pKa,loss + 10pKa,gain−7 · Kow,alt
)
(3.6)
Kow,app,pH7 =
(
1
1 + 10pKa,gain−7 + 107−pKa,loss · Kow
)
+
(
1
1 + 107−pKa,gain + 10pKa,loss−7 · Kow,alt
)
(3.7)
where
pKa,loss
= the equilibrium constant proton loss from conjugated acid of the parent compound,
pKa,gain
= the equilibrium constant proton gain from conjugated acid of the parent compound,
Kow
= the octanol­water partition coefficient of the original species,
Kow,alt
= the octanol­water partition coefficient of the alternate form.
Furthermore, it is given in Table 10 in the USEtox documentation that if no pKa,loss or
pKa,gain is listed in the substance data for a given chemical, it is set to 14 and 0, respec­
tively [73]. In cases where neither pKa,loss or pKa,gain is listed (and, thus, if both pKa and
pKb are 0 and 14, respectively), the chemical in question is assumed to be neutral. In
cases where only pKa,loss or only pKa,gain is listed, it is assumed to be an acid or base,
respectively.
Thus, the values of the apparent octanol­water partition coefficient at neutral pH were
calculated by downloading the latest USEtox release (corrective release 2.13) [74] and
inserting data for pKa,gain and pKa,loss (’pKa Acidic Apparent’ and ’pKa Basic Apparent’
in CompTox, respectively), and the molecular weight extracted from CompTox [75] into
the ’USEtox_substance_data_organics’ excel file in the ’InputData’ folder, together with
the predicted Kow values for each model. Hereafter, USEtox was run by opening the
’USEtox2.13’ excel file, importing the substance data from the previously mentioned file
with inserted data, and selecting the ’Run’ sheet where the relevant outlying chemicals
were chosen in order to finally obtain the apparent octanol­water partition coefficient at
neutral pH in the ’Fate’ sheet in row 27.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
25
==PAGE:36==
The same correction was intended to be conducted for BCF as various models depend
on the value of log Kow. In this case, the BCF from CompTox was inserted into the ’USE­
tox_substance_data_organics’ file as well in column AM (’BAFfish’) as this is the USEtox
equivalent to the mentioned BCF in this study. However, after testing this for several
chemicals (most outlying chemicals for BCF), it was found that there was an error in the
coding behind the calculation. It turned out that the IF loop in cell K200 in the mentioned
’Fate’ sheet only considers the values of ’pKa,gain’ and ’pKa,loss’ when no user input is
given for ’BAFfish’ in the ’Substance data’ sheet. Although, the equation for BAF for both
the original and alternate chemical species cannot be run if this user input is not given.
Therefore, USEtox does not correct for dissociation for BAF in any case. Had it been
possible, the same correction would have been made for BCF as it was for Kow for the
most outlying data points across the models.
3.6
Statistical Analysis
Evaluating the performance of the models, correlation­based methods was used to es­
tablish the goodness­of­fit of the model predictions. The metric used for R2 to evaluate
the models performances, is the method commonly called R2 in machine learning termi­
nology [76]. R2 is used to evaluate how well a model predicted values match those of the
experimental data. Interpretation of R2 in model validation, the R2 is interpreted as the
higher the R2 value, indicates better fit, with the maximum value being 1. However, using
the R2 metric, means the value of R2 can also be negative. This is particularly the case
when using library scikit­learn’s R2 score function in Python [77]. A negative R2 value
indicates that the model’s predictions are worse than simply predicting the mean of the
observed data. Interpreting a negative R2 value is thus a sign that the model is not appro­
priate for the data or that there may be issues with the model or data itself. A positive R2
indicates the model explains a portion of the variance in the data. An R2 of 0, indicates
that the model’s predictions are no better than predicting the mean of the observed data.
Alongside R2, the RMSE metric is also evaluated for each for the models, to provide
comprehensive insight into model performance overall. The definition of RMSE is a mea­
sure of the variance between the experimental and predicted values of a model [78]. The
value of the RMSE thus represent the average magnitude of error in the predicted val­
ues compared to the experimental, giving yet another quantitative measure of a models
performance.
R2 = 1 −
(
∑(Oi −¯O)(Pi −¯P)
√∑(Oi −¯O)2√∑(Pi −¯P)2
)2
(3.8)
where
26
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:37==
Oi
= observed values,
Pi
= predicted values,
¯O
= mean of observed values,
¯P
= mean of predicted values [76].
Diving deeper into the model results, the ClassyFire classification system was applied
on the chemical data. This allowed for analysis of whether of the any outliers, occur­
ring in the models, were assigned to certain chemical classes and, hence, if there were
any trends in chemical spaces that proved difficult to predict for certain models across
parameters. The ClassyFire classification system categorises the compounds in three
different levels of chemical class taxonomy; superclasses, classes, and subclasses. The
top level, ’superclass’, is a broad classification based on common, but general features
in the chemicals structures. The middle level is the ’class’, where additional structural
details such as substructures are considered and include functional groups. Compounds
are distinguished based on the placement of e.g., hydroxyl groups (­OH). In the last and
most specific level, ’subclass’, detailed characteristics of a given compound are consid­
ered, making it possible to distinguish between close related compounds with potentially
significantly varying biological properties [33]. Note that not all compounds in the chemical
data set used in this study were assigned a subclass by ClassyFire.
3.7
Interview with Finn Pedersen
To gain insight into the REACH initiative, an interview was conducted on April 18th, 2024,
with Finn Pedersen. Finn Pedersen is former employee of the Danish Ministry of the
Environment and ECHA. Finn took part in shaping the foundation of REACH and has
previously been posted in the European Commission. The purpose of the interview with
Finn Pedersen was to gain expert elicitation on selected questions around data gap filling
in regulatory context. Quotes used from the interview throughout the thesis have been
translated to English and set into context by Anne Birgitte Lillelund & Carina H. Bunde
and approved by Finn Pedersen. The questions that were asked during the interview can
be found in Appendix J. The duration of the interview was approximately 1½ hours.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
27
==PAGE:38==
28
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:39==
4
Results
To select the parameters investigated in this study, an initial identification of data require­
ments within each regulation were performed. The results of this identified five different
parameters within physicochemical properties that were included among all four regu­
lations regardless of tonnage as shown in Table 4.2. Of these five properties partition
coefficient were chosen for further investigation. For toxicological information only acute
toxicity by oral route were identified as requirement across all regulation and tonnage.
Due to the complexity and limited availability of QSARs within this parameter, it was not
selected for further investigation. For ecotoxicological information the PPP and FCM reg­
ulation had only a few of these included in the data requirements and most contained
data in qualitative format. The selected parameters were therefore aquatic toxicity and
bio accumulation for aquatic species.
In order to make recommendations on the use of QSAR models, three parameters were
selected: Kow, BCF (fish), and EC50 (fish; chronic and acute) representing physicochem­
ical properties, environmental fate, and ecotoxicity, respectively. Models were selected
for each parameter based on availability and applicability. The chemical superclasses
were investigated for each parameter in an attempt to identify predictability of the mod­
els regarding specific types of chemical structures. There were no trends in the results
indicating that specific superclasses proved challenging.
As seen in Table 4.1, the models for Kow generally performed better when evaluated
against experimental data from EPI Suite™rather than from DrugBank, judging from both
higher correlation coefficients, R2, and lower root mean square errors, RMSE. Overall,
OPERA performed best of the models with an R2 of 0.98 and an RMSE of 0.26 (for EPI
Suite™experimental data). However, for DrugBank experimental data, the performance
of OPERA was similar to the other models. The only exception was the worst performing
model, MF­LOGP, which had an R2 of ­0.30 and ­0.77 and an RMSE of 2.09 and 3.53
for EPI Suite™and DrugBank experimental data, respectively. The non­neutral outliers
across the Kow models were corrected for dissociation by using the USEtox model, from
which it was concluded that the outliers could not be explained by the missing dissociation
correction. Furthermore, it was checked whether the cause of the outliers was due to the
presence of surfactants, which are known to lead to issues in Kow measurements, but
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
29
==PAGE:40==
this was not the case.
For BCF, OPERA was also the best performing model with an R2 of 0.98 and a RMSE
of 0.16. EPI Suite™BCFBAF, TEST, and MEYLAN had very similar performances. Even
though OPERA performed best for both Kow based on statistical results, it was considered
unreliable due to near perfect correlation, stemming from data points located exactly on
the 1:1 line.
A model comparison of chronic EC50 could not be made as only one model was found
for this parameter. However, this model, TRIDENT, could predict both acute and chronic
EC50, for which it had similar performances. It was also the best performing model for
acute EC50 with R2 = 0.59 and RMSE = 1.04.
Table 4.1: Overview of all model statistical results based on EPI Suite™, DrugBank, and
ECOTOX Knowledge base experimental data (where applicable).
Model
n
R2
RMSE
EPI Suite™
DrugBank
EPI Suite™
DrugBank
Kow
EPI Suite™KOWWIN
11,401
0.85
0.28
0.72
2.32
OPERA
10,940
0.98
0.69
0.26
1.49
AlogP
6,158
0.86
0.69
0.77
1.46
MlogP
6,092
0.77
0.66
0.98
1.53
MF­LOGP
10,888
­0.30
­0.77
2.09
3.53
BCF
EPI Suite™BCFBAF
806
0.76
­
0.53
­
OPERA
802
0.98
­
0.16
­
TEST
802
0.76
­
0.54
­
MEYLAN
540
0.76
­
0.55
­
Model
n
R2
RMSE
ECOTOX Knowledgebase
ECOTOX Knowledgebase
Chronic EC50
TRIDENT
273
0.59
0.96
Acute EC50
TRIDENT
292
0.59
1.04
TEST
163
0.29
1.32
IRFMN
200
0.31
1.28
QSAR SSD Toolbox
318
­0.04
1.62
30
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:41==
Note that EPI Suite™contains both a database of experimental data, as well as the
prediction models, KOWWIN and BCFBAF.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
31
==PAGE:42==
4.1
Requirements of Regulations
Table 4.2 shows an overview of the data requirements that are mentioned in the REACH,
PPP, BP, and FCM regulations compared to the comprehensive list of data requirements
from the REACH regulation. The CLP does not have specific data requirements related
to authorising a chemical on the market, it builds upon the already existing data and what
you can derive from these, which is why it is not included in this table. Finn Pedersen
states, that
”There are no data requirements for CLP. It only builds on already available
data, from which classifications are made. However, this doesn’t relieve in­
dustry from their general obligation to ensure that the chemicals they produce,
place on the market or use do not adversely affect human health and the en­
vironment.”
— Finn Pedersen
The PPP, BP, and FCM regulations include case specific data requirements, not included
in the REACH regulation, which was used as a baseline. The individual specific data
requirements for each of these regulations, that are not included in the REACH, are illus­
trated in Table C.1, Table C.2, and Table C.3 in Appendix C.
32
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.2: Overview of data requirements in the PPP, BP and FCM regulations compared
to the REACH regulation. Green indicate the parameter is included in the regulation. red
indicted the parameter is not included. The nuances of brown categorise the different
requirements based on the annual production tonnage of a given chemical, as they are
listed in REACH.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
33
==PAGE:44==
Table 4.2 (Continued).
34
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:45==
Table 4.2 (Continued)..
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
35
==PAGE:46==
4.2
The Octanol­Water Partition Coefficient (Kow)
Figure 4.1 illustrates the correlation between experimental data represented on the y­axis
and model prediction data on the x­axis for the octanol­water partition coefficient, Kow.
The prediction values were obtained from different four models, namely: EPI Suite™KOWWIN,
OPERA, AlogP, MlogP, and MF­LOGP. Experimental data for Kow has been procured
from two data sources: EPI Suite™and DrugBank.
Figure 4.1: Predicted vs.
experimental data for Kow for five different models: EPI
Suite™KOWWIN (n = 11,401), OPERA (n = 10,940), AlogP (n = 6,158), MlogP (n =
6,092), and MF­LOGP (n = 10,888). Total DrugBank experimental data points: n = 1,083;
total EPI Suite™experimental data points: n = 11,256.
The statistical analysis of the models generally shows that experimental data from the
36
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:47==
DrugBank performs worse that those of EPI Suite™in terms of both lower values of R2
and higher values of R2. Overall, OPERA performs best of all the models given its R2
= 0.98 and RMSE = 0.26 considering experimental data from EPI Suite™. This is ex­
pected as OPERA uses EPI Suite™data for training the model, which is likely the reason
that the performance of OPERA resembles that of the other models (AlogP, and MlogP)
for the experimental data from DrugBank in the sense that it performs worse. However,
while the EPI Suite™KOWWIN model (aside from MF­LOGP) is similar to the other model
performances for the EPI Suite™experimental data source, it stands out from the rest of
models with a much lower R2 of 0.28 and much higher RMSE of 2.32 for the DrugBank
source.
MF­LOGP is the worst performing model with a negative R2 for both data sources, which
indicates that the model predictions are worse than predicting the mean of the observed
data. In other words, a negative R2 suggests that the model does not capture the variance
in the data and is, thus, performing poorly. As seen in Figure 4.1, MF­LOGP also tends to
overestimate Kow compared to experimental values, considering the larger cloud of data
points below the 1:1 compared to above it. In relation to the CLP regulation [46], this could
mean a higher tendency of indicating a bioconcentration potential if using Kow in the eval­
uation (recall that log Kow ≥4 or Kow ≥10, 000 indicates a potential to bioconcentrate;
see section 3.2). In the other models, the data point clusters seem to be more evenly dis­
tributed, only with a slight overestimation and underestimation in EPI Suite™KOWWIN
and MlogP, respectively. For Kow, an overestimation is considered better than an under­
estimation.
Table 4.3: Number of Kow data points in each of the
top 10 chemical superclasses [33].
Top 10 Superclasses for Kow
Count
(%)
Unknown
5,714
48.1%
Benzenoids
2,516
21.2%
Organoheterocyclic compounds
1,563
13.2%
Organic acids and derivatives
481
4.1%
Organic oxygen compounds
387
3.3%
Lipids and lipid­like molecules
387
3.3%
Other
332
2.8%
Organic nitrogen compounds
228
1.9%
Phenylpropanoids and polyketides
137
1.2%
Organohalogen compounds
127
1.1%
Total number of data points
11,872
100%
Table 4.3 shows an overview
of the number of data points
that were assigned to each of
the top 10 chemical superclasses
for Kow.
There were 23 su­
perclasses in total for Kow, of
which 332 were further cate­
gorised as ’Others’ for visualisa­
tion purposes in the plots. Thus,
’Others’ consists of the fifteen su­
perclasses shown in Table G.1
in Appendix G. ’Unknowns’, i.e.
compounds that could not be
classified by ClassyFire, make up
almost half of all the data points,
followed by ’Benzenoids’, which
make up around 1/5 of the data points. When identifying the outlying compounds across
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
37
==PAGE:48==
the models, no general trend was found in terms of superclasses, as the outliers belong to
varying superclasses. In parallel, no superclasses stood out in terms of performing better
than others in any of the models. In Appendix G, a full list of number of data points in
each of the unique superclasses in Kow is listed. Across the models in Figure 4.1, it can
also be seen that the data points from the sample selection of chemicals (marked with
crosses) seem to correlate well with the experimental data as they are distributed almost
exactly on the 1:1 line. This supports the hypothesis that the sample selection serves well
as a representation/snapshot of the large collection of organic chemicals for the different
models.
In order to further investigate the cause of the outlying compounds, the data points were
categories based on their source data, i.e. if the experimental data originated from Drug­
Bank or EPI Suite™. Figure 4.2 identifies the outlying chemicals. The two most outlying
compounds within each model were chosen as subjects, and their locations across the five
models for Kow have been highlighted as seen in the figure. All of the outliers are located
in the DrugBank experimental data. From Figure 4.2, it can be seen that beta­Carotene
(CAS: 7235­40­7) and Neomycin B (CAS: 119­04­0) are the most outlying compounds
throughout all five prediction models. The outliers span from 10−12 to 1018 (30 orders of
magnitude) to for all the models for Kow.
Beta­carotene is underestimated in all models except for EPI Suite™KOWWIN, where it
is right on the 1:1 line, indicating a very good prediction for this compound. Neomycin B is
overestimated in both OPERA and MF­LOGP, however rather close to the 1:1 line in both
EPI Suite™, AlogP, and MlogP, while Fondaparinux (CAS: 104993­28­4) is underesti­
mated in all of the models, except MF­LOGP, and especially in EPI Suite™KOWWIN and
AlogP. Lastly, Acarbose appears only as a slight outlier in EPI Suite™KOWWIN, although
it is located very close to the 1:1 line in both the MlogP and AlogP models. Acarbose was
not predicted by OPERA and MF­LOGP.
38
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.2: Predicted vs. experimental data for Kow for five different models, divided into
experimental data source, where the most outlying compounds have been highlighted.
The compound Acarbose (CAS: 56180­94­0) was not predicted by the OPERA and MF­
LOGP models and is, thus, not visible on those two plots.
As mentioned previously (see section 3.2), it can be difficult to measure Kow for am­
phiphilic compounds such as surfactants because they inherit both hydrophobic and hy­
drophilic characteristics. Therefore, the outlying compounds in the Kow plots were further
inspected by classifying them as either hydrophilic, hydrophobic, or surfactants based on
their molecular structures (see Figure F.1 in Appendix F). With this in mind, hydrophilic
and hydrophobic compounds were expected to be predicted well (expected non­outliers),
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
39
==PAGE:50==
while surfactants were expected to have poor predictions (expected outliers). This was
not the case, however, as seen in Table 4.4, since only one out of the five outliers could be
considered a surfactant. Thus, the hypothesis that the Kow of highly hydrophobic or hy­
drophilic compounds is predicted more accurately than for compounds that lie in­between,
known as surfactants, is rejected.
Table 4.4: Classifications of chemical outliers for Kow.
Chemical Name
CAS No.
Molecular Formula
Classification
Fondaparinux
104993­28­4
C31H53N3O49S8
Hydrophillic
Beta­carotene
7235­40­7
C40H56
Hydrophobic
Neomycin B
119­04­0
C23H46N6O13
Hydrophillic
Ubidecarenone
303­98­0
C59H90O4
Surfactant
Acarbose
56180­94­0
C25H43NO18
Hydrophillic
In Figure 4.2, it is also seen that, while the strongest outliers all originate from the Drug­
bank source, some outliers stem from the EPI Suite™experimental data source. More­
over, some of the data points in the OPERA model are located exactly on the 1:1 line,
which indicates that the input of the model is equal to the output. Therefore, an additional
test has been made for this model only with the hypothesis that removing data points that
fall outside of the applicable domain (AD) increases the R2 and decreases the RMSE of
the individual model. The results of this test are found in Figure 4.3. Note that the results
shown in this figure are based on EPI Suite™experimental data only.
40
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.3: Predicted vs. EPI Suite™experimental data for Kow for the OPERA model,
where data points have been differentiated based on location in training test (blue dots)
or test set (red dots) [79]. Data points outside the AD or neither in the training nor test set
have been removed.
Based on the fact that the R2 has changed from 0.98 to 0.97 and the RMSE has changed
from 0.26 to 0.33 for the OPERA model after the removal of all data points that fell outside
the applicable domain, the hypothesis is rejected. In addition, it was hypothesised that
outliers were not included in the training set of the model. When looking into the model
documentation for OPERA [60], the same trend was not found in the performance plots.
Thus, an explanation as to why the data points appear exactly on the 1:1 line could not
be found.
Table 4.5 contains the extracted data for pKa,gain (’pKa Acidic Apparent’; pKa), pKa,loss
(’pKa Basic Apparent’; b), and Kow from CompTox, which was used as input data for the
USEtox model. Note that the Kow listed in this table is, thus, not derived from the model
results obtained in this study. The Kow,app,pH7 is the apparent octanol­water partition coef­
ficient at neutral pH, calculated by the USEtox model from Equation 3.6 and Equation 3.7
as mentioned in section 3.5.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
41
==PAGE:52==
Table 4.5: Dissociation constants from CompTox [80, 81, 82, 83, 84] along with calculated apparent octanol­water partition coefficients from
USEtox (if applicable) of chemical outliers across Kow models.
Chemical Name
CAS No.
pKa
Chemical
Class
pKa
Acidic
Apparent
pKa
Basic
Apparent
Kow
Kow,app,pH7
(USEtox)
EPI Suite™
KOWWIN
OPERA
AlogP
MlogP
MF­LOGP
EPI Suite™
KOWWIN
OPERA
AlogP
MlogP
MF­LOGP
Fondaparinux
104993­28­4
Acid
2.45
­3.54
7.10E­32
2.44E­03
6.92E­14
2.45E­06
2.53E+07
2.00E­36
6.88E­08
1.95E­18
6.92E­11
7.13E+02
Beta­carotene
7235­40­7
Neutral
­
­
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Neomycin B
119­04­0
Amphoter
9.52
10.0
3.88E­10
3.10E­02
1.01E­09
3.55E­07
9.37E+03
1.17E­12
9.33E­05
3.30E­12
1.07E­09
2.82E+01
Ubidecarenone
303­98­0
Neutral
­
­
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Acarbose
56180­94­0
Amphoter
6.08
8.50
1.31E­10
N/A
9.77E­08
2.04E­07
N/A
1.14E­10
N/A
8.48E­08
1.77E­07
N/A
42
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.4 highlights the Kow values corrected for dissociation compared to the original
predicted values for each model. As seen in the figure, the corrected Kow values for per­
form worse for Fondaparinux and Neomycin B in all the models, located farther from the
1:1 line, than the original values. The only exception is the correction of Acarbose. As
mentioned previously, Acarbose was not predicted by the OPERA and MF­LOGP models,
which is why it is not visible in those model plots. For Acarbose, the original and corrected
values fall within the same order of magnitude, resulting in the two purple squares over­
lapping as the difference is too precise to be depicted on the figures.
In the EPI Suite™KOWWIN model, the predicted value of Fondaparinux exceeds the
scale of the x­axis, with a predicted value of 10−36, i.e. 10 orders of magnitude farther from
the 1:1 line compared to the original value. For Neomycin B, the corrected value is located
close to the original value, but still farther from the 1:1 line. Based on these observations,
it can be concluded that correction for dissociation does not better the prediction values for
the selected outliers. Outliers Beta­carotene and Ubidecarenone have not been corrected
for dissociation as they are considered neutral compounds.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.4: Predicted vs. experimental data for Kow where selected outliers (see Ta­
ble 4.5) have been corrected for dissociation (light squares) to be compared to the cor­
responding non­corrected values (dark squares). Corrected and non­correct values of
Acarbose are overlapping due to same order of magnitude.
44
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:55==
4.3
The Bioconcentration Factor (BCF)
Figure 4.5 illustrates the correlation between experimental data on the y­axis and model
prediction data on the x­axis for BCF. The prediction values were obtained from four dif­
ferent models, namely: EPI Suite™BCFBAF, OPERA, TEST, and MEYLAN. The experi­
mental data was procured from a single data source: EPI Suite™.
Figure 4.5: Predicted vs. experimental data for BCF for four different prediction models:
EPI Suite™BCFBAF (n = 806), OPERA (n = 802), TEST (n = 802), and MEYLAN (n =
540).
Judging from the statistical analysis of the models, OPERA is, once again, the best per­
forming with an R2 of 0.98 and an RMSE of 0.16. The EPI Suite™BCFBAF, TEST, and
MEYLAN models all perform relatively similarly both in terms of their R2 and RMSE. Gen­
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
45
==PAGE:56==
erally, the RMSEs indicate that the predictions of the models are displaced by a certain
average from the actual experimental value. Thus, OPERA has a very low displacement
of 0.16 L/kg while that of the other three models ranges from 0.53­0.55 L/kg.
When comparing the model outputs of EPI Suite™BCFBAF and MEYLAN, it is clear to
see that they share same pattern in the form of a vertical line at BCF = 3.16, corresponding
to log BCF = 0.50. The fact that the same pattern can be seen for both models can be
explained by the basis behind these two models. According to the EPI Suite™BCFBAF
documentation, non­ionic compounds with log Kow < 1.0 and ionic compounds with log
Kow < 5.0 are assigned the default log BCF value of 0.50 (see Table D.1 in Appendix
D.1.2). Since both EPI Suite™BCFBAF and MEYLAN are based on the proposed method
by Meylan et al., 1999 [58], the vertical line is, therefore, expected to be seen in both plots.
This is likely also the reason why the plots for these two models are almost identical. Both
models seem to have a tendency to overestimate more than underestimate, judging based
on number of data points below the 1:1 line and their distance to it, while the TEST model
seems to have a higher tendency to underestimate with an abundance of data points
above the 1:1 line. In the case of BCF, an overestimation can be considered better than
an underestimation because an overestimation would lead to a stricter regulation of a
given chemical.
Table 4.6: Number of BCF data points in each of the
top 10 chemical superclasses [33].
Top 10 Superclasses for BCF
Count
(%)
Benzenoids
432
53.6
Unknown
118
14.6
Organoheterocyclic compounds
58
7.2
Organic acids and derivatives
54
6.7
Organohalogen compounds
44
5.5
Lipids and lipid­like molecules
29
3.6
Organic nitrogen compounds
24
3.0
Organic oxygen compounds
21
2.6
Other
20
2.5
Phenylpropanoids and polyketides
6
0.7
Total number of data points
806
100
Table 4.6 shows the distribution
of data points in BCF for the
top 10 superclasses.
In Ta­
ble G.2 in Appendix G, a full
list of all data points in each of
the unique superclasses in BCF
is listed.
As seen from the ta­
ble, benzenoids is the dominat­
ing superclass, making up more
than half of the total number
of data points, followed by un­
knowns and organoheterocyclic
compounds. This would explain
why most outliers seen in Fig­
ure 4.5 are benzenoids.
Still,
some outliers are seen to belong
to the superclasses such as organoheterocyclic compounds, unknowns, and organic
acids and derivatives. Two out of the four present chemicals from the sample selec­
tion (marked with crosses) are generally close to the 1:1 line while the remaining two are
slightly further, however still within data cluster.
46
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.6: Predicted vs. experimental data for BCF for the OPERA model, where data
points have been differentiated based on location in training and test set [79]. Data points
outside the AD have been removed.
.
Just as for the OPERA Kow model, most of the predicted values, including the sample
selection, from the OPERA BCF model are aligned exactly with the 1:1 line, which was ini­
tially thought to be due to the fact that the model has been trained on EPI Suite™experimental
data. However, considering this, it would mean that the input of the model is equal to its
output. Still, there are some outliers in the plot. In order to explore the cause of these
results, the data from OPERA were tested by removing data points which were not inside
the AD as seen in Figure 4.6. After the removal of these data points, both the R2 and the
RMSE of the OPERA BCF model remained the same. Hence, it had no effect and could,
therefore, not explain the outliers based on the AD. Another hypothesis was that the out­
liers were chemicals, which were not included in the training set of the model, leading to
poor predictability from the model. The results of this test support this hypothesis, consid­
ering that only few data points within the training set are not on the 1:1 line. Because of
the many data points located exactly on the 1:1 line, it is not clear to determine whether
the model has tendencies of under­ or overestimation of BCF.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure
4.7:
Outliers
in
BCF
predictions.
Disodium
2,2’­methylenebis[3,4,6­
trichlorophenolate]
(CAS:
3247­34­5),
Benzyltrimethylammonium
chloride
(CAS:
56­93­9), and 1,3,5­Tribromo­2­(2,3­dibromo­2­methylpropoxy)benzene (CAS: 36065­
30­2) are not predicted by all models. Highlighted chemicals with textboxes appear as
outliers in all the models. The remaining identified outliers are shown in the legend.
48
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:59==
For deeper examination of the outliers for BCF, two to three of the most outlying com­
pounds of each model have been selected. Figure 4.7 highlights the identified outliers
and their locations in each of the models. The three compounds Lauric acid (CAS. 143­
07­7), Bis(pentabromophenyl) ether (CAS. 1163­19­5), and Octachloronaphtalene (CAS.
2234­13­1) stand out in the sense that they all appear as outliers across multiple models.
The outliers span from 10−0.5 to 105.2 ( 6 orders of magnitude) in EPI Suite™BCFBAF,
100.1 to 104.1 ( 4 orders of magnitude) in OPERA, 10−0.5 to 105 in TEST, and 10−0.5 to 105
for MEYLAN. The bottom outliers are, thus, the same for all the BCF models.
The predicted BCF of Lauric acid is generally underestimated in the models, whereas that
of Octachloronaphtalene is generally overestimated. However, even though Decachloro­
biphenyl (CAS: 2051­24­3) is identified as outlier in the TEST model, it does perform well
in the other models. For OPERA, however, based on the previous test, it should be men­
tioned that this compound is part of the training set for the OPERA model and appears
right on the 1:1 line.
The TEST model stands out from the other model in the sense that the compounds, Lauric
acid and Bis(pentabromophenyl) ether, are within the data cloud. Lauric acid is, along
with Benzyltrimethylammonium chloride, classified as surfactants as the only two out of
the nine outliers, which are expected to be predicted poorly. Therefore, based on the
classifications of the outliers, the hypothesis that was previously mentioned for Kow is not
supported for BCF, either.
Table 4.7: Classifications of chemical outliers for BCF.
Chemical Name
CAS No.
Molecular Formula
Classification
Dehydroabietic Acid
1740­19­8
C20H28O2
Hydrophobic
Disodium 2,2’­methylenebis­
[3,4,6­trichlorophenolate]
3247­34­5
C13H6Cl6O2Na2
Hydrophilic
Benzyltrimethylammonium chloride
56­93­9
C10H16ClN
Surfactant
Bis(pentabromophenyl) ether
1163­19­5
C12Br10O
Hydrophobic
1,3,5­Tribromo­2­(2,3­dibromo­2­
methylpropoxy)benzene
36065­30­2
C10H7Br5O
Hydrophobic
Octachloronaphthalene
2234­13­1
C10Cl8
Hydrophobic
Decachlorobiphenyl
2051­24­3
C12Cl10
Hydrophobic
Lauric acid
143­07­7
C12H24O2
Surfactant
Pentabromotoluene
87­83­2
C7H3Br5
Hydrophobic
Table 4.7 shows the classifications for each of the identified outliers.
Seeing as two
of the most distinct outliers, Bis(pentabromophenyl) ether and Octachloronaphtalene,
can be classified as hydrophobic compounds, these compounds would be expected to
be predicted well by the models due to the known correlations between Kow and BCF.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
49
==PAGE:60==
That is, considering their multivariate linear regression relations in models such as EPI
Suite™BCFBAF and MEYLAN, these models would be expected to have similar charac­
teristics in terms of model performance as the Kow models.
Figure 4.8: Outlying chemicals from the BCF models as they appear in the Kow models.
Classification of each outlier is described in Table 4.7.
Because Kow and BCF have known correlations, which are also used for prediction in
some of the models, it was thought interesting to explore whether outlying chemicals
found in the BCF models were better or worse predicted by the Kow models. Conversely,
it was intended to do the same analysis for Kow outliers in the BCF models, but these were
not found in the experimental data set for BCF and, thus, it was not possible to check this.
This is likely due to the fact that the data set for Kow is vastly larger than that of BCF
50
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:61==
investigated in this study.
Five out of the nine identified outliers from the BCF models were found in the experimental
data set for Kow. These are: Dehydroabietic Acid (CAS: 1740­19­8), Benzyltrimethylam­
monium chloride (CAS: 56­93­9), Octachloronaphthalene (CAS: 2234­13­1), Decachloro­
biphenyl (CAS: 2051­24­3), and Lauric acid (CAS: 143­07­7). Figure 4.8 highlights the
locations of the outlying compounds from BCF models as they appear in the Kow data.
Classifications of the outliers can be found in Table 4.7.
Even though Lauric acid and Benzyltrimethylammonium chloride in Figure 4.8 are surfac­
tants, they perform unexpectedly well in four out of the five models as they located on the
1:1 line. The only exception is the MF­LOGP model, where Benzyltrimethylammonium
chloride is rather far from the 1:1 line, although Lauric acid is still relatively close to it. The
remaining three outliers are all classified as hydrophobic and are, thus, expected to have
good predictions as is also the case, again with the exception of the MF­LOGP model,
which is the worst performing Kow model. This would indicate that the BCF models are
worse than the Kow models in their predictability for these compounds.
4.4
Chronic Effective Concentration (EC50)
Figure 4.9 illustrates the correlation between experimental data represented on the y­
axis and model prediction data on the x­axis of the chronic effective concentration, EC50,
for fish. Correlation analysis consists of chronic EC50 predictions from one models, and
experimental data from one data sources, ECOTOX Knowledgebase [72].
Figure 4.9: Predicted vs. experimental data for chronic EC50 (fish) for the TRIDENT model
(n = 273).
The TRIDENT model was run with 15 days (360 hours) as this was the median for the
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
51
==PAGE:62==
experimental data for chronic EC50 (see Figure E.1 in Appendix E. As seen in Figure 4.9,
the data points generally clasp around the 1:1 line. However, there are a few outliers. The
outlier that particularly stand out are 2,6,6­Trimethylbicyclo[3.1.1]heptane (CAS: 473­55­
22) from the superclass lipids at around 10−7 mg/L.
Due to lacking experimental data, only two chemicals from the sample selection could be
included in the analysis of EC50, namely Cyproconazole (CAS: 94361­06­5) and Dede­
cyldimethylammonium chloride (CAS: 7173­51­5). There is a large spread in the data
points with the span of outliers of 8 orders of magnitude, ranging from 10−6 to 102.1 mg/L.
It has not yet been possible to find the reason as to why the model generally overes­
timates the EC50 value. Because the model tends to overestimate the EC50, it means
that it underestimates the toxicity in fish. This could be a problem in relation to chemical
regulation as a given chemical might seem less hazardous than it is in reality.
Table 4.8: Number of chronic EC50 data points in each
of the top 10 chemical superclasses [33].
Top 10 Superclasses for Chronic EC50
Count
(%)
Benzenoids
141
42.5
Organoheterocyclic compounds
38
11.4
Organic acids and derivatives
31
9.3
Unknown
26
7.8
Other
21
6.3
Lipids and lipid­like molecules
20
6.0
Organic nitrogen compounds
20
6.0
Organohalogen compounds
20
6.0
Organic oxygen compounds
12
3.6
Phenylpropanoids and polyketides
3
0.9
Total number of data points
332
100
From the statistical analysis of
the TRIDENT model, it can be
seen that the model performs ad­
equately in this test with a R2 of
0.59.
The displacement of the
predicted EC50 value compared
to the experimental are quite high
though with an RMSE of 0.96
mg/L. However, when investigat­
ing the plot further, it is evident
that TRIDENT for chronic EC50
overestimates the EC50 value,
and therefore underestimates the
toxicity, which is a problem. If the
model that companies uses for re­
porting hazard data tends to un­
derestimate toxicity, this can be a big problem. For the purpose of predicting a chemical
toxicity for chronic EC50, this model is not very suitable even though it has many values
close to the 1:1 line because of this. Table 4.8 below show the distribution of chemicals
in the top 10 superclasses.
In Appendix G a full list of all data points in each of the unique superclasses in acute EC50
is listed.
4.5
Acute Effective Concentration (EC50)
Figure 4.10 illustrates the correlation between experimental data represented on the y­
axis and model prediction data on the x­axis of the parameter, acute effect concentration,
52
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:63==
EC50, for fish. Correlation analysis consists of acute EC50 predictions from four models,
and experimental data from one data sources, ECOTOX. Just as for chronic EC50, there
was not a lot of experimental data and due to this, only one chemical from the sample
selection could be used for the model comparison: Cyproconazole (CAS: 94361­06­5).
The sample compound lies on the 1:1 line for the TRIDENT mode, but for the three others,
the sample compound is underestimated meaning the toxicity of the sample compound is
overestimated in three of the models predictions.
Figure 4.10: Predicted vs. experimental data for acute EC50 for four different models:
TRIDENT (n = 292), TEST (n = 163), IRFMN (n = 200), and QSAR SSD Toolbox (n =
318).
Again the results show a vast spread in data points, with the most outlying compounds
span over 8 orders of magnitude compared to experimental data, ranging from 10−4 to
104 across all models.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
53
==PAGE:64==
Table 4.9: Number of acute EC50 data points in each
of the top 10 chemical superclasses [33].
Top 10 Superclasses for Acute EC50
Count
(%)
Benzenoids
124
39.0
Organic acids and derivatives
45
14.2
Other
37
11.6
Unknown
26
8.2
Organoheterocyclic compounds
23
7.2
Organohalogen compounds
22
6.9
Organic oxygen compounds
14
4.4
Lipids and lipid­like molecules
10
3.1
Organic nitrogen compounds
10
3.1
Phenylpropanoids and polyketides
7
2.2
Total number of data points
318
100
Predicting toxicological data is a
complex affair due to the test
organisms biological complexity.
Acute EC50 is however, a pa­
rameter where a lot of predic­
tions models has been devel­
oped. With this in mind, the re­
sults of the predictions of acute
EC50 is therefore not as expected.
Generally the results show, that
there are little correlation with the
experimental data from the ECO­
TOX database and the predic­
tion models. Evaluating the mod­
els performances from statistical
analysis, the model that performs
best is the TRIDENT model however, not as well as for chronic EC50 with an R2 of only
0.59. There are a large spread between the compounds. Even though a lot of the com­
pounds lie around the 1:1 for the TRIDENT model, the model still tends to both over­ and
underestimate the acute EC50 for a vast amount of the compounds. The TEST model
tends to underestimate med EC50 values, and thus overestimating the toxicity of the com­
pounds. Both the VEGA model IRFMN and the machine learning model QSAR SSD
Toolbox has a spread both over­ and underestimating the value, the predictions of these
models are thus not certain or precise enough. For the QSAR SSD Toolbox model the R2
is negative, further indicating that the models performs poorly.
Table 4.9 show the distribution of chemicals in the top 10 superclasses.
In Appendix G a full list of all data points in each of the unique superclasses in acute EC50
is listed.
54
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:65==
5
Discussion
The main hypothesis of this study to be tested was the integration of data gap filling meth­
ods in chemical hazard assessment offers a time­ and cost­efficient approach that can
reduce or replace animal testing in EU regulatory context, but the accuracy is influenced
by the type and complexity of parameters as well as the complexity of chemicals predicted
and highly dependent on existing experimental data. In order to answer the main hypoth­
esis, multiple sub­hypotheses were constructed and tested as described in the following.
The hypothesis that data gaps primarily exist in human toxicology and ecotoxicology and
are commonly filled by methods such as read­across and QSAR was tested by review­
ing chemical dossiers in ECHA CHEM [85] (REACH). DGFMs in dossiers were identified
in the process of creating the sample selection of chemicals. In this process, an initial
selection was made, where after some chemicals were removed and new compounds
were added. A snapshot of this process can be seen in Table B.1. Each data require­
ment in REACH for a given chemical was checked for compliance according to tonnage,
as data requirements in REACH vary and depend upon this. The data compliance was
categorised as ’Experimental’, ’Other’ (experimental data from handbook etc.), DGFM
(’QSAR’/Read­across’), ’N/R’ (data­waiving), or ’N/A’ (data gap, i.e. data requirement not
fulfilled by either of the former mentioned categories). As seen in Table B.1, data gaps
(’N/A’) were found to be abundant within the areas of toxicological information (human
toxicology) and ecotoxicological information (ecotoxicology). These findings support the
stated hypothesis. A contributing factor these findings could be the complexity of biologi­
cal factors within toxicological endpoints.
To fill these data gaps, different methods (such as the mentioned QSAR and read­across)
are available. Thus, it was of interest to test the hypothesis that data gap filling methods
are a well­defined concept, but are lacking validity criteria. When attending the PARC
(Partnership for the Assessment of Risks from Chemicals) Work package 6 Workshop,
held in Stockholm on April 22nd to 24th, 2024, the new approach methods (NAMs) were
an important discussion point. NAMs differ from DGFMs as they purely involve the sub­
stitution of animal (in vivo) tests, while DGFMs also cover physicochemical parameters,
which do not require animal testing. Still, it came to light during the breakout session;
”Brainstorm on NAMs for chemical risk assessment: how can WP6 contribute to promot­
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
55
==PAGE:66==
ing the regulatory uptake?”, that while some data gap filling methods are well­defined,
NAMs is a concept that is still in need of definition. Moreover, an immense limitation of
DGFMs, as mentioned in a quote by Finn Pedersen in section 1.4, is the lack of valid­
ity. Without sufficient documentation, results from these models cannot be validated and,
thus, provide an important limitation to the use of DGFMs. Based on these findings, the
hypothesis was partially rejected.
This lack of validity criteria is presumably an underlying cause as to why DGFMs have
not yet fully replaced animal testing. This peaks the interest of testing several data gap
filling models in order to compare their performances and reliability.
5.1
Reliability of Models
In the expansion of the usage of DGFMs, performance and reliability are important factors.
Therefore, it was considered relevant to test the hypothesis that data gap filling methods
can fully or partially replace animal tests to make predictions of chemical hazard data. In
this study, QSAR was the only DGFM that was investigated. For this test, three param­
eters were selected: the octanol­water partition coefficient (Kow), the bioconcentration
factor (BCF) in fish, and the half­maximal effective concentration (EC50) in fish for both
acute and chronic effects. Models for each parameter was selected based on availability
and applicability. More details on the model results can be found in chapter 4.
For Kow, the tested models were EPI Suite™KOWWIN, OPERA, MlogP, AlogP, and MF­
LOGP, using experimental data from both EPI Suite™and DrugBank. Model predictions
made for chemicals in the EPI Suite™exp. data had higher correlation (R2) and lower
displacement of predicted values from experimental values (RMSE) than for those in the
DrugBank source. This implies that pharmaceuticals are more difficult than other chemi­
cals due to inherent chemical properties. Out of the five models, OPERA performed best
with R2 = 0.98 and RMSE = 0.26 with EPI Suite™experimental data. It should be noted,
however, that the reliability of the OPERA model was compromised because most data
points fit perfectly on the 1:1 line, which does not reflect realistic results as previously de­
scribed in chapter 4. MF­LOGP performed worst with R2 = ­0.30 and RMSE = 2.09 for EPI
Suite™experimental data, and R2 = ­0.77 and RMSE = 3.53 for DrugBank experimental
data. The negative correlation coefficient for MF­LOGP model indicates that it is not suit­
able for the data or that it has some issues. Neither of the peculiarities seen in OPERA and
MF­LOGP in this study were seen in their model documentations [60, 69]. Furthermore,
as seen from Table 3.4, EPI Suite™KOWWIN had the highest correlation (R2 = 0.982) of
the Kow models based on the R2 values reported in the various model documentations.
In this study, the correlation was lower with R2 = 0.85 for EPI Suite™exp. data. From
the overall results, the OPERA and MF­LOGP models were found to be unreliable in this
study, while EPI Suite™KOWWIN, AlogP, and MlogP provide decent predictions for Kow
with a minor amount of outliers.
56
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:67==
For BCF, four models were tested: EPI Suite™BCFBAF, OPERA, TEST, and MEYLAN.
Similarly to the OPERA model for Kow, the OPERA model for BCF was the best perform­
ing out of the four models with R2 = 0.98 and RMSE = 0.16. Although, the model had the
same issues in terms of perfectly fitting data points to the 1:1 line, making these results
unreliable. Aside from the OPERA model, the model performances of the remaining three
models were almost identical with an R2 = 0.76 for all and a RMSE range of [0.53; 0.55].
For EPI Suite™BCFBAF and MEYLAN, this was not surprising as they are based on the
same proposed method by Meylan et al. [58, 64]. In comparison, the statistics found in
the model documentations (see Table 3.4) had a range of [0.634; 0.80] for R2 (excluding
the OPERA model). So, generally the statistical results for these three models are quite
similar to those found in the model documentations. The BCF models generally had more
outliers than those used to predict Kow. Still, most data points were found within the data
cluster with only few conspicuous outliers. In line with the results for the Kow, these re­
sults indicate decent predictions, taking the OPERA model out of account.
There were much fewer data points for EC50 (both acute and chronic) compared to BCF
and (especially) Kow. This is likely partially due to data requirements in REACH [45] for
specific annual tonnage ranges. Table 4.2 shows that Kow must be reported for the lowest
annual tonnage threshold (≥1 t/y), BCF and chronic EC50 in fish for the ≥100 t/y, and
acute EC50 for ≥10 t/y. Therefore, it is not surprising that more models were found for
acute EC50 than for chronic EC50. Only one model was tested for latter, while four models
were tested for the former.
Four models were tested for acute EC50: TRIDENT, TEST, IRFMN, and QSAR SSD Tool­
box. All of the models had lots of outliers as seen in Figure 4.10, which made it difficult to
spot a clear trend in the data points. This might be influenced by the lack of data points.
The overall model performance was low to moderate, with R2 ranging from ­0.04 (QSAR
SSD Toolbox) to 0.59 (TRIDENT) and RMSE values ranging from 1.04 (TRIDENT) to
1.62 (QSAR SSD Toolbox). Based on these results, TRIDENT had the best model per­
formance while QSAR SSD Toolbox had the worst. All four models seem to generally
overestimate the EC50 value, meaning that they underestimate the toxicity. In relation to
chemical regulation, this could pose a huge risk as some potentially very toxic chemicals
would be allowed in production, if the assessment were purely conducted upon these
models. Thus, these models would seem insufficient in the prediction of acute EC50,
though they should not be rendered useless. Compared to the statistical results from the
model documentations (see Table 3.4), the performances generally deviate by quite a lot.
The most conspicuous difference is for QSAR SSD Toolbox as it had a negative R2. Out
of the four models, TRIDENT would, according to this thesis, be the preferred one to use
based on model results.
Since the TRIDENT can be used for predicting both acute and chronic effects, it was used
to predict chronic EC50. Compared to the results for acute EC50, TRIDENT seemed to
perform better as there was a clearer trend around the 1:1 line with fewer outliers. Despite
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
57
==PAGE:68==
that, the statistical results were quite similar with R2 = 0.59 for both acute and chronic and
an RMSE of 1.04 and 0.96 for acute and chronic, respectively. These values reflect a
higher correlation compared to the model documentation, but with an RMSE about twice
as high (see Table 3.4). Just as for acute EC50, TRIDENT tends to overestimate the value
and, thus, underestimate the toxicity, with outliers spanning about 8 orders of magnitude.
This means that it is not necessarily more suitable than the models for acute EC50.
Based on the above findings, the hypothesis can neither be accepted nor rejected. In­
stead, the results imply that some QSAR models can be used as a competent starting
point in hazard identification, while others require more work in their documentation and
testing if they are to replace or reduce in vivo tests in the future. Nonetheless, it is im­
portant to consider the possibility of errors in either the implementation of models or in
the data itself used in this study. This consideration is important in relation to lack of
agreement between findings in this thesis and those in model documentations. Further­
more, the applicability of QSARs is greatly decreased for pharmaceuticals based on found
correlations with DrugBank experimental data.
During the examination of several prediction models for BCF, it was found that many of
the traditional QSAR models use a correlation between Kow and BCF. Therefore, it was
of interest to test the following hypothesis: the BCF is a better parameter for predicting the
environmental fate of organic compounds in terms of model performance. This hypothe­
sis leads back to the thresholds for Kow and BCF in regard to determining the potential
for a chemical to bioconcentrate mentioned in the CLP regulation (see section 3.2).
Logically, BCF was expected to be the better prediction parameter, considering the fact
that it represents the concentration ratio in aquatic organisms and water and, thus, cap­
tures biological mechanisms. In contrast, Kow is simply a pure phase partitioning between
two defined phases, lipids and water. However, living organisms are complex matrices
of fat, lipids, tissue etc. So, from a parameter point­of­view, it would be better to measure
the concentration in fish than to measure in a standardised octanol solution, as the lat­
ter mentioned would undoubtedly involve higher inaccuracy regarding environmental fate
predictions.
The OPERA models for both parameters are not considered in this comparison due to
previously mentioned reliability issues. From the statistical results in Table 4.1, it is seen
that the EPI Suite™KOWWIN and AlogP models have an R2 of 0.85 and 0.86 and an
RMSE of 0.72 and 0.77, respectively. In comparison, all the BCF models had an R2 of
0.76, although with lower RMSEs ranging from [0.53; 0.55]. Additionally, as mentioned
previously, more outliers were found in the BCF models than in the Kow models in general.
These results imply that the model performances for Kow are better overall compared to
model predictions of BCF, when using the EPI Suite™source data.
Thus, one could say that while Kow may be worse for predicting the bioaccumulative po­
tential of a chemical, the parameter itself may be more accurately predicted in QSARs
compared to BCF. In the end, the parameter could serve as a better indicator when using
58
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:69==
QSARs for estimating the value. To conclude, BCF as a parameter is more accurate on
its own than Kow in relation to the prediction of the environmental fate of a chemical, but
the prediction value for BCF may be less accurate in the current versions of QSARs than
that of Kow. Hence, the hypothesis partially rejected. A continued holistic evaluation of
both Kow and BCF values for evaluating the environmental is still needed. However, this
is the case where BCF is not just derived from Kow.
In addition, the partitioning coefficient is also important to include as this is partial of de­
scribing a compounds ability of ’grass­hopping’. The impact of this ’grass­hopping’ effect
is seen in the cases of e.g. brominated flame­retardants and PFAS, where even remote
areas across the globe these compounds are found [86], [87]. So, Kow serves multiple
purposes.
Investigating the performance of the BCF model for the outliers identified in Kow would
have been interesting. However, the outlying compounds from Kow were not present in
the data set of BCF. It was therefore not possible to analyse. Understanding the cause
of outlying compounds of Kow the hypothesis that the Kow of highly hydrophobic or hy­
drophilic compounds is predicted more accurately than for compounds that lie in­between,
called surfactants was tested. The molecular structure and formula of each outlier was
studied, to identify their ability to mix with water (see results in Table 4.4). The results of
Kow in Figure 4.2 show no correlation between the outliers hydrophobic, hydrophilic or
surfactant properties and the expected behaviour. Measuring Kow for amphiphilic com­
pounds such as surfactants, is challenging as surfactants include both hydrophobic and
hydrophilic characteristics. From a chemical perspective, surfactants was expected to be
predicted poorly, whereas hydrophobic and hydrophilic compounds were expected to be
predicted well ­ and not be outliers. Our results show the opposite behaviour. With 4 out
of 5 outliers for Kow classified as either hydrophobic or hydrophilic, and only 1 out of the
5 outliers being a surfactant, the hypothesis is rejected. On the other hand, it is important
to note that the outlying compounds investigated are only a few. Investigating classifica­
tion of only 5 outliers is an important limitation to take into account when interpreting the
results. To conclude on this assumption a larger dataset of outliers need to be assessed
based on their hydrophobic, hydrophilic or surfactant characteristics. Testing the outliers
for the BCF based on their classification, showed the same unexpected prediction results
as for Kow. Only 2 out of 9 investigated outliers were surfactants (see Table 4.7).The
other 7 outliers are classified as either hydrophobic or hydrophilic compounds, based on
their molecular formula and structure.
To investigate this unexpected behaviour of the outliers, the OPERA model that include
both Kow and BCF prediction models were selected for further investigation into the mod­
els applicability domain. In this context, the hypothesis that removing data points that
fall outside of the applicable domain (AD) of the OPERA model increases the R2 and de­
creases the RMSE of the individual model was tested. Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.6 show the
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
59
==PAGE:70==
results of the predicted parameters, after data points not included in neither the training set
or the test set of the model were removed. By comparing the statistical metrics from the
original Kow results for the OPERA model and the statistics after removing data points not
within OPERAs applicability domain (AD) show little to no change after filtering for chem­
icals within the AD only. The original Kow had an R2 = 0.98 and an RMSE = 0.26 with
data points ranging over 14 orders of magnitude. The OPERA AD had an Rs = 0.97 and
an RMSE = 0.33 with data points ranging over 10 orders of magnitude. Based on the
results, the performances did not change significantly. The original BCF had a R2 = 0.98
and RMSE = 0.16 with data points ranging over 12 orders of magnitude. The BCF for
OPERA AD only has an R2 = 0.98 and an RMSE = 0.16 with data points also ranging
over 12 orders of magnitude. For BCF, there were no changes in the statistical analysis
after filtering for compounds within OPERA model AD. There were no results supporting
the hypothesis. Nevertheless, it is a factor expected to have high influence on the model
performances. A test including training set of more models are hence relevant to conduct,
to explore if the results changes for models that does not have the same implications as
the OPERA model as described in chapter 4.
Aside from the larger chemical data set, a sample selection of chemicals was also created.
The hypothesis that the sample selection serves well as a representation/snapshot of the
large collection of organic chemicals for the different models was tested. Various QSAR
models were used to fill out data gaps as well as control simulations were conducted. This
was done in order to confirm or deny the results reported in the dossiers ­ or to assess
whether a chemical was indeed allowed to be registered, or if it actually should have gone
for further investigation. When testing the data gap filling method of QSARs, a sample
set of chemicals was initially tested. Analysing the results support the hypothesis. The
sample set of chemicals generally lies clear within the data cluster of the large chemical
data set and often directly on the 1:1 line. However, a contributing factor to the almost
perfect prediction, could be attributed to the criteria set up for selecting the sample chem­
icals. In selecting the sample set of chemicals, we stated several criteria to be fulfilled.
The criteria for the chemicals were a) the compound was known, b) in the reported haz­
ard data DGFMs should be used, and c) the compound should be high tonnage, as this
increases the data requirements. These requirements may have contributed to a biased
representation in the sample set, compared to a random selected set of chemicals. It is
unknown if a random selection of sample chemicals would perform worse in the prediction
models, but the correlation of the sample set prediction and experimental data potentially
being biased is worth having in mind.
Are we then looking into an effective alternative to in vivo testing using QSARs? The
following section discuss how and in what way the results of this study can be used.
60
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:71==
5.2
Approach Limitations
The process of collecting ’good’ experimental data proved challenging. Especially data on
ecotoxicological information, EC50, was challenging. With the ecotoxicity data as the most
challenging to find good data on as it is either not existing or not available to the public.
The database first investigated was found lacking of sufficient and uniform data format.
Obtaining data for chronic EC50 was almost an impossible task. A bias and limitation of
this study can be linked the use of experimental data. For EC50, only the experimental
data were extracted directly from the source databases by undersigned.Experimental data
of log Kow and BCF this study rely on data already curated and provided by research col­
leagues. It is not necessarily of influence, but it is an important point to acknowledge. Like­
wise, the experimental data applied in this study are obtained from one source database
only, with the exception of Kow. The distinction of Kow containing widely different com­
pounds where the DrugBank e.g., contain only pharmaceuticals or compounds relevant in
medical industry. This result in few or fewer data points than could be possible if several
databases for one parameter were applied. Generally data driven approaches have the
conditional performance of the quality and availability of data to train the model.
Had the model comparison been executed on more data points (essentially, more chemi­
cals) from different databases, the results might look different and other conclusion could
possibly have been drawn. The quality of data influences the tools for decision making in
chemical related problems. Especially the data on toxicological information lacks unifor­
mity in reporting and availability of public data which classification data are based on. This
challenge of finding good quality data, was however experienced by researchers before
us. The research team behind the TRIDENT model encountered similar challenges. The
researchers behind TRIDENT, thus had the same conclusion, that a standardised and uni­
form format for toxicological of chemicals are needed [68]. Emphasising that other more
cost­efficient approaches such as QSARs are needed. With the still increasing compu­
tational power of modern technology the machine learning models can be trained to also
provide predictions for chemicals yet not applied to in the current versions. Additionally,
due to time limitations, this study does not include a comparison of EC50 values across
trophic levels, which was an initial objective of this study. It would be important to gain in­
sight in as the environmental pathway differ between the different trophic levels. E.g, the
food chain and species sensitivity within the different trophic levels which overall provides
a comprehensive analysis of the environmental fate of the compounds and ultimately, how
it will affect humans.
Another limitation to this study is the selection of implemented models. Evaluating model
assumptions and how the choices influences the use of predictions models and inter­
pretation of model results, it is pertinent to draw attention to the results of Kow from the
Meylan and EPISuite models. This behaviour is visible in the straight line at 3.16 [L/kg]
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
61
==PAGE:72==
in Figure 4.1. Some chemicals have exactly the same predicted BCF values while the
experimental data and log Kow are different for these chemicals. VEGA predicts a BCF
value of 3 L/kg for several chemicals while EPI Suite™predicts one of 3.16 L/kg for sev­
eral chemicals. The SMILES for these chemicals are quite different, i.e. not similar in
structure. The reason for this assignment of default values in the Meylan and EPISuite
models are attributed to ionic substances. Ionic substances has a low log Kow value (log
Kow < 5) or non­ionic substances with log Kow < 1 has an almost constant BCF value. This
assignment of default log BCF values are ascribable to a model assumption for chemi­
cals with low partition coefficients, suggesting low bioconcentration. The model assigns
a default log BCF value to chemicals with insufficient base of experimental data ensuring
a conservative prediction of a chemicals potential for bioconcentration [58]. The similarity
of the pattern in both models is because the Meylan model for predicting BCF is also used
in EPISuite.
A general limitation of QSARs currently available is the range of chemicals conventional
QSARs cover. Likewise is the range of chemicals newer machine learning approaches
possibly can address still unknown [10]. The models currently available are only appli­
cable for a certain domain of chemicals as described in the introduction. Finn Pedersen
also elaborate this complication in the interview:
It is logical to apply QSARs on substances such as mono­constituents. Cur­
rently, it is not possible to do QSARs on multi­constituents, UVCBs, or in­
organic compounds.
The methodology has been developed based on or­
ganic compounds. All the exposure, distribution and fate models are based
on mono­constituent organic compounds.
— Finn Pedersen
This means there is a substantial grey area when it concerns chemicals outside the
domain of organic compounds. This limitation directly related to implications in policy­
making.
5.3
Policy Implications and Future Research Needs
A current issue in the exposure assessment of chemical risk assessment relates specifi­
cally to obtaining exposure data. In order to regulate chemicals, exposure data is required.
However, these data cannot be curated without actually exposing living organisms to the
chemicals. This is a huge paradox in chemical regulation and, thus, a need for future re­
search in this area is much needed. Projects already underhand include the EU­ToxRisk
[88] and PROTEX­HT framework [89] among others.
The way it works right now, chemicals are innocent until proven guilty. And as stated by
Finn Pedersen;
62
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:73==
”It is always the responsibility of the industry to provide data on chemicals.”
— Finn Pedersen
With power and responsibility, one might ask whether the industry is in practice regulat­
ing itself? With the control of the registered data i REACH, currently only happening in
control screenings by ECHA as authority, the control is already deficient. If the authority
finds insufficient reporting of hazard data the intuitive response to this would be, that pro­
duction is withheld until the issue has been corrected, however, this is not the case. The
consequence for a registrant when the registration, in particular the hazard information,
is found non­compliant with regulatory requirements (in REACH):
“The consequence is that they have free reins for some years until they are
caught. If I were a low­tonnage producer (…) When a registrant submission is
not accepted, production is not stopped immediately, but rather the registrant
will have either months or years to work with depending on the which tests
they must make (…) The consequence is that you [the registrant] can keep
producing and put it [the chemical] on the market.”
— Finn Pedersen
Currently, ECHA performs annual screenings of registration dossiers to ensure that they
comply with regulatory data requirements. These screenings are performed on at least
5% within each tonnage band [90]. One could ask if the reason for the weak format of
reporting data by authorities is deficient to accommodate the industry. Is money power?
Or is the formatting an indicator that the area is too complex yet to regulate? That the
technology are too immature yet? If so, why are the precautionary principle not followed
instead? Making sure no production and market are allowed before a chemical is proven
­ without doubt ­ safe to use?
As mentioned in the introduction, the WHO reports the health consequences of deaths
related to chemical exposure in 2019. Older research projects likewise found correlation
between death attributable to chemical exposure [91]. This known fact of the burden
of chemical exposure should support decision­making to further restrict the beforehand
approval of chemicals.
Chemicals are ambivalent ethically speaking [92]. Balancing the the benefits of the use
of a compound against the consequences is a fine art. The arguments are always putting
the human race first on the expense of the environment, overlooking the fact and paradox
that the human race cannot live without a thriving environment. It has been a paradox ad­
dressed multiple times e.g., in relation to the pesticide DDT, which resulted in insurmount­
able damage to the environment, but at the same time prevented famine and disease
prevention [93]. Prioritisation of human benefit instead of protection of the environment
was one of the reason of the continued use of DDT. Even though the use of DDT were
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
63
==PAGE:74==
first restricted some countries continued to use the pesticide in medicinal way to prevent
disease from malaria [93]. The increasing number of chemicals on the market likewise
increases the challenge of assessing the impact of the substances. In order to only gain
the benefit from the use of chemical compounds in our every day lives, there is a need
for optimising and developing chemical management for one.
Is it possible to harmonise DGFMs across regulations to improve chemical management?
Generally the compounds regulated only constitute a fraction of the overall chemical land­
scape as mixtures and organometallic compounds are too complex yet to assess and thus
regulate. This constitutes a huge limitation and challenge in the goal of regulating chemi­
cals for a safe environment. It is therefore of great importance that research into mixtures
and organometallic compounds are conducted, in order to develop assessment methods
and tools to expand the chemicals that are possible to regulate. An harmonisation across
regulations could include the same level of control and authorisation across regulations
as are evident for chemicals regulated under the FCM regulation. It is of course still an
ethical dilemma assessing acceptable benefits and consequences across the influenced
viewpoints. A general consideration in harmonisation of regulations would also include
balancing the international and unintentional effects of a chemical in a ethical perspective.
Recognising the need for justice in relation to risk, cost as well as benefits related to the
use and production of chemicals [92].
To make this study relevant for policy makers, an extended study going through different
DGFMs systematically assessing results for an expanded set of parameters regulations
and models would improve the robustness of results for a solid base for policy­making.
The study thus addresses the research community. Hence the results of this study serves
as a starting point for future research, setting the stage for additional effort to systemati­
cally cover all relevant chemicals, models and approaches, regulations, and parameters
for improving data gap filling in regulatory risk assessment of chemicals in the EU. The
limitations of this study’s approach is influenced by the assumptions and choices made
during the project.
It is both expensive and time­consuming to conduct a chemical risks assessment as well
as conducting new experiments. More data requirements means higher expenses and
more legislation needs more data but we do not want increase in animal tests. It is a
paradox. In the end, would it be worth for the company/industry in terms of profit to pro­
duce the chemical risk assessment?
“Low tonnage substances. The data requirements [in REACH] are set after
the tonnage. If you make a chemical risk assessment based on annex VII [in
the REACH regulation], it can cost around 500,000 euros, so if a manufacturer
produces 3 tons [of a given chemical] a year, it is necessary for the manufac­
turer to have a high revenue to gain a profit to be able to pay for the testing
64
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:75==
and assessment costs.”
— Finn Pedersen
The applicability of QSARs instead of traditional tests are thus cost­wise of great impor­
tance.
Additional points for future research, are exploring the correlation of subclasses and pre­
diction accuracy. As shown in Table 4.3, Table 4.6 and Table 4.9 the vast quantity of
subclasses within each parameter, meant it was not possible within the scope of this
study to analyse. With the insight in the chemicals subclasses it could potentially explain
whether some models perform better than others for specific chemical classes that espe­
cially would be of great relevance for recommending models for specific chemical classes,
chemical spaces as well as scenarios. Superclasses are simply too broad to be used as
an indicator for recommended use of models in relation to chemical classes within the do­
main of organic compounds. However, an issue of dividing into subclasses, as previously
mentioned, is that not all chemicals are assigned a subclass, which would be a barrier in
this type of research. In addition to this, it would be relevant to conduct an uncertainty
analysis on all models in order to increase credibility in machine learning models.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
65
==PAGE:76==
66
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:77==
6
Recommendations
Following the objective of this thesis, to provide recommendations on harmonisation across
EU regulations related to DGFMs in chemical risk assessment, the initiatives below are
recommended.
Making a common consensus across regulations on the validation criteria for models in
DGFMs, is recommended. This could consequently result in decreasing the likelihood
of data being discarded or discredited when using such methods. Furthermore, it is rec­
ommended that software hubs such as the OECD QSAR Toolbox is expanded such that
it includes both more models, endpoints, and regulatory frameworks. Models included
in the OECD QSAR Toolbox should, then, only be models that have been validated by
regulatory bodies based on decided validation criteria. It could also be relevant to list, for
which regulation each endpoint is required or of interest directly in the software hub in
order to create as much transparency as possible for the user (the industrial bodies) and,
thus, generally less confusion about the use of data gap filling methods.
Additionally, this study will based on the challenge of collecting and verifying reported data
in chemical dossiers, recommended a stringent reporting format. Hence the reporting of
hazard data for a compound cannot be submitted before all required data fields are filled
proficiently following the guidelines. This would both ensure no data gaps would exist
and simultaneously lessen the workload of authorities (e.g., REACH with their annual
screenings of chemicals as mentioned previously) and ultimately increase the control of
the reported data. Which brings us to the next point of recommendation, to increase
the overall control of registered chemicals, which is in REACH evidently insufficient or
lacking in data, where approaches of control as existing for Food Contact Materials would
increase the safer use of chemicals. In addition to the uniform stringent format for the
registration of hazard data, a further step could be the development of a common chemical
database across EU regulations and authorities, allowing for the collection of all chemical
data in one place. Such a database could help enhance transparency and uniformity
of data reporting while simultaneously providing a comprehensive database of chemical
data to be utilised by all regulatory bodies such as ECHA and EFSA, or other stakeholders
such as researchers. This common database could then contain a feature, which would
allow for automatic filtering of chemicals after registrant submission and, thereby, create
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
67
==PAGE:78==
a form of tag or category, according to which regulation(s) the given chemical belongs.
The possibilities for such a system are endless and so it would show great potential for
optimisation of chemical data sharing in general. This would be an approach to also
address the need for more existing data, as emphasised earlier, the models are only as
good as the data, so a compiled data base comprised of all chemical data could influence
the development of data gap filling methods.
It is recognised that exposure data is unobtainable without conducting exposure tests,
so instead of the current requirement of exposure data when registering a compound
an alternative could be require a ’trial period’ instead of a certain amount of years and
then re­evaluate the chemical when this period has expired or sufficient data points of
high quality have been collected to finalise the exposure assessment. At this point, the
original registrant should have obtained exposure data on the given chemical, which can
then be submitted/added to the registration report.
In addition, it is recognised that communication between regulatory bodies and member
states in the EU in common legislation and knowledge sharing is challenging. A collab­
oration between regulatory bodies and member states is already in action by organising
e.g. the PARC initiative. However, this collaboration could take a step further by ensur­
ing even closer contact between regulatory bodies. Make a specific network/platform for
this purpose. This was also a hot topic during the PARC workshop in Stockholm of April
2024 during the breakout session; ”Brainstorm on NAMs for chemical risk assessment:
how can WP6 contribute to promoting the regulatory uptake?”, although this question
was raised specifically in relation to PARC: ”How can we bring together information in one
place and ultimately create an ”ecosystem” of PARC projects/activities, including an in­
frastructure for information exchange and cross­project collaboration?” The suggestions
that were illuminated during this breakout sessions were e.g. to create a common platform
for data/project submission.
Another important recommendation would involve which models are better than others,
concerning data gap filling. However, this study does not have a sufficient data foundation
to derive a useful recommendation of models to fill data gaps as described in section 5.3
and presented in Table 4.1.
A last recommendation of this study is reforming the whole basis of regulating chemicals.
Reverting the regulating process so that a chemical is no longer innocent until proven
guilty ­ as we have already learned can consequently result in insurmountable impact and
damage to health and environment.
68
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:79==
7
Conclusion
The study aimed to answer the following hypothesis: The integration of data gap fill­
ing methods in chemical hazard assessment offers a time­ and cost­efficient approach
that can reduce or replace animal testing in EU regulatory context, but the accuracy is
influenced by the type and complexity of parameters as well as the complexity of chem­
icals predicted and highly dependent on existing experimental data. The results of this
study, supports the hypothesis. QSAR models are generally quick and easy to imple­
ment, when integrated into software hubs or when well documented materials are avail­
able. Compared to lab tests, QSAR methods for filling data gaps are both a time­ and
cost­efficient alternative. The results further show vast differences in prediction perfor­
mance, with higher performance for the more simple physicochemical parameter, Kow,
and decreasing accuracy in prediction of the more complex the parameters, BCF and
EC50 (chronic and acute). The results of this study are, however, subject to limitations
that influence the recommendations that can be provided based on the results.
By identifying where in the chemical dossiers data gaps were present, this study found
correlation with previous studies. Within ecotoxicity is where most data gaps occur. The
categories with most use of DGFMs were identified to be in toxicological and ecotoxico­
logical information. By comparing the data requirements within each of the regulations,
REACH was identified as the most general and comprehensive regulation. Several pa­
rameters included in the REACH regulation are also within requirements of the other reg­
ulations. The PPP, BP and FCM regulations had more chemical­specific requirements.
The sample selection was regulated across multiple regulations and hence covered a
variety of chemical spaces and applications.
QSAR is a DGFM proposed by three out of four of the regulations that propose alternative
methods to in vivo, excluding the CLP regulation that in content of data requirements and
data gaps filling differ from the REACH, PPP, BP and FCM regulations. The read­across
method is mentioned in all four regulations. With the focus of this study on QSAR as
DGFM, selected models were chosen to predict values within physicochemical properties,
Kow, environmental fate, BCF, and ecotoxicological information, EC50. The models were
selected based on the criteria of public availability, universally approved in in silico circles
and contained prediction models for the selected three parameters.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
69
==PAGE:80==
Outliers were identified, but despite multiple hypothesis tests related to superclass trends,
surfactant properties, applicable domain, model training sets, and dissociation correction,
the cause of outliers and the poor predictability from the models of these compounds in
inconclusive.
From a purely statistical point of view, OPERA was the best performing model when based
on experimental data from EPI Suite™for both Kow (R2 = 0.98; RMSE = 0.26) and BCF
(R2 = 0.98; RMSE = 0.16). However, the high correlation is attributable to the fact, that
many of the data points appeared exactly on the 1:1 line. Hence, the OPERA appears
to demonstrate issues of reliability, in this study specifically, as the model output did not
reflect realistic predictions. Instead, it appeared as if the input was equal to the output,
contradicting the model performance results, found in the model documentation. For Kow,
the EPI Suite™KOWWIN, AlogP, and MlogP models all perform rather similarly, though
the performance of MlogP was slightly worse than the two models. MF­LOGP was the
worst performing model with a negative correlation coefficient both when based on EPI
Suite™and DrugBank experimental data, indicating that the there might be complications
with the model or data itself, or that the model is not appropriate for the data. For BCF,
EPI Suite™BCFBAF, TEST, and MEYLAN performed very similar both in terms of their
R2 and RMSE. Thus, due to parallelism between models and and unreliable results for
the otherwise best performing model, OPERA, for both Kow and BCF, model recommen­
dations for these two parameters cannot be devised.
For chronic EC50, only one model (TRIDENT) was found available and used for model
performance testing. The determined correlation coefficient was rather low (R2 = 0.59),
as was the root mean square error (RMSE = 0.96 mg/L). This means that the model
only explains 59% of the data variance, but with a small displacement between experi­
mental and predicted data. For acute EC50, only the TRIDENT model provided a result
resembling a correlation between experimental and predicted data. The coefficient of de­
termination is still quite low, with a R2 = 0.59 and RMSE of 1.04. The prediction from
TEST, IRFMN and QSAR SSD Toolbox demonstrate a vast spread in data points. The
most outlying compounds span over 8 orders of magnitudes. These three models espe­
cially, does therefore not provide evidence of reliability.
The main limitations of this study originate in the constriction to organic, non­mixture com­
pounds as well as availability of good quality data. While organic compounds remain a
hot topic in chemical pollution, they are merely a part of the greater picture. The models
used in this study are also limited in their ability of estimating within this chemical domain
also.
The main recommendations of this study relates to the data reporting and handling. Re­
formatting and collecting the data reporting system, in a database where the registrants
inserts hazard data directly in the database. Ensuring no chemical reporting can be sub­
70
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:81==
mitted without complying with the data requirements of the regulations and tonnage across
regulation. This also ensures the possibility of an automatic screening system for control­
ling authorisation of substances. Lastly, such a collective database of uniform data re­
porting format for public availability would enhance further research within chemical risk
assessment. Regarding model performance and recommendations on which model to be
used in what scenario, it was found infeasible to conclude on a best performing model
based on the results of this study. It is therefore of relevance to expand the research
enhancing the data foundation used to model predictions and further investigate the un­
derlying patterns of outliers in addition to the tests performed in this study.
There is no changing the fact that chemicals are all around us and probably always will
be. This does not only concern your shampoo or your clothing. With new chemicals being
developed every day, the anthropogenic pollution from chemicals is proving perilous. The
enhancement of tools to support regulatory decisions is, therefore, a necessity. This thesis
serves as a starting point for future research, setting the stage for additional effort to
systematically cover all relevant chemicals, models and approaches, regulations, and
parameters for improving data gap filling in regulatory risk assessment of chemicals in
the EU.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
71
==PAGE:82==
72
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:83==
References
[1]
Mark Cartwright. Alchemy ­ World History Encyclopedia. 2023. URL: https://www.
worldhistory.org/Alchemy/.
[2]
Ernst Homburg, Anthony S. Travis, and Harm G. Schröter. “The Chemical Industry
in Europe, 1850–1914”. In: The Chemical Industry in Europe, 1850–1914 (1998).
DOI: 10.1007/978-94-017-3253-6.
[3]
Ravi Naidu et al. “Chemical pollution: A growing peril and potential catastrophic
risk to humanity”. In: Environment International 156 (Nov. 2021), p. 106616. ISSN:
0160­4120. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENVINT.2021.106616.
[4]
World Health Organisation (WHO). Chemical safety. 2023. URL: https://www.
who.int/europe/news-room/fact-sheets/item/chemical--safety.
[5]
European Environment Agency. Living healthily in a chemical world — European
Environment Agency. Aug. 2023. URL: https : / / www . eea . europa . eu / signals -
archived/signals-2020/articles/living-healthily-in-a-chemical-world.
[6]
Bjorn Larsen and Ernesto Sánchez­Triana. “Global health burden and cost of lead
exposure in children and adults: a health impact and economic modelling analysis”.
In: The Lancet Planetary Health 7.10 (Oct. 2023), e831–e840. ISSN: 25425196.
DOI: 10.1016/S2542-5196(23)00166-3. URL: http://www.thelancet.com/article/
S2542519623001663/fulltext%20http://www.thelancet.com/article/S2542519623001663/
abstract%20https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanplh/article/PIIS2542-5196(23)
00166-3/abstract.
[7]
Stockholm Convention and UN Environment Programme. The 12 Initial POPs.
URL: https://chm.pops.int/TheConvention/ThePOPs/The12InitialPOPs/tabid/296/
Default.aspx.
[8]
Marilena E. Dasenaki and Nikolaos S. Thomaidis. “Meat Safety: II Residues and
Contaminants”. In: Lawrie’s Meat Science: Eighth Edition (Jan. 2017), pp. 553–
583. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100694-8.00018-2.
[9]
Diane J. Benford. “Risk Assessment of Chemical Contaminants and Residues in
Food”. In: Chemical Contaminants and Residues in Food: Second Edition (Jan.
2017), pp. 3–13. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100674-0.00001-1.
[10]
Kerstin von Borries et al. “Potential for Machine Learning to Address Data Gaps in
Human Toxicity and Ecotoxicity Characterization”. In: Environmental Science and
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
73
==PAGE:84==
Technology 57.46 (Nov. 2023), pp. 18259–18270. ISSN: 15205851. DOI: 10.1021/
acs.est.3c05300. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.3c05300.
[11]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). Progress in evaluation in 2018. 2024. URL:
https://echa.europa.eu/further-information-requests-2018.
[12]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). Progress in evaluation in 2019. 2024. URL:
https://echa.europa.eu/dossier-evaluation-progress-2019.
[13]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). Progress in evaluation in 2020. 2024. URL:
https://echa.europa.eu/dossier-evaluation-progress-2020.
[14]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). Progress in evaluation in 2021. 2024. URL:
https://echa.europa.eu/further-information-requests-2021.
[15]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). Progress in evaluation in 2022. 2024. URL:
https://echa.europa.eu/further-information-requests-2022.
[16]
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). Call for data on genotoxicity data on
maltitol (E 965 i). Jan. 2023. URL: https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/call/call-data-
genotoxicity-data-maltitol-e-965-i.
[17]
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). Call for data on genotoxicity data on
sorbitol (E 420 i). June 2023. URL: https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/call/call-data-
genotoxicity-data-sorbitol-e-420-i.
[18]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). One in three checked biocidal products
found to be non­compliant. Nov. 2023. URL: https://echa.europa.eu/- /one- in-
three-checked-biocidal-products-found-to-be-non-compliant.
[19]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). One in four substances recovered from
waste non­compliant with REACH. Nov. 2022. URL: https://echa.europa.eu/-
/one-in-four-substances-recovered-from-waste-non-compliant-with-reach.
[20]
Natasha Gilbert. Gaps in EU pesticide authorisation | PAN Europe. 2011. DOI:
10.1038/475150a. URL: https://www.pan-europe.info/resources/briefings/2023/04/
gaps-eu-pesticide-authorisation.
[21]
De Castelbajac T et. al. Innovative tools and methods for toxicity testing within
PARC work package 5 on hazard assessment. 2023. DOI: 10.3389/ftox.2023.
1216369. URL: https://www-scopus-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/record/display.uri?eid=
2-s2.0-85166559318&origin=inward&txGid=e28041381d285eb0572299200f8689b0.
[22]
Lucina E. Lizarraga et al. “Advancing the science of a read­across framework
for evaluation of data­poor chemicals incorporating systematic and new approach
methods”. In: Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 137 (Jan. 2023), p. 105293.
ISSN: 0273­2300. DOI: 10.1016/J.YRTPH.2022.105293.
[23]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). In vitro methods. 2024. URL: https://echa.
europa.eu/support/registration/how-to-avoid-unnecessary-testing-on-animals/in-
vitro-methods.
74
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:85==
[24]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). QSAR models. 2024. URL: https://echa.
europa.eu/support/registration/how-to-avoid-unnecessary-testing-on-animals/qsar-
models.
[25]
Prachi Pradeep. Quantitative Structure Activity Relationships: An overview. Tech.
rep. 2017.
[26]
ECHA. Substance info ­ ECHA. 2024. URL: https://echa.europa.eu/da/search-for-
chemicals?p_p_id=disssimplesearch_WAR_disssearchportlet&p_p_lifecycle=0&
_disssimplesearch_WAR_disssearchportlet_searchOccurred=true&_disssimplesearch_
WAR_disssearchportlet_sessionCriteriaId=dissSimpleSearchSessionParam101401720100329087.
[27]
The European Commission. EU Pesticides Database ­ Active substances. 2024.
URL: https://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/pesticides/eu-pesticides-database/start/
screen/active-substances.
[28]
ECHA. Information on biocides ­ ECHA. 2024. URL: https://echa.europa.eu/da/
information-on-chemicals/biocidal-products?p_p_id=dissbiocidalproducts_WAR_
dissbiocidalproductsportlet&p_p_lifecycle=1&p_p_state=normal&p_p_mode=
view&_dissbiocidalproducts_WAR_dissbiocidalproductsportlet_javax.portlet.action=
dissBiocidalProductsAction.
[29]
ECHA. C&L Inventory ­ ECHA. 2024. URL: https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-
chemicals/cl-inventory-database.
[30]
The European Commission. COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 10/2011 on
plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with food. 2011. URL:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32011R0010.
[31]
ECHA. Registered substances. 2024. URL: https://echa.europa.eu/information-
on-chemicals/registered-substances.
[32]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). REGULATION (EU) No 528/2012 OF THE
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL. Tech. rep. ECHA, 2012.
[33]
Yannick Djoumbou Feunang et al. “ClassyFire: automated chemical classification
with a comprehensive, computable taxonomy”. In: Journal of Cheminformatics 8.1
(Nov. 2016), pp. 1–20. ISSN: 17582946. DOI: 10.1186/s13321-016-0174-y. URL:
https://jcheminf.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13321-016-0174-y.
[34]
Joaquín Isac­García et al. “Determining Physical and Spectroscopic Properties”.
In: Experimental Organic Chemistry (Jan. 2016), pp. 145–175. DOI: 10.1016/B978-
0-12-803893-2.50005-X.
[35]
Anders Baun, Niels Nyholm, and K Ole Kusk. Environmental Risk Assessment of
Chemicals. Tech. rep. 2017.
[36]
Epaminondas Voutsas. “Estimation of the Volatilization of Organic Chemicals from
Soil”. In: Thermodynamics, Solubility and Environmental Issues (Jan. 2007), pp. 205–
227. DOI: 10.1016/B978-044452707-3/50013-6.
[37]
The Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD). “Test
No. 107: Partition Coefficient (n­octanol/water): Shake Flask Method”. In: OECD
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
75
==PAGE:86==
Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 1 (July 1995). DOI: 10.1787/
9789264069626-EN. URL: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/test-no-107-
partition-coefficient-n-octanol-water-shake-flask-method_9789264069626-en.
[38]
The Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD). “Test No.
117: Partition Coefficient (n­octanol/water), HPLC Method”. In: OECD Guidelines
for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 1 (June 2022). DOI: 10.1787/9789264069824-
EN. URL: https : / / www . oecd - ilibrary . org / environment / test - no - 117 - partition -
coefficient-n-octanol-water-hplc-method_9789264069824-en.
[39]
The Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD). “Test
No. 123: Partition Coefficient (1­Octanol/Water): Slow­Stirring Method”. In: OECD
Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 1 (June 2022). DOI: 10.1787/
9789264015845-EN. URL: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/test-no-123-
partition-coefficient-1-octanol-water-slow-stirring-method_9789264015845-en.
[40]
Hemi Cumming and Christoph Rü. “Octanol−Water Partition Coefficient Measure­
ment by a Simple 1 H NMR Method”. In: (2017). DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01102.
URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.7b01102.
[41]
Gui Ning Lu et al. “Estimation of n­octanol/water partition coefficients of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons by quantum chemical descriptors”. In: Central European
Journal of Chemistry 6.2 (June 2008), pp. 310–318. ISSN: 18951066. DOI: 10.
2478/s11532-008-0010-y.
[42]
Nurul Fahimah, Katharina Oginawati, and S. Suharyanto. “Fate and spatial dis­
tribution of Pb, Cd, Cu and Zn in the water column and in the surface sediment
of Indonesian Estuary (Citarum River Estuary)”. In: E3S Web of Conferences 148
(Feb. 2020). ISSN: 22671242. DOI: 10.1051/E3SCONF/202014807007.
[43]
Geoff Hodges et al. “A comparison of log K ow (n­octanol–water partition coef­
ficient) values for non­ionic, anionic, cationic and amphoteric surfactants deter­
mined using predictions and experimental methods”. In: Environmental Sciences
Europe 31.1 (Dec. 2019), pp. 1–18. ISSN: 21904715. DOI: 10 . 1051 / e3sconf /
202014807007. URL: https://enveurope.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s12302-
018-0176-7.
[44]
W. X. Wang. “Bioaccumulation and Biomonitoring”. In: Marine Ecotoxicology: Cur­
rent Knowledge and Future Issues (Jan. 2016), pp. 99–119. DOI: 10.1016/B978-
0-12-803371-5.00004-7.
[45]
European Commission. “REACH Regulation (EC) 1907 2006”. In: (Dec. 2006).
[46]
ECHA. Regulation (EC) No. 1272/2008 CLP. Tech. rep. 2008.
[47]
G. D. Veith, D. L. DeFoe, and B. V. Bergstedt. “Measuring and Estimating the
Bioconcentration Factor of Chemicals in Fish”. In: 36.9 (Sept. 1979), pp. 1040–
1048. ISSN: 0015­296X. DOI: 10.1139/F79- 146. URL: https://cdnsciencepub-
com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/10.1139/f79-146.
76
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:87==
[48]
Donald Mackay. “Correlation of Bioconcentration Factors”. In: Environmental Sci­
ence and Technology 16.5 (1982), pp. 274–278. ISSN: 15205851. DOI: 10.1021/
es00099a008. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/es00099a008.
[49]
ECETOC. “Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) Response to UNEP/INC/CEG­I
Annex 1”. In: (Jan. 2000). URL: https://www.ecetoc.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/
08/DOC-0412.pdf.
[50]
Nicolò Aurisano et al. “Extrapolation Factors for Characterizing Freshwater Eco­
toxicity Effects”. In: Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 38.11 (Nov. 2019),
pp. 2568–2582. ISSN: 1552­8618. DOI: 10.1002/ETC.4564. URL: https://setac.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/etc.4564.
[51]
The Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD). Test No.
210: Fish, Early­life Stage Toxicity Test | OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chem­
icals, Section 2 : Effects on Biotic Systems. July 2013. URL: https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/environment/test-no-210-fish-early-life-stage-toxicity-test_9789264203785-
en.
[52]
The Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD). Test No.
212: Fish, Short­term Toxicity Test on Embryo and Sac­Fry Stages | OECD Guide­
lines for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 2 : Effects on Biotic Systems. Sept.
1998. URL: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/test-no-212-fish-short-term-
toxicity-test-on-embryo-and-sac-fry-stages_9789264070141-en.
[53]
The Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD). Test No.
215: Fish, Juvenile Growth Test | OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals,
Section 2 : Effects on Biotic Systems. Jan. 2000. URL: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.
org/environment/test-no-215-fish-juvenile-growth-test_9789264070202-en.
[54]
The Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD). Test No.
203: Fish, Acute Toxicity Test | OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals,
Section 2 : Effects on Biotic Systems. June 2019. URL: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.
org/environment/test-no-203-fish-acute-toxicity-test_9789264069961-en.
[55]
The Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD). Test No.
236: Fish Embryo Acute Toxicity (FET) Test | OECD Guidelines for the Testing
of Chemicals, Section 2 : Effects on Biotic Systems. July 2013. URL: https://
www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/test-no-236-fish-embryo-acute-toxicity-fet-
test_9789264203709-en.
[56]
The Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD). “Series
on Testing and Assessment No. 126 SHORT GUIDANCE ON THE THRESHOLD
APPROACH FOR ACUTE FISH TOXICITY”. In: (2010). URL: https://ntp.niehs.
nih.gov/sites/default/files/iccvam/suppdocs/feddocs/oecd/oecd-gd126.pdf.
[57]
European Commission. Aquatic toxicity. 2024. URL: https://joint-research-centre.
ec . europa . eu / eu - reference - laboratory - alternatives - animal - testing - eurl - ecvam /
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
77
==PAGE:88==
alternative-methods-toxicity-testing/validated-test-methods-health-effects/aquatic-
toxicity_en.
[58]
William M. Meylan et al. “Improved method for estimating bioconcentration/bioac­
cumulation factor from octanol/water partition coefficient”. In: Environmental Tox­
icology and Chemistry 18.4 (Apr. 1999), pp. 664–672. ISSN: 1552­8618. DOI:
10 . 1002 / ETC . 5620180412. URL: https : / / setac - onlinelibrary - wiley - com . proxy .
findit.cvt.dk/doi/10.1002/etc.5620180412.
[59]
William M Meylan and Philip H Howard. Atom/Fragment Contribution Method for
Estimating Octanol­Water Partition Coefficients. Tech. rep. July 1994. DOI: 10.
1002/jps.2600840120.
[60]
Kamel Mansouri et al. “OPERA models for predicting physicochemical proper­
ties and environmental fate endpoints”. In: Journal of Cheminformatics 10.1 (Dec.
2018), pp. 1–19. ISSN: 17582946. DOI: 10.1186/s13321-018-0263-1. URL: https:
//jcheminf.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13321-018-0263-1.
[61]
Kamel Mansouri and Antony Williams. QMRF ­ Title: LogP model for Octanol­water
partition coefficient prediction from the OPERA models. Oct. 2017. DOI: 10.13140/
RG.2.2.12731.82723/1. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/316789769_
QMRF_-_Title_LogP_model_for_Octanol-water_partition_coefficient_prediction_
from _ the _ OPERA _ models ? channel = doi & linkId = 59e624efa6fdcc3dcd33e916 &
showFulltext=true.
[62]
Kamel Mansouri and Antony Williams. QMRF ­ Title: BCF model for Fish Biocon­
centration Factor from OPERA models. Oct. 2017. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.17974.
70722/1. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/316789338_QMRF_-
_Title_BCF_model_for_Fish_Bioconcentration_Factor_from_OPERA_models?
channel=doi&linkId=59e62c3145851598a13a5b52&showFulltext=true.
[63]
Martin and Todd. “User’s Guide for T. E. S. T. (Toxicity Estimation Software Tool)
Version 5.1 A Java Application to Estimate Toxicities and Physical Properties from
Molecular Structure”. In: (2020). URL: https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/
2016-05/documents/600r16058.pdf.
[64]
Emilio Benfenati. “QMRF Title: VEGA BCF model (Maylan) v 1.0.4”. In: (Apr. 2019).
URL: https://www.vegahub.eu/vegahub-dwn/qmrf/QMRF_BCF_MEYLAN.pdf.
[65]
Domenico Gadaleta and Emilio Benfenati. “QMRF Title: ALog P model v. 1.0.1”.
In: (May 2022). URL: https://www.vegahub.eu/vegahub-dwn/qmrf/QMRF_VEGA_
ALogP.pdf.
[66]
Domenico Gadaleta and Emilio Benfenati. “QMRF Title: MLog P model v. 1.0.1”.
In: (May 2022). URL: https://www.vegahub.eu/vegahub-dwn/qmrf/QMRF_VEGA_
MlogP.pdf.
[67]
Erika Colombo and Emilio Benfenati. “QMRF Title: Fish Acute (LC50) Toxicity
model (IRFMN) (version 1.0.1)”. In: (Apr. 2022). URL: https://www.vegahub.eu/
vegahub-dwn/qmrf/QMRF_FISH_LC50_IRFMN.pdf.
78
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:89==
[68]
Mikael Gustavsson et al. “Transformers enable accurate prediction of acute and
chronic chemical toxicity in aquatic organisms”. In: bioRxiv (Apr. 2023), p. 2023.04.17.537138.
DOI: 10.1101/2023.04.17.537138. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/
2023.04.17.537138v1.
[69]
David H. Kenney et al. “Dimensionally reduced machine learning model for predict­
ing single component octanol–water partition coefficients”. In: Journal of Chemin­
formatics 15.1 (Dec. 2023), pp. 1–14. ISSN: 17582946. DOI: 10.1186/s13321-022-
00660-1. URL: https://jcheminf.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13321-022-
00660-1.
[70]
Runsheng Song et al. “Accelerating the pace of ecotoxicological assessment using
artificial intelligence”. In: Ambio 51.3 (Mar. 2022), pp. 598–610. ISSN: 16547209.
DOI: 10.1007/s13280-021-01598-8. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
s13280-021-01598-8.
[71]
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Download EPI Suite™­ Estimation
Program Interface v4.11. 2024. URL: https://www.epa.gov/tsca-screening-tools/
download-epi-suitetm-estimation-program-interface-v411.
[72]
United States Environmental Protection Agency. ECOTOX Knowledgebase. 2024.
URL: https://cfpub.epa.gov/ecotox/search.cfm.
[73]
Editor Peter Fantke et al. “UNEP/SETAC scientific consensus model for character­
izing human toxicological and ecotoxicological impacts of chemical emissions in
life cycle assessment DOCUMENTATION (Version 1.1) USEtox ® 2.0 Documen­
tation USEtox ® 2.0 Documentation USEtox ® 2.0 Documentation (Version 1.1)”.
In: (2024). DOI: 10.11581/DTU:00000011. URL: http://usetox.org.
[74]
USEtox. Official USEtox Download Site | USEtox®. 2024. URL: https://usetox.
org/model/download.
[75]
United States Environmental Protection Agency. CompTox Chemicals Dashboard.
2024. URL: https://comptox.epa.gov/dashboard/batch-search.
[76]
David R. Legates and Gregory J. McCabe. “Evaluating the use of ’goodness­
of­fit’ measures in hydrologic and hydroclimatic model validation”. In: Water Re­
sources Research 35.1 (1999), pp. 233–241. ISSN: 00431397. DOI: 10 . 1029 /
1998WR900018.
[77]
F. Pedregosa et al. r2_score — scikit­learn 1.5.0 documentation. 2011. URL: https:
//scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.r2_score.html.
[78]
Deepak Kumar et al. Sharma. Root Mean Square Error ­ an overview | ScienceDi­
rect Topics. 2022. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/root-
mean-square-error.
[79]
Kamel Mansouri. GitHub ­ kmansouri/OPERA: Free and open­source application
(command line and GUI) providing QSAR models predictions as well as applica­
bility domain and accuracy assessment for physicochemical properties, environ­
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
79
==PAGE:90==
mental fate and toxicological endpoints. May 2024. URL: https://github.com/
kmansouri/OPERA/.
[80]
CompTox Chemicals Dashboard v2.4.1. Heparin pentasaccharide Properties. 2024.
URL: https://comptox.epa.gov/dashboard/chemical/properties/DTXSID10146903.
[81]
CompTox. beta­Carotene Properties. 2024. URL: https://comptox.epa.gov/dashboard/
chemical/properties/DTXSID3020253.
[82]
CompTox. Neomycin B Properties. 2024. URL: https://comptox.epa.gov/dashboard/
chemical/properties/DTXSID2023359.
[83]
CompTox. Ubidecarenone Properties. 2024. URL: https : / / comptox . epa . gov /
dashboard/chemical/properties/DTXSID6046054.
[84]
CompTox. Acarbose Properties. 2024. URL: https://comptox.epa.gov/dashboard/
chemical/properties/DTXSID8046034.
[85]
European Chemicals Agency. ECHA CHEM. 2024. URL: https : / / chem . echa .
europa.eu/.
[86]
AMAP 2004. “Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP) AMAP As­
sessment 2002: Persistent Organic Pollutants in the Arctic”. In: (2002).
[87]
William F. Hartz et al. “PFAS have been found in the most remote places of the
world, from Antarctica to the Mariana Trench. ­ ChemSec”. In: 871 (May 2023).
ISSN: 18791026. DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.161830. URL: https://chemsec.org/
wrappedinchemicals/facts/pfas-fact-4/.
[88]
European Comission. An Integrated European ‘Flagship’ Program Driving Mechanism­
based Toxicity Testing and Risk Assessment for the 21st Century | EU­ToxRisk |
Project | Fact sheet | H2020 | CORDIS | European Commission. 2020. URL: https:
//cordis.europa.eu/project/id/681002.
[89]
Li Li et al. “Development and Evaluation of a Holistic and Mechanistic Model­
ing Framework for Chemical Emissions, Fate, Exposure, and Risk”. In: Environ­
mental health perspectives 129.12 (Dec. 2021). ISSN: 1552­9924. DOI: 10.1289/
EHP9372. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34882502/.
[90]
European Chemicals Agency and European Commission. “REACH Evaluation
Joint Action Plan ­ Ensuring compliance of REACH registrations”. In: (2024). URL:
https://echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/21877836/final_echa_com_reach_
evaluation_action_plan_en/0003c9fc-652e-5f0b-90f9-dff9d5371d17.
[91]
Annette Prüss­Ustün et al. “Knowns and unknowns on burden of disease due to
chemicals: A systematic review”. In: Environmental Health: A Global Access Sci­
ence Source 10.1 (2011). ISSN: 1476069X. DOI: 10.1186/1476-069X-10-9. URL:
https://ehjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1476-069X-10-9.
[92]
Tom Børsen and Søren Nors Nielsen. Applying an ethical judgment model to the
case of DDT. 2017. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/59d387d85010df1c78360354.
[93]
Hindrik Bouwman, Henk van den Berg, and Henrik Kylin. DDT and malaria pre­
vention: Addressing the paradox. June 2011. DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1002127. URL:
80
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:91==
https://www- scopus- com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/record/display.uri?eid=2- s2.0-
79958858355&origin=inward&txGid=51be143a1d775ad2e6642d9177de7835.
[94]
European Chemical Agency. Assessing read­across – how ECHA does it. 2024.
URL: https://echa.europa.eu/da/-/assessing-read-across-how-echa-does-it.
[95]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). “Read­Across Assessment Framework (RAAF)”.
In: (2017). DOI: 10.2823/619212. URL: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-
/publication/841c5a3a-2981-11e7-ab65-01aa75ed71a1/language-en.
[96]
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). Grouping of substances and read­across.
2024. URL: https://echa.europa.eu/support/registration/how-to-avoid-unnecessary-
testing-on-animals/grouping-of-substances-and-read-across.
[97]
Institute of Medicine (US) Supplements and National Research Council (US) Com­
mittee on the Framework for Evaluating the Safety of Dietary. “Categories of Sci­
entific Evidence—In Vitro Data”. In: (2005). URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK216047/.
[98]
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). EPI Suite™­Estimation Program In­
terface. 2024. URL: https : / / www . epa . gov / tsca - screening - tools / epi - suitetm -
estimation-program-interface.
[99]
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). EPI Suite™. 2024. URL: https://
episuite.dev/EpiWebSuite/#/.
[100]
Jon A. Arnot and Frank A.P.C. Gobas. “A review of bioconcentration factor (BCF)
and bioaccumulation factor (BAF) assessments for organic chemicals in aquatic
organisms”. In: Environmental Reviews 14.4 (2006), pp. 257–297. ISSN: 11818700.
DOI: 10.1139/A06-005. URL: https://cdnsciencepub.com/doi/10.1139/a06-005.
[101]
National Toxicity Program U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. OPERA.
Nov. 2023. URL: https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/whatwestudy/niceatm/comptox/ct-
opera/opera.
[102]
United States Environmental Protection Agency. Toxicity Estimation Software Tool
(TEST) | US EPA. 2024. URL: https://www.epa.gov/comptox- tools/toxicity-
estimation-software-tool-test.
[103]
VEGA Hub. VEGA QSAR – VEGA HUB. 2024. URL: https://www.vegahub.eu/
portfolio-item/vega-qsar/.
[104]
Mikael Gustavsson et al. “Transformers enable accurate prediction of acute and
chronic chemical toxicity in aquatic organisms”. In: bioRxiv (Apr. 2023), p. 2023.04.17.537138.
DOI: 10.1101/2023.04.17.537138. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/
2023.04.17.537138v1%20https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.04.17.
537138v1.abstract.
[105]
Runsheng Song. QSAR_SSD_Toolbox: An Neural Networks based QSAR Model
and a Connector to SSD. Sept. 2017. URL: https://github.com/RunshengSong/
QSAR_SSD_Toolbox.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
81
==PAGE:92==
[106]
PubChem. 2,2’,4,4’,5­Pentabromodiphenyl ether | C12H5Br5O | CID 36159. 2024.
URL: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/36159.
[107]
PubChem. Fondaparinux | C31H53N3O49S8 | CID 5282448. 2024. URL: https:
//pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/5282448.
[108]
PubChem. Beta­Carotene | C40H56 | CID 5280489. 2024. URL: https://pubchem.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/5280489#section=Structures.
[109]
PubChem. Framycetin | C23H46N6O13 | CID 8378. 2024. URL: https://pubchem.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/8378#section=2D-Structure.
[110]
PubChem. Ubidecarenone | C59H90O4 | CID 5281915. 2024. URL: https : / /
pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/5281915#section=2D-Structure.
[111]
PubChem. Precose | C25H43NO18 | CID 444254. 2024. URL: https://pubchem.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/444254#section=2D-Structure.
[112]
PubChem. Dehydroabietic acid | C20H28O2 | CID 94391. 2024. URL: https://
pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/94391#section=2D-Structure.
[113]
PubChem. 2,2’­Methylenebis(3,4,6­trichlorophenol) disodium salt | C13H4Cl6Na2O2
| CID 76734. 2024. URL: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/76734#
section=2D-Structure.
[114]
PubChem. Benzyltrimethylammonium chloride | C10H16N.Cl | CID 5963. 2024.
URL: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/5963#section=2D-Structure.
[115]
PubChem. Decabromodiphenyl oxide | C12 Br10O | CID 14410. 2024. URL: https:
//pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/14410#section=2D-Structure.
[116]
PubChem. 1,3,5­Tribromo­2­(2,3­dibromo­2­methylpropoxy)benzene | C10H9Br5O
| CID 118274. 2024. URL: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/118274.
[117]
PubChem. Octachloronaphthalene | C10Cl8 | CID 16692. 2024. URL: https://
pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/16692#section=2D-Structure.
[118]
PubChem. Decachlorobiphenyl | C12Cl10 | CID 16318. 2024. URL: https://pubchem.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/16318#section=2D-Structure.
[119]
PubChem. Lauric Acid | C12H24O2 | CID 3893. 2024. URL: https://pubchem.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/compound/3893#section=2D-Structure.
[120]
PubChem. 2,3,4,5,6­Pentabromotoluene | C7H3Br5 | CID 6906. 2024. URL: https:
//pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/6906#section=2D-Structure.
[121]
TeixeiraResearchLab. TeixeiraResearchLab/MF­LOGP_Development­: This repos­
itory will house all relevant codes and data associated with the development of the
MF­LOGP algorithm. Nov. 2022. URL: https://github.com/TeixeiraResearchLab/
MF-LOGP_Development-.
82
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:93==
A
Other Data Gap Filling Methods
A.0.1
Read­across
The most common approach for filling data gaps in registration of substances is the
method of ”Read­across”. It is an alternative method to animal testing of chemicals. To
avoid underestimation of hazard in data predicted by the read­across method the tech­
nique generally rely on conservative estimations. The read­across method consider sim­
ilarities in structure, metabolism and toxicity. The method rely on the best source iden­
tified, if sufficient similarity is established, and adopts the source substance quantitative
assessment for the target substance [22]. ECHA has produced a systematic framework,
called the Read­Across Assessment Framework (RAAF) to ensure consistency and reli­
ability when using the read­across method [94]. This method uses relevant information
from substances considered analogues to the substance in question, later referred to as
’source substance’ and ’target substance’ to predict behaviours and properties of the tar­
get substance. Analogous referring to structural and functional similarities, as well as
similar physicochemical properties. The read­across method uses available information
from a relevant well characterised source substance within same chemical group to fill out
data gaps in the target substance. The aim with using read­across method is to reduce
the need for experimental tests when data of a target substance is missing [95] [96].
A.0.2
In vitro
Another approach to gain data on a substance is through experimental testing. In vitro
is a method testing the substance performed in a laboratory dish. The test is thus per­
formed outside a living organism even though it usually involves testing on organic matter
such as cells and tissue, and it thus proposes an alternative experimental test method to
conventional animal testing. For testing certain toxicological properties ECHA named the
in vitro method the default testing method in 2016 [23]. The guiding principle for the use
of in vitro testing, as described by the National Center for Biotechnology Information is,
that it can serve as indicator of potential harmful effects to living organisms [97].
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
83
==PAGE:94==
B
Data Methods in REACH (ECHA CHEM)
84
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:95==
Table B.1: Overview of data methods reported in chemical dossiers from ECHA CHEM
database. Red colour indicate, information not available in the chemical dossier. Grey
indicate the data was deemed not relevant for the specific compound. Green indicate
experimental data provided in the dossiers and blue indicate the data is either filled using
Read­across or QSAR. The four different shades of brown indicate the tonnage production
of each compound investigated in this initial overview.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
85
==PAGE:96==
Table B.1 (Continued).
86
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:97==
Table B.2: Overview of toxicological parameters.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
87
==PAGE:98==
Table B.3: Overview of toxicological parameters.
88
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:99==
C
Data Requirements in Regulations
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
89
==PAGE:100==
Table C.1: Overview of data requirements in the PPP regulation.
90
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:101==
Table C.1 (Continued).
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
91
==PAGE:102==
Table C.1 (Continued).
92
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:103==
Table C.2: Overview of data requirements in the BP regulation.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
93
==PAGE:104==
Table C.2 (Continued).
94
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:105==
Table C.2 (Continued).
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
95
==PAGE:106==
Table C.3: Overview of data requirements in the FCM regulation.
96
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:107==
Table C.3 (Continued).
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
97
==PAGE:108==
Table C.3 (Continued).
98
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:109==
D
Elaborated Descriptions of
Implemented Models
D.1
EPI Suite: BCFBAF & KOWWIN
Estimation Programs Interface (EPI Suite)™is a software package developed by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 2000­2019 containing different QSAR
models. The software package includes programs of models to predict parameters within
physicochemical properties as well as environmental fate endpoints. The version used in
this study is EPI Suite™v4.11, which is, at the time of writing this, the latest version [71].
As seen in Table 3.3, two models from EPI Suite have been used in this thesis, namely
KOWWIN and BCFBAF.
D.1.1
KOWWIN
The KOWWIN model (v1.68) is used to predict the octanol­water partition coefficient, Kow.
This model estimates log Kow by using an atom/fragment contribution method and, thus,
only requires the chemical structure in the form of the SMILES notation for a given com­
pound to make the estimation [98, 99]. The model domain of KOWWIN is limited to organic
compounds. Note that while the KOWWIN model origins from the EPI Suite™software
application, the OECD QSAR Toolbox was used to obtain the results from this model.
log Kow =
∑
(fini) +
∑
(cjnj) + 0.229
(D.1)
The statistical results for this model are n = 2,447, R2 = 0.982, and SD = 0.217.
D.1.2
BCFBAF
For predicting environmental bioconcentration factor (BCF), the model BCFBAF (previ­
ously known as BCFWIN) uses two different method approaches to predict BCF. The
first method is a regression approach based on the octanol­water partition coefficient (log
Kow). The second method is the Arnot­Gobas method, that calculates the BCF based
on mechanisms and factors related to chemical properties and environmental conditions
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
99
==PAGE:110==
[98, 99]. BCFBAF uses the KOWWIN model within EPI Suite™to estimate the log Kow
value for every SMILES notation as well as extracts experimental values from a database
of 13,200 organic compounds (from BCFBAF user manual within EPI Suite™[71]).
The version of BCFBAF used in this study was v3.02 (currently latest version).
According the documentation for the BCFBAF model [58], BCFBAF uses experimental
values of BCF from a quality reviewed BCF database [100]. Non­ionic compounds are
divided into three categories based on their log Kow value (< 1.0, 1.0 to 7.0, and > 7.0).
For compounds with log Kow > 7, the following linear regression has been derived:
log BCF = −0.49 log Kow + 7.554 +
∑
Fi
(D.2)
where ∑Fi is the summation of all correction factors applicable to a given compound.
Note that this is the current estimation equation as it is given in the User Guide Help
inside the EPI Suite™application software [71]. The previous BCFWIN equation is that
which is listed in the EPI Suite™documentation [58] and is as follows:
log BCF = −1.37 log Kow + 14.4 +
∑
Fi
(D.3)
For compounds with 1 < log Kow < 7, the current linear regression equation is as follows
[71]:
log BCF = 0.6598 log Kow −0.333 +
∑
Fi
(D.4)
The previous BCFWIN equation is [58]:
log BCF = 0.77 log Kow −0.70 +
∑
Fi
(D.5)
Compounds with a log Kow < 1.0 are assigned a default value for the estimated log BCF
of 0.5. The reasoning behind this was that most of the measured log BCF values ranged
from 0 to 1.0. An overview of how BCFBAF predicts log BCF based on log Kow threshold
for ionic and non­ionic compounds can be viewed in Table D.1.
While there is no universally accepted definition of the BCFBAF model domain, the model
is meant to be used on organic compounds. The model prediction might be less accurate
for compounds, for which...
• the molecular weight (MW) is outside the ranges ([68.08 g/mol; 959.17 g/mol]) of
the training set compounds.
• the log Kow is outside the ranges ([­6.50; 11.26]) of the training set compounds.
• there are more instances of a given correction factor than that maximum for all train­
ing compounds.
These limitations have been stated in the BCFBAF User Guide Help inside the EPI Suite™
application software [71].
100
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:111==
Table D.1: Overview of predictions made by the EPI Suite™model, BCFBAF.
log Kow Threshold
log BCF Prediction
Non­Ionic Compounds
< 1.0
0.50
1.0 to 7.0
Equation D.4
> 7.0
Equation D.2
Aromatic azo compounds
Special treatment
Ionic Compounds
< 5.0
0.50
5.0 to 6.0
0.75
6.0 to 7.0
1.75
7.0 to 9.0
1.00
> 9
0.50
Compounds with ≥C11 alkyl
Special treatment
Tin and Mercury Compounds
Metals (tin and mercury)
Special treatment
D.2
CompTox
D.2.1
OPERA
The OPEn structure activity/property Relationship App (OPERA) is a collaboration
between the U.S. EPA and NICEATM providing QSAR models for physicochemical prop­
erties, toxicity and environmental fate properties [101]. The modelling process of OPERA
is based on the principles for QSAR models developed by OECD [60]. Although OPERA
model was run by using the CompTox Chemicals Dashboard [75], it also has its own
stand­alone app [79]. Additionally, it is available as an extension to the OECD QSAR
Toolbox [101]. Two OPERA models have in this study been used to make predictions for
log Kow (denoted here as log P) and BCF.
Both models are using a weighted k­nearest neighbour algorithm with k = 5, where closer
neighbours are given a greater weight. Several descriptors are used for both models such
as atomic or molecular fragment contributions and atom type electrotopological state. The
statistics for goodness­of­fit for the log P model are n = 10,537, R2 = 0.86, and RMSE =
0.67, and those for the BCF model are n = 626, R2 = 0.85, and RMSE = 0.53 [61, 62].
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
101
==PAGE:112==
D.2.2
TEST
The Toxicity Estimation Software Tool (TEST) was developed by the U.S. Environmen­
tal Protection Agency in 2008. The software tool can estimate toxicity values as well as
physicochemical properties of organic chemical compounds [102]. In this study, it was
used to predict BCF. From the model documentation, it has been understood that the
TEST model uses the consensus method in its prediction in the sense that it combines hi­
erarchical clustering method, single model method, group contribution method, and near­
est neighbour method. In the model documentation, the consensus method showed the
best statistical results with R2 = 0.754, RMSE = 0.670, and MAE = 0.523 [63].
D.3
VEGA
The following sections describe the models that were implemented by using the VEGA
Hub stand­alone app [103].
D.3.1
MEYLAN
MEYLAN is a model used to predict BCF. It is based on the same method as the one for
BCFBAF [64] and, thus, estimates BCF based on Table D.1. The latest version of the
BCF MEYLAN model was used (v1.0.4).
D.3.2
AlogP
The model AlogP is from VEGA Hub and is used to predict Kow. The latest version of
the ALogP model was used (v1.0.1). AlogP is a multivariate linear regression model. The
model classifies each atom in the input structure of a given chemical into an atom type,
whereafter it predicts Kow with the following equation:
AlogP =
∑
(niai)
(D.6)
where
ni
= the number of atoms of type i (120 atom types)
ai
= the corresponding hydrophobicity constant
There are multiple statistics for this model listed obtained from different sources listed
in the model documentation. The internal evaluation was conducted on n = 9,834 com­
pounds with R2 = 0.932. One of the external evaluations used the training set from the
EPI Suite™KOWWIN model with n = 9,961, R2 = 0.84, and RMSE = 0.72. It is also
stated in the model documentation that it cannot be utilised for inorganic chemicals and
substances which consist of other elements than C, O, N, S, P, Cl, Br, F, and I [65]. This
is interpreted as organic compounds in the common sense.
102
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:113==
D.3.3
MlogP
The model MlogP is from VEGA Hub and is used to predict Kow. The latest version of
the MlogP model was used (v1.0.1). AlogP is a multivariate linear regression model. The
equation behind this model is as follows:
MlogP = −1.041 + 1.244(CX)0.6 −1.017(NO)0.9 + 0.406(PRX) −0.145(UB)0.8
+ 0.511(HB) + 0.268(POL) −2.215(AMP) + 0.912(ALK) −0.392(RNG)
−3.684(QN) + 0.474(NO2) + 1.582(NCS) + 0.773(BLM)
(D.7)
where
C
= summation of weighted numbers of carbon and halogen atoms (the weights are:
0.5 for F, 1.0 for C & Cl, 1.5 for Br, and 2.0 for I)
NO
= total number of nitrogen and oxygen atoms
PR
= proximity effects of N/O
U
= number of unsaturated bonds, including semi­polar bonds such as nitrogen
oxides and sulfoxides (except those in NO2=)
H
= dummy variable for the presence of intramolecular hydrogen bond
POL
= number of aromatic polar substituents with an upper limit of 4
AMP
= amphoteric property; α­amino acid = 1, aminobenzoic acid = 0.5, and
pyridinecarboxylic acid = 0.5
ALK
= dummy variable for alkane, alkene, cycloalkane, and cycloalkene
RNG
= dummy variable for the presence of ring structures except benzene
QN
= quaternary nitrogen: 1; nitrogen oxide: 0.5
NO2
= number of nitro groups
NCS
= isothiocyanate: 1.0; thiocyanate: 0.5
BLM
= dummy variable for the presence of β­lactam
One of the reported statistical evaluation says is n = 9,961, R2 = 0.73, and RMSE = 0.96
by using the training set procured from the EPI Suite™KOWWIN model. Just as for
AlogP, the model cannot be utilised for inorganic chemicals and substances which con­
sist of other elements than C, O, N, S, P, Cl, Br, F, and I, and its estimation is therefore
interpreted to be organic compounds in common sense [66].
D.3.4
IRFMN
IRFMN is an acute fish toxicity model from VEGA Hub, i.e. it predicts the acute EC50; or
more specifically, the LC50 (96h) of the fish species, Oryzias latipes, expressed in mg/L.
The latest version of IRFMN was used (v1.0.2). Note that this is the version that is listed
inside the VEGA Hub app., although the version listed in the documentation from VEGA
Hub’s website is 1.0.11. IRFMN is a machine learning model based on a random forest
1https://www.vegahub.eu/portfolio­item/vega­qsar­models­qrmf/
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
103
==PAGE:114==
algorithm. The procured statistics from the training set used on this model are RMSE =
0.75, R2 = 0.72, and n = 264.
Just as for AlogP and MlogP, the model cannot be utilised for inorganic chemicals and
substances which consist of other elements than C, O, N, S, P, Cl, Br, F, and I, and its
estimation is therefore interpreted to be organic compounds in common sense [67].
D.4
TRIDENT
TRIDENT is a computational method that predicts ecotoxicological data for three tropic
levels: fish, aquatic invertebrates, and algae. Based on a transformer that takes structural
features that are associated with ecotoxicological effects and using the method of deep
neural network this model predicts effect concentrations of the tropic levels [104]. The
TRIDENT model is based on training data of experiments within exposure. The model
architecture of TRIDENT is a deep learning model using deep neural network (DNN) to
predict ecotoxicity endpoints. Using molecular structures (SMILES), the model takes as
input information on chemical toxicity endpoints, exposure duration and effect to predict
effect concentration (EC50) in log10 [log10 mg/L] [68].
When running the TRIDENT model for acute EC50, 96h was used for the exposure du­
ration as this was found to be the median for the observed duration for the extracted
experimental data (see Figure E.2). Note that the ’Observed Duration Mean (Days)’ of
more than 7 days were systematically excluded, assuming that these were given in differ­
ent units than days as was stated. This was found to be reasonable since the data had
already been filtered when extracting it from the ECOTOX Knowledgebase by selecting a
maximum of 7 days for the observed duration under the test conditions.
Similarly, for chronic EC50, 15 days (360h) was used as this was the median for the ex­
tracted experimental data (see Figure E.1 in the appendix).
Since this model was well­documented and even had its own web service, it was very
easy to utilise. Because it had its own web service, this is what was used in this study.
D.5
MF­LOGP
The Molecular Formula­LogP (MF­LOGP) is a machine learning model based on a ran­
dom forest (RF) algorithm. The model takes the molecular formula of a chemical as input
to predict its octanol­water partition coefficient, Kow. However, this model can only make
predictions for chemicals with certain elements: C, H, N, O, S, P, F, Cl, Br, and I. A total
of 18,091 data points was used for the development of this model, whereof training set
MF­LOGP contained 15,377 data points and the test set contained 2,714 data points. The
statistics of this model were n = 18,091, R2 = 0.83 ± 0.003, MAE = 0.52 ± 0.003, and
104
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:115==
RMSE = 0.77 ± 0.007 [69].
When feeding the model a (list of) molecular structure(s), it parses three types of features:
1. The number of each atom present in the molecule.
2. The molar weight (MWn) of the compound (n).
3. The double bond equivalence (DBE).
The random forest regression (RFR) equation given in the documentation [69] is as fol­
lows:
ˆyn = 1
B
B
∑
b=1
Tb(Xn)
(D.8)
In the documentation [69], it can be seen that when comparing the absolute errors of
the predictions for the functional groups (alcohols, aromatics, carbonyls, halogens, het­
eroatoms, amines/nitriles/, saturated, and unsaturated), the absolute error was highest for
unsaturated compounds (0.59 log units), indicating that the model may not predict Kow as
well for this functional group compared to others. Amines/nitriles and aromatics had the
second­ (0.54 log units) and third­highest (0.53 log units) absolute errors, respectively.
The documentation for this model was lacking. Therefore, several tests were made in
order to find the correct Python version and Pandas package version to run this model.
In the end, Python version 3.9 and Pandas package version 1.4.2 were used to run this
model.
A great advantage to this model is that it only requires the molecular formula rather than
the structure of the chemical of interest. Thus, it could have great potential for fx. medic­
inal companies who would like to predict the value of Kow without revealing the structure
of the drug they are trying to develop.
D.6
QSAR SSD Toolbox
The QSAR SSD Toolbox consists of artificial neural network (ANN) models used to pre­
dict the acute EC50 for organic compounds for 8 different species, of which 5 are fish
species. These species can be seen in Table D.2. [70]
As can be seen in Table D.2, there was only one entry for the fish species Cyprinodon
variegatus in the experimental data set from the ECOTOX Knowledgebase. Due to this,
it was not considered representative and, thus, removed from the calculation of the geo­
metric mean of EC50 for fish.
Another issue with this model is the fact that many of the predicted values were not inside
the AD.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
105
==PAGE:116==
Table D.2: Experimental data entries in the ECOTOX Knowledge base [72] of each fish
species used in the QSAR SSD Toolbox for acute EC50.
Species
Data Entries in ECOTOX Knowledge base
Cyprinodon variegatus
1
Lepomis Macrochirus
594
Oncorhynchus Mykiss
545
Oryzias latipes
257
Pimephales promelas
660
It was not clear, in which unit the prediction results were given. From looking at the Python
script ’qsar.py’2 in line 34­35 from the GitHub repository [105] and by comparing with the
ECOTOX experimental data, it seemed reasonable to assume that the predicted results
were given in µmol/L. These values were then converted to mg/L in order to compare with
the experimental data.
Some of the SMILES in both input and output had to be discarded due to formatting
issues. The SMILES along with the molecular formula and average mass (molecular
weight) were originally found through CompTox Chemicals Dashboard [75]. However,
when using the SMILES as input for this model, it could be seen that some of the SMILES
had weird formats such as vertical lines ”|...|” with some text in between. The SMILES
C*.C*.OCCOCCO|lp:4:2,7:2,10:2,m:1:5.6,3:8.9| is an example of this. Furthermore, when
encountering some errors in Excel during data treatment, it was discovered for a few
chemicals that either the SMILES, molecular formula, or molecular weight (if not all) were
in disagreement with the information found on PubChem [106] for the corresponding CAS
number. An example of this is CAS no. 32534­81­9, where a comparison of data from
the two sources can be seen in Table D.3.
2Directory: QSAR_SSD_Toolbox/QSAR_SSD_Toolbox/src/qsar.py
106
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:117==
Table D.3: Comparison of CompTox data with PubChem with CAS no. 32534­81­9 as
illustration of potential errors from CompTox.
CompTox data
PubChem data
CAS No.
32534­81­9
32534­81­9
Chemical Name
Pentabromodiphenyl ether
2,2’,4,4’,5­Pentabromodiphenyl ether
SMILES
[*]C1=C([*])C([*])=C
(OC2=C([*])C([*])=C([*])
C([*])=C2[*])C([*])=C1[*]|$
_R1;;;\_R1;;_R1;;;;;_R1;;
_R1;;_R1;;_R1;;_R1;;_R1;;
_R1$,c:1,8,16,21,t:5,12,lp:
7:2,RG:_R1={Br* |$
;_AP1$,lp:0:3},LOG={_R1:;H;5}|
C1=CC(=C(C=C1Br)Br)OC2=CC
(=C(C=C2Br)Br)Br
Molecular Formula
C12O
C12H5Br5O
Molecular Weight
160.131 g/mol
564.7 g/mol
This is to show that some errors may occur in the data procured from CompTox Chemicals
Dashboard [75], which has been used to obtain the molecular formulas, SMILES, and
molecular weights for the larger chemical datasets.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
107
==PAGE:118==
E
EC50
• All Chemicals (however, divided into multiple parts in order to be able to download
the output file)
• Effects: Mortality
• Endpoints: AC50, EC50, IC50, LC50
• Species: Fish
• Test Conditions: Water ­ Fresh Water & Obs. Duration (Max. Num Days) = 7 (for
acute) or Obs. Duration (Min. Num Days) = 7 (for chronic)
Figure E.1: Histogram that displays the frequency of ’Observed Duration Mean (Days)’
values for chronic EC50 data.
108
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:119==
Figure E.2: Histogram that displays the frequency of ’Observed Duration Mean (Days)’
values for acute EC50 data.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
109
==PAGE:120==
F
Outliers from Kow Models
(a) Fondaparinux (CAS: 104993­28­4). Repli­
cated from PubChem [107].
(b) beta­Carotene (CAS: 7235­40­7).
Repli­
cated from PubChem [108].
(c) Neomycin B (CAS: 119­04­0).
Replicated
from PubChem [109].
(d) Ubidecarenone (CAS: 303­98­0). Replicated
from PubChem [110].
Figure F.1: Molecular structures of outliers across the Kow models.
110
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:121==
(a) Acarbose (CAS: 56180­94­0).
Replicated
from PubChem [111].
Figure F.1 (Continued).
Table F.1: Main outliers across the Kow models.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
111
==PAGE:122==
G
Overview of data points in
superclasses
Table G.1: Full overview of number of data points in each superclass for Kow.
Kow: Unique superclasses
Count
(%)
Unknown
5,714
48.1
Benzenoids
2,516
21.2
Organoheterocyclic compounds
1,563
13.2
Organic acids and derivatives
481
4.1
Lipids and lipid­like molecules
387
3.3
Organic oxygen compounds
387
3.3
Organic nitrogen compounds
228
1.9
Phenylpropanoids and polyketides
137
1.2
Organohalogen compounds
127
1.1
Organosulfur compounds
71
0.6
Nucleosides, nucleotides, and analogues
64
0.5
Hydrocarbons
62
0.5
Alkaloids and derivatives
53
0.4
Organic 1,3­dipolar compounds
27
0.2
Organometallic compounds
10
0.1
Organophosphorus compounds
9
0.1
Homogeneous non­metal compounds
8
0.1
Hydrocarbon derivatives
8
0.1
Acetylides
6
0.1
Lignans, neolignans and related compounds
6
0.1
Mixed metal/non­metal compounds
4
0.0
Organic Polymers
2
0.0
Allenes
1
0.0
Organic salts
1
0.0
Total number of data points
11,872
100
112
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:123==
Table G.2: Full overview of number of data points in each superclass for BCF.
BCF: Unique superclasses
Count
(%)
Benzenoids
423
52.5
Unkown
118
14.6
Organoheterocyclic compounds
58
7.2
Organic acids and derivatives
54
6.7
Organohalogen compounds
44
5.5
Lipids and lipid­like molecules
29
3.6
Organic nitrogen compounds
24
3.0
Hydrocarbons
23
2.9
Organic oxygen compounds
21
2.6
Phenylpropanoids and polyketides
6
0.7
Organosulfur compounds
3
0.4
Organic 1,3­dipolar compounds
2
0.2
Homogeneous non­metal compounds
1
0.1
Total number of data points
806
100
Table G.3: Full overview of number of data points in each superclass for chronic EC50.
Chronic EC50: Unique superclasses
Count
(%)
Benzenoids
141
42.5
Organoheterocyclic compounds
38
11.4
Organic acids and derivatives
31
9.3
Unknown
26
7.8
Lipids and lipid­like molecules
20
6.0
Organic nitrogen compounds
20
6.0
Organohalogen compounds
20
6.0
Organic oxygen compounds
12
3.6
Organosulfur compounds
8
2.4
Organic salts
8
2.4
Phenylpropanoids and polyketides
3
0.9
Organometallic compounds
2
0.6
Hydrocarbons
1
0.3
Mixed metal/non­metal compounds
1
0.3
Organophosphorus compounds
1
0.3
Total number of data points
332
100
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
113
==PAGE:124==
Table G.4: Full overview of number of data points in each superclass for acute EC50
Acute EC50: Unique superclasses
Count
(%)
Benzenoids
124
39.0
Organic acids and derivatives
45
14.2
Unknown
26
8.2
Organoheterocyclic compounds
23
7.2
Organohalogen compounds
22
6.9
Organic salts
15
4.7
Organic oxygen compounds
14
4.4
Organometallic compounds
12
3.8
Lipids and lipid­like molecules
10
3.1
Organic nitrogen compounds
10
3.1
Phenylpropanoids and polyketides
7
2.2
Mixed metal/non­metal compounds
5
1.6
Organosulfur compounds
2
0.6
Homogeneous non­metal compounds
1
0.3
Organic 1,3­dipolar compounds
1
0.3
Hydrocarbon derivatives
1
0.3
Total number of data points
318
100
114
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:125==
H
Outliers from BCF Models
Table H.1: Main outliers across the BCF models.
Table H.2: BCF outliers located in Kow data.
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
115
==PAGE:126==
(a)
Dehydroabietic
acid
(CAS:
1740­19­8).
Replicated from PubChem [112].
(b)
Disodium
2,2’­methylenebis[3,4,6­
trichlorophenolate] (CAS: 3247­34­5).
Repli­
cated from PubChem [113].
(c) Benzyltrimethylammonium chloride (CAS:
56­93­9). Replicated from PubChem [114].
(d) Bis(pentabromophenyl) ether (CAS: 1163­
19­5). Replicated from PubChem [115].
Figure H.1: Molecular structures of outliers across the BCF models.
116
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:127==
(a)
1,3,5­Tribromo­2­(2,3­dibromo­2­
methylpropoxy)benzene
(CAS:
36065­30­2).
Replicated from PubChem [116].
(b) Octachloronaphthalene (CAS: 2234­13­1).
Replicated from PubChem [117].
(c)
Decachlorobiphenyl
(CAS:
2051­24­3).
Replicated from PubChem [118].
(d) Lauric acid (CAS: 143­07­7).
Replicated
from PubChem [119].
Figure H.1 (Continued).
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
117
==PAGE:128==
(a) Pentabromotoluene (CAS: 87­83­2). Repli­
cated from PubChem [120].
Figure H.1 (Continued).
118
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:129==
I
Python Code Edits
I.1
MF­LOGP
Edited version of the script ”MFLOGP_Run_Code.py” from the MF­LOGP model Github
repository [121]:
1
"""
2
MFLOGP Prediction Script
3
NOTE: This script is the culmination of the MFLOGP project. Within this script
4
a user can input a molecular formula and the algorithm will return its
5
prediction. The user can either run a single compound within the script
6
or load in a list of formulas in an excel (.xlsx) file.
7
8
It is important to note that the MFLOGP algorithm only works on ORGANIC
9
compounds. Attempting to analyze an ingorangic compound will lead to
error
10
codes.
11
12
Instructions:
13
1.) Add single compound or directory and file for list of formulas
14
2.) Choose either single compound or list options
15
3.) RUN!!
16
17
PI: Dr. Andrew Teixeira
18
Author: David Kenney ('25)
19
Institution: Worcester Polytechnic Institute
20
21
For all questions please email arteixeira@wpi.edu
22
"""
23
24
#Load in Python packages
25
import numpy as np
26
import pandas as pd
27
import joblib
28
import chemparse as cp
29
import sys
30
31
32
"""USER INPUTS"""
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
119
==PAGE:130==
33
single_compound = 0
34
compound_list = 1
35
36
molecular_formula = 'C17H8Cl2F8N2O3' #"""Single Compound Only"""#
37
38
#Only required if you are analyzing a list of compounds in an excel document#
39
file_dir = r'..\MF-LOGP_Development -\Kow ALL CHEMICALS -pf2.xlsx'
40
#file_dir = r'..\MF-LOGP_Development -\CompTox - Molecular Formulas - 18 chosen
ones_CAS.xlsx'
41
sheetname = 'Python'
42
43
#----------------------------------------------------------------------------#
44
if (single_compound) | ((single_compound !=1) & (compound_list !=1)) | (
single_compound & compound_list):
45
46
if ((single_compound !=1) & (compound_list !=1)):
47
print('No run option chosen , default single compound was run')
48
single_compound = 1
49
50
if (single_compound & compound_list):
51
print('Both run option chosen , default single compound was run')
52
single_compound = 1
53
compound_list = 0
54
55
molecular_formula = pd.DataFrame([molecular_formula],columns = ['Formula'
])
56
57
features = molecular_formula['Formula'].apply(cp.parse_formula)
58
features = pd.json_normalize(features)
59
features = features.fillna(0)
60
61
elements = ['C','H','N','O','S','P','F','Cl','Br','I']
62
compound = pd.DataFrame(0,index = np.arange(1),columns = [elements])
63
64
for ii in range(0,len(features.columns)):
65
if features.columns[ii] == 'C':
66
compound['C'] = features['C']
67
68
elif features.columns[ii] == 'H':
69
compound['H'] = features['H']
70
71
elif features.columns[ii] == 'N':
72
compound['N'] = features['N']
73
74
elif features.columns[ii] == 'O':
75
compound['O'] = features['O']
76
77
elif features.columns[ii] == 'S':
78
compound['S'] = features['S']
79
120
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:131==
80
elif features.columns[ii] == 'P':
81
compound['P'] = features['P']
82
83
elif features.columns[ii] == 'F':
84
compound['F'] = features['F']
85
86
elif features.columns[ii] == 'Cl':
87
compound['Cl'] = features['Cl']
88
89
elif features.columns[ii] == 'Br':
90
compound['Br'] = features['Br']
91
92
elif features.columns[ii] == 'I':
93
compound['I'] = features['I']
94
95
else:
96
sys.exit('Incompatible Formula')
97
98
elif compound_list:
99
100
data = pd.read_excel(file_dir ,sheet_name = sheetname)
101
102
features = data['Formula'].apply(cp.parse_formula)
103
features = pd.json_normalize(features)
104
features = features.fillna(0)
105
106
if len(features.columns) > 10:
107
sys.exit('Incompatible Formula')
108
elif len(features.columns)<10:
109
elements = ['C','H','N','O','S','P','F','Cl','Br','I']
110
compound = pd.DataFrame(features , columns = elements)
111
compound = compound.fillna(0)
112
113
else:
114
elements = ['C','H','N','O','S','P','F','Cl','Br','I']
115
compound = features
116
117
#%%
118
119
MFLOGP = joblib.load(r'..\MF-LOGP_Development -\MFLOGP.sav')
120
scale_X = joblib.load(r'..\MF-LOGP_Development -\scale_y.sav')
121
scale_y = joblib.load(r'..\MF-LOGP_Development -\scale_y.sav')
122
123
try:
124
MFLOGP = joblib.load('MFLOGP.sav')
125
scale_X = joblib.load('scale_X.sav')
126
scale_y = joblib.load('scale_y.sav')
127
except:
128
print('Please ensure MFLOGP.sav, scale_X.sav, and scale_Y.sav are all in
the same directory as MFLOGP_Run_Code.py')
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
121
==PAGE:132==
129
130
compound_prediction = scale_y.inverse_transform((MFLOGP.predict(pd.DataFrame(
scale_X.transform(compound),columns = elements))).reshape(-1,1))
131
132
133
if single_compound:
134
print(compound_prediction)
135
elif compound_list:
136
predictions = compound_prediction
137
print(predictions)
138
139
print(len(predictions))
140
141
# My additions
142
predictions = pd.DataFrame(predictions)
143
predictions.to_excel("Kow ALL CHEMICALS results.xlsx")
I.2
QSAR SSD Toolbox
New script made to run the QSAR SSD Toolbox for all species (models) at once [105]:
1
from QSAR_SSD_Toolbox.src.qsar import qsar
2
import numpy as np
3
import pandas as pd
4
5
6
#####################################################
7
####
INPUT
######################################
8
#####################################################
9
10
11
# list of methods as strings
12
methods = ['Americamysis bahia', 'Pimephales promelas', 'Daphnia magna', '
Cyprinodon variegatus', 'Oncorhynchus Mykiss', 'Lepomis Macrochirus', '
Oryzias latipes', 'Other Water fleas']
13
14
# metods without spaces to save results later
15
methodsNames = ['Americamysis_bahia', 'Pimephales_promelas', 'Daphnia_magna',
'Cyprinodon_variegatus', 'Oncorhynchus_Mykiss', 'Lepomis_Macrochirus', '
Oryzias_latipes', 'Other_Water_fleas']
16
17
# load all SMILEs as list of strings
18
chemicalsList = np.loadtxt('SMILES_10 -06-24.txt', dtype='string', comments='%'
, delimiter=',')
19
# crate a list of lists that contain SMILEs
20
SMILEs = []
21
for ii in range(0, len(chemicalsList)):
122
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:133==
22
SMILEs.append([chemicalsList[ii]])
23
24
25
26
#####################################################
27
####
CALCULATE
##################################
28
#####################################################
29
30
31
numberChemicals = len(SMILEs)
32
for method in methods:
33
34
# return predicted LC50 values for the given species and method
35
this_q = qsar(method)
36
results = []
37
for ii in range(0, numberChemicals):
38
# compute and then sort results in nested list
39
prediction , insideAD , predictionError , predictionUpper ,
predictionLower = this_q.predict(SMILEs[ii])
40
resultsPlaceholder = [SMILEs[ii][0], prediction[0][0], insideAD[0],
predictionError[0], predictionUpper[0], predictionLower[0]]
41
results.append(resultsPlaceholder)
42
43
# save predicted LC50 values for all species and given method to csv
44
pd.DataFrame(results).to_csv("results_%s.csv" % methodsNames[methods.index
(method)], index=False, header=['SMILEs', 'Prediction', 'Inside AD', '
Prediction Error', 'Prediction Upper', 'Prediction Lower'])
45
print('%s DONE' %method)
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
123
==PAGE:134==
J
Interview Questions
Below is a list of all the planned questions that were asked during the interview with Finn
Pedersen (not in order as they were asked in the interview itself; translated from Danish):
1. What are the most common reasons for data gaps in chemical reporting under
REACH?
2. Could you walk us through the standard procedure that is followed when a data gap
is identified in a chemical dossier?
3. In your opinion, are there specific types of chemicals or industries that are more
prone to reporting data gaps? If so, why?
4. What are the current challenges faced by industry and regulators in closing data
gaps?
5. In our experience when looking up regulation required data in the dossiers, we
found, that lack of coherent and streamlined reporting made it difficult to collect
and interpret data. Currently the data is collected in the ECHA Chem database, do
you know why the reporting system by the registrants are not following the ECHA
Chem interface? In the sense, that the registrants should and can only insert results
and data in the guideline approved format that ECHA Chem uses?
6. What are the consequences for a registrant if they fail to adequately address data
gaps in their chemical reporting?
7. Are there data that are not publicly available, and if so, do you know what parameters
these are and why they are not publicly published? We have countered such missing
data for endocrine disrupters for example.
124
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
==PAGE:135==
Filling chemical data gaps under different EU regulations
125
==PAGE:136==
Dear reader, it is fortunate this thesis has been formulated in digital form, so the tears that went into
finalising this thesis is imperceptible.
Does the reader value your happy state of mind, that you hopefully posses at the moment of reading
this, do yourself a favour and put this thesis down. Ignorance is bliss they say.
If you are indeed a daring reader, and still holds this thesis in hand, well go on then. Read it. Read
it all. If you dare.
WARNING: Prolonged exposure of this thesis might result in side effects. Any potential side effects
from reading this thesis, such as but not limited to extreme tiredness, instant need for caffeine,
strong urge to suddenly be politically active, uncontrollable urge to discuss chemical pollution and
legislation at parties, is hereby renounced of responsibility by the authors of the thesis.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
