==PAGE:1==
Causal discovery and inference of
data from production flows
Jonas Bruun Hubrechts
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to ...
[1] The effective control of the power consistency, which is one of the most im-
portant quality indicators of diesel engine, plays a decisive role for improving
the competitiveness of the products. The widely used sensors and other data
acquisition equipment make the “data-driven quality control” become possible.
However, how to determine the highly related parameters with the engine power
from massive captured manufacturing data and effectively discriminated the di-
rect and indirect dependencies between these variables are still challenging. This
paper proposed a feature selection algorithm named NMI-ND which uses net-
work deconvolution (ND) to infer causal correlations among various diesel engine
manufacturing parameters from the observed correlations based on normalized
mutual information (NMI). The proposed algorithm is thoroughly evaluated
through the experimental study by comparing it with other representative fea-
ture selection algorithms. The comparison demonstrates that NMI-ND performs
better in both effectiveness and efficiency.
[2] Recognizing direct relationships between variables connected in a network is
a pervasive problem in biological, social and information sciences as correlation-
based networks contain numerous indirect relationships.
Here we present a
general method for inferring direct effects from an observed correlation matrix
containing both direct and indirect effects. We formulate the problem as the
inverse of network convolution, and introduce an algorithm that removes the
combined effect of all indirect paths of arbitrary length in a closed-form solu-
tion by exploiting eigen-decomposition and infinite-series sums. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in several network applications: distinguish-
==PAGE:4==
ii
ing direct targets in gene expression regulatory networks; recognizing directly
interacting amino-acid residues for protein structure prediction from sequence
alignments; and distinguishing strong collaborations in co-authorship social net-
works using connectivity information alone. In addition to its theoretical impact
as a foundational graph theoretic tool, our results suggest network deconvolu-
tion is widely applicable for computing direct dependencies in network science
across diverse disciplines.
[3] To clarify the causality among process parameters is a core issue of data-
driven production performance analysis and product quality optimization. The
difculty lies in accurately measuring and distinguishing direct and indirect as-
sociations of complex manufacturing systems. In this work, the nonparametric-
copula-entropy and network deconvolution method is proposed for causal dis-
covery in complex manufacturing systems. Firstly, based on copula theory and
kernel density estimation method, the nonparametric-copula-entropy is intro-
duced to improve the accuracy of association measurement between parameters,
and its superiority is verifed by comparing with the results of diferent associa-
tion measurement methods. Then, the global association matrix is constructed
by the nonparametric-copula-entropy, and network deconvolution method is em-
ployed to extract the direct information from the global association matrix. The
proposed method is tested by using an open gene expression dataset. Finally, as
an experimental application, the causal analysis for a diesel engine production
line is carried out by the proposed method. The results show that the proposed
method can reveal causal relationship between process parameters and quality
parameters in the diesel engine production line well, which provide theoreti-
cal guidance and implementation approach for the optimal control of complex
manufacturing system.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at ...
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with ...
The thesis consists of ...
Lyngby, 31-July-2024
Jonas Bruun Hubrechts
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my....
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Data
5
2.1
Basic statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Incompleteness of trailing batches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Production processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Cleaning operations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Method
27
3.1
Causal discovery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Setup and assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Information measures and computation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.1
Copula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.2
Mutual information and Copula entropy . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.3
Entropy and mutual information in the limit
. . . . . . .
37
3.2.4
Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3
Copula based network discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.1
Network deconvolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.2
Ensuring convergence and the effect of β . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.3
Robustness to noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.4
Estimating mutual information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4.1
B-splines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.4.2
M-splines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.4.3
Naïve KDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.4.4
Boundary corrected KDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4
Results
65
4.1
Gaussian chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.1.1
Gaussian chain deconvolution using correlation . . . . . .
68
4.1.2
Gaussian chain deconvolution using mutual information .
75
4.2
Directed acyclic Gaussian graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.3
CE computation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
4.3.1
Spline and KDE based CE estimation . . . . . . . . . . .
87
4.3.2
Exponentiated multivariate Gaussian . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
4.3.3
Gaussian network revisited - Application of complete frame-
work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
4.4
Pharmaceutical data deconvolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
5
Conclusion
115
6
Appendix
117
6.1
Suicide data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
6.1.1
A better spline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
6.2
M-spline based MI estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
6.3
Confidence interval for absolute correlation in bivariate Gaussian 122
6.4
Gaussian chain deconvolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
6.5
Gaussian network deconvolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
6.6
Pharmaceutical process deconvolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Bibliography
129
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In present days, rising customer requirements regarding product quality and
quantity is the key performance measure for manufacturers. Pharmaceutical
production firms such as Novo Nordisk especially have seen an increase in cus-
tomer interest [4]. It is thus of great interest how to efficiently schedule such
production flows. Reducing the production time and increasing production in
general is hence a major challenge for industry but also for academia. In general,
complicated production systems, consisting of multiple disjoint processes, can
involve many processes that may or may not influence each other and propagate
through the production system. In pharmaceutical productions systems this
encompasses processes such as filtration, reaction of chemical agents, centrifu-
gation and many other depending on the drug substance that is to be produced.
The duration of each process, the quantity being processed of different sub-
stances among other factors all have sources of variation. For example, a human
operated part of a process is a known source of variation. How such variations
propagate and effect other processes can be hard to detect without extensive
exploration and knowledge of the undergoing processes of the system. Hence, it
is of great interest from an industrial point of view to efficiently discover such
relations and further use these to make informed decisions along the execution
of such processes. In particular, sudden deviations and inaccuracies may occur
but having a good understanding of the causal effects of the production system
and how these deviations are expected to propagate can be crucial for keeping
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
production throughput. More specifically, at some point in the process a human
may need to manually remove deposits from a reaction tank or adjust the pH
by adding NaOH. This can influence how long the product stay in the reaction
tank and further impact subsequent processes. In particular, it is of interest to
deduce whether such variation influence a process further down the line directly
or if it is an indirect effect i.e. the variation in a process influencing the variation
in the next process and so on called transitive effects.
Due to the inherent graphical nature of the problem i.e. inferring the direct
effects by filtering out transitive effects, it is natural to take a graphical ap-
proach to the problem. Graphical models have been proposed by [5]. Bayesian
networks [6] [7] and the strongly related belief propagation algorithm for infer-
ence on graphical models [8] are also well known methods, however they are
all computationally expensive on large scale systems and typically require prior
assumptions or are limited to specific applications. We note that there exists
many feature selection algorithms, but it is often not inherently clear how to
extend these if one wants a detailed structure of how the effects propagate.
Namely, feature selection is often applied if one only wants to understand how
a set of variables influence a specific measure. It is thus often not capable of
identifying where errors originate and how they propagate.
Thus, the objective of this thesis is to quantify the impact of each process in a
production system on a specific measure of performance here taken to be time
through a systematic method by inferring the direct dependencies in the network
representing true interactions thus removing transitive effects. In particular
Given;
historical observations of sojourn times, delays, concentration
changes and more from a production system
Determine;
the causal structure and/or dependency relations between the
attributes of the processes
Subject to;
limited observations and possible prior topological considera-
tions
Based on existing material on the topic [2] [3] [1] we shall in particular investigate
the robustness of the method through perfectly controlled simulations and based
on theoretical results and extend the algorithm to infer causal direction subject
to certain assumptions instead of only direct dependencies which initially are
represented by undirected edges. The robustness is considered both in terms
of the assumptions driving the algorithm and particularly also the accuracy of
the estimator of mutual information which does not seem to be covered in the
existing literature.
The rest of the thesis is structured as follows. In chapter 2, we introduce the
data simulated from [9] which is subject to multiple error sources that need
==PAGE:15==
3
manual handling. In particular, we present some initial analysis of the simu-
lated observations and conclude that a more advanced method for discovering
the direct effects between the durations of each process. In chapter 3 we present
the method proposed in [2] and methods for computing and estimating mutual
information. We apply the method in chapter 4 and explore potential shortcom-
ings of the method for removing indirect effects and estimating the information
between pairs of variables on controlled simulations before finally applying ev-
erything to the data from chapter 2. Finally, in chapter 5 we summarize our
findings and comment on the properties of the presented methodology.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Data
In this chapter, we will introduce the pharmaceutical production data, that we
shall later use to infer a causal structure pertaining different parts of the pro-
duction system. In particular, as we are interested in the duration and amount
of produced substance during the production flow, these are highly relevant at-
tributes of the processes that make up the production. Hence, we will start
this chapter with an overview of the production system, how the observations
are structured and created to begin with. For the rest of the chapter, we will
concern ourselves with analysis of the production system such as basic statis-
tics, incomplete or wrongly labelled observations and initial observations about
codependency (which is very relevant when studying causality).
The observations that we will ultimately use for the causal study is simulated
by [9]. However, before diving into how these simulations were carried out, we
present the overall structure of the simulated observations and the production
system they are supposed to originate from. Namely, a set of 6 cycles, where each
cycle consists of a set of batches executed one by one. Thus, as cycle is simply a
notion for multiple batches that are executed in continuation of each other. In
particular, different settings for the simulation of each cycle have been used to
encompass multiple scenarios of how the production system can function. We
note that although the cycles are generated from different settings, they are still
representative of the same production system. Hence, we shall later combine
observations from all cycles.
==PAGE:18==
6
Data
A batch refers to a collection of processes/unit U that need to be executed in
some order to produce a product. In particular, for this simulation study, each
batch is a collection of the processes depicted in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The structure of a single cycle. A cycle comprises nc batches that
are carried out one by one. Thus, a cycle is simply a collection of a complex
task (a batch), that need to be repeated nc times. The number of times is often
based on time or amount of produced drug or substance, such that a cycle is
terminated after these criterions are met. We shall later see that in the case of
this simulation study, nc is determined from the accumulated duration of the
batches i.e. after a certain amount of time has been simulated, the simulation
is terminated. The structure of each batch is observed in the lower part of the
figure and consists of 11 main processes such as addition of solids and chemicals
(processes labeled with ID 1 through 4). Each process can be made up of a
number of subprocesses such as the subprocess with ID 4.3, where the batch
waits for a control operator before proceeding.
For each cycle, we then have a time series, where the ID of the batch is given
as well as sensory values. The sensors measure the level of the tank (percentage
of mow much of the tank is filled), the height (equivalent to the level), the
RPM of a motor that circulates the contents of the tank, the cooling water flow
(specifically for the cooling process with ID 9) and the steam flow during the
reaction process. We shall however restrict ourselves to only using the level
sensor in this thesis but including the other variables could improve on our
results later on. We have chosen only the level as it is assumed to be the most
descriptive of how much product is eventually produced.
In Figure 2.2 an example of the temporal evolution of a process is shown (with
==PAGE:19==
7
the previous process as well).
We define T P
u to be the duration of the pro-
cess/unit operation u and equivalently M P
u to be the change in level during
process u. Not that we have also defined random variables T D
u and M D
u . Why
we need these will become apparent in Section 2.3 but for now we note that they
correspond to delays after each of the processes. In particular, after a process
is completed, the might be some downtime in the production system due to
unforeseen reasons. We shall later see that for some processes, the delays will
not influence the level of the tank whereas the reverse is true for other processes
such as the reaction (labelled 7).
Figure 2.2: Exemplification of the evolution of the level in a tank during a
process u and the previous process. The variables T P
u , T D
u , M P
u and M D
u related
to the process are shown. Note that M P
u and M D
u are the changes in level from
the previous process or delay of process such that they describe the accumulated
evolution in the level of the tank during said process. In particular, changes in
levels can occur when the production system is idle.
We note that simulations were carried out through a mixture of Simulink and
Stateflow simulations. In particular, the continuous subsystems such as the
reaction in process 7 where simulated through Simulink based mass-balance
equations.
At this point, we have a rudimentary understanding of how the system is simu-
lated and the meaning of the random variables that are related to each process.
We thus continue with some basic statistics concerning the durations of batches.
For the remaining of the chapter, we will primarily present results for the dura-
tion and delays of the processes as the analysis and results are identical to those
of the change in level. Namely, we shall observe that the dimension of the ran-
dom vector that describes each batch (i.e. durations, delays and level changes)
large enough such that no meaningful conclusion on the causal relation between
random variables can be drawn. In particular, we will need a framework such
==PAGE:20==
8
Data
as the one presented in chapter 3, to discover such relationships.
2.1
Basic statistics
Before analyzing the time series in more depth and filter out (or correct) trou-
blesome data points, we present some initial statistics on the duration of batches
for each cycle. The statistics are summarized in Table 2.1 below. We note that
some difference is observed from cycle to cycle, but we choose to assume that
these differences are simply a feature of the production system, such that later
on, we can combine all observations across all cycles into a single dataset to be
used for causal discovery.
Cycle
number of
batches
mean
variance
standard
deviation
coefficient
of variation
A
66
14.776
3.641
1.908
0.1291
B
64
15.644
3.915
1.979
0.1265
C
61
17.714
2.330
1.526
0.08617
D
60
18.069
6.922
2.631
0.1456
E
60
18.088
9.613
3.100
0.1714
F
63
17.227
7.766
2.787
0.1618
Combined
cycles
374
16.876
7.218
2.687
0.1592
Table 2.1: Basic batch statistics for each cycle and by combining all cycles into
a single data set. The average duration of batches across cycles appear similar
when taking the variance of the durations into account. We note that later,
we wish to estimate the dependency between pairs of random variables whence
more observations is better, as always in data science. We do however note that
there appears to be a difference between especially the first three cycles and the
latter ones. In particular, the variance is larger for cycles named D, E and F.
The source of this variation is at this point unknown however it could be seen
as a feature of the dataset. Namely, if the observations are truly from the same
production system, this variation could be an inherent feature of the production
system which we should not remove.
In the following section, we discuss a problem with some of the batches. Namely,
the trailing batches, which appear to be cut-off during simulation. In this way,
we shall end up with a total of 368 batches, which after some correction (see
Section 2.3) will be our final data set.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Incompleteness of trailing batches
9
2.2
Incompleteness of trailing batches
In this section, we shall investigate the combined dataset of 374 batches in
more detail. In particular, we shall observe some deviation from Figure 2.1 in
terms of labels of each event in the time series and how we have handled these
discrepancies. Namely, by looking through the time series for each cycle, we
observe entries labeled with negative processes. These, we will investigate the
next section and note that from paper introducing the simulations we present
here [9], it is by design that some labels are incorrect.
Their argument for
this is in relation to training a robust machine learning algorithm but as this
is none of our concern, we shall manually handle these in correct labels. In
particular, the negative labels are initially negated to be positive instead. Hence,
we observe events labeled 3, which is not originally a part of the production
system description from Figure 2.1. With these negative labels transformed,
we count for each of the (new) process labels, how many batches are observed.
E.g. how many batches are at some point observed to be undergoing process 1
(the addition of a material). We do this to make sure that in fact every batch
go through all processes from Figure 2.1. The result of this counting batches
is presented in Table 2.2, where the description of the recognized processes
has been copied from [9]. Note that Educt1, Educt2 and Educt3 are just some
(unknown) materials that we do not care about. Note that we have not included
ID
Count
Description
1.0
374
Addition of liquid raw material Educt1
2.0
374
Addition of liquid raw material Educt2
3.0
181
3.1
374
Addition of liquid raw material Educt3
3.2
374
Agitation
4.0
163
4.1
374
Waiting for field operation
4.2
374
Addition of solids
4.3
374
Waiting for control operator
5.0
374
centrifugation
6.0
374
Product transfer
7.0
370
Reaction
8.0
369
Post reaction
9.0
369
Cooling
10.0
368
Material transfer
Table 2.2: The number of batches across all cycles that contains at least one
observation for each different process label.
labels pertaining the cleaning operation as these will be handled separately in
==PAGE:22==
10
Data
Section 2.4 where we also argue why we will not use these observations in the
later analysis.
Interestingly, the unrecognized process labels 3 and 4 only occur for processes
with subprocesses. We shall later observe that these labels all originate from
negative process labels and that they actually correspond to delays between
processes as portrayed in Figure 2.2. For now, we however concentrate on the
last four process labels 7, 8, 9 and 10. In particular, as all the other process labels
(excluding 3 and 4) appear exactly 374 (the number of batches in total) times,
we suspect that something weird is going on with these missing observations.
As hinted to before, it turns out that the simulations have been cut off after
1100 hours. Therefore, the trailing batch of each cycle does not complete all
processes. For example, in Figure 2.3, we have shown the first batch of cycle
A as well as the trailing batch and how the over time switch between process
labels (not that for this plot, we have not negated the negative process labels)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
time [h]
10
5
0
5
10
Process label
A1
A66
Figure 2.3: The first and last batch from cycle A. The horizontal colored bars
corresponds to the different process labels such that time stamps labeled e.g.
3.1 and 3.2 fall in the same colored region. It is clear that the final batch is cut-
off before finishing the last process. Furthermore, we observe that the negative
process labels for these two batches only occur before the process label enters a
new colored region. This hints to the negative process labels are actually delays
between processes.
From the above, it is clear that we need to remove the final batches of each
cycle. Thus, we now have a total of 368 batches. In the following section, we
shall see in more detail when the negative process labels occur and make the
assumption that they correspond to delays between processes. Note that the
cleaning operation is not considered in the following section.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Production processes
11
2.3
Production processes
We now focus on the processes labelled 1 through 10 from Figure 2.1. In par-
ticular, we shall denote these processes as production processes, as they are
exactly the processes where a substance is produced or handled in some other
way. Initially, we shall however focus on the first processes up to and including
4.3. Namely, from Table 2.2, we saw that it was these few initial processes where
labels seemed to be weird.
In Figure 2.4, we have shown the 22nd batch of cycle B. Once again, we observe
the negative process label. We notice that it is only visited once, and only at
the of the process which its label corresponds to.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
time [h]
4
2
0
2
4
Process label
Figure 2.4: The temporal evolution of process labels for batch 22 from cycle
B. Only the processes pertaining to the first boxes of Figure 2.1 are shown to
easier tell what is happening.
Investigating further, we see that negative process labels occur throughout all
the six cycles. Furthermore, by saving what negative process labels have oc-
curred for each cycle, we obtain Table 2.3 where we observe a clear tendency
regarding the process labels −4.1, −4.2 and −4.3. Namely, they only occur in
cycle F. From [9], we note that cycle F is the only phase containing wrongly
labeled time points. In particular, we can conclude that the negative process
labels apart from −4.1, −4.2 and −4.3 are not an error in the data set.
In Figure 2.5, we have shown some of the batches which contain the process
labels −4.1 etc. We observe that if either of the three process labels are negative,
then all of them are and no corresponding positive labels occur. We shall thus
==PAGE:24==
12
Data
Event
Cycle
A
B
C
D
E
F
-1
-2
-3
-4
-4.1
-4.2
-4.3
-5
-6
-7
-8
-9
-10
Table 2.3:
Occurrences of negative process labels.
It is observed that the
process labels -4.1, -4.2, -4.3 only occur in cycle F which is known to be the only
cycle with wrongly labelled phases.
assume that whenever −4.1, −4.2 or −4.3 is observed, it is actually just the
negated process label. Correcting the data set under this assumption, we then
only have negative process labels that are integer which we have summarized in
Table 2.4 below.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
time [h]
4
2
0
2
4
Process label
Figure 2.5: 13 out of the total 48 batches where at least one of the process
labels -4.1, -4.2 or -4.3 were observed.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Production processes
13
Event
Cycle
A
B
C
D
E
F
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
-9
-10
Table 2.4: In the modified data set, where −4.1, −4.2 and −4.3 have been
converted their absolute value.
We observe that the occurrence of negative
labels is not identical from cycle to cycle. Depending on the parameters of the
simulation, this could either be per happenstance on different settings of the
simulation. Either way, we assume that as the simulation is based on the same
production system, this variation is observed naturally. Hence, we shall not do
more with these observations in terms of filtering them out or correcting them.
From Table 2.4, we see that cycles D, E and F appear to contain more negative
process labels. We will however assume that the cycles are simulated from the
same production system such that no hyperparameters were changes. In partic-
ular, we shall assume that the observations of negative process labels occurs at
random, independently of the cycle.
Furthermore, by plotting the different batches from different cycles, it is appar-
ent that the negative process labels always occur after each process (including
subprocesses) and before the next process. I.e. we only observe the label −1
after 1 and before 2. Likewise, −3 only occurs after both 3.1 and 3.2 but be-
fore 4.1. As hinted to before, we shall thus assume that these negative process
labels corresponds to delays between processes. This does make sense from a
production point, but they also note in [9] that delays between operations have
been implemented.
==PAGE:26==
14
Data
At this point, it would seem that the labels of the processes are understood for
phases 1 through 10 corresponding to the actual production in each batch. Thus,
we proceed by searching relationships and otherwise quantifying the durations
of each phase, both delays and duration for each of the phases. As a beginning,
histograms for each of the phases and delays are plotted in Figure 2.6. Notice
that phases 4.1, 4.3 and 8 are not shown, this is because they always last 15
min, 5 min and 2 hours respectively with the only derivation being in machine
precision either when loaded or during calculations. Furthermore, notice that
for the negative IDs i.e. the delays, the orange bar. This bar represents the
cases where no delay was observed which is thus modelled as an atom at 1.
Figure 2.6: Histograms of all phases and delays which are non-constant.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Production processes
15
Apart from the above comments, not much catches the eye when looking at
Figure 2.6, and we thus proceed by checking if any correlation is immediately
present.
Cycle
A
B
C
D
E
F
\
E [P Xu]
13.993
13.898
15.343
14.471
14.589
14.418
\
Var (P Xu)
0.95636
0.46587
0.76111
4.9589
4.2678
5.3545
P
\
Var (Xu)
0.50590
0.31182
0.36667
1.8322
1.5788
1.9696
\
E [P XD
u ]
0.96398
1.9402
2.4503
3.6050
3.7390
3.0041
\
Var (P XD
u )
0.31843
0.39117
0.90187
1.2468
1.2787
1.0462
P
\
Var (XD
u )
0.34921
0.53198
0.74914
1.4357
1.2454
1.3099
\
E [P Xu XD
u ]
1.9321
1.5001
4.8191
6.4225
6.0405
6.3343
\
Var (P Xu XD
u )
3.7798
0.89920
16.870
22.133
12.660
16.194
Table 2.5: Each of the time related variables Xi and Di and variance descrip-
tion.
2.3.1
Correlations
Lige en korrelationsmatrix
==PAGE:28==
16
Data
Figure 2.7: Correlation matrix for all phases with non-constant duration.
9 og 10 er ikke specielt korreleret med noget (afkøling og materiale overførsel).
Ellers er 2 fremt il og med reaktionen alle korrelerede med hinanden. Eftersom
rent fysisk det udvikles i tid, må handlingen i 2 påvirke de næste osv.
Umiddelbart lidt spøjst hvis delay på 7 (reaktion) skulle have noget med tiden
for afkøling at gøre, især at den skulle være positiv (ville man ikke tro delay efter
produktion ville afkøle mere og dermed reducere behov for afkøling, medmindre
varmt steam bliver tilføjet også under delay på 7)
Herunder er samme korrelationsmatrix, dog hvor delay og phasens varighed lagt
sammen (også med sub phases såsom 3.1, 3.2 og -3 tilsammen bliver 3)
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Production processes
17
Figure 2.8: Permuteringstest med α = 0.05. Also run with less simulations
but same result at 1 mil and 10k sims. The Benjamin-Hochberg procedure on
the upper (or lower) triangle reveals that none of the correlations are significant.
==PAGE:30==
18
Data
Figure 2.9: Correlation matrix for all phases collapsed
Ligeledes scatter plots for superdiagonalen i ovenstående matrix. Altså phase
1 overfor phase 2, phase 2 overfor phase 3 osv. Er farvelagt efter hvilken cycle
de kommer fra. Table 2.4 forklarer hvorfor nogle af de horisontale fremkommer
sammen med Figure 2.6 (selve produktionstiden er ret kort sammenlignet med
delay.)
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Production processes
19
Figure 2.10: Phases vs their next phase when collecting everything regarding
a single phase into a total time duration
==PAGE:32==
20
Data
2.4
Cleaning operations
Sometimes, the vessel is cleansed. This is however not every time after a batch
so might be interesting to investigate further. Initially, per cycle, the cleanings
are summarized in the following table with basic statistics. As can be seen,
there is quite some differences.
The most notifiable differences per batch are the number of cleanses especially
when comparing to Table 2.1. For the first two cycles, the cleanses seem to be
in between every batch, which is indeed also the while the later four are only
sometimes.
Furthermore, although the cleanses are between every batch for
cycles A and B, the variances are extremely different. For the last four cycles,
they seem to be grouped further, E and F are very alike while cleanses in C and
D are generally longer although D has a substantially smaller variance than C.
Cycle
#ops
min
max
µ
σ2
σ
σ/µ
A
65
1.113
3.067
1.917
0.269
0.518
0.270
B
63
1.324
1.751
1.566
0.00883
0.0939
0.0600
C
9
1.544
3.306
2.153
0.277
0.526
0.245
D
10
1.474
2.009
1.581
0.0212
0.146
0.0922
E
10
0.827
1.584
1.465
0.0462
0.215
0.147
F
10
0.748
1.610
1.466
0.0595
0.244
0.166
Table 2.6: Per cycle cleansing statistics
To verify these observations and potentially discovering more important facts
of their probability distributions, histograms are plotted in the following Fig-
ure 2.11. We indeed again observe the likeliness between the cycles A and B, C
and D, E and F respectively. Also, for the first two cycles and more so cycle B,
the cleaning times are somewhat normally distributed although cycle A has a
very heavy right tail in that case. The later four cycles only have 10 observations
but the mode (i.e. peak) seem to be about the same.
From the above observation of like modes one may want to observe the histogram
of the combined set of cleaning times. In particular, under the hypothesis that
the durations are actually from the same probability distributions and realized
independently within each cycle a histogram of all the observations are of interest
and is shown in Figure 2.12 below.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Cleaning operations
21
Figure 2.11: Each of the 6 cycles, cleaning operations histograms.
Figure 2.12: Combined cleaning operations histograms.
Finally, to get a better overview of the irregularities is the number of clean-
ing periods (mostly concerning cycles C through F), each cleaning operation is
shown in the following Figure 2.13. The vertical shaded rectangles signify the
period in which a cleaning operation is taking place. Furthermore, the event
IDs are shown but to get a clearer view on what is going on, a single rectangle
(zoomed in) is shown in Figure 2.14.
==PAGE:34==
22
Data
Figure 2.13: Each of the 6 cycles, cleaning (corresponding to BatchID = 0).
Each ( Cleaning Procedure), CIP, is highlighted with an opaque interval (the
blue rectangles). The dots marked with red (only ID 11.5, but not all of these
are red), is if the Cleaning ID is 0.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Cleaning operations
23
Figure 2.14: A single blue rectangle zoomed in
It is observed that the observations marked with red in figure 2.13 occur exactly
when that specific cleaning operation does not go to the state 11.0 after the
flush of the tank (event ID 11.5) and vice versa. It is hard to conclude what this
may mean, but the cleaning being in state 11.0 may indicate that the system is
idle before continuing the next batch like what is observed from the other steps
of the process flow. Also, it is noted that while the red dots occur nothing else
is happening according to the dataset.
From a modelling point of view, the cycles C through F can be thought of as
the cleansing operation having a probability of not happening or equivalently
as having a duration of 0. It is thus of interest to observe what the probability
of cleaning after an operation is. From Table 2.1 and Table 2.6, we that indeed
for cycles A and B, the probability is 100 % when disregarding the possibility
of cleaning after the final batch. Hence, we see that for the remaining cycles,
the probabilities of cleaning the tank after an operation are as in Table 2.7
Cycle
% cleaning
A
100.00
B
100.00
C
15.00
D
16.95
E
16.95
F
16.13
Table 2.7: Per cycle probability of cleaning
Furthermore, let Ci denote whether the ith batch is followed by a cleaning of the
tank or not. It is then of interest if the next batch is followed by a cleaning given
whether the current batch is followed by a cleaning. In particular, we count for
each of the cycles the transitions which are shown in the following tables. Notice
that the number of observations is two less than the total number of batches
within each specific cycle. This is due to the last batch is never followed by
==PAGE:36==
24
Data
a cleaning (nor is the first batch superseded by a cleaning procedure) which
results in one less observation and also due to the fact that we are logging
transitions and hence lose another observation. To test for randomness, a Chi-
squared test is carried out on each of the cycles to check for independence. It
is observed all the cycles exhibit independence between the groups i.e. there
is no statistical evidence for information is gained about if the next batch is
followed by a cleaning operation given whether the current batch is followed by
a cleaning operation.
Ci
Ci+1
No
Yes
No
41
9
Yes
9
0
(a) C, p = 0.3293
Ci
Ci+1
No
Yes
No
41
8
Yes
7
2
(b) D, p = 0.6456
Ci
Ci+1
No
Yes
No
41
7
Yes
7
3
(c) E, p = 0.3532
Ci
Ci+1
No
Yes
No
41
9
Yes
9
1
(d) F, p = 1.0000
Table 2.8: Contingency table for Cycle C-F
Thus collecting the observations from all the last four cycles, we may want to
model the atom of the cleaning procedure independently of the previous batch
and with a probability of 0.8375 corresponding to the cleaning procedure only
being carried out 16, 25% of cases.
Finally, we show the autocorrelation function for each the four cycles C-F in
Figure 2.15 and note that all the ACF stay within the 95% confidence interval.
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Cleaning operations
25
Figure 2.15: Autocorrelation function for each of the final 4 cycles. As can
also be seen from this there seem to be no information to be gained of Ci from
Ci−1.
==PAGE:38==
26
Data
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
Method
General introduction to metodeafsnittet og causalitet
3.1
Causal discovery
In this section, we shall discuss the method for network deconvolution, originally
proposed by [2]. The underlying problem is inferring direct effects and depen-
dencies. From this, using prior information on the production setup, we shall
be able to infer causal dependencies by directing the resulting edges from the
network deconvolution (ND) algorithm. Particularly, the framework and gen-
eral algorithm proposed by Feizi et al. stems from a graph-theoretic approach
to the problem of inferring direct dependencies. Namely, suppose that obser-
vations are made of some properties such as levels and sojourn times of in this
case a chemical process. We shall represent these properties as vertices (nodes)
V and dependencies between properties as edges. Initially, when observing the
vertices, we observe both direct and indirect effects. Particularly, a vertex v1
might influence some other vertex v3 through another vertex v2 if v2 depends on
v1 and v3 of v2. In this case, we will observe that v1 influences v3, but actually
it is v2 that has a direct influence on v3. In graph-theoretical terms, we thus
observe the transitive closure of the information that flows between vertices but
want to infer the underlying network structure.
==PAGE:40==
28
Method
An important note on the algorithm to come is that we only use vertices that
we have observed. Namely, the underlying structure might be as in Figure 3.1a
with an unobserved node/variable (named U in this case). However, without
any more assumptions or modelling choices we would (ideally) infer the network
structure depicted in Figure 3.1b.
With these initial comments, we proceed
0
U
1
2
(a)
0
1
2
(b)
Figure 3.1: (a) An example of a causal structure depicted as a graph. When
observing the network, only nodes 0, 1 and 2 are observed/recorded. (b) The
resulting inferred graph from observational data. Although this is not a complete
picture of the true underlying dynamics of the system, if only the observed
variables are of interest, this will be an equally proper representation of the
system. Furthermore, in practice this means no further assumptions are made
which can and can not be of desire. Namely, if prior information is accessible
one might introduce new nodes in the inferred network.
with the general setup and assumptions for network deconvolution based on
observations.
3.1.1
Setup and assumptions
Suppose a set of N random variables (Xi) is given.
The method presented
in this section aims to discover direct relationships between pairs Xi and Xj
for i ̸= j. These relationships will be presented by a directed graph as in the
previous section or an undirected graph in case the causal direction is either
unknown or such an assumption on direction is not plausible. In particular, we
shall let each random variable Xi be represented by a vertex in a graph. We
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Causal discovery
29
will later discuss a way of directing edges such that a causal network may be
discovered i.e. a directed acyclic graph that may be used for inference.
The method proposed by [2] then works as follows. Given an observed matrix
Gobs ∈RN×N of similarities between each pair of variables, we shall deduce a
matrix Gdir ∈RN×N of direct similarities between each pair of random variables
Xi and Xj. In particular, we wish to filter out indirect effects which we will
denote by Gdir defined as effects between pairs of variables that is the result
of effects propagating through other variables. The measure of similarity, can
in practice be any desired measure such as correlation or mutual information
which we will focus on in this thesis. See Section 3.2 for a further discussion
on these two measures and Section 3.3 for how to obtain such a matrix. Note
that the algorithm presented will in theory work for non-symmetric measures
as well such as Interaction information, Directed information and Normalized
information.
illustration af hvordan algoritmen fungerer/formål
The (direct) network is then presented by the discovered Gdir containing only
the direct effects i.e. interaction between pairs of variables which can be viewed
as weights on the edges of the complete graph with nodes representing the
random variables. As we shall see in Subsection 3.3.3, the algorithm is somewhat
robust to noise in the sense that we can ensure accuracy depending on the level
of noise observed present in Gobs and on the norm chosen (from a certain,
although rather general, set of norms). Namely, if Gobs is subject to noise, we
find a bound on how different the inferred directed effects can be to the true
direct effects using different matrix norms to measure this difference. This hints
to that a threshold on the inferred weights on the edges of the network might
be a good idea to remove small inferred effects. This is further supported by
the facts that often only the most influential variables are of importance when
trying to control the process.
The first assumption is that the observed matrix of co-dependence Gobs may be
expressed as
Gobs = Gdir + Gindir
(3.1)
Namely, that the direct and indirect effects can be added together to get the
total and thus observed interdependence between each pair of variables. Often,
this is not the case as we shall see later on. However, the error made from
this assumption and the ones to be presented seem to be small enough that the
discovered network accurately resemble the true underlying network.
The second and final assumption is that the indirect effects Gindir can be com-
==PAGE:42==
30
Method
puted in terms of Gdir. Namely, that
Gindir = G2
dir + G3
dir + . . .
(3.2)
i.e. that the observed information exchanged on an edge eij between nodes Xi
and Xj is the sum of the second, third etc. order effects, each given by the
information on the n-path (where n is the order of the (diminishing) indirect
effect) again assumed to be a sum of products. In other terms, the second order
indirect effect between Xi and Xj (given as the (i, j) element of G2
dir) is the
sum of products on edges eik and ekj for all k

G2
dir

ij =
N
X
k=1
eik ekj
where eij is the (i, j) element of Gdir. This is of course not true in general, but
through the error analysis in Subsection 3.3.3 and the examples in chapter 4
this is not necessarily a problem. Immediately, we observe that eii is of interest
in terms of its physical meaning. The co-dependence between a random variable
and itself might be somewhat ambiguous or even undefined depending on the
measure. Thus, the notion of (non-existing) edges eii will be of interest later on
when using the method on controlled cases. We note that in Gobs we shall in
general set these elements to 0.
Thus, from the above assumptions, it follows that we can express Gobs as
Gobs = Gdir + G2
dir + G3
dir + · · · = Gdir + Gdir Gobs
(3.3)
Clearly, such a Gdir must have spectral radius at most 1 as otherwise, the above
sum diverges and thus Gobs will not exist. I.e. ρ (Gdir) < 1. Thus, assuming
convergence we can rewrite the infinite series as
Gobs = Gdir (I −Gdir)−1
(3.4)
It immediately follows that Gdir is given by (can be proved by directly inserting
the above expression for Gobs)
Gdir = Gobs (I + Gobs)−1
(3.5)
Furthermore, if the measure of dependence between pairs of variables is sym-
metric, then so is Gobs and hence diagonalizable by some orthogonal matrix U
and diagonal matrix Λobs such that Gobs = UΛobsU T (with the columns of U
being right eigenvectors of Gobs). It follows that Gdir can be expressed in a
simple (and later computationally efficient) way
Gdir = UΛdirU T
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Causal discovery
31
where Λdir = Λobs (I + Λobs)−1 which is also a diagonal matrix.
We note that from the above one needs (I + Gobs)−1 to be well-defined which is
equivalent to −1 ̸∈σGobs i.e. −1 is not an eigenvalue of Gobs. To see that this
is indeed the case whenever ρ (Gdir) < 1, and that I + Gobs is thus invertible
we use Equation 3.4 and simplify
I + Gobs = I + Gdir (I −Gdir)−1
= (I −Gdir) (I −Gdir)−1 + Gdir (I −Gdir)−1
= (I −Gdir)−1
which is clearly invertible. Furthermore, we note that under the assumption
ρ (Gdir) < 1 we can not place any bound on the spectral radius of Gobs. Namely,
if v is a eigenvector of Gdir with eigenvalue λ such that |λ|< 1, then v is also
an eigenvector of Gobs as
Gobsv =
∞
X
k=1
Gk
dirv =
∞
X
k=1
λkv =
λ
1 −λv
i.e.

λ
1−λ, v

is an eigenpair of Gobs and since
λ
1−λ ∈(−1/2, ∞) for λ ∈(−1, 1)
we can in general not bound the spectral radius of Gobs, although we should
never observe an eigenvalue equal to or below −1/2 (which again proves that
−1 is not an eigenvalue of Gobs).
As we shall later use some assumptions regarding causality i.e. directing the
edges in the graph, we shall investigate the effect of letting Gobs be a triangular
matrix which corresponds to a directed acyclic graph. Namely, in the following,
we show that given the existence of Gdir (with necessary and sufficient conditions
on Gobs as given above), Gobs is triangular if and only if Gdir is triangular. Thus,
by directing the observed similarity (by removing half the edge weights in Gobs),
we also infer a directed graph Gdir.
Clearly, if Gdir is triangular, so are the powers Gi
dir for all i ∈N and hence
if the infinite sum P∞
i=1 Gi
dir converges, Gobs is triangular as well. To show
the other way, assume that Gobs is triangular and is the result of a Gdir with
spectral radius smaller than 1. By Equation 3.5, Gdir is triangular if the inverse
of I + Gobs is triangular (upper triangular if Gobs is also upper triangular and
similarly for lower triangular). This is indeed the case as in general, the inverse
of a triangular matrix is also triangular provided that the diagonal elements
are non-zero which is true as I + Gobs has only ones in the diagonal as we will
later assume in Equation 3.9. A simple proof of this is as follows. Without
loss of generality, we assume that a matrix T is upper triangular. Let D be
the diagonal elements of T and Tu be the remaining strictly upper triangular
==PAGE:44==
32
Method
part of T such that T = D + Tu. Then, assuming that D has non-zero diagonal
elements, T = D
 I + D−1Tu

and hence, we have that
T −1 =
 I + D−1Tu
−1 D−1
=
∞
X
i=0
 −D−1Tu
i D−1
which is clearly also upper triangular. Thus, we conclude that Gobs is triangular
if and only if Gdir is (under the assumption Gdir exists).
Finally, before discussing the implementation and analyzing the algorithm both
analytically and through examples, we will take a closer look at the similarity
measures that are to be used with this method and that in the end will make
up the matrix Gobs. Namely, mutual information and correlation.
3.2
Information measures and computation
In this section we discuss two measures that can be used to construct the ma-
trices of codependency from the previous section. Namely, we shall touch on
correlation and discuss what one might choose to call Copula-based entropy.
However, before discussing Copula entropy (CE) we first need to define what a
copula is.
3.2.1
Copula
Given a set of N random variables X1, . . . , Xd, a copula is loosely speaking a
distribution function with support [0, 1]d incorporating the dependence struc-
ture between the random variables. Given a joint distribution function F and
(invertible) marginals F1, . . . , FN we define a copula C as
F(x1, . . . , xN) = P (X1 ≤x1, . . . , XN ≤xN)
= P (F1 (X1) ≤F1 (x1) , . . . , Fd (Xd) ≤Fd (xd))
= C (F1 (x1) , . . . , FN (xN))
Letting ui = Fi (xi) ∈[0, 1] it is clear that C is a distribution function as
described above [10]. Furthermore, it follows that the marginals of C are uniform
as Fi (Xi) is uniformly distributed. We thus define a copula in probabilistic
terms as
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Information measures and computation
33
Definition 3.1 (Copula). A function C : [0, 1]d →[0, 1] is called a copula
if it has uniform marginals and is a distribution function for a d-dimensional
random vector X.
An important and fundamental theorem of copulas for especially continuous
random variables where the marginals are also continuous functions is stated by
Sklar:
Theorem 3.2 (Sklar’s theorem). For a random vector X with CDF F and
univariate marginal CDFs F1, . . . , Fd. There exists a copula C such that
F(x1, . . . , xd) = C(F1(x1), . . . , Fd(xd))
(3.6)
If X is continuous, C is unique; otherwise C is uniquely determined on the
Cartesian product of the ranges of distribution functions Fi, Q Ran (Fi).
Note that the last statement for non-continuous random variables can be made
unique by instead using subcopulas, a generalization of copulas with domain I
only a subdomain of the unit hypercube Id = [0, 1]d containing all faces of the
unit hyper cube. However, there are infinitely many ways of extending such a
subcopula to a copula C[11]. In our case, this means that for discrete and/or
mixed variables, we will later have to work around this non-uniqueness when
calculating mutual information. The example made by Geenens[11] is a bivariate
random vector of independent variables X ∼Bern (πX) and Y ∼Bern (πY ).
The support of FX and FY is then {0, 1−πX} and {0, 1−πY } respectively. Due
to the restriction on the boundary of the unit square, the only unique point of
a copula C is then (1 −πX, 1 −πY ), and by independence we must have
C (1 −πX, 1 −πY ) = (1 −πX)(1 −πY )
Geenens then proceed to define an uncountable set of copulas that fulfill the
above criterion which further illustrates that the basic concepts of copulas are
not well suited for discrete random vectors. Note that in the article it is however
argued how one can extend the concept to a more general concept that works
for mixed variables.
From Equation 3.6 we see that a copula is thus simply just a function that
couples the marginals of a random vector to the joint distribution. The following
corollary follows immediately
Corollary 3.2.1 (Coordinate transformation). Under the assumptions of The-
orem 3.2, given any set (T1, . . . , Td) of strictly increasing functions, if C is a
copula of (X1, . . . , Xd) then it is also a copula of (T1(X1), . . . , Td(Xd)).
==PAGE:46==
34
Method
Proof. Suppose (X1, . . . , Xd) permits a copula C and let Ti be given as stated.
Consider coordinate wise the result of the transformation Yi = Ti(Xi) and
consider the CDF FYi(yi)
FYi(yi) = P (Yi ≤yi)
= P
 T −1
i
(Yi) ≤T −1
i
(yi)

= P
 Xi ≤T −1
i
(yi)

= FXi
 T −1
i
(yi)

The above is easily generalized for a joint distribution as well. Thus, by the
existence of a Copula C for X
FY (y1, . . . , yd) = FX
 T −1
1
(y1) , . . . , T −1
d
(yd)

= C
 FX1(T −1
1
(y1)), . . . , FXd(T −1
d
(yd))

= C (FY1(y1), . . . , FYd(yd))
where Sklar’s theorem have been used for the second equality. The above shows
that C is indeed also a Copula for Y = (T1(X1), . . . , Td(Xd)).
□
The above corollary is actually equivalent with a seemingly stronger statement
and follows easily
Proposition 3.3. Since Ti is strictly increasing, the inverse T −1
i
exists and is
also strictly increasing. Thus, the above implication is bidirectional and hence
for strictly increasing functions Ti, C is a copula of (X1, . . . , Xd) if and only if
it is a copula of (T1(X1), . . . , Td(Xd)).
3.2.2
Mutual information and Copula entropy
In this section we introduce Copula entropy as done in [3] and see how it actually
is equal to the well known mutual information (multiplied by −1) and hence
as a corollary that mutual information is independent of marginals. The name
comes from the general definition of (differential) entropy as we shall see shortly.
However, first we define mutual information between a set of random variables
Definition 3.4 (Mutual information). For a random vector X = {Xi}, we
define the mutual information as
I(X) = E

logb

f(X)
Q
i fi(Xi)

==PAGE:47==
3.2 Information measures and computation
35
where f is the joint density function with marginals fi of the random vector X.
The base of the logarithm b is often chosen to be 2, e or 10 although the choice
is unimportant as all logarithms are equivalent up to a scaling factor.
We note that later on, as the choice of b will result in a scaling of Gobs, but we
will also introduce a scaling parameter α for Gobs to both ensure the convergence
of the algorithm and to control higher order effects, we shall in general choose
b = e.
An important property of mutual information is that the continuous version
is the limit of the discrete mutual information for random (continuous) vector
discretized as the mesh size goes to zero i.e. recovering the continuity of the
random vector.
This is discussed in Subsection 3.2.3.
For now, we proceed
with the definition of (joint) entropy for both discrete and continuous random
vectors.
Definition 3.5 (Entropy). The (joint) entropy of a random vector X is defined
as
H (X) = −E [logb f(X)]
In case of a discrete random vector, this is called the Shannon entropy while
for continuous random vectors, this is called differential entropy and is often
denoted as h (X) instead of H (X).
We note the need for two separate notations of entropy as differential entropy
is not the limit of Shannon entropy in the way mutual information is. Again,
this is further discussed in Subsection 3.2.3.
Before discussing Copula entropy (CE), we note a very useful relation between
entropy and mutual information. Indeed, we shall later use this to show that
mutual information in the continuous version is the limit of the discretization.
Lemma 3.6 (Mutual information and entropy relation). For a continuous ran-
dom vector X, the (joint) mutual information I (X) can be decomposed into a
sum of differential entropies as
I (X) =
d
X
i=1
h(Xi) −h (X)
where d is the dimension of X. The same is true for discrete variables but with
entropy H instead of differential entropy h.
==PAGE:48==
36
Method
Proof. This follows immediately from the definition of mutual information and
entropy:
E

logb
f (X)
Q
i fi (Xi)

= E [logb f (X)] −
X
i
E [logb fi (Xi)]
□
With the definitions of mutual information and entropy we are finally ready to
introduce Copula entropy.
Definition 3.7 (Copula entropy). For a continuous random vector X with a
uniquely defined Copula C, and Copula density c, we define the Copula entropy
CE of X as
CE (X) = h (U)
where U has density c. In particular,
CE (X) = −E [logb c (U)]
As stated above, Copula entropy is actually equal to the negative mutual infor-
mation which we state as a theorem
Theorem 3.8 (Equality of Copula entropy). For a continuous random vector
X, the Copula entropy CE is equal to the negative joint mutual information of
X
CE (X) = −I (X)
Proof. By Theorem 3.2, letting xi = F −1
i
(ui), we can relate the copula density
to the joint density of X and its marginals
c(u1, . . . , un) = ∂
∂uC(u1, . . . , un)
= ∂
∂uF
 F −1
1
(u1) , . . . , F −1
n
(un)

= f
 F −1
1
(u1) , . . . , F −1
1
(un)

1
f1
 F −1
1
(u1)

. . . fn
 F −1
1
(ud)

==PAGE:49==
3.2 Information measures and computation
37
It follows directly that
−CE (X) =
Z
[0,1]d c (u) log c (u) du
=
Z
X
f(x)
Qd
i=1 fi (xi)
log
 
f(x)
Qd
i=1 fi (xi)
!
d
Y
i=1
fi (xi) dx
=
Z
X
f(x) log
 
f(x)
Qd
i=1 fi (xi)
!
dx
= I (X)
where X is the domain of the random variable X and the third equality follows
from a change of variables with the trivial substitution ui = Fi(xi) such that
dui = fi(xi) dxi. This concludes the proof.
□
Finally, before moving on to correlation as a measure of similarity, we discuss
what happens in the limit of mutual information and entropy as we shall later
need this as arguments for numerical stability.
3.2.3
Entropy and mutual information in the limit
In this section, we shall discuss the differences between entropy and differential
entropy and observe how this difference cancels when computing mutual infor-
mation. In fact, we shall see that mutual information defined for continuous
random vectors is the limit of the discrete version which will be useful later
when implementing the algorithm.
First, although one may think differential entropy is the limit of (discrete) en-
tropy, this is not the case. Namely, consider the support of f(x) (here assumed
to be the entire real line) binned into intervals i.e. a discretization of the con-
tinuous random variable X, which we shall denote X∆.
To make notation
simpler, we shall bin into equal-sized intervals of width ∆. Then, for each in-
terval [i∆, (i + 1)∆) for i ∈Z, there exists an xi such that the probability mass
on this interval is represented by this xi:
P
 X∆= xi

= f(xi)∆=
Z (i+1)∆
i∆
f(x) dx
(3.7)
Clearly, this discretization is a valid distribution as
X
i∈Z
f(xi)∆=
Z
R
f(x) dx = 1
==PAGE:50==
38
Method
and in the limit, as ∆→0 we recover the original distribution f(x). However,
if we try to calculate the entropy of this discretization, denoted by H∆, we get
a diverging limit
H∆= −
X
i∈Z
f(xi)∆log f(xi)∆
= −
X
i∈Z
f(xi)∆log f(xi) −
X
i∈Z
f(xi)∆log ∆
= −
X
i∈Z
f(xi)∆log f(xi) −log ∆
Clearly, the first term in the above expression converges to the differential en-
tropy h (X) as ∆→0 whereas log ∆→−∞i.e. the expression diverges alto-
gether when differential entropy is well-defined.
A similar argument for the joint entropy between the discretization of X1 and
X2 (and in principle to any number of dimensions), denoted by H∆
12, results in
H∆
12 = −
X
i,j∈Z
f

x(i)
1 , x(j)
2

∆1∆2 log f

x(i)
1 , x(j)
2

−log ∆1 −log ∆2
where x(i)
1
∈[i∆1, (i + 1)∆1) and x(j)
2
∈[j∆2, (j + 1)∆2) are defined such that
f

x(i)
1 , x(j)
2

∆1∆2 =
Z (j+1)∆2
j∆2
Z (i+1)∆1
i∆1
f(x1, x2) dx1dx2,
∀i, j ∈Z
Note that clearly

x(i)
1 , x(j)
2

exists for all i, j ∈Z. Again, the joint entropy
diverges however, when computing the mutual information, we see that the
diverging terms cancel. Namely, from Lemma 3.6
I∆
12 = H∆
1 + H∆
2 −H∆
12
= −
X
i∈Z
f1

˜x(i)
1

∆1 log f1

˜x(i)
1

−log ∆1
−
X
j∈Z
f2

˜x(j)
2

∆2 log f2

˜x(j)
2

−log ∆2
+
X
i,j∈Z
f

x(i)
1 , x(j)
2

∆1∆2 log f

x(i)
1 , x(j)
2

+ log ∆1∆2
= −
X
i∈Z
f1

˜x(i)
1

log f1

˜x(i)
1

∆1 −
X
j∈Z
f2

˜x(j)
2

log f2

˜x(j)
2

∆2
+
X
i,j∈Z
f

x(i)
1 , x(j)
2

log f

x(i)
1 , x(j)
2

∆1∆2
→h(X1) + h(X2) −h(X1, X2) as ∆1, ∆2 →0
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Information measures and computation
39
Thus, the limit of the mutual information for discrete random variables is indeed
the mutual information defined for continuous random variables and can be
computed either as the limit of discretizing the probability density function and
then computing entropies or just using the initial definition for (discrete) mutual
information in Definition 3.4.
Before continuing, we discuss the case where X1 is equal to X2. In this case,
discretizing with a common ∆we have that
f

x(i)
1 , x(j)
2

∆2 =
Z (j+1)∆
j∆
Z (i+1)∆
i∆
f(x1, x2) dx1dx2,
∀i, j ∈Z
Clearly, the above integral is 0 for i ̸= j. Although f(x1, x2) is not well-defined in
the usual functional sense, extending to distribution, we might write f(x1, x2) =
f(x2|x1)f(x1). In terms of distributions, it works to put f(x2|x1) = δ(x2 −x1)
where δ is the Dirac delta distribution, as then
R
R f(x1, x2) dx2 = f(x1) and
f(x1, x2) is "0" when x1 ̸= x2. I.e. the marginals and probability mass are
correct. Then, when calculating the above integral, we get that
f

x(i)
1 , x(i)
1

∆2 =
Z (i+1)∆
i∆
Z (i+1)∆
i∆
f(x1, x2) dx1dx2
=
Z (i+1)∆
i∆
f (x1) dx1
= f

˜x(i)
1

∆
Thus, when calculating I∆for two identical variables, we obtain
I∆= −
X
i∈Z
f

˜x(i)
1

log f

˜x(i)
1

∆−
X
j∈Z
f

˜x(j)
2

log f

˜x(j)
2

∆
+
X
i∈Z
f

˜x(i)
1

log f

˜x(i)
1

∆−log ∆
→∞as ∆→0
Thus in practice, it would not make much sense to compare equal variables or
even a random vector only defined on a lower dimensional manifold as we would
get an infinite Copula entropy.
3.2.4
Correlation
At this point, we have a good understanding of Copula entropy/mutual informa-
tion for calculations later on. However, another typical measure of similarity is
==PAGE:52==
40
Method
correlation which is easily estimated from sample data. However, in this section
we show that in general, we can not compute the correlation coefficient from a
Copula which we saw above is the case for mutual information. Namely, given
a copula C for some set of random variables {Xi}i∈I indexed by finite I, one
can not calculate ρ between any pair (Xi, Xj), i ̸= j from the copula. This is
easily shown by the following argument.
First, note that from Corollary 3.2.1, C is also a copula for Zi := (Xi −µi) /σi
for i ∈I where µi = E[Xi] and σi = √Var Xi (assuming that these exist).
Clearly, the correlation coefficient for Zi and Zj is the same as between Xi and
Xj. We thus proceed trying to calculate the correlation between any pair Zi
and Zj.
ρij =
Z Z
R2 zizjfij(zi, zj) dzi dzj
=
Z Z
[0,1]2 F −1
i
(ui) F −1
j
(uj) cij(ui, uj) dui duj
(3.8)
where cij density version of the copula defined for Xi and Xj and Fi and Fj
are the marginals of Zi and Zj with mean 0 and variance 1. From the above,
it is then clear for a fixed, non-constant copula C, the correlation depends on
the marginals of Xi and Xj. Also, we see that a constant copula density (only
admissible if c ≡1 on [0, 1]2 and 0 elsewhere) always results in ρij = 0 as
Z 1
0
F −1(u) du =
Z
R
zf(z) dz = 0
where the final equality follows from the construction of Zi.
Thus, we conclude that indeed mutual information and correlation are very dif-
ferent measures of codependency. Namely, mutual information does not depend
on the marginal distributions whereas from Equation 3.8 we see that correlation
does. Thus, it does not make much sense to introduce copulas in the setting
of correlation albeit at this point we do not favor one measure above the other
except if marginals should be insignificant to the network, Copula entropy is
preferred.
3.3
Copula based network discovery
In this section, we will present the general algorithm and discuss some of its prop-
erties regarding uncertainty and convergence. We will focus on using mutual
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Copula based network discovery
41
information i.e. Copula entropy as the measure of similarity but other measures
such as correlation can be interchanged at will in the general algorithm.
By Theorem 3.8 we can compute the mutual information from observed data
from the copula. Namely, let CEij denote the (pairwise) Copula entropy of
variables Xi and Xj. We shall then set
Gobs =


0
−CE12
. . .
−CE1n
−CE21
0
. . .
−CE2n
...
...
...
...
−CEn1
−CEn2
. . .
0


(3.9)
where n is the number of nodes in the graph i.e. random variables that we
have observed. Notice that we have chosen the diagonal elements as 0 since
information between a random variable X and itself is not really well-defined
and when trying to compute this numerically, we observe diverging results as
also discussed in the previous section. Furthermore, only the information that
propagates through the network is of interest and so setting 0 in the diagonal
avoids a bias when (de)convolving the information or any similarity in general.
Especially for mutual information where the information between a variable
and itself diverges to ∞thus in the limit, from Equation 3.5, we would get the
identity matrix which does not tell us much about the direct dependencies.
Algorithm 1 then follows immediately from Equation 3.9
Algorithm 1 Gobs computation
Require: n > 0
▷Number of variables
Gobs ←0
for 1 ≤i, j ≤n | i ̸= j do
Estimate Fi and Fj from xD
i and xD
j
uD
i ←Fi(xD
i )
uD
j ←Fj(xD
j )
Estimate cij from uD
i and uD
j
Compute NCEij
[Gobs]ij ←−NCEij
end for
return Gobs
Namely, for each entry in Gobs, except for the diagonal elements, first estimate
the cumulative distributions of Xi and Xj based on samples xD
i . Then, trans-
form the samples by the estimated distribution function to obtain corresponding
uniform samples. This may be done outside the loop to increase computational
==PAGE:54==
42
Method
efficiency. From the paired samples (xD
i , xD
j ), estimate the Copula density cij
and finally use this to compute the mutual information/Copula entropy. Meth-
ods for estimating the densities and in continuation hereof the distribution func-
tions are presented in Section 3.4. The negative Copula entropy is then recorded
in (i, j) entry of Gobs. We note that the algorithm can be optimized for sym-
metric measures such as Copula entropy itself, to only loop through i < j and
saving the computed entropy in the (j, i) entry as well. Also, as Copula entropy
diverges as Xi and Xj are jointly distributed closer to a one-dimensional mani-
fold, ideally there should be a check for such or the user should check the paired
observations to exclude such variable combinations.
From Subsection 3.2.3, to calculate the (joint) copula entropy of a continuous
random vector, we simply discretize the domain of each random variable and
use the estimated copula density evaluated at these points to estimate the total
Copula entropy. Furthermore, if one or more elements of the random vector are
mixed random variables, we choose the discrete events to be their own bins and
discretize the rest or in the context of Algorithm 1 only estimate the distribution
functions for the continuous component of the random variable. This works due
to the Copula entropy for continuous random variables being the limit of the
discretization and as such, the Copula entropy is well-defined for mixed random
variables as well.
We continue with an example of how this discretization of a mixed random
variable would work. Notice that we only have a discrete event (an atom) at
0 as this resembles the observed behavior of the delays, although the example
could be extended to more complex discrete distributions.
[12]
Example 3.1 (Discrization of mixed random variable). Let X be a mixture of
an atom in e.g. 0 and an exponential with parameter λ with proportions p and
1−p. Then, a discretization of X is 0 with probability mass p and the remaining
support (0, ∞) discretized in some way with total probability mass 1−p and each
bin having probability according to Equation 3.7 scaled with 1−p. If the bin size
is a constant ∆, then for the discretized variable X∆, we have P
 X∆= 0

= p
and P
 X∆= xi

= (1 −p) exp (−λi∆) (1 −exp(−λ∆)), where xi is given by
xi = i∆+ 1
λ
 log (λ∆) −log
 1 −e−λ∆
,
i ∈N0
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Copula based network discovery
43
3.3.1
Network deconvolution
At this point, we have obtained a convolved matrix of information Gobs and are
ready to use Equation 3.5. We present the original algorithm from [2] in the case
Gobs is symmetric and hence diagonalizable by an orthogonal matrix U. The
original Matlab implementation was translated to Python and is summarized in
the following pseudocode.
Algorithm 2 (ND) Network Deconvolution
Require: Gobs, α, β
[Gobs]ii ←0, ∀i ∈{1, . . . , N}
▷ensure zero-diagonal
[Gobs]ij ←0, when [Gobs]ij < Qα (Gobs)
Compute eigendecomposition U, Λ of Gobs
λ+ ←max (λmax, 0)
λ−←min
 λmin, 0

k+ ←1−β
β λ+
k−←1+β
β λ−
c−1
s
←max (k+, −k−)
ˆΛ ←Λ
 c−1
s I + Λ
−1
return U ˆΛU T
where Qα (Gobs) denotes the α quantile of the strictly upper (or lower due to
symmetry) triangular part of Gobs. We note the two extra parameters alpha
and β which we will discuss shortly. In particular, the paper contains conflicting
information on how to find β from how it is defined. Furthermore, they include
some analysis on the robustness of the above deconvolution algorithm but only
in a somewhat particular case and with some confusion on matrix norms and
spectral radius. This analysis on robustness, we will extend and clarify in the
following Subsection 3.3.3.
From the definition of Qα (Gobs) it is clear that the α parameter is a filter on the
observed edges and is useful if one wants to filter out insignificant observations.
However, in practice, as we will see, it is often not very influential except for
large α (corresponding to many edges set to 0) as small perturbations from e.g.
imperfect calculations should not influence the results for fairly conditioned
matrices as we shall observe in Section 4.3. Thus, setting α = 0 retains all
values in Gobs after setting the diagonal equal to 0. As a technical detail, we
note that the quantile function from NumPy (v. 1.26.4) has been used to find
this quantile as quantiles can be defined in many ways from a data set.
Finally, we note that the β ∈(0, 1) parameter corresponds to a scaling of Gobs
==PAGE:56==
44
Method
such that the resulting spectral norm of Gdir is β. From Algorithm 2 it is seen
that it serves as a regularization on the eigenvalues of Gobs and although this is
discussed in [2], their results do not conform with their implementation, and we
thus comment on this and what else could be done to ensure convergence of the
algorithm in the following section. Also, in practice we choose a threshold t on
the elements of Gdir returned from Algorithm 2 to further filter out insignificant
direct dependencies.
3.3.2
Ensuring convergence and the effect of β
In this section we will further discuss the effect of β and how the steps for
rescaling the observed similarity matrix Gobs are derived. In particular, we will
reformulate the original derivation from [2] as there is a discrepancy between
their code1 and their proof of choosing a scaling parameter cs of Gobs. Namely,
denote ˜Gobs as the rescaled Gobs such that ˜Gobs = csGobs.
Choosing cs as
in Algorithm 2 i.e.
c−1
s
= max

1−β
β λ+, −1+β
β λ−
where λ+ is the largest
positive eigenvalue of Gobs (and 0 if no eigenvalue is positive) and λ−is the most
negative eigenvalue of Gobs (and 0 if no eigenvalue is negative) then implies ˜Gdir
obtained from the new ˜Gobs has spectral radius β < 1 i.e. a proper Gdir with the
largest numerical eigenvalue equal to β. This holds in general and not only for
symmetric Gobs as we will see in the following. However, when Gobs is symmetric
the resulting ˜Gdir can easily be expressed through the eigendecomposition of
Gobs, U, Λ as
˜Gdir = ˜Gobs

I + ˜Gobs
−1
= csGobs (I + csGobs)−1
= UcsΛU T  UU T + UcsΛU T −1
= UcsΛU T U (I + csΛ)−1 U T
= UΛ
 c−1
s I + Λ
−1 U T
which can also be seen in Algorithm 2. Thus, with everything else explained
about the algorithm, we show that the resulting ˜Gdir in general have spectral
radius β.
Let (λ, v) be an eigenpair of Gobs with λ ̸= 0, it then follows that

λ
c−1
s
+λ, v

is
an eigenpair of ˜Gdir. Then, following the arguments in [2] (which we have redone
to know why the original implementation and derivation differs), we obtain that
1https://compbio.mit.edu/nd/
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Copula based network discovery
45
for a λ in [0, ∞), we must have that
c−1
s
≥1 −β
β
λ+
and similarly for λ ∈(−c−1
s , 0)
c−1
s
≥−1 + β
β
λ−
for λ < −c−1
s
we obtain that the resulting eigenvalue is larger than 1 hence we
must also have that c−1
s
≥−λ−which is covered by the above constraint on
c−1
S . Thus, the smallest c−1
s
we can choose to ensure that ρ

˜Gdir

≤β is by
c−1
s
= max

1−β
β λ+, −1+β
β λ−
which also implies that ρ

˜Gdir

= β as either
the most negative or most positive eigenvalue is mapped to β or −β respectively.
This coincides with the original implementation, noting that some error has been
made in the original discussion of the parameter β in [2]. Furthermore, we note
that if we just want the algorithm to converge, as we discussed before, this
is equivalent to σ

˜Gobs

⊆(−1/2, ∞), so really, we can just choose c−1
s
=
−(2 + δ)λ−for some small δ if λ−< −1/2 and otherwise not scale Gobs to
preserve the structure.
Finally, we note that as β tends to 0, higher order
interactions become less significant as can clearly be seen from Equation 3.4.
Thus, β also allows us to tune how much influence higher order interactions
should have and one should try different β to see how influenced results are to
higher order effects.
3.3.3
Robustness to noise
Finally, before discussing how to compute and estimate the mutual information
between two random variables based on observations, we turn our heads to
error analysis of the deconvolution algorithm. It is important to understand
how well the algorithm performs subject to noise and errors. Namely, in the
case of mutual information, the assumption that higher order effects can be
calculated as a sum of matrix powers of the direct effects does not hold. Thus,
if we can quantify the error in Gobs, we can from the following analysis quantify
the resulting error in Gdir. We shall first discuss the original result from [2],
correcting some errors in terms of definitions and see how their result can also
be expressed as an absolute upper bound on the error instead of only how this
error behaves for small perturbations. Furthermore, we shall extend their result
to not only hold when ρ (Gobs) < 1 and ρ (Gobs + N) < 1 where N is some noise
e.g. from computation or assumptions that does not completely hold.
==PAGE:58==
46
Method
The original result states that

Gdir −˜Gdir


2 ≤γ + O
 δ2 + γ2 + δγ

where
||·||2 is the Euclidean norm also known as the spectral norm as this is equal
to the largest singular value of the input matrix. However, they note that the
Euclidean norm of a matrix M is equal to
qP
i,j m2
ij which is incorrect. This
is the Frobenius norm, and instead it should have been defined as
||M||2 =
sup
||x||2=1
||Mx||2 = σmax (M)
They then proceed to let γ be the largest absolute eigenvalue of N and δ the
largest absolute eigenvalue of ˜Gobs = Gobs+N however as the noise may be both
positive and negative, it is easier to define δ as the largest absolute eigenvalue
of Gobs instead which we will do in the following. We note that γ and δ are
not the spectral/Euclidian norm of N and Gobs respectively as in general, we
only have ρ (M) ≤||M||2. However, if Gobs and N are both (real) symmetric
matrices, then the spectral norms are equal to the largest absolute eigenvalues of
Gobs and N respectively. Thus, if instead one wanted to measure the difference
in the direct dependency matrices in terms of e.g. the Frobenius norm, it is
important to differentiate between the spectral radius and the norm that is
actually being used. Finally, before constructing the actual upper bound on the
error instead of quantizing the asymptotic behavior for small γ, we note that
||·||2 is a sub-multiplicative matrix norm defined as bellow ([13]), and that we
shall assume that ρ (Gobs) , ρ

˜Gobs

< 1.
Definition 3.9 (Sub-multiplicative Matrix norm). A matrix norm ||| · ||| is said
to be sub-multiplicative, if for every A, B ∈Fn×n where F is either the real or
complex field:
|||AB||| ≤|||A||| · |||B|||
As we do not use any property of the spectral norm except that it is sub-
multiplicative, we shall consider any norm ||·|| in general that is also sub-
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Copula based network discovery
47
multiplicative. Thus, consider the norm of the difference Gdir −˜Gdir:

Gdir −ˆGdir

 =

Gobs (I + Gobs)−1 −ˆGobs

I + ˆGobs
−1

=


−
X
k≥1
(−Gobs)k +
X
k≥1

−ˆGobs
k


≤
X
k≥1

Gk
obs −(Gobs + N)k

≤
X
k≥1
k
X
i=1
k
i

||N||i ||Gobs||k−i
=
X
k≥1
k
X
i=1
k
i

γiδk−i
=
X
k≥1

(γ + δ)k −δk
=
γ + δ
1 −γ −δ −
δ
1 −δ
=
γ
(1 −γ −δ)(1 −δ)
(3.10)
where in the second to last inequality, we assume that γ + δ < 1 as then both
P (γ + δ)k and P δk converges as γ + δ ≥δ ≥0 and hence also the difference
of the sums converges. Also, the second equality uses that the spectral norm of
Gobs and ˜Gobs is less than 1 in order to express the inverses as infinite series.
Thus, the above bound on the difference Gdir −˜Gdir does not hold in every case
and we observe for fixed γ, the bound tends to ∞as δ →1. Furthermore, we
note that the final infinite sum diverges whenever γ+δ > 1 through the following
argument using the ratio test for infinite sums which is needed because we can
not conclude on the convergence of a difference of diverging sums solely from
the fact that the individual sums diverge:
lim
n→∞

(γ + δ)n+1 −δn+1
(γ + δ)n −δn
 = lim
n→∞

(γ + δ)
 1 + γ
δ
n −δ
 1 + γ
δ
n −1

= lim
n→∞
δ + γ
 1 + γ
δ
n
 1 + γ
δ
n −1

= lim
n→∞
δ + γ
1
1 −
 1 + γ
δ
−n

= |γ + δ| = γ + δ
==PAGE:60==
48
Method
assuming that γ, δ > 0 corresponding to neither N nor Gobs is the zero matrix
in which case the above analysis in nonsensical.
Before continuing with a more general bound on the error, we first note that
examples of sub-multiplicative matrix norms are every induced norm such as the
spectral norm and the Frobenius norm which is often useful when interpreting
error. Also, the max norm is not sub-multiplicative, but a scaled version is
(which is true for any matrix norm from the fact that all matrix norms are
equivalent).
Now, consider the general case, where we do not restrict the spectral radius
of either Gobs or N except such that Gobs and ˜Gobs admits direct similarity
matrices Gdir and ˜Gdir (with spectral radius less than 1). To obtain a more
general result, we shall use the following result from [14], which is very useful
when doing matrix perturbation analysis.
Theorem 3.10 (Inverse of sum of matrices). Let A, B ∈Rn×n such that A and
A + B are invertible. Then the inverse of A + B can be expressed as
(A + B)−1 = A−1 −A−1B (A + B)−1
The proof of the above is simple through direct computation. Hence, we continue
to once again consider the difference Gdir −˜Gdir
Gdir −˜Gdir = Gobs (I + Gobs)−1 −(Gobs + N) (I + Gobs + N)−1
= Gobs

(I + Gobs)−1 −(I + Gobs + N)−1
−N (I + Gobs + N)−1
= Gobs (I + Gobs)−1 N (I + Gobs + N)−1 −N (I + Gobs + N)−1
= −(I + Gobs)−1 N (I + Gobs + N)−1
where the third equality follows from Theorem 3.10. This way, we have a simple
exact expression for the difference without any further assumptions on Gobs and
N. Now, under a sub-multiplicative norm ||·|| we can bound the norm of the
difference in the following way.

Gdir −˜Gdir

 ≤||N||

(I + Gobs)−1


(I + Gobs + N)−1

(3.11)
We note that if once again, we assume that the spectral radius of Gobs and
Gobs + N are smaller than 1, we rediscover Equation 3.10. Equation 3.11 also
shows that in general, if N is small or Gobs is large we should observe small
errors which is also what we would expect intuitively. The above result is also
very useful when later on in Section 4.3 we discuss the error from using mutual
information in the case of a multi-variate Gaussian.
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Estimating mutual information
49
From Equation 3.11, by another application of Theorem 3.10, we find the relative
error in general to be bounded as follows

Gdir −˜Gdir


||Gdir||
≤||N||

1 −
||I||

Gobs (I + Gobs)−1



(I + Gobs + N)−1

Finally, before discussing the methods for estimating the copula density, we
comment on some frequently used matrix norms and show some explicit bounds
on the error only using the difference of Gobs and ˜Gobs, N. Namely, we shall
consider the max norm and Frobenius norm of the difference Gdir −˜Gdir and
note that from [15], we can relate the Euclidean norm to the Frobenius and max
norm in the following way. Namely, for any matrix A ∈Rn×n it holds that
||A||2 ≤||A||F ≤√n ||A||2
||A||max ≤||A||2 ≤n ||A||max
Finally, if Gobs and N are symmetric, the singular values are equal to the ab-
solute eigenvalues for Gobs and ˜Gobs and because σ (I + Gobs) , σ

I + ˜Gobs

⊆
(1/2, ∞) implies σ

(I + Gobs)−1
, σ

I + ˜Gobs
−1
⊆(0, 2) we infer that

(I + Gobs)−1

2 ,



I + ˜Gobs
−1

2
≤2. Using this with the above equivalence
on the Euclidean norm with Equation 3.11, we conclude that

Gdir −˜Gdir


F ≤4
√
d ||N||F

Gdir −˜Gdir


max ≤4d ||N||max
(3.12)
This clearly shows us that for small networks (thus small d) we risk smaller
errors in terms of the Frobenius and max norm (which is not surprising) which
are clearly interpreted through the difference of individual element of Gdir and
˜Gdir and that the max norm scales linearly with the number of nodes while the
Frobenius difference only scales with the square root of the number of nodes.
3.4
Estimating mutual information
For Algorithm 1 to work, we need a good and preferably fast estimator of mu-
tual information. [2] proposes to use B-splines for this based on [16] which we
shall describe in the following section. It is however quickly apparent that this
==PAGE:62==
50
Method
estimator has some problems when computing mutual information based on the
Copula representation. We extend the method to other splines but end up us-
ing kernel density estimators (KDE) as they can be regularized in a continuous
manner and as a result of this in general show great performance.
3.4.1
B-splines
A spline is in general a piecewise polynomial [17]. We say that a spline is of order
p + 1 if the piecewise polynomials are of order p. A particular and widely used
type of splines are B-splines which are a basis for all splines such that any spline
can be expressed as a linear combination of B-splines. Five B-splines of degree 3
(order 4) can be seen in Figure 3.2a where we denote Bi,p as a B-spline of degree
p. The index i comes from the following. Namely, let i ∈{1, . . . , m + p + 1}, we
define knots ti as where pieces of polynomials meet such that
Bi,p (t) =
(
non-zero,
t ∈[ti, ti+p+1)
0,
otherwise
uniquely defines m splines on [tp+1, tm] if we further constraint the splines such
that
m
X
i=1
Bi,p (t) = 1
The B-splines Bi,p can then be evaluated at some t through recursion by the
Cox-de Boor recursion formula:
Bi,0 (t) = 1,
t ∈[ti, Ti+1)
(3.13)
Bi,k (t) =
t −ti
ti+k −ti
Bi,k−1 (t) +
ti+k+1 −t
ti+k+1 −ti+1
Bi+1,k−1 (t)
(3.14)
The fact that the B-splines sum to 1 and that we have m splines of degree p is
what we will use to estimate the density and in return the mutual information
between two random variables based on observations. Namely, suppose we want
to compute the mutual information, this can then be done by discretizing the
random variables by binning. Namely, we assign the probability mass Pi,j to
bin (i, j) ∈{1, . . . , m}×{1, . . . , m} as the fraction of observations in the domain
corresponding to that bin. In particular, using Copula entropy, we would divide
the unit interval into m2 equal bins. As we saw earlier, in theory, increasing
the number of bins will result in a more and more exact estimate of the mutual
information.
However, with limited observations, this is not the case as in
the limit, the bins would not represent the true underlying distribution due
to the finite number of observations.
Namely, we would observe a few bins
with 1 observation and many with none. As an example, suppose we have n
==PAGE:63==
3.4 Estimating mutual information
51
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Bi, p(t)
B1, 3
B2, 3
B3, 3
B4, 3
B5, 3
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Pi
(b)
Figure 3.2
observations and m bins in both dimensions. Then, for m large enough, Pi,j = 1
n
for a hundred distinct bins as well as the marginal probability masses Pi = 1
n
and Pj = 1
n. But then,
I
 X∆
1 , X∆
2

= −
m
X
i=1
Pi log Pi −
m
X
j=1
Pj log Pj +
m
X
i,j=1
Pi,j log Pi,j
= −n
 1
n log 1
n

= log n
which is clearly independent of the true underlying distribution. However, if
for each observation xj we assign it to bin i with probability mass Bi,p (xj)
this problem is mitigated to some extent as long as m is not too large.
It
follows that in total each xj is assigned to all m bins with a combined mass 1
as P
i Bi,p(xj) = 1. Thus, let
 X(1), X(2)
be a pair of random vectors each of
d i.i.d variables representing observations drawn from a joint distribution, we
then define the B-spline density estimator (i.e. a random variable) for X(1) as
P (1)
i
= 1
d
d
X
j=1
Bi,p

X(1)
j

,
i ∈{1, . . . , m}
and similarly for X(2).
Furthermore, the B-spline joint density estimator is
given by
Pi,j = 1
d
m
X
k=1
Bi,p

X(1)
k

Bj,p

X(2)
k

i.e.
a product of the probability masses such that Pd
i,j=1 Pi,j = 1 and the
marginal probability masses are given by P (1)
i
and P (2)
j
respectively.
==PAGE:64==
52
Method
However, there is still one problem. Namely, the marginals are not uniform when
p > 0 when X(k) is. This can also be seen from Figure 3.2b. This is especially
bad when computing Copula entropy as for e.g. a Gaussian random vector we
would dramatically underestimate the mutual information as we shall also see
in the next chapter. To see that this is the case, consider the expectation of
P (k)
i
for k ∈{1, 2}:
E
h
P (k)
i
i
= 1
d
d
X
j=1
E
h
Bi,p

X(k)
j
i
=
Z 1
0
Bi,p (x) dx
Indeed, we would want this to be 1
m but from the Cox-de Boor recursion formula,
we see that this is not the case. Namely, by choosing the knots as in [16] we see
that the bins close to the boundary have too little probability mass. Thus we
turn our head to anouther family of splines called M-splines.
3.4.2
M-splines
Another known family of splines called M-splines have exactly the desired prop-
erty of equal integrals. Namely, the M-splines Mi,p all have unit integrals. Thus,
rescaling with 1
m results in a family of splines ˜
Mi,p such that on average we have
that Pi = 1
m. The M-splines equivalent to those of Figure 3.2 are shown in Fig-
ure 3.3. Indeed, we see that the marginals are uniform. M-splines can similarly
to B-splines by computed recursively by the following [18]
Mi,0 (t) =
1
ti+1 −ti
,
t ∈[ti, ti+1)
(3.15)
Mi,k (t) = k ((t −ti) Mi,k−1 (t) + (ti+k −t) Mi+1,k−1 (t))
(k −1) (ti+k −ti)
(3.16)
However, now the problem is that the splines no longer sum to 1 (after rescaling
with 1
n). Namely, we can no longer guarantee that the probability masses P M
i,j
based on the M-spline sum to 1. Thus, a renormalization is needed to ensure
a proper probability mass function. From Figure 3.4 we see that the effect of
Pm
i=1 ˜
Mi,p (x) ̸= 1 in this case is that observations on the interior are smoothed
more than those near the boundary.
This can however be a useful property especially for a bivariate Gaussian for
which the Copula density, as we shall see, have peaks at (0, 0) and (1, 1) while
being relatively smooth elsewhere.
We note that through construction, one can create a family of splines that both
sum to 1 have integrals
1
m. However, as these spline-based smoothing meth-
ods does not perform well in general perform very differently for different m
==PAGE:65==
3.4 Estimating mutual information
53
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
t
0
2
4
6
8
Mi, p(t)
M1, 3
M2, 3
M3, 3
M4, 3
M5, 3
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Pi
(b)
Figure 3.3: Pi is area of each rectangle i.e. 0.2.
with the lack of continuously varying this parameter that acts as a regularizing
parameter, as we shall see in chapter 4, we only present the method for con-
structing such splines in Subsection 6.1.1 and instead consider a more general
way of estimating the Copula density, namely kernel density estimators.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
t
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
i
Mi, p(t)
Figure 3.4
==PAGE:66==
54
Method
3.4.3
Naïve KDE
As we shall see in REFERENCE TIL RESULTAT AFSNIT OM EST AF MI
UD FRA PERFEKT DENSITET, if one can accurately determine the Copula
density of X1 and X2, then using an approximation of the integral, one can
calculate the mutual information to any precision wanted. This clearly follows
from the above analysis regarding the behavior of the discretization of X1 and
X2 in the limit as the mesh gets more fine. Thus, if we can estimate the joint
Copula density well, we obtain a good estimate of the mutual information of X1
and X2. A widely used non-parametric method for density estimation is kernel
density estimation. Namely, if {xi} is a set of n, d-dimensional observations
from a population, i.e. xi can be both scalars and vectors in the case of a multi-
dimensional distribution, the kernel density estimator (KDE) of the probability
density function is in general given as
ˆf(x) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
1
Qd
j=1 hi,j
K
x −xi
hi

(3.17)
where hi is the bandwidth (vector) associated with observation xi and K is
the kernel (function), defined on the domain of X which is often Rd. Often,
the bandwidths hi are taken to be equal and initially, we shall do so as well.
Furthermore, the kernel K is a non-negative function, and is in itself a density
function i.e. integrates to 1 as shown below. This ensures that ˆf in Equation 3.17
integrates to 1 and is non-negative i.e. a proper distribution.
Z
Rd K(x) dx = 1
In one dimension, a particular useful kernel is the Gaussian kernel given by
K(x) = ϕ (x) where ϕ is the density function for the standard Normal distri-
bution. ϕ is chosen due to its simple behavior and mathematical properties.
In particular, we shall see in the following section, that the properties of the
Gaussian kernel allows for simple expressions when correcting for a boundary
such that computation is quick and efficient. For multiple dimensions, we often
consider product kernels, which are kernels K of the form
K (x) =
d
Y
i=1
Ki (xi)
(3.18)
I.e. just a product of kernels. In particular, we choose Ki = ϕ again due to the
numerical properties. Thus, initially, we have a KDE ˆf of the following form
where we once again note that hi = h for all i ∈{1, . . . , n} such that hj denotes
the bandwidth associated with the j’th dimensino.
ˆf (x) =
1
n Qd
j=1 hj
n
X
i=1
d
Y
j=1
ϕ
xj −xi,j
hj

==PAGE:67==
3.4 Estimating mutual information
55
The choice of bandwidth h is important regarding a trade-off between the vari-
ance and bias of the KDE. In general, we want to choose h as small as possible
resulting in the least bias but a too small h will result in large variance of the es-
timator. In particular, h acts as a smoothing parameter like the number of bins
from the previous section, but here, we can choose any h > 0 making the KDE
a much more versatile tool. Often the Mean Integrated Square Error (MISE) is
used which is the expected L2-norm of ˆf −f i.e.
MISE

ˆf

= Ef
Z
Rd
 ˆf (x) −f (x)

2
dx

which of course depends on h. The expectation Ef denotes the expectation with
respect to the samples {xi} of X with (true) density distribution function f.
Expanding the above expression, we obtain a simple expression relating MISE
to the integrated squared bias and integrated variance as shown below
MISE

ˆf

=
Z
Rd
Ef
h
ˆf (x)
i
−f (x)

2
dx +
Z
Rd Var
h
ˆf (x)
i
dx
It is however quite complicated to optimize the above, and we shall thus often
use a simple rule of thumb known as Scott’s rule [19] for choosing h. Namely, for
product kernels, we let the bandwidths of each dimension j equal the following
where ˆσj is the standard deviation estimated from the observations of Xj
hScott
j
= ˆσjn−1/(d+4),
j ∈{1, . . . , d}
0
200
400
600
800
x
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
f(x)
h = hScott
h = 5
h = 100
Figure 3.5: The suicide data from MHE. The 86 observations are shown as a
histogram of densities along with Gaussian KDEs with bandwidth h = 5 and
h = 100 and h chosen from Scott’s rule h = ˆσn−1/5 ≈59.86.
In Figure 3.5, we have shown a basic example in one dimension with two different
manual choices of the bandwidth h and h chosen by Scott’s rule. We have used
==PAGE:68==
56
Method
data from [20], tabulated in [21] which has been used in [22] which propose a
method for correcting the KDE near a boundary which we shall discuss in the
following section. The data consists of 86 observations regarding suicide and
is known to be non-negative. In consideration of the reader, we have included
the observations in Table 6.1. It is clear that using hScott results in what we
qualitatively would deem a good estimate for the probability density function
as h = 100 seen to be overly smoothed whereas h = 100 too under-smoothed. In
particular, from repeated samples we would expect the estimator using h = 100
would have large bias but small variance whereas for h = 5 would have much
larger variance but smaller bias. However, a problem the estimators, h = 100
and h = hScott especially, have is that they have probability mass below 0 which
in this case is unwanted. I.e. when restricting ˆf to [0, ∞) they are no longer
proper probability distribution functions as they do not integrate to 1. A Simple
fix could be to simply rescale ˆf such that this is the case, but as seen from the
example in Figure 3.6 where this method is applied to the same example as
above, this tends to underestimate the peaks especially near the boundary.
0
200
400
600
800
x
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
f(x)
h = hScott
h = 5
h = 100
Figure 3.6: Using a rescaled version of ˆf on the interval [0, ∞) and disregarding
any probability mass below x = 0 we obtain proper probability distributions
once again. However, neither of the methods capture the peak near the boundary
x = 0. In particular, although hScott still seem to be a good choice for h, the
KDE does not capture the tendency observed in the data.
We note that using a non-constant h would improve on this behavior, but simpler
methods exists, and we thus proceed in the next section with a method that
shows great promise regarding this seemingly fundamental issue with KDE. In
particular, we refer to a systematic way of letting the shape of each of the kernels
depend on the associated observation xi.
==PAGE:69==
3.4 Estimating mutual information
57
3.4.4
Boundary corrected KDE
Before introducing the boundary corrected kernels presented by [22], we mention
another simple method of boundary correction called reflection. Namely, sup-
pose without loss of generality x = 0 is the lower boundary of the domain of X
and let ˆf be KDE as from the previous section. Then, the reflection boundary
corrected KDE denoted ˆfR is defined as
ˆfR(x) = ˆf(x) + ˆf(−x)
Clearly, ˆfR is non-negative, and it follows from the below that it is also a proper
density function as the probability mass is 1
Z ∞
0
ˆfR (x) dx =
Z ∞
0
ˆf (x) + ˆf (−x) dx =
Z ∞
0
ˆf (x) +
Z 0
−∞
ˆf (x) dx = 1
Also, the above is easily extended to two boundaries. Namely, if the domain is
[a, b], the reflection boundary corrected KDE is given by
ˆfR (x) = ˆf (x) + ˆf (2a −x) + ˆf (2b −x) ,
x ∈[a, b]
If we once again apply this to the suicide data, comparing to Figure 3.6 we
see a big improvement near the boundary as shown in Figure 3.7a. However,
we still proceed with the method originally presented in [22]. The reason for
this is that when testing for distribution type using the Kolmogorov Smirnov
test (on a 5% significance level) we reject that the observations originate from
ˆfR with h = 100. For h = 5 we do not but due to the above considerations
0
200
400
600
800
x
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
fR(x)
h = hScott
h = 5
h = 100
(a)
0
200
400
600
800
x
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
fR(x)
fe(x)
h = hScott
h = 100
(b)
Figure 3.7
regarding the integrated point wise variance of the estimator, this choice of h is
undesired in either case. For h = hScott we do not reject the distribution but
==PAGE:70==
58
Method
as the shape of the error resembles the error for h = 100 we suspect that there
is some systematic error which we also see from Figure 3.7b. Furthermore, the
largest deviation from the empirical distribution to ˆfR is close to the boundary
(as expected). The test statistics (the largest absolute difference D between the
distribution functions and the adjusted statistic) is shown in Table 3.1 where
the adjusted test statistic should be compared to the critical value 1.358 on a
5% significance level. Furthermore, to really test the kernel density estimators,
one should compute the MISE based on bootstrap and/or cross-validation. In
particular, this way larger h i.e.
more smoothing would be more favorable
compared to the Kolmogorov Smirnov test results which shows small h best
represent the empirical distribution.
h
D
Adjusted D
5
0.029042
0.27315
hScott
0.11262
1.0593
100
0.19194
1.8053
Table 3.1: (√n + 0.12 + 0.11/√n) D
We now turn our attention to the boundary corrected KDE from [22]. They
shortly described this in [3] where it was used to estimate the mutual information
in terms of Copula entropy. However, issues arise when using this KDE in terms
of non-negativity of the KDE and the facts that it does not integrate to unity.
All of these issues can however be handled in a general way without effecting
the results regarding bias of the estimator as we shall also see from the above
example on suicide data. In particular, [22] show that the bias of their estimator
ˆfL is of order O
 h2
whereas the reflection method discussed above has O (h)
bias. The basic idea of ˆfL is that it is a linear combination of a symmetric
kernel K and x K i.e. a first order kernel. They do however only give explicit
expressions when a lower bound at x = 0 is enforced but the math generalize
nicely to 2 boundaries. In particular, we shall let xu denote the upper bound
of the domain and keep x = 0 as the lower bound. Before continuing with the
derivation and results regarding implementation for the Gaussian kernel we note
that in R2, there is a library evmix which implements the boundary corrected
KDE from [22] but only for 1 dimension and only with a lower bound at x = 0.
We thus expand on this library (although in Python) to include both lower
and upper bounds and furthermore, generalize to multiple dimensions using a
product kernel as noted in Equation 3.18.
To expand on the boundary corrected KDE to include an upper bound on the
domain, we define the functions am (x). Note that in [22], they define am as a
2https://search.r-project.org/CRAN/refmans/evmix/html/bckden.html
==PAGE:71==
3.4 Estimating mutual information
59
function of p = x/h where h is the bandwidth, but to keep the expression later
on easier to understand in terms of kernel centers etc. we instead define them
as a function of x ∈[0, xu]. The reason for initially defining am in terms of h is
to keep the bandwidth out of the expression, which we then define as follows,
when there is no upper bound
am (x) =
Z
x
h
−∞
umK (u) du,
x ∈[0, ∞)
The above is actually equal to the part of the mth moment of the kernel centered
at x (and width bandwidth h), that is inside the interval [0, ∞) up to a difference
in sign. In particular, using the change of variables z = x −hu we have that
am (x) = (−1)m
Z ∞
0
z −x
h
m 1
hK
z −x
h

dz
where we have used that K assumed to be symmetric. Indeed, the above is as
described the part of the mth moment that comes from [0, ∞) (up to a difference
in sign) of the kernel that is centered at x with bandwidth h. From this, it is
a natural extension to replace the upper bound of the integral with xu which,
when expanding on the initial definition in [22] as done in e.g. [23] turns out to
be the correct adjustment. Thus, am can be understood as part of the moments
which we shall then use as normalizing functions. Thus, for an upper bound xu
we find that instead am is defined as
am (x) =
Z
x
h
x−xu
h
umK (u) du,
x ∈[0, xu]
The boundary adjusted KDE which we shall denote KL and index depending
on the i’th kernel center is then given by
KL
i (x) = 1
h
a2 (x) −a1 (x) x−xi
h
a0 (x) a2 (x) −a2
1 (x) K
x −xi
h

(3.19)
For the Gaussian kernel, am (x) for m ∈{0, 1, 2} are easily computed and imple-
mented in code through standard routines as they have simple closed forms in
terms of ϕ and Φ, i.e. the standard Gaussian density and distribution functions.
Namely, for a0 we simply have that by definition of Φ
a0 (x) =
Z
x
h
x−xu
h
ϕ(u) du
= Φ
x
h

−Φ
x −xu
h

==PAGE:72==
60
Method
And similarly, for a1, using that
R
u ϕ (u) du = −ϕ (u) + C
a1 (x) =
Z
x
h
x−xu
h
uϕ(u) du
= ϕ
x −xu
h

−ϕ
x
h

Finally, for a2 we have, using integration by parts for the first step
a2 (x) =
Z
x
h
x−xu
h
u2ϕ(u) du
= [−uϕ (u)]
x
h
x−xu
h
+
Z
x
h
x−xu
h
ϕ (u) du
=
x −xu
h
ϕ
x −xu
h

−x
hϕ
x
h

+

Φ
x
h

−Φ
x −xu
h

= x
ha1 (x) −xu
h ϕ
x −xu
h

+ a0 (x)
From the improved bias of O
 h2
for KL
i , we have then obtained an estimator
that should perform better in terms of a smaller MISE as we have less bias and
by choosing h optimally, we should expect small variance as well. Figure 3.8a
shows the KDE ˆfL using KL as the kernel (with xu = ∞) and is compared to the
reflected kernel from above using the same bandwidth. We note that ˆfL has be
rescaled such that it integrates to unity on [0, ∞). Also, from Figure 3.8b we see
that the density is not statistically significant, and although we can not conclude
from this alone, we observe that the deviation from the empirical distribution
functions is less than that of the reflected KDE.
As noted above, we need to rescale ˆfL to unity as the kernels in Equation 3.19
does not have unit integrals. Furthermore, ˆfL is not even ensured to be non-
negative. This can be handled in multiple ways. One way is to simply take the
maximum of ˆfL and 0 effectively cutting off any negative density however in
[24], a method is given for KDE based on KL
i specifically, ensuring the O
 h2
bias of the estimator. Namely, let KN
i
be given as
KN
i (x) =
1
h a0 (x)K
x −xi
h

which is then the kernel, locally renormalized using a0.
We then define the
related KDE as
ˆfN (x) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
KN
i (x)
==PAGE:73==
3.4 Estimating mutual information
61
which is then non-negative everywhere as a0 (x) , K (x) > 0. The non-negative
boundary corrected KDE, denoted ˆfP (x) is then defined as
ˆfP (x) = ˆfN (x) e
ˆ
fL(x)
ˆ
fN (x) −1
This ˆfP is also shown in Figure 3.8 resulting in identical density functions. We
note that ˆfP works by multiplying the non-negative ˆfN by a (large positive)
constant when ˆfL is larger than ˆfN and thus drives ˆfN towards ˆfL. However,
from implementation and trying on different distributions, sometimes we observe
some odd behavior that can easily be derived from the definition of ˆfP . Thus,
we propose a modification to overcome these odd properties of ˆfP . Namely,
suppose both ˆfL and ˆfN are close to 0 at some point x. If ˆfL is a magnitude of
10 larger than ˆfN, then ˆfP is approximately 8000 · ˆfN which even if ˆfN is small
may be large. Thus, it is possible even if both are close to 0, that ˆfP >> 0
which is in contrast to what we would want from the estimator.
Thus, we
propose a regularized KDE version of ˆfP denoted ˆfregP which is obtained from
first rewriting ˆfP as follows
ˆfP (x) = ¯f (x) e
˜
f(x)−ˆ
f(x)
ˆ
f(x)
then, we introduce the regularizing parameters λ ≥0 such that
ˆfregP (x) = ¯f (x) e
˜
f(x)−ˆ
f(x)
ˆ
f(x)+λ
In practice, we have found that λ = 0.001 is a sufficient regularization whilst
preserving the shape. A small λ is preferred as then we are ensured O
 h2
behavior of the bias. In Figure 3.8 we have also shown this regularized version
with λ = 0.001 and observe that it is basically identical to ˆfP on the domain
while also behaving well numerically for large x, where the issue discussed above
arise for ˆfP . Before continuing with a few more interesting methods of density
estimation and mutual information estimation in particular, we note that in the
same R package there is a KDE based on the Gaussian Copula density which at
first glance might seem a good choice especially if we are trying to estimate the
density of a Copula that we know to be Gaussian. The KDE is based on [25],
and trivially we get that the domain of the basis functions is already [0, 1]. In
particular, the kernel for a given bandwidth h and kernel center xi is given by
KGC
i
(x) =
1
h
√
2 −h2 e
−(1−h2)
2h2(2−h2)

(1−h2)

(Φ−1(x))
2+(Φ−1(xi))
2
−2Φ−1(x) ϕ−1(xi)

which is obtained by letting h2 = 1−ρ in the original expression for the Gaussian
Copula density. However, in practice, we shall see that this choice of kernel has
some numerical instabilities especially for large correlations i.e. small h and
does not perform as well as ˆfregP even when using their optimal bandwidth.
==PAGE:74==
62
Method
0
200
400
600
800
x
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
f(x)
fL
fP
fregP
fR
(a)
0
200
400
600
800
x
0.100
0.075
0.050
0.025
0.000
0.025
f(x)
fe(x)
fL
fP
fregP
fR
(b)
Figure 3.8
FUrthermore, we note that as observations are initially transformed such that
they are approximately uniform on [0, 1], the variance of these uniform obser-
vations ui = ˆF (xi) will also be approximately 1/12 and hence the Scott rule
of thumb will give a near constant bandwidth. However, as we shall see later,
the performance is drastically improved by choosing smaller bandwidth for sub-
domains with high density. We thus note that a local bandwidth should be
considered in the future. This could e.g. by using k-nearest neighbor and the
distances of these which is the basic idea of [26]. Although we will not be using
this method as it is out of scope for this paper, we note that their estimator
seem to result in good estimates when n ≥300. Using the core ideas of this
paper, one could perhaps deduce a better algorithm for choosing h globally or
locally.
Finally, we note that a recent method based on diffusion [27] [28] which shows
great potential. Without going into too much detail, it works by considering
the PDE
∂
∂t
ˆf (x; t) = 1
2
∂2
∂x2 ˆf (x; t)
where t = h2. The Gaussian kernel is then the unique solution when the domain
is R with condition ˆf [x; 0] =
1
n
Pn
i=1 δ (x −xi) i.e.
the observations is the
boundary condition at h = 0. If instead we add that the support should be e.g.
[0, 1] the Neumann boundary conditions on the boundary results in an analytical
solution. Namely, from the boundary conditions
∂
∂x
ˆf (x; t)

x=0
= ∂
∂x
ˆf (x; t)

x=1
= 0
==PAGE:75==
3.4 Estimating mutual information
63
the analytical solution to ˆf is
ˆfD (x; t) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
KD
i (x)
where
KD
i (x) = 1
h
∞
X
k=−∞
ϕ
x −(2k + xi)
h

+ ϕ
x −(2k −xi)
h

which is similar to the reflection method from above. They even give an algo-
rithm for calculating t which from the example below appear to work very well.
Before presenting this example we note that although it is out of scope to use
this method in the following chapter, it would be interesting to see how well it
would perform as it is the only KDE here that does not use any transformation
near the boundary while still being consistent at the boundary as they show in
[28].
Example 3.2 (Diffusion based KDE). Let X ∼Beta (1, 4) such that f(x) =
4 (1 −x)3 for x ∈[0, 1] and thus F (x) = 1 −(1 −x)4. Generating 1000 samples
from the distribution and using the algorithm in [28] to estimate the bandwidth,
we get a bandwidth hD = 0.05461 whereas with Scott’s rule we get hScott =
0.04145. From Figure 3.9 we see that diffusion and the regularized boundary
corrected KDE ˆfregP from above agree almost everywhere. Only near the lower
boundary at x = 0 there is a significant difference and here ˆfregP seem to fit the
true distribution better. This is due to the Neumann boundary condition which
enforce ˆfD to have horizontal derivative at both boundaries. Note that we have
used both the hD and hScott bandwidth for the regularized boundary corrected
KDE resulting in basically no difference.
At this point, we thus have a complete set of methods for both estimating the
mutual information from observations and from these, algorithms to estimate
the (causal) structure depending on assumptions regarding direction i.e. a topo-
logical ordering of the variables. We thus proceed with numerical results in the
following chapter and apply the framework on both fully controlled systems and
the observations from chapter 2.
==PAGE:76==
64
Method
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
x
0
1
2
3
4
f(x)
true pdf
fD
fregP, hD
fregP, hScott
Figure 3.9: Using the diffusion based KDE on 1000 samples from a Beta (1, 4)
distribution, we see that in general it fits very well. Only at the boundary x = 0
there seems to be a problem which on the other hand, ˆfregP does not seem to
suffer from to the same extend. In particular, repeating the experiment, ˆfregP
is on average 4 at x = 0 while ˆfD constantly seem to undershoot.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 4
Results
An introduction to what is going to be included in this section. What results
etc.
In this section, we will investigate how the algorithms Algorithm 1 and Algo-
rithm 2 works in junction and individually. We shall observe how the algorithms
can fail and what may be done to correct such cases.
Overordnet pointe er at genere forskellige mulige graphisce modeller, som senere
ville kunne bruges til at lave PGM el.l. Er nok bedst som et ekspolartivt værktøj,
og vi undersøger her forskellige situationer, og hvornår der kan ske fejl ud fra
om det er lange kæder af kausalitet eller mere komplekse strukturer
==PAGE:78==
66
Results
4.1
Gaussian chains
In this section we discuss the errors made from the assumption that indi-
rect effects can be computed as a sum of powers of the direct effects, i.e.
Gindir = P
k≥1 Gk
dir.
In particular, on a theoretical level, we shall observe
the error in Gobs based on the above assumption of how similarities are con-
volved which we equate with the noise N from Subsection 3.3.3, although it
is a systematic error. To do this, we shall in this section use a multivariate
Gaussian to be able to control the correlation and as an extension of this, the
mutual information between pairs of random variables. As we already know,
correlation and mutual information is independent of the mean and variance of
each of the variables however for a bivariate Gaussian the mutual information
is given by the correlation as stated in the following proposition.
Proposition 4.1. Given a bivariate normal distribution X ∼N (µ, Σ) where
Σ =
 σ2
1
ρσ1σ2
ρσ1σ2
σ2
2

Then the mutual information I (X1, X2) = −1
2 ln
 1 −ρ2
.
Proof. This follows by direct computation Using e.g. that I(X1, X2) = h(X1)+
h(X2) −h(X1, X2)
□
Thus, if we know a correlation structure of a Gaussian random vector, we also
know the mutual information between every pair of variables which we shall
now use in the following made up example. Namely, what we shall denote as a
Gaussian chain defined as a Gaussian random vector in the following way. Let
X be a d-dimensional Gaussian random vector, the X is a standard Gaussian
chain if it can be written in the following way in terms of d independent standard
normal variables Zi up to a permutation i.e. there exists a permutation of the
variables of the random vector X that permits the following structure.
X1 = Z1
X2 = ⃗ρ1,2X1 +
q
1 −⃗ρ2
1,2Z2
X3 = ⃗ρ2,3X2 +
q
1 −⃗ρ2
2,3Z3
...
Xd = ⃗ρd−1,dXd−1 +
q
1 −⃗ρ2
d−1,dZd
(4.1)
==PAGE:79==
4.1 Gaussian chains
67
It follows that the marginals have variance 1 as clearly Var [X1] = Var [Z1] = 1
and for i > 1, Var [Xi] = ⃗ρ2
i−1,iVar [Xi−1] +
 1 −⃗ρ2
i−1,i

Var [Zi] = 1 by inde-
pendence of Xi−1 and Zi. Thus, the above structure also implies the Cholesky
factorization of the correlation matrix for X, namely
L =


1
⃗ρ1,2
q
1 −⃗ρ2
1,2
⃗ρ2,3⃗ρ1,2
⃗ρ2,3
q
1 −⃗ρ2
1,2
q
1 −⃗ρ2
2,3
...
...
Qd
i=2 ⃗ρi−1,i
. . .
q
1 −⃗ρ2
j−1,j
Qd
i=j+1 ⃗ρi−1,i
. . .
q
1 −⃗ρ2
d−1,d


Which will allow us to both sample from such a chain and calculate Gdir and
Gobs theoretically. However, in this example, it is easier to calculate the corre-
lation between the variable Xi and Xj directly. As the variance of each variable
is 1 we simply calculate the covariance. We assume without loss of generality
that i < j whence
Cov [Xi, Xj] = Cov
h
Xi, ⃗ρj−1,jXj−1 +
q
1 −⃗ρ2
j−1,jZj
i
= ⃗ρj−1,jCov [Xi, Xj−1]
which by induction implies ρi,j = Qj
k=i+1 ⃗ρk−1,k = ρj,i. At this point, we are
almost ready to use the algorithms from the previous chapter. First, we will
only use Algorithm 2 to deconvolve the network based on theoretical correlations
and later mutual information. However, before doing so, we note that from
the definition in Equation 4.1 the random variable X exhibits a Markovian
property. Namely, the Xi above can be understood discrete stochastic process
as they are successively drawn based only on the previous variable Xi−1 i.e.
f (xi | Xi−1, Xi−2, . . . , X1) = f (xi | Xi−1).
Thus, if the algorithm works as
intended, we should observe that the deconvolved network is a chain of variables
as shown in the Figure 4.1 Thus, we now have the expected result, and we
Figure 4.1: The graphical representation of a Gaussian chain. Arrows signify
a possible causal structure. If furthermore, one assumes that X1 is generated
first, then X2 and so on, this is the only causal structure that would make sense.
proceed with using correlation and mutual information to try and rediscover
this structure in the following two sections
==PAGE:80==
68
Results
4.1.1
Gaussian chain deconvolution using correlation
In this section, we will use the observed correlations as elements of Gobs. In
particular, the (i, j) entry of Gobs is ρi,j = Qj
k=i+1 ⃗ρk−1,k when i < j and 0
otherwise. This makes Gobs strictly upper triangular. Note that although it
makes sense to consider the correlation between a variable and itself, we shall as
discussed before set the diagonal to 0. The reason for this becomes clear when
we try to convolve Gdir based on the initial definition of a general Gaussian
chain in Equation 4.1. We note that in Algorithm 1 we usually (without an
assumption of the topology of the random variables) use a symmetrical Gobs.
We shall however postpone this discussion a bit and first use an upper triangular
Gobs. In particular, we shall observe that we perfectly recover the directional
correlations ⃗ρk−1,k from Equation 4.1 through Equation 3.5.
As Gobs is in this case strictly upper triangular, the spectral radius is 0 and
hence we have no problems with convergence of the infinite sum of powers of
(the uniquely defined) Gdir. From the above, it is clear that Gobs is given as
follows
Gobs =


0
⃗ρ1,2
⃗ρ1,2 ⃗ρ2,3
. . .
Qd
k=2 ⃗ρk−1,k
0
⃗ρ2,3
. . .
Qd
k=3 ⃗ρk−1,k
...
...
0
⃗ρd−1,d
0


(4.2)
Now, let Gdir be given as follows
Gdir =


0
⃗ρ1,2
0
⃗ρ2,3
...
...
0
⃗ρd−1,d
0


then G2
dir is given by
G2
dir =


0
0
⃗ρ1,2 ⃗ρ2,3
0
0
⃗ρ2,3 ⃗ρ3,4
...
...
...
0
0
⃗ρd−2,d−1 ⃗ρd−1,d
0
0


It is not hard to show that in fact P
k≥1 Gk
dir = Pd
k=1 Gk
dir = Gobs. Thus, if we
know a graph topological ordering of the random variables corresponding to the
structural causal model, we completely recover (without any error) the direct
==PAGE:81==
4.1 Gaussian chains
69
dependencies/correlation from to the initial definition in Equation 4.1. This
result holds for a general chain where Zi can follow any distribution as long as
they are uncorrelated. This follows from the above computation of Cov [Xi, Xj],
where no assumption of Zj was needed except for correlation 0.
From the above, we might think that if we have a topological ordering of the
random variables this is the preferred method, and it is as long as correlation is a
good enough measure of similarity/codependency. Albeit this is only shown for
the special case of a chain, in Section 4.2 we consider the more general case and
conclude that this indeed holds. Regarding the comment on correlation being a
good enough measure of similarity, a prototypical case is when joint probability
density function of two variables resemble a parabola. Namely, let X1 ∼U (0, 1)
and X2 | X1 ∼N

1 −4 (x1 −1/2)2 , σ2
i.e. X2 = 1 −4 (X1 −1/2)2 + ϵ where
ϵ ∼N
 0, σ2
. In Figure 4.2, 1000 samples from this distribution is shown for
σ = 1/10 along with the expectation E [X2|X1]. It is not hard to show that
the covariance between X1 and X2 is 0 however we clearly see a relationship
between the two variables. In fact, computing the mutual information results
in I (X1, X2) ≈1.030 implying X1 ̸⊥X2 i.e. there exists a higher order (non-
linear) dependency. Thus, if the algorithm permits, we would prefer mutual
information to correlation as we can then use observed higher order relationships
to infer a causal structure. On a more technical point of view, we note that
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
X1
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
X2
Figure 4.2:
1000 samples generated from X1 ∼U (0, 1) and X2 | X1 ∼
N

1 −4 (x1 −1/2)2 , σ2
with σ = 1/10. The mutual information is calcu-
lated theoretically to be I (X1, X2) ≈1.030 and repeated simulations show that
the empirical correlation is symmetric around 0 supporting the claim that the
underlying correlation is in fact 0
mutual information is a measure of how dense the joint distribution is, invariant
to scale. In a way, it is a measure of how close the joint distribution is to a lower
==PAGE:82==
70
Results
dimensional manifold.
We proceed with a 10-Gaussian chain defined by the following correlations:
ρ1,2 = 0.6,
ρ2,3 = 0.5,
ρ3,4 = 0.4
ρ4,5 = 0.2,
ρ5,6 = 0.9,
ρ6,7 = 0.8
ρ7,8 = 0.9,
ρ8,9 = 0.8,
ρ9,10 = 0.7
(4.3)
We have chosen correlations of different sizes to check if the deconvolution is
robust in presence of both strong and weak links.
In particular, X5 is only
ρ2
4,5 = 4% of X4 and the remaining 96% is noise/indescribable variance i.e. a
very weak link between the first part of the chain up to and including X4 and the
rest. However, as discussed above, if let Gobs be upper triangular, we should
completely rediscover these direct relations which is indeed also the case. In
particular, from Figure 4.3 we observe that the inferred network, represented by
Gdir, is indeed a chain of variables and is exactly equal to the theoretical Gdir
as we would expect (up to very small rounding errors of the size 10−16). The
estimated Gdir is also shown as a directed graph which the initial topological
assumption implies, with edges wherever Gdir is non-zero.
==PAGE:83==
4.1 Gaussian chains
71
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(a) Gobs
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) Gdir as a digraph
Figure 4.3: Results from using an upper triangular Gobs and correlation to
infer the causal network structure. (a) shows the upper triangular Gobs with
the correlation between every pair of variables. (b) shows the deconvolved Gobs
and as we expect, the superdiagonal contains the original correlations given in
Equation 4.3. (c) shows Gdir represented as a digraph and matches the expected
result.
We now proceed to investigate what happens when we remove the prior infor-
mation of the topological ordering. Namely, if Gobs is no longer triangular but
symmetric. In particular, let Tdir be given as Gdir above. We then have that
Gdir in the symmetric case is Tdir+T T
dir and similarly for Gobs, Gobs = Tobs+T T
obs.
Clearly, I + Gobs is positive definite as it is a proper correlation matrix. How-
ever, that also implies that we might have eigenvalues of Gobs less than or equal
to −1/2 which we know from Subsection 3.1.1 is not the result of a Gdir such
that Equation 3.4 holds as then the infinite sum diverges. However, as −1 is
not an eigenvalue of Gobs, we will investigate what happens if one tries to use
Equation 3.5 anyway.
==PAGE:84==
72
Results
But first, we shall discuss the errors being made using the symmetric Gobs and
Gdir instead of triangular. Namely, we investigate the powers of Gdir:
G2
dir =
 Tdir + T T
dir
2 = T 2
dir +
 T T
dir
2 + TdirT T
dir + T T
dirTdir
Higher power can be calculated similarly, but for the second power we already
observe an error. The first two terms corresponds to a reflection of the second
order effects that we saw above and know to be true, whence the final two terms,
that add to a diagonal matrix, is an error and will propagate with higher order
powers of Gdir. Through simple calculation the resulting error is
TdirT T
dir + T T
dirTdir =


ρ2
1,2 + ρ2
2,3
ρ2
2,3 + ρ2
3,4
...
ρ2
d−2,d−1 + ρ2
d−1,d


Thus, for chains, we expect larger errors for sub-chains with strong links i.e. a
subgraph of a chain that is also a chain where the correlation from one variable to
the next is large. Using Gobs = Tobs + T T
obs we have that the smallest eigenvalue
is approximately λmin ≈−0.92263 thus, multiplying Gobs with a constant cs <
0.54192 will make Gdir have spectral radius at most 1. The results vary with one
or two edges for the choice of cs and in the following we have chosen cs = 0.53651
resulting in ρ (Gdir) ≈0.98020 and ˜Gobs and ˜Gdir as seen in Figure 4.4. From
Figure 4.4b we see that some correlation/association seem to bleed to variables 2
or 3 edges away which we of course know is not true given the Markov property
discussed above. However, it is also clear that the error here is that the original
assumption does not hold since using a symmetric Gobs imply that the measure
of similarity flows both ways where in this case it is very much unidirectional.
From Figure 4.4 conclude that we are somewhat able to rediscover the causal
structure. Not surprisingly, we observe that the weak link between X4 and X5
is one of the first to break and that we observe some extra edges between the
later more strongly linked sub-chain as by the above discussion. Finally, before
presenting the results for the unscaled Gobs (where the smallest eigenvalue is
smaller than −1/2) we note that changing the parameter α in Algorithm 2 did
not have much of an effect indicating that the network is quite sparse (as we also
know it to be) as even removing 65% of the smallest correlations from Gobs did
not have any effect. The chosen threshold of t = 0.2 on Gdir seemed to be the
best compromise of a connected graph and the density of the edges (although
this is somewhat biased from prior knowledge of the true graphical structure).
==PAGE:85==
4.1 Gaussian chains
73
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(a) Gobs
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) Gdir as a graph
Figure 4.4: Using a symmetric Gobs as shown in (a), we observe that higher
order effects start to emerge as can be seen in (b). The main response is still in
the superdiagonal and subdiagonal as we expect, where some similarity seems
to bleed to nearby nodes/variables thus making the threshold used important
for the resulting graph. For (c), a threshold t = 0.2 was used to obtain a decent
compromise between connectedness and denseness of the direct association.
Finally, we try using the unscaled Gobs in Equation 3.5. Interestingly, we find
that the true structure emerges as can be seen from Figure 4.5. Although the
correlations in Figure 4.5b are not really correlations they do resemble those
discovered in Figure 4.3b. On closer inspection, it is not apparent how they
are related except that it is a non-linear relationship. Although in this case
it seemed to work not rescaling Gobs in order to discover the causal structure
we will in general not apply this to real world scenarios as the method is not
well-defined in terms of assumptions and what the resulting Gdir should be
interpreted as. Thus, at this point we have a rather good understanding of how
the method works on Gaussian chains if one uses correlation as a measure of
==PAGE:86==
74
Results
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(a) Gobs
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0
1
2
3
4
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) Gdir as a graph
Figure 4.5: Using an unscaled (symmetric) Gobs results in a good recovery of
the causal structure as seen in (b) and (c). However, at this point it is not clear
whether it holds only for chains and using correlation or if it is a more general
phenomenon.
association. Furthermore, if one knows (a plausible) topological ordering of the
variables, we are able to perfectly rediscover the network of direct dependencies.
However, as noted above, correlation is not always a good measure of similarity.
Thus, we proceed experimenting with mutual information on the same Gaussian
chain.
==PAGE:87==
4.1 Gaussian chains
75
4.1.2
Gaussian chain deconvolution using mutual informa-
tion
In this section, we continue the example from the previous section but instead
of using correlation as a measure of similarity, we will use mutual information.
Immediately, we note that mutual information or Copula entropy does not prop-
agate as assumed in Equation 3.4. As an example, from Proposition 4.1, we
know that the mutual information in the case of a Gaussian chain between a
variable Xi and the next variable Xi+1 is −1/2 log
 1 −ρ2
i,i+1

and similarly,
using Equation 4.2, we have that
I (Xi, Xi+2) = −1
2 log
 1 −ρ2
i,i+1ρ2
i+1,i+2

Thus, if Gdir is triangular, using Equation 3.4 we should observe the following
at the (i, i + 2) entry of Gobs instead
1
4 log
 1 −ρ2
i,i+1

log
 1 −ρ2
i+1,i+2

I.e. we make an error (which we could take to be the noise N from Subsec-
tion 3.3.3) for second order effects equal to
−1
2 log
 1 −ρ2
i,i+1ρ2
i+1,i+2

−1
4 log
 1 −ρ2
i,i+1

log
 1 −ρ2
i+1,i+2

In general, for a Gaussian chain, we have that
Ni,j = −1
2 log
 
1 −
jY
k=i+1
ρ2
k−1,k
!
−

−1
2
j−i
jY
k=i+1
log
 1 −ρ2
k−1,k

As we will see in Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7, for Gaussian chains we can expect
some of the same bleeding behavior as observed in Figure 4.4 where we did
not use the topological ordering but based the deconvolution on correlation.
In particular, from the figures below, we see that for 3-chains, the error is in
many cases close to 0 and for most combinations of ρ1,2 and ρ2,3 less than
0.1. Furthermore, we note that the errors are the largest when it is a strongly
connected 3-chain i.e. if both ρ1,2 and ρ2,3 are close to 1 which again resemble
the behavior seen in the case of a symmetrical Gobs using correlation as the
measure of association although in this case, the error does not propagate to
the same extent which we shall also see shortly, when applying the deconvolution
algorithm. Notice that as only the absolute value of the correlation matters, we
only show the error for ρ1,2, ρ2,3 ≥0.
We extend the above discussion to 4- and 5-chains (i.e. j = i + 3 and j = i + 4
in the above expression for Nij) to see how the error propagates in more detail.
==PAGE:88==
76
Results
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1, 2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2, 3
0.096
0.080
0.064
0.048
0.032
0.016
0.000
0.016
0.032
Figure 4.6: The error made by the assumption of Gobs and Gdir for second
order observed effect. Although mutual information does not comply with the
underlying assumptions, we observe that in the case of a Gaussian 2-chain, we
can expect the error to be relatively small.
This is shown in Figure 4.7 for three different scenarios of a 4-chain and a
single 5-chain. In particular, as the error Ni,j is symmetric in ρ1,2, ρ2,3 and
ρ3,4 (and ρ4,5 in the case of a 5-chain) and because it is hard to accurately
show four or five dimensional surfaces, we keep to a fixed set of ρ3,4 and ρ4,5
when investigating.
For the 4-chain, choosing ρ2,3 = 0.9 (corresponding to
mutual information about 0.8304) approximately results in the same error as in
Figure 4.6 and if ρ2,3 is above e.g. 0.95, we get a worse propagation of errors
compared to the 3-chain. Finally, from Figure 4.7d, we see the same picture
i.e. that keeping the correlations and hence information between subsequent
variable low results in smaller errors in Gobs and hence the inferred Gdir. Note
that under the assumption of a topological ordering such that Gobs is strictly
upper triangular results in ρ (Gobs) = 0 such that no rescaling is necessary
(although different choices of the base of the logarithm would have an effect on
how much higher order associations influence Gdir).
Having obtained a good understanding of how shifting to mutual information
instead of correlation in the case of Gaussian chains, we continue with the above
example now using mutual information as the elements of Gobs based on the
correlation matrix from the previous section. Using a triangular Gobs we observe
similar behavior to that of original example using a triangular Gobs but with
correlation as can be seen from Figure 4.8. In particular, we do not observe the
same magnitude of bleeding effects as in Figure 4.4. However, we observe
==PAGE:89==
4.1 Gaussian chains
77
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1, 2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2, 3
0.096
0.080
0.064
0.048
0.032
0.016
0.000
0.016
0.032
(a) 4-chain ρ3,4 = 0.7
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1, 2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2, 3
0.096
0.080
0.064
0.048
0.032
0.016
0.000
0.016
(b) 4-chain ρ3,4 = 0.9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1, 2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2, 3
0.096
0.080
0.064
0.048
0.032
0.016
0.000
(c) 4-chain ρ3,4 = 0.95
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1, 2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2, 3
0.096
0.080
0.064
0.048
0.032
0.016
0.000
0.016
(d) 5-chain ρ3,4 = 0.85, ρ4,5 = 0.6
Figure 4.7: Errors of convolving mutual information along a 4-chain (a), (b),
(c) and a 5-chain (d). Due to symmetry in the expression of the error, only
the first 2 links i.e. ρ1,2 and ρ2,3 are varied on [0, 1] respectively. Only positive
correlations are shown as the sign of the correlation cancels in the expression for
the error. We note that large correlations and hence large mutual information
on each edge results in larger error. In particular, when not too many of the
links are strong, we have almost 0 error.
the same tendency to miss weak connections as was also observed in Figure 4.4.
All in all, we get very good results using a triangular Gobs even though mutual
information does not have the same properties as correlation. In particular,
this is what we expected as we have only used ρi,i+1 ≤0.9, from the above
investigation of the error.
==PAGE:90==
78
Results
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(a) Gobs
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) Gdir from t = 2.1 · 10−2
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(d) Gdir from t = 4.6 · 10−2
Figure 4.8: Using mutual information as the measure of similarity as well as
assuming a topological order i.e. making Gobs strictly triangular as seen in (a) we
almost perfectly infer Gdir as seen in (b) except for [Gdir]6,9. Choosing cutoffs
t = 2.1 · 10−2 (c) and t = 4.6 · 10−2 (d) it is clear that adjusting the threshold
we can get a better result than using a symmetric Gobs with correlation.
Finally, we use the corresponding symmetric Gobs (rescaled such that the largest
absolute eigenvalue of Gdir is 0.99) which results in Gdir and the graph using a
threshold t = 4.88 · 10−2 shown in Figure 4.9. Again, we observe some bleeding
on the more strongly connected sub-chain as with the symmetric Gobs using
correlation in Figure 4.4. Again, we observe comparable results and note that
increasing the threshold would disconnect X3 and X4 before removing the higher
order effects.
In conclusion, we have seen what errors can arise in the discovered network using
both correlation and mutual information as the measure of association. Namely,
long strongly connected chains seem to be a problem if one does not know a
==PAGE:91==
4.1 Gaussian chains
79
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(a) Gobs
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) Gdir as a graph
Figure 4.9: Using a symmetric Gobs containing the observed mutual infor-
mation (a) we infer a Gdir (b) comparable to that if we had used correlation
instead. Choosing the threshold t = 4.88·10−2 seem a good compromise between
connectedness and density resulting in an almost identical discovered network
structure to that of using a symmetric correlation Gobs.
topological ordering of the variables, in which case these are heavily reduced
as seen in Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.8.
Thus, we proceed in the next section
by considering a more complicated underlying (Gaussian) network to observe if
other unwanted effects can occur and if a topological ordering is necessary if the
network is not simply a path.
==PAGE:92==
80
Results
4.2
Directed acyclic Gaussian graphs
In this section, we will expand on the results from the previous section by con-
sidering a more general structure. In particular, let G be a directed acyclic graph
with nodes corresponding to variables from a random vector X with directed
edges indicating direct dependencies. Clearly, such a DAG has a topological
ordering and as such we shall index the variables 1 through d such that if the
index of a variable is i, and j is the index of another element of the random
vector X, then i < j implies there is no (directed) path from j to i. Note
that since a topological ordering is not necessarily unique, we can not infer that
there is a (directed) path from i to j or even if k is reachable form j (i.e. there
exists a path from j to k) it does not follow that k is reachable from i. In Fig-
ure 4.10 a subset of such a DAG is shown with a possible labelling where i < j
and km < kn when m < n. It is then the weights along these directed edges
which we will once again call Gdir that we wish to infer based on the transitive
closure. As an example, from Figure 4.10, the transitive closure would result
in an observed similarity between i and j although no 1 path i.e. single direct
edge connects the two variables. From the definition of the labels, it is clear
Figure 4.10: A general (linear) network represented as a DAG. The directed
edge weights ⃗ρk,l specify how much the variable index k make up of variable l.
Although i and j are not directly connected, multiple paths may exist between
the two nodes, making the propagation of similarity more complex from that of
a chain.
that Gdir is once again strictly upper triangular as entries below the diagonal
corresponds to edges going from a random variable with an index i to another
random variable with index j such that i > j which is clearly a contradiction.
Also, the diagonal elements are 0 as there can not be any loops in DAGs.
Similarly to the definition of (Gaussian) chains, based on d independent (or even
just pairwise uncorrelated) random variables Zi we can define a general network
==PAGE:93==
4.2 Directed acyclic Gaussian graphs
81
of random variables Xi based on Z in the following way
X1 = Z1
X2 = ⃗ρ1,2X1 +
q
1 −⃗ρ2
1,2Z2
X3 = ⃗ρ1,3X1 + ⃗ρ2,3X2 + c3Z3
...
Xd =
X
k<d
⃗ρk,dXk + cdZd
(4.4)
where ci is chosen such that Var (Xi) = 1. This is done to make the analysis later
on simpler as then covariance and correlation are equal and ⃗ρi,j becomes the
direct correlation between the variables indexed i and j as shown in Figure 4.10.
Of course, for the variance of each random variable to be 1 there must be some
constraints on the chosen ⃗ρi,j such as neither one of them can exceed 1 in
absolute value. Furthermore, consider the following bound on the variance of
Xi assuming ck for k < i have been chosen such that Var (Xk) = 1.
Var [Xi] =
X
k<i
⃗ρ2
k,i + 2
X
k<l<i
⃗ρk,i⃗ρl,iCov [Xk, Xl] + c2
i
≤
X
k<i
⃗ρ2
k,i + 2
X
k<l<i
⃗ρk,i⃗ρl,i + c2
i
=
 X
k<i
ρk,i
!2
+ c2
i
(4.5)
where we have used that Zi is uncorrelated with Xk for k < i and that the
covariance between variables with variance 1 is at most 1 to obtain the inequality.
Hence, choosing the sum of the ingoing edges to be at most 1 for every node
ensures that the constants ci for i ∈{2, . . . , d} exist in order to make the variance
of each Xi 1. This, we will use in the following example to easily build a network
such that ⃗ρi,j is the pure correlation.
However, before constructing an example and using bot correlation and mutual
information we must determine the theoretical Gobs for both cases. To do this,
we shall consider the (i, j) element of Gobs when using correlation as a measure
of similarity and later use mutual information based on these correlations and
Proposition 4.1 in the case of Z being a Gaussian random vector. To calculate
[Gobs]i,j we shall consider the immediate predecessors to node j in the graph
G corresponding to Equation 4.4. The immediate predecessors or in-neighbors
of a node j is denoted N −(Xj) or in shorthand notation N −
j . An example of
this is shown in Figure 4.11 where the in-neighbors of j has been marked in red.
With this notation, we proceed with the computation of the (i, j) entry of Gobs
which is the covariance between Xi and Xj when i < j and 0 elsewhere.
==PAGE:94==
82
Results
Figure 4.11: For node j, the set N −
j
is illustrated with red borders. It is
exactly the set of nodes going directly into j. We note that an in-neighbor l of in-
neighbor k of node j can also be an in-neighbor of j i.e. l can influence both k and
j whilst k also directly influenced j. It is in particular these direct dependencies
we want to be sure of as their existence makes the network more complex but
failing to discover these can lead to a significant reduction in prediction accuracy.
[Gobs]i,j = Cov

Xi,
X
k∈N−
j
⃗ρk,j Xk + cjZj


= Cov

Xi,
X
k∈N−
j
⃗ρk,j Xk


=
X
k∈N−
j
⃗ρk,jCov [Xi, Xk]
=
j−1
X
k∈1
⃗ρk,jCov [Xi, Xk]
= ⃗ρi,j +
d
X
k∈1
⃗ρk,j [Gobs]i,k
(4.6)
For the fourth equality, we have used that ⃗ρk,j = 0 whenever k ̸∈N −
j
which
again for the fifth equality holds for any k ≥j. Furthermore, since [Gobs]i,i = 0
we need to add ⃗ρi,j to make the final equality hold. It is clear that the above
can also be expressed as a matrix equation, namely
Gobs = GobsGdir + Gdir
Hence, as Gdir is strictly upper triangular thus making I −Gdir invertible, we
can directly express Gobs in terms of Gdir. We find that
Gobs = Gdir (I −Gdir)−1
==PAGE:95==
4.2 Directed acyclic Gaussian graphs
83
which we recognize as Equation 3.4 hence also for a general network (and not
just a chain), using correlation and knowing/assuming a topological order of the
random variables we are able to perfectly rediscover Gdir from Gobs.
With the above, we then define an example Gaussian network with the following
weights and shown in Figure 4.12 to get a better understanding of this example
hopefully should reappear after deconvolution using both correlation and mutual
information respectively.
⃗ρ1,2 = 0.7,
⃗ρ5,6 = 0.5,
⃗ρ2,7 = 0.3
⃗ρ6,7 = 0.3,
⃗ρ6,8 = 0.7,
⃗ρ4,9 = 0.3
⃗ρ8,9 = 0.3,
⃗ρ7,10 = 0.4,
⃗ρ9,10 = 0.2
(4.7)
In particular, from Equation 4.5 and Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7, we suspect that
the bleeding effects observed for the Gaussian chain won’t appear to the same
extent in this case.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
Figure 4.12:
The graph defined in Equation 4.7.
Note that X3 is neither
influenced nor influences any other variable.
It is of course in our interest
to accurately tell if X3 should be considered if we try to infer a probability
distribution on e.g. X10 given observations of the other variables.
Applying the deconvolution algorithm, we obtain the results in Figure 6.10 which
trivially, from the above analysis on Gobs, results in a perfect reconstruction of
the network.
If instead, we do not assume a topological structure, we can
also recover the structure, although we need to tune the threshold as can be
seen from Figure 4.13. Tuning the α and β did not have much of an effect.
Actually, decreasing β seemed to worsen the results which is also in line with our
expectations as choosing smaller β skews the effects of higher order interactions.
==PAGE:96==
84
Results
Thus, it is primarily the threshold that we want to tune in this case and choosing
t = 1.18 · 10−1 we accurately infer the network structure contrary to the results
from the Gaussian chain. However, we still observe second order effects i.e. the
edge between X5 and X8 which was also the case in Figure 4.4 Finally, before
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(a) Gobs
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) Gdir from t = 6.4 · 10−2
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(d) Gdir from t = 1.18 · 10−1
Figure 4.13: Not knowing the topological structure and thus using a symmetric
Gobs (a) we obtain the Gdir in (b). Clearly, there is some bleeding, but choosing
the threshold t = 1.18 · 10−1 we can accurately rediscover the network structure
up to a direction on the edges. As with the previous example of Gaussian chains,
we observe some tendency to inaccurately filter out second order effects as can
be seen in (c) where X5 and X8 is connected.
continuing with results regarding the different methods for estimating mutual
information, we present the results from above using mutual information instead
of correlation as the measure of similarity. Namely, once again assuming the
topological order such that Gobs is strictly upper triangular and hence no need
for rescaling we get the results shown in Figure 4.14. As expected, we observe
on par performance to using correlation. Only the edge from 5 to 8 being almost
==PAGE:97==
4.2 Directed acyclic Gaussian graphs
85
as strong as 9 to 10 could be a problem i.e. choosing a threshold a little larger
than t = 1.7 · 10−2 (which is quite small and has been used for Figure 4.14c)
would have resulted in an edge from X5 to X8. Hence, in a real world example
we might have chosen to either leave out both edges which depending on the
scenario may or may not be an acceptable error or include the both of them.
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
(a) Gobs
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) Gdir as a graph
Figure 4.14: Using mutual information instead of correlation results in Gobs
shown in (a). The non-linear map from correlation to mutual information only
effects the resulting Gdir a little as shown in (b) when comparing to the ⃗ρi,j
from Equation 4.7. Choosing the relatively small threshold t = 1.7·10−2 results
in a perfect reconstruction of the graph structure.
Furthermore, using a symmetric Gobs instead i.e. no assumption on topology,
does not seem to have much of an effect as seen from Figure 4.15. Although
there still is a small weight on the edge from X5 to X8, by choosing the threshold
t = 1.96 · 10−2 we can accurately construct the true network structure.
In conclusion, we observe a useful property of more general networks that for
==PAGE:98==
86
Results
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
(a) Gobs
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) Gdir as a graph
Figure 4.15:
Using a symmetric Gobs instead of an upper triangular Gobs
result in near identical Gdir in terms of relative weights on the edges. Namely,
the Gdir shown in (b) seem to be almost a scaled version of the (reflected) Gdir
derived from a triangular Gobs. Thus, as (c) also shows, we can accurately infer
the structure of the network using a threshold t = 1.96 · 10−2.
both mutual information and correlation, the additional assumption of the topo-
logical order does not have much of an effect in these cases contrary to what
we observed for Gaussian chains and linear chain models in general, when using
correlation.
==PAGE:99==
4.3 CE computation
87
4.3
CE computation
Having discussed the strengths and weaknesses of Algorithm 2, we now turn our
attention to Algorithm 1. Namely, in this section we shall discuss the different
methods from Section 3.4 and how they perform on two examples. Once again,
we shall base our results on two examples. The first is a simple case, where we
shall see what to be aware of when initially the observations are transformed
through estimated distribution functions as well as how accurate the different
methods for estimating the Copula entropy i.e. mutual are. Continuing from
the first example, we shall once again consider the network from Section 4.2
specified by Equation 4.7.
In particular, we will see how well the combined
framework performs on an example we have already seen to be quite solvable
if one uses accurate estimates of the mutual information which we previously
calculated theoretically.
4.3.1
Spline and KDE based CE estimation
Before discussing the first example, we shall however discuss the problem with
the spline based method and using histograms in general. Namely, we shall first
see that if one were to just simply us a raw binning approach, the number of
bins N influences the estimate a lot and no number of bins seems to perform
well on all cases. Namely, let X be a bivariate Gaussian with correlation ρ, then
the Copula density looks as in Figure 4.30. In particular, we notice the peaks
at (0, 0) and (1, 1) which result in a lot of mutual information. Now, simulating
n = 400 observations from the joint distribution and transforming to the unit
square through the marginal distribution function for varying correlations ρ, we
can compare the estimated mutual information Iestim using the results from Sub-
section 3.2.3 to the true mutual information given by Iexact = −1
2 log
 1 −ρ2
.
The results are shown in Figure 4.16 where we report the relative size of the esti-
mate and the exact mutual information and in Figure 4.17 where the difference
is reported. From Figure 4.16, we might choose N ≈10 as in [2] however for
large correlations, we drastically underestimate mutual information. Increasing
the number of bins to e.g. N = 50 corrects this error for large correlations,
but then small correlations have a relatively large error of around 0.5 which is a
relatively large error when comparing to the error the deconvolution step makes
as illustrated in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:100==
88
Results
0
10
20
30
N
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(a)
0
10
20
30
N
0
2
4
6
8
10
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(b)
0
50
100
150
N
0
1
2
3
4
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(c)
Figure 4.16
0
10
20
30
N
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Iestim
Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(a)
0
50
100
150
N
2
1
0
1
2
3
Iestim
Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(b)
Figure 4.17
We thus proceed with using the B-spline approach. Similar to the above results,
in Figure 4.18 and Figure 4.19, we observe that B-spline approach is prone to
the same errors as the raw binning approach. However, from Figure 4.19 we see
that the error are smaller for the B-spline based approach but also that a better
choice for the number of bins is around N = 60 contrary to the results of [2].
==PAGE:101==
4.3 CE computation
89
0
10
20
30
N
0
10
20
30
40
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(a)
0
10
20
30
N
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(b)
0
50
100
150
N
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(c)
Figure 4.18: Evaluation of MI for old method for different N. Ligner der er
knæk ved fporhold lig 1. Men ved næremere undersøgelse blev det fundet ud af
at det ikke helt er tilfældet, og derudover vil der skulle laves en algoritmisk måde
at finde dette knæk på. Savitzky–Golay filter kunne være en mulighed, eller
gruppere e.g. 5 forskellige bins og tag gennemsnit. Efter smoothing kan anden
afledte tæt på 0 bruges, til at finde hvornår stykket bliver fladt (tilnærmelses
vist)
0
10
20
30
N
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Iestim
Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(a)
0
50
100
150
N
2
1
0
1
2
Iestim
Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(b)
Figure 4.19: through repeated trials, we see that this method is actually quite
robust when varying the number of observations n
The results for M-splines are shown in Figure 6.6 and Figure 6.6 and we observe
comparable performance except perhaps for a better estimation of mutual infor-
mation for large correlations which is what we would expect from our discussion
in Subsection 3.4.2.
==PAGE:102==
90
Results
The problem we observe with the above methods is that when mutual informa-
tion is large, the Copula density is close to a one-dimensional manifold. Hence,
to calculate the mutual information well, need many bins. However, with many
bins the estimate becomes more noisy as the support of each spline shrinks with
1
N . However, as seen from Figure 4.20, if we can accurately estimate the Cop-
ula density function from observations, we can compute the mutual information
perfectly by increasing the fineness of the integral approximation. In particu-
lar, the results below where obtained through the theoretical Copula density
function evaluated at the bin centers
  2i−1
2N , 2j−1
2N

for i, j ∈{1, . . . , N}. We see
that this simple approximation with N = 1000 is good for correlations up to
ρ = 0.99. However, due to numerical limitations, we shall use N = 500 and only
400 observations to evaluate the performance of the KDE from the previous
chapter. We note that a more efficient implementation is possible splitting up
the computation in multiple parts as the problem with many observations and
bins is to compute the joint density function which is of O
 N 2n

10
100
300
1000
2000
3000
N
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(a)
300
1000
2000
3000
N
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(b)
Figure 4.20: Evaluation of MI for new method for different N. Bør sammen-
lignes med artiekl fundet (har sat i bibtex) og original papers (ikke Kina)
the chosen h is around 0.085 every time using Scott’s rule. As we see from
Table 4.1, we have relatively low variance and in general, we compute the mutual
information to a higher accuracy than either B-splines and M-splines. Thus, in
the following example, we will only consider this method for estimating the
mutual information between pairs of variables. In Figure 4.21 we have shown
the estimated density and the theoretical copula. We observe that indeed the
method accurately estimates the Copula density, although we note that the
==PAGE:103==
4.3 CE computation
91
ρ
h
mean error
variance
0.1
hScott
0.01583
5.3446 · 10−5
0.3
hScott
0.02302
3.7957 · 10−4
0.4
hScott
0.006898
3.2655 · 10−4
0.6
hScott
0.007803
1.0027 · 10−3
0.9
hScott
−0.1844
4.4478 · 10−4
0.99
hScott
−1.007
1.6328 · 10−4
0.99
0.3 hScott
−0.3468
1.0616 · 10−3
Table 4.1: based on 10 trials
concept of a local bandwidth as discussed in Subsection 3.4.4 is likely to improve
on the results as peaks at (0, 0) and (1, 1) does not quite resemble those of
the theoretical Copula density.
In particular, we observe that reducing the
bandwidth improves on the estimate and is clearly observe by the improved
resemblance with the theoretical Copula density. Although this is at the cost
of undersmoothing on the interior. Indeed, a K-means based estimator of the
bandwidth h could work well as the mean distance near (0, 0) and (1, 1) is very
small compared to the interior. However, we note that as long as observations
are not almost on a line, the KDE performs quite well. This, we shall also see in
the next section where we couple the above discussions on mutual information
estimation with the deconvolution algorithm.
==PAGE:104==
92
Results
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u2
0.0
3.9
7.8
11.7
15.6
19.5
23.4
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u2
0.0
3.9
7.8
11.7
15.6
19.5
23.4
(b)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u2
0.0
3.9
7.8
11.7
15.6
19.5
23.4
(c)
Figure 4.21
4.3.2
Exponentiated multivariate Gaussian
Let us consider a simple case with Y = eX (element wise exponentiation) where
X ∼N (0, Σ) where
Σ =


σ2
1
0.9σ1σ2
0
0.9σ1σ2
σ2
2
0
0
0
σ2
3

= diag (σ)


1
0.9
0
0.9
1
0
0
0
1

diag (σ)
In particular, in terms of Equation 4.4, we have that for X, ⃗ρ1,2 = 0.9. It is
clear that to Algorithm 1, the mean of X is of no importance as it simply corre-
sponds to a scaling of the Yi variables. Furthermore, because of Corollary 3.2.1,
theoretically, due to the uniqueness of the Copula C (as Y is continuous) we
should expect near equal or very similar results for Y and X from Algorithm 1.
Additionally, different σ corresponds to different scaling of X, and thus we
should observe equal or near equal Gdir for all Y independently of σ. Initially,
==PAGE:105==
4.3 CE computation
93
we shall see how this hypothesis holds up when considering the following three
examples
σ = (0.07, 0.3, 0.9),
σ = (1, 1, 1),
σ = (1, 2, 3)
To draw from this distribution, one can either use built-in functions or use the
Cholesky factorization of the correlation matrix to generate proper correlated
variables from 3 independent standard normal distributions and then scale with
the chosen standard deviation to generate samples from all three cases based
on the same seed. We shall do the latter and also generate a generous number
of samples (10,000) such that the KDE based methods have the best possible
prerequisites whilst also being numerically tractable later on.
In order for the sample size to not influence the results, we simulate a generous
number of samples, namely, for the following results we have used n = 10,000
samples. For σ = (1, 1, 1), Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 returns the following
(using α = 1 and β = 0.99)
Gdir =


−0.3363
0.6552
0.08813
0.6552
−0.3328
0.06480
0.08813
0.06480
−0.01734


(4.8)
Similarly, for σ = (0.07, 0.3, 0.9):
Gdir =


−0.3289
0.6610
0.004827
0.6610
−0.29889
0.004977
0.004827
0.004977
−0.00007197


(4.9)
Finally, for σ = (1, 2, 3):
Gdir =


−0.1836
0.3117
0.2252
0.3117
−0.4065
0.5962
0.2252
0.5962
−0.3673


For σ = (1, 1, 1) and σ = (0.07, 0.3, 0.9) we observe the most resemblance to
the Σ, although the resulting Gdir deviate in the final column. The difference
is likely produced by Algorithm 1 as if the resulting Gobs was the same, then
so would Gdir and from the above argument, we know that theoretically this
should be the case. For the final example, σ = (1, 2, 3), we see a completely
different result and immediately suspect that there must be some numerical
errors. Investigating the partial results of Algorithm 1 we immediately see a
flaw in the supposedly uniform variables Ui as shown in figure Figure 4.22
==PAGE:106==
94
Results
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
U1
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
5
10
15
U2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
U3
Figure 4.22: The samples transformed using Ui = Fi(Xi) for σ = (1, 2, 3).
These should be uniformly distributed, but clearly this is not the case for U2 and
U3. Even U1 does not quite resemble 10,000 samples from a uniform distribution.
U1
U2
U3
Dn
0.16512
0.38354
0.42764
p-value
0
0
0
Table 4.2: based on 10,000 samples for σ = (1, 2, 3).
Before handling this, the non-uniformity of U1 in Figure 4.22 is likely also present
in the case when σ = (1, 1, 1). Indeed, Figure 4.23 shows that this is indeed the
case.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
U1
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
U2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
U3
Figure 4.23: The samples transformed using Ui = Fi(Xi) for σ = (1, 1, 1).
U1
U2
U3
Dn
0.16511
0.14672
0.10561
p-value
0
0
2.3819975157518748 · 10−4
Table 4.3: based on 400 samples for σ = (1, 1, 1).
==PAGE:107==
4.3 CE computation
95
Finally, just to be sure, σ = (0.07, 0.3, 0.9) is also shown in Figure 4.24 and
seems very reasonable, except for U3.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
U1
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
U2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
U3
Figure 4.24: The samples transformed using Ui = Fi(Xi) for
σ = (0.07, 0.3, 0.9).
U1
U2
U3
Dn
0.029036
0.029026
0.085611
p-value
0.88427
0.88454
0.0052791
Table 4.4: based on 10,000 samples for σ = (0.07, 0.3, 0.9).
From the above examples, it seems that the larger the variance, the worse the
uniforms turn out. Reasons for this could include numerical issues when trying
to calculate u(j)
i
form y(j)
i
by u(j)
i
=
R y(j)
i
−∞fi(y) dy and bad fitting of the kernel
density estimate from observations.
In particular, for values similar, which
happens in the case for large σ such that we observe large negative realizations
of Xi, y(j)
i
are almost 0, and when computing the integral could result in identical
values. Furthermore, from Figure 4.25 we see that indeed the fit is quite poor.
Note that we have zoomed in on the interval [−200, 200] which contains 96.2%
of observations.
The poor fit is primarily due to the use of Scott’s Rule as
discussed above which in this case overshoots the optimal bandwidth by a lot.
==PAGE:108==
96
Results
200
150
100
50
0
50
100
150
200
X3
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
fX3
Figure 4.25
The poor fit also explains the high concentration of U3 around 0.5 in Figure 4.22
as only 54.5% of the probability mass lies above 0.
However, also here Corollary 3.2.1 proves to be useful. Namely, we can get rid
of the numerical issues by transforming Yi using e.g. log(·) or (·)p for p > 0
to get even out the observations more. As the first simply inverts the initial
transformation of Xi, we choose the latter as a more interesting case. In par-
ticular, choosing p < 1 will result in a more even distribution. In the following,
p = 1/10 has been used to transform Y prior to running Algorithm 1 and the
resulting u(j)
i
is shown in Figure 4.26.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
U1
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
U2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
U3
Figure 4.26
The resulting u(j)
i
now seem to follow a uniform distribution and indeed the
KDE fits much better as seen in Figure 4.27.
==PAGE:109==
4.3 CE computation
97
U1
U2
U3
Dn
0.0061099
0.0061435
0.0073148
p-value
0.84838
0.84368
0.65690
Table 4.5: based on 10,000 samples for σ = (1, 2, 3) with power transform.
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
Y3
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
fY3
Figure 4.27
Turning to Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 we now find that Gdir is given by
Gdir =


−0.3290
0.6610
0.01188
0.6610
−0.3289
0.004603
0.01188
0.004603
−0.0002167


Which is indeed much more comparable with the result from before in Equa-
tion 4.8 and Equation 4.9. The difference between Gdir from Y and Y p is clearly
visible in Figure 4.28 and also Figure 4.28b resembles the original correlation
structure.
==PAGE:110==
98
Results
Yp
1
Yp
2
Yp
3
Yp
1
Yp
2
Yp
3
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(a)
Yp
1
Yp
2
Yp
3
Yp
1
Yp
2
Yp
3
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(b)
Figure 4.28: Gdir resulting from 400 samples from multi variate Gaussian with
σ = (1, 2, 3) in (a) with raw samples from Y and in (b) the transformed data
corresponding to Y p.
Finally, to end this example we shall compare with some theoretical results.
Namely, the output Gobs of Algorithm 1 can also be calculated theoretically.
For this, we shall use Proposition 4.1 which permits a theoretical result, namely
Gobs =


0
−1
2 ln
 1 −ρ2
12

−1
2 ln
 1 −ρ2
13

−1
2 ln
 1 −ρ2
21

0
−1
2 ln
 1 −ρ2
23

−1
2 ln
 1 −ρ2
31

−1
2 ln
 1 −ρ2
32

0


∼=


0
0.83037
0
0.83037
0
0
0
0
0


Similarly, prior to deconvolution, using just the sampled X (i.e. no exponential
transform), Algorithm 1 returns
Gobs =


0.
0.64069542
0.01824538
0.64069542
0.
0.0135368
0.01824538
0.0135368
0.


Test om denne G er lige den teoretiske. Eller nærmere, argumenter for hvorfor
vi ikke laver en test, eller hvad man kunne gøre. Har samplet fra en simultan
normalfordeling, så kan lave en til en mellem MI og korrelation.
From the confidence density for the correlation ρ given the emperical correlation
==PAGE:111==
4.3 CE computation
99
r is given by
f (ρ | r, ν) = ν(ν −1)Γ(ν −1)
√
2πΓ(ν + 1
2)
 1 −r2 ν−1
2
 1 −ρ2 ν−2
2
(1 −rρ)
2ν−1
2
F
3
2, −1
2, ν + 1
2, 1 + rρ
2

from the mutual information, we can calculate the absolute correlation. Notice
that the density does not change when reversing both r and ρ simultaneously,
thus, without loss of generality, assume r ≥0, then we can calculate a CI for ρ
(which will be negated if we had used −r instead and thus would be identical
when taking the absolute value). If the original CI [a, b] contains 0 i.e. a < 0, we
shall write the CI for the absolute correlation as [0, b] instead. This way, we can
compare the absolute correlations and see if they are the same (by checking if
the CI contains the theoretical correlation) by [29]. Using numerical integration
(fast enough with high numerical accuracy from many bins, 1 mil bins, yielding
probability mass 1.0000000000008133), can compute CI for absolute correlation
Section 6.3
Clearly these are not equal, but in this case, the error is suspected to origi-
nate from the estimated joint density. For example, considering X1 and X2, we
compare the estimated joint copula density and compare to the theoretical ref-
erence til et sted hvor gausisk copula står shown in Figure 4.29 and Figure 4.30
respectively.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u2
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u2
0
1
2
3
4
5
c(u1, u2)
(b)
Figure 4.29: Estimated copula density c with ρ = 0.9 corresponding to X1
and X2.
==PAGE:112==
100
Results
The noticeable difference is in the corners (0, 0) and (1, 1) where the theoretical
copula density tends to infinity whereas the estimated density has modes at
(0.1, 0.1) and (0.9, 0.9). In particular, simply rescaling the copula density in
Algorithm 1 does not resemble the theoretical boundary which is a known issue
reference til artikel om undershoot peaks og boundary conditions for KDE. A
better approach may be to use jackknifing link til afsnit of jackknifing, som også
indeholder reference til artikel hvor dette gøres.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u2
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
(b)
Figure 4.30: Theoretical copula density c with ρ = 0.9 corresponding to X1
and X2.
We note however, that the underlying structure is still captured i.e. that Y1 and
Y2 covary while Y3 does not inform Y1 or Y2 and vice versa.
We continue with a similar example to the previous one. The key difference is
the number of variables and a more complicated correlation structure to test
the algorithms further.
==PAGE:113==
4.3 CE computation
101
4.3.3
Gaussian network revisited - Application of com-
plete framework
None are significant (marginal distribution).
Also, we expect this to do well, since there are no correlations above 0.7. Thus,
from Table 4.1 the errors in the mutual information estimates should be quite
small.
the setup is like before that we simulate 400 observations from the network,
defined by Equation 4.7
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(a) ˆGdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) ˆGdir as a graph
Figure 4.31: Using a symmetric Gobs
==PAGE:114==
102
Results
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
(a) ˆGdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) ˆGdir as a digraph
Figure 4.32: Using a triangular Gobs
casuality svarer til at lave nedre/øvre trekant. Er der forskel i at gør edet før og
efter for en symmetrisk matrix? - Ja, men begge metoder på 10 eksempel giver
gode resultater. Kommenter at det er matematisk meget forskelligt at filtrere
først og så ND efter og omvendt
==PAGE:115==
4.4 Pharmaceutical data deconvolution
103
4.4
Pharmaceutical data deconvolution
Finally, we turn our attention to the pharmaceutical production data introduced
in chapter 2. Namely, we have at this point used the methodology discussed
in chapter 4 both to estimate mutual information, to deconvolve Gaussian net-
works and chains based on analytical expressions for the correlation between
variables and finally in Subsection 4.3.3 where we have combined Algorithm 1
and Algorithm 2 to infer the causal structure of a 10-dimensional Gaussian
network.
In particular, we saw that the methodology combined produced very accurate
results when the mutual information between pairs of random variables were not
too large as these proved difficult to estimate to high accuracy without turning
to a manual tuning of the bandwidths. We especially want to avoid the manual
tuning of the bandwidth in this section, as we shall compute mutual information
between 1653 pairs of random variables.
The random variables are the duration and delays of each process as well as
the change in level of the tank during these operations. Recall that e.g. T P
4.1
is the duration of process 4.1 while T D
4
is the delay after all subprocesses of
process 4 are completed.
Also, for each temporal variable T P
i
and T D
i , we
have a corresponding change of level M P
i
and M D
i . Initially, we also add the
accumulated random variables.
Namely, for process 1, we add the random
variable T1 = T P
1 +T D
1 and likewise for the level changes for all processes. Also,
the total duration T = P10
i=1 Ti and change in level M = P10
i=1 Mi are added
as random variables. The accumulated random variables are initially added to
see if our method can rediscover these simple causal relations. We will later
remove these from our discussion as we try to gain a deeper understanding of
the production system.
Hence, from the above, we initially have 68 variables. However, some of them
are constant and thus out of interest. The constant random variables are
M D
1 ,
M D
2 ,
T P
4.1,
M P
4.1,
T P
4.3,
M D
4 ,
M D
6 ,
T P
8 ,
M D
10
However, as T8 = T P
8 +T D
8 we shall also exclude either T8 or T D
8 due to T P
8 being
constant. In particular, T8 and T D
8 can be interchanged at will when computing
mutual information according to Corollary 3.2.1. Here, we have chosen to keep
T D
8 as it is easier to relate to the other processes. Thus, we are only considering
58 random variables and hence 58 · 57/2 = 1653 pairs of variables as stated
above.
We note that as the resolution in time is 0.001 we add uniform distributed noise
from [0, 0.001] to the durations and delays. In particular, we observe that in
==PAGE:116==
104
Results
some cases equal durations are observed. These would result in non-uniform
marginals like in Subsection 4.3.2 hence making the algorithm fail at computing
the mutual information accurately.
We note that the experiments to follow
have been carried out multiple times to assess the influence of this perturbation
to the durations and delays. However, as this did not influence our results in
the slightest we will not discuss this further. Furthermore, instead of using a
KDE as in Subsection 4.3.2 to transform the (continuous) observations to lie on
the unit interval through the distribution function, we have used the empirical
distribution function. This was done to ensure that all 58 random variables were
transformed appropriately without having to consider transformations (like in
Subsection 4.3.2).
TD
i
TP
i
Ti
T
MD
i
MP
i
Mi
M
TD
i
TP
i
Ti
T
MD
i
MP
i
Mi
M
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure 4.33: Gdir from a symmetric Gobs. Other than the accumulated vari-
ables, we observe strong dependencies between the duration of a process and the
change in level during the process by comparing the columns and rows labeled
T P
i
and M P
i .
The resulting Gobs is shown in the appendix, Figure 6.11.
We observe that
there indeed is a strong dependence between the accumulated variables and
==PAGE:117==
4.4 Pharmaceutical data deconvolution
105
their summands such as T1 and T D
1
as well as T P
1 . We immediately use the
deconvolution algorithm resulting in the Gdir seen in Figure 4.33
We have labeled sections of Gdir such that each sections corresponds to and
ordered list of variables. The variables in each section are
T D
i
=

T D
1 , T D
2 , T D
3 , T D
4 , T D
5 , T D
6 , T D
7 , T D
8 , T D
9 , T D
10
	
T P
i
=

T P
1 , T P
2 , T P
3.1, T P
3.2, T P
4.2, T P
5 , T P
6 , T P
7 , T P
9 , T P
10
	
Ti = {T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, T6, T7, T9, T10}
T = {T}
M D
i
=

M D
3 , M D
5 , M D
7 , M D
8 , M D
9
	
M P
i =

M P
1 , M P
2 , M P
3.1, M P
3.2, M P
4.2, M P
4.3, M P
5 , M P
6 , M P
7 , M P
8 , M P
9 , M P
10
	
Mi = {M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, M6, M7, M8, M9, M10}
M = {M}
(4.10)
I.e. the section labeled T D
i
consists of all the delays after each process and so
on for the remaining section labels.
From Figure 4.33, we observe that the accumulated durations of each process Ti
is indeed very dependent on both the delay and durations of the process. This
is a sign that the algorithm performs well as by definition Ti = T D
i + P
k∈Pi T P
i
(where Pi is defined as the set of subprocesses that constitute the process i).
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TD
4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
T4
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TP
4.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
T4
(b)
Figure 4.34:
T4 vs T D
4
and T P
4.2 in (a) and (b) respectively.
Notice that
the continuous part of the variables has been transformed using the empirical
distribution function such that the domain is [0, 1] for all the variables. The
transformation allows for an easier assessment of the mutual information be-
tween the pairs of variables.
==PAGE:118==
106
Results
For example, we observe that T D
4
is strongly associated with T4 while T P
4.2 is
not as strongly associated with T4. However, there is still a connection. If we
plot T4 vs. T D
4
and T P
4.2 respectively (Figure 4.34) we indeed observe that the
information between T D
4 and T4 is much greater than T P
4.2 and T4. As we saw in
Section with data, this is because the delays after process 4 are much larger than
the duration to begin with. Thus, even though T D
4
is 0, 56.25% of times, most
of T4 can be explained from this alone, when comparing to the scores between
T4 and the other random variables.
Furthermore, we observe that the total duration T is mostly explained by T7
which in turn is explained mostly by T P
7 . Although there are many other inter-
esting observations such as the most change in levels and masses occurs during
process 3, addition of a material and stirring. The level after process 3 is in
turn mostly influenced by the stirring but also seem to have some unexplained
variation. We observe the unexplained variation from the row corresponding to
M3 which has relatively small associations with the other delays, durations and
levels.
At this point, we have observed that the algorithm rediscovers what we already
know to be true. Namely, that the total masses and process durations are well
explained by the individual processes. However, a more interesting question is
how each of the processes affect each other. More precisely, if we only consider
each process without the accumulated random variables Ti, T, Mi and M, we
hope to discover more interesting dependencies between the processes. Also, Ti
etc. can always be computed from the processes, so we do not really care for
these random variables if we want to understand the dynamics of the system.
Initially, we consider the durations and delays only.
Namely, we choose the
submatrix of Gobs corresponding to the sets T D
i
and T P
i
from Equation 4.10.
Still using a symmetric Gobs, Gdir is computed as shown in Figure 4.35a. Now,
when removing the trivial random variables, as they are known to be the sum
of others, a clearer image of how the durations and delay of each process depend
on each other emerges. A strong association between T P
9 and T D
7
is observed.
When plotting the observations of the random variables (again with the contin-
uous part transformed through the empirical density function) in Figure 4.35b,
we indeed observe that for many batches, if the delay for process 7 is non-zero,
then the duration of process 9 is greater than if the delay after process 7 was
0. Furthermore, as we have removed transitive effects, it seems as if this asso-
ciation is direct. I.e. something happens during the delay after process 7, the
reaction process, which heavily influences to the duration of the cooling process
9. Interestingly, from Figure 4.35a it does not seem like T P
7 is associated with
T P
9 . In Figure 6.9 we have shown these two variables plotted against each other
and indeed observe that neither is particularly descriptive of the other.
==PAGE:119==
4.4 Pharmaceutical data deconvolution
107
TD
i
TP
i
TD
i
TP
i
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(a) Gdir
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TD
7
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TP
9
(b) T P
9 vs T D
7
Figure 4.35: When only using the durations and delays, we observe Gdir as
in (a). A very strong similarity is calculated between T P
9 and T D
7 , which when
plotted in (b) is not an unreasonable finding. Namely, if the delay after process
7 is 0, T P
9 is primarily below the 0.6-quantile and otherwise appear to be linearly
related to T D
7 .
In figure Figure 4.36, we have shown Gdir (from Figure 4.35a) as a graph with
varying thresholds. It is clear that the durations of each process are depen-
dent on each other and depending on the threshold we conclude anything from
a simple network structure (Figure 4.36b and Figure 4.36c) to a much more
complicated dependency structure (Figure 4.36a) between the durations of the
processes. As is also clear from Figure 4.35a, the delays of the processes are the
first random variables we conclude to be independent of both each other and
all other process durations except for T D
2
and T D
9
corresponding to the delays
when adding material and cooling respectively and the link between T D
7 and T P
9
discussed above.
Like in Subsection 4.3.3, we have good understanding of the topological structure
of the processes. Namely, as the delay of processes are always after the process
we have that in terms of a topological structure of the random variables, T D
i
is
always after T P
i . For example, T D
3 is always realized after T P
3.1 and T P
3.2 (in that
order). Likewise, as shown in ref to figure about simulation process structure,
as the processes are executed one by one, the topological structure is a simple
chain. This should not be confused with the actual causal structure being a
chain as in Section 4.1. As the topological structure is a chain, it is also unique
i.e.
there is exactly one ordering of the random variables.
The topological
structure is summarized in Equation 4.4
==PAGE:120==
108
Results
TD
1
TD
2
TD
3
TD
4
TD
5
TD
6
TD
7
TD
8
TD
9
TD
10
TP
1
TP
2
TP
3.1
TP
3.2
TP
4.2
TP
5
TP
6
TP
7
TP
9
TP
10
(a) t = 0.1
TD
1
TD
2
TD
3
TD
4
TD
5
TD
6
TD
7
TD
8
TD
9
TD
10
TP
1
TP
2
TP
3.1
TP
3.2
TP
4.2
TP
5
TP
6
TP
7
TP
9
TP
10
(b) t = 0.118
TD
1
TD
2
TD
3
TD
4
TD
5
TD
6
TD
7
TD
8
TD
9
TD
10
TP
1
TP
2
TP
3.1
TP
3.2
TP
4.2
TP
5
TP
6
TP
7
TP
9
TP
10
(c) t = 0.12
Figure 4.36: Gdir from Figure 4.35 represented as a graph for different thresh-
olds t. In general, we observe that the delays appear to be indescribable from
the other variables and vice versa. As for the actual durations of the processes,
depending on the threshold, we observe a more or less complicated relational
structure. Varying the threshold t outside the considered range [0.1, 0.12] does
not change the graph noticeably.
T P
1 −→T D
1 −→T P
2 −→T D
2 −→T P
3.1 −→T P
3.2 −→T D
3
−→T P
4.2 −→T D
4 −→T P
5 −→T D
5 −→T P
6 −→T D
6 −→T P
7
−→T D
7 −→T D
8 −→T P
9 −→T D
9 −→T P
10 −→T D
10
(4.11)
==PAGE:121==
4.4 Pharmaceutical data deconvolution
109
Using this to order the rows and columns of Gobs and finally only keeping the
upper triangular part, we can deconvolve the network once again, but this time
using the topological structure. The resulting Gdir is shown in Figure 4.37.
TP
1 TD
1 TP
2 TD
2 TP
3.1TP
3.2 TD
3 TP
4.2 TD
4 TP
5 TD
5 TP
6 TD
6 TP
7 TD
7 TD
8 TP
9 TD
9 TP
10TD
10
TP
1
TD
1
TP
2
TD
2
TP
3.1
TP
3.2
TD
3
TP
4.2
TD
4
TP
5
TD
5
TP
6
TD
6
TP
7
TD
7
TD
8
TP
9
TD
9
TP
10
TD
10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Figure 4.37: Gdir based on durations and delays but now with the added
assumption of the topological order of the variables. Notice that the order of the
variables is different from that of Figure 4.35a and hence not easily comparable.
We refer to the graphical representations in Figure 4.36 and Figure 4.38 for
comparison of dependence and causal structure.
Although it is hard to compare this Gdir with the one obtained without the
assumption of topological structure in Figure 4.35a, we see some differences. T P
1
and T P
10 are not as directly dependent as originally inferred from the symmetric
Gobs. The differences are however more noticeable, when comparing the graphs
from before with those in Figure 4.38 where the directed Gobs has been used
instead.
Depending on the chosen threshold t, we observe that still the delays are the
least predictable from other observations as they are not connected to other
random variables. This was also the conclusion from Figure 4.36. The major
difference is that now T P
1 influence T P
10 indirectly whereas in Figure 4.36 they
were always directly connected. Also, as threshold in [0.1, 0.2] seem to result in
good balance between connectedness complexity of the graph. In our opinion
==PAGE:122==
110
Results
Figure 4.38b obtains a good balance while also making sense in terms of how
processes of a production flow, structured as in ref til data pharmaceutical flow
figure, could influence later processes.
TP
1
TD
1
TP
2
TD
2
TP
3.1
TP
3.2
TD
3
TP
4.2
TD
4
TP
5
TD
5
TP
6
TD
6
TP
7
TD
7
TD
8
TP
9
TD
9
TP
10
TD
10
(a) t = 0.1
TP
1
TD
1
TP
2
TD
2
TP
3.1
TP
3.2
TD
3
TP
4.2
TD
4
TP
5
TD
5
TP
6
TD
6
TP
7
TD
7
TD
8
TP
9
TD
9
TP
10
TD
10
(b) t = 0.15
TP
1
TD
1
TP
2
TD
2
TP
3.1
TP
3.2
TD
3
TP
4.2
TD
4
TP
5
TD
5
TP
6
TD
6
TP
7
TD
7
TD
8
TP
9
TD
9
TP
10
TD
10
(c) t = 0.2
Figure 4.38: Using a triangular Gobs resulting in a directed graph, we observe
once again that the delays are largely unrelated.
This hints to most delays
should be treated separately when we only concern ourselves with durations of
processes. An important difference from these graphs to the previous where no
topological order was assumed, is that now T P
1
only influences T P
10 indirectly
where it was a direct link before. In general, we observe that durations only
have a direct influence on the next process or the ones after that again. I.e. a
more chain-like structure emerges compared to the previous results.
==PAGE:123==
4.4 Pharmaceutical data deconvolution
111
Finally, we shall try once again to use the levels of the tank after each process
along with a topological assumption. However, as it is unclear whether it is
the duration of a process that influences the change in levels or the other way
around, we shall only make Gobs almost triangular. In particular, the entries in
Gobs related to durations and levels of the same process such as T P
1
and M P
1
are symmetric along the diagonal whilst everything else is removed. This makes
Gobs almost triangular in the sense that it is triangular but with entries in the
subdiagonal (in case of an upper triangular Gobs). The resulting Gobs can be
TP
1
MP
1 TD
1
TP
2
MP
2 TD
2 TP
3.1 MP
3.1 TP
3.2 MP
3.2 TD
3
MD
3 TP
4.2 MP
4.2MP
4.3 TD
4
TP
5
MP
5 TD
5
MD
5
TP
6
MP
6 TD
6
TP
7
MP
7 TD
7
MD
7 MP
8 TD
8
MD
8
TP
9
MP
9 TD
9
MD
9 TP
10 MP
10 TD
10
TP
1
MP
1
TD
1
TP
2
MP
2
TD
2
TP
3.1
MP
3.1
TP
3.2
MP
3.2
TD
3
MD
3
TP
4.2
MP
4.2
MP
4.3
TD
4
TP
5
MP
5
TD
5
MD
5
TP
6
MP
6
TD
6
TP
7
MP
7
TD
7
MD
7
MP
8
TD
8
MD
8
TP
9
MP
9
TD
9
MD
9
TP
10
MP
10
TD
10
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Figure 4.39:
Gdir from an almost upper triangular Gobs.
Like before, we
observe a chain like structure. However, with the added random variables of
changes in levels during a process, the most significant dependencies are between
these and the corresponding duration.
seen in the appendix, Figure 6.12. As we would expect, level changes and du-
rations for the same process are often very related and share much information.
Unsurprisingly, M P
4.3 does not seem to be related to any other process. This is
==PAGE:124==
112
Results
likely because the process consists of waiting for a control operator. This also
holds when deconvolving the network as seen in Figure 4.39 and from the orig-
inal result in Figure 4.33 where all the random variables where used (although
it is harder to see).
When comparing Gdir in Figure 4.39 to Gobs in Figure 6.12, we observe that
much of the association between processes originate from indirect effects (as
expected) either 1, 2 or 3 processes ago. In particular, the delays, durations and
level changes of process 9 (cooling) appear to caused or at least explained well
by what takes places during process 7 (reaction) which is not unlikely from a
chemical point of view. Process 7, in turn, appear to be influenced mostly by
process 6 (product transfer).
In Figure 4.40, we have shown Gdir represented as a graph with a threshold
t = 0.09 as this filtered out most small values in Gdir while keeping a reason-
able structure with only the edges with the most information carried along. As
mentioned above M P
4.3 is alone. Furthermore, we observe that the delays related
to process 3 (after adding the final solids) and 8 (post reaction process) are by
themselves. The duration of the delay and the change in level are however con-
nected although weakly as per Figure 4.39. This also agrees with Figure 4.38b
and Figure 4.38c where when we only used the durations and delays of the pro-
cesses, we observed that T D
3
and T D
8
where unconnected nodes. As another
example, M P
8
is not connected to any of the other variables invariant to the
choice of threshold t. This also makes sense when comparing to REF TIL FIG-
URE MED DURATIONS VS MASSES OG MASSES VS MASSES where the
change in level during the post reaction (process 8) does not seem to be related
to any of the other random variables.
Other interesting observations can be made from the graph depending on the
interests of the reader. However, we round of our discussion of the pharmaceu-
tical data by noting that we have obtained a causal structure for the random
variables that in many ways reflect both our understanding of the production
layout from chapter 2 and our observations of data. In particular, we observe
a relatively simple structure, where many of the processes are only affected by
the previous process. Notable deviations of this are the initial processes 1, 2
and 3.1 where raw materials are added. Each of these processes seem to have
an influence on the duration of process 3.2 (the stirring). This also makes sense
as the more material is added to the tank, the longer it probably needs to agi-
tated to ensure a consistent mixture of materials to allow for chemical reactions.
Finally, the change in level for process 10 (the transfer of material), appear to
be influenced primarily by processes 7 (the chemical reaction) and 9 (cooling)
while the duration of process 10 only seems to be related to change in level and
no other process directly. This would make sense practically, as we would think
that it is the amount of material that is really influenced by the other processes
==PAGE:125==
4.4 Pharmaceutical data deconvolution
113
TP
1
MP
1
TD
1
TP
2
MP
2
TD
2
TP
3.1
MP
3.1
TP
3.2
MP
3.2
TD
3
MD
3
TP
4.2
MP
4.2
MP
4.3
TD
4
TP
5
MP
5
TD
5
MD
5
TP
6
MP
6
TD
6
TP
7
MP
7
TD
7
MD
7
MP
8
TD
8
MD
8
TP
9
MP
9
TD
9
MD
9
TP
10
MP
10
TD
10
Figure 4.40: Gdir represented as a graph using a threshold t = 0.09. Once
again, we observe a chain like structure, but the added random variables corre-
sponding to changes in levels, T P
3.2 becomes a bottleneck, in the sense most of the
behavior of the production system after process 3.2 is irrelevant when knowing
the duration of process 3.2. This could also make sense from a practical point of
view as the duration of the stirring contains much combined information of the
initial processes and hence is a good descriptor of the behavior of the processes
later on.
and the duration of transferring the material is only as need to be in order to
remove all the material produced.
==PAGE:126==
114
Results
==PAGE:127==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
• Long chains can be a problem when the links have varying strength. We
observe that the chain might break at the weak points and more strongly
connected parts bleed into neighboring nodes resulting in dense subgraphs.
• Long chains using MI with highr correlation if symmetric seem to be con-
nected i −i + 1 and i −i + 2.
If very large MI might want to treat
differently.
• Works well, trough experimentation, on linear networks. If Xj = f(P Xi)
for in-neighbors it is not necessarily well, however as MI is independent of
marginals, we expect better performance on these systems than if one had
used correlation. In particular, if it is a chain, transforming each variable
gives exactly the same result.
• Although [1] use normalized mutual information, we have not done this.
However, it will be easy to extend the code we have produced to use this
instead as we already compute the entropies. However, it is no longer
invariant to marginal transformations and ideally, the entropy is 0 for
marginals as are transformed to be uniform. However if instead we com-
put ethe entropy for the marginals without transforming, we can use the
constructed framework in extension to calculate the mutual information
and from that the normalized mutual information
==PAGE:128==
116
Conclusion
==PAGE:129==
Chapter 6
Appendix
6.1
Suicide data
1
25
40
83
123
256
1
27
49
84
126
257
1
27
49
84
129
311
5
30
54
84
134
314
7
30
56
90
144
322
8
31
56
91
147
369
8
31
62
92
153
415
13
32
63
93
163
573
14
34
65
93
167
609
14
35
65
103
175
640
17
36
67
103
228
737
18
37
75
111
231
21
38
76
112
235
21
39
79
119
242
22
39
82
122
256
Table 6.1: The length of treatment of control patients in suicide study. The
data originates from the Mental Health Enquiry (MHE) of England of Wales
and was published in 1967.
==PAGE:130==
118
Appendix
6.1.1
A better spline
In theory, we could make a set of splines ourselves, that has both of the desired
properties of B-splines and M-splines. I.e. a set of piecewise polynomials, which
we shall denote Qi,p, that has both the property that
n
X
i=1
Qi,p(t) = 1
and
Z 1
0
Qi,p(t) dt = 1
n
Actually, both M- and B-splines satisfies this for p = 0 as they are then both
piecewise constant and non-zero on disjoint intervals. From this, one can the
construct such sets of Qi,p in the following way. Namely, start with the piecewise
constant functions, Qi,0 depicted in Figure 6.1 as boxes in the case n = 5.
1
0
1
0
Figure 6.1
A better spline
Cut off function has derivative 0 at top and is halfway down at the sides
This example does however not work well for many bins, in particular, due to the
splines not overlapping that much i.e. a poor regularization on the smoothness.
However, the method used for constructing this set of splines can be extended
to bleed into multiple neighboring bins just as for B- and M-splines.
==PAGE:131==
6.1 Suicide data
119
1
0
1
0
Figure 6.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Qi, p(t)
Q1, 3
Q2, 3
Q3, 3
Q4, 3
Q5, 3
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Pi
(b)
Figure 6.3: Pi is area of each rectangle i.e. 0.2.
==PAGE:132==
120
Appendix
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
t
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.02
1.04
i
Qi, p(t)
Figure 6.4
6.2
M-spline based MI estimation
0
10
20
30
N
0
5
10
15
20
25
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(a)
0
10
20
30
N
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(b)
0
50
100
150
N
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Iestim / Iexact
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(c)
Figure 6.5
==PAGE:133==
6.2 M-spline based MI estimation
121
0
10
20
30
N
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Iestim
Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(a)
0
50
100
150
N
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Iestim
Iexact
 = 0.1
 = 0.3
 = 0.4
 = 0.6
 = 0.9
 = 0.99
(b)
Figure 6.6
==PAGE:134==
122
Appendix
6.3
Confidence interval for absolute correlation
in bivariate Gaussian
From [29], given a bivariate Gaussian, the confidence distribution of ρ given the
empirical correlation r based on n observations is given by
f (ρ | r, ν) = ν(ν −1)Γ(ν −1)
√
2πΓ(ν + 1
2)
 1 −r2 ν−1
2
 1 −ρ2 ν−2
2
(1 −rρ)
2ν−1
2
F
3
2, −1
2, ν + 1
2, 1 + rρ
2

where F (a, b, c, z) is the Gaussian hypergeometric function and ν = n −1.
That is, given a sample correlation r, what is the confidence in ρ in terms of a
distribution. In the following figure, a sample correlation r = 0.8 and r = 0 has
been used with varying number of observations (degrees of freedom) in figures
Figure 6.7a and Figure 6.7b respectively.
A key property is that f is even
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
f (
r )
n=30
n=100
n=1000
(a)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
f (
r )
n=30
n=100
n=1000
(b)
Figure 6.7:
f (ρ | r, ν) shown for r = 0.8 and r = 0 in (a) and (b) with
n ∈{30, 100, 1000}. As one would expect, the power i.e. the width of the peak
decreases with increasing n and for correlations closer to 0, the width is the
largest.
symmetric in ρ, r. That is f(ρ | r) = f(−ρ | −r). Thus, a confidence interval
for ρ given r is the negative of the confidence interval given −r. In particular,
if we only observe |r|, we can calculate a confidence interval for ρ up to the sign
of the bounds of the interval. Furthermore, as we want a CI for |ρ|, it does
not matter if r is negative or positive. Hence, without loss of generality, we
assume that r ≥0. At this point, to construct a confidence interval for |ρ| we
list the following desired properties. Firstly, it should be an exact confidence
interval, meaning that for a given significance level α, the CI includes the true
value exactly 1−α fraction of the times. Secondly, if for a given r, it can not be
rejected that ρ is 0, 0 should also be contained in the interval. Finally, if we reject
==PAGE:135==
6.3 Confidence interval for absolute correlation in bivariate Gaussian 123
that ρ = 0, we shall have α/2 probability mass above and below the bounds of
the interval. The above is enough to uniquely define a confidence interval in all
cases. Before continuing with how this CI is calculated, we mention that as r is
an unbiased estimator of ρ, we would preferably want |r|∈CI1−α (|ρ|) (where
CI1−α (|ρ|) denotes the 1 −α confidence interval for |ρ|). However, although
this will in almost every scenario be the case, we can not be sure of this from
the above properties and in fact examples with large α can be constructed such
that |r| lies just outside the constructed CI.
First, to conform with the second desired property, if it can not be rejected that
ρ = 0 on a significance level α, we will initially compute a CI for ρ (not |ρ|)
based on r (wlog chosen to be non-negative). This CI will just be a symmetric
CI in the sense that α/2 of the probability mass will lie below the lower bound
of the CI and above the upper bound of the CI respectively. If 0 is contained in
this CI, we can not reject that ρ = 0 and vice versa on an α significance level.
Thus, if 0 is contained in this initial CI for ρ, we will start the CI for |ρ| at 0
and determine and upper bound b such that α probability mass is above this b.
Otherwise, we shall find a and b such that α/2 probability mass is below a and
above b respectively. Choosing a and b this way also conforms with the third
property. Finally, to ensure that the CI contains exactly 1 −α, we define ˜f as
the reflected f in ρ such that
˜f (ρa | ra, ν) = f(ρa | ra, ν) + f(−ρa | ra, ν),
ρa, r ∈[0, 1]
where ρa and ra is the absolute correlation and empirical correlation respectively.
With this ˜f, the density at ρa is both the density for the negative and positive
correlation ensuring that the ˜f has probability mass 1. Thus, if a = 0 (i.e. the
CI must contain 0), we find b as the 1 −α percentile of ˜f and if a ̸= 0, we take
a as the α/2 percentile and b as the 1 −α/2 percentile of ˜f.
As an example, suppose ra = 0.06 with 1000 observations. Then a 95% CI
for |ρ| is [0, 0.11164] whereas if on had observed ra = 0.07 the CI would be
[0.01071, 0.1314]. These CI could then be used to test the absolute correlation
of a bivariate Gaussian i.e. for ra = 0.07 based on 1000 observations would be
rejected as stemming from a Gaussian with absolute correlation 0.01 on a 5%
significance level.
==PAGE:136==
124
Appendix
6.4
Gaussian chain deconvolution
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(a)
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(b)
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c)
Figure 6.8: Triangular, mutual information, cutoff 2 · 10−10, 2.1 · 10−2 and
4.51 · 10−2.
==PAGE:137==
6.4 Gaussian chain deconvolution
125
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TP
7
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TP
9
Figure 6.9
==PAGE:138==
126
Appendix
6.5
Gaussian network deconvolution
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(a) Gobs
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(b) Gdir
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
(c) Gdir as a graph
Figure 6.10: For the linear network defined in Equation 4.7, using a triangular
Gobs (a) with the true topological structure we are able to perfectly rediscover
the causal structure as seen in (b) and (c).
==PAGE:139==
6.6 Pharmaceutical process deconvolution
127
6.6
Pharmaceutical process deconvolution
TD
i
TP
i
Ti
T
MD
i
MP
i
Mi
M
TD
i
TP
i
Ti
T
MD
i
MP
i
Mi
M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 6.11: Gobs from pharmaceutical production data. Strong dependencies
between variables and the related accumulated variables are observed.
==PAGE:140==
128
Appendix
TP
1
MP
1 TD
1
TP
2
MP
2 TD
2 TP
3.1 MP
3.1 TP
3.2 MP
3.2 TD
3
MD
3 TP
4.2 MP
4.2MP
4.3 TD
4
TP
5
MP
5 TD
5
MD
5
TP
6
MP
6 TD
6
TP
7
MP
7 TD
7
MD
7 MP
8 TD
8
MD
8
TP
9
MP
9 TD
9
MD
9 TP
10 MP
10 TD
10
TP
1
MP
1
TD
1
TP
2
MP
2
TD
2
TP
3.1
MP
3.1
TP
3.2
MP
3.2
TD
3
MD
3
TP
4.2
MP
4.2
MP
4.3
TD
4
TP
5
MP
5
TD
5
MD
5
TP
6
MP
6
TD
6
TP
7
MP
7
TD
7
MD
7
MP
8
TD
8
MD
8
TP
9
MP
9
TD
9
MD
9
TP
10
MP
10
TD
10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Figure 6.12: Gobs for both durations, delays and level changes for the simulated
data from [9]. Labels related to the same process are divided by lines vertically
and horizontally to easier observe what is related to what.
==PAGE:141==
Bibliography
[1] W. Qin, D. Zha, and J. Zhang, “An effective approach for causal vari-
ables analysis in diesel engine production by using mutual information
and network deconvolution,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 31,
pp. 1661–1671, 08 2020.
[2] S. Feizi, D. Marbach, M. Médard, and M. Kellis, “Network deconvolution as
a general method to distinguish direct dependencies in networks,” Nature
biotechnology, vol. 31, pp. 726 – 733, 2013.
[3] Y.-N. Sun, W. Qin, and Z. Zhuang, “Nonparametric-copula-entropy and
network deconvolution method for causal discovery in complex manufac-
turing systems,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 33, 08 2022.
[4] “Novo
nordisk
supply
update.”
https://www.novonordisk-us.com/
supply-update.html. Accessed: 20124-07-28.
[5] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, Graphical Models, Exponential Fami-
lies, and Variational Inference. Hanover, MA, USA: Now Publishers Inc.,
2008.
[6] N. Friedman, M. Linial, I. Nachman, and D. Pe’er, “Using bayesian net-
works to analyze expression data,” in Proceedings of the Fourth Annual
International Conference on Computational Molecular Biology, RECOMB
’00, (New York, NY, USA), p. 127–135, Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, 2000.
[7] N. Friedman, “Inferring cellular networks using probabilistic graphical mod-
els,” Science, vol. 303, no. 5659, pp. 799–805, 2004.
==PAGE:142==
130
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] M. Weigt, R. A. White, H. Szurmant, J. A. Hoch, and T. Hwa, “Identifi-
cation of direct residue contacts in protein-protein interaction by message
passing,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 106, no. 1,
pp. 67–72, 2009.
[9] M. L. Vicente, J. F. Granjo, R. Tan, and F. D. Bähner, “A benchmark
model to generate batch process data for machine learning testing and
comparison,” in 32nd European Symposium on Computer Aided Process
Engineering (L. Montastruc and S. Negny, eds.), vol. 51 of Computer Aided
Chemical Engineering, pp. 217–222, Elsevier, 2022.
[10] D. Kurowicka and H. Joe, Dependence Modeling: Vine Copula Handbook.
World Scientific Publishing Co Pte Ltd, 12 2010.
[11] G. Geenens, “Copula modeling for discrete random vectors,” Dependence
Modeling, vol. 8, pp. 417–440, 12 2020.
[12] W. Gao, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Estimating mutual infor-
mation for discrete-continuous mixtures,” in Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems (I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, eds.), vol. 30, Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2017.
[13] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis. Cambridge University
Press, 2 ed., 2012.
[14] H. V. Henderson and S. R. Searle, “On deriving the inverse of a sum of
matrices,” SIAM Review, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 53–60, 1981.
[15] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations. The Johns Hopkins
University Press, third ed., 1996.
[16] J. J. Faith, B. Hayete, J. T. Thaden, I. Mogno, J. Wierzbowski, G. Cottarel,
S. Kasif, J. J. Collins, and T. S. Gardner, “Large-Scale Mapping and Vali-
dation of Escherichia coli Transcriptional Regulation from a Compendium
of Expression Profiles,” PLOS Biology, vol. 5, pp. 1–13, January 2007.
[17] C. d. Boor, A Practical Guide to Splines. New York: Springer Verlag, 1978.
[18] J. O. Ramsay, “Monotone regression splines in action,” Statistical Science,
vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 425–441, 1988.
[19] D. W. Scott, “Multivariate density estimation: Theory, practice, and visu-
alization,” in Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics, 1992.
[20] J. B. Copas and M. J. Fryer, “Density estimation and suicide risks in psy-
chiatric treatment,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Gen-
eral), vol. 143, no. 2, pp. 167–176, 1980.
==PAGE:143==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
131
[21] B. W. Silverman, Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis. Lon-
don: Chapman & Hall, 1986.
[22] M. C. Jones and T. Buch-Kromann, “Simple boundary correction for kernel
density estimation,” Statistics and Computing, vol. 3, pp. 135–146, 1993.
[23] J. Dai and S. Sperlich, “Simple and effective boundary correction for kernel
densities and regression with an application to the world income and en-
gel curve estimation,” Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, vol. 54,
pp. 2487–2497, 08 2010.
[24] M. Jones and P. Foster, “A simple nonnegative boundary correction method
for kernel density estimation,” Statistica Sinica, vol. 6, 01 1996.
[25] M. C. Jones and D. A. Henderson, “Kernel-type density estimation on the
unit interval,” Biometrika, vol. 94, no. 4, pp. 977–984, 2007.
[26] A. Kraskov, H. Stögbauer, and P. Grassberger, “Estimating mutual infor-
mation,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 69, p. 066138, Jun 2004.
[27] Z. Botev, “A novel nonparametric density estimator,” The University of
Queensland, Tech Rep, 01 2006.
[28] Z. I. Botev, J. F. Grotowski, and D. P. Kroese, “Kernel density estimation
via diffusion,” The Annals of Statistics, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2916 – 2957,
2010.
[29] G. Taraldsen, “Confidence in correlation,” 11 2020.
