==PAGE:1==
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing
and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honey­
pot
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Georgios Theodoridis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five and a half months at the Section for DTU Secure,
Department of Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Computer Science
and Cyber Security.
Georgios Theodoridis ­ s223181
Signature
Date
ii
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The digitalization of healthcare improved medical diagnostics, but at the same time, it
came along with quite several cybersecurity risks, especially in the area of medical imag­
ing. This thesis investigates the vulnerabilities of the DICOM (Digital Imaging and Com­
munications in Medicine) standard, emphasizing honeypots as a defense mechanism.
We developed DicomHawk, a custom honeypot for DICOM systems, then conducted ex­
periments to gather data on attack patterns. DicomHawk demonstrated improved realism,
detection capabilities, and proved to be more resource­efficient in working effectively with
minimal cloud resources compared to existing solutions. Our findings offer insights into
safeguarding healthcare data from the menace of cyber threats and emphasize continu­
ous improvements in best practices for cybersecurity.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Completing this thesis has been both a challenging and rewarding journey. I would like to
extend my heartfelt thanks to the following individuals for their invaluable support:
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
for his valuable guidance, expertise and insights that helped form this thesis.
I would also like to thank my family, especially my parents and brothers, for the daily
support and trust they have shown me over the years, as nothing would have been pos­
sible without them. Finally, I dedicate this work to my grandmother, whose passing this
year has been a profound loss. Her unwavering financial support was instrumental in my
pursuit of education, and without it, achieving this master’s degree would not have been
possible.
iv
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Security Motivation & Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
DICOM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Technical Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Honeypots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Cloud Services and Virtual Private Servers (VPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Related Work
15
3.1
DICOM Vulnerabilities and Cybersecurity in Medical Imaging Systems . . . 15
3.2
Fingerprinting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Honeypots for Medical Imaging Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Design & Implementation
23
4.1
T­POT and Dicompot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
DicomHawk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Experiments & Evaluation
39
5.1
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6
Discussion & Conclusion
63
6.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6.3
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6.4
Future Work and Enhancements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6.5
Final Remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Bibliography
67
.1
Appendix: Code Listings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The progress made in regard to digitalizing the health care industry has a significant im­
pact on the improvement of the medical diagnostics and patient care services yet has
seen a rise in cybersecurity risks in relation to medical imaging. The DICOM (Digital
Imaging and Communications in Medicine) [1] standard, a cornerstone of medical imag­
ing systems, is at the center of a critical security challenge. DICOM was primarily made
in order to make it easier to save, share, and send medical pictures across the internet.
However, it may now allow substantial data spill and inappropriate access to patient data
[2]. This thesis explores the security flaws within DICOM systems according to bibliogra­
phy, emphasizing the role of cybersecurity honeypots as a proactive defense mechanism
to detect, analyze, and mitigate these vulnerabilities by examining the current state of
DICOM security through the lens of cyber deception and the efficacy of honeypots, our
research aim is to provide actionable insights into safeguarding critical healthcare data
against evolving cyber threats.
1.1
The problem
DICOM is the established standard for the digital structuring and storage of medical im­
ages such as X­rays, MRIs, CT scans, and also medical image transfer network protocols.
DICOM has contributed by aiding the diagnosis and treatment of many diseases over the
past thirty years. Nevertheless, the latest studies have raised security concerns about the
security of the DICOM protocol, implying that it now poses potential danger to the public
health field as there are data leakage issues.
 The health sector has faced the problem of data leakage in recent times, with the DICOM
protocol being the main culprit. But despite attempts to modernize healthcare systems
in recent years, the problem has gotten worse, experiencing an increase in data leakage
worldwide.  This was the situation by 2023 when more than 59 million patients’ records
became available online due to vulnerabilities present in DICOM’s protocol  [3, 4, 5].
DICOM includes outdated protocols that have not been modernized with the rest of the
healthcare system as a whole. To reduce costs and improve efficiency simultaneously,
quite a number of medical centers are migrating their DICOM systems to cloud solutions.
Nonetheless, such procedures are normally initiated without considering security implica­
tions hence compromising data security [2]. The existence of this problem has also been
worsened by small enterprises and imaging centers that have been exposing their DICOM
servers to the Internet without sufficient security mechanisms or financial resources [5].
A study presented at the BlackHat Europe 2023 conference by Aplite researchers [4]
uncovered significant security issues with the DICOM protocol, leading to substantial data
leakage in the healthcare sector. The research identified more than 3,800 DICOM servers
accessible on the Internet, with 1,159 of these servers leaking more than 59 million patient
personal and medical records. Alarmingly, as much as 73% of them were cloud­hosted or
DSL­connected and often unsecured. Those centers, hosting basic IT infrastructures and
mostly used for sharing results through DICOM servers with doctors, lacked essential
security controls leading to exposing such servers to the outside world. The research
goal was to identify the leaked data’s character, how far it had gone in circulation, and its
potential misuse, involving a comprehensive analysis of the DICOM protocol, scanning
the entire Internet for accessible DICOM servers, enumerating the exposed records, and
analyzing the data.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
1
==PAGE:10==
Several servers were identified as honeypots or staging servers, and others as servers
for animal records in academic institutions or research institutions sharing anonymized
data. Excluding these datasets brought out that over 16 million personally identifiable
information (PII) records such as names, addresses, phone numbers, gender or social
security numbers were found in it while there also existed more than 43 million patient’s
data files that contained all kind of patient health details such as examination results,
doctor names, and operator names.
The implications of a potential data leak can be disastrous and once it happens, is irre­
versible; moreover, there are chances of its leak being used in bad ways such as black­
mailing or even stealing someone else‘s identity. The leaked data span over 111 countries,
with the United States leading with 18 million records, followed by India, South Africa, Iran,
and Brazil. The situation becomes worse due to cloudification trend that leads to hospi­
tal’s usage of cloud services from abroad hence they end up breaching data protection
policies [3, 4].
DICOM includes detailed personal information because medical imaging requires integra­
tion with hospital information systems for patient management and billing. These systems,
originally designed to be isolated and secure, are now exposed on the Internet. DICOM
images consist of multiple layers, each storing detailed elements such as tags, value rep­
resentatives, lengths, and actual values.
There are inherent security issues in the DICOM network protocol, which is a client­server
architecture that uses TCP/IP. Associations are requested by clients for the purpose of
establishing sessions; in doing so, servers can either allow or disallow these requests
depending on the application entity titles or IP addresses. The categorized into query,
retrieval, or storage services, DICOM requests and responses can be communicated be­
tween authorized clients. However, there are quite a number of suppliers whose access
controls are inadequate, while others have such access controls, but are usually weakly
implemented.
The study found more than 2,900 servers without access control and more than 750
servers with weak authorization that could be bypassed by simple dictionary attacks. Less
than 1% of servers had proper authorization mechanisms. Hackers need only know the
IP address, port number, and basic usage of command­line tools to access sensitive in­
formation [3].
Services such as C­FIND, C­GET, and C­MOVE allow hackers to search for and retrieve
data. More than 30% of the Internet exposed servers support these services without
proper authorization, leading to significant data leakage. In addition, hackers can use
the C­STORE service to send new images to a server, which could corrupt current data
and inject fake images into a series due to DICOM’s lack of limitations on image instance
numbers.
A detailed example of how adversaries can steal patient information from databases, gen­
erate fake images and re­upload them as has been shown. This attack has the power to
ruin a whole series or alter diagnostic signs in radiology images. More than 39 million
records can be compromised using such techniques.
The situation is complex ­ each implementation had at least one SQL injection vulnera­
bility. Additionally, although the DICOM standard provides ways for security, they are not
obligatory and these ways are often ignored by vendors and customers creating numerous
security holes.
2
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:11==
Solving this problem involves good governance from standard bodies; requiring security
by force of law and appropriate certification processes. Prudent measures demand hos­
pitals to secure their DICOM infrastructures now more than ever in order to curb any risks
associated with this.
1.2
Security Motivation & Research Questions
The growing concern about cybersecurity in healthcare technology, particularly concern­
ing DICOM systems used in medical imaging, has piqued my interest. This work aims
at examining how we can improve security for such systems through concepts that we
borrow from nature. By asking the right research questions about the current state of
attacks, deception, and fingerprinting of deceptive tactics, we seek to provide valuable
insights and possible methods of deception. We will focus on finding the information se­
curity issues that are encountered by DICOM systems through relevant studies and try to
design and test specialized security mechanisms, known as honeypots, to examine these
challenges in practice.
1.2.1
State of Attacks
Cyber attacks frequency on medical systems is worrying; medical organizations are how­
ever facing very complex cyber threats. Ransomware, data breaches, phishing, and ad­
vanced persistent threats (APTs) are all forms of cyberattacks that seek to compromise
sensitive patient data and disrupt critical health care services [6]. Severe consequences
include operational downtime, financial losses, and possibly harming patient care. The
Health Sector Cybersecurity Coordination Center (HC3) had reported about increased
ransomware attacks targeted on hospitals and health care providers, with some incidents
leading to patients being asked to go to other facilities [7].
Research Question: How can cybersecurity honeypots be effectively designed in DI­
COM systems to detect, analyze, and mitigate sophisticated cyber threats targeting health­
care organizations?
1.2.2
State of Deception
In response to increasing threats, deception technology is increasingly being preferred to
act as a form of proactive defense in healthcare. Crafting realistic fake systems and data
is an aspect of deception that misleads intruders from original assets and collects infor­
mation about their strategies.Applying this method assists not only in spotting intrusions
early but also in putting off and confusing attackers hence reducing successful breaches.
Deception tools, such as honeypots and honeytokens, should be integrated into health­
care IT infrastructures to enhance security posture and resilience against cyber threats
according to U.S. Department of Health & Human Services [8].
Research Question: How can the integration of deception technology, specifically hon­
eypots, enhance the security and resilience of DICOM systems in healthcare IT infras­
tructures against sophisticated cyber threats?
1.2.3
State of Fingerprinting
Fingerprinting poses significant hurdles for DICOM honeypots, since hackers as well as
tools such as Shodan [9] and Censys [10] are getting better at recognizing and tagging
such decoy systems. These tools scan and analyze network devices with an aim of gener­
ating comprehensive profiles that attackers can use to differentiate between real systems
and honeypots. A competitive DICOM honeypot should imitate an actual DICOM server
as closely as possible for it to be efficient, and it should also be difficult to detect and fin­
gerprint. It does not just replicate genuine systems’ behaviors and features, but also has
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
3
==PAGE:12==
to keep changing to imitate various techniques employed by attackers or network scan­
ners over time. In general, the idea is to make honeypots that can fit well in a network
so that hackers will feel attracted to them without knowing that they are there for intelli­
gence gathering purpose.To boost its role in cyber security, incorporation of a high level
of sophistication in DICOM honeypot design is recommended for health care institutions
Research Question: How can DICOM honeypots be designed to evade detection and
fingerprinting by tools like Shodan and Censys, as well as by cyber attackers?
4
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
2.1
DICOM
DICOM is the international standard for medical images and related information. De­
scribes the formats for medical images that can be exchanged with the data and quality
necessary for clinical use [11]. DICOM is implemented in almost every radiology, cardiol­
ogy imaging, and radiotherapy device (X­ray, CT, MRI, ultrasound, etc.), and increasingly
in devices in other medical domains such as ophthalmology and dentistry [11] DICOM has
two different reasons of existence:
• File Format: Designed to store medical images and patient data, these files can
include data from various types of imaging methods, including radiography, ultra­
sonography, and computed tomography. DICOM files typically contain extensive
metadata, such as patient information.
• Network Protocol: A client­server protocol employed to transfer medical images,
it is often utilized to integrate medical imaging devices with Picture Archiving and
Communication Systems (PACS). The default port number for DICOM is 104/TCP
and the most used alternative is 11112/TCP. Rarely, port 4242/TCP is utilised, mostly
when Orchard [12] Software’s suite of laboratory information systems (LIS) is used.
There has been an internet wide research on DICOM and security concerns rised because
a large amount of personal information and medical records belonging to patients is scat­
tered across the internet [4] .The decades­old standard protocol for medical imaging, has
revealed a distressing fact where healthcare facilities have inadvertently exposed the con­
fidential information and medical backgrounds of numerous patients to the expansive do­
main of the internet. The security issues associated with DICOM stem from the utilization
of outdated protocols on the internet, a consequence of industries striving to shift towards
Cloud­based solutions. Demonstrating how hackers can easily locate, access, and exploit
vulnerable DICOM endpoints to retrieve patients’ data and potentially manipulate medical
records, while detailing the methods employed to circumvent DICOM security measures,
including the analysis of statements from vendors and service providers regarding their
compliance with DICOM standards.
2.1.1
Historical Context and Evolution
The origins of DICOM go back to the early 1980s. At that point medical imaging was
transitioning from the analog to the digital formats. At first, there were basic challenges
in decoding and then printing images that were generated by devices such as Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Computed tomography (CT) machines due to different
manufactures using proprietary nature of data formats [13]. In order to bring a viable so­
lution to that, in 1983, the American College of Radiology (ACR) and the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association (NEMA) collaborated closely to form a standards committee
aimed at creating a unified standard for digital imaging. That led to the first version of the
standard in 1985 called ACR­NEMA 300.
The major updates and milestones in DICOM’s evolution are:
1988: The second version of ACR­NEMA 300 was released, gaining wider acceptance
among vendors.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
5
==PAGE:14==
1993: The third version, known as DICOM, was introduced. This version used local
area networks like Ethernet and the TCP/IP protocol, facilitating more robust and flexible
communication of medical images. This marked the official naming of the standard as
DICOM.
1995­2005: Significant enhancements were made, including the addition of protocols
for ultrasound, X­ray angiography, nuclear medicine, and structured reporting. These
updates expanded DICOM’s applicability beyond radiology to other medical specialties
such as cardiology and dentistry.
2006­2013: Introduction of advanced features like Web­access to DICOM objects (WADO),
support for new media types (e.g., Blu­ray, USB), and the implementation of secure com­
munication profiles. The concept of DICOMweb was also developed to provide RESTful
web services for accessing DICOM images, aligning with modern web technologies [14].
2.2
Technical Specifications
DICOM files are composed of a series of data elements, each identified by a unique tag.
These elements contain the actual image data and various pieces of metadata, such
as patient information, study details, and acquisition parameters. Each data element is
described in 2.1
Table 2.1: DICOM Data Elements
Element
Description
Tag
A unique identifier for the data element.
Value Representation (VR)
Describes the data type and format.
Value Length (VL)
Indicates the length of the data value.
Value Field (VF)
Contains the actual data value.
The data elements are grouped into data sets, which together make up a complete DICOM
file. This structure allows DICOM files to store complex and detailed information about
medical images, ensuring that images are accompanied by all necessary contextual data.
The standardized structure of DICOM files is crucial for ensuring interoperability between
different medical imaging devices and systems. By adhering to the DICOM standard,
devices from various manufacturers can exchange and interpret imaging data without
compatibility issues. Additionally, the inclusion of comprehensive metadata within the
file structure helps maintain data integrity by ensuring that all relevant information about
the image is preserved and can be accurately retrieved and displayed by any compliant
system.
DICOM network communication is based on a client­server model involving two types
of nodes: Service Class Users (SCUs) and Service Class Providers (SCPs). An SCU
initiates communication and requests services from an SCP . For example, a CT scan
machine (SCU) sends images to a PACS (Picture Archiving and Communication System)
server (SCP) for storage and management (see Figure 2.1).
6
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:15==
SCU
(CT Scan)
Network
SCP
(PACS Server)
DICOM File
(Tag, VR, VL, VF)
Send Image
Transfer Data
Client­Server Model
DICOM File Elements: Tag, VR, VL, VF
Figure 2.1: Illustration of DICOM File Structure and Network Communication
DICOM services can be categorized into two main types: operations and notifications.
Operations are utilized to initiate specific actions, such as transferring data or retriev­
ing information, whereas notifications are used to communicate event reports or alerts to
other systems on the network. These services facilitate seamless communication and co­
ordination among various medical imaging devices, such as CT scanners, MRI machines,
and PACS (Picture Archiving and Communication System) servers.
Notifications are commands used to communicate event reports or alerts to other sys­
tems on the network. These commands help in reporting and managing the status and
events within the DICOM environment. Table 2.2 lists the primary DICOM notifications.
Table 2.2: DICOM Notifications and Their Functions
Command
Description
N­EVENT­
REPORT
Reports events or notifications about occurrences or changes
within the DICOM environment.
N­GET
Retrieves specific attributes or parameters from a remote DICOM
node.
N­SET
Modifies or updates specific attributes on a remote DICOM node.
N­ACTION
Requests the execution of a specific action on a remote DICOM
node.
N­CREATE
Creates a new instance of a specified type at the SCP.
N­DELETE
Deletes an existing instance at the SCP.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
7
==PAGE:16==
Operations are commands used to perform specific actions within the DICOM network,
such as transferring or retrieving data. These commands are essential for the efficient
functioning of medical imaging workflows. Table 2.3 lists the primary DICOM operations.
Table 2.3: DICOM Operations and Their Functions
Command
Description
C­ECHO
Verify that a connection between DICOM nodes is active and responsive
by sending an ECHO request message from the source system and
receiving a success or error status code response message from the
destination system.
C­FIND
A query­based command used to search for DICOM objects matching
specific criteria within a DICOM node’s database. It allows users to
retrieve information about patient studies, series, or individual images
based on search parameters such as patient name, study date, modal­
ity, etc.
C­GET
Used to retrieve DICOM objects (such as images or studies) from a
remote DICOM node. It initiates the transfer of specified data from the
remote system to the requesting system.
C­MOVE
Similar to C­GET, C­MOVE is used to retrieve DICOM objects from a
remote DICOM node. However, instead of transferring the data directly
to the requesting system, C­MOVE instructs the remote system to send
the data to a designated destination specified by the requesting system.
C­STORE
Used to store DICOM objects (e.g., images or reports) on a remote DI­
COM node. It initiates the transfer of DICOM data from the requesting
system to the remote system for storage.
C­CANCEL
Used to cancel or abort an ongoing DICOM operation initiated by a pre­
vious command, such as C­FIND, C­GET, or C­MOVE.
2.2.1
Security Challenges
 The primary security challenges associated with DICOM systems relate to the lack of
encryption and the persistent employment of legacy systems.  There exist several DI­
COM versions that still transmit data without encrypting them, which in this case makes
such details vulnerable to interception or tapping by any unauthorized party on the In­
ternet.  This poses an acute security issue because medical imaging archives usually
contain very crucial data about patients whose identities must be protected at all cost [15,
16].  Moreover, data and metadata stored on servers often lack encryption, making them
vulnerable to unauthorized access [15].
Regarding legacy systems, as mentioned earlier in Section 2.1, the use of outdated pro­
tocols by many healthcare facilities indicates a lack of proper authentication mechanisms,
which causes significant security risks.  This issue is exacerbated as many systems are
now being moved to the cloud and have internet­facing components, increasing their ex­
posure to potential threats [16].  
Moreover, there have been reports of vulnerabilities in the actual DICOM file format. In
May 2019 a weakness was observed in a 128­byte preamble of the DICOM format; this
could lead to putting executable malware into files saved on media like CDs and DVDs
[17].  As a consequence, it is important that strict security mechanisms are implemented
to mitigate these risks.  
8
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:17==
2.2.2
Current Trends in DICOM Data Management
 The management and accessibility of DICOM data is undergoing significant transforma­
tions with the integration of cloud technologies.  Its main advantages are it can scale,
enabling healthcare providers to save high volumes of imaging data without having to
employ extensive on premise infrastructure. It proves to be scalable because it allows for
storage solutions to adjust easily when data volume increases with no substantial cost
involved.  Furthermore, healthcare professionals can access DICOM images and data
from anywhere through the cloud, improving collaboration and patient care.  Moreover,
expenses associated with hardware equipment and the energy needed to maintain data
centers can be reduced by using cloud services.  Also, is common among cloud providers
to typically offer robust backup and disaster recovery solutions, ensuring data integrity and
availability even in the event of hardware failures or other disruptions  [18, 19]. However,
integrating DICOM systems with the cloud also presents challenges, notably in ensuring
the security and privacy of sensitive patient information, complying with regulations such
as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) [20], and addressing
potential latency issues when accessing large files [21].
Another significant trend is the increasing use of AI and machine learning within the DI­
COM workflow.  AI can help to analyze medical images, detect patterns or anomalies
that might indicate diseases, hence speeding up and improving diagnoses.  Additionally,
machine­learning algorithms are capable of automatically generating reports from DICOM
images, thus easing the radiologists’ burden and maintaining consistent records.  More­
over, prediction through predictive analytics using machine learning models can be used
to predict patient outcomes based on historical imaging data, leading to early interven­
tions and personalized treatment plans.  Furthermore, workflow optimization is also a key
benefit due to AI­supported tasks such as image sorting labelling, and routing, and hence
improves general efficiency while minimizing the possibilities of human error.  The en­
hancements mentioned above are not only beneficial for patient care, but also enhance
operational efficiency within healthcare facilities [19, 22].
2.2.3
Standards, Compliance, and Use Cases
Interoperability Standards and Compliance: DICOM interacts with other healthcare
IT standards like HL7 and FHIR to ensure that there is comprehensive interoperability
between various systems used in healthcare.  Compliance with regulatory standards like
HIPAA is crucial for protecting patient information and maintaining data privacy  [23].
Notable Use Cases: Utilization of DICOM in hospitals shows that it has positive effects on
enhancement of patient care, as well as operational efficiency. On the book ”A Brief His­
tory of DICOM” is clearly demonstrate is how the use of DICOM has helped in improving
workflow processes and in increasing diagnostic precision [14].
2.3
Honeypots
Honeypots are decoy systems designed to lure and capture attackers by acting as at­
tractive targets. They intend to mimic real systems or networks while providing valuable
information about attacker behavior and tactics. Often, traditional honeypots, rely on static
configurations and signature­based detection, which can be bypassed by sophisticated
attackers[24].
2.3.1
Types of Honeypots
Honeypots are mainly classified based on the purpose for which they are used and the
extent of their interaction. In terms of their intended use, they are classified as:
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
9
==PAGE:18==
• Research Honeypots: Used to gather information about the tactics, techniques,
and procedures (TTPs) of attackers. A research­founded organization called ”The
Honeynet Project” [25], studies how the attackers behave and operate.They deploy
honeypots so as to learn attack methods and tactics, thereby providing useful theat
intelligence regarding cyber security threats.
• Production Honeypots: Production honeypots are deployed within production net­
works to enhance security by detecting and deflecting attacks. Honeyd [26] is a
well­known production honeypot that can be deployed within enterprise networks to
detect and divert malicious activities. This is because Honeyd emulates different
types of OSs and services to divert cybercriminals from real digital assets.
As for their level of interaction, honeypots can be classified by the level of the allowed
interaction for the attacker:
• Low­Interaction Honeypots: Simulate only a limited set of services and interac­
tions. A low­interaction honeypot only simulates services which aren’t exploitable
to take control over the honeypot. There is no operating system for the attacker
to interact with, making it similar to a passive Intrusion Detection System (IDS) as
it does not modify network traffic or interact with the attacker. This minimizes risk
but also limits functionality. This strategy prevents potential danger but it comes at
the cost of limited functionality. Despite these limitations„ low­interaction honeypots
permit analysis of spam emails; they can serve as active countermeasures against
worms [27]. An example of a low­interaction honeypot is Dionaea [28]. Dionaea is
designed to catch malware by emulating services that are commonly exploited by
malicious actors. This honeypot can simulate various protocols like SMB, HTTP,
FTP, and more, in order to tempt malicious activities.
Rather than enabling full
access to the system, it captures and records attempts for interactions thus mitigat­
ing potential threats while enabling the generation of valuable information regarding
malware behaviour and attack patterns [28].
• Medium­Interaction Honeypots: Medium­interaction honeypots are more adva­
nced than low­interaction ones but not as complex as high­interaction honeypots.
They don’t have a complete operating system, instead they simulate more sophis­
ticated services. This increased complexity makes it more likely that an attacker
might find a vulnerability, yet it remains unlikely that the system will be fully compro­
mised. These honeypots provide a more convincing illusion of an operating system,
allowing more detailed attack logging and analysis [27]. Examples include mwcol­
lect [29] and nepenthes [30] which are used to capture autonomously spreading
malware by logging attacks and downloading malware binaries. While Honeytrap
[31] dynamically creates port listeners based on TCP connection attempts, allowing
it to handle unknown attacks.
• High­Interaction Honeypots: Simulate a full operating system, providing exten­
sive interaction possibilities for attackers. Even though some studies may classify
high­interaction honeypots as instances that require both hardware and software de­
vices, other research projects extend this definition to include virtual environments
that emulate entire devices and services [32]. High­interaction honeypots are im­
portant as they capture entire information about an attacker’s actions, thereby of­
fering high­quality information. Though essential in offering this information, they
have significant risks associated with them in that they give access to actual re­
sources that can be easily manipulated by the attackers. Furthermore, setting up
high­interaction honeypots is harder than setting up low­interaction ones. They also
10
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:19==
yield large amounts of data and are difficult to manage, unlike their low­interaction
counterparts [32]. Virtual machines and Docker containers are often implemented
as high­interaction honeypots because they can be easily reverted to a clean snap­
shot in case an attacker interacts with them. This arrangement, therefore, permits
an in­depth study of an attack event without compromising the integrity of the hon­
eypot environment. Using virtual machines and Docker containers enables system
administrators to recover their initial configurations promptly, thus preventing malig­
nant alterations done by intruders from lingering in the system [33, 34, 35].
Other classifications can vary from the classification of roles to the availability of source
code. In the case of role refers to a honeypot’s active or passive capture of traffic [36],
with some honeypots acting like a server and wait for attacks, while others act like a client
which can actively initiate a server request. The availability of source code is another clas­
sification that distinguishes between open­source honeypots, which are freely available
for modification and improvement, and proprietary honeypots, which are closed­source
and commercially sold. Not all honeypot and honeynet creators make the source code of
their decoy systems publicly available. When the source code is accessible, it enables
researchers and developers to understand the systems better and contribute to their en­
hancement and development [32].
2.3.2
Purpose and Benefits
Honeypots serve multiple purposes in cybersecurity, including threat detection, threat
analysis, and mitigation and prevention. They aid in identifying and alerting about suspi­
cious activities, collecting data on attack techniques and software used by adversaries,
and provide early warnings to enable proactive defense strategies. Honeypots help en­
hance incident response and reduce the attack surface by improving threat intelligence.
For instance, Franco et al. [32] thoroughly researched the various technologies used for
honeypots and focus on their significance in identifying and analyzing threats, especially
so in the Internet of Things (IoT) and cyber­physical systems. Likewise, research work by
Zielinski and Kholidy [37] elaborates on ways in which honeypots can deceive attackers
as well as gather valuable data for cybersecurity defense.
2.3.3
Honeypot Deployment Strategies
Deploying honeypots requires careful planning to ensure their effectiveness as the Net­
work placement is critical. For that reason, honeypots must be positioned strategically
within the network to attract attackers. It is vital to adjust Firewall rules and control traffic
that goes into a honeypot in order to enhance realism. Setting up honeypots should be
done in such a way that potential attackers aiming at the system cannot suspect anything,
making sure they are located in a network segment that attackers are likely to target.
Isolation and containment are also crucialbecause if a honeypot is isolated from produc­
tion systems it can prevent lateral movement by attackers. The impact of such movement
can range from insignificant in cases when the honeypot has been deployed on a dedi­
cated cloud machine up to crucial situations when it is located on badly isolated production
server.
Finally, robust monitoring and logging mechanisms are essential to capture detailed at­
tacker activities. Deploying a honeypot will not be cost effective unless a system with all­
encompassing monitoring and logging is used. In addition, obtaining intelligence from logs
through parsing and visualization may reveal patterns of attack to augment the general
security posture. This makes sure the honeynet deployment traps are not only lures at­
tackers but also that they generate useful information for enhancing cyber defense mech­
anisms.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3.4
Challenges and Limitations
Although honeypots are valuable tools, they also face certain challenges, one of them
being detection by attackers. Intelligent attackers may identify honeypots thereby cir­
cumnavigating them. Because many honeypots are open source; they exhibit recurrent
activity patterns with a typical configuration that can be fingerprinted. This may make at­
tackers aware at an early stage or in situations where they are automated, default scripts
can be used to detect and bypass these honeypots.
 Installing honeypots with inappropriate settings may lead to false positives due to which
their overall effectiveness is decreased. Such errors arise when benign activities are mis­
takenly identified as malicious, leading to the emergence of numerous messages with­
out any relevance on the system.  Valuable resources are, as a result, squandered on
erroneous tasks thereby potentially obstructing the realization of genuine threats hence
complicating prompt reactions by security groups.  It is vital to ensure that honeypot data
provides a reliable basis for threat detection and analysis by minimizing inaccuracies and
imprecision so as to decrease the occurrence of misleading false positive indications.  
Lastly, to be useful and efficient, honeypots require regular updates and maintenance.
In order to attract attackers with realism and attractiveness, it is necessary to change
configurations as well as signatures of honeypots against continuously mutating cyber
threats. Regularly updating the software, patching vulnerabilities while at the same time
adjusting behavior to closely resemble genuine systems is what regular maintenance en­
tails. If a Honeypot is not consistently updated, it will be out­of­date and easily detected
therefore decreasing its effectiveness as a security tool
2.3.5
Advanced Honeypot Techniques
There are promising modern honeypots that seem to employ advanced techniques to
enhance their effectiveness. From adaptive honeypots like Chameleon [38] that can
dynamically generate appropriate responses to avoid being fingerprinted by attackers, to
collections of honeypots that simulate an entire network for more comprehensive threat
detection, called honeynets, and from honeynets to the integration with artifical intelli­
gence (AI), with honeypots having AI capabilities.
2.4
Cloud Services and Virtual Private Servers (VPS)
Cloud services and Virtual Private Servers (VPS) are essential for establishing scalable
and flexible IT infrastructures. The truth is that they are cost­effective, and easy to man­
age, hence being of great importance when hosting honeypots among other security tools.
2.4.1
Cloud Services
In recent years, the movement of a large part of corporate systems to the cloud is evident.
Whether it is for their entire infrastructure or part of it, the cloud can offer several advan­
tages, with corresponding disadvantages, of course. When using the cloud to deploy one
or more honeypots, several advantages become apparent.
Firstly, since a honeypot must be partially isolated and not communicate with crucial sys­
tems of the environment, it can be scaled better through the cloud. This is due to the way
in which the resources and image engines in the cloud have better scalability and can be
reduced or enlarged easily on demand.
Moreover, speaking of cost­effectiveness, while the cloud can have a higher price in
large­scale solutions compared to traditional in­house servers, in the case of honeypot
deployment, it offers the beneficial function of paying only for the resources you use, thus
reducing overall costs.
12
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:21==
Finally, the reliability of the cloud is enhanced by high availability and redundancy features
that can ensure continuous operation. In addition, the ease with which you can manage
firewall rules, assign extra space, and different IPs makes the use of a cloud platform very
attractive.
Of course, there are also some challenges that someone should consider regarding the
use of the cloud. In the case of using the cloud for the deployment of a honeypot, any
possible issues related to data latency that may directly affect the logging of the system
should be analyzed and resolved, especially if the remote servers are located at a large
geographical distance.
Trying to identify a connection between honeypots and cloud infrastructure, with the aim
of presenting a regular case study, the paper ”A Comparative Analysis of Honeypots
on Different Cloud Platforms”. provides an analytical study of honeypot deployments
across three major cloud providers: Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google Cloud Plat­
form (GCP), and Microsoft Azure.  Kelly et al. [39] deployed multiple honeypots in various
regions and analyzed the collected data over a three­week period in May 2020 with the
objective to monitor and understand the behavior of attackers targeting cloud­based in­
frastructures.  After analyzing the deceptive part of their deployed honeypots, they provide
a conclusion about the impact of the cloud provider, stating that despite Google Cloud
having the smallest market share among the studied providers, it experienced the high­
est volume of attacks.  This contradicts the assumption that attackers would target cloud
services based on their market share.  
2.4.2
Virtual Private Servers (VPS)
The use of VPS for the deployment of a honeypot can have significant advantages. Most
of modern VPS provide greater control over server configurations and software installa­
tions. Bundled with an effective administration panel, one can efficiently configure firewall
policies with permitted and not permitted ports and IPs, choose the preferred operating
system and even provide an initial bundle of software before the initial start of the server.
Furthermore, dedicated powerful CPUs, enough RAM and SSD memory can ensure con­
sistent performance. Last but not least, in terms of cost, VPS prove to be more afford­
able compared to traditional dedicated physical servers and can save extra costs that
an incorrectly configured cloud environment can charge.However, there are also certain
challenges to consider as a VPS requires manual updates and maintenance to keep the
system secure and running smoothly [40].
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:23==
3
Related Work
In this section, we review existing research related to honeypots and their application to
secure medical imaging systems, particularly those that use the DICOM (Digital Imaging
and Communications in Medicine) standard.
3.1
DICOM Vulnerabilities and Cybersecurity in Medical
Imaging Systems
Because of their widespread use in dealing with sensitive patient information in health
facilities, DICOM system security is very important so it is a necessity. This section stud­
ies a number of papers which show stages of development in discovering vulnerability
possibilities while describing ways aimed at increasing safety within them.
The increasing interconnectivity and digitalization of medical systems have significantly
improved healthcare delivery but this progress has come with an increase in cyber threats.
DICOM protocol, while vital for the smooth operation of medical imaging devices for over
three decades has some major vulnerability flows [41].
In their study article titled ’How Secure Is Your Radiology Department? Mapping Digital
Radiology Adoption and Security Worldwide’ [42], Stites and Pianykh reveal the problem
with radiology security all over the world by pointing out that majority of radiology servers
are not protected. This study underscores how often security protocols are forgotten
among the most technologically advanced nations, and provides strong emphasis on the
urgent need for global standards as well as pro­active security measures in radiology
departments.
Mileva et al. introduced the idea of network steganography within DICOM protocols in
the paper titled ’Information Hiding in the DICOM Message Service and Upper Layer Ser­
vice with Entropy­Based Detection’. By this study, complex ways for hidden transmission
channels are disclosed attesting to successful steps taken in order to reduce these threats
as well as create more robust protection mechanisms on the DICOM system levelciteMil­
eva2017. Building upon this global perspective, David Cordero and Cristian Barría, in
their article on ’Cybersecurity Analysis in Nodes which Employ the DICOM Protocol’ [43]
focus on Chile, delving into the cybersecurity vulnerabilities inherent in DICOM nodes. In
so doing, the paper demonstrates that there are indeed real threats of security breach aris­
ing from the interconnectedness such systems have. The article also shows how some
problems within Latin America reflect similar scenarios worldwide on imaging practices. .
Further expanding on individual system vulnerabilities, David Cordero Vidal and Cristian
Barría Huidobro’s article ’Cybersecurity Analysis on PACS­DICOM Servers’ [44] states the
flaws in individual PACS systems. Medical imaging systems rely heavily on the servers
for the transmission of images and are vulnerable to hacking since they have weak se­
curity protocols. As such, secure procedures need to be put in place alongside routine
vulnerability evaluation tests prior to any relevant image viewing.
Following up on the consequences of compromised systems, DICOM Images Have Been
Hacked! Now What? [45] by Benoit Desjardins et al. discusses why we must improve
the protective measures following data breaches in order to avoid such incidents in future
times. It advocates for an collaborative security approach that involves manufacturers,
medical service providers, and cybersecurity experts.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
15
==PAGE:24==
In their study on ’DICOM Vulnerability Mining Based on Fuzzing Technology’ [46], Zhiqiang
Wang et al. used a fuzzing approach to discover new flaws in DICOM servers. Based on
this research we can see that there are chances of cyber­attacks becoming even more
complex due to the advanced fuzzing techniques applied. The importance of regular se­
curity testing as well as updating becomes very clear while analyzing different responses
among various DICOM implementations when they encounter improperly formatted data.
’Security of Medical Cyber­physical Systems’ [47] by Zhiqiang Wang, Pingchuan Ma, et al.
presents a comprehensive study on the security of medical imaging devices. A detailed
review is made of security threats, models and protection techniques relevant for medical
cyber ­ physical systems while considering how effective protection mechanisms are as
well as stressing on how difficult it can be to protect these vital health care components
from emerging cyber threats.
Concluding the section, Sina Yazdanmehr’s report ’Millions of Patient Records at Risk’
focuses primarily on the susceptibilities of the DICOM protocol. In this all­inclusive review,
she establishes that inadequate security systems have rendered online about 59 million
patient records. From the study, 45 million distinct DICOM files kept over 2,140 servers
belonging to 67 countries including some within the scope such as USA, India, South
Africa, Iran, and Brazil are exposed. People usually leave these huge amounts of data
exposed because they fail to configure properly their cloud storage solutions to ensure that
all information remains private, especially when we are dealing with less equipped health
centers such as those found at local levels. The ones deploying the solutions usually
leave these huge amounts of data exposed because they fail to configure properly their
cloud storage solutions to ensure that all information remains private especially in smaller
medical facilities found at local levels [4].
Yazdanmehr found out that better ways to secure DICOM servers include introduction of
improved authorization protocols, network segmentation, a policy of strict access control,
and regular security checks by manufacturers and CERTs. One way of improving on this
is by incorporating cybersecurity honeypots into medical imaging systems because they
work like DICOM servers that lure cyber attackers hence making it easier for them to see
how they operate in order to detect [4].
 Together, these studies form a detailed landscape of the current state of DICOM security,
highlighting both the depth of existing vulnerabilities and the potential for significant se­
curity enhancements.  Their joint plea is for dynamic robust security measures that can
adapt to emerging threats and keep critical patient information safe.  This narrative un­
derscores the vulnerabilities while at the same time mentioning certain changes to create
innovative solutions in order to protect global healthcare services [48].
To further illustrate the real­world impact of these vulnerabilities, several notable incidents
have highlighted the significant consequences of DICOM security lapses. In recent years,
unauthorized access to hospital imaging archives has led to patient data leaks and finan­
cial losses. For instance, a 2023 report indicated that ransomware attacks affected at
least 141 hospitals, causing delays in diagnoses and treatment, and resulting in financial
losses averaging $11 million per breach [49]. Another incident exposed millions of patient
scans and health records online due to DICOM protocol vulnerabilities [50]. These cases
underscore the critical need for healthcare organizations to adopt robust security prac­
tices, advanced threat detection systems, and comprehensive data encryption to protect
sensitive medical information.
16
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.1: Summary of Related Work on DICOM Vulnerabilities and Cybersecurity
Year
Title
Summary
2008
How Secure Is Your Radi­
ology Department?
Map­
ping Digital Radiology Adop­
tion and Security Worldwide
Reveals global security issues in radiol­
ogy departments, emphasizing the need for
global standards and proactive security mea­
sures.
2017
Information
Hiding
in
the
DICOM
Message
Service
and Upper Layer Service with
Entropy­Based Detection
Introduces network steganography within DI­
COM protocols, proposing methods to en­
hance security frameworks.
2020
Cybersecurity
Analysis
in
Nodes
which
Employ
the
DICOM Protocol
Focuses on the cybersecurity vulnerabilities
in DICOM nodes in Chile, reflecting similar
global issues.
2020
Cybersecurity
Analysis
on
PACS­DICOM Servers
Discusses vulnerabilities in PACS systems,
highlighting the need for secure protocols
and regular vulnerability assessments.
2020
DICOM Images Have Been
Hacked! Now What?
Discusses the need for improved protective
measures following data breaches in DICOM
systems.
2021
DICOM Vulnerability Mining
Based on Fuzzing Technol­
ogy
Utilizes fuzzing technology to discover new
vulnerabilities in DICOM servers, emphasiz­
ing the need for continuous security testing
and updates.
2022
Security of Medical Cyber­
physical Systems
Presents a comprehensive study on the se­
curity of medical imaging devices, evaluating
protection mechanisms against evolving cy­
ber threats.
2023
Millions of Patient Records at
Risk
Details vulnerabilities in the DICOM protocol,
exposing millions of patient records due to
improper cloud storage configurations.
3.2
Fingerprinting
This section focuses on honeypot­specific fingerprinting research.
Identifying and differentiating between honeypot systems and legitimate production sys­
tems is a significant part of cybersecurity research. Niels Provos discusses the Honeyd
framework in his paper titled ’Honeyd: A Virtual Honeypot Daemon’ [51], providing one of
the first contributions to the field. It works by simulating virtual computer systems at the
network level, tricking network fingerprinting tools through its emulation of TCP/IP stack
behaviors from a range of OS implementations. Moreover, it can create large scale virtual
networks containing different routing configurations with adjustable link properties such
as latency and packet loss. With the help of this flexibility, Honeyd mimics many network
environments making it a potent tool for cyber security research. Consequently, by giv­
ing genuine responses to network probes and handling varied virtual honeypots, Honeyd
thwarts fingerprinting efforts effectively, thus making cyber threats more studyable and
controllable.
In the paper ’Detecting Honeypots and Other Suspicious Environments’ Holz and Ray­
nal [52] discuss the methods used by attackers to locate honeypots. The paper presents
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
17
==PAGE:26==
how attackers spot honeypots by checking environmental aspects like virtualization fea­
tures and debugging tools. The constraints within current research based on honeypots
are pointed out by the authors to suggest ways of lessening honeypot detectability. Hon­
eypot developers may, therefore, enhance system resilience through overcoming these
detection methods that attackers might use to discover them.
Network environments keep changing, hence the need for advanced fingerprinting tech­
niques as shown in the research ’Evaluation of Fingerprinting Techniques and a Windows­
Based Dynamic Honeypot’ by Mohammadzadeh et al. [53]. This paper points out that
static honeypots can be easily detected due to their redundant settings and consistent
availability. On the other hand, dynamic honeypots are able to adjust their configurations
automatically to model a real network’s diversity to prevent detection by reducing likeliness
of being detected. In its evaluation, the paper has looked at both active and passive fin­
gerprinting tactics, observing that active ones tend to be more precise compared against
passive approaches despite generating conspicuous traffic that often prompts security
monitors to raise alarm. Passive fingerprinting, such as the use of the p0f tool, offers a
safer alternative by analyzing existing network traffic without generating additional pack­
ets. The authors emphasize that these fingerprinting techniques should be incorporated
into dynamic honeypots so as to make them stealthier and thus more viable tools for
cybersecurity research.
Vetterl and Clayton’s [54] piece ’Bitter Harvest: Systematically Fingerprinting Low­ and
Medium­Interaction Honeypots at Internet Scale’ introduced a novel method to system­
atically fingerprint low as well as medium interaction honeypots. Identification of these
honeypots is made possible through detection of minor protocol variations usually caused
by the employment of pre­designed libraries to implement transport layers. Researchers
managed to detect 7,605 honeypot instances across nine different setups such as SSH,
Telnet as well as HTTP by creating crafted probes and monitoring resulting traffic. It
additionally disclosed that considerable number of these sensors were managed badly
reflected by non­update of many for many years thus indicating how perpetually suscep­
tible employed honeypots are. This study shows that there is a pressing requirement to
develop a new generation of honeypots that mimic authentic systems more closely so
they can’t be easily identified by intruders.
Morishita et al. [55] investigate how many easily detectable honeypots are there in the
web in their work called ’Detect Me If You Can: An Internet­Wide View of Self­Revealing
Honeypots’. They used basic detection signatures to locate open­source honeypots with
default configurations and discovered 19,208 such systems running on 637 different au­
tonomous systems. The study underscores the importance of tailoring honeypot configu­
rations to evade detection and minimize the chances for attackers to exploit honeypots.
Papazis and Chilamkurti [56] in their work, entitled ’Detecting Indicators of Deception in
Emulated Monitoring Systems’, explore different methods that attackers use to discover
which systems in this category are actually real such as honeypots, sandboxes as well as
virtual machines. The study categorizes these techniques into network anomalies, service
exercising anomalies, and environmental anomalies, providing a detailed taxonomy of
the indicators of deception. The authors have also come up with a few countermeasures
that can make such systems stealthier. This involves changing network responses and
behaving more like real systems, so that they can do better in avoiding detection and
improve their utility in cybersecurity defenses.
According to Huang et al. [57], they recommend a way that can distinguise honeypots
applying an artificial intelligence technique that they develop through remotely probing
18
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:27==
other systems hence examining received replies. The authors suggest that this could be
done by tapping into the properties of the application, network and system underneath in a
recursive manner. This enables the machine to make classifications about other systems
depending on how they respond, since it trains on instances from fixed honeypots. How­
ever their study lacks to include the classification of responses for well­known honeypots
like Kippo, Cowrie, or Dionaea.
The paper “Gotta Catch ’em All: A Multistage Framework for Honeypot Fingerprinting”
by Srinivasa et al. [58] introduces a comprehensive model which combines both probe­
based and metascan­based methods used to improve the accuracy of honeypot detec­
tion. The framework reduces false positives systematically through novel techniques like
protocol handshake fingerprinting, static TLS certificate checks and FQDN analysis. 2.9
billion IPv4 addresses have been scanned thoroughly, revealing 21,855 honeypots indi­
cating an effectiveness of these procedures. In addition, the research revealed more than
355,000 systems that could be vulnerable hence the call for improved security practices.
Consequently, informing those system managers and honeypot creators about such vul­
nerabilities was a great contribution to the field of honeypot fingerprinting in the wider
context of network security.
Table 3.2: Summary of Related Work on Fingerprinting
Year
Title
Summary
2003
Honeyd: A Virtual Honeypot
Daemon
Describes Honeyd’s capabilities in simulat­
ing virtual systems and emulating TCP/IP
stack behaviors to avoid fingerprinting.
2005
Detecting
Honeypots
and
Other
Suspicious
Environ­
ments
Explores methods attackers use to detect
honeypots, highlighting ways to reduce hon­
eypot detectability.
2013
Evaluation of Fingerprinting
Techniques and a Windows­
Based Dynamic Honeypot
Compares active and passive fingerprinting
techniques, advocating for dynamic honey­
pots to avoid detection.
2018
Bitter
Harvest:
Systemat­
ically
Fingerprinting
Low­
and
Medium­Interaction
Honeypots at Internet Scale
Discusses fingerprinting methods for low­
and medium­interaction honeypots, empha­
sizing the need for realistic honeypots.
2019
Detecting Indicators of De­
ception in Emulated Monitor­
ing Systems
Explores different methods attackers use to
discover honeypots and suggests counter­
measures to improve stealth.
2021
Detect Me If You Can:
An
Internet­Wide View of Self­
Revealing Honeypots
Examines the prevalence of easily de­
tectable honeypots, stressing the impor­
tance of customized configurations.
2021
Honeypot
Fingerprinting
with
Artificial
Intelligence
Techniques
Recommends AI techniques for distinguish­
ing honeypots by probing systems and ana­
lyzing responses.
2023
Gotta Catch ’em All: A Multi­
stage Framework for Honey­
pot Fingerprinting
Introduces a framework for honeypot fin­
gerprinting
combining
probe­based
and
metascan­based methods, revealing numer­
ous honeypots and potential vulnerabilities.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
19
==PAGE:28==
3.3
Honeypots for Medical Imaging Systems
This section will focus on existing research on honeypots specifically designed to protect
medical imaging systems, including DICOM­based systems.
The exposure of over a billion medical images due to insecure PACS servers, as detailed
by Whittaker [59], highlights critical vulnerabilities within medical imaging systems. De­
spite numerous warnings from security researchers, many hospitals and imaging centers
continue to neglect basic security protocols, resulting in unauthorized access to sensitive
patient data, including X­rays, ultrasounds, and CT scans. These exposed systems of­
ten lack password protection and other security measures, making them easy targets for
cybercriminals. This alarming situation underscores the necessity for deploying honey­
pots to detect and mitigate unauthorized access attempts, thereby safeguarding patient
information and improving the overall security posture of medical imaging systems.
Investigating the use of honeypots to enhance the cybersecurity of medical imaging sys­
tems was done by Ihanus et al. [60, 61]. The authors underlined that, honeypots’ use
could help draw and detect cyber threats through monitoring the behavior of these sys­
tems. They emphasize that in the context of medical imaging systems, honeypots are
particularly useful for collecting sensor data related to security incidents, given that these
devices are often technically closed and limit the ability to collect log information. As a re­
sult, it greatly heightens situationally awareness within the networks of medical appliances
that use these technologies. Moreover, honeypots solve problems with technical visibility
of medical device and provide valuable information at varying distinct attack phases. They
recommend such systems to be deployed due to their ability to improve the detection and
strengthen cybersecurity defenses within healthcare premises.
Wang et al. [62] in their work provided has introduced a method new for categorizing attack
patterns using control periods deploying 462 honeypots across 22 countries capturing
real­world attack activities. This method consists of empirical research which aims to find
botnets through data analysis as well as grouping alike patterns in attacks hence informing
us on various forms that internet­connected devices can take when they are used as
bots by attackers. They discovered that botnets display a number of time­oriented attack
patterns during a single control period and noted several important ones but which could
help security experts in comprehending and fighting these botnet assaults.
Overall, the integration of honeypots into medical imaging systems represents a promis­
ing approach to enhancing cybersecurity in healthcare, providing critical data and improv­
ing defenses against emerging threats. The use of honeypots in healthcare is part of a
broader strategy to increase cybersecurity in an environment where a cyber incident could
have serious consequences. This approach is especially relevant given the increasing
digitization of healthcare and the corresponding rise in cyber threats [63].
Jouni Ihanus, Tero Kokkonen, and Timo Hämäläinen’s paper ’Modelling Medical Devices
with Honeypots: A Conceptual Framework’ examines cybersecurity’s crucial place in
modern intelligent hospital environments, and also how this relates to safeguarding medi­
cal equipment. According to the writers, the reason why conventional safety methods are
ineffective stems from the fact that log data cannot be gleaned due to the closed technical
nature of those devices. Honeypots come in handy when it comes to this issue ­ they im­
itate medical devices thereby attracting various cyber­attacks just waiting to be analyzed
[60].
The paper outlines the technical characteristics of medical devices and the challenges in
achieving visibility and security, such as the use of unencrypted protocols and insufficient
20
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:29==
network segmentation. Moreover, it provides deconstruction on cyber­attacks employing
such frameworks as the Cyber Kill Chain and MITRE ATT&CK which are then cohered
with honeypot capabilities to demonstrate the manner in which their deployment serves
to facilitate detection as well as comprehension of different stages of attack. To address
technical visibility issues in the medical field, the authors suggest a systematic method for
merging these findings with phases of an attack as way of improving general safety. They
also mention that one direction of future research might be examining whether honey pot
data can be used elsewhere apart from labs or if it can be used with Security Informa­
tion and Event Management (SIEM) systems beyond their normal scope. In summary,
this conceptual framework highlights the potential of honeypots to provide valuable in­
sights into cyber threats and improve the resilience of medical device networks against
sophisticated attacks.
After extensive research for existing medical honeypots, we identified Dicompot [64] and
Medpot [65].
Dicompot is a low­interaction honeypot specifically designed to simulate the DICOM pro­
tocol, it is written in GoLang and has a lot of dependencies in archived libaries with no
maintenance, while Medpot, on the other hand, supports the HL7 (Health Level 7) proto­
col, which consists of international standards for the transfer of clinical and administrative
data between software applications used by healthcare providers. Medpot is also written
in GoLang and seems to be very immature and incomplete solution.
Table 3.3: Summary of Related Work on Honeypots for Medical Imaging Systems
Year
Title
Summary
2017
Dicompot and Medpot
Dicompot simulates the DICOM protocol,
while Medpot supports the HL7 protocol.
Both are immature and incomplete solutions
written in GoLang.
2020
Modelling Medical Devices
with Honeypots:
A Con­
ceptual Framework
Highlights the potential of honeypots to pro­
vide insights into cyber threats and improve
the resilience of medical device networks.
2022
Categorizing Attack Pat­
terns Using Control Peri­
ods Deploying 462 Honey­
pots Across 22 Countries
Introduces a method for categorizing attack
patterns and identifying botnets through data
analysis.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:31==
4
Design & Implementation
In view of the research given, our aim was to further analyze how DICOM systems func­
tioning with records are managed in hospitals. To do so, our goal was to establish if it
would be possible to make a DICOM honeypot endowed with essential functionalities that
will allow it to be exposed on the web to collect data from potential malicious activities.
4.1
T­POT and Dicompot
While exploring ways to simulate the DICOM protocol, we discovered an existing project
named dicompot [64]. This project provided a foundational DICOM honeypot that could
simulate a DICOM server environment and log interactions. At that point, given the time
constraints and the complexity of building a honeypot from scratch, we decided it would
be efficient to adapt and utilize this pre­existing solution in order to gather data while
developing our own solution. Despite our efforts, we encountered difficulties in making
the dicompot function as intended. These challenges included configuring the honeypot to
correctly simulate a DICOM server and ensuring it could interact with potential attackers
in a realistic manner. However, we found out that dicompot had been integrated into
the T­POT[66] project, a comprehensive honeypot management framework that includes
multiple honeypots and monitoring tools.
4.1.1
Overview of T­POT and Dicompot Integration
T­POT is a sophisticated honeypot framework that integrates multiple containerised hon­
eypots which are orchestrated as a whole solution. One of the many honeypots that
T­POT includes is a variation of dicompot. This holistic solution provides a centralized
management interface, easy deployment and strict architecture as shown in 4.1.
One of the honeypots included in T­POT as mentioned before, is dicompot, a DICOM
honeypot designed to simulate a DICOM server environment. Dicompot emulates DI­
COM servers and captures interactions with adversaries attempting to perform operations
such as image storage (C­STORE), query/retrieve (C­FIND, C­MOVE), and verification
(C­ECHO).
Figure 4.1: T­POT Architecture.[66]
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
23
==PAGE:32==
4.1.2
Deployment on Azure
Subsequently, we began experimenting with T­POT on the Azure cloud platform and we
successfully configured T­POT to run in the cloud, leveraging its robust infrastructure and
scalability.
Notably, T­POT’s Dicompot was operating on port 11112, an alternative port for DICOM,
whereas the standard port is 104. Delving deeper into the use of ports in DICOM systems,
it was identified that port 104 is designated as a privileged port, typically reserved for sys­
tem or well­known services. This restriction explains the common use of port 11112 for
DICOM services in various implementations to avoid the administrative overhead associ­
ated with privileged ports. Research indicates that using non­standard ports can some­
times affect the realism of the honeypot, as attackers might recognize the use of these
ports as an indication of a honeypot environment[67].
Given our concerns that using port 11112 might reveal the honeypot’s nature, we modified
the Dockerfile to implement a port translation from 104 to 11112. This adjustment was
intended to make the honeypot appear more like a legitimate DICOM server, as many
medical facilities use port 104. However, this change did not yield a significant alteration
in traffic patterns, suggesting that attackers either did not notice the port difference or that
the traffic was consistent with typical DICOM usage regardless of the port.
4.1.3
Transition to VPS with IONOS
Following the depletion of my Azure student credits, we transitioned to a Virtual Private
Server (VPS) provided by IONOS with a datacenter in Germany. This move was driven
by the need to maintain the honeypot without incurring high cloud service costs. Our VPS
had the followng specifications:
• 4 vCore
• 8 GB RAM
• 240 GB NVME SSD
• Ubuntu 22.04
The cost was 14.71 Euros per month, with an additional one­time fee of 10 Euros to start
the subscription. Our objective was to streamline T­POT to run solely the DICOM hon­
eypot and essential monitoring services such as Spiderfoot and Kibana, excluding other
unnecessary honeypots. Below is a screenshot of the running services on the customized
T­POT setup:
Figure 4.2: T­POT Services after customisation.
24
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:33==
The procedure of setting up the VPS involved the server configuration for handling DICOM
traffic, making sure the necessary ports were open on the firewall and the necessary ser­
vices were correctly installed. By focusing on a single honeypot and relevant monitoring
tools as in 4.3, our goal was to create a more targeted and efficient setup, utilising the
monitoring tools to analyze the incoming traffic. From that analysis we could identify pat­
terns, and possibly understand the behavior of potential attackers.
Figure 4.3: T­POT kibana board for Dicompot.
4.1.4
Enhancing Honeypot Realism
Additional measures were taken in order to improve the realism of the honeypot. Such
steps involved inserting real but nonsensitive data in the DICOM server so as to simulate
a real medical imaging server. This data arrangement was meant to make the attackers
think that they were dealing with actual medical records, hence prompting them to inter­
act. Moreover, the firewall was configured accordingly in order to have only the DICOM
protocol ports open to inbound connections, while having other ports like ssh open only
for specific IPs.
4.1.5
Data Collection and Analysis
 The last step was the creation of automatic scripts that would enable data collection and
analysis from the honeypot.  Consequently, it became possible to use these data to identify
common attack vectors, the geographic origin of attacks, and the techniques employed
by attackers.
To achieve comprehensive data analysis, the scripts utilized various external services
4.1, including Shodan[9], AbuseIPDB[68], Maltrail’s Blackhole[69], Greynoise[70], and
Censys[10]. Each of these services offered fresh perspectives on the attacks and added
to the already­collected data thus providing a number of various details of attack. In order
for this external services to work with an API key, direct communications have been made
so as to get extensive research access to their API and be able to exceed the free available
queries.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 4.1: External Services Integrated for Data Enrichment
Service
Description
Shodan
Used to gather additional information about IP addresses interacting
with the honeypot, such as open ports and associated services.
AbuseIPDB
Queried to check the reputation of IP addresses and identify those pre­
viously reported for malicious activities.
Blackhole
Utilized for identifying and filtering traffic originating from known mali­
cious sources.
Greynoise
Provided context about IP addresses to distinguish between benign and
malicious internet scanning activities.
Censys
Used to gain insights into the characteristics of devices and services
interacting with the honeypot, helping to identify potentially vulnerable
systems.
Data Processing Workflow
1. Data Collection: The script fetch the compressed log files from the honeypot, those
files are zipped depending on the date of the logs. The script then combines all the
dates into one consolidated log file.
2. Enrichment: The data are then enriched by querying the external services men­
tioned above.
3. Database Creation: The results of the analysis are stored in a structured database
file(.db).
4. Analysis: The enriched database data are then manually analysed to identify com­
mon attack vectors, geographic origins, and attacker techniques.
By integrating various external services into our data collection and analysis script, we
were able to create a robust and insightful database to distill the most critical threat in­
telligence into a manageable format. The detailed implementation of the script, including
the integration with various services and the data processing workflow, is provided in the
appendix (see Appendix .1.1), while the data processing workflow is illustrated in Figure
4.4, which shows the architecture of the DICOM honeypot system.
26
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:35==
T­POT
Dicompot
(inside T­POT)
ElasticSearch
Kibana Dashboard
Data Collection
Enrichment
SQLite Database
Analysis
Shodan
AbuseIPDB
Blackhole
Greynoise
Censys
External Services
Figure 4.4: Architecture diagram of the DICOM honeypot system using T­POT and Di­
compot. The diagram shows T­POT, Dicompot, ElasticSearch, Kibana Dashboard, and
the data collection and analysis process utilizing external services for data enrichment.
4.1.6
Fingerprinting Challenges with T­POT and Dicompot
The fingerprinting problem presented a significant challenge for the for the results of our
DICOM honeypots. Not long after the deployment of our T­POT Dicompot, Shodan identi­
fied our system as a honeypot, as illustrated in Figure 4.5. At that point, it became part of
our research to identify the reasons behind that tag and possible ways to avoid it. Bearing
in mind that a service like Shodan is publicly accessed and any attackers or automated
attacks could have skipped our system because of that information, created the need for
a way to avoid being tracked as a honeypot by network vulnerability scanners.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.5: Screenshot from Shodan identifying the DICOM system as a honeypot.
Although Shodan’s source code is not publicly available, we identified several possible
reasons for the detection:
• Distinctive Network Patterns: Both T­POT and Dicompot exhibited identifiable
network traffic patterns and response signatures that were easily detected by ser­
vices like Shodan.
• Predictable Responses: The systems had predictable and consistent responses
to DICOM requests, making them vulnerable to detection.
• Automated Detection: Shodan and other network scanning services were able to
identify these honeypots based on their unique behaviors and publicly accessible
nature.
These issues highlighted the need for a more sophisticated approach to avoid detection
and ensure the effectiveness of the honeypot in capturing genuine attack data.
4.2
DicomHawk
In this section, we explain the design and implementation of our custom DICOM honeypot,
which we named DicomHawk. The main aim behind the development of DicomHawk is to
develop a comprehensive analysis and logging system to detect potential security threats
within a medical imaging environment. The architecture of DicomHawk is illustrated in
Figure 4.6, which shows the key components and their interactions. Consequently, we
are going to provide details about its critical parts while showing how it works, using some
code snippets.
28
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:37==
DicomHawk
DICOM Server
(Flask, Pynetdicom, pydicom)
DICOM File
Generation
Data Collection
Enrichment
Detailed Logging
(dicom_server.log)
Simplified Logging
(dicom_simplified.log)
SQLite Database
(Logs Storage)
Shodan
AbuseIPDB
Blackhole
Greynoise
Censys
External Services
Figure 4.6: Architecture diagram of the DICOM honeypot system, including DICOM
Server Emulator, Detailed Logging, Simplified Logging, DICOM File Generation, Data
Collection, Enrichment, and SQLite Database. External services used for enrichment are
also depicted.
The application has been developed in Python, utilizing the Flask framework to serve as
the web server. Another major external library is Pynetdicom[71], a pure Python package
that facilitates the implementation of the DICOM networking protocol. Integrated with
pydicom, it simplifies the creation of DICOM Application Entities (AEs). These AEs can
function as Service Class Users (SCUs) and Service Class Providers (SCPs), establishing
associations with other AEs to utilize or offer the services available within the association.
Finally, to ensure scalability and performance, the whole application is containerized us­
ing Docker and as the flask framework is not suggested for environments beyond devel­
opment and testing, we use Gunicorn (Green Unicorn), a python Web Server Gateway
Interface(WSGI) that acts as an http server for UNIX and serves our web application.
Generating Fake DICOM Files
The create_fake_dicom_files function generates a set of fake DICOM files with ran­
domly chosen patient names. This simulates realistic DICOM data for the honeypot to
serve.
1
import random
2
from datetime import datetime
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
29
==PAGE:38==
3
from pydicom.dataset import Dataset, FileDataset
4
from pydicom.uid import generate_uid, ExplicitVRLittleEndian,
PYDICOM_IMPLEMENTATION_UID
,→
5
import pydicom
6
7
def create_fake_dicom_files(directory, num_files=10):
8
os.makedirs(directory, exist_ok=True)
9
10
first_names = ["Frederik", "Sofie", "Lukas", "Emma", "William", "Ida",
"Noah", "Anna", "Oliver", "Laura"]
,→
11
last_names = ["Jensen", "Nielsen", "Hansen", "Pedersen", "Andersen",
"Christensen", "Larsen", "Sørensen", "Rasmussen", "Jørgensen"]
,→
12
13
for i in range(num_files):
14
filename = os.path.join(directory, f"test_file{i+1}.dcm")
15
file_meta = Dataset()
16
file_meta.MediaStorageSOPClassUID = CTImageStorage
17
file_meta.MediaStorageSOPInstanceUID = generate_uid()
18
file_meta.TransferSyntaxUID = ExplicitVRLittleEndian
19
file_meta.ImplementationClassUID = PYDICOM_IMPLEMENTATION_UID
20
21
ds = FileDataset(filename, {}, file_meta=file_meta, preamble=b"\0" *
128)
,→
22
ds.PatientName =
f"{random.choice(first_names)}^{random.choice(last_names)}"
,→
23
ds.PatientID = f"{i+1}"
24
ds.StudyInstanceUID = generate_uid()
25
ds.SeriesInstanceUID = generate_uid()
26
ds.SOPInstanceUID = file_meta.MediaStorageSOPInstanceUID
27
ds.Modality = "CT"
28
ds.StudyDate = datetime.now().strftime("%Y%m%d")
29
ds.StudyTime = datetime.now().strftime("%H%M%S")
30
ds.Rows = 512
31
ds.Columns = 512
32
ds.BitsAllocated = 16
33
ds.BitsStored = 12
34
ds.HighBit = 11
35
ds.PixelRepresentation = 0
36
ds.SamplesPerPixel = 1
37
ds.PhotometricInterpretation = "MONOCHROME2"
38
ds.PixelData = b'\x00' * (ds.Rows * ds.Columns * 2)
39
40
ds.is_little_endian = True
41
ds.is_implicit_VR = False
42
43
pydicom.dcmwrite(filename, ds)
44
detailed_logger.info(f"Created fake DICOM file: {filename}")
45
log_simplified_message({
46
"ID": str(int(time.time() * 1000000)),
47
"event": "Created fake DICOM file",
48
"file": filename,
49
"timestamp": datetime.now().isoformat()
50
})
30
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:39==
4.2.1
Handling DICOM Associations
We define several event handler functions to manage DICOM associations, store, query,
and retrieve requests. These handlers log detailed information about the interactions.
Importing necessary modules and defining initial setup.
1
from pynetdicom import AE, evt
2
from pynetdicom.sop_class import
PatientRootQueryRetrieveInformationModelFind, CTImageStorage
,→
Function to handle incoming DICOM associations.
1
def handle_assoc(event):
2
assoc_id = str(int(time.time() * 1000000))
3
assoc_sessions[event.assoc] = assoc_id
4
detailed_logger.info(f"Association requested from
{event.assoc.requestor.address}:{event.assoc.requestor.port}")
,→
5
6
version = event.assoc.requestor.implementation_version_name if
event.assoc.requestor.implementation_version_name else "N/A"
,→
7
8
log_simplified_message({
9
"session_id": assoc_id,
10
"ID": assoc_id,
11
"event": "Association requested",
12
"IP": event.assoc.requestor.address,
13
"Port": event.assoc.requestor.port,
14
"level": "warning",
15
"msg": "Connection from",
16
"timestamp": datetime.now().isoformat()
17
})
18
log_simplified_message({
19
"session_id": assoc_id,
20
"ID": assoc_id,
21
"Version": version,
22
"level": "info",
23
"msg": "Client",
24
"timestamp": datetime.now().isoformat()
25
})
List of event handlers for various DICOM events.
1
handlers = [
2
(evt.EVT_ACSE_RECV, handle_assoc),
3
(evt.EVT_RELEASED, handle_release),
4
(evt.EVT_C_FIND, handle_find),
5
(evt.EVT_C_STORE, handle_store),
6
(evt.EVT_C_ECHO, handle_echo),
7
(evt.EVT_C_MOVE, handle_move),
8
(evt.EVT_C_GET, handle_get),
9
]
4.2.2
Web Interface for Monitoring
We use Flask in order to provide a web interface so that we can monitor how our honeypot
is doing as well as get at any logs in real time without the need to connect to the server.
This interface has been designed with administrators in mind because it assists them in
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
31
==PAGE:40==
managing and examining what our honeypot does. Below you will find the code sets up
the Flask routes for different functionalities such as displaying status, viewing logs, and
handling errors.
1
from flask import Flask, jsonify, render_template, send_from_directory
2
3
app = Flask(__name__)
4
5
@app.route('/')
6
def landing_page():
7
return render_template('landing.html')
8
9
@app.route('/home')
10
def home():
11
return render_template('status.html')
12
13
@app.route('/logs')
14
def logs():
15
return render_template('logs.html')
16
17
@app.route('/status')
18
def status():
19
return jsonify({"status": "running", "associations":
len(ae.active_associations)})
,→
20
21
@app.route('/logs/all')
22
def all_logs():
23
try:
24
if not os.path.exists(log_file_path):
25
return jsonify({"error": "Log file does not exist"}), 404
26
with open(log_file_path, 'r') as f:
27
log_content = f.read().replace('\n', '<br>')
28
return f"<pre>{log_content}</pre>"
29
except Exception as e:
30
exception_logger.error(f"Error reading log file: {e}")
31
return jsonify({"error": "Internal Server Error"}), 500
32
33
Exception as e: exception_logger.error(f"Invalid JSON in log file: {line} -
{e}")
,→
34
continue
35
return jsonify(log_entries)
36
except Exception as e:
37
exception_logger.error(f"Error reading simplified log file: {e}")
38
return jsonify([])
# Return an empty list in case of error
39
40
@app.route('/logs/simplified_page')
41
def simplified_logs_page():
42
return render_template('simplified_logs.html')
43
44
@app.route('/favicon.ico')
45
def favicon():
46
return send_from_directory('static', 'favicon.ico')
47
48
@app.errorhandler(404)
49
def not_found(e):
50
# Do not log 404 errors
32
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:41==
51
return jsonify({"error": "Not Found"}), 404
52
53
@app.errorhandler(Exception)
54
def handle_exception(e):
55
exception_logger.error(f"Unhandled exception: {e}")
56
return jsonify({"error": "Internal Server Error"}), 500
57
58
if __name__ == "__main__":
59
start_dicom_server()
60
app.run(port=5000)
This setup includes several routes:
• /: Renders the landing page.
• /home: Displays the home page with the status of the honeypot.
• /logs: Displays a page for viewing logs.
• /status: Returns the current status of the honeypot as JSON.
• /logs/all: Returns the detailed log file content.
• /logs/simplified: Returns the simplified log entries as JSON.
• /logs/simplified_page: Displays the simplified logs page.
• /favicon.ico: Serves the favicon.
• Error handlers for 404 and other exceptions.
4.2.3
Starting the DICOM Server
To start the DICOM server and the Flask application, we check if the DICOM port is avail­
able and then initialize the server with the configured event handlers.
1
import socket
2
3
def is_port_in_use(port):
4
with socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM) as s:
5
return s.connect_ex(('0.0.0.0', port)) == 0
6
7
def start_dicom_server():
8
dicom_port = 11112
9
if is_port_in_use(dicom_port):
10
print(f"Port {dicom_port} is in use. Please free up the port and try
again.")
,→
11
return
12
ae.start_server(('0.0.0.0', dicom_port), evt_handlers=handlers)
13
14
if __name__ == "__main__":
15
start_dicom_server()
16
app.run(port=5000)
This code ensures that the DICOM server starts on port 11112* and the Flask web ap­
plication runs on port 5000. The is_port_in_use function checks if the specified port is
available before starting the server.
* This can later be overwritten by the dockerfile structure or by the docker run command.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
33
==PAGE:42==
4.2.4
Docker Setup
We use Docker to enhance the portability and scalability of our application. By container­
izing the application, we ensure consistent behavior across different environments, includ­
ing development, testing, and production. Docker also facilitates easier experimentation
and future enhancements by isolating dependencies and configurations.
The Dockerfile used for this setup performs several key tasks:
• Base Image: Starts with the official Python 3.9­slim image to provide a minimal
Python runtime environment.
• Install Dependencies: Installs essential build tools and libraries needed for com­
piling Python packages. This includes tools like build-essential and gcc.
• Set Working Directory: Defines /app as the working directory within the container.
This is where the application code and dependencies will be placed.
• Copy Project Files: Copies the current directory’s contents into the container’s
/app directory, making the application code available inside the container.
• Install Python Packages: Uses pip to install Python packages listed in requirements.txt
and installs Gunicorn, a WSGI server for serving the Flask application.
• Expose Ports: Opens port 11112 for DICOM communication and port 5000 for the
Flask web server, allowing external access to these services.
• Environment Variable: Sets the FLASK_APP environment variable to dicomhawk.py,
which tells Flask which application to run.
• Run Application: Configures the container to start the Flask application using Gu­
nicorn with 4 worker processes. This setup improves performance and handles
multiple concurrent requests efficiently.
This Dockerfile ensures that our application is portable and scalable, while also making it
easier for others to deploy and test in their own environments.
4.2.5
Additional Scripts and Configuration Files
Several additional scripts and configuration files support the functionality and deployment
of DicomHawk. These include:
• Logging Scripts: Handles the creation and management of detailed and simplified
logs. The detailed logs capture all activity from DicomHawk, while the simplified
logs extract the most critical threat intelligence information from the raw log files,
generating a daily JSON log.
• Web Interface Scripts: Flask routes and templates for the web interface to monitor
honeypot activities.
Example: requirements.txt
1
Flask==2.0.1
2
pynetdicom==1.5.7
3
pydicom==2.1.2
4
gunicorn==20.1.0
4.2.6
Running and Testing the Application
To run the application, one has to follow these steps:
34
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:43==
Build the Docker Image: Navigate to the project directory and run the following command
to build the Docker image:
1
docker build -t dicomhawk .
Run the Docker Container: Once the image is built, run the container using:
1
docker run -p 5000:5000 -p 11112:11112 --name dicomhawk_container dicomhawk
The above command can be modified regarding port numbers and forwarding configura­
tion, allowing the DICOM honeypot to listen on a different port. In our setup, we decided
to listen on the ACR­NEMA DICOM port which is port 104 and forward it internally to port
11112 for better security. This approach was preferred over listening exclusively on the
alternative DICOM port (11112) because we aimed to capture potential attacks and in­
teractions with legacy DICOM systems, for which the ACR­NEMA DICOM port is more
relevant. As a result, the command we used to run the container is as follows:
1
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 -p 104:11112 --name dicomhawk_container dicomhawk
• ­p 5000:5000: Maps port 5000 on the host to port 5000 on the Docker container.
• ­p 104:11112: Maps port 104 on the host to port 11112 on the Docker container. This
means external traffic coming to port 104 on the host will be forwarded to port 11112
inside the container.
Access the Web Interface: Open a web browser and navigate to http://localhost:5000
to access the DicomHawk web interface which have the aesthetics of 4.7.
Figure 4.7: DicomHawk homepage interface.
From here, one can navigate to the interface pages for ”Logs” and ”Simplified Logs.” The
”Logs” page 4.8a displays raw text representation, while the ”Simplified Logs” 4.8b page
presents the information in a database­like format.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) DicomHawk logs interface.
(b) DicomHawk simplified logs interface.
Figure 4.8: Interfaces of DicomHawk: (a) Logs, (b) Simplified Logs.
4.2.7
Verify DICOM Server Functionality
To ensure that the DICOM server (DicomHawk) is functioning correctly, we use DICOM
client tools to send various DICOM requests. For our server, which emulates a legacy
DICOM system without authentication, the Application Entity Title (AET) is not required.
The server is running on IP address 98.71.20.222 and port 104.
C­ECHO: A C­ECHO request is used to verify that the DICOM server is available and
responding to network requests.
1
echoscu 98.71.20.222 104
C­FIND: A C­FIND request is used to query the DICOM server for information. For exam­
ple, to query for studies:
1
findscu -v -S -k 0010,0010="PATIENT_NAME" 98.71.20.222 104
C­STORE: A C­STORE request is used to send a DICOM object (such as an image) to
the DICOM server.
1
storescu -v 98.71.20.222 104 DICOM_FILE.dcm
C­MOVE: A C­MOVE request instructs the DICOM server to transfer a DICOM object to
another DICOM server or client.
1
movescu -v -aem DESTINATION_AET -S -k 0010,0010="PATIENT_NAME" 98.71.20.222
104
,→
Explanation of Parameters:
• -v: Verbose mode, provides detailed information about the process.
• 98.71.20.222: The IP address of our DICOM server.
• 104: The port number on which the DICOM server is listening.
• -S: Indicates that the query is for studies.
• -k: Specifies the DICOM tag and value for the query.
• 0010,0010="PATIENT_NAME": Example DICOM tag for Patient Name used in queries.
36
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:45==
• -aem DESTINATION_AET: The AET of the destination DICOM entity for C­MOVE re­
quests.
These examples use command­line tools from the DCMTK (DICOM Toolkit) suite, a popu­
lar open­source DICOM implementation. Ensure that DCMTK is installed and configured
properly on your system to execute these commands successfully.
Note: The Application Entity Title (AET) is typically used for authentication and identifica­
tion purposes in DICOM communications. However, for our DICOM server (DicomHawk),
which aims to emulate a legacy system without authentication, we have omitted the AET
requirement to simplify the interaction.
4.2.8
Project Reflection
This implementation of DicomHawk demonstrates a robust and scalable approach to de­
ploying a DICOM honeypot. The employment of Docker guarantees consistency across
environments, while the detailed logging and web interface that can act effectively in mon­
itoring the entire process. Among the challenges faced during the implementation were
configuring the DICOM handlers correctly and making sure the logging system collected
everything vital without interfering with performance. Those challenges were overcome
by intensive testing and step by step optimization until the reach of a minimum viable
product that could prove to be up to our expectations. Using Docker, Python libraries,
and Flask, DicomHawk provides a valuable tool to detect and analyze security threats in
medical imaging environments. This DICOM honeypot implementation for sure provides
better and more analytic logging while featuring a lightweight design that ensures seam­
less deployment online with minimal bugs and reduced resource demands. The complete
DicomHawk codebase is publicly available on our GitHub repository [72].
4.2.9
Mitigating the Fingerprinting Problem
 DicomHawk was created with several major functions aimed at solving the fingerprinting
problems evident in T­POT and Dicompot.  To generate non­static responses to DICOM re­
quests, the system leverages the Pynetdicom library which allows it to generate non­static
responses to DICOM requests, significantly reducing the chances of being flagged as a
honeypot by automated scanners.  This response variability, combined with improved pro­
tocol emulation, enables DicomHawk to mimic real DICOM servers more effectively, mak­
ing its behavior less predictable and more difficult to detect.  Moreover since DicomHawk
is a new system, it is not present in fingerprint databases used by scanning services like
Shodan.  For instance, as illustrated in Figure 4.9, DicomHawk is currently identified as a
”cloud medical” device on Shodan, reflecting its integration into the monitoring landscape
without immediate detection as a honeypot.  This combination of non­static responses,
realistic protocol emulation, and newness to the scanning databases has led to improved
reliability and accuracy in data collection, enhancing DicomHawk’s effectiveness for cy­
bersecurity research.  
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.9: Screenshot from Shodan showing DicomHawk identified as a ”cloud medical”
device.
38
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:47==
5
Experiments & Evaluation
In this chapter, there is a detailed analysis of the experimental setup, execution, and re­
sults drawn by different honeypots that can be used in monitoring DICOM medical imag­
ing systems. The primary goal of the experiments is to assess the effectiveness, perfor­
mance, and resource consumption of the various honeypot configurations to detect and
analyze hostile activities targeted at DICOM servers. Thirty days of experiment were per­
formed on the ground with both VPS and cloud environments. During this time, a large
amount of data was collected about attack patterns, attacker geolocation, temporal distri­
bution of interactions, and also IP addresses that appeared in different CTI databases.
This chapter is organized as follows:
• Section 1: Experiments ­ In this section, the setting and configurations of each
particular experiment are described, including infrastructure and deployed tools.
• Section 2: Evaluation ­ A comparative analysis among experiments is provided
with a focus on key metrics: the number of interactions, the number of detected
DICOM­specific commands, and the CTI presence of the interacting IPs. It is our
intention to infer insights into potential threats attacking DICOM systems from a
study of the behavior and characteristics of potential threats, by way of a systematic
analysis of the data collected in these experiments. The findings from this study will
help strengthen measures against the back and forth on DICOM servers to further
enhance the robustness of medical imaging networks against cyber threats.
5.1
Experiments
This section details the experimental setup used to evaluate the effectiveness and per­
formance of our different honeypots for DICOM medical imaging systems. The experi­
ments were conducted using both VPS and cloud environments to collect and analyze
data over a 30­day period. The following subsections describe the specific setup and
configurations used in each experiment, along with the relevant infrastructure and tools.
The experiments were conducted using the following infrastructure and tools:
• Azure: Cloud platform used for deploying and managing the DicomHawk honeypot.
• VPS: Virtual Private Servers used to host Dicompot honeypots.
• TPOT: An advanced honeypot framework integrating Dicompot to monitor and col­
lect data.
• DicomHawk: Our custom implementation of a DICOM Honeypot, designed to evade
fingerprinting, minimize resource usage, and incorporate an advanced logging sys­
tem.
• Database: A centralized database for storing and analyzing the enriched collected
data, utilizing SQLite.
Screenshot of the Azure virtual machine configuration and details are provided on 5.1
below.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.1: Azure Setup for DicomHawk Honeypot.
Experiments Overview
Three experiments were conducted to evaluate the performance
of the honeypots:
1. Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 11112: Monitoring data on port 11112.
2. Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104: Monitoring data on port 104.
3. DicomHawk Cloud: Monitoring data in an Azure cloud environment on port 104.
Each experiment was run for 30 days, and data was collected and analyzed to identify
patterns, attack vectors, and resource utilization.
5.1.1
Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 11112
In this experiment, Dicompot was deployed on a VPS using the TPOT framework to mon­
itor traffic on port 11112. The experiment ran for 30 days, and the data collected included
various types of attacks and interactions with the honeypot.
Table 5.1: Usage of Specific DICOM Commands
DICOM Command
Number of Interactions
C­FIND Search
3
The observed frequency of the C­FIND command, which was detected three times, indi­
cates a minimal level of query activity. The C­FIND command is typically used to query the
availability of certain studies or images within a DICOM server. The aforementioned com­
mands came from two different IPs and searched for studies and patients as depicted on
5.2. None of those IPs have a malicious reputation or presence on CTI, which can sug­
gest that it was either a mistake by a benign system or possibly a malicious actor who
has not been recorded on the CTI platforms used to triage our data. The actor behind
81.145.33.230 searched for a study but got no hits, while the actor behind 95.91.205.220
got full number (50) of our patient names.
40
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:49==
Table 5.2: Interaction Logs
Date
IP
Version
Term & Type
ISP
2024­06­05 22:10:59
81.145.33.230
RadiAnt­2023.1
20240506­StudyDate
British Telecommunications PLC
2024­06­05 23:12:57
81.145.33.230
RadiAnt­2023.1
20230606­StudyDate
British Telecommunications PLC
2024­06­07 17:59:19
95.91.205.220
RadiAnt­2023.1
*­PatientName
Vodafone Deutschland GmbH
Notably, there were no interactions involving the C­ECHO, C­STORE, or C­MOVE com­
mands, suggesting that probing or reconnaissance efforts specifically targeting these op­
erations were limited.
This minimal interaction with the honeypot using DICOM­specific commands over a month­
long period could be attributed to several factors. First, the attackers were doing so only
to scan for the existence of these servers; thus, they did not proceed to try other more
resource­intensive commands, such as C­STORE or C­MOVE. Secondly, the nature of
configuration of the honeypot could actually have influenced the kind of interactions and
would have deterred sophisticated attack methods. Lastly, the very short duration of the
experiment might not have been sufficient for a greater variety of attack methods to be
attracted and captured.
Geolocation of IP Addresses
Understanding the geographic distribution of IP addresses interacting with our honeypot
as depicted in 5.2 provides insights into the regions from which scanning and attack ac­
tivities originate. This information can help in identifying trends and potential threats from
specific areas, allowing for better­targeted security measures.
Figure 5.2: Geolocation of IP Addresses.
The majority of interactions originated from the United States, with 70 interactions, fol­
lowed by Great Britain with 45 interactions, and the Netherlands with 25 interactions.
Other countries with notable interactions include Germany, Russia, Italy, Belgium, and
Poland.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
41
==PAGE:50==
Number of Interactions Over Time
Analyzing the number of interactions as depicted in 5.3 over time helps in identifying
temporal patterns and trends in attack activity. This data can be used to predict periods
of high activity and prepare accordingly.
Figure 5.3: Number of Interactions Over Time.
Peaks in interactions were observed around the 28th of May and the 5th of June, with the
highest single­day interaction count exceeding 25. The overall interaction pattern sug­
gests sporadic activity, with several periods of high intensity followed by quieter periods.
Presence in CTI Databases
The presence of IP addresses in various Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) databases as
depicted in 5.4 indicates their recognition as potential threats. This analysis can help in
understanding the reputation and behavior of interacting IPs.
Figure 5.4: Presence in CTI Databases.
42
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:51==
All IP addresses were listed in the AbuseIPDB database. Additionally, 30.3% of the IP
addresses were listed in the GreyNoise database, indicating known benign or common
scanning behavior. Furthermore, 57.9% of the IP addresses were listed in the Shodan
database, highlighting their presence in other scanning databases. All IP addresses were
also listed in the Censys database, indicating widespread scanning and enumeration ac­
tivities.
Top Attacking IPs and ISPs
Identifying the top attacking IPs and their associated ISPs provides information on the
sources of malicious activities. This information can aid in pinpointing repeat offenders
and understanding the role of specific ISPs in hosting malicious actors.
Figure 5.5: Top 10 Attacking IPs.
The analysis of the top attacking IPs revealed that the most frequent attackers included
IPs such as 172.23.57.157, 178.79.139.171, and 109.74.204.123, each of which was
responsible for multiple interactions.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.6: Top 10 ISPs by Number of Attacks.
Additionally, the top ISPs associated with these attacks were Censys Inc. and Linode
LLC. This indicates that many of the attacks originated from known cloud providers and
scanning services, highlighting the involvement of these entities in scanning and potential
malicious activities.
Temporal Patterns of Attacks
Understanding the temporal patterns of attacks helps to identify when the system is most
vulnerable. This can inform the timing of enhanced monitoring and security measures.
Figure 5.7: Heatmap of Attacks by Day of Week and Hour.
Analysis of attack patterns revealed peaks during certain hours and days, with notable
44
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:53==
activity occurring on Fridays and Thursdays around midday.
Figure 5.8: Number of Unique Attacking IPs by Day.
Additionally, the number of unique attacking IPs fluctuated daily, with several peaks in­
dicating coordinated or distributed scanning activities. This temporal pattern provides
insights into the timing and coordination of attacks, which can be critical for developing
effective monitoring and defense strategies.
Version Distribution of Attacks
Analyzing the version distribution of the interactions as depicted in 5.9 helps us to un­
derstand which DICOM clients interact the most commonly with the honeypot. This can
provide insight into the tools used by attackers and potential vulnerabilities.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.9: Version Distribution of Attacks.
Notable Findings: The majority of interactions were associated with the OFFIS_DCMTK_362
and OFFIS_DCMTK_360 versions. OFFIS_DCMTK_362 and OFFIS_DCMTK_360 are
versions of the DCMTK (DICOM Toolkit) developed by OFFIS, a research and develop­
ment institute. DCMTK is a widely­used open­source library for handling DICOM files
and network communication. Its extensive functionality makes it a popular choice among
healthcare institutions and developers to implement DICOM applications. The high fre­
quency of interactions with these versions suggests their prevalent use in the field, either
for legitimate medical imaging tasks or as targets for testing and exploitation due to their
widespread adoption and potential vulnerabilities. Additionally, a minor proportion of in­
teractions involved versions like ”RadiAnt­2023.1” and others. RadiAnt­2023.1 refers to
a version of RadiAnt DICOM Viewer, a commercial medical image viewer designed for
viewing and analyzing DICOM files. It is known for its user­friendly interface and powerful
features that cater to the needs of healthcare professionals. The presence of interac­
tions with this and other less common versions highlights the variety of DICOM clients in
use. These interactions, although smaller in number, indicate the breadth of tools and
versions that access the system, reflecting a diverse ecosystem of medical imaging soft­
ware. Overall, the analysis of the version distribution provides insights into the usage
patterns and potential security concerns related to different DICOM clients interacting
with the honeypot. The concentration of interactions around certain versions could inform
targeted security measures, while the diversity of other versions underscores the need for
comprehensive monitoring and analysis.
5.1.2
Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104
In this experiment, Dicompot was configured to listen on port 104, another common DI­
COM port that hosts mostly legacy DICOM systems. The same TPOT framework and
46
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:55==
VPS setup were used, and data was collected over 30 days.
Table 5.3: Usage of Specific DICOM Commands
DICOM Command
Number of Interactions
C­ECHO
1
The observed frequency of the C­ECHO command, which was detected once, indicates
an even lower level of interaction compared to the previous experiment on port 11112. The
C­ECHO command is typically used to verify communication with a DICOM server. The
command originated from a single IP address, as detailed in Table 5.4. The IP address
178.32.197.86 has a malicious reputation and is associated with the ONYPHE SAS data
center in France. This suggests that the interaction might have had malicious motives.
Table 5.4: Interaction Logs
Date
IP
Version
Term & Type
Country Code
ISP
2024­07­01 15:18:30
178.32.197.86
OFFIS_DCMTK_362
C­ECHO
FR
OVH SAS
The limited interaction involving only the C­ECHO command suggests that there was no
attempt to perform resource­intensive operations like C­STORE or C­MOVE. This could
be due to the nature of the probe being more about verifying the presence and communi­
cation ability of the DICOM server rather than an in­depth reconnaissance or exploitation
attempt.
The absence of interactions involving commands such as C­FIND, C­STORE, or C­MOVE
could be attributed to several factors. First, the attackers might have been scanning for
DICOM servers and only verifying their presence with a simple C­ECHO command. Fur­
thermore, the configuration and visibility of the honeypot could have influenced the types
of interactions it attracted, potentially deterring more complex attack methods. Finally,
the short duration of the experiment might not have been sufficient to attract and capture
a wider variety of attack methods.
Geolocation of IP Addresses
Understanding the geographic distribution of IP addresses interacting with our honeypot,
as shown in Figure 5.10, provides insights into the regions from which scanning and at­
tack activities originate. This information helps identify trends and potential threats from
specific areas, allowing for better­targeted security measures.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.10: Geolocation of IP Addresses for Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104.
Most of the interactions originated in Great Britain (GB), the United States (US), and the
Netherlands (NL), indicating a high level of interest or activity from these regions.
Number of Interactions Over Time
Analyzing the number of interactions over time, as shown in Figure 5.11, helps identify
temporal patterns and trends in attack activity. These data can be used to predict periods
of high activity and prepare accordingly.
Figure 5.11: Number of Interactions Over Time for Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104.
The number of interactions varied over the 30­day period, with notable peaks in activity
occurring periodically.
48
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:57==
Presence in CTI Databases
The presence of IP addresses in various Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) databases, as
depicted in Figure 5.12, indicates their recognition as potential threats. This analysis can
help us understand the reputation and behavior of interacting IPs.
Figure 5.12: Presence in CTI Databases for Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104.
Most IP addresses were present in AbuseIPDB, with a significant presence in Shodan
and GreyNoise, indicating that many of the interacting IPs are known to CTI sources.
Heatmap of Attacks by Day and Hour
Understanding the temporal distribution of attacks, as shown in Figure 5.13, helps identify
when the system is most vulnerable. This can inform the timing of enhanced monitoring
and security measures.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.13: Heatmap of Attacks by Day and Hour for Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104.
The heatmap reveals that certain hours and days saw higher concentrations of attacks.
This pattern can help us understand the behavior of attackers and plan mitigations ac­
cordingly.
Top Attacking IPs and ISPs
Identifying the top attacking IPs and their associated ISPs provides information on the
sources of malicious activities. This can aid in pinpointing repeat offenders and under­
standing the role of specific ISPs in hosting malicious actors.
Figure 5.14: Top 10 Attacking IPs for Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104.
Analysis of the top attacking IPs revealed that the most frequent attackers included IP
50
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:59==
addresses from various ISPs, indicating a diverse set of sources for the attacks.
Figure 5.15: Top 10 ISPs by Number of Attacks for Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104.
Furthermore, the ISPs with the highest number of attacks included Linode LLC and Cen­
sys Inc., suggesting that many attacks were coming from cloud service providers.
Number of Unique Attacking IPs by Day
Analyzing the number of unique attacking IPs by day, as shown in Figure 5.16, provides
insights into the diversity of sources over time. This helps to understand the fluctuation in
attack sources and the potential for coordinated or distributed scanning activities.
Figure 5.16: Number of Unique Attacking IPs by Day for Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
51
==PAGE:60==
The daily count of unique attacking IPs fluctuated, with some days experiencing higher
diversity in attackers compared to others.
Version Distribution of Interactions
Understanding the distribution of the versions of the interactions, as depicted in Figure
5.17, helps identify which DICOM clients are most commonly interacting with the honey­
pot. This provides insights into the tools used by attackers and potential vulnerabilities.
Figure 5.17: Version Distribution of Interactions for Dicompot (TPOT) VPS 104.
The majority of interactions involved the version OFFIS_DCMTK_362, with some interac­
tions from other versions such as CharruaVista and OFFIS_DCMTK_360, indicating that
the interacting clients used multiple versions of the DICOM tool.
In summary, the experiment on port 104 demonstrated a high level of interest from certain
geographical regions and specific ISPs. The presence of IPs in the CTI databases sug­
gests known malicious activities. The variation in interaction volumes and the diversity of
attacking IPs highlight the dynamic nature of the threat landscape.
5.1.3
DicomHawk Cloud Experiment
DicomHawk was deployed in an Azure cloud environment to assess its performance and
resource utilization compared to the VPS­based Dicompot deployments. Data was col­
lected over 30 days.
Table 5.5: Usage of Specific DICOM Commands
DICOM Command
Number of Interactions
C­FIND Search
1
C­ECHO
2
52
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:61==
The observed frequency of the DICOM commands indicates a higher level of interaction
compared to the VPS­based deployments but not a significant difference that can be high­
lighted. The C­FIND command, detected once, is typically used to query the availability
of certain studies or images within a DICOM server. The C­ECHO command, detected
twice, is used to verify communication with a DICOM server. The commands came from
different IPs as shown in Table 5.6. The IP addresses involved in these interactions are
associated with internet service providers in Greece and Denmark.
Table 5.6: Interaction Logs
Date
IP
Version
Term & Type
Country Code
ISP
2024­07­21 21:07:04
94.70.57.135
­
C­FIND Search
GR
Otenet
2024­07­14 01:18:48
85.190.238.26
­
C­ECHO
DK
Packethub S.A.
2024­07­21 21:07:38
94.70.57.135
­
C­ECHO
GR
Otenet
The interaction logs suggest that the IP address 94.70.57.135 from Greece interacted
with the honeypot twice, once with a C­FIND Search and once with a C­ECHO command.
The IP address 85.190.238.26 from Denmark interacted with the honeypot using a C­
ECHO command. The interaction from Greece might indicate either benign probing or
initial reconnaissance by a potential attacker, as both C­FIND and C­ECHO commands
were used.
The minimal but varied interaction observed in this experiment highlights the need to mon­
itor for different types of DICOM commands. While the short duration of the experiment
might not have captured a wider variety of attack methods, the interactions observed pro­
vide insights into the potential behaviors of entities scanning or probing DICOM services
in a cloud environment.
Geolocation of IP Addresses
Understanding the geographic distribution of IP addresses interacting with our honeypot,
as shown in Figure 5.18, provides insights into the regions from which scanning and at­
tack activities originate. This information helps identify trends and potential threats from
specific areas, allowing for better­targeted security measures.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.18: Geolocation of IP Addresses for DicomHawk Cloud.
The majority of interactions originated from the United States (US), with over 100 inter­
actions. Other significant sources included Great Britain (GB), the Netherlands (NL), and
Germany (DE).
Number of Interactions Over Time
Analyzing the number of interactions over time, as shown in Figure 5.19, helps identify
temporal patterns and trends in attack activity. This data can be used to predict periods
of high activity and prepare accordingly.
Figure 5.19: Number of Interactions Over Time for DicomHawk Cloud.
The number of interactions varied over the 30­day period, with notable peaks in activity
occurring periodically around the 24th of July and the 8th of August.
54
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:63==
Presence in CTI Databases
The presence of IP addresses in various Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) databases, as
depicted in Figure 5.20, indicates their recognition as potential threats. This analysis helps
understand the reputation and behavior of interacting IPs.
Figure 5.20: Presence in CTI Databases for DicomHawk Cloud.
All IP addresses were listed in the AbuseIPDB database. 51.0% of the IP addresses
were not listed in the GreyNoise database, indicating that a significant proportion were
unknown or were not categorized by GreyNoise. 64.4% of the IP addresses were listed
in the Shodan database, highlighting their presence in other scanning databases. Finally,
all IP addresses were also listed in the Censys database, indicating widespread scanning
and enumeration activities.
Heatmap of Attacks by Day and Hour
Understanding the temporal distribution of attacks, as shown in Figure 5.21, helps identify
when the system is most vulnerable. This can inform the timing of enhanced monitoring
and security measures.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.21: Heatmap of Attacks by Day and Hour for DicomHawk Cloud.
The heatmap reveals higher concentrations of attacks during certain hours and days, with
notable activity on Mondays and Saturdays around midday and late evening.
Top Attacking IPs
Identifying the top attacking IPs and their associated ISPs, as depicted in Figure 5.22,
provides information on the sources of malicious activities. This can aid in pinpointing
repeat offenders and understanding the role of specific ISPs in hosting malicious actors.
Figure 5.22: Top 10 Attacking IPs for DicomHawk Cloud.
The most frequent attackers included IP addresses from various ISPs, indicating a diverse
set of sources for the attacks.
56
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:65==
Top ISPs by Number of Attacks
Analyzing the top ISPs by the number of attacks, as shown in Figure 5.23, helps identify
which ISPs are frequently used for malicious activities. This can provide insights into the
role of specific ISPs in the threat landscape.
Figure 5.23: Top 10 ISPs by Number of Attacks for DicomHawk Cloud.
The ISPs with the highest number of attacks included DigitalOcean LLC and Censys Inc.,
suggesting that many attacks were originating from cloud service providers.
Number of Unique Attacking IPs by Day
Analyzing the number of unique attacking IPs by day, as shown in Figure 5.24, provides
insights into the diversity of sources over time. This helps understand the fluctuation in
attack sources and the potential for coordinated or distributed scanning activities.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.24: Number of Unique Attacking IPs by Day for DicomHawk Cloud.
The daily count of unique attacking IPs fluctuated, with some days experiencing higher
diversity in attackers compared to others.
Version Distribution of Interactions
Understanding the version distribution of interactions, as depicted in Figure 5.25, helps
identify which DICOM clients interact the most frequently with the honeypot. This provides
insights into the tools used by attackers and potential vulnerabilities.
Figure 5.25: Version Distribution of Interactions for DicomHawk Cloud.
The majority of interactions involved the version OFFIS_DCMTK_360, with a significant
proportion using OFFIS_DCMTK_362.
58
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:67==
Summary: The DicomHawk Cloud experiment demonstrated significant interaction from
certain geographical regions and specific ISPs, with varying attack volumes and diverse
attacking IPs. The presence of IPs in CTI databases suggests known malicious activities.
The observed patterns and behaviors provide valuable insights into the threat landscape
targeting DICOM systems.
Interactions with Shodan
Our system attracted a significant number of scans from Shodan compared to the Di­
compot system. This is evident from the hostnames and ISPs containing ”Shodan” that
interacted with our honeypot. The following table provides a sample of these interactions.
Table 5.7: Sample of Hostnames with ”Shodan” in Hostname or ISP
Hostname
ISP
juice.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
juice.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
gravy.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pretzel.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pancake.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
bacon.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
hashbrown.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
toast.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
milk.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
eggs.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
This high frequency of interactions with Shodan suggests that our DicomHawk honeypot
effectively evaded Shodan’s fingerprinting techniques, leading to repeated scanning at­
tempts. This indicates the heightened interest from Shodan’s scanning services in our
setup.
The full table of hostnames with ”Shodan” can be found in Appendix .1.2.
5.2
Evaluation
This section provides a comparative analysis of the three experiments. The evaluation
focuses on the effectiveness, performance, and resource utilization of each honeypot
setup.
5.2.1
Evaluation of Dicompot Running on Different Ports
The comprehensive analysis of the Dicompot honeypot experiments on ports 104 and
11112, conducted over a 30­day period, provides several critical insights into the behavior
of attackers targeting DICOM medical imaging systems.
In terms of geographical distribution, the majority of attacks originated from the United
States, Great Britain, and the Netherlands, indicating these regions as significant sources
of malicious activity targeting DICOM services. There was a noticeable shift in the top
interacting countries between the two ports, with the US leading on port 11112 and GB on
port 104. This suggests that different ports might attract attention from different regions.
The temporal patterns of the attacks showed periods of high and low activity, with specific
peaks indicating coordinated attack efforts. Notable peaks were observed on different
dates for each port, highlighting that attackers may focus their efforts on specific ports at
different times. The heatmap analysis revealed that certain days and hours experienced
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
59
==PAGE:68==
higher attack volumes, which can inform the timing of defensive measures and resource
allocation.
The presence of IP addresses in threat intelligence databases is telling. All interacting IPs
were listed in AbuseIPDB and Censys, indicating that these IPs are widely recognized as
sources of malicious activity. Additionally, a significant proportion of IPs were listed in
Shodan and GreyNoise, suggesting that many of the attacks involved known scanning
behaviors and were performed by entities cataloged in these databases.
Identifying the top attacking IPs and ISPs provided further insights. Certain IPs, such as
109.74.204.123, 172.233.57.157, and 178.79.139.171, were frequent attackers across
both ports. Monitoring and blocking these IPs can enhance security. Moreover, many
attacks originated from cloud service providers such as Linode LLC and Censys Inc.,
indicating the use of cloud resources for malicious activities. Collaboration with these
providers could help mitigate some of the attack sources.
Regarding version distribution, the ”OFFIS_DCMTK_362” version was the most com­
monly used by interacting clients. This consistency suggests that attackers often use
similar tools and versions for their activities. The presence of other versions, though in
smaller numbers, indicates some diversity in the tools used by attackers, which could be
explored further to better understand the attack methodologies.
5.2.2
Evaluation of Dicompot and DicomHawk Experiments
This section provides a comparative analysis of the three experiments, focusing on the
effectiveness, performance, and resource utilization of each honeypot setup.
Comparative Analysis
The following graphs compare the number of attacks and inter­
actions across the three experiments. Figure 5.26 provides a visual representation of the
interactions across different honeypot setups.
Figure 5.26: Comparison of Interactions Across Different Honeypot Setups.
The table below summarizes the number of attacks and key observations from each ex­
60
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:69==
periment:
Table 5.8: Summary of Experiment Results
Experiment
Number of Attacks
Comments
Dicompot
(TPOT)
VPS 11112
152
Limited DICOM­specific interactions,
primarily general scanning.
Dicompot
(TPOT)
VPS 104
198
Higher number of interactions, with
one notable C­ECHO command de­
tected.
DicomHawk Cloud
149
Moderate interactions, with a mix of
C­FIND and C­ECHO commands de­
tected.
CTI Presence Analysis
The presence of IP addresses in various CTI databases indi­
cates their recognition as potential threats. The analysis of CTI presence helps to un­
derstand the reputation and behavior of interacting IPs. The figures below provide the
distribution of CTI presence across the experiments.
The table 5.9 provides a summary of the experiment results, including total interactions,
DICOM­specific interactions, unique IPs, and CTI presence.
Table 5.9: Summary of Experiment Results
Experiment
Total Inter­
actions
DICOM
Specific
Interac­
tions
Unique IPs
CTI
Presence
(Shodan,
Censys, GreyNoise)
Dicompot(11112)
152
3 C­FIND
82
Shodan:
57.9%, Censys:
100%, GreyNoise: 30.3%
Dicompot(104)
198
1 C­ECHO
87
Shodan:
71.8%, Censys:
100%, GreyNoise: 19.5%
DicomHawk
149
2 C­FIND, 1 C­ECHO
72
Shodan:
64.4%, Censys:
100%, GreyNoise: 51.0%
Analysis
The CTI presence analysis highlights several critical insights. First, the high
presence of IPs in the Censys database across all experiments indicates widespread
scanning and enumeration activities, suggesting that the interacting IPs are well­known in
the scanning community. This high presence underscores the need for constant vigilance
and monitoring to detect and mitigate such scanning activities.
Additionally, the significant presence of IPs in the Shodan database, particularly in the
104 experiment (71.8%), suggests that many of the attacks involved known scanning
behaviors cataloged in Shodan. This highlights the importance of monitoring Shodan to
detect potential threats early.
The variability in GreyNoise presence across the experiments is also noteworthy. The
DicomHawk experiment had the highest GreyNoise presence (51.0%), indicating that it
attracted more known benign or common scanning behavior. In contrast, the 104 exper­
iment had the lowest GreyNoise presence (19.5%), suggesting fewer interactions with
known benign scanners.
By comparing these metrics, we can conclude that the Dicompot on port 104 experienced
the highest interaction volume, followed by the Dicompot on port 11112 and then Di­
comHawk. The DICOM­specific interactions were minimal across all experiments, with
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
61
==PAGE:70==
only a few C­FIND and C­ECHO commands detected. The CTI presence data further un­
derscores the diverse nature of the interacting IPs and the varied threat landscape each
honeypot setup encountered.
In summary, each honeypot setup provided valuable insights into the nature of interac­
tions and threats targeting DICOM systems. The analysis highlights the need for robust
monitoring and the importance of using multiple CTI sources to gain a comprehensive
understanding of potential threats.
Note: The complete datasets are attached with this Thesis and available upon request
on the author.
62
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:71==
6
Discussion & Conclusion
6.1
Discussion
The discussion section delves into the initial efforts and challenges faced during the de­
velopment of the DICOM honeypot, alongside the limitations encountered throughout the
research. This analysis provides a comprehensive understanding of the complexities and
constraints that influenced the project’s outcomes.
6.1.1
Initial Efforts and Challenges
Our initial efforts in developing a DICOM honeypot were based on a foundational un­
derstanding of the DICOM protocol. This required extensive learning about the DICOM
standard, its protocols, and its use in medical imaging. However, due to our inexperience
with honeypots and the complexity of the DICOM protocol beyond simple SSH setups, the
task proved to be quite infeasible within the timeframe of this thesis. Developing a hon­
eypot from scratch demanded a deep understanding of both the protocol and the security
landscape, which was challenging given the limited resources and time available.
6.1.2
Limitations
Several limitations were encountered during the research and development of this thesis.
The most significant was the limited time available. Researching DICOM systems from a
security perspective alone could be the subject of an entire thesis. The documentation for
the DICOM protocol contains over 600 pages, making the understanding and protection
of its various components a considerable task. Despite the time constraints, we managed
to design and implement a custom honeypot solution. With more time, this solution could
have been further improved to provide additional functions and insights.
To avoid delays, personal financial resources were used for VPS rental, which had finan­
cial implications and impacted the results. Conducting the experiment on a university or
hospital server would likely have attracted more in number and more interesting interac­
tions, as it would have better deceived potential adversaries.
Finally, the problem of fingerprinting, which is a ”cat and mouse” game, significantly limited
our results. While the implementation of DicomHawk addressed this issue to some extent,
it remains an ongoing process of parameterization aimed at avoiding detection.
6.2
Conclusion
In this thesis, we explored the design and implementation of honeypots specifically tai­
lored for DICOM medical imaging systems. Our primary goal was to assess the effective­
ness, performance, and resource utilization of various honeypot configurations in detect­
ing and analyzing hostile activities targeted at DICOM servers. Through a series of exper­
iments conducted over thirty days in both VPS and cloud environments, we collected and
analyzed extensive data on attack patterns, attacker geolocation, and interaction charac­
teristics.
Our research faced several challenges, including limited time and financial resources.
Despite these limitations, we successfully implemented a custom DICOM honeypot, Di­
comHawk, which demonstrated improved functionality and evasion techniques compared
to existing solutions like Dicompot. The experiments revealed valuable insights into the
geographic distribution of attacks, temporal patterns, and the involvement of specific ISPs
and IP addresses in malicious activities.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
63
==PAGE:72==
The experiments demonstrated varying levels of effectiveness and resource utilization
across different honeypot setups. The DicomHawk Cloud setup, despite having fewer
total interactions compared to Dicompot VPS 11112 and 104, showcased more efficient
resource usage. That being said, DicomHawk could effectively run in a cloud entity of 2
core CPU and 4GB of RAM, while Tpot with dicompot need at least a 4 core CPU with
128 GB of RAM to run effectively. Future work could involve refining these honeypot
configurations and exploring additional cloud platforms for further optimization.
6.3
Key Findings
• Effectiveness of DicomHawk: The custom implementation of DicomHawk show­
cased enhanced realism and detection capabilities while providing a unique web
user interface with live monitoring of logs. By addressing fingerprinting issues and
integrating non­static responses, DicomHawk proved to be a more resilient and de­
ceptive honeypot compared to Dicompot.
• Geographic and Temporal Insights: The analysis of attack origins and timing
highlighted specific regions and periods of heightened activity, informing better pre­
paredness strategies for potential threats.
• CTI Presence: The presence of interacting IPs in multiple CTI databases under­
scored the recognition of these IPs as potential threats, emphasizing the importance
of continuous monitoring and threat intelligence integration.
• Resource Efficiency: DicomHawk demonstrated significant resource efficiency by
effectively running in a cloud entity with a 2­core CPU and 4GB of RAM, whereas
Tpot with Dicompot required at least a 4­core CPU and 128GB of RAM to run effec­
tively.
6.4
Future Work and Enhancements
Several other features could be included to make DicomHawk even more functional and
effective. The inclusion of advanced handlers for dealing with special DICOM commands
like C­MOVE or C­GET would significantly improve command handling. Real patient and
imaging data can be included, along with embedded honeytokens, to make data richer in
realism and detail adversarial interaction. The deployment of DicomHawk can be max­
imized further into more medical­specific server environments to prompt more targeted
interactions and further assist in data collection. Promoting contributions from the re­
search community will help in collaborative development and refinements of DicomHawk.
Additionally, running the honeypot for extended periods or deploying additional sensors
in various environments will allow for the gathering of more comprehensive data, helping
to determine whether observed patterns persist over longer durations or across different
geographic regions.
6.5
Final Remarks
The journey of designing, developing, and evaluating DicomHawk has been both chal­
lenging and rewarding. It demanded much research into the DICOM protocol itself￿its
security implications￿and into the practical implementation of honeypots. The initial hope
was that we would get more interest in DICOM than network scanning activities, but the
findings in this study lay a good ground for more findings to be made in this area.
Reviewing the process of preparing this thesis, I find it appropriate to reflect on the initial
plan and the points that were successful or challenging. The research process around
DICOM systems was laborious as it was a completely new subject for me. Additionally,
64
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:73==
understanding their connection with security techniques and implementing such a system
to search for data and insights was challenging. Nonetheless, I am satisfied with the final
result.
Throughout this journey, the initially set research questions guided the direction and focus
of the project:
How can cybersecurity honeypots be effectively designed in DICOM systems to
detect, analyze, and mitigate sophisticated cyber threats targeting healthcare or­
ganizations?
Based on our research, effective DICOM honeypots can be designed with advanced com­
mand handling, realistic data enrichment, and adaptive evasion techniques—integrating
this system into the detection and analysis of sophisticated cyber threats to give very
important insights into behavior and strategies.
How can the integration of deception technology, specifically honeypots, enhance
the security and resilience of DICOM systems in healthcare IT infrastructures against
sophisticated cyber threats?
The integration of deception technology, as implemented in DicomHawk, enhances the
security and resilience of DICOM systems by creating realistic decoy environments, en­
trapping and confusing cyber attackers. In so doing, it will serve not only for early detec­
tion of intrusions but also gather intelligence on attack methods and feed into a strategy
of proactive defense.
How can DICOM honeypots be designed to evade detection and fingerprinting by
tools like Shodan and Censys, as well as by cyber attackers?
Specifically, DicomHawk tackles the evasion by constantly reflecting on its response and
mimicking behavior of a real DICOM server. Through the avoidance of static configura­
tions and keeping up with regular updates of its behavior, DicomHawk provides the ability
to elude detection or fingerprinting by tools, including Shodan, Censys, and cyber attacks
themselves.
In conclusion, the design and testing of DicomHawk bring us a step closer to achieving
an all­secure, robust, and trusted DICOM system. The work in this study will further
contribute to broader cybersecurity practices and inspire further research.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA). DICOM Standard. Accessed:
2024­06­24. 2024. URL: https://www.dicomstandard.org/.
[2]
ITNews. “Millions of Australians’ Sensitive Medical Images, Data Left Openly Ac­
cessible”. In: ITNews (2021). Accessed: 2024­06­24. URL: https://www.itnews.com.
au/news/millions-of-australians-sensitive-medical-images-data-left-openly-accessible-
531248.
[3]
“45 Million Medical Images Accessible Online”. In: CybelAngel (2021). URL: https:
//cybelangel.com/medical-data-leaks/.
[4]
Aplite Researchers. “Millions of Patient Records at Risk”. In: Aplite Blog (Dec. 2023).
Accessed: 2024­06­05. URL: https://aplite.de/2023/12/06/millions-of-patient-
records-at-risk-118/.
[5]
“Medical Imaging Leaks Highlight Unhealthy Security Practices”. In: DarkReading
(2020). URL: https://www.darkreading.com/application-security/medical-imaging-
leaks-highlight-unhealthy-security-practices.
[6]
H. T. Neprash et al. “Trends in ransomware attacks on us hospitals, clinics, and
other health care delivery organizations, 2016­2021”. In: JAMA Health Forum 3 (12
2022), e224873. DOI: 10.1001/jamahealthforum.2022.4873.
[7]
AHA News. “HHS Alerts Health Sector to Leading Ransomware, Social Engineering
Threats”. In: AHA News (2024). Accessed: 2024­06­24. URL: https://www.aha.
org/news/headline/2024-04-10-hhs-alerts-health-sector-leading-ransomware-social-
engineering-threats.
[8]
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. Health Industry Cybersecurity Prac­
tices (HICP) Technical Volume 2: Cybersecurity Practices for Medium and Large
Healthcare Organizations. Tech. rep. Section 8.L.F: Deception Technologies, page
98. 2023. URL: https://405d.hhs.gov/Documents/tech-vol2-508.pdf.
[9]
Shodan. Honeyscore: Honeypot or Not? Accessed: 2024­06­24. 2024. URL: https:
//honeyscore.shodan.io/.
[10]
Censys. Censys: The Search Engine for Internet Connected Devices. Accessed:
2024­06­24. 2024. URL: https://censys.io/.
[11]
DICOM. About DICOM: Overview. Retrieved from https://www.dicomstandard.org/about/.
1993.
[12]
Orchard Software. Orchard Laboratory Information Systems. https://www.orchardsoft.
com. Accessed: 2023­05­31. 2023.
[13]
NEMA. DICOM Standards Committee: Part 1 ­ Introduction and Overview. Accessed:
2024­06­24. 2023. URL: https://dicom.nema.org/medical/dicom/current/output/
chtml/part01/sect_1.3.html.
[14]
“A Brief History of DICOM”. In: Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
(DICOM). Accessed: 2024­06­24. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-540-74571-6_4. URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-
74571-6_4.
[15]
Ding Zhou and Eran A. Edirisinghe. “Automatic Selective Encryption of DICOM Im­
ages”. In: Applied Sciences 13.8 (2023), p. 4779. DOI: 10.3390/app13084779. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/13/8/4779.
[16]
Oleg S. Pianykh. “DICOM Security”. In: Digital Imaging and Communications in
Medicine (DICOM). Springer, 2010, pp. 321–338. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-10850-
1_11. URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-10850-1_11.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
67
==PAGE:76==
[17]
DICOM Standards Committee. DICOM FAQ Response to 128­byte Preamble Vul­
nerability. May 2019. URL: https://www.dicomstandard.org/docs/librariesprovider2/
dicomdocuments / wp - content / uploads / 2019 / 05 / faq - dicom - 128 - byte - preamble -
posted1-1.pdf?sfvrsn=f4f75455_2.
[18]
Microsoft. DICOM Data Lake in Azure. 2023. URL: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-
us/azure/healthcare-apis/dicom/dicom-data-lake.
[19]
Azure. Azure Health Data Services ­ FHIR, DICOM & MedTech. 2021. URL: https:
//azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/health-data-services/.
[20]
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA). 2021. URL: https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/index.html.
[21]
PostDICOM. CloudPACS Integration With Electronic Health Record. 2021. URL:
https://www.postdicom.com/en/article/cloudpacs-integration-with-electronic-health-
record.
[22]
Healthcare IT News. Google Cloud strikes imaging partnerships with Change Health­
care, Dicom. 2020. URL: https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/google-cloud-
strikes-imaging-partnerships-change-healthcare-dicom.
[23]
Jr Bidgood W. Dean et al. “Understanding and Using DICOM, the Data Interchange
Standard for Biomedical Imaging”. In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association 4.3 (May 1997), pp. 199–212. ISSN: 1067­5027. DOI: 10.1136/jamia.
1997 . 0040199. eprint: https : / / academic . oup . com / jamia / article - pdf / 4 / 3 / 199 /
2479706/4-3-199.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1136/jamia.1997.0040199.
[24]
Niels Provos. “A Virtual Honeypot Framework”. In: 13th USENIX Security Sym­
posium (USENIX Security 04). San Diego, CA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2004.
URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/13th-usenix-security-symposium/virtual-
honeypot-framework.
[25]
Honeynet Project. The Honeynet Project. https://www.honeynet.org/. Accessed:
2024­07­03.
[26]
N. Provos. “Honeyd—A virtual honeypot daemon”. In: Proceedings of the 10th USENIX
Security Symposium. Accessed: 2024­07­03. 2004. URL: https://www.usenix.org/
legacy/publications/library/proceedings/sec04/tech/provos.html.
[27]
Iyatiti Mokube and Michele Adams. “Honeypots: concepts, approaches, and chal­
lenges”. In: Proceedings of the 45th annual southeast regional conference. 2007,
pp. 321–326.
[28]
Markus Koetter. Dionaea ­ Catching Bugs. https://github.com/DinoTools/dionaea.
Accessed: 2024­07­03. 2024.
[29]
Mwcollect Project. mwcollect: Malware Collection Daemon. https://mwcollect.org.
Accessed: 2024­07­03. 2024.
[30]
Nepenthes Project. Nepenthes: A Tool to Capture and Analyze Malware. https://
nepenthes.carnivore.it. Accessed: 2024­07­03. 2024.
[31]
Honeytrap Project. Honeytrap: Dynamic TCP Connection Listener. https://honeytrap.
io. Accessed: 2024­07­03. 2024.
[32]
Javier Franco et al. “A Survey of Honeypots and Honeynets for Internet of Things, In­
dustrial Internet of Things, and Cyber­Physical Systems”. In: IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials 23 (2021), pp. 2351–2383. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:236924363.
[33]
Yuanyuan Grace Zeng, David Coffey, and John Viega. “How Vulnerable Are Un­
protected Machines on the Internet?” In: Passive and Active Measurement. Ed. by
Michalis Faloutsos and Aleksandar Kuzmanovic. Cham: Springer International Pub­
lishing, 2014, pp. 224–234. ISBN: 978­3­319­04918­2.
68
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:77==
[34]
E. Alata et al. “Lessons learned from the deployment of a high­interaction honey­
pot”. In: 2006 Sixth European Dependable Computing Conference. 2006, pp. 39–
46. DOI: 10.1109/EDCC.2006.17.
[35]
Martin Valicek et al. “Creation and Integration of Remote High Interaction Honey­
pots”. In: 2017 International Conference on Software Security and Assurance (IC­
SSA). 2017, pp. 50–55. DOI: 10.1109/ICSSA.2017.21.
[36]
Wenjun Fan et al. “Enabling an Anatomic View to Investigate Honeypot Systems:
A Survey”. In: IEEE Systems Journal 12.4 (2018), pp. 3906–3919. DOI: 10.1109/
JSYST.2017.2762161.
[37]
D. Zielinski and H. A. Kholidy. “An Analysis of Honeypots and their Impact as a Cyber
Deception Tactic”. In: SUNY Polytechnic Institute. 2020. URL: https://sunypoly.edu/
research/honeypots-analysis.
[38]
Ye Zhou. “Chameleon: towards adaptive honeypot for internet of things”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the ACM Turing Celebration Conference ­ China. ACM TURC ’19.
Chengdu, China: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019. ISBN: 9781450371582.
DOI: 10.1145/3321408.3321589. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3321408.3321589.
[39]
Christopher Kelly et al. “A Comparative Analysis of Honeypots on Different Cloud
Platforms”. In: Sensors 21.7 (2021). ISSN: 1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s21072433.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/7/2433.
[40]
Abdullah Almurayh. “Virtual Private Server”. In: UCCS­CS526, May (2010).
[41]
Oleg S. Pianykh. Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM): A
practical introduction and survival guide. Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
ISBN: 978­3­642­10850­1.
[42]
Mark Stites and Oleg S. Pianykh. “How Secure Is Your Radiology Department?
Mapping Digital Radiology Adoption and Security Worldwide”. In: American Journal
of Roentgenology 206.4 (2016). PMID: 26934387, pp. 797–804. DOI: 10.2214/AJR.
15.15283. eprint: https://doi.org/10.2214/AJR.15.15283. URL: https://doi.org/10.
2214/AJR.15.15283.
[43]
David Cordero and Cristian Barría. “Cybersecurity Analysis in Nodes that Work
on the DICOM Protocol, a Case Study”. In: ITNG 2021 18th International Confer­
ence on Information Technology­New Generations. Ed. by Shahram Latifi. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 69–76. ISBN: 978­3­030­70416­2.
[44]
David Cordero Vidal and Cristian Barria. “Cybersecurity Analysis on PACS­DICOM
Servers in Chile”. In: Springer, Oct. 2020, pp. 215–224. ISBN: 978­3­030­62553­5.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-62554-2_16.
[45]
Benoit Desjardins et al. “DICOM Images Have Been Hacked! Now What?” In: Amer­
ican Journal of Roentgenology 214.4 (2020). PMID: 31770023, pp. 727–735. DOI:
10.2214/AJR.19.21958. eprint: https://doi.org/10.2214/AJR.19.21958. URL:
https://doi.org/10.2214/AJR.19.21958.
[46]
Zhiqiang Wang et al. “DICOM­Fuzzer: Research on DICOM Vulnerability Mining
Based on Fuzzing Technology”. In: Communications and Networking. Ed. by Hong­
hao Gao et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 509–524.
[47]
Zhiqiang Wang et al. “Security of Medical Cyber­physical Systems: An Empirical
Study on Imaging Devices”. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2020 ­ IEEE Conference on Com­
puter Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS). 2020, pp. 997–1002.
DOI: 10.1109/INFOCOMWKSHPS50562.2020.9162769.
[48]
Clemens Scott Kruse et al. “Cybersecurity in healthcare: A systematic review of
modern threats and trends”. In: Technology and Health Care 25.1 (2017), pp. 1–10.
DOI: 10.3233/THC-161263.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
69
==PAGE:78==
[49]
HIPAA Journal. “Ransomware Attacks in Healthcare Sector in 2023”. In: HIPAA
Journal (2023). URL: https://www.hipaajournal.com/ransomware-attacks-healthcare-
sector-2023/.
[50]
TechCrunch. “Millions of Patient Scans Exposed Online Due to DICOM Vulnerabil­
ities”. In: TechCrunch (2023). URL: https://techcrunch.com/2023/04/19/dicom-
vulnerabilities-expose-patient-scans/.
[51]
Niels Provos. “Honeyd ­ A Virtual Honeypot Daemon”. In: Washington, D.C.: USENIX
Association, Aug. 2003.
[52]
Thorsten Holz and Frederic Raynal. “Detecting Honeypots and Other Suspicious
Environments”. In: Proceedings of the Sixth Annual IEEE SMC Information Assur­
ance Workshop. IEEE. 2005, pp. 29–36. DOI: 10.1109/IAW.2005.1495930.
[53]
Hamid Mohammadzadeh, Masood Mansoori, and Ian Welch. “Evaluation of Finger­
printing Techniques and a Windows­based Dynamic Honeypot”. In: Proceedings of
the Eleventh Australasian Information Security Conference (AISC 2013). Australian
Computer Society, Inc. 2013, pp. 59–66.
[54]
Alexander Vetterl and Richard Clayton. “Bitter Harvest: Systematically Fingerprint­
ing Low­ and Medium­Interaction Honeypots at Internet Scale”. In: 12th USENIX
Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT 18). USENIX Association. 2018.
[55]
Shun Morishita et al. “Detect Me If You Can: An Internet­Wide View of Self­Revealing
Honeypots”. In: 2019 IFIP/IEEE Symposium on Integrated Network and Service
Management (IM). IEEE. 2019, pp. 134–142. DOI: 10.23919/INM.2019.8717918.
[56]
Kon Papazis and Naveen Chilamkurti. “Detecting Indicators of Deception in Emu­
lated Monitoring Systems”. In: Service Oriented Computing and Applications 13.1
(2019), pp. 17–29. DOI: 10.1007/s11761-018-0252-2.
[57]
Li Z. Huang Q. and Zhou R. “Honeypot Fingerprinting Based on Machine Learn­
ing Techniques”. In: Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Network
Security and Privacy (ICNSP 2021). IEEE. 2021, pp. 23–28.
[58]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “Gotta
Catch ’em All: A Multistage Framework for Honeypot Fingerprinting”. In: Digital
Threats: Research and Practice 4.3 (2023), pp. 1–28. DOI: 10.1145/3584976.
[59]
Zack Whittaker. “A billion medical images exposed, but doctors ignore warnings”.
In: TechCrunch (2020). URL: https://techcrunch.com/2020/01/10/medical-images-
exposed-pacs/.
[60]
Jouni Ihanus and Tero Kokkonen. “Modelling Medical Devices with Honeypots”. In:
Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and Systems.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 295–306. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
030-65726-0_26. URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-65726-
0_26.
[61]
Jouni Ihanus, Tero Kokkonen, and Timo Hämäläinen. “Modelling Medical Devices
with Honeypots: A Conceptual Framework”. In: Lecture Notes in Networks and Sys­
tems. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 145–155. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-031-04826-5_15. URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-
04826-5_15.
[62]
Huanran Wang et al. “Using honeypots to model botnet attacks on the internet of
medical things”. In: Computers and Electrical Engineering 102 (2022), p. 108212.
ISSN: 0045­7906. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2022.108212. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045790622004529.
[63]
Department of Health and Human Services. Using Honeypots for Network Intrusion
Detection. Accessed: 2024­03­13. Oct. 2020. URL: https://www.hhs.gov/sites/
default/files/using-honeypots-network-intrusion-detection.pdf.
70
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:79==
[64]
NSM Foo. dicompot. GitHub repository. 2024. URL: https://github.com/nsmfoo/
dicompot.
[65]
Julian Schmale. MedPot: A Honeypot for Medical Devices. https://github.com/
schmalle/medpot. Accessed: 2024­07­08. 2024.
[66]
A. Vorbach och B. Kober M. Ochse S. Harderecker. T­Pot: The All In One Honeypot
Platform. 2021. URL: https://github.com/telekom-security/tpotce.
[67]
DICOM Standards Committee. DICOM Upper Layer Protocol for TCP/IP. Accessed:
2024­07­08. 2024. URL: https://dicom.nema.org/medical/dicom/current/output/
chtml/part08/chapter_9.html.
[68]
AbuseIPDB. AbuseIPDB. https : / / www . abuseipdb . com. Accessed: 2024­07­11.
2024.
[69]
Blackhole. Blackhole. https : / / raw . githubusercontent . com / stamparm / maltrail /
master/trails/static/mass_scanner.txt. Accessed: 2024­07­11. 2024.
[70]
Greynoise. Greynoise. https://www.greynoise.io. Accessed: 2024­07­11. 2024.
[71]
Pynetdicom. pynetdicom: A Python library for DICOM networking. Accessed: 2024­
06­24. 2024. URL: https://pydicom.github.io/pynetdicom/.
[72]
Georgios Theodoridis. DicomHawk. https://github.com/gtheodoridis/DICOMHawk.
2024.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:81==
.1
Appendix: Code Listings
.1.1
Script for Fetching and Analyzing Logs
This script is designed to handle the comprehensive process of fetching, analyzing, and
enriching log data from various sources. It begins by retrieving IP abuse information from
APIs such as AbuseIPDB, GreyNoise, and Shodan. To enhance performance, the script
employs threading techniques to concurrently fetch information for multiple IP addresses.
Once the data is retrieved, it integrates additional details into a DataFrame, including
public status, country code, ISP information, and various reports from the APIs. Following
data enrichment, the script saves the enhanced information into an SQLite database and
exports it as CSV files. Additionally, it aggregates log entries by their ID and generates
consolidated reports for further analysis.
Below is the complete code for the script:
1
from datetime import datetime
2
import pandas as pd
3
import gzip
4
import os
5
import requests
6
import sqlite3
7
import time
8
from threading import Thread
9
from queue import Queue
10
11
def fetch_abuseip_info(ip_address, api_key):
12
"""Fetch IP abuse information using the AbuseIPDB API."""
13
url = f"https://api.abuseipdb.com/api/v2/check?ipAddress={ip_address}"
14
headers = {'Key': api_key, 'Accept': 'application/json'}
15
try:
16
response = requests.get(url, headers=headers)
17
response.raise_for_status()
18
return response.json().get('data', {})
19
except requests.RequestException as e:
20
print(f"Failed to fetch data for IP {ip_address} from AbuseIPDB:
{e}")
,→
21
return {}
22
23
def fetch_greynoise_info(ip_address, api_key):
24
"""Fetch IP information using the GreyNoise API."""
25
url = f"https://api.greynoise.io/v3/community/{ip_address}"
26
headers = {'key': api_key, 'Accept': 'application/json'}
27
try:
28
response = requests.get(url, headers=headers)
29
if response.status_code == 404:
30
print(f"IP {ip_address} not found in GreyNoise.")
31
return {}
32
response.raise_for_status()
33
return response.json()
34
except requests.HTTPError as http_err:
35
if "429" in str(http_err):
36
print(f"Rate limit exceeded for GreyNoise. Skipping further
requests for today.")
,→
37
return "429"
38
print(f"Failed to fetch data for IP {ip_address} from GreyNoise:
{http_err}")
,→
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
73
==PAGE:82==
39
return {}
40
except requests.RequestException as e:
41
print(f"Failed to fetch data for IP {ip_address} from GreyNoise:
{e}")
,→
42
return {}
43
44
def fetch_shodan_info(ip_address, api_key):
45
"""Fetch IP information using the Shodan API."""
46
url = f"https://api.shodan.io/shodan/host/{ip_address}?key={api_key}"
47
try:
48
response = requests.get(url)
49
response.raise_for_status()
50
return response.json()
51
except requests.RequestException as e:
52
print(f"Failed to fetch data for IP {ip_address} from Shodan: {e}")
53
return {}
54
55
def worker(ip_queue, result_queue, abuseip_api_key, greynoise_api_key,
shodan_api_key, skip_greynoise):
,→
56
while not ip_queue.empty():
57
ip = ip_queue.get()
58
abuseip_info = fetch_abuseip_info(ip, abuseip_api_key)
59
60
greynoise_info = {}
61
if not skip_greynoise:
62
greynoise_info = fetch_greynoise_info(ip, greynoise_api_key)
63
if greynoise_info == "429":
64
skip_greynoise[0] = True
65
greynoise_info = {}
66
67
shodan_info = fetch_shodan_info(ip, shodan_api_key)
68
69
result_queue.put((ip, abuseip_info, greynoise_info, shodan_info))
70
ip_queue.task_done()
71
72
def fetch_all_ip_info(unique_ips, abuseip_api_key, greynoise_api_key,
shodan_api_key):
,→
73
"""Fetch information for all unique IPs from AbuseIPDB, GreyNoise, and
Shodan using threading."""
,→
74
ip_queue = Queue()
75
result_queue = Queue()
76
skip_greynoise = [False]
77
78
for ip in unique_ips:
79
ip_queue.put(ip)
80
81
threads = []
82
for _ in range(10):
# Number of threads
83
t = Thread(target=worker, args=(ip_queue, result_queue,
abuseip_api_key, greynoise_api_key, shodan_api_key,
skip_greynoise))
,→
,→
84
t.start()
85
threads.append(t)
86
87
for t in threads:
88
t.join()
74
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:83==
89
90
ip_info_dict = {}
91
while not result_queue.empty():
92
ip, abuseip_info, greynoise_info, shodan_info = result_queue.get()
93
ip_info_dict[ip] = {
94
'abuseip_info': abuseip_info,
95
'greynoise_info': greynoise_info,
96
'shodan_info': shodan_info
97
}
98
99
return ip_info_dict
100
101
def enrich_df_with_ip_info(df, ip_info_dict):
102
"""Enrich DataFrame with IP information from the fetched data."""
103
df['ID'] = df['ID'].astype(str)
# Ensure ID is a string for later
aggregation
,→
104
105
# Prepare columns for IP info
106
columns = [
107
'IsPublic', 'CountryCode', 'UsageType', 'ISP', 'TotalReports',
'LastReportedAt', 'hostname',
,→
108
'gn_classification', 'gn_name', 'gn_last_seen',
109
'shodan_country', 'shodan_org', 'shodan_isp', 'shodan_ports'
110
]
111
for col in columns:
112
df[col] = None
113
114
# Iterate over unique IP addresses in the DataFrame
115
for ip, info in ip_info_dict.items():
116
abuseip_info = info.get('abuseip_info', {})
117
greynoise_info = info.get('greynoise_info', {})
118
shodan_info = info.get('shodan_info', {})
119
120
if abuseip_info:
# Check if AbuseIPDB information is available
121
# Update DataFrame with AbuseIPDB information for this IP
122
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'IsPublic'] =
abuseip_info.get('isPublic', False)
,→
123
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'CountryCode'] =
abuseip_info.get('countryCode', 'Unknown')
,→
124
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'UsageType'] =
abuseip_info.get('usageType', 'Unknown')
,→
125
# Check and handle hostname
126
hostnames = abuseip_info.get('hostnames', [])
127
if hostnames:
128
# Assuming we only want the first hostname, if available
129
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'hostname'] = hostnames[0]
130
else:
131
# Assign NaN or a placeholder if no hostname is found
132
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'hostname'] = pd.NA
133
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'ISP'] = abuseip_info.get('isp',
'Unknown')
,→
134
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'TotalReports'] =
abuseip_info.get('totalReports', 0)
,→
135
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'LastReportedAt'] =
abuseip_info.get('lastReportedAt', 'Unknown')
,→
136
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
75
==PAGE:84==
137
if greynoise_info and greynoise_info != "429":
# Check if GreyNoise
information is available and valid
,→
138
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'gn_classification'] =
greynoise_info.get('classification', 'Unknown')
,→
139
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'gn_name'] = greynoise_info.get('name',
'Unknown')
,→
140
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'gn_last_seen'] =
greynoise_info.get('last_seen', 'Unknown')
,→
141
142
if shodan_info:
# Check if Shodan information is available
143
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'shodan_country'] =
shodan_info.get('country_name', 'Unknown')
,→
144
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'shodan_org'] = shodan_info.get('org',
'Unknown')
,→
145
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'shodan_isp'] = shodan_info.get('isp',
'Unknown')
,→
146
ports = shodan_info.get('ports', [])
147
if ports:
148
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'shodan_ports'] = ','.join(map(str,
ports))
,→
149
else:
150
df.loc[df['IP'] == ip, 'shodan_ports'] = pd.NA
151
152
# Convert LastReportedAt and gn_last_seen to datetime format
153
df['LastReportedAt'] = pd.to_datetime(df['LastReportedAt'])
154
df['gn_last_seen'] = pd.to_datetime(df['gn_last_seen'])
155
156
# Remove timezone information
157
df['LastReportedAt'] = df['LastReportedAt'].dt.tz_localize(None)
158
df['gn_last_seen'] = df['gn_last_seen'].dt.tz_localize(None)
159
160
return df
161
162
def write_to_sqlite(df, db_name, table_name):
163
"""Write DataFrame to an SQLite database."""
164
with sqlite3.connect(db_name) as conn:
165
df.to_sql(table_name, conn, if_exists='replace', index=False)
166
167
def read_data_from_gz(directory):
168
"""Read all gzipped JSON files in a directory and combine into a single
DataFrame."""
,→
169
data_frames = []
170
for filename in os.listdir(directory):
171
if filename.endswith('.gz'):
172
file_path = os.path.join(directory, filename)
173
with gzip.open(file_path, 'rt') as gz_file:
174
data_frames.append(pd.read_json(gz_file, lines=True))
175
return pd.concat(data_frames, ignore_index=True)
176
177
def consolidate_entries_by_id(df):
178
def join_unique_strings(series):
179
return ', '.join(series.dropna().unique())
180
181
return df.groupby('ID').agg({
182
'time': 'first',
183
'IP': 'first',
76
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:85==
184
'Port': 'first',
185
'level': join_unique_strings,
186
'msg': join_unique_strings,
187
'Version': join_unique_strings,
188
'Status': join_unique_strings,
189
'Command': join_unique_strings,
190
'Term': join_unique_strings,
191
'Type': join_unique_strings,
192
'Matches': 'sum',
193
'IsPublic': 'first',
194
'CountryCode': 'first',
195
'UsageType': 'first',
196
'ISP': 'first',
197
'hostname': 'first',
198
'TotalReports': 'sum',
199
'LastReportedAt': 'max',
200
'gn_classification': 'first',
201
'gn_name': 'first',
202
'gn_last_seen': 'max',
203
'shodan_country': 'first',
204
'shodan_org': 'first',
205
'shodan_isp': 'first',
206
'shodan_ports': 'first',
207
'IsOnBLACKHOLE': 'first'
# Include IsOnBLACKHOLE in aggregation
208
}).reset_index()
209
210
def load_blacklist(url):
211
"""Load the blacklist IPs from a URL."""
212
blacklist_ips = set()
213
response = requests.get(url)
214
for line in response.text.splitlines():
215
line = line.strip()
216
if line and not line.startswith('#'):
217
ip = line.split()[0]
218
blacklist_ips.add(ip)
219
return blacklist_ips
220
221
def add_blacklist_column(df, blacklist_ips):
222
"""Add a column to the DataFrame indicating if the IP is in the
blacklist."""
,→
223
df['IsOnBLACKHOLE'] = df['IP'].apply(lambda x: x in blacklist_ips)
224
return df
225
226
def main():
227
"""Main function to execute the workflow."""
228
abuseip_api_key = os.getenv('ABUSEIPDB_API_KEY',
'default_abuseip_key_if_not_set')
# Placeholder for AbuseIPDB API
key
,→
,→
229
greynoise_api_key = os.getenv('GREYNOISE_API_KEY',
'default_greynoise_key_if_not_set')
# Placeholder for GreyNoise API
key
,→
,→
230
shodan_api_key = os.getenv('SHODAN_API_KEY',
'default_shodan_key_if_not_set')
# Placeholder for Shodan API key
,→
231
censys_api_id = os.getenv('CENSYS_API_ID_KEY',
'default_censys_id_key_if_not_set') # Placeholder for Censys API id
key
,→
,→
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
77
==PAGE:86==
232
censys_api_secret = os.getenv('CENSYS_API_SECRET_KEY',
'default_censys_secret_key_if_not_set') # Placeholder for Censys API
secret key
,→
,→
233
directory = 'compressed'
234
db_name = 'dicompot_logs.db'
235
table_name = 'logs'
236
237
# Get the current date in the format yyyyMMdd
238
current_date = datetime.now().strftime("%Y%m%d")
239
date_folder = f'logs_{current_date}'
240
241
# Construct the full path to the date-specific folder
242
directory_date = os.path.join(directory, date_folder)
243
244
# Read the logs from gzipped files
245
df = read_data_from_gz(directory_date)
246
247
# Extract unique IP addresses
248
unique_ips = df['IP'].dropna().unique()
249
250
# Fetch information for all unique IPs
251
ip_info_dict = fetch_all_ip_info(unique_ips, abuseip_api_key,
greynoise_api_key, shodan_api_key)
,→
252
253
# Enrich the DataFrame with the fetched information
254
df = enrich_df_with_ip_info(df, ip_info_dict)
255
256
# Load blacklist IPs
257
blacklist_url =
'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/stamparm/maltrail/master/trails/static/mass_scanner.t
,→
258
blacklist_ips = load_blacklist(blacklist_url)
259
260
# Add the blacklist column
261
df = add_blacklist_column(df, blacklist_ips)
262
263
write_to_sqlite(df, db_name, table_name)
264
265
'''combined'''
266
267
# Get the current date in the format dd_mm_yy for the combined logs
268
current_date_for_combined = datetime.now().strftime("%d_%m_%y")
269
270
# Ensure the directory exists
271
output_directory_combined = 'combined_logs'
272
os.makedirs(output_directory_combined, exist_ok=True)
273
274
combined_csv = os.path.join(output_directory_combined,
f'combined_logs_{current_date_for_combined}.csv')
,→
275
df.to_csv(combined_csv, index=False)
276
277
'''consolidated'''
278
279
# Get the current date in the format dd_mm_yy for the consolidated logs
280
current_date_for_consolidated = datetime.now().strftime("%d_%m_%y")
281
282
# Ensure the directory exists
78
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:87==
283
output_directory_consolidated = 'consolidated_logs'
284
os.makedirs(output_directory_consolidated, exist_ok=True)
285
286
# Generate the database filename with the current date inside the
specified directory
,→
287
db_consolidated = os.path.join(output_directory_consolidated,
f'consolidated_logs_{current_date_for_consolidated}.db')
,→
288
df = consolidate_entries_by_id(df)
289
290
# Convert 'Port' and 'Matches' to integer after aggregation
291
df['Port'] = pd.to_numeric(df['Port'], downcast='integer')
292
df['Matches'] = pd.to_numeric(df['Matches'], downcast='integer')
293
294
# Save the consolidated DataFrame to a CSV file in the same directory
295
consolidated_csv = os.path.join(output_directory_consolidated,
f'consolidated_logs_{current_date_for_consolidated}.csv')
,→
296
df.to_csv(consolidated_csv, index=False)
297
298
# Write the consolidated DataFrame to an SQLite database
299
write_to_sqlite(df, db_consolidated, table_name)
300
301
print(df.head())
302
303
if __name__ == "__main__":
304
main()
.1.2
Full List of Hostnames with ”Shodan”
The following tables 1 and 2 list all hostnames and ISPs containing ”Shodan” that inter­
acted with our honeypot.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
79
==PAGE:88==
Table 1: Hostnames with ”Shodan” in Hostname or ISP
Hostname
ISP
juice.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
juice.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
juice.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
juice.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
gravy.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
gravy.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
gravy.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
gravy.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
gravy.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
gravy.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pretzel.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pretzel.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pretzel.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pretzel.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pancake.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pancake.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pancake.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
pancake.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
biscuit.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
biscuit.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
biscuit.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
biscuit.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
biscuit.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
bacon.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
bacon.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
bacon.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
bacon.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
bacon.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
bacon.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
hashbrown.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
hashbrown.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
hashbrown.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
hashbrown.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
hashbrown.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
hashbrown.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
toast.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
milk.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
milk.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
milk.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
milk.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
milk.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
eggs.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
eggs.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
eggs.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
80
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
==PAGE:89==
Table 2: Hostnames with ”Shodan” in Hostname or ISP
waffles.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
waffles.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
waffles.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
croissant.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
croissant.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
croissant.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
croissant.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
croissant.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
croissant.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
chocolate.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
chocolate.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
chocolate.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
salsa.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
salsa.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
salsa.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
salsa.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
salsa.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
cereal.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
nan
Shodan LLC
butter.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
butter.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
butter.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
butter.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
butter.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
donut.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
donut.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
donut.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
donut.scanf.shodan.io
DigitalOcean LLC
refrigerator.census.shodan.io
CARI.net Inc.
Advancing Medical Cybersecurity: Designing and Implementing a DICOM Honeypot
81
==PAGE:90==
The final pages of this thesis were composed as I sat in the maternity hospital awaiting the arrival
of my first nephew. It truly set a very surreal environment to be working on a thesis about medical
systems’ safety. Late nights of writing were definitely softened a bit by the excitement and happiness
that came with the arrival of this little human into the world and our family.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk
