==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Inverse design of organometallic
complexes using generative diffusion
model
Student:
Student number:
DESHMUKH, Pratham Pushparaj
s222491
Supervisor: Dr. Arghya Bhowmik,
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
Inverse design of organometallic complexes using generative diffusion model
2
==PAGE:3==
Inverse design of organometallic complexes using generative diffusion model
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I would like to thank my supervisor Arghya Bhowmik for giving me this wonderful op-
portunity and his constant support and inputs throughout the project. I would also like
to thank François Raymond J Cornet for his help in setting up the code and giving con-
structive suggestions during the course of this project. I would also like to thank Bardi
Benediktsson for his help with the computational chemistry aspects of this project.
I
==PAGE:4==
Inverse design of organometallic complexes using generative diffusion model
ABSTRACT
Design and discovery of catalysts is a cumbersome process often involving trial and er-
ror methods thus becoming time consuming and resource intensive. Machine Learning
methods have been developed that can make rapid predictions to accelerate the screen-
ing process. However they are limited to screening libraries provided to them that have
perhaps not included potential candidates.
Generative models have introduced a new paradigm in the design process of catalysts,
the inverse design of catalysts. Given a reactivity metric the generative model can sam-
ple catalysts with the given reactivity. In this work we aim to leverage such generative
models to discover novel organometallic complexes particularly of the class of Vaska’s
complex. We use a generative diffusion model architecture, the OM-Diff, generate novel
Vaska’s complexes with low activation barrier energy.
However, generating potential candidates is not enough, they need to be screened and
validated. Therefore, we implement an integrated generation, screening and validation
pipeline that generates samples, screens them on the basis of various metrics and vali-
dates them test their suitability to act as a catalyst with low activation barrier. We also
implement an iterative generation and validation scheme to tackle the issue of low data
availability.
II
==PAGE:5==
Inverse design of organometallic complexes using generative diffusion model
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Catalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Data-driven chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Diffusion model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Dataset
5
2.1
Section 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methods
6
3.1
Generative diffusion model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.1
Data representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.2
Forward diffusion process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.3
Reverse denoising process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.4
Regressor guidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.5
Symmetry considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Screening surrogate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Screening pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3.1
Novelty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.2
Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.3
Surrogate screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
DFT validation protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Results and Discussion
15
4.1
Section 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.1
Generative diffusion model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.2
Surrogate model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.3
Time regressor training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Conditional v/s unconditional generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Analysis of generated functional groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Accuracy of DFT protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Conditional generation experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5.1
First conditional generation iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5.2
Second conditional generation iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5.3
Generation with model fine-tuned on constrained chemical space
26
Conclusion
29
Bibliography
30
III
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
1.
Introduction
This chapter serves as an introduction to the background of this work and the various
tools and methods implemented in this work. This chapter discusses the importance
of catalysts, their discovery strategies using data-driven methods like Machine Learning
and generative artificial intelligence and finally the particular generative AI method used
in this work, the diffusion models.
1.1
CATALYSIS
Catalysts are one of the most industrially important materials playing a vital role in the
manufacture of fuels, fertilisers, pharmaceuticals, plastics, etc. They are involved in the
manufacture of more than 80% of all goods and contribute to around 35% of the global
GDP [1]. The significance of catalysts can perhaps be put into perspective by taking the
example of Haber-Bosch process for the production of ammonia. Ammonia is essential
for manufacturing fertilisers used in agriculture. Fertilisers are believed to help feed
more than 50% of the global population and is responsible for sustaining the today’s
population [2]. In more recent times catalysis are proving to be of prime importance in
tackling the urgent challenges of climate change and sustainability. Catalysts are play
an important role in synthesising green fuels [3], in fuel cells for converting chemical
energy to electrical energy [4]. They can also open new pathways to chemical reactions
thereby reducing the production of unwanted waste products [5]. Catalysts can also
reduce the energy required for processes thus making them efficient and less resource
consuming [6].
Designing of catalysts is a significant challenge in the field of chemistry. This is due to
the fact that a vast chemical space needs to be explored to find the optimal catalyst. For
small organic molecules alone the chemical space contains more than 1060 [7] possible
molecules. It is impractical to evaluate each and every one of these molecules to find
the ideal catalyst. Additionally catalysts depend on a wide range of factors such as tem-
perature, pressure and other environmental factors this makes the process of finding the
optimal candidate even more difficult since changes in even one variable can radically
impact the outcomes. With evaluating all the possible candidates out of the question
we rely on chemical knowledge to design catalysts. Inferences about the reactivity and
mechanism from the existing catalysts can help us design new catalysts. This method
then becomes a process of trial and error wherein chemical intuition is used to predict
a possible catalyst and then it is verified via experiments whether the catalyst is func-
tional or not. This approach can get us closer to finding the optimal catalyst candidate
but it involves time consuming, laborious and often resource intensive methods. In sil-
ico catalyst designed has proved to be a great alternative to this [8]. In silico design
Page 1 of 32
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
1.2 – Data-driven chemistry
involves the use of computational methods to simulate the properties of materials. Ini-
tially these computational simulations were used only to support experimental findings
however over time they have gained immense popularity and has widely become the
first step in designing catalysts. These virtual methods act as screening methods to test
potential candidates before trying them out in the lab. However, these methods suffer
from scaling and increasing dimnesionality of the chemical search space [9].
1.2
DATA-DRIVEN CHEMISTRY
Machine Learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques have witnessed a
rapid rise in the recent decades [10].
The contributing factors have been advance-
ments in hardware capabilities, computer theory and data storage. These techniques
have found applications in a wide variety of fields such as self-driving cars, bioinfor-
matics, image generation, natural language processing, robotics, etc. They have also
made their way into chemistry and materials science research, helping accelerate the
discovery of novel materials and molecules [11]. Machine learning tools leverage vast
datasets to figure out patterns and inferences from within the datasets that have been
overlooked by traditional techniques or perhaps were not even possible to be uncovered
by the traditional methods. In chemistry this translates to the ability of these techniques
to predict properties, behaviours and reaction outcomes with great precision.
ML models have been applied in chemistry in retrosynthesis for planning chemical syn-
thesis [12], to develop ML potentials for evaluating the potential energy surface(PES)
[13] and for property prediction [14]. ML models basically train on datasets consist-
ing of chemical entities which are labelled with certain targets such as energy. These
target values are generally computed using expensive quantum chemical calculations
and are highly accurate. The ML model maps a function between the chemical entity
and the target value. This function can then be used to predict the target value for a new
chemical entity with reasonable accuracy with respect to the quantum chemical method.
The advantage that ML models offer is that they are order of magnitudes faster than the
quantum chemical methods. We can leverage this aspect of machine learning tools to
tackle the problem stated in the previous section. The problem of virtually screening
vast chemical libraries. Machine Learning models can carry out screening while been
trained on a small fraction of the chemical library.
Although Machine Learning models offer good advantages over quantum chemical
screening they suffer from a few issues. The screening libraries are constructed based on
the chemical intuition of the person building the library, this can lead to some important
and interesting chemical moieties being left out or not taken into consideration. For this
a new paradigm is been developed in recent years called generative models [15]. Gener-
ative models train on similar datasets as the previously mentioned ML models, however
Page 2 of 32
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
1.3 – Diffusion model
the generative models can generate novel datapoints that are present in the same chem-
ical space as the dataset but not in the dataset. Some of the most latest such algorithms
are the diffusion models.
1.3
DIFFUSION MODEL
Diffusion models are a class of latent variable models with their roots in non-equilibrium
thermodynamics [16]. Diffusion models have recently found immense success in image
generation tasks where they have beaten GANs and VAEs which have dominated this
domain for a while. Diffusion models have exhibited high stability as compared to
GANs leading them to be less susceptible to mode collapse thereby generating diverse
data. The first article describing the successful implementation of diffusion models to
learning tasks was by Sohl-Dickstein et. al. [16] in 2015. Since then advancements have
been made that have improved the performance of diffusion models the most significant
of which was the introduction of Denoising Diffusion probabilistic models by Ho et. al.
[17]. This work is based on the latter type of diffusion model. The underlying concept of
diffusion models is that they destroy the data in the input by progressively adding noise
until it is entirely destroyed and resembles a Gaussian distribution then the model learns
to remove the added noise to recover the original input. This gives the model the ability
to generate novel samples from complete noise. Typically, a guidance mechanism is also
included that guides the denoising process towards producing samples with a desired
property.
A basic idea of the working of the diffusion model would be necessary to understand
its application. Therefore, an introduction of the various components of the diffusion
model is given as follows:
1) Forward diffusion: The forward process takes place in steps in each of which a time-
step dependent noise βt is added. The noise is added in such a way that the distribution
of sample in the following time-step is a Gaussian centred around zero with a unit
variance.
2) Reverse diffusion: The aim of the reverse process is to generate the original input
from the noisy image. This is the part of the model that is learned. There are multiple
approaches for this carrying this step out but the most popular is the denoising diffu-
sion in which the noise added at each step is predicted and removed starting from the
complete noisy step.
3) Regressor guidance: The regressor guidance helps generate samples with desired
properties. It works in conjunction with the denoiser and vectors the generation process
towards producing required samples.
Following the success of diffusion models in audio, video, text generation tasks they
Page 3 of 32
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
1.3 – Diffusion model
were applied in chemistry for molecule generation. The first application of diffusion
models in this domain was by Welling et. al. [18] They developed an E(3) equivari-
ant diffusion model for generating organic molecules. Following this work there were
multiple implementations of diffusion models for organic molecule generation, however
there was no diffusion model specifically designed for organometallic complexes. The
first and only known work in this field is the OM-Diff [19]. The OM-Diff model is
developed keeping in mind the importance of metals in organometallic complexes. The
architectures allows complete control over the metal centre and can be customised to
allow for scaffold design of ligands. The another great advantage of this model was that
it could generate 3D structures of molecules instead of just 2D representations such as
SMILES or graphs. This is of relevance when dealing with chemistry of conformers,
stereo-isomers and transition states.
Page 4 of 32
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
2.
Dataset
2.1
SECTION 1
The main dataset used in this work is a collection of 1,947 Iridium-based complexes,
compiled by Friedrich et. al [20]. These complexes are derivatives of the Vaska’s com-
plex. The dataset contains the optimized geometries of the complexes and a hydrogen
activation transition state. Each complex is labelled with the barrier energy for hydrogen
activation which is the difference in energy of the transition state and the initial state of
the complex.
The Iridium metal centre of the Vaska’s complex has 16 valence electrons thus making
it “coordinatively unsaturated” this allows for it to bind to various ligands such as H2,
O2, I2, etc. The original Vaska’s complex has two mutually trans triphenylphosphate
ligands, a chloride ligand and a carbon monoxide arranged in a square planar geometry
[21]. The complexes in this dataset are combinations of 26 ligands. These ligands are
divided into three types: A) σ donors, B) σ donor/ π acceptor, and C) σ donor, acceptor/
π donor. These ligands are arranged in the same square planar geometry.
This yields 2,574 different possible combinations, however DFT calculation on only
1,947 were successful. The target value in the dataset is the activation barrier energy
for the complex. The barrier was computed as the difference between the single point
energy of the transition state complex and the energy of the initial catalyst complex and
hydrogen molecule that is to be activated. The calculations were done using Gaussian
g09 program at the PBE/def2-SVP level.
Figure 2.1: Histogram depicting distribution of activation energies in the training dataset
Page 5 of 32
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 3
3.
Methods
This chapter discusses the various methods and tools used in this project. We start off
with a discussion of the generative diffusion model, we first discuss in the data rep-
resentation involved 3.1.1, the symmetry considerations taken into account3.1.5. We
then explore the various components of the diffusion model namely the forward pro-
cess3.1.2, the reverse process 3.1.3, the regressor guided reverse process 3.1.4. We give
a mathematical description of the algorithm involved and we also take a brief look at
the architecture of the respective components. Following this we discuss the screening
pipeline in which we first look at the screening surrogate3.2, then the novelty checker
3.3.1, the validity checker 3.3.2and finally the DFT protocol used to computationally
validate the screened samples 3.4.
3.1
GENERATIVE DIFFUSION MODEL
This principal component of this work is a 3D graph generative diffusion model named
"OM-Diff". We use this diffusion model in conjunction with regressor guidance to gen-
erate transition states of novel Vaska’s complexes having low barrier energies. The OM-
Diff is a diffusion model architecture specifically designed for generating organometal-
lic complexes. The following subsections discuss the various components of the diffu-
sion model.
3.1.1
DATA REPRESENTATION
The choice of data representation method is of prime importance to the performance
of any machine learning model. In this work we use 3D graphs as representation for
the organometallic complexes. In mathematics graphs are used to describe a set of
objects with certain fixed attributes that are connected with each other through edges.
In chemistry graphs can be used to represent molecules by considering the atoms as
nodes and the bonds between them as edges [22]. Each node has a feature vector that
has its atom type and 3 dimensional coordinates. We can collect all the nodes in the
organometallic complex C and represent it mathematically as a set
C = {C(C),C(L)} = {[x(C),h(C)], [x(L),h(L)]}
(3.1)
Here, x and h represent the three-dimensional coordinates and the atom types respec-
tively. The superscript (C) and (L) represent the central metal atom and the ligands
respectively. We prefer to isolate the central metal from the rest of the molecule in order
to have more control over its position and atom type. This arrangement can also be al-
ternatively used in cases where we would like to keep certain ligands fixed and generate
Page 6 of 32
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 3
3.1 – Generative diffusion model
the rest of the ligands in which instance the fixed ligand will be added to the centre
subset.
3.1.2
FORWARD DIFFUSION PROCESS
The forward diffusion process involves progressively adding noise to the samples at
each time step T in a Markov chain process that leads to the data distribution being
diffused into a complete Gaussian distribution N(0,I). This forward diffusion process
can be expressed as follows
q(xt|xt−1) = N(xt|
q
1 −βtxt−1, βtI)
(3.2)
Where xt is the distribution of the sample at timestep t The βt here is the fixed noise
schedule at each timestep. It decides how much noise is to be added. The noise schedule
used in this work is the VP polynomial [18]. To calculate the latent distribution xt of
the sample after the noising process at a timestep t we use the following equation
xt =
q
1 −βtxt−1 +
q
βtϵt
(3.3)
Here the ϵt denotes noise sampled from a standard Gaussian which is introduced as a
part of the reparameterization trick. To calculate the latent distributions all the way to
T we will have to apply this transformation multiple times leading to expensive compu-
tations, however we can use a direct method to calculate all the latents at once. We first
set αt = 1 - βt
Inserting this in the previous equation we get,
xt = √αtxt−1 + √1 −αtϵt
(3.4)
We can get a similar equation for the latent xt−1 as
xt−1 = √αt−1xt−2 +
q
1 −αt−1ϵt−1
(3.5)
Substituting it in the above equation we get,
xt = √αt
√αt−1xt−2 + √αt
q
1 −αt−1ϵt−1 + √1 −αtϵt
(3.6)
Since ϵt and ϵt−1 are both Gaussians, we can use the following identity where a and b
are scalars and x,y and z are Gaussians
Page 7 of 32
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 3
3.1 – Generative diffusion model
ax + by =
√
a2 + b2z
(3.7)
Therefore,
xt = √αtαt−1xt−2 +
q
1 −αtαt−1ϵt,t−1
(3.8)
We can apply these transformations and get xt directly from x0
xt = √αtαt−1........α1x0 +
q
1 −αtαt−1........α1ϵ
(3.9)
We can thus use this expression to get the latent distribution of any timestep t between 1
and T without going through each timestep. Considering that we choose to seperate the
metal centre from the ligands in the representation 3.1.1 the forward diffusion process
can be described by the following equation
q(Ct|Ct−1) = δ([C(Ct−1),C(Ct)]).N(C(L)
t
;
q
1 −βtC(L)
t−1,βtI)
(3.10)
Here, the distribution of the intermediate latent space is represented by q(Ct|Ct−1). The
Dirac delta function ensures that the centre remains unchanged. The noise is always in
the range 0 < βt < 1. The noising process involves the data points to be scaled down
by
q
(1 −βt)and summed with the Gaussian distribution with variance βt. This process
is carried out for T = 1000 timesteps at the end of which the distribution of the latent
space resembles a standard Gaussian distribution q(CT) = N(0,I)
3.1.3
REVERSE DENOISING PROCESS
In order to obtain the original sample back from the completely noisy sample we run a
reverse of the forward process. This is the part of the generative model that is learned.
There can be three approaches to carry out the reverse process 1) predicting the orig-
inal sample directly from the noise 2) predicting the mean of the noise distribution in
each timestep 3) predicting the noise in each timestep [17]. Using the first approach
is convenient however is intractable and leads to poor reproduction of the sample. The
next two approaches are more computation heavy but yield high quality samples. It has
been shown that predicting the mean is the same as predicting the noise, only that they
are parameterised differently. In this work we predict the mean of the noise distribution
as will be discussed further. This predicted noise is deducted from the sample at each
timestep and eventually we end up with the original sample.
The denoising process begins with first sampling the metal centre C(C)
T
followed by
Page 8 of 32
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 3
3.1 – Generative diffusion model
sampling the number of atoms in the coordinated ligands. The atoms of the ligands are
initialised with random atom types and positions thus obtaining C(L)
T . The denoising
process now begins where we seek to derive CT−1 from CT. This process is another
distribution and can be represented as follows
q(C(L)
t−1|C, Ct) = N

C(L)
t−1
µC(L)
t−1|t(C(L)
t
, C(L)), σ2
C(L)
t−1|tI

(3.11)
The mean of this distribution is given by
µ(L)
Ct−1|t

C(L)
t
, C(L)
= αt−1
αt
σ2
t−1
σ2
t
C(L)
t
+
 
αt−1 −σ2
t−1
σ2
t
α2
t
αt−1
!
C(L)
(3.12)
While the variance is given by
σ2
C(L)
t−1|t = σ2
t−1 −σ2
t−1
σ2
t
α2
t
αt−1
(3.13)
The variance of the denoising process can be computed exactly since all the variables in-
volved are known from the time schedule however the calculation of the mean involves
the term C(L) which is unknown at the time of generation. We can obtain a approxi-
mation for C(L) from C(L) =
1
αt

C(L)
t
−σtϵ

all the terms in this equation are known
except for the unscaled noise ϵ which can be estimated using a neural network ϵθ which
takes an input (Ct,t). Therefore,
ϵ = ϵθ(Ct,t)
(3.14)
Substituting the noise ϵ in Eq.3.12 with Eq.3.14 we can rewrite equation for mean as
µθ (Ct,t) = αt−1
αt
 
C(L)
t
−(σt −σ2
t−1
σt
α2
t
α2
t−1
)ϵθ(Ct,t)
!
(3.15)
Using the mean in Eq.3.15 and variance in Eq.3.13 we can derive the distribution of the
sample at timestep t −1 from timestep t.
The architecture of the denoising neural network in the original EDM [18] was based
on equivariant graph neural network (EGNN) [23]. The OM-Diff model however uses
a denoiser based on the PaiNN architecture [24]. The PaiNN (Polarizable atomic inter-
action neural network) architecture belongs to a class of message passing graph neural
Page 9 of 32
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
3.1 – Generative diffusion model
networks (MPNNs) designed specifically for predicting chemical properties. The algo-
rithm operates by representing the molecule as a graph with atoms as nodes and bonds
as edges. Each node i has scalar and vectorial hidden states denoted by hm
i = (sm
i , vm
i )
where sm
i ∈R1XD is a scalar feature vector and vm
i ∈R3XD vector feature. These hid-
den states are updated through several message passing rounds. In a message passing
round a message is generated by each node i according to the Message function Mt and
propogated to nodes j within the preset cutoff radius (cutoff of 7.5 Å was used in this
work).
mt+1
i
=
X
j∈N(i)
Mt(st
i, st
j, vt
i, vt
j,⃗rij)
Here, mi is the message, t is the time, st
i, st
j are the scalar features and vt
i, vt
j are the
vectorial features of nodes i and j and rij is the relative distance. The message passing
preserves the symmetries in the molecule thereby making the architecture equivariant
to symmetry transformations. When the message reaches the neighbouring node the
hidden state of this node is updated according to the update function Ut
st+1
i
= Ut(st
i, mt+1
i
)
vt+1
i
= Ut(vt
i, mt+1
i
)
At the end of the M message passing rounds the hidden states hM
i are read out to obtain
the noise
h
ˆϵx(L), ˆϵh(L)
i
. The vectorial component ˆϵx(L) is readout using gated equivariant
block [24] while the scalar component ˆϵh(L) is obtained through a one hidden-layer MLP.
As stated earlier, the OM-Diff model uses PaiNN as a denoiser instead of EGNN be-
cause of the higher expressiveness of the architecture. The messages exchanged in
EGNN are based only on the pairwise distances however the PaiNN architecture also
passes local angular information. This improves the model performance significantly.
3.1.4
REGRESSOR GUIDANCE
The forward and reverse processes discussed till now featured only unconditional gen-
eration of samples, however we would like to use the diffusion model to generate
complexes having certain desired properties. This procedure is known as conditional
generation and is an important part of generative diffusion models. Image generation
tasks include classifier guidance as first described by Song et.al. [25] and Dhariwal &
Nichol [26]. CLIP was introduced by [27] for text-to-image generation. Similarly, for
conditional generation of molecules a regressor guidance method was introduced by
Page 10 of 32
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
3.1 – Generative diffusion model
Bao et.al. [28].
In order to carry out conditional generation of molecules, we pair the denoising gener-
ator in 3.1.3 with a regressor guidance that directs the generation process at each step
towards generating complexes having the required target properties. The conditional
sampling procedure can be conditioned on the target property y as follows
pθ,ϕ (Ct−1|Ct,y) ∝pθ (Ct−1|Ct) pθ (y|Ct−1)
(3.16)
Where pθ (Ct−1|Ct) is the unconditional generation process and pθ (y|Ct−1) is the distri-
bution given a property y. The distribution over property depends on an energy function
that is the squared loss between the target property y and the predicted property of the
sample yϕ at timestep t. The energy function is given below
fϕ (y,Ct) = ∥y −yϕ (Ct,t) ∥2
(3.17)
The gradient of this loss function with respect to the estimated mean calculated in un-
conditional denoising process 3.15 is used to add a correctional term and a corrected
mean is obtained.
µθϕ (Ct,y,t) = µθ (Ct,t) −σ2
C(L)
t−1|t∇µθ(Ct,t)fϕ (y,µθ (Ct,t))
(3.18)
This corrected mean is then used in the denoising process. This correction is carried out
at each denoising step, in doing so the generation process is vectored towards generating
samples of desired property. The property predictor yϕ has a similar architecture to
the denoiser ϵθ. It makes use of the same hidden states, message passing and update
scheme. However, during readout the scalar states are aggregated into a single state
using attention mechanism and passed to a fully connected neural network that then
outputs the property value y.
3.1.5
SYMMETRY CONSIDERATIONS
Inductive biases are a means to give more information to the deep learning model about
the data. For data in 3-dimensional spaces, such as molecules, we can provide geometric
information of the data that the model can use as inductive bias. These inductive biases
are extremely important for generalisation on dataset [29]. One of the sub-categories
of geometric information is symmetry under transformations. 3-D data can undergo
translation, rotation, reflection and permutation transformations, therefore providing the
deep learning model with information of behaviour of data under these transformations
would help the model in making inferences about the data. A class of data can either be
Page 11 of 32
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
3.3 – Screening surrogate
equivariant under transformations or invariant. A function can be called equivariant to a
transformation if the transformation applied to the input is equivalent to transformation
applied to the output of the same input. It can be mathematically represented as follows
f(T(x)) = T(f(x))
Where f is the function and T is the transformation applied to a datapoint x. In the case
of invariance, a function would output the same quantity irrespective of transformations
applied to the input.
f(T(x)) = f(x)
In this work the model is constructed in such a way that it is permutation, rotation and
reflection equivariant but translation invariant. We require the model to be permutation
equivariant since permuting the order of atoms will also need to change the ϵθ accord-
ingly. Similarly, we make the model rotation and reflection equivariant which means
the output is rotated and reflected to in the same way as the input. Finally, the model in
invariant to rotation which is a consequence of the fact the changing the position of the
input molecule in 3D space should not change the output.
3.2
SCREENING SURROGATE
The conditional generation of complexes generates a large number of complexes which
may or may not have activation barriers that were given as the prompt. Since it is
not practical to use DFT to compute the activation barriers, we use a neural network
model that predicts the activation barrier in a fraction of time and on the basis of this
predicted energy we can screen out samples with higher barriers. For this purpose,
an equivariant graph neural network based on the same architecture as the regressor
guidance was used with the minor modification that the neural network does not take
the timestep information as input. The surrogate model was trained separately but on
the same training dataset as the generative model.
3.3
SCREENING PIPELINE
Post the generation of samples by the diffusion model we select samples based on nov-
elty, validity and their predicted barrier energies, after which we compute their actual
Page 12 of 32
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3
3.3 – Screening pipeline
barrier energies using DFT and add these new samples to the training set for another
generation run. It is necessary to check sample novelty in order to avoid selecting com-
plexes that are already present in the dataset and hence provide no new information
about the chemical space. The validity of the generated molecules also needs to be
checked in order to avoid having unphysical complexes in the dataset. The novelty and
validity metrics are discussed in detail as follows.
3.3.1
NOVELTY
A sample is considered novel if it is not seen by the model before, i.e., the sample is
not in the training dataset. The novelty check is carried out by calculating the Tanimoto
similarity coefficient between the generated complex and the complexes of the training
set and if the coefficient is above a certain threshold the complex is considered non-
novel. It is agreed that if the coefficient is greater than 0.85 the molecules are similar
[30]. We set the threshold at 0.90 to make sure only the novel samples are passed
through the screens. The novelty check was implemented using RDKit [31] by first
converting the xyz file to RDKit mol object, the mol object was then used to generate
molecular fingerprint. This molecular fingerprint was then used to compute Tanimoto
similarity coefficient with respect to the fingerprints of the complexes from the dataset.
The coefficient is checked against the threshold and the sample is retained or discarded
depending on the coefficient value.
3.3.2
VALIDITY
An important aspect of 3D generative models is to generate complexes that have valid
valencies for the atoms in the molecule along with the bonds. Since the generative
model used in this work does not encode bonding and valency information in the input
molecule there is a great risk of generating complexes that do not satisfy chemical rules.
To screen out complexes that have invalid bonding, bond orders, etc. a validity checker
was implemented. The validity checker employs RDKit library to test the validity. The
RDKit mol object is generated as stated in the previous section 3.3.1, following which
rdDetermineBonds() is used to compute bond orders for the mol object. Then RDKit
function DetectChemistryProblems() is used to check whether there are any atoms with
explicit valences in the molecule. The function also needs an overall charge of the
molecule, although the generated molecules are supposed to be neutral we allow for
non-neutral charges on the complex in order to accommodate cases with novel ligand
combinations that might give rise to charged complexes. Therefore, we allow complexes
with charges -1,0,1.
Page 13 of 32
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
3.4 – DFT validation protocol
3.3.3
SURROGATE SCREENING
In the final step of screening we use the surrogate model to make rapid predictions of
the activation barrier of the generated samples and screen out samples with activation
energy higher than the given target. The surrogate thus makes predictions and if the
predicted energy is higher than the target + 1.0 Kcal/mol the sample is discarded.
3.4
DFT VALIDATION PROTOCOL
Once the invalid, non-novel and high activation complexes are screened out we com-
putationally validate the remaining complexes using DFT. For this we set up a protocol
to obtain the relaxed geometry of the catalyst, search for the transition state and get
converged energies of both the structures which are then used to calculate the activation
barrier. For the geometry optimization of catalyst we use the transition state generated
by the model, remove the activated hydrogens from the metal centre and use the result-
ing structure as the initial guess. The level of theory used is the same as the one used
in the original dataset, PBE functional is used with def2-SVP basisset. Effective Core
Potentials (ECPs) are specified for the Iridium metal center. Dispersion corrections with
Grimme’s D3 model are used. Optimization was done with a convergence criterion of
“tight” to ensure geometry optimization. The transition state search was carried out at
the same level of theory. First the H-H bond was frozen at 1 Å and rest of the molecule
was optimized, following this the optimized structure was used as a starting guess for
transition state search. The search was done using the Gaussian keyword ‘ts’. Since we
need the calculation of the Hessian matrix for Berny optimization we include the key-
word ‘calcfc’ that calculates the Hessian matrix once at the beginning. Simultaneously
frequency calculations were also carried out to aid in the post-calculation verification of
the transition state structures.
Page 14 of 32
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 4
4.
Results and Discussion
This chapter deals with the results of the various experiments carried out in this work.
In the first section 4.1 we take a look at the results of the training of the various neural
networks algorithms used in this work, i.e., the diffusion model, the surrogate property
predictor and the time regressor. In the subsequent sections we apply these algorithms
for generation tasks. In section 4.2 we compare the diffusion model on conditional and
unconditional generation tasks. In the next section 4.3 we do a structure activity re-
lationship analysis by conditionally generating samples at various property values and
then comparing the ligands generated. In the section that follows 4.4 we test how the
DFT protocol developed in this work compared to the DFT protocol used to generate the
training dataset. The final section 4.5 discusses the performance of the diffusion model
in various generation tasks. In subsections 4.5.1 and 4.5.2 we perform iterative condi-
tional generation, in subsection 4.5.3 we make use of pre-trained model for conditional
sampling.
4.1
SECTION 1
In this section we discuss the results of the training of the various deep learning algo-
rithms trained. We first look into the training of the generative diffusion model followed
by the time regressor and finally we discuss the surrogate property predictor. We do a
quantitative analysis of the models by inspecting the loss metrics.
4.1.1
GENERATIVE DIFFUSION MODEL TRAINING
We train the diffusion model on the Vaska’s complexes dataset as mentioned in the
chapter on datasets (2). The dataset consists of 1,947 complexes labelled with their
activation barriers, we use the transition state geometries to train the model since we
would like the model to generate transition state guesses. In training the diffusion model
the forward process follows a fixed schedule and so need not be learned, however the
reverse process involves the estimation of the noise ϵ in the sample at each timestep and
needs to be learned. The training objective therefore is the loss on the estimated noise.
The loss function is defined as
Lθ = EC∼Q(C)
ϵx(L) −ˆϵx(L)

2 +
ϵh(L) −ˆϵh(L)

2
(4.1)
Page 15 of 32
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 4
4.1 – Section 1
For training the model we split the dataset into 90% training, 5% validation and 5%
test datasets. We choose this train validation test split since we want to evaluate the
performance based on the generated samples instead of a held-out test fold. We use the
10-fold cross validation scheme to evaluate validation error. The model was trained for
10,000 epochs with a batch size of 32, a learning rate of 0.0001, to prevent overfitting
due to large weights a weight decay of 10−12 was used. In training the diffusion model
we are essentially training the ability of the denoiser to predict the noise in the sample
at each timestep. To evaluate the denoiser we plot the mean squared error on the pre-
dicted noise and the estimated sample obtained after removing the noise. We make the
evaluations separately on the atom types and the atom positions. The results are plotted
in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Evaluation of denoiser performance for denoising the atom types(h) and atom posi-
tions(x). Plots in top row depict the noise prediction error, the bottom row depicts the error on
the estimated denoised samples.
In the figure, the top row assesses the ability of the denoiser to predict the noise in the
samples at each timestep. The error is low for timesteps closer to pure Gaussian noise
and rises to a maximum then falls again to a minimum and close to timestep zero rises
again slightly. The performance for denoising atom positions is better than on atom
Page 16 of 32
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 4
4.1 – Section 1
types, this can also be verified from the generated samples in which it can be seen that
the square planar geometry around the metal centre is preserved. In the bottom row of
the figure we can see the evaluation of the denoiser in its ability to separate the noise and
estimate the sample. The error gradually decreases from timestep 1000 until timestep
0.
4.1.2
SURROGATE MODEL TRAINING
The surrogate provides an efficient and computationally cheap method to estimate the
barrier energies of the generated models. The surrogate is an equivariant graph neural
network.To evaluate the surrogate model performance we train the model on a 90-10
train-test split, the training data is further split into train and validation sets using the
10-fold cross validation scheme. The training was carried out for 200 epochs with a
batch size of 16, learning rate of 0.0001 and weight decay of 10−12.
Figure 4.2: Histogram depicting the distribution of absolute errors on prediction of barrier
energies of samples in the test fold.
The histogram above shows the residual errors of the surrogate performance on the test
set. The majority of the errors lie within the acceptable error of 1 Kcal/mol.
4.1.3
TIME REGRESSOR TRAINING
The time regressor directs the conditional generation process towards generating sam-
ples of required property. It is based on the same architecture as the surrogate and
predicts the property value with a given input of time step t and noisy image of the
sample xt For training the model we do a train validation split of 98% to 2%. We then
start the training with learning rate and weight decay same as in training the diffusion
model and the surrogate.
Page 17 of 32
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
4.2 – Conditional v/s unconditional generation
To test the performance of the trained time regressor we compute the deviation of the
prediction of the time regressor from the actual property value as a function of time step.
We use the mean absolute error score for this purpose. We expect the error to be high
for the time step closer to T since the samples will contain high amount of noise and
accordingly a lower error at time step closer to since the sample will have low amounts
of noise. The following plot visualises the time regressor performance and follows the
expected error distribution.
Figure 4.3: Time regressor performance as a function of time step.
4.2
CONDITIONAL V/S UNCONDITIONAL GENERATION
In this section we compare how the model performs in conditional and unconditional
generation tasks. In particular we would like to verify whether doing conditional gener-
ation actually leads to generation of samples with the given property. In order to make
the comparison we first carry out conditional generation of 10,000 samples conditioned
at 5Kcal/mol, next we unconditionally generate 10,000 samples. We then use the surro-
gate model to make predictions on the energies of all the generated samples. We then
plot the distribution of the energies using Kernel Density Estimation. The results are as
follows.
Page 18 of 32
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4
4.3 – Analysis of generated functional groups
Figure 4.4: Distribution of energies generated conditionally v/s unconditionally. The averages
of the distribution are also indicated with a dashed line and the values at the bottom.
We first analyse the unconditional generation distribution, the energy distribution is
extremely similar to the distribution of the training data. The average of this distribution
is at 12.19 Kcal/mol which is close to the average of training data at 11.9 Kcal/mol. We
can also see the distinct peak prior to 10 Kcal/mol which was also seen in the training
data. For conditional generation we can see that the peak of the distribution is shifted
towards a lower value than the unconditional generation. Although the condition was
of 5 Kcal/mol we obtained the average at 8.08 Kcal/mol this is probably due to the fact
that the model has not been able to generate many samples in the low energy regime due
to less training data available in the region. However from this analysis we can confirm
that the model can conditionally generate samples.
4.3
ANALYSIS OF GENERATED FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
The ligands coordinating to the metal centre play a huge role in deciding the properties
of the organometallic complex. In the hydrogen activation by Vaska’s complex reaction
we need ligands that can stabilise the electron rich Iridium metal centre thereby pulling
down the activation barrier. The chemical space of the dataset contains π acceptor
ligands that are significant for lowering of the barrier energy, likewise the presence
of π donor ligands will raise the barrier energy. We would like the generative model
to develop this chemical intuition from the dataset and generate samples accordingly.
To verify whether the trained conditional generative model has learned this chemical
information we conditionally generate samples at low and high activation energies and
verify the ligands present in the samples. For this purpose we check for the presence
of fluoride(F −), hydroxide(OH−) and isocyanate or thioisocyanate(N = C = X)
Page 19 of 32
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
4.4 – Accuracy of DFT protocol
in high activation complexes and cyanide(CN−) in low activation complexes. We
conditionally generate 10,000 samples at targets 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25 Kcal/mol and plot
the violin plots of distribution of the selected ligands below.
(a) 5Kcal/mol
(b) 10Kcal/mol
(c) 15Kcal/mol
(d) 20Kcal/mol
(e) 25Kcal/mol
Figure 4.5: Violin plots displaying the distribution of various ligands in the conditionally gen-
erated samples at various target barriers.
In the plot 4.5a we can see that the concentration of the cyanide ligand, which is respon-
sible for lowering activation barrier, is high and especially in the low barrier region.
We also see in the subsequent plots that as we move to higher energy regimes the con-
centration of the cyanide ligands decreases and the distribution also remains below the
distribution of the other ligands. For the π donor ligands on the other hand we see
that the distribution is always in the high energy regime especially for isocyanate and
thioisocyanate, we even see the complete absence of thioisocyanate ligand in the 5Kcal/-
mol plot 4.5a Therefore the plots in 4.5 suggest that the generative model as well as the
time regressor have sufficiently being able to extract key chemical information from the
data and generate samples accordingly.
4.4
ACCURACY OF DFT PROTOCOL
The DFT protocol implemented in this work to computationally validate the generated
complexes should be checked against the DFT protocol used in the training dataset. For
this we randomly selected 15 complexes from the dataset and computed their activation
barriers using our DFT protocol. We obtained the following results which shows that
the DFT protocol used by us gives accurate barrier energies with respect to protocol
used to generate the training dataset.
Page 20 of 32
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 4
4.5 – Conditional generation experiments
(a) Error bar plot
(b) Error regression plot
Figure 4.6: Performance of DFT protocol used in this work as compared to the protocol used to
generate training dataset. (a) Residual errors between the barrier calculated by our DFT pro-
tocol and the DFT protocol in the article (b) Regression plot depicting the correlation between
the two protocols.
The mean absolute error for the calculations is about 0.45 Kcal/mol which is within the
acceptable deviation of 1 Kcal/mol. This result implies that the DFT protocol used here
can accurately reproduce the energies calculated by DFT protocol used in generating
the training dataset. We can also see visually from plot 4.6a that all the calculations are
within the acceptable range of 1Kcal/mol barring one which has a significantly higher
deviation, this can be safely considered an outlier.
4.5
CONDITIONAL GENERATION EXPERIMENTS
After having scrutinised the performance of all the components of the molecule genera-
tion pipeline we put it to work and analyse the results we obtain. We discuss the samples
generated by diffusion models trained on various datasets, we examine the results ob-
tained after passing these samples through the screening pipeline. In the first subsection
4.5.1 we discuss generation and screening of samples obtained from diffusion model
trained on the initial training dataset, we will also analyse the ligands generated. In the
next subsection 4.5.3 we analyse samples from model fine-tuned on constricted dataset.
Page 21 of 32
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
4.5 – Conditional generation experiments
Figure 4.7: Schematic diagram of the generation, screening and validation procedure
4.5.1
FIRST CONDITIONAL GENERATION ITERATION
The aim of this work is to discover novel complexes with a very low activation barrier
for hydrogen activation on Vaska’s complex. Therefore, we would like the generative
algorithm to generate complexes with low activation barrier. For the first iteration we
select 5Kcal/mol as target barrier energy for conditional generation. This target was
chosen keeping in mind that we want to generate low activation barrier complexes but
since such complexes are limited in the training dataset we chose a target value for
which sufficient samples were available. Referring to the plot 2.1 we can see that at
5Kcal/mol there are sufficient number of examples available for the model to train on
and the activation energy is also low enough. Hence, with a target of 5Kcal/mol we
generate 10,000 samples and screen them for novelty, validity and barrier energy. The
screening statistics for this iteration are in the following table. The first column contains
the screening criteria, the second column contains the number of samples that satisfy the
criteria and the third column contains the percentage of samples.
Metric
Count
Percentage
No. of novel samples
5405
54.05%
No. of valid samples
6277
62.77%
No. of valid and novel
samples
1954
19.54%
No. of samples selected for
DFT
505
5.05%
Total number of samples
10000
-
Table 4.1: Statistics for first iteration
Page 22 of 32
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4
4.5 – Conditional generation experiments
For this iteration we obtained a total of 505 promising candidates that are novel, chem-
ically valid and predicted to have activation energy less than or equal to 6Kcal/mol, we
decided to accept samples with energy 1Kcal/mol higher than the barrier to account for
any deviations in DFT calculations and also to allow for more samples from the rele-
vant chemical space. We then do a final validation using DFT and eventually obtain 11
complexes that have sufficiently low activation barrier. The low number of "hits" can be
attributed to the complications involved in finding a transition state. The distribution of
activation energies of the 11 complexes is in the following plot. There is an observable
peak at 5 Kcal/mol thus demonstrating the ability of the algorithm to generate samples
in the target chemical space.
Figure 4.8: Distribution of DFT validated activation energies of samples generated in first iter-
ation.
We will now discuss the chemical structures of the novel complexes generated by the
model. It was seen in all the generated complexes that three out of the four ligands are
from within the three classes of ligands and only the fourth ligand is unique. Thereby
implying that the model explores the chemical space within close proximity of the com-
plexes in training set. Certain novel ligands obtained in this iteration are as follows.
The ligand in figure 4.9a closely resembles triphenylphosphine with one of the phenyl
rings replaced with a cyclopentadienyl. Ligand in figure 4.9b can be seen as having
been in the neighborhood of the trimethyl amine ligand. Finally ligand 4.9c is lying in
the chemical space between trimethyl amine and triethyl amine.
Page 23 of 32
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
4.5 – Conditional generation experiments
(a) 2.78 Kcal/mol
(b) 3.30 Kcal/mol
(c) 5.12 Kcal/mol
Figure 4.9: Selected ligands generated in the first iteration
4.5.2
SECOND CONDITIONAL GENERATION ITERATION
The first conditional generation yielded only 11 suitable candidates, one of the reasons
for this is the lack of adequate data in corresponding chemical space. An iterative active
learning scheme is a solution to this issue. We added the newly generated candidate
back to the initial training dataset and trained the diffusion model on the same, then used
this diffusion model to conditionally generate more samples. The model was retrained
with the new dataset from the last checkpoint of the previously trained model for 5000
epochs. The retrained model was used to conditionally generate 10,000 samples with
the condition of 5 Kcal/mol and screened. The results obtained are in the following
table.
Metric
Count
Percentage
No. of novel samples
6953
69.53%
No. of valid samples
4082
40.82%
No. of valid and novel
samples
1300
13.00%
No. of samples selected for
DFT
458
4.58%
Total number of samples
10000
-
Table 4.2: Statistics for second iteration
Page 24 of 32
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4
4.5 – Conditional generation experiments
The number of novel samples obtained in this iteration is higher than the earlier one
signifying that the algorithm is trying to explore newer regions of the chemical space
however the number of chemical valid compounds has dropped this could be due to the
model not having enough chemical information about the new region.
The number of novel complexes discovered in this iteration is 18 which is higher than
the previous iteration. We can see in figure 4.10 that the model has again generated high
number of complexes in the 5Kcal/mol region and as compared to the previous iteration
the distribution has shifted towards lower barrier energy.
Figure 4.10: Distribution of DFT validated activation energies for the second iteration
The complexes generated in this iteration showed changes in only one of the four lig-
ands similar to the previous iteration. However, multiple complexes were seen to be
modifications on the complexes generated in the previous iteration, thereby indicating
that the algorithm is searching chemical spaces further away from the initial training
dataset.
Page 25 of 32
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
4.5 – Conditional generation experiments
(a) 4.31 Kcal/mol
(b) 3.66 Kcal/mol
(c) 4.84 Kcal/mol
(d) 3.81 Kcal/mol
Figure 4.11: Selected ligands generated in the second iteration
The first ligand seen here 4.11a is a modification on triethyl phosphine ligand, similarly
4.11d is a modification on trimethyl amine. We see a very novel ligand design in 4.11c,
although we have seen a pentyl ring in complex 4.9a this particular ligand has a covalent
bond with the neighbouring group. A large number of ligands generated in this iteration
were identical to 4.9c. This can be explained by the fact that the AR3 where A ∈
[P,N,As] and R ∈[CH3,Et3,ph] class of ligands leads to lower activation energies as
stated in dataset article [20]
4.5.3
GENERATION WITH MODEL FINE-TUNED ON CONSTRAINED
CHEMICAL SPACE
The sparse chemical space of the training data in the low activation barrier region posses
a challenge for the algorithm to generate samples belonging to this region. Therefore,
we fine-tune the model on examples from this region. The fine-tuning is done on the
model trained on the entire dataset. We then take the best checkpoint from this model
and fine-tune it with a dataset consisting only of samples with activation barrier less
than 6Kcal/mol from the same dataset. The results obtained using this scheme were
significantly better than the previous iterations. The statistics for the generated samples
are in the table 4.3
It can be seen that the number of novel complexes generated is not higher than the
Page 26 of 32
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4
4.5 – Conditional generation experiments
Metric
Count
Percentage
No. of novel samples
4024
40.24%
No. of valid samples
7357
73.57%
No. of valid and novel
samples
1573
15.73%
No. of samples selected for
DFT
730
7.30%
Total number of samples
10000
-
Table 4.3: Statistics for fine-tuned model
previous iterations however the number of samples selected for DFT are considerably
higher than the previous iterations. After DFT validation the number of complexes
with target property values were also higher at 36 complexes which is thrice that of the
first iteration and twice that of the second iteration. The following plot visualizes the
distribution of the validated complexes.
Figure 4.12: Distribution of DFT validated activation energies for the fine-tuned model
We can see a much higher number of complexes generated in this region along with an
increase in the complexes at extremely low activation energies. We generated complexes
with activation barriers as low a 0.11 Kcal/mol.
Page 27 of 32
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
4.5 – Conditional generation experiments
(a) 5.96 Kcal/mol
(b) 2.83 Kcal/mol
(c) 3.93 Kcal/mol
(d) 5.97 Kcal/mol
Figure 4.13: Selected complexes generated in this iteration
The complexes generated in this experiment follow the same prior trend of modifica-
tion on existing ligands however we obtained a much higher number of low activation
complexes. Starting with ligand in figure4.13a we can see that this ligand has "evolved"
from the phosphorine ligand which is a 6-membered heterocycle akin to pyridine. Next
we have ligand4.13b which is a modification on imidazole. Then we have ligand4.13c
which is similar to an oxazole with ring expanded to 6-membered ring while conserv-
ing chemical validity. Finally, we have ligand4.13d which is again a modification on
imidazole.
Page 28 of 32
==PAGE:34==
Inverse design of organometallic complexes using generative diffusion model
Conclusion
The generative diffusion model OM-Diff was successfully trained on a dataset of organometal-
lic Vaska’s complexes and used to conditionally generate potential catalyst candidates.
A screening and validation pipeline was also constructed and put together with the gen-
erative diffusion model. This generation, screening and validation pipeline was used to
discover novel Vaska’s complexes by means of an iterative generation-validation pro-
cess. Additional experiment of fine-tuning the diffusion model was also carried out.
These experiments led to the generation of novel candidates for Vaska’s complex catal-
ysed hydrogen activation reaction. The iterative method proved to be successful by
generating a higher number of potential candidates in the second iteration. The fine-
tuning experiment also brought about great results by sampling the highest number of
potential candidates and also with extremely low activation barriers.
The major contribution of this work are: Training of generative diffusion model on
Vaska’s complexes dataset, building and integrated generation, screening and validation
pipeline, showcasing the effectiveness of iterative generation-validation scheme and the
potency of fine-tuning generative models.
Page 29 of 32
==PAGE:35==
Inverse design of organometallic complexes using generative diffusion model
Bibliography
[1] T. Taseska, W. Yu, M. K. Wilsey, C. P. Cox, Z. Meng, S. S. Ngarnim, and A. M.
Müller, “Analysis of the scale of global human needs and opportunities for sus-
tainable catalytic technologies,” Topics in Catalysis, vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 338–374,
2023.
[2] J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont, and W. Winiwarter, “How
a century of ammonia synthesis changed the world,” Nature Geoscience, vol. 1,
no. 10, pp. 636–639, 2008.
[3] B. Yao, T. Xiao, O. A. Makgae, et al., “Transforming carbon dioxide into jet fuel
using an organic combustion-synthesized fe-mn-k catalyst,” Nature Communica-
tions, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 6395, 2020.
[4] Z. Zhao, Y. Sun, and F. Dong, “Graphitic carbon nitride based nanocomposites: A
review,” Nanoscale, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 15–37, 2015.
[5] S. Li, J. Shi, S. Liu, W. Li, Y. Chen, H. Shan, et al., “Molecule-electron-proton
transfer in enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic system,” Chinese Journal of Catalysis,
vol. 44, pp. 96–110, 2023.
[6] W. W. Yang, X. Xu, H. He, D. Huo, X. Li, L. Dai, et al., “The catalytic hy-
drodeoxygenation of bio-oil for upgradation from lignocellulosic biomass,” Inter-
national Journal of Biological Macromolecules, vol. 242, p. 124773, 2023.
[7] P. Kirkpatrick and C. Ellis, “Chemical space,” Nature, vol. 432, no. 7019, p. 823,
2004.
[8] C. Poree and F. Schoenebeck, “A holy grail in chemistry: Computational cata-
lyst design: Feasible or fiction?,” Accounts of Chemical Research, vol. 50, no. 3,
pp. 605–608, 2017.
[9] J. G. Freeze, H. R. Kelly, and V. S. Batista, “Search for catalysts by inverse de-
sign: Artificial intelligence, mountain climbers, and alchemists,” Chemical Re-
views, vol. 119, no. 11, pp. 6595–6612, 2019.
[10] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553,
pp. 436–444, 2015.
[11] A. Tkatchenko, “Machine learning for chemical discovery,” Nature Communica-
tions, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 4125, 2020.
[12] B. Liu, B. Ramsundar, P. Kawthekar, J. Shi, J. Gomes, Q. L. Nguyen, et al., “Ret-
rosynthetic reaction prediction using neural sequence-to-sequence models,” ACS
Central Science, vol. 3, no. 10, pp. 1103–1113, 2017.
Page 30 of 32
==PAGE:36==
Inverse design of organometallic complexes using generative diffusion model
[13] E. Kocer, T. W. Ko, and J. Behler, “Neural network potentials: a concise overview
of methods,” Annual Review of Physical Chemistry, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 163–186,
2022.
[14] B. Meyer, B. Sawatlon, S. Heinen, O. A. von Lilienfeld, and C. Cormin-
boeuf, “Machine learning meets volcano plots: computational discovery of cross-
coupling catalysts,” Chemical Science, vol. 9, no. 35, pp. 7069–7077, 2018.
[15] D. M. Anstine and O. Isayev, “Generative models as an emerging paradigm in the
chemical sciences,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 145, no. 16,
pp. 8736–8750, 2023.
[16] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. A. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli, “Deep un-
supervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” arXiv.org, 2015.
[17] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” 2020.
[18] E. Hoogeboom, V. G. Satorras, C. Vignac, and M. Welling, “Equivariant diffusion
for molecule generation in 3d,” in International Conference on Machine Learning,
pp. 8867–8887, PMLR, 2022.
[19] F. Cornet, B. Benediktsson, B. Hastrup, M. N. Schmidt, and A. Bhowmik, “Om-
diff: Inverse-design of organometallic catalysts with guided equivariant denoising
diffusion,” ChemRxiv, 2024.
[20] P. Friederich, G. d. Passos Gomes, R. De Bin, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and D. Bal-
cells, “Machine learning dihydrogen activation in the chemical space surrounding
vaska’s complex,” Chemical Science, vol. 11, pp. 4584–4601, 2020.
[21] L. Vaska and J. W. DiLuzio, “Carbonyl and hydrido-carbonyl complexes of iridium
by reaction with alcohols. hydrido complexes by reaction with acid,” Journal of the
American Chemical Society, vol. 83, no. 12, pp. 2784–2785, 1961.
[22] “molecular graph,” 2019.
[23] V. Garcia Satorras, E. Hoogeboom, and M. Welling, “E(n) equivariant graph neu-
ral networks,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9323–9332,
PMLR, 2021.
[24] K. T. Schütt, O. T. Unke, and M. Gastegger, “Equivariant message passing for
the prediction of tensorial properties and molecular spectra,” in Proceedings of the
38th International Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 139, PMLR, 2021.
[25] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole,
“Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Page 31 of 32
==PAGE:37==
Inverse design of organometallic complexes using generative diffusion model
0.5 – Bibliography
[26] P. Dhariwal and A. Nichol, “Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis,” Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 8780–8794, 2021.
[27] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry,
A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al., “Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision,” in International Conference on Machine Learning,
pp. 8748–8763, PMLR, 2021.
[28] F. Bao, M. Zhao, Z. Hao, P. Li, C. Li, and J. Zhu, “Equivariant energy-guided
sde for inverse molecular design,” in The Eleventh International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2022.
[29] N. Thomas, T. Smidt, S. M. Kearnes, L. Yang, L. Li, K. Kohlhoff, and P. Riley,
“Tensor field networks: Rotation- and translation-equivariant neural networks for
3d point clouds,” CoRR, vol. abs/1802.08219, 2018.
[30] G. Maggiora, M. Vogt, D. Stumpfe, and J. Bajorath, “Molecular similarity in
medicinal chemistry,” Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 3186–
3204, 2014. Retrieved 2023-11-13.
[31] G. Landrum, RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics, 2024.
Page 32 of 32
