==PAGE:1==
Investigating the impact of current and future
tariff structures on the value and scheduling
of portfolios with storage and renewable pro-
duction assets
using stochastic dynamic programming
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and
scheduling of portfolios with storage and renewable production assets
using stochastic dynamic programming
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Pieter Quaghebeur
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Produk-
tionstorvet, Building 424, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Section for Energy Economics and modelling, De-
partment of Managment, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Pieter Quaghebeur - s223053
Signature
Date
iiInvestigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis evaluates the impact of various grid tariff structures on the behaviour and value
of battery storage systems (BESS) within renewable energy (VRE) portfolios. A modelling
framework is proposed to address the revenue opportunities in value stacking, allowing
bids on the capacity reservation market, the day-ahead and the intraday market. The in-
clusion of intraday bidding in this framework expands the literature on BESS + VRE. The
cases of a fixed tariff and a dynamic tariff are compared, both from a private profit per-
spective and a welfare loss perspective. It is shown that the dynamic tariff causes a lower
private and welfare loss than the fixed tariff, as compared to the base case. Additionally,
the impact of high tariff levels, through the inclusion of public service obligation fees, are
discussed. In both cases, the inefficiency of these tariffs are shown, providing arguments
to exempt storage operators from them. Simulations for 2019 and 2023 show the same
general trends, but due to the high volatility of the energy prices in 2023, the effects of
the tariff structures are smaller. The study also explores the nuanced impacts of double
taxation, revealing a slight profit increase (0.37%) for battery operators due to round trip
efficiency benefits. To address the impact of the capacity reservation markets, scenarios
excluding them show the benefits that the ancillary markets have by shielding the portfolio
from the tariff impacts.
The insights suggest that dynamic tariffs are more effective in minimising welfare losses
and enhancing battery revenue. Future research should focus on strategic operator be-
haviour, capacity activation, and the long-term impacts of tariff structures on battery degra-
dation and TSO revenue adequacy.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Pieter Quaghebeur, DTU
First of all, I want to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Prof. Dogan Keles, for his
invaluable support, feedback, and inspiring discussions during the process of this thesis.
I am grateful for the pleasant and inspiring discussions I had with the researchers at the
Energy Economics and Modelling section at DTU. I also want to thank Wim Somers at
Ecopower cv for the initial talks which led to the first idea for the thesis.
I want to thank Stelina and Samuele for the motivating library sessions and my flatmate
Fabian for keeping my spirits high. In these last days, I am particularly grateful to Samuele
for the motivational speeches and his company, hospitality, and cooking skills.
I want to thank my family for their faith in me and their numerous supportive calls. I am
especially thankful to my parents for the opportunities they provided me, allowing me to
study what and where I wanted.
I want to thank you, my dear Nele. I am gratefull for your help during this process, the nu-
merous proof-reads and grammatical suggestions, which improved the text greatly. Thank
you for always believing in me, and supporting me throughout. I couldn’t have done this
without you.
Ten slotte, lieve Nele, wil ik je bedanken om met mij dit twee-jaar-lange avontuur aan te
gaan. We zijn er bijna. Ik kom naar huis.
ivInvestigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
Abbreviations
ACER
Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators
aFRR
automatic frequency restoration reserve
BESS
Battery Energy Storage System
DA
Day-ahead
DSO
Distribution System Operator
ENTSO-E
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity
EU
European Union
HP
Hybrid Power Plant
ID
Intra-day
MDP
Markov Decision Process
PSO
Public Service Obligation
PV
Photovoltaic
SDP
Stochastic Dynamic Program
TSO
Transmission System Operator
VPP
Virtual Power Plant
VRE
Variable Renewable Energy
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
v
==PAGE:8==
viInvestigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective and research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Outline of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature review
5
2.1
The impact of grid tariffs on energy systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Virtual power plant dispatch models and behaviour in the electricity markets
8
2.3
Regulation overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Overview of the methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Markov Decision Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Optimisation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Scenario generation and clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Case study
33
4.1
Tariff structure test cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Portfolio characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.3
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Results and discussion
37
5.1
Simulation models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2
The impact of grid tariffs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
55
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
vii
==PAGE:10==
viiiInvestigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Problem statement
In the Fit for 55-package, the EU pledged to become carbon neutral by 2050. To achieve
this goal, the share of renewable energy within the European energy mix should increase
to 40% by 2030, which is almost double the share in 2021. To achieve this, a drastic
increase in renewable energy sources like wind and solar is needed [1].
Yet, the intermittent nature of these renewable sources poses additional challenges due
to their non-dispatchability. Storage technologies can help with this transition. Portfolios
combining variable renewable energy (VRE) with storage enable a more efficient dispatch
in sync with the system demand, minimising spilling of VRE. Additionally, it firms up the
installed capacity, as storage enables the portfolio operator to better adhere to their bid
schedules when forecasts prove to be inaccurate. As a consequence, the total renewable
share of the energy mix can be considerably higher with grid-scale storage than without,
for the same installed capacity of VRE [2].
Moreover, as VRE technologies such as solar and wind continue to mature, they are
increasingly expected by policymakers to operate more like traditional power plants in
the future, decreasing the dependency on feed-in support schemes and increasing the
reliance on spot-market income [3]. For this reason, adding storage to the portfolio will
likely be a prerequisite to successful operation in the future.
Apart from these reliability benefits, storage can also defer grid investments and lower
national CO2 emissions. By increasing national consumption of VRE through storage,
less new network investments are needed to import electricity when wind and solar output
is low. [4].
More storage in the energy system thus has clear benefits. It defers grid investments, it
ensures maximum use of VRE resources and it provides a more reliable firm capacity by
balancing VRE output. Especially battery energy storage systems (BESS) are of inter-
est, as they can also provide numerous ancillary services alongside providing the earlier
mentioned benefits due to their ability to react quickly [5, 6]. Paradoxically, these bene-
fits to the system do not lead to a guaranteed business case, as studies show that the
economically viable operation of grid scale storage facilities is far from evident [7, 5, 8,
9]. This hampers private investment and the fast deployment of storage technologies. [5]
provides a review of business cases for grid scale storage facilities. They find that, al-
though BESS can increase their revenue streams through value stacking by participating
in different markets, their profitability is still ambiguous.
Two reasons for this are identified, namely a high technology investment cost and in-
sufficient revenue. The investment cost depends on factors such as material prices and
economies of scale in technology production. The insufficient revenue, on the other hand,
can be improved through regulatory policy, by providing support mechanisms, or by re-
moving access barriers, grid tariffs and taxes. In its study on the status of storage in
Europe, the EU Commission acknowledged this paradox, and called for regulatory action
to accelerate storage deployment [8].
One area of regulatory policy that deserves special attention within the context of this
thesis is the design of grid tariff structures. System operators in the EU recover their costs
via grid charges agreed on by the national regulator. These costs are mostly invoiced
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
1
==PAGE:12==
with a two part scheme, a fixed volumetric charge per energy unit, and a capacity charge
based on the connection size. Sometimes, a demand charge is added based on the
mean demand peak in a certain period. In its last tariff overview, ENTSO-E estimated
that approximately 60% of grid costs are invoiced on a volumetric basis [10]. Depending
on the country, the grid costs are either shared between generation and load, or only
payed by the load.
Especially the volumetric part of the grid tariffs has seen discussion in the policy debate
[11, 12]. In effect, market participants perceive them as a fixed price increase on top of
the wholesale price, distorting the scarcity signal conveyed through the wholesale elec-
tricity prices. A clear signal is particularly important for storage technologies in high VRE
markets, as they act on spot prices to determine when demand is high or when there is
an oversupply.
From a revenue standpoint, the grid tariffs also decrease the possible arbitrage spread,
limiting the revenue for the operator. Additionally, storage systems sometimes face double
taxation, as they can be classified as both a generator and a load, depending on the flow
direction.
The described issues with the volumetric tariffs are acknowledged by the electricity gener-
ation sector, the storage sector and a study commissioned by the European Commission,
stating that grid tariffs should minimise the distortion of price signals for flexible technolo-
gies. [8, 13, 14]. Additionally, the EU Commission study states that tariff design should
encourage storage deployment, maybe emphasising the time-signal through time-varying
tariffs, and recommends to abolish ”double taxation”. Yet, ACER, the EU agency for the
cooperation of energy regulators notes that ”double taxation” is not necessarily unjusti-
fied, as long as the injection and intake charges cover the costs that can be ascribed to
respectively generation and load behaviour [15].
According to the storage sector itself, the current tariff structures charge them dispro-
portionately relative to the benefits storage brings to the system, like the deferral of grid
investments, asking for more cost-reflective tariffs [14]. This is nuanced by the Dutch reg-
ulator, stating that this argument only holds when storage operators only make use of the
”rest-capacity” of the grid. In a congested grid, extra storage connection could necessitate
extra grid infrastructure [16], justifying capacity fees to fund this investment.
In the recent past, several countries put exemptions in place for storage operators, shield-
ing them fully or partially from all grid charges. In Germany, for example, all new storage
facilities built between 2011 and 2026 would be exempted for the first 20 years of opera-
tion. Spain and Italy apply similar measures. However, these exceptions are often only
applied to pumped hydro storage facilities, like in France and Portugal [14]. Exempting
storage operators from grid tariffs might be a straightforward way to indirectly promote
these technologies. However, it is not sure whether these benefits will persist, or indeed,
whether they are fair and cost-reflective. Storage operators rely on the grid for their activ-
ities, and the maintenance of the grid, together with past investments should be financed
regardless of the deferral of new investments.
Given the clear benefits of storage in the electricity mix of the future, policy makers should
take the impact of tariff structures on the revenue of storage facilities into account. Espe-
cially storage as part of a renewable portfolio is of interest, as these enable the maturation
of RVE, facilitating the shift of production to high demand periods.
Given these aspects, it is surprising that only little literature is available on the impact of
grid tariff structures on the business case of storage operators, especially as a part of a
2Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:13==
VRE generation portfolio (see section 2.1). This thesis aims to address this gap.
1.2
Objective and research question
The objective of this thesis is to gain insight in the impacts that grid tariffs have on the
behaviour and profits of BESS+VRE portfolios in the electricity markets. With regards to
recent discussions, both the double taxation of storage providers and dynamic tariffs will
be compared against the volumetric tariff structures. Rather than evaluating the optimal
tariff level, the analysis will be comparative in nature, emphasising the implications that
different grid tariff structures have, both from a private profit and social welfare standpoint.
The investigation is guided by the following research questions.
How do grid tariff structures impact the value of battery storage within a portfolio of VRE?
How do grid tariff structures impact the behaviour and value of the portfolio as a whole?
How do grid tariff structures impact the social welfare?
What is the effect of value stacking when comparing the behaviour of the portfolio under
different tariff structures?
What is the effect on the value and behaviour of the portfolio under a double taxation
scheme?
The portfolios discussed and modelled here are so-called virtual power plants (VPP), but
the problems introduced apply to any kind of BESS + VRE portfolio. This choice has two
reasons. First, VPPs are the most general and loose form of a portfolio. The VRE and
BESS are not collocated and are only constraint by their respective grid connection. This
also allows conclusions on standalone systems. Secondly, VPPs are the most affected by
the impact of grid tariff structures, as there are no behind-the-meter charging opportunities
like those for hybrid powerplants. In conclusion, a model for a VPP leads to a general
model which can be constrained further, and allows to form clearer conclusions on the
impact of the examined tariffs.
This study will contribute to the BESS and VPP literature in several ways. Firstly, it ex-
pands current modelling frameworks and through the impact evaluation on grid tariffs
under uncertainty. Secondly, it explores the grid tariff structures currently in use and un-
der development, with a discussion on their use and argumentation. This overview allows
realistic test cases comparisons. Moreover, the impact of these structures are compared,
not only based on private profits, but also on welfare losses. This twofold approach will
give policymakers better guidance when deciding on grid tariff structures. Due to the high-
level definition of the BESS and the VRE, the model can be used for different portfolios
and flexible assets, making the conclusions more generally applicable.
1.3
Outline of the thesis
The thesis is organised as follows:
• Chapter 1 provides the context and motivation of the research questions.
• Chapter 2 provides a twofold overview on the literature and introduces the tariff
structures currently in use in the EU. The first part discusses the literature on the
link between grid tariffs and portfolio value. The second part discusses the modelling
of BESS + VRE portfolios in literature to conclude with relevant characteristics of a
model to answer the research questions.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
3
==PAGE:14==
• Chapter 3 explains the model used to derive the results, as guided by the conclu-
sions from the literature. First, the total model framework is introduced and broken
down in three components. The first component concerns a long-term model, opti-
mising the portfolio behaviour over the course of a year. Then, a daily optimisation
model is proposed, which will optimise the daily decisions of the operator, within
the annual framework. The last part of this chapter describes a methodology to de-
rive combined simulations for renewable production and electricity prices. These
will be used in the optimisation models defined earlier. They will be derived using
time-series modelling techniques and clustering reduction to extract a number of
representative scenarios.
• Chapter 4 describes the chosen case-study, the used input data and the examined
tariff structures with justification for their use.
• Chapter 5 provides the results of the analysis. A first section shows the results
of the time-series models for VRE production and electricity prices. The second
section aims to critically analyse the results concerning the impact of the shown
tariff structures, formulating answers on the research questions. Pathways for future
research and policy implications will be derived.
• Chapter 6 ends this thesis with a conclusion, repeating the most important remarks
and limitations of this study.
4Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature review
This review attempts to get an overview of the state-of-the-art research investigating the
impact of grid tariffs on utility scale energy systems in general, and on BESS systems
specifically. The second part analyses modelling structures for BESS+VRE systems to
identify relevant model characteristics for simulating the behaviour of a BESS+VRE port-
folio under influence of these grid tariffs. Lastly, a comparison is made for three represen-
tative tariff structures in the EU, including future developments. From these, archetypal
structures will be extracted which are relevant to test in the study, as most EU countries
use a version or a combination of these structures. A conclusion will summarise the find-
ings to define the research gap.
2.1
The impact of grid tariffs on energy systems
The value of battery storage combined with VRE and the link with grid tariffs has mostly
been examined in the context of residential prosumers and small businesses. The aim
is to accelerate storage deployment to limit the problems that distribution grids encounter
with large amounts of distributed solar generation [17, 18, 19].
The main limitation of these studies is that they consider consumers that are experiencing
flat electricity prices or crude time of use pricing schemes. That way, the potential arbi-
trage revenue is limited. The pay-off of the investment is thus gained through limiting grid
imports, feed-in peaks and maximising self-sufficiency. Providing incentives for residen-
tial self-consumption of solar helps to minimise feed-in peaks, but in a system with high
penetrations of both solar and wind, this will not be enough to handle all intermittency.
Additionally, as pointed out in [20], residential consumers are limited in their flexibility
potential, as they also depend on the energy for their daily activities.
Studies on the specific combination of grid-scale BESS+VRE facilities impacted by grid
tariffs are fewer in number. This could be due to the fact that most research on these
combinations regards BESS as a means to firm up VRE capacity. The operation of the
BESS is guided by forecast uncertainty to meet the day-ahead VRE commitments, rather
than price signals, as discussed in the second part of this literature review. In this scope,
grid tariffs are not deemed a deciding factor, and are often not considered.
An exception is ref [21], which examines the case of a BESS and a solar farm. Regarding
grid tariffs, this study shows that the value of a battery within a portfolio reduces drastically
when volumetric grid fees are introduced, as yearly return for the portfolio is reduced by
30%. An improvement is found when both VRE and BESS are placed ”behind-the-meter”,
to avoid grid fees when charging within the portfolio. This contains the yearly revenue loss
to 12%. In contrast to the other studies in this part of the literature review, the study takes
into account interday uncertainties, both for prices and VRE infeed.
Regarding standalone BESS, two studies provide insight on the impact of grid tariffs on
the arbitrage potential on the day-ahead spot markets as a price-taker in Belgium [22] and
Canada [23]. In both cases, the BESS is assumed to be connected to the transmission
grid, and only the volumetric tariffs are taken into account. Fees based on factors like the
connection capacity are said to be part of an investment decision framework, and these
do not impact the daily trading decisions. Apart from charging fees, both tariff structures
also incorporate a smaller discharge fee.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
5
==PAGE:16==
As part of a investigation on BESS value in every EU country, ref [22] provides a case
study on the impact of the Belgian grid tariffs, using a perfect-forecast MILP model with a
7-day rolling horizon for different BESS sizes (25, 100, 1000 MW, 5H- discharge duration)
and round trip efficiencies (50%, 75%). The results show a decrease in arbitrage value
of at least 20% up to 50% when compared with base case with no tariffs, across differ-
ent locations on the Belgian grid. Due to the tariffs, the schedule of the BESS is altered,
resulting in a value factor that nearly halves. Interestingly, the value loss due to the grid
tariffs is split up in the value transfer to the TSO through a grid charge and ”missed op-
portunities”, which is revenue that could not be extracted due to the distortive effect of the
tariffs [22] on the price signal. However, the amount of these missed opportunities is not
quantified. The Belgian grid tariff also has a tariff on discharge, an example of the double
taxation of storage. This tariff is considered in the model, but no further comments are
made on the impact of this.
This loss of value is most drastic for the smallest storage sizes, as the grid tariffs decrease
with the yearly intake. In some years, it is observed that the BESS exactly achieves the
threshold volume needed for the tariff discount, signifying strategic decisions to reach this
[22].
Ref [23] uses a similar model, but not with a rolling optimisation window. Every week
between 2010 and 2014 is optimised on its own for a BESS system with a round trip effi-
ciency of 80%, a power capacity of 10 MW and a 5-hour discharge duration. The results
show that while the overall bidding pattern does not change with the inclusion of grid fees,
there is a general decrease in traded volumes, as both charging and discharging power
flows are driven down by the volumetric charges. The mean arbitrage value loss from the
BESS operator’s point of view is 25%. Similar as in [22], the authors make the distinc-
tion between value transfer to the TSO and real value loss from a system perspective,
respectively 21% and 4%, or a proportion of 84% and 16% of the total loss.
Studies on the Danish district heating sector provide an interesting perspective on the
impact of grid tariffs on investment value and flexibility potential for utility-scale facilities
connected to the 10 kV voltage distribution grid. One study shows the impact that different
grid tariffs have on the value of an electric boiler, within a district heating system [20]. It
demonstrates that both the value of the boiler and the flexibility potential of the system
increase with grid tariffs that allow for a clearer price signal. Specifically, by removing
volumetric tariffs, the electrical boiler is able to provide up to 17% of the heat demand,
lowering heat production costs and emissions. The tariff structures are tested on Danish
and Norwegian energy prices, respectively with high and low volatility, due to the large
proportion of hydro power in the Norwegian system. An analysis is made on the Nor-
wegian tariff structure, and this tariff is levelled based on system load to ensure that the
system operator receives the same revenue from a typical consumer for all the examined
tariff structures.
Novel in this study is the test case of a dynamic tariff, defined as a percentage of the
day-ahead spot price. This tariff aims to decrease the impact on the price signal. With
this scheme negative prices become more negative, and the peak prices become even
more expensive through the higher tariffs at these moments. The percentage is calculated
based on the system load to ensure that the system operator maintains consistent income
from a typical consumer, similar to that of a fixed tariff. The value of the boiler is described
as cost savings to the overall heating system and increases with 82% compared to a fixed
volumetric tariff. The effects were calculated using a MILP cost-minimisation model for
one year, using perfect-forecast electricity spot prices.
6Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:17==
Another study proposes novel grid tariffs based on residual system demand for a similar
case of an electric boiler as part of a heat production portfolio with storage [24], effectively
linking RVE infeed in the system with the grid tariffs. A ”peak event tariff” sets the intake
tariff at 0 €/MWh during the hours with the lowest residual load. A ”dynamic tariff” lowers
the volumetric tariff for the lowest residual load hours, and follows a scaled version of the
residual load curve afterwards. Both these tariffs incentivise the consumption of electric-
ity in periods with high VRE. A benchmark for maximum flexibility potential is based on a
flat, connection capacity based fee, effectively taking away the influence of grid tariffs on
the optimisation decisions. It was shown that especially the peak-event tariffs increased
the value of the heat storage withing the system, up to 8%. In general, both flexibility
and value of the boiler was increased when exposed to variable grid fees that incentivise
consumption when this was most efficient from a system-wide perspective. This leads to
a change in merit order, as the electric boiler replaces a part of the heat produced by a
natural gas boiler. The most successful tariff, both through cost-savings and flexibility, is
the flat fee, but the authors note that it is not evident to ensure revenue for the system
operator, as it is difficult to calculate and assign the total grid costs based on connection
capacity alone. Moreover, they stress that yearly flat fee should not disincentivise electric-
ity against other heat production methods, and that flexibility incentives should be weighed
against tariff simplicity and system operator revenue. These effects were calculated with
a perfect-forecast MILP model, with fixed technology capacities.
As these district heating studies focus on the merit order of production technologies and
the average heat cost, the inclusion of an analysis on ”missed opportunities” is not rele-
vant.
In summary, it has been shown that the classic volumetric tariff distorts the price signal,
reduces the value of a utility scale BESS, and creates dead-weight loss. This is observed
for BESS as a part of a VRE portfolio or as a standalone facility. Novel dynamic tariff
structures applied on district heating systems have demonstrated that the distortive effect
of volumetric fees can be reduced. They allow the examined facilities to behave more
flexibly while increasing the value of heat storage within the system. However, these dy-
namic tariffs have not been tested and compared for large BESS and VRE portfolios, and
have only been evaluated using perfect-forecasts methods. Additionally, the studies on
standalone BESS facilities suggest a framework to assess the loss from the perspective
of the operator and general welfare. As for now, no comparison has been made between
different tariff structures using this framework.
This reveals a gap in the literature, as the impact of dynamic tariffs on utility scale BESS
and VRE portfolios, especially under more uncertain forecast conditions, remains un-
explored. Additionally, the impact of the double-taxation tariff schemes, as used in the
study on the Belgian arbitrage value, has not been discussed or compared with other
tariff schemes before in literature. Comparing these from different perspectives, such as
private profits and welfare losses, could guide policymakers when deciding on new tariff
structures.
To research this, a modelling framework is needed that considers the specific charac-
teristics, capabilities and constraints of BESS with relevancy to the research question.
This leads to the next part of the literature review, where dispatch models for VPPs are
explored.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
7
==PAGE:18==
2.2
Virtual power plant dispatch models and behaviour in the
electricity markets
In an attempt to get an overview of the state-of-the-art of BESS + VRE portfolio dispatch
models, the relevant literature will be discussed using a comparative framework on three
main aspects: market participation and identified revenue streams, uncertainty handling,
and consideration of time-dependencies. At the end of this part of the literature, the main
findings are summarised to be worked out in the methodology later on.
During the selection of relevant studies within this review, the following guidelines where
followed:
First of all, it should be noted that the portfolios considered in this thesis are virtual power
plants (VPP), a joint dispatch of several assets in the power markets, without the collo-
cation of the assets at the same grid connection [25]. Hybrid power plants are similar,
but they differ in the fact that the assets within the portfolio do share a grid connection.
VPPs are commonly associated with the aggregation of smaller assets, such as residen-
tial rooftop solar and electrical vehicles, which are not of interest within the scope of this
thesis [25]. HPs are mostly considered utility-scale facilities, such as a wind farm collo-
cated with a battery storage. As these types of portfolios fit better within the scope of this
thesis, studies on HPs are also included in the modelling review. From a dispatch model
perspective, the main difference is that the net power flow from the portfolio is restricted
by the common connection, while for a VPP, the flow is restricted by each facility’s local
connection point.
Secondly, the focus in this review is on the optimal dispatch of portfolios from a revenue
perspective, and not from a system services perspective.
Lastly, only price-taker portfolios will be discussed, which implies that the portfolio owner
has no power to manipulate the prices in the markets where they participate [21].
The following relevant studies were selected: [26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 21, 34, 35].
All of them, except [21], concern portfolios with wind and BESS, whereas [21] describes
BESS collocated with a solar farm.
Market participation and revenue streams
To start this comparison, a quick overview of the general characteristics of the sequential
energy markets are given as in use in most european countries. On the day-ahead market,
power is sold and bought one day before delivery. Market participants submit their bids
for each hour of the following day, and at gate closure time, typically around mid-day, the
clearing price is revealed based on the merit order of the participants. The day-ahead
market is a pay-as-clear market, meaning that everyone receives or pays this clearing
price, regardless of the submitted price. In contrast, the intraday market is a continuous
market, where power can be bought and sold until right before delivery. This provides
opportunities to participants to change their day-ahead positions if for example the RVE
availability changes when time of delivery nears. The time resolution of the bids is typically
shorter, at each quarter hour. Collectively these two markets form the spot markets. The
capacity reservation market, also known as ancillary market, ensures grid reliability by
reserving capacity from flexible actors that can be called upon to provide additional power
or reduce demand on short notice. The time resolution of the bids is typically longer,
e.g. 4 hours in the German market. Apart from the capacity reservation, a second bid is
placed to decide on the energy price if actually activated. Both of these bidding processes
are generally cleared as pay-as-bid, so every participant with an accepted bid pays or
receives their bid price. Note that simultaneous participation is allowed, which is called
8Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:19==
value stacking.
A first grouping can be made, as most studies only concern the day-ahead spot market
and the balancing markets [26, 27, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35].
The first research objective of these studies is to find the optimal dispatch to limit the
deviation from day-ahead commitments if the VRE forecasts change when time of delivery
approaches. As pointed out by [30], this allows the portfolio to behave like a regular power
plant. Adding to this, refs [26] and [33] explore the arbitrage opportunities that the battery
adds to the portfolio. Ref [26] shows that time-based arbitrage, which shifts produced RVE
from low demand to high demand periods, increased the revenue with 10% compared to
a standalone wind farm. To maximise revenue, it recommends scheduling the portfolio
according to the spot price forecasts, instead of focusing on the balancing of deviations. In
[33], market-based arbitrage between the day-ahead and the real time balancing market
is investigated. The authors explore different levels of risk aversion and conclude that a
portfolio owner who is willing to take more risk bids a higher trading volume in the real-time
imbalance market.
On top of the day-ahead, ref [21] also includes the ancillary services in the model, allowing
bids to the capacity reservation market. While the activation of the bids is out of the scope
of this study, the possible activation of the 4-hour bid is accounted for in the state-of-charge
constraints.
Two studies situating a combined wind + BESS in the Spanish power markets also investi-
gate the possibility to bid on the intraday market [28, 34]. This market allows rescheduling
of the portfolio position, in between the day-ahead spot market and the balancing market.
The intraday markets in the Spanish electricity market are a system of auctions, each
one nearer to the time of delivery. The intraday auctions can be used to adjust the po-
sition when the VRE forecast gets more accurate, avoiding imbalances. [28] starts from
a standalone wind farm, noting that the inclusion of intraday markets leads to a revenue
increase of 12% through market arbitrage, where the operator might choose a strategic
position on the day-ahead market. Besides this, the authors add that the addition of a
BESS also opens the way to time arbitrage on the day-ahead markets, as also mentioned
in the other studies. This only adds a revenue increase of 1.6%. Given that the market
arbitrage can already provide a significant revenue increase to the standalone wind farm,
it is argued that the added time-arbitrage might not justify the BESS investment.
Ref [34] investigates a similar portfolio in the same market structure, but now adds the
possibility to bid in the capacity reservation markets, without considering the activation
of the capacity bids. The authors note that the reduction of imbalances due to forecast
errors is not the most important reason to combine BESS with VRE, as the impact on the
portfolio revenue from reduced imbalance is less than 2.5%. Besides that, the revenue
provided by the intraday markets stays below 2.5% of the total revenue. However, the
imbalance and intraday markets are needed to ensure the feasibility of the model. This
aspect of the imbalance markets is also pointed out by the other studies mentioned above.
Secondly, the inclusion of a BESS in the portfolio increases the overall revenue with 10%
when only the day-ahead and intraday markets are considered, but this is not enough to
justify the investment. However, the additional bidding on the reserve markets is shown
to increase the revenue nearly fourfold in the investigated test case. This differs from the
results obtained in [21], where the capacity reservation market was less of a significant
contributor to the overall revenue. This might be because of the difference in market
structures. Ref [21] concerns the German electricity market, where capacity reservation
bids have a duration of 4 hours, as opposed to the hourly bids in the Spanish market. This
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
9
==PAGE:20==
might restrict the flexible potential of the battery storage for too long.
An interesting difference in perspectives on the intraday market can be seen when com-
paring refs [34, 28].
According to ref [28], the intraday markets provide an arbitrage
opportunity, allowing intraday bids to reverse the full day-ahead bid, only constraining
them with the total installed capacity of the VRE+BESS. The added BESS capacity is
used to increase the market arbitrage opportunity, as it increases the possible bidding
volume. Ref [34], however, perceives the intraday market only as a tool to compensate
the intraday forecast deviation. Additionally, the authors consider that the market oper-
ator would punish the portfolio owner if strategic market arbitrage behaviour would be
detected. Therefore, the total intraday bid is constrained with the expected minimum and
maximum deviations between the day-ahead and the intraday VRE forecasts. This dif-
ference is reflected in the results, where [34] obtains a large proportion of the revenues
through the intraday market, whereas this quantity is far lower in ref [28], although this is
important for the model feasibility.
Uncertainty handling
A defining characteristic of VRE is the output uncertainty. Additionally, the portfolio op-
erator also faces uncertainty in prices on the markets in which they operate. In this part,
the inclusion of these uncertainties in the models are discussed.
Most discussed studies follow some sort of two-stage approach [26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32,
33]. In the first stage, the day-ahead bids are optimised. In the second stage, the real
time balancing of the VRE is managed. This second stage can be an updating algorithm,
rescheduling every time new information enters on the delivery day, as in [26, 32, 33].
In [28, 29], the second stage is optimised in one stage over the delivery day. Refs [26,
27] do not use stochastic optimisation, but rather optimise based on a simulation of the
day-ahead prices and the updated wind forecasts in real-time.
[32, 33] handle the VRE forecast uncertainty through robust optimisation, defining a chang-
ing uncertainty interval during the updating real-time second stage. [33] also uses robust
optimisation for the balancing and day-ahead prices. Robust optimisation tends to be
overly conservative, as the program optimises for the worst case in the uncertainty inter-
val, as also noted in [29]. To counteract this effect, [32] proposes a hybrid approach, with
stochastic scenarios for market prices and robust optimisation for VRE.
Refs [28, 29] use a machine-learning approach to extract representative scenarios from
historical data, as opposed to the other studies, that either use simulation tools or time
series models to generate realistic scenarios. Ref [27] uses the simulation tool CorRES,
which provides correlated price and VRE production simulations. Machine learning is also
used to cluster and reduce the generated scenarios in [21].
A note should be made on ref [28]. The study showed a very high opportunity for market
arbitrage in the intraday markets. However, in the model, day-ahead and intraday are part
of the same stage. The operator is not assumed to face uncertainty in between these two
markets, which might affect the high market arbitrage income.
Ref [21] focuses on the interday uncertainties, taking into account the ancillary and day-
ahead markets. Within the daily optimisation model itself, all prices and VRE availability
are deterministic, but the transition from one day to the next is based on system state
scenarios, coupled with transition probabilities from one state to the next. For each day, a
number of states contain coherent price and VRE series, taking into account the so-called
”merit order effect”, where high VRE is met with low prices and vice versa. The coherent
scenarios are developed using time series techniques coupled with a jump mechanism,
10Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:21==
to reflect the clustered peaks that are inherent to electricity price series.
Ref [34] handles the uncertainty in prices and volume through an elaborate stochastic tree
structure with 27 levels. The day-ahead, intraday and ancillary service market each get a
stochastic level, while the real-time balancing is performed for each hour of the delivery
day in the last 24 stages.
Time linkage
A final distinction is made based on the time-coupling constraints for the state of charge
of the BESS. The possible actions during a day are constrained by the starting battery
level of that day. The optimisation of those actions, in turn, creates the starting conditions
for the next day, by deciding on the battery level at the end of the day. This effect is not
mentioned or argued for in most of the studies in this review, except for refs [26, 21]. Most
studies overlook this effect, because only a 24-hour window is considered. This results in
a greedy approach, where only the current day is optimised, without considering the next
days.
Ref [26] only optimises a 24-hour time frame, but provides insight in the effects of the
initial state of charge. In this model, a ”target state of charge” is determined, set to be
achieved at the end of each day. A target level of 0% is used, with the argument that
the battery operator would typically prefer to make use of the lowest prices between 12
am and 4 am the next day to charge up. Additionally, a sensitivity analysis is included on
the effects of different target levels, which proves that within the model, ending the day
with an empty battery provides most revenue over a longer period of time. Note that this
model only takes the day-ahead and the balancing markets into account. The inclusion of
ancillary services might cause different optimal battery levels, as the reliance on the low
prices in the early hours could decrease. Additionally, with increasing price volatility, the
general daily price trends are becoming less predictable.
Ref [21] optimises the optimal battery level at the end of the day explicitly through stochas-
tic dynamic programming (SDP), within a Markov-Decision Proces (MDP). Each day within
the time frame is optimised for 5 discrete initial battery levels, and a number of price and
VRE states. The MDP is solved through classic backwards induction, which means that
the possible optimal revenues in the next day can be included in the daily optimisation.
This allows to both optimise the current daily revenue, and the total revenue through the
ending battery level, since the expected value of the next day for each initial battery level is
already known. The authors compare monthly arbitrage profits calculated with the MDP
model both with a perfect-forecast optimisation and a heuristic approach. The perfect
forecast approach optimises the entire month in one stage, acting as an upper bound
benchmark. The heuristic approach keeps the MDP framework, but the daily optimisation
becomes more like the one in ref [26]. The beginning and ending battery level is set to 0%.
In peak periods power is sold and in off-peak periods power is bought. It is argued that
this adheres more to a typical trading schedule. The heuristic strategy is able to achieve
63% of the perfect forecast revenue, but is outperformed by the presented SDP model,
which achieves 78% of the benchmark [21]. This shows the importance of the storage
state as a factor in the optimal scheduling of a BESS.
Conclusion
As a conclusion on this aspect of the literature, a lot of focus has been put on the use
of BESS for enabling the total portfolio to adhere to the day-ahead bids. However, most
studies indicate that this provides little value. The majority of the additional revenue gen-
erated by adding a battery to the portfolio arises from arbitrage opportunities, whether
they are time-based or market-based using the intraday markets. An additional stream of
revenue comes from the ancillary services, but the added value varies based on market
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
11
==PAGE:22==
structure. It should be noted that the studies that investigate reserve market bidding do
not include the activation of these bids, due to the added complexity of modelling such in-
traday uncertainties. However, they do ensure the feasibility of these activations through
state-of-charge constraints.
Regarding uncertainty, a variety of methods are used to allow for uncertain prices and
VRE, resulting in elaborate stochastic structures and algorithms. The main driver for the
stochastic complexity of these models is associated with the real-time balancing, which
has been shown to have a limited impact on revenue.
To provide a relevant answer on the research questions, a choice should be made on
which markets to include, striking a balance between accuracy and complexity. The model
should consider the revenue opportunities with high values, but should also consider the
link with grid tariff structures.
Both the day-ahead market and the capacity reservation market have been clearly shown
to provide considerable revenue to VRE+BESS portfolios. Moreover, since it is exactly
the arbitrage on the day-ahead market that is most distorted by the volumetric fee, they
should be included in the framework.
The discussed studies provide varying perspectives on the revenue obtained from the
intraday markets, but there are strong arguments for including intraday bidding in the
model. First of all, these studies consider the Spanish intraday markets, a system based
on 6 daily auctions. These differ with the continuous auctions used in most EU countries,
such as Germany. To the best of the author’s knowledge, intraday trading for utility-scale
BESS+VRE portfolios in continuous auction markets like Germany has not yet been mod-
elled, presenting an opportunity to advance the current state-of-the-art. Secondly, by in-
cluding the intraday markets, the model can later be constrained or relaxed based on the
risk aversion of the discussed portfolio, providing a more generalisable framework.
Given the high complexity of modelling bidding on the balancing market, coupled with a
low revenue, this opportunity will not be considered moving on. In the same way, the ac-
tivation of the capacity reservation bids would require extra modelling complexity, as both
the prices and the activation volume, as well as the period itself are uncertain. Moreover,
it would trouble the grid tariff analysis, as it would introduce extra uncertainty on the BESS
power flow, which is used to calculate tariff costs. This is in contrast to the intraday and
day-ahead spot markets, where the corresponding grid tariff cost is certain. For these
reasons, this aspect of the ancillary service is not included.
The last discussed aspect demonstrated the importance of temporal constraints and initial
state-of-charge conditions as an optimisation variable, and not just an exogenous param-
eter. As such, it will be taken into account.
2.3
Regulation overview
With the interest of providing relevant and applicable results, insight from tariffs currently in
use or under development will enable realistic and relevant case studies to be examined.
The EU has a wide diversity of grid tariff structures and regulatory legislation [15]. As a
result of this, storage operators face a broad range of tariffs on discharge volume,charge
volume, installed capacity, and others. In addition, some jurisdictions have granted ex-
ceptions or special tariff structures specifically to support the business case of grid-scale
storage facilities. As an example and an introduction for the case study later on, the
transmission grid tariff structures in Germany, Belgium and Denmark are compared for
12Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:23==
the highest voltage levels. The comparison is again summarised in table 2.1. These coun-
tries are selected because they contain the elements that are used in most EU countries,
allowing for an efficient overview.
In Belgium, the TSO bills connected facilities through a volumetric injection fee, a volu-
metric withdrawal fee, fees based on the monthly and yearly withdrawal peaks [36] and a
fee based on the connection capacity. The connection capacity tariff is a fixed cost based
on the installed capacity and, as such, has no influence on the operating schedule. The
monthly fee is based on the 11th monthly maximum intake peak. The annual peak fee
charges the yearly maximum intake as measured during the winter months between 5 pm
and 8 pm. As storage facilities are generally in injection mode during these hours, the
Belgian regulator states that operators enjoy a de facto discount on this tariff [37]. This
tariff is therefore not taken into account in the summary table.
As opposed to the other two discussed countries, a storage operator thus faces both
injection related fees and withdrawal fees, which is an example of the so-called ”double
taxation” of storage [1, 14]. The Belgian regulator argues that because of cost-reflectivity,
the cost for black-start and frequency regulation is split equally between generators and
loads [15]. The loads are responsible for ”market integration” and ”system management
costs”, which include losses. The volumetric tariffs are aggregated in table 2.1.
An exemption has been put in place, shielding storage operators from all grid tariffs for
the first 10 years of operation, if they are built after 2018. Existing storage facilities can
get a tariff discount for 5 years if they significantly expand their capacity [37].
In Germany, injection charges on the transmission grid are not allowed by law [15]. The
grid costs are covered based on the yearly maximum power intake and a volumetric tariff
for each unit of energy [38]. Unlike in the Belgian case, it does not matter whether this
peak is measured in a low or high load period. In effect, this tariff is more a fixed capacity
cost than a peak fee.
In 2005, the German Federal Government decided to grant a total grid fee exemption for
all electricity storage facilities for the first 20 years of operation, on the condition that they
go online before 2026 [39].
The Danish tariff structure has undergone reforms and temporary measures recently [40,
41]. In 2025, a new structure for load connections on the transmission grid will go in
effect, consisting of an annual capacity charge and a dynamic volumetric fee [42]. The
annual capacity charge is meant to cover the investment and maintenance costs of the
infrastructure, similar to Belgium and Germany. The volumetric fee covers the costs of
balancing losses on the transmission grid through a pricing system based on the hourly
spot price pDAh on the day-ahead markets. It is argued that the balancing energy has to
be bought on the spot market, so this tariff accounts for the fluctuating cost of providing
this service [40]. The structure is defined as follows for each hour h:
Th = (pDAh + M) ∗α
(2.1)
In this system, M and α are constants communicated at the end of the previous year. M is
a markup to account for the average expected loss of trading the balancing energy and α
describes the percentage of lost volume to be financed with the tariff compared to the total
yearly load. In addition to the load based tariffs, generation also pays an injection charge.
This charge has been temporarily withdrawn in 2024, but is in review to be brought back
in 2025, expected at a level around 5kr/MWh.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
13
==PAGE:24==
There are no exceptions in place for the mentioned tariffs for storage operators [15], but
stakeholder workshops with a possibility to reform this have held place [43]. In table 2.1,
the tariffs as recalculated on 2023 costs by the Danish TSO are given with an average for
the volumetric tariff. An exchange rate of 0.134 EUR
DKK is used [44].
In table 2.1, the relevant transmission tariffs are shown for these 3 jurisdictions.
Table 2.1: Summary table on the examined tariff structures faced by storage operators in
2023 [36, 38, 45]
fixed ann.
connection fee
[EUR/kW/annum]
monthly peak fee
[EUR/kW/month]
withdrawal fee
[EUR/MWh]
injection fee
[EUR/MWh]
exemptions
BE
4.51
0.21
2.13
0.62
all fees
DK
16.75
-
2.41 (av.)
0.67
-
DE
72.49
-
5.30
-
all fees
Note that the costs shown here are only the pure TSO tariffs. Typically, some government
measures relating to the energy transition, like support tariffs for renewables or energy
efficiency measures, are financed through the electricity bill as an extra volumetric fee,
often called ”public service obligations” [10]. These measures are argued to benefit all
electricity consumers, suggesting they should be distributed in proportion to each user’s
electricity consumption [46].
However, during the energy crisis of 2022, the governments of Germany and Belgium
decided to fully or partially fund these measures through the government budget, to alle-
viate the direct impact of these measures on the electricity bill [47, 46]. In Germany, fees
are still in place to fund state support for combined heat and power plants [48], offshore
infrastructure [49], fairer tariff costs for small businesses [50] and a relatively small fee to
remunerate flexible demand in industry. The last fee, however, will be discontinued from
2024 onwards [51]. The combination of the first three fees amounts to 13.65EUR/MWh
in 2023 [48, 49, 50]. These fees are included in the exemption as discussed above and
are to be paid when charging.
2.4
Conclusion
In the first part of the literature review, the research gap for this study was clearly defined.
The impact of dynamic tariff structures on the value and scheduling of VRE+BESS port-
folios has not been explored. A framework evaluating private and welfare loss has been
proposed in some studies, but the comparison of tariff structures has not been conducted
using this framework. This supports the research questions formulated in the introduction.
To analyse this impact, an overview of the literature on VRE+BESS dispatch model re-
vealed the relevant model characteristics. A balance between relevancy and complexity
guided the choice for market participation to be included in this modelling framework.
Day-ahead arbitrage and capacity reservation will be included, as they provide substan-
tial revenue in investigated studies. A contribution of this study will be the addition of the
intraday market.
The real-time balancing and the capacity activation have been excluded from the model,
due to their high complexity and low revenue potential. Including these components would
introduce additional uncertainty on the power flows, complicating the analysis of the grid
tariffs’ impact.
14Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:25==
Some studies also pointed out the importance of including the initial state of charge for
the daily optimisation as a variable, and not a parameter. Most studies lack this, resulting
in a greedy daily approach.
To increase the relevancy of the study, three representative tariff structures have been dis-
cussed. The case study will be designed to reflect these structures. In addition to the TSO
tariff schemes, the analysis showed that in some countries relatively high additional fees,
known as ”public service obligations” (PSO), are imposed. To provide a comprehensive
analysis, these extra charges will also be included in the case study.
This section provided the foundation for the modelling framework, which will be explained
further in the methodology section and the section on the case study.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
15
==PAGE:26==
16Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:27==
3
Methodology
3.1
Overview of the methodology
The literature review on dispatch models selected the capacity reservation market and
the day-ahead spot market as main revenue opportunities, and the intraday market as
a contribution opportunity to the current state-of-the-art. Moreover, the importance of
uncertainty was highlighted for the prices and VRE forecasts. In this section, a model will
be developed which considers these aspects, and supports the analysis of different tariff
structures.
This model presented here is based on a modelling framework proposed in [21], which will
be expanded to allow for intraday uncertainties, intraday bidding and dynamic grid tariffs.
In this modelling framework, the actions of a BESS + VRE installation are modelled as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) with the objective to find the optimal annual profit of the
portfolio. Within this MDP, the daily actions of the portfolio operator are optimised, based
on stochastic states for RVE and prices.
In this modelling framework, it is assumed that the day-ahead prices and VRE forecasts
can be forecasted sufficiently accurate on the bidding day, so the stochasticity in this
model is reflected in the interday uncertainties [21]. The capacity reservation market
is modelled as a deterministic price, taken from the automatic Frequency Restoration
Reserve market (aFRR). The same assumptions will be used in this study. Added to
this, intraday uncertainties will be modelled based on the ID3-index, which is the volume
weighted average of the continuous bids in the last three hours before delivery. The up-
dated VRE forecasts will be modelled based on the day-ahead and intraday RVE forecasts
provided by the TSO.
Proceeding, three parts of the model are explained. The first part quickly explains the
concept of an MDP, and applies the concept on the case of a BESS+VRE. Moreover, the
connection is made with the two sections later on. Additionally, the MDP is discretised
to allow tractability. The second section introduces the daily optimisation model which is
solved within the MDP. The last section introduces the time series models used to create
the scenarios for the day-ahead and intraday prices, together with the scenarios for day-
ahead and intraday VRE forecasts.
3.2
Markov Decision Process
A Markov Decision Process is generally defined by actions and states. The state captures
the situation in which the actor currently operates, setting the boundaries within which the
actor can maneuver. The action is the set of actions the actor undertakes based on the
current state. Through taking this action, the actor creates a reward, and progresses
to a next state. In the most general form of an MDP, this transition to the next state
is dependent on the current state and the actions taken in the current state. A state
constrains the opportunities to gain future rewards, and therefore a balance should be
found with the actions of the current state, and the reward possibilities of the next states.
This balance is found by finding the optimal policy. A policy is defined as a mapping of
the action to be taken in each state. To optimise an MDP thus means to find the optimal
policy, which optimises the total value generated.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
17
==PAGE:28==
This is why storage optimisation problems are often framed as an MDP. The actions taken
today impact the profits opportunities of tomorrow, as the initial state of charge of the unit
is decided on in the previous day.
Now, the states and actions will be defined based on the methodology developed in [21],
and further expanded with intraday variables. In the time frame of a year, the operator will
bid everyday in the selected sequential energy markets, depending on the state it is in.
First, three time frames are introduced to split up each day d:
• time slices ts ∈T S to account for the capacity reservation duration in each day,
• hours h ∈H to account for the 24 hours in each day,
• quarter hours qh ∈QH to signify the set of the 96 quarter hours in a day.
The state of the system Sd on day d is defined below, whereby the variables p denote
the external prices for the capacity reservation, day-ahead and intraday market, and the
variables Φ denote the RVE availability. Note that the intraday variables are given as
stochastic scenarios with probability πi. The last part of the state is not external and
denotes the state-of-charge SOCqh=96,d−1 at the end of the previous day, which defines
the initial conditions of day d.
Sd = (pcap+
d
, pcap−
d
, pDA
d
, ΦDA
d
, πID
d,i , pID
d,i , ΦID
d,i , SOCqh=96,d−1)
(3.1)
Within this state, the operator commits the action Ad based on the state s. On one hand,
this action consists of volume bids in the sequential energy markets by the battery x↑, x↓,
respectively discharging and charging the battery. On the other hand, it includes volume
bids denoting the direct marketing of the RVE in these markets, r↑, or the storage of RVE
in the BESS, r↓. Note that the RVE cannot bid in the capacity reservation market and that
the intraday bids are not scenario-dependent.
Ad = (xcap+
d
, xcap−
d
, xDA↑
d
, xDA↓
d
, rDA↑
d
, xDA↓
d
, xID↑
d
, xID↓
d
, rID↑
d
, rID↓
d
)
(3.2)
Based on the ”space of action” defined by the state, the action, which consists of market
commitments, results in the generation of a reward, or here, contribution CSd,Ad. This
contribution consists of the net revenues obtained from the markets ρ and the costs due
to the tariffs κ. The intraday revenue is an expected revenue over the intraday scenarios.
CSd,Ad = ρcap+
d
+ ρcap−
d
+ ρDA
d
+ ρID
d
(3.3)
To emphasize that a policy is a mapping of states with actions, the contribution obtained
under policy pol is given as CSd,polc(Sd).
The MDP can be formulated as a stochastic dynamic process (SDP), using the Bellman
equations. These define the value Vd(Sd) of each state on each day recursively as a
function of the immediate contribution and the expected values of the following day, given
the end storage state defined on the current day d.
Vd(Sd) = maxAd(CSd,Ad + E(Vd+1(Sd+1|SOCqh=96,d)))∀d ∈(D −1, 0)
(3.4)
18Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.1: Overview of the SDP tree structure and the backwards induction method as
proposed in [21]
In principle, the amount of states the system can face are infinite. To handle the uncer-
tainty in prices and RVE, the possibilities for the external states are approximated by a
set of K representative scenarios Zd,k, each with a transition probability πd,k,k′ from state
k in day d and the state k′ in day d + 1. These scenarios define a recombining stochastic
tree.
The state consists of external factors such as the prices and the RVE forecast on one
hand, and the initial SOC of the battery on the other hand. Again, this SOC can take any
real number between 0 and 1, so it will be discretised to ensure computational feasibility.
Specifically, the SOC at the end of each day will be interpolated between N battery states
sb ∈SB, using interpolation coefficients λsb
d . The coefficients are added to the actions of
the decision process, however, to emphasise them, they will be shown separately.
For each day, the state space now consists of K scenarios, and N possible initial SOC
levels, for D days. The actions are the commitments in the market, the in-portfolio charg-
ing with RVE and the interpolation variables at the end of the day. Figure 3.1 shows this
stochastic tree, with the days and scenarios on the x- and y-axis, and with the battery
states on the z-axis.
To solve the SDP, using the Bellman equations, an approximation method based on clas-
sical backward induction is proposed [21]. This means that optimal value of the last day
is calculated first, for all external states and initial battery states. Then, the value for each
state in the previous day can be calculated, taking into account that the actions will decide
which future value can be achieved.
With these new actions, a discrete state space and the backwards induction approxima-
tion method, equation 3.4 can be approximated as follows.
V k,sb
d
(Sk,sb
d
) = maxAd,λdCSd,Ad +
K
∑
k′=1
N
∑
sb′=1
πd,k,k′ ·λsb′
d ·V k′,sb′
d+1 (Sk′,sb′
d+1 )∀d ∈(D −1, 0) (3.5)
For d = 0, there are no transition probabilities, so the initial probabilities are chosen based
on the amount of scenarios in each cluster. Additionally, the initial SOC of the battery can
be chosen, en will be set equal to the SOC at the end of day D, similar as in [21]. This
ensure that all value is made within the chosen time frame, which is one year in this case.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
19
==PAGE:30==
The backwards induction algorithm can be coded as seen in listing ??. Note how a daily
optimisation is needed for each external state and battery state, which leads to the next
section.
Algorithm 1 Stochastic Dynamic Programming Algorithm
1: Initialize V (d = 1 : D, k = 1 : K, sb = 1 : SB) ←0
2: Initialize λ(d = 1 : D, k = 1 : K, sb = 1 : SB) ←0
3:
4: for k ←1 to K do
5:
for sb ←1 to SB do
6:
7:
V k,sb
d=D ←daily_optimisation(Sk,sb
d
)
8:
{daily_optimisation decides optimal actions based on the state Sk,sb
d
}
9:
end for
10: end for
11:
12: for d ←D −1 down to 0 do
13:
for k ←1 to K do
14:
for sb ←1 to SB do
15:
{Define the future expected value}
16:
V ′
d+1,sb ←∑K
k′=1 πk,k′ · V k′,sb
d+1
17:
18:
{Co-optimisation of the contribution and future expected value}
19:
V k,sb
d
←daily_optimisation(Sk,sb
d
, V ′
d+1,sb)
20:
end for
21:
end for
22: end for
23:
24: V ∗←∑K
k′=1 π0
k′ · V k′,sb=sb0
d=0
25:
26: return V ∗
3.3
Optimisation model
3.3.1
Introduction
This model is solved for each day, state and battery state as transferred from the MDP. As
stated in the model introduction, both the day-ahead power prices pDA
h
and the capacity
reservation market prices pcap,−
ts
, pcap,+
ts
are deterministic within the one-day optimisation
model. Bids in these two markets will all be assumed to be accepted.
The intraday market is a continuous process, where ask and sell bids are executed as
soon as a potential match has been found. This is possible right until 15 minutes before
delivery. Modelling this process would require a lot of decision stages. As the daily optimi-
sation will be performed multiple times in the MDP, computational efficiency is important.
In ref [52], an alternative methodology is proposed in which the intraday bidding can be
approximated by one decision stage, clearing 96 quarter-hourly bids in a pay-as-clear
system. The clearing prices are based on the ID3-index, which is the volume-weighted
average price in the last 3 trading hours before delivery in each quarter hour qh. Among
others, these prices are affected by the adjusted VRE intraday forecasts, as discussed in
section 3.4. To reflect this uncertainty, I scenarios of 96 intraday prices pID
i,qh are evaluated
in the optimisation model, each with a probability of πi.
20Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:31==
The same uncertainty structure is used for the VRE forecasts. Within the model, the day-
ahead forecasts ΦDA
r,h are deterministic for each hour h and each plant r. The quarter-
hourly intraday forecasts ΦID
r,i,qh are consistent with the price scenarios.
The commitment variables x↑and x↓signify a power flow towards the market and from
the market to the battery respectively. Similarly, the variables r↑and r↓signify the power
flow from the VRE facilities towards the market and the battery.
This MILP model aims to optimise the bids in the day-ahead (DA), intraday (ID) and ca-
pacity reservation markets in order to maximise the immediate revenues ρ on the energy
markets, while also maximising the future value of the battery based on the storage state
V ′d+1. Simultaneously, it minimises grid tariff costs κtariff and the cost of load shedding
κimb. Note that curtailment of VRE is allowed within this model.
The objective of the daily optimisation is as follows.
Max
ρcap + ρDA + ρID −κtariff + V t+1 −κimb
(3.6)
Note that the value as transferred in the SDP process is the objective value without the
imbalance cost.
In the following, the constraints are explained and shown in equations 3.7 - 3.40.
3.3.2
Trading constraints
The revenues for the day-ahead and the capacity reservation market are defined respec-
tively, based on the deterministic daily prices:
ρcap =
TS
∑
ts
xcap,+
ts
pcap,+
ts
+ xcap,−
ts
pcap,−
ts
(3.7)
ρDA =
H
∑
h
(xDA,↑
h
+ rDA,↑
h
−xDA↓
h
)pDA
h
(3.8)
As mentioned above, the intraday market is modelled as a pay-as-clear market. In the first
stage, ask and sell bid curves tID↓
qh,lid, tID↑
qh,lid are submitted for each qh based on discrete
price bidding levels lid, as in [52]. The authors argument that the operator has no incentive
to bid on prices other than those in the intraday price scenarios, so the price bidding
levels are simply taken from the intraday scenarios. In the second stage, the intraday
information is revealed through acceptance parameters βi,qh,lid. These indicate for each
scenario and quarter hour whether the price level lid is higher than the intraday price
pID
i,qh. This parameter equals 1 if price level lid is lower than or equal to the intraday price,
indicating a successful sale. If the price level is higher, the parameter is 0. In that case
(1 −βi,qh,lid) indicates a successful buying bid. Note that this means that in order to buy,
the bid price should be higher than, and not equal to, the uniform clearing price, as done
in [52].
This leads to the following intraday income.
ρID =
I
∑
i
πi
∑
qh,lid
(βi,qh,lidtID↑
qh,lid −
∑
qh,lid
(1 −βi,qh,lid)tID↓
qh,lid) · pID
i,qh
(3.9)
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
21
==PAGE:32==
3.3.3
Technical constraints
In both the day-ahead and the intraday stage, the dispatch of VRE should be bounded by
the available production at that time. P rve
r
denotes the installed capacity of each particular
VRE facility r. This capacity is multiplied with the capacity factor forecast in each stage.
The day-ahead forecast serves as an expected value for the intraday final forecast. It is
assumed that the storage operator acts risk averse, and views the intraday market as a
tool to act on the intraday deviations, rather than creating them for gains through market
arbitrage, similar to the view in [34]. Therefore, the operator commits the expected VRE
capacity completely through the variables rDA↑
h
, rDA↓
h
.
rDA↑
h
+ rDA↓
h
=
∑
r
ΦDA
r,h P vre
r
∀h
(3.10)
In the stochastic intraday stage, the forecast is updated in each scenario. Depending on
this update, action to readjust the portfolio position is needed. This is signified by the
continuous variable ∆ID
i,qh.
rDA↑
h
+ rDA↓
h
+ ∆ID
i,qh =
∑
r
ΦID
r,i,qhP vre
r
∀i, h, qh ∈h
(3.11)
The intraday deviation is broken down in a positive and negative deviation, respectively
signifying an increase or decrease in available VRE from the day-ahead to the intraday
stage. This breakdown is linearised using the big-M method with binary variable δID
i,qh.
∆ID
i,qh
= ∆ID+
i,qh −∆ID−
i,qh
∀i, qh (3.12)
0
≤∆ID+
i,qh ≤δID
i,qh · M
∀i, qh (3.13)
0
≤∆ID−
i,qh ≤(1 −δID
i,qh) · M
∀i, qh (3.14)
The positive deviation allows to sell or store more VRE, or to curtail the energy.
∆ID+
i,qh = rID↑
i,qh + rID↑
i,qh + spilli,qh∀i, qh
(3.15)
A negative deviation, indicating a shortfall, should be bridged in order to meet the day-
ahead commitments. This can be done by providing energy from the battery xID↑
i,qh to
replace the loss in VRE. Alternatively, extra energy can be bought on the intraday market
to fulfill the day ahead commitments (xID↓
i,qh ), or load can be shed through loadshedi,qh.
∆ID−
i,qh = xID↑
i,qh + xID↓
i,qh + loadshedi,qh∀i, qh
(3.16)
Note that only rID↑
i,qh and xID↓
i,qh constitute transactions on the intraday market. These should
thus be matched with the accepted trades on the intraday market for each scenario and
quarter hour. The intraday trading variables are the same for all the scenarios, to ensure
non-anticipativity.
22Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:33==
∑
lid
βi,qh,lidtID,spot
qh,lid
= rID↑
i,qh
∀i, qh
(3.17)
∑
lid
(1 −βi,qh,lid)tID,stor
qh,lid
= xID↓
i,qh
∀i, qh
(3.18)
At all times, the power flows in and out of the battery should be lower than the battery
power capacity P batt
b
. Below are the constraints for the day-ahead stage. The final battery
flow is decided on in the intraday stage and shall be constrained in the next subsection of
constraints.
xcap+
ts
+ xDA↑
h
≤
∑
b
P batt
b
∀i, ts, h ∈ts, qh ∈h
(3.19)
xcap−
ts
+ xDA↓
h
+ rDA↓
h
≤
∑
b
P batt
b
∀i, ts, h ∈ts, qh ∈h
(3.20)
To prevent charging and discharging of the battery at the same time, the binary variable
δcharge
h
is used to choose between these states using the big-M method.
xDA↓
h
+ rDA↓
h
≤(1 −δcharge
h
) · M∀h
(3.21)
xDA↑
h
≤δcharge
h
· M∀h
(3.22)
The state of charge (SOC) is normalised with the battery storage capacity Cbatt and is
thus bounded between 0 and 1. The variable SOCi,qh is defined as the SOC at the end of
quarter hour qh.
0 ≤SOCi,qh ≤1∀i ∈I, qh
(3.23)
The SOC is updated every quarter hour with the net incoming energy, multiplied with a
factor of 0.25 to adjust for the 15-minute intervals when multiplying with power flow. Note
that the incoming energy is discounted with η, the round trip efficiency. As the SOC is
bound between 0 and 1, the incoming energy is divided by the storage capacity. Note that
the intraday variable xID↓
i,qh is not included in the battery SOC equation, as it constitutes
an adjustment to keep the day-ahead schedules. In other words, it is already accounted
for in the day-ahead variables. However, xID↑
i,qh , rID↓
i,qh are power flows experienced by the
battery,respectively discharging and charging the battery.
SOCi,qh = SOCi,qh−1 +
1
Cbatt ·0.25·((xDA↓
h
+rDA↓
h
+rID↓
i,qh )·η −(xDA↑
h
+xID↑
i,qh ))∀i, h, qh ∈h
(3.24)
If qh = 1, the previous SOC value is given as the parameter SOC0, which is the SOC at
the end of the previous day. This is an exogenous parameter within the daily optimisation.
SOCi,qh=1 = SOC0 +
1
Cbatt ·0.25·((xDA↓
h=1 +rDA↓
h=1 +rID↓
i,qh=1)·η −(xDA↑
h=1 +xID↑
i,qh=1))∀i (3.25)
To allow compliance with capacity reservation commitments, the battery must have suf-
ficient energy to supply full activation for the duration of the time slice ts, which spans
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
23
==PAGE:34==
4 hours. Likewise, the battery should be able to absorb a full activation of the negative
capacity bid for the full duration of the bid.
4 · xcap,+
ts
≤SOCi,qh · Cbatt
∀i, ts, qh ∈ts
(3.26)
4 · xcap,−
ts
≤(1 −SOCi,qh) · Cbatt
∀i, ts, qh ∈ts
(3.27)
3.3.4
Tariff and spillage constraints
To evaluate the tariffs, the following constraints are proposed. The tariff costs should be
based on the net flow direction of the battery, taking into account that the committed net
flow might change from the day-ahead stage to the intraday stage.
First, the net outflow position is defined for each intraday scenario and quarter hour, with
∆batt
i,qh, a continuous variable.
∆batt
i,qh = xDA↑
h
−rDA↓
h
−xDA↓
h
+ xID↑
i,qh −rID↓
i,qh ∀i, h, qh ∈h
(3.28)
The net outflow is split to a net outflow and a net inflow variable (∆batt↑
i,qh , ∆batt↓
i,qh ), using the
binary auxiliary variable δ↑↓
i,qh.
∆batt
i,qh
= ∆batt↑
i,qh −∆batt↓
i,qh
∀i, qh (3.29)
0
≤∆batt↑
i,qh ≤δ↑↓
i,qh · M
∀i, qh (3.30)
0
≤∆batt↓
i,qh ≤(1 −δ↑↓
i,qh) · M
∀i, qh (3.31)
(3.32)
This allows tariff schemes for both generation t↑
h and load behaviour t↓
h. Note that the time
structure of the tariffs can differ on an hourly basis within this model. The expected tariff
cost is defined below. As the tariffs t are defined in €/MWh, the time factor 0.25 is used
again to convert to quarter-hourly energy quantities.
κtariff =
∑
i
πi
∑
h,qh∈h
0.25 · (∆batt↑
i,qh · t↑
h + ∆batt↓
i,qh · t↓
h)
(3.33)
The battery flows should be constrained by the maximal power flow capacity of the battery.
xcap+
ts
+ ∆batt↑
i,qh ≤
∑
b
P batt
b
∀i, ts, qh ∈ts
(3.34)
xcap−
ts
+ ∆batt↓
i,qh ≤
∑
b
P batt
b
∀i, ts, qh ∈ts
(3.35)
The total shed load is charged with a fee equal to big-M.
κimb =
∑
i,qh
πi · 0.25 · (spilli,qh + loadshedi,qh) · M
(3.36)
24Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:35==
3.3.5
Interpolation and future value
These constraints facilitate the co-optimisation of the future value functions, together with
the daily contribution above. The SOC at the end of the day is interpolated between the
discrete battery levels sb ∈(1, 2, .., N) for each scenario i with interpolation variables λi,sb.
They are bounded as shown below. This is an adaption of the methodology shown in [21]
to include the intraday uncertainty.
SOCi,qh=96 =
∑
sb
λi,sb · sb −1
N −1∀i
(3.37)
∑
sb
λi,sb = 1∀i
(3.38)
0 ≤λi,sb ≤1∀i, sb
(3.39)
The future value vector V ′
d+1,sb, giving the future value for each discrete ending SOC level
sb is a parameter within the scope of this optimisation. The expected future value V ′
t+1,
based on the expected ending SOC of the current day t, is then optimised within the
objective function, and is defined below.
V ′
d+1 =
∑
i
πi
∑
sb
λi,sbV ′
d+1,sb
(3.40)
3.3.6
Auxiliary definition of revenue streams
For later reference, the revenue streams of the portfolio were previously defined as rev-
enue on the day-ahead, intraday and capacity reservation markets, but this division does
not emphasise the role of the battery in the portfolio. For the spot markets, it is not clear
whether the revenue comes from the battery trading or the VRE trading, whereas the
aFRR revenue is easily attributed to the battery. Therefore, the spot market revenues
are redistributed over an arbitrage service stream, which adds to the value of the battery,
and a generation service stream, which signifies the trading of the VRE, both towards the
market and towards the battery. Within this revenue framework, the capacity reservation
revenue will be called ancillary service for coherence. Note that these are not optimisation
variables, and will be denoted by R.
Rarbitrage =
∑
h
(xDA,↑
h
−xDA↓
h
−rDA,↓
h
)pDA
h
−
∑
i,qh
0.25 · πirID,↓
i,qh pID
i,qh
(3.41)
Rgeneration =
∑
h
(rDA,↑
h
+ rDA,↓
h
)pDA
h
+
∑
i,qh
0.25 · πi(rID,↑
i,qh −rID↓
i,qh −xID,↓
i,qh )pID
i,qh
(3.42)
Rancillary = ρcap
(3.43)
Note that Rgeneration + Rarbitrage = ρDA + ρID, but the new streams extract the pure value
of the arbitrage service delivered by the battery. The VRE production stored in the battery
provides income in the generation stream, and is a cost in the arbitrage stream. The
added value of a battery to the portfolio is then roughly equal to Rarbitrage + Rancillary,
excluding gains through avoided curtailment of VRE.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
25
==PAGE:36==
3.4
Scenario generation and clustering
The scenario models provide the yearly scenarios needed to introduce uncertainty in the
modelling framework through the external state variables Sk
d. Several approaches in liter-
ature have been found for modelling RVE feed-in series and power prices. The literature
review on uncertainty handling showed that some authors used machine learning ap-
proaches, others generated scenarios from existing tools like CorRES, while others used
time series models or robust optimisation.
The development of these scenarios as such is not the main goal of this thesis, and
the proposed modelling framework in the first two sections of this chapter can be used
regardless of the origin of the scenarios. Yet, it is important that the correlation between
RVE and prices are reflected in the scenarios.
Within the scope of this thesis, simplified models based on existing literature have been
used, which will be discussed and referenced to its origin.
The concept behind the models presented is based on a framework developed in [53] and
summarised in figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Modelling framework as proposed in [53]
First, the dependency on the RVE feed-in is eliminated, and afterwards, the deterministic
component of the prices is eliminated, leaving a historical stochastic component. This
historical component can be fitted and simulated for each simulation, to which the deter-
ministic components of the prices are added again. Finally, once the RVE simulations are
obtained as well, these can be added again, to create a correlated scenario consisting of
yearly price and RVE series.
The general approach for the RVE in-feed follows the same steps of eliminating histori-
cal deterministic components, simulating the remaining stochastic component to create a
number of simulations and them again.
As to not confuse the indices used here with the ones from the model, the time series will
be generally defined with time step t ≤T, whereby T denotes the amount of time steps
in a year, either T = 8760 for hourly series, and T = 35040 for quarter-hourly time series.
These models will generate simulations based on historical price and RVE series, which
will afterwards be clustered using a multidimensional K-means algorithm. These are the
final clusters that will be used in the SDP, which were previously named Zd,k. The first
26Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:37==
part of this section concerns the day-ahead simulations, the second part the intraday sim-
ulations, and the last part discusses the clustering to generate representative scenarios.
3.4.1
Day-ahead scenarios
Solar production
The solar production is based on a model by [54], in which it is assumed that the uncer-
tainty regarding solar production is largely contained in the maximum production value of
the day. For a given period and area, the maximum production curve can be assumed
constant, and thus the total aggregated production in this area is based on the maximum
production value, acting as a scaling constant on this curve.
The historical hourly solar production time series ϕsol
t
is first normalised with the installed
capacity. Then, the maximum value of each day is selected to form the maximum daily
time series ϕsol,max
d
. A seasonal yearly cycle is fitted based on the following function.
a1 ∗sin 2a2πd + a3 + a4
(3.44)
After fitting, this function is subtracted to gain the deseasonalised, stochastic time series
ˆϕsol,max
d
.
This time series is then normalised using the logit transformation, again as proposed
in [54]. To model this stochastic process, an auto-regressive (AR) model of order p is
proposed. The process is then defined as follows.
ˆϕsol,max
d
=
p
∑
j=1
βsol
j
ˆϕsol,max
d−j
+ ϵd.
(3.45)
The factors βsol
j
are fitted using least squares, and the residuals ϵd are observed to be
approximately normally distributed.
This facilitates the generation of simulations, as the AR model is simulated with the addi-
tion of normally distributed residuals. To get back to an hourly solar production simulation,
the time series is retransformed from the logit transform, and multiplied with the daily av-
erage solar curve from the corresponding month.
Wind production
The simulation of wind production series is based on a model developed in [55]. First, the
hourly annual wind production time series is normalised with the installed capacity, and
then the wind production is deseasonalised using the 10% an 90% quantiles in each month
of the year. This deseasonalisation method effectively rescales the wind power production
spread in every month towards the annual mean production spread. Moreover, it shifts
the mean of the monthly time series to the annual mean. Then, a stochastic hourly wind
production series hatϕwind
t
is obtained.
It has been shown in [55] that the first-order differences are distributed as a Laplace dis-
tribution, and that the parameters defining this distribution depend on the moving average
of the previous wind production values. If this ”update” from one time step to the next is
defined as ∆ˆϕwind
t
, the process is as follows.
ˆϕwind
t
= ˆϕwind
t−1 + ∆ˆϕwind
t
(3.46)
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
27
==PAGE:38==
Similar to the solar production series, this stochastic process can be simulated, and the
seasonal components are added back. After multiplication with the installed capacity, the
production simulations are obtained.
Prices
The model presented here is calibrated for the four seasons, each 13 weeks long, and an
additional distinction is made between weekdays and weekend days. In effect, models
are fitted.
First, the impact of the RVE is eliminated from the prices through linear regression.
pDA
t
= β0 + β1 · ϕwind
t
+ β2 · ϕsol
t
+ ˆpDA
t
(3.47)
The process ˆpDA
t
is now free from the impact of RVE, and the coefficients β will later be
used to add the RVE simulations back to the price. An annual, weekly and daily cycle is
fitted and detracted from this time series, leaving a stochastic process. The annual cycle
is defined by the monthly mean price, while the daily cycle is based on the mean daily
price curve for each season and day type. The weekly cycle is a trigonometrical function,
as proposed in [53].
As proposed in [53], a model is developed to handle so-called price jumps, a period with
a high occurrence of extreme high and low prices. As these are important for market
actors depending on market arbitrage, such as BESS, it is important that these effects
are considered. The framework is based on regime switching, whereby a base regime is
defined by prices within a range {µ −3σ, µ + 3σ}, and a low and high price regime for the
low and high outliers respectively.
Transition probabilities between these regimes are defined based on the empirical occur-
rence of the transition in the historical price series. The transition probability to go from
the base regime to the high regime is calculated as the amount of times a base regime
value is followed by a high regime value, divided by the amount of base regime values.
The probability to go from low to high and vice versa is assumed to be zero.
The base regime is modelled as a mean-reversion process, as proposed in [53]. To model
this process, all non-base values in the deseasonalised historic price series are replaced
with the series mean. The mean-reversion process is shown below, with ϵt the stochastic
residual.
The process is shown below, as derived from [56], with parameters κ, µ.
ˆpDA
t
= ˆpDA
t=0 · e−κ·δt + µ(1 −e−κ·δt) + ϵt
(3.48)
To estimate the parameters, δt is set equal to 1, resulting in the following.
ˆpDA
t+1 = ˆpDA
t
· e−κ + µ(1 −e−κ) + ϵt
(3.49)
The constants can now be fitted with least squares on the historical stochastic process.
The error term was shown to be approximately Laplace distributed.
To simulate this process, and to include the high and low regimes again, the additional
magnitude of the high and low regime values are first fitted with a normal distribution
N(0, σ+,−. Based on the transition probabilities, a switching parameter ψt ∈{−1, 0, 1} is
simulated, indicating the regime. Then, the stochastic process is expanded with parame-
ter ωt, allowing for the price spikes.
28Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:39==
ωt =





N(0, σ−)
if ψt = −1
0
if ψt = 0
N(0, σ+)
if ψt = 1
(3.50)
The simulated process is then defined as follows.
ˆpDA
t
= ˆpDA
t=0e−κ·δt + µ(1 −e−κ·δt) + ϵt + ωt(ψt)
(3.51)
Finally, the solar and wind simulation series can be added back to this process again,
resulting in the final simulation.
3.4.2
Intraday scenarios
The intraday uncertainty scenarios are all modelled as deviations from the corresponding
day-ahead variable, similar to the approach in [52]. The ID3 intraday price is modelled as a
deviation from the day-ahead price, while the intraday series for solar and wind production
are modelled as the deviation between the intraday and the day-ahead forecast.
This deviation-based framework allows for a more practical optimisation model and min-
imises the amount of scenarios for intraday uncertainty, as the same scenarios can be
added to different day-ahead scenarios to create different outcomes.
Solar deviation
The intraday solar deviation time series is defined below. The day-ahead forecast series
is expanded to a quarter-hourly resolution using spline interpolation.
∆ϕsol,ID
t
= ϕsol,ID
t
−˜ϕsol,DA
t
(3.52)
The deviation is divided by the installed capacity to normalise the data. A first exploration
showed that the uncertainty of the solar data is not grasped by the deviation of the maximal
capacity factor, unlike in the day-ahead forecast model. This is due to the fact that the
intraday uncertainty is manifested in a deviation of the expected cloudiness, for which
the variations can be perceived more clear when delivery time comes near. Therefore, a
quarter-hourly deviation model should be used, which is complicated by the fact that the
deviations are near zero most of the time when the solar curve is zero.
A linear regression model is proposed for four seasons of 13 weeks each, consisting of an
AR(3) term and the mean daily profile of the deviation for the discussed season ∆ϕ
sol,ID
qh
,
with error terms ϵt.
∆ϕsol,ID
t
=
3
∑
j=1
βsol,ID
j
· ∆ϕsol,ID
t
+
96
∑
qh=1
∆ϕ
sol,ID
qh
· 1(qh|qh = t
mod 96) + ϵt
(3.53)
The examination of the error terms revealed a Laplace distribution, with a very high oc-
currence for near zero error terms, which is caused by the hours during which the sun
is down. Therefore, a day and night dummy variable is created based on the monthly
profiles derived for the day-ahead forecast. When simulating the intraday deviation re-
gression model, a Laplace distributed error term is added in the ”day” quarter hours, and
a zero error term is added in the ”night” quarter hours.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
29
==PAGE:40==
After simulation, the deviation series is multiplied again with the installed capacity, to get
the intraday solar deviations.
Wind deviation
The intraday wind deviation time series is defined below. The day-ahead forecast series
is expanded to a quarter-hourly resolution using spline interpolation.
∆ϕwind,ID
t
= ϕwind,ID
t
−˜ϕwind,DA
t
(3.54)
First, the deviation is divided by the installed capacity, so the deviation can be interpreted
as the deviation of the capacity factors. Similar to the solar deviation model, deseason-
alisation has been explored, but no significant seasonal correlation, for example in the
means, was found. The deviation is further modelled as an AR process with error term ϵt.
∆ϕwind,ID
t
=
p
∑
j=1
βwind,ID
j
∆ϕwind,ID
t−j
+ ϵt.
(3.55)
The epsilon term can be distributed approximately as a Laplace distribution, however,
randomly spread outliers in the error term where found. When isolating them, it became
clear that they were following an exponential distribution. To allow for this, the Laplace
distributed error term has been randomly expanded with these outliers during the simu-
lations, depending on their probability of occurrence. To decide when the error term was
expanded, a method similar to the jump method in section 3.4.1 was used.
After simulation, this series is multiplied again with the installed capacity.
Intraday prices
To model the intraday prices, a simplified model based on [52] is used. A regression
model based on an AR(5) component, the seasonal mean daily profile and the intraday
RVE deviations is defined as follows. This model is fitted for four seasons of 13 weeks
each, and a weekend dummy variable is included to allow for the difference in weekdays
and weekends.
∆pID
t
= α0 + α1 · ∆ϕwind,ID
t
+ α2 · ∆ϕsol,ID
t
+
5
∑
j=1
βID
j
· ∆pID
t
+
96
∑
qh=1
∆p
ID
qh · 1(qh|qh = t
mod 96) + δweek
t
+ ϵt
(3.56)
Similar to the day-ahead prices, a regime switching system is used. The residual term
follows a Laplace distribution in the base regime. During the simulation, high and low
jumps are added to this residual term according to the probability of occurrence.
3.4.3
Clustering
To create representative scenarios Zd,k, the following method is proposed [21]. Each sce-
nario Zd,k is a combination of a day-ahead scenario package ZDA
d,k and an intraday sce-
nario package ZID
d , containing I stochastic deviation scenarios. The clustering method is
the same for both packages, and the method will be explained for day-ahead scenarios,
zsc
t
The models explained above are used to generate SC coupled scenarios zsc
t = (psc
t , ϕsol,sc
t
, ϕwind,sc
t
)
of one year. They are coupled because the wind and solar simulation have been used
30Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:41==
to generate the price simulation. In order to create a recombining tree, these year long
scenarios are reduced through clustering for each day d of the year. To do this, all coupled
scenarios are split in daily sections, so zsc
t = (zsc
d )d≤D. For each day, a matrix (zsc
d )sc≤SC
d≤D
is created, which has the dimensions (SC, D, Td), with Td = 24 for the day-ahead sce-
narios. On each of the daily matrices, K-means clustering is performed, resulting in K
clusters for each day. Each cluster can be represented by its centroid Zd,k.
The day-ahead package is used to build the recombining tree, so transition probabilities
πd,k,k′ should be derived. These are calculated empirically counting the scenarios zDA,sc
d+1
in cluster k′, which were part of cluster k on day d, divided by the amount of scenarios in
cluster k on day d. The initial probabilities of the first day are based on the cluster size.
The intraday package does not build the recombining tree. Instead, the created daily in-
traday clusters are used as stochastic scenarios in each state, which are denoted with i
in the optimisation model. Because they are defined as deviations from the day-ahead
stage, the intraday realisation will be different in each state and day. The stochastic prob-
abilities πi for each stochastic cluster i are simply calculated by the amount of scenarios
in cluster i, divided by the total amount of scenarios SC.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
31
==PAGE:42==
32Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:43==
4
Case study
The model defined in the previous section will be applied to a BESS+VRE portfolio, oper-
ating in the German power markets. The operating country in itself is not important, as the
focus of the study is on the impact of tariff structures. However, as the German market
structure is similar to the structures used in most other EU countries, it allows for more
generalisable results. Moreover, the needed data to model these markets was available
to the author. Proceeding in this section, the case studies for the tariff structure are ex-
plained and the portfolio characteristics are argued for. Lastly, an overview of the used
market and VRE data is given, with the corresponding sources.
4.1
Tariff structure test cases
Structures
Based on the regulation overview in section 2.3, three archetypical tariff structures are
proposed and will be compared to a base case where no tariffs apply. The structures are
based on the German, Belgian and Danish structures, but are simplified to emphasise
the differences. Elements of the tariff structures that do not influence the scheduling of
the plant, like the annual connection charge, are not taken into account. The focus of this
thesis is on the impact of the tariff structure, rather than the exact level. Therefore, the
structures are levelled to ensure that the TSO will have the same income for a typical load
for each of the structures, similar to [20].
The ”BASE” structure has a zero tariff to serve as a comparison. In several EU countries,
like Belgium and Germany, storage operators effectively operate in this tariff structure for
the first years of operation due to exemptions [15].
In the ”FIX” structure, a fixed volumetric fee Tfix is charged when charging the battery,
similar to the structure in Germany.
The ”DOUBLE” tariff examines the double taxation of a fixed volumetric fee on both charge
and discharge volume, similar to the Belgian tariff structure. To ensure consistent income
for the TSO, the FIX tariff is redistributed over both flow directions of the battery using
the 2023 distribution of the Belgian tariff, which is 77/23. This way, the TSO gets the
same amount for each MWh transported on the grid, when used and produced within the
same bidding zone. If Tfix signifies the fixed volumetric tariff from the previous case, and
Tcharge, Tdischarge, the charge and discharge tariffs respectively in the ”DOUBLE” structure,
they relate as follows.
Tfix = Tcharge + Tdischarge = 0.77Tfix + 0.23Tfix
The ”DYN” tariff is based on the future Danish tariff structure, as described in section
2.3. The original structure is based on a fixed percentage of the day-ahead spot price
after addition of a fixed mark-up. The exact numbers of these constants are based on
cost calculations by the TSO, which are out of the scope of this thesis. An alternative
approach is proposed in [20], where the mark-up constant is not taken into account, but a
fixed percentage α is sized based on the historical hourly system load Lh and spot price
pDA
h
. This ensures the same revenue for the system operator for a typical load.
Constant income independent of a fixed tariff or a dynamic tariff means the following.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
33
==PAGE:44==
∑
h
Tfix · Lh =
∑
h
(αpDA
h
) · Lh
(4.1)
The impact of Tfix on α is emphasised through annual factor betay, so α becomes:
α = Tfix ·
∑
h Lh
∑
h pDA
h
· Lh
= Tfix · betay
(4.2)
The structures are summarised below in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: The examined tariff structures, expressed as a redistribution of a fixed tariff on
charging
structure
charge
discharge
Based on
BASE
-
-
Exemptions
FIX
Tfix
-
Germany
DOUBLE
0.77Tfix
0.23Tfix
Belgium
DYN
(βyTfix) · pDA
h
-
Denmark
Tariff level
As mentioned earlier, the emphasis is put on the tariff structure, and not on the level itself.
The cost to be covered through tariffs is not only influenced by spot prices, but also by
policy decisions and mostly, infrastructure investment [40]. These factors are not a part
of this model, so it is difficult to compare the tariff levels of different years. Therefore, the
same tariff level is used both in 2019 and 2023, emphasising the impact of tariff structure
and market volatility.
The tariff level is thus set as the 2023 volumetric tariffs on the German transmission grid
[38], namely 5.30
€
MWh. To allow analysis on a higher tariff level, the public service obliga-
tion tariffs can be included as described in section 2.3, resulting in a tariff of 18.95
€
MWh.
With these tariffs and the load and spot price time series for Germany in 2019 and 2023,
the variables in the tariff structures are defined in table 4.2. Note that the dynamic coef-
ficient is lower for 2023, as the day-ahead prices are higher to support the same amount
of TSO income.
Table 4.2: Input variables for the tariff structures
Level
Low
High
year
2019
2023
2019
2023
Tfix
5.30
€
MWh
18.95
€
MWh
α
13.57%
5.40%
48.51%
19.32%
4.2
Portfolio characteristics
Similar to the operation country, the main objective of the choice of portfolio is to obtain
generalisable results. Therefore, an equal-weights portfolio is chosen with 5 MW of PV
and onshore wind. The BESS is modelled on a high level, with only the power capacity,
storage capacity and round trip efficiency defined. Previous studies have used BESS with
a 5 hour discharge duration, which was chosen as a relevant storage capacity to perform
34Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:45==
Table 4.3: Portfolio parameters of the examined case study
Parameter
Value
Unit
Installed PV capacity
5
MW
Installed onshore wind capacity
5
MW
BESS volume
10
MWh
BESS power capacity
2
MW
BESS roundtrip efficiency
0.92
-
time arbitrage between the daily peaks [23, 22]. To facilitate critical comparison with the
results obtained, the same ratio of power and volume is used. A power capacity of 2 MW
is chosen, which is higher than the average power output of the RVE in the portfolio, with
a typical load factor of 10% for solar and 20% for onshore wind in Germany [57]. The
round trip efficiency is taken from the Danish Energy Agency catalogue for utility-scale
lithium ion batteries on the AC grid [58]. Table 4.3 summarises the data.
4.3
Input data
Table 4.4: Input data for the price-series models and their corresponding sources
Input data
Source
day-ahead spot price
ENTSO-E Transparancy Platform [59]
day-ahead onshore wind forecast
ibid.
day-ahead PV forecast
ibid.
intraday onshore wind forecast
ibid.
intraday onshore PV forecast
ibid.
ID3 intraday index
EPEX spot [60]
Capacity reservation prices aFRR
Regelleistung.net [61]
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
35
==PAGE:46==
36Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:47==
5
Results and discussion
5.1
Simulation models
For both the day-ahead and intraday, 500 scenarios were generated. For the day-ahead,
these were clustered in 3 clusters for each day, resulting in three possible states in each
day. The intraday packages are also clustered in three clusters for each day, and they
are part of each daily state to facilitate the stochastic optimisation within each day, based
on the deviations from the day ahead parameters.
The models, as described in the methodology section were run for both 2019 and 2023,
and some general metrics on the simulations and the historical price series are provided
below.
Table 5.1: Comparison of the simulations and historical data in 2019
DA
∆ID
mean
std.dev.
mean
std.dev.
historic
37.67
15.52
-0.06
14.05
simulated
36.84
14.03
-0.64
18.25
Table 5.2: Comparison of the simulations and historical data in 2023
DA
∆ID
mean
std.dev.
mean
std.dev.
historic
95.18
47.58
1.83
35.06
simulated
89.17
44.52
1.76
43.32
It is apparent that in both years, the mean and variation of the day-ahead prices are
underestimated, seen in tables 5.1 and 5.2. Indeed, it was observed that the simulations
could not grasp every peak with the jump regimes.
The percentage difference for the historical means and standard deviation of the day-
ahead in 2019 is respectively equal to 2.2% and 9.6%. The difference on the mean is in
line with results in literature, while the difference on the volatility is higher, with the literature
stating a difference of 3% [21]. The normalised mean root square error (NMRSE) between
the simulations and the historical data stands at 8%, as expected from the literature.
It is observed that the proposed model had difficulties grasping the increased volatility of
2023 in absolute terms, and the percentage differences for the mean and standard devi-
ation reflect this. They are respectively equal to 6.3% and 6.4%. Moreover the NMRSE
is equal to 14%. This increased difference might be explained by the consideration of the
effect of RVE feed-in in the used model, which relies on constant linear coefficients. In
an increasingly VRE-penetrated grid, differentiation could be made for the impact of RVE
in-feed, based on factors such as residual load and time of day.
Regarding the intraday deviations, the model has not been proved sufficient to grasp the
full characteristics of the deviations between the day-ahead and the ID3 price index. In
both years, the variation is overestimated. One of the identified reasons is that due to the
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
37
==PAGE:48==
low differences in forecast deviation, the model coefficients for these drivers are too sen-
sitive, resulting in large RVE deviation outliers in the simulations. These low differences
will be explained further in the first part of the next section. Additionally, the model is a
simplified version based on ref [52], which also included the residual load.
In the used modelling framework, residual load was not considered, but future research
could include this to better capture the effects of the increasing share of RVE. It would
also allow to test the tariff structures based on residual load as proposed in [24].
5.2
The impact of grid tariffs
The evaluation of 4 tariff structure cases, 2 tariff levels and 2 years provides a lot of results.
They will be discussed below based on their relevance to the research questions, but all
results are provided with this thesis as CSV files. All the quantities discussed hereafter are
annual expected quantities, as they are multiplied with intraday probabilities and interday
transition probabilities over the optimisation horizon of one year. To maximise readability,
the expected nature of these quantities is assumed and not named explicitly.
Guided by the research questions, the market participation of the portfolio is discussed
first. Then, the valuation of the revenue streams is based on the activity performed, rather
than being based on the market of origin. Within this framework, the added value of the
battery to the portfolio can be evaluated, allowing analysis on the impacts of the volumetric
and dynamic tariffs. To address the effect of value stacking, and the limitation of the
accepted capacity reservation bids, the tariffs are investigated solely on the spot markets
in the third part of this section. Lastly, the impact of a double taxation tariff is concerned.
Each of the model runs were calculated on a standard home PC, taking between 25 and
45 minutes each.
Market participation
First, some general remarks are made based on the revenue streams for the 2019 sce-
narios. In table 5.3, the total annual revenue of the portfolio is given. This revenue is
defined as the total income from the markets, with the costs of buying energy on the spot
markets already included. The contribution of each originating market is described as a
percentage of this total revenue.
Table 5.3: Annual revenue of the portfolio for the different structures in 2019, divided over
the originating markets.
structure
total revenue
EUR
aFRR
day-ahead
intraday
FIX
579,023.99
9.94%
90.01%
0.06%
DYN
580,190.27
9.50%
90.44%
0.06%
DOUBLE
579,150.28
9.92%
90.02%
0.06%
BASE
582,240.24
8.45%
91.49%
0.06%
The expected income for intraday trading is a very small contributor to the overall revenue,
and is lower than the 2.5% obtained for a risk averse portfolio in [34]. The reason for this
is twofold.
First of all, the difference between the day-ahead forecasts and the intraday forecasts
used in the methodology are quite small, as shown for different portfolio capacities in table
5.4. The forecasts, obtained from ENTSO-E are aggregated over the whole of Germany.
In effect, this means that the portfolio has a perfect geographical distribution, levelling out
38Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:49==
local differences through a portfolio effect. Even when the day-ahead forecast is com-
pared with the actual generation, the difference remains very small, although larger. On
top of this, as the portfolio contains both solar and wind, a second portfolio effect is cre-
ated. In table 5.4, it can be seen that a mixed portfolio of the same installed capacity
size further lowers the error volatility. As a result, the small forecast error can usually be
bridged by the battery, either taking in more or producing more. As long as the battery is
able to deliver this service, it will do so, as this is less risky than trading on the intraday
markets.
Secondly, as the day-ahead forecast serves as the expected value, possible up and down
regulation are equally possible. The expected total intraday revenue is the combination
of these up and down trades. A risk averse operator is not likely to gain a lot of revenue
from the intraday, other than the resolution of its imbalance.
Table 5.4: Mean and standard deviation of the historical portfolio renewables forecast er-
rors, both between day-ahead and intraday forecast, and day-ahead and actual forecasts.
deviation
metric
5 MW solar
5 MW wind
2.5 MW solar + 2.5 MW wind
ΦID −ΦDA
µ
0.00198
0.00173
0.00185
σ
0.105
0.133
0.0850
Φreal −ΦDA
µ
0.00576
0.0259
0.0158
σ
0.145
0.190
0.119
This creates two further paths of research. First of all, more local effects could be taken
into account, with forecasted and realised production data on portfolios from one specific
area, instead of the publicly available forecasts by the TSO. Secondly, the model can be
used to evaluate strategic behaviour of a portfolio operator, performing market arbitrage
between the day-ahead and the intraday market.
Activity based valuation
The high contribution of the day-ahead markets asks for more analysis, as it is not clear
to what extent the battery contributes to the revenue. The added revenue of the bat-
tery should be split from the direct marketing of VRE. To that end, the income can also
be distributed per activity, valuing every service or activity that the portfolio performs, as
opposed to the market origin base used in table 5.3. For the same scenarios, table 5.5
shows this activity based distribution. We define three services, for which the mathemat-
ical definitions are shown in section 3.3.6.
Generation is the total income from VRE generation sold to the market, and internally
”sold” to the battery in the portfolio. Arbitrage accounts for the income gained from shifting
VRE production from low demand to high demand periods. Here, the ”sold” in-portfolio
power is bought to charge the battery, resulting in a neutral operation from a portfolio
perspective. A last service is the ancillary stream, which is equal to the income from the
capacity trading on the aFRR markets. The relative contributions are shown in table 5.5.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
39
==PAGE:50==
Table 5.5: Total revenue of the portfolio for the different structures in 2019, divided over
the portfolio activities.
structure
total revenue
EUR
Ancillary
Arbitrage
Generation
FIX
579,023.99
9.94%
5.16%
84.90%
DYN
580,190.27
9.50%
5.77%
84.72%
DOUBLE
579,150.28
9.92%
5.21%
84.87%
BASE
582,240.24
8.45%
7.12%
84.43%
The absolute numbers can be found in the appendix, but a remark should be made on the
consistency of the generation stream revenue, which is equal to €491558 in the base case.
The deviations of other scenarios from this base case revenue is less than 0.01%. This is
explained by the fact that the same VRE availability and price scenarios are faced for the
different tariff structures. The curtailment experienced in each case is lower than ≈0.2%
of the total available VRE. When running the model without a battery, a curtailment of 0.5%
of the total available VRE is observed, or 208 MWh on an annual basis. This decrease in
curtailment confirms one of the main benefits of BESS, as they take in surplus VRE, even
when prices are negative. This only increases the arbitrage spread.
Due to this low curtailment, the effect on the expected VRE sales income is very lim-
ited, which means that the change in portfolio income in the examined cases is almost
completely explained by the change in battery income.
From table 5.5, the added value of the battery to the portfolio is more clear, as it is the
combination of the ”ancillary” and the ”arbitrage” activity. Overall, the battery contributes
≈15% of the overall revenue.
Constraining flexibility, the impact of the tariff structures in low volatility years
From table 5.5, it became clear that the total portfolio revenue decreases when applying
tariffs, even before taking into account the costs of these tariffs themselves. Additionally,
the loss in revenue is shown to be mostly due to the loss in battery revenue. For each
case, the battery profit is defined as the income from the arbitrage and ancillary services,
minus the tariff costs, so P = I −T. The base case profit is equal to the base case income
I0, as there are no tariff costs. The profit difference is then defined as:
P0 −P = (I0 −I) + T
The profit loss due to the grid tariffs can thus split up in two posts, the tariff costs and the
change in revenue, which bears a social welfare interpretation. Indeed, the profit loss is a
loss for the portfolio operator, but the transmission fees payed to the TSO are not ”lost” for
society, as the maintenance of the grid is financed with this. However, due to the tariffs,
the behaviour of the portfolio operator is changed away from the optimum, as quantified
by the factor I0−I. As discussed in the introduction, grid tariffs are internalised as an extra
cost, decreasing the actual price-spread and disturbing the price signal. Because of this,
revenue available in the market could not be extracted, resulting in welfare loss. These
three aspects of the battery profit loss are shown for 2019 in figure 5.1. This distinction
is also made in [22]. For interpretation purposes, the quantities are normalised with P0,
which is equal to €90682.
40Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.1: Breakdown of the profit loss for the dynamic and fixed tariff as a proportion of
the base case profit in 2019.
For both tariff level cases, the profit loss due to the dynamic tariff is lower. Respectively,
a decrease of 26% and 17% is seen compared with the fixed tariff scheme for the low and
high tariffs. These two components have different reasons.
The lower TSO costs can be explained based on the dynamic tariff design. The grid tariffs
are based on the spot prices, meaning they are higher during peak demand periods, and
they are lower during periods of low load. This is in contrast to the fixed tariff in the fixed
case. As the battery typically charges in low load periods, it can make use of the lower
tariffs, thereby decreasing tariff costs.
Secondly, the dynamic tariff is less distortive for the price signal. To indicate this distortive
effect, a comparison is made with the zero tariff base case. This case shows the available
revenue, which can be extracted when the price signal is perfectly clear. This can be seen
in figure 5.2, where the average output is shown for 2019, compared with the base case.
It is clear that the base case is able to shift the produced RVE to the more profitable peak
hours. This shift is facilitated by the arbitrage of the battery, which is impacted by both
grid tariff structures. The battery fails to discharge optimally during the peak periods, but
especially, it fails to absorb the solar power produced in the middle of the day. This is
reflected in the portfolio output, as the RVE is shifted slightly behind the morning peak
rather than directly aligning. Now, when comparing the two grid structures, it can be seen
that the dynamic structure impacts the output to a lesser extent. This is also quantified in
the extracted arbitrage revenue. The fixed tariff and the dynamic tariff achieve 72% and
81% of the base case arbitrage revenue, respectively.
It should be noted that the lower costs for the dynamic tariff do not necessarily pose a risk
for revenue inadequacy for the TSO. The dynamic scheme is levelled with total demand to
ensure this in the years discussed here. However, this scheme requires that the TSO has
a reasonable forecast on both prices and load for the next regulatory period. Especially
if an increase in flexible loads is expected, a shorter regulatory period would be better
suited, to enable a more close follow-up on load and price dynamics. A second critique
of this system, as also pointed out in [20], is that the tariff is higher when non-flexible
consumers consume the most electricity, effectively transferring the grid costs to them. In
this study, DSO tariffs where considered, but as the DSOs aggregate these non-flexible
consumers, the transmission tariffs will be transferred to these consumers regardless, so
the critique also applies here. A proposed solution for this is to give flexible consumers the
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.2: The average output of the battery and the portfolio in 2019
choice to opt into the tariff if they believe they will benefit from such a tariff [20]. However,
this creates two concurrent tariff schemes.
A possible counter-argument to this issue is based on cost-reflectivity, as the dynamic
tariff can assign certain grid costs more accurately to the driver. This tariff case is based
on a component of the future Danish grid tariffs, as explained in section 2.3. Within this
reformed scheme, this component is intended to pay for the balancing power bought on
the spot market to balance losses and redispatch. These costs are clearly associated
with the real time grid use, and not capacity. Also, the costs are balanced at market
price. In other words, the balancing needs increase with transported volume, and the
costs increase with market price, justifying a dynamic volumetric tariff. Therefore, when
the portfolio owner uses the grid at low load periods, the losses caused are relatively
cheaper to balance.
However, in this case study, the differences are exacerbated as the total volumetric grid
tariff of Germany is redistributed to a dynamic case. This also includes costs for compo-
nents such as black start and frequency regulation, which are more difficult to link to the
varying volume and price [62]. This remark essentially concerns the tariff level, which is
not the goal of this study. What the comparison does show, is that the dynamic distribu-
tion of a certain grid cost benefits the dispatch-ability of an VRE+BESS portfolio. The new
Danish tariff methodology shows that this dynamic tariff can be part of a cost-reflective
framework.
Returning to figure 5.1, the impact of the high tariff cases is discussed. This high tariff
consists of the low tariff, with additional public service obligations added, increasing the
tariff from €5.30 to €18.95, which is reflective of the German TSO tariffs in 2023.
42Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:53==
The total profit losses are higher when the applied tariff level also includes the service
fees, respectively 96% and 124% for the fixed and dynamic case when compared with the
low tariff level. Given that the tariff more than doubled, this increase in losses is almost
fully due to the increase in welfare loss, increasing with 549% and 582% respectively.
Strikingly, the TSO transfer component increases only slightly for the dynamic tariff, and
even decreases for the fixed tariff, resulting in a welfare loss higher than the TSO transfer.
This has three implications.
Firstly, for the TSO, this means that the added service obligations, which increase the
original tariff level with 257%, do not result in a meaningful growth in income for the TSO.
Secondly, the increase in tariff level disturbs the price signal in such a way that the bat-
tery fails at providing the arbitrage service to the portfolio. This decreases the charging
volume, limiting the paid fees. Figure 5.2 clearly shows that the portfolio output is now
mostly defined by the solar production peak in the middle of the day, rather than following
demand. In the battery output, the dynamic tariff attempts to capture the second daily
peak, but both tariffs prohibit the absorption of the solar in the middle of the day. The
extracted arbitrage value decreases to 0.35% and 29.4% of the base case value, for the
fixed and dynamic tariff.
Thirdly, as both the private loss and welfare loss increase significantly, and the TSO trans-
fer shows only a slight change, this additional public service obligation fee ultimately dis-
advantages all parties involved.
A final remark on market participation concerns the ratio of the battery revenue produced
by the ancillary stream and the arbitrage stream, as shown in table 5.6. It is observed
that, when the tariff structures are more prohibitive for arbitrage, the battery capacity is
freed up to bid more volume to the capacity reservation markets. This is indicated by the
growth in income for this revenue stream. However, note that the increase is not enough
to resolve the arbitrage revenue loss. The loss in battery revenue is equal to the welfare
loss, so it can be concluded that the capacity reservation market dampens the welfare
loss experienced because of the tariff structure.
Table 5.6: The impact of the tariff structures in 2019 on the contribution of the revenue
streams to the battery revenue.
case
Battery revenue
EUR
arbitrage
EUR
Ancillary revenue
EUR
BASE
9.07e+4
4.15e+4
4.92e+4
FIX (low)
-3.59%
-27.95%
+16.95%
DYN (low)
-2.25%
-19.24%
+12.07%
FIX (high)
-23.33%
-96.48%
+38.36%
DYN (high)
-15.38%
-70.68%
+31.25%
Constraining flexibility, the impact of the tariff structures in a high volatility year
The year of 2023 is an interesting case to discuss, as the spot prices show a higher
volatility than in 2019, as shown earlier in the section on the case study. Although the
mean price is higher in 2023, the arbitrage potential, and thus a large part of the battery
value, is impacted mostly by the price spread, which can be quantified by the standard
deviation. This is reflected in the arbitrage revenue of the base case equal to €117272.71,
which is almost three times higher than the base case arbitrage value in 2019, at €41484.
Most strikingly, however, is the increase in revenue and revenue share of the ancillary
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.3: Breakdown of the profit losses in 2023 as a proportion of the base case profit
service, going from contributing 54% of the value in 2019, to 69% in 2023. As seen in
section ?? 2023 shows higher capacity reservation prices, this market provides more
value than the arbitrage service. The share of arbitrage revenue and ancillary revenue is
given in table 5.7 as a percentage difference with respect to the base case.
Table 5.7: The impact of the tariff structures in 2023 on the contribution of the revenue
streams to the battery revenue.
case
Battery revenue
EUR
arbitrage
EUR
Ancillary revenue
EUR
BASE
3.81e+5
1.17e+5
2.63e+5
FIX (low)
-0.32%
-9.73%
+3.87%
DYN (low)
-0.24%
-6.43%
+2.52%
FIX (high)
-3.76%
-42.34%
+13.41%
DYN (low)
-2.41%
-27.15%
+8.61%
Again, a similar trend is observed whereby the decrease in arbitrage revenue is somewhat
dampened by the uptake in ancillary revenue. Especially in the low tariff case, the battery
revenue change is limited to < 0.5%, resulting in a very low social welfare loss. This is
reflected in figure 5.3, where the breakdown of the profit loss is shown as a fraction of
the base case profit, which is equal to €380701. The relative losses in 2019 were around
10% and 25% of the base case profit, whereas in 2023, these losses are limited to 4%
and 12% respectively for low and high tariffs.
Comparative conclusions on these relative profit losses should be taken with care because
of the low change in battery revenue and the higher share of the ancillary revenue stream
in 2023. Because of the low welfare loss, most of the losses are due to the tariffs, and
ancillary revenue stream does not incur fees. Still, the cases on itself concern realistic
price environments.
Comparison on the changes in arbitrage value are more legitimate, as these account
more for the purely distortive impact of the tariffs. Tables 5.6 and 5.7 demonstrate that
the impact of tariffs on the arbitrage value in 2023 is less pronounced compared to 2019.
Particularly for the high tariff cases, the arbitrage value is still preserved to 60% of its
original value, whereas it collapses completely to 4% of its base case value in 2019. This
resistance is also seen in the average output curves in figure 5.4. Note the small difference
44Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.4: The average output of the battery and the portfolio in 2023
in output for the low tariff levels. It is observed that the output curve is impacted for the
higher tariff levels, but no total collapse of the arbitrage activity is seen as was the case for
2019. Yet, the portfolio now fails to absorb the solar production in the middle of the day.
Overall, however, it can be concluded that the distortive effect is lower in higher volatility
years.
To end this section, the simple comparison of the cases observed leads to two conclu-
sions. First, the introduction of a grid tariff, however low, introduces some welfare loss,
as the portfolio owner takes the tariffs into account when calculating the optimal arbitrage
spread. The loss in arbitrage value can be minimised somewhat by a shift towards more
capacity reservation income.
Secondly, in all examined years and cases, the dynamic tariff achieved the lowest welfare
losses, combined with the lowest private losses. This effect has previously been shown for
district heating systems, but not yet for BESS+VRE portfolios, and without taking welfare
losses into account [24, 20]. As shown by the recent Danish tariff reform, this could be
part of a more cost-reflective tariff structure.
This aspect should be considered by regulators, when deciding on tariff structures, as the
welfare loss limits the benefits that storage brings to the power system and the transition
to more VRE. As mentioned in [24], if the TSO had perfect knowledge on the exact costs
incurred by the battery while using the grid, it would incur all these costs through a yearly
flat fee to maximise flexibility, as the day to day scheduling would not be impacted. Yet,
it is difficult to assign this flat fee. In this perspective, if the wellfare loss is a relatively
low part of the total profit loss, it could be regarded as a measurement cost, necessary to
allocate and measure the grid costs in an transparent and understandable way.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
45
==PAGE:56==
However, in case the storage operator also has to pay public service obligations, it is
observed that the portfolio as a whole fails to shift the produced RVE efficiently to follow
demand. Moreover, with the introduction of a higher tariff, the welfare losses increased
significantly more than the TSO income, as seen in table 5.8. This shows the inefficiency
of incurring high fees in general, but the public service obligations in particular. In prohibit-
ing the portfolio to optimally market the produced RVE, the service obligations effectively
achieve the opposite of what they are meant for, namely accelerating the energy transi-
tion. This arguments for exemptions of the PSO for storage operators.
Table 5.8: Percentage change for the TSO transfer and welfare loss, due to the increasing
tariff.
year
cases
TSO transfer
welfare loss
2019
FIX
-28.69%
549.65%
DYN
16.86%
120.44%
2023
FIX
111.50%
1079.40%
DYN
124.30%
921.84%
The role of the aFRR capacity income
In both examined years, the share of ancillary services increased for less flexible tariff
structures, indicating that the ancillary service stream is seen as a ”fall-back” option when
tariffs become to prohibitive for arbitrage value. By shifting towards more ancillary rev-
enue, the profit loss is damped through its two components. First, the ancillary service
in this model does not produce power flows, so no tariffs can be applied. The rise in
tariffs, and thus the TSO transfer, is counteracted by limiting the power flows. Secondly,
the shift from the base case ratio increases the ancillary revenue, while the arbitrage rev-
enue goes down. This uptake in ancillary revenue counteracts the decrease in arbitrage
revenue partly, dampening the value loss of the battery and thus the welfare loss.
Because of the importance of the aFRR in these dynamics, the study is confronted with
two limitations regarding this revenue source. Regarding the tariff costs, the model per-
ceives no tariff costs associated with capacity reservation, as the activation is not mod-
elled. However, if this would be modelled, both the activated volume and duration of
activation would be given by stochastic scenarios. The expected value of the power flow
due to activation would be low, so it is unlikely that the inclusion of activation will change
the shown impact of the tariff structures in a substantial way. Yet, the overall effect on the
ancillary share could change, as the activation provides an extra revenue opportunity.
The other limitation of the study in this regard is that the capacity reservation bids are
assumed to be accepted, so this fall-back option could be too certain of an option for the
portfolio operator. In a sense, the inclusion of guaranteed ancillary income opportunity
signifies the maximum protection a portfolio owner operating on the spot markets might
face. To see the full impact of tariff structures, and to adress the now certain aFRR income
opportunity, the scenarios are rerun for both years without the aFRR markets. In this case,
the portfolio is maximally exposed to the tariff structures, as no replacement income is
available.
The results are compared below based on the battery revenue, as well as the profit loss
and welfare loss as a proportion of the base case profit.
Based on the tables 5.9 and 5.10, three general conclusions can be made.
First of all, it is apparent that the battery value decreases significantly when the possibility
46Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:57==
Table 5.9: Battery income and profit and welfare losses as a proportion of the base case
profit in 2019. Percentage changes with respect to the aFRR scenarios.
Battery revenue
EUR
Relative profit loss
Relative welfare loss
value
delta
value
delta
value
delta
BASE
57,728.96
-36.34%
0.00
+0.00%
0.00
+0.00%
FIX (low)
53,528.71
-38.77%
0.43
+159.12%
0.07
+102.63%
FIX (high)
21,320.44
-69.34%
1.04
+218.19%
0.63
+170.37%
DYN (low)
54,651.94
-38.34%
0.32
+160.87%
0.05
+136.48%
DYN (high)
36,704.54
-52.17%
0.81
+200.40%
0.36
+136.77%
Table 5.10: Battery income and profit and welfare losses as a proportion of the base case
profit in 2023. Percentage changes with respect to the aFRR scenarios.
Battery revenue
EUR
Relative profit loss
Relative welfare loss
value
delta
value
delta
value
delta
BASE
201,885.88
-46.97%
0.00
+0.00%
0.00
+0.00%
FIX (low)
200,236.74
-47.23%
0.14
+240.61%
0.01
+156.03%
FIX (high)
186,499.94
-49.10%
0.44
+278.94%
0.08
+102.53%
DYN (low)
200,604.70
-47.18%
0.09
+228.78%
0.01
+169.36%
DYN (high)
190,715.10
-48.67%
0.30
+257.58%
0.06
+129.83%
for ancillary bidding is excluded. When comparing this effect for 2019 and 2023, the
battery value decrease is higher for 2023. This is explained by the earlier mentioned fact
that the portfolio obtained a higher share of its revenue through the ancillary services in
that year. In case of the high fixed tariff in 2019, the profit loss is even negative. This is in
line with the conclusions of the introduction and literature review of this thesis, as several
authors pointed out the importance of ancillary services for a sufficient added value of the
battery both as a standalone facility and as a part of a portfolio.
Secondly, it is observed that the dynamic tariff cause a lower loss in battery value than
the fixed tariffs with respect to the battery value with ancillary services included. Again,
this is in line with the other results of this study, as the dynamic tariff is better suited to
extract arbitrage value, which is now the only income resource. However, the difference
between the fixed and dynamic tariffs concerns only a few percent points.
Third, the welfare losses increase, as the loss in arbitrage value can not be counteracted
anymore with an increase in ancillary value. Yet, the welfare losses of the fixed and
dynamic cases are now more alike. This causes the increase for the dynamic tariff cases
to be even higher. When the arbitrage revenue is the only income stream available for the
BESS, even less interesting arbitrage opportunities are grasped, bringing the difference
between the dynamic and fixed tariff down.
The comparison between this scenario and the previously considered one can provide
boundaries for the impact of grid tariffs, i.e. under ”perfect protection” of the ancillary
revenue stream, or under ”total exposure” of the spot prices. These boundaries can be
seen for the profit and welfare loss as a percentage of the respective base case profit
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
47
==PAGE:58==
for all considered cases in this section. Tables 5.11 and 5.12 show these boundaries.
They nuance the conclusion from the previous section, yet confirm them in a more robust
way, addressing the issue of the perfect forecast on the reservation, and the exclusion of
activation revenue.
Table 5.11: Range of the relative profit and welfare losses in 2019, respectively with and
without aFRR bidding.
Cases
Welfare loss
Profit loss
FIX (low)
[3.59% - 7.28%]
[16.56% - 42.92%]
FIX (high)
[23.33% - 63.07%]
[32.58% - 103.65%]
DYN (low)
[2.25% - 5.33%]
[12.31% - 32.11%]
DYN (high)
[15.38% - 36.42%]
[27.13% - 81.50%]
Table 5.12: Range of the relative profit and welfare losses in 2023, respectively with and
without aFRR bidding.
Cases
Welfare loss
Profit loss
FIX (low)
[0.32% - 0.82%]
[4.09% - 13.92%]
FIX (high)
[3.76% - 7.62%]
[11.73% - 44.47%]
DYN (low)
[0.24% - 0.63%]
[2.88% - 9.48%]
DYN (high)
[2.41% - 5.53%]
[8.34% - 29.84%]
The effect of double taxation
Lastly, a common form of double taxation is applied and examined. In some countries, a
part of the grid costs are split over load and generation, as earlier discussed in the section
on regulation 2.3. Storage operates both as a load and and a generator, as both are
applicable to storage operators. This ”double taxation” of storage operators is seen as an
entry barrier for storage in the market, and policy studies have asked for a structure where
either demand or supply charges are applied to the storage facility [8]. To investigate the
effect of these typical supply charges, the ”DOUBLE” case is proposed.
As explained in the case study, the double tariff is designed as a redistribution of the fixed
tariff over the charge and discharge direction of the battery and portfolio, simulating tariffs
like the one applied in Belgium and other countries. In table 5.13, relevant results for the
year 2019 are shown, in comparison with the alternative fixed tariff. Unlike the earlier
discussed cases, the portfolio now also faces injection fees. These are split between
RVE and the battery, to enable analysis of the battery value. As the fixed tariff and double
taxation tariff cases show similar results, table 5.13 shows percentage differences.
From the perspective of the portfolio owner, this tariff structure performs worse than the
fixed tariff, mostly due to the extra tariff costs on RVE production. Added to this, the
expected annual curtailment increases with respect to the fixed tariff case, respectively
with 3% and 12%. Still, the overall proportion of curtailment against the total available
production is below 0.2%. This increase in curtailment is a direct result of the generation
fee, as spot prices lower than this fee are perceive as negative prices, for which the
portfolio effectively has to pay to sell it to the grid. This effect is minimised due to the
battery, which tries to absorb this surplus power.
The other variables in table 5.13 concern the battery behaviour within the portfolio. It is
observed that for both tariff levels, the tariff costs due to the battery go down, linked with
48Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:59==
Table 5.13: Comparison of the double taxation cases against the fixed tariff on charging
for 2019, for both low and high tariff levels.
case
Portfolio profit
EUR
Curtailment
MWh
Battery profit
EUR
Arbitrage revenue
EUR
Welfare loss
EUR
FIX (low)
5.67e+5
5.85e+1
7.57e+4
2.99e+4
3.26e+3
DOUBLE
-2.98%
3.44%
0.37%
0.93%
-5.56%
FIX (high)
5.52e+5
7.65e+1
6.11e+4
1.46e+3
2.12e+4
DOUBLE
-11.06%
12.08%
0.76%
13.57%
-1.76%
a rising battery profit. Analysing the value streams reveals a rise in arbitrage value and a
decrease in welfare loss. Especially these last two results indicate that the double taxation
scheme used here is less distortive for the price signal than the fixed tariff on charging
alone. The explanation is found in the impact of the round trip efficiency, revealing a de
facto discount for less efficient storage facilities.
In principle, if a unit of energy is produced and consumed within the jurisdiction of the
TSO, the TSO is indifferent which proportion of the tariff is paid by generation and load,
as the total amount received per committed unit of energy remains the same. This is
different for the storage operator, which incurs storage losses on each charged unit of
energy. The volume on which charging fees are paid, is higher than the volume on which
discharge fees are paid. If η is the round trip efficiency, and π the proportion of the tariffs
assigned to discharge side of the battery, the following tariff cost for each unit of energy
is defined.
T equivalent
double
= Tfix · (ηπ + (1 −π)) = Tfix −Tfix · (π(1 −η))
(5.1)
The term (π(1 −η)) thus serves as a ”tariff discount”, which lowers the effective tariff for
each charged unit of energy. This explains the lower tariff costs and the higher arbitrage
value. However, it should be stressed that within this tariff scheme, the BESS pays less
tariffs, but the income of the TSO does not change.
For a fixed round trip efficiency, a higher fee proportion on discharge or generation is
beneficial. Vice versa, the discount benefits storage systems with lower efficiencies more
than ones with a high efficiency. In this case study, an efficiency of η = 0.92 is used, so
the discount is quite limited and the equivalent tariff is 0.98Tfix. As a result, only a small
difference is seen in the behaviour of the battery.
For a standalone battery, costs are minimised when the total grid fee is incurred on the
discharge side. Yet, this is not realistic. Jurisdictions implementing these proportions
have mechanisms in place to keep the discharge proportion limited, as to not put domestic
producers in a disadvantage when competing with foreign suppliers, who might not have
to pay this cost.
On the other hand, when looking at the portfolio as a whole, this tariff structure reduces
the profits, as the small discount in tariff for the battery is overshadowed by the extra
cost of the supply tariff for the VRE facilities within the portfolio. Still, in a reality where
both generation and load incur a fee, the battery has a slightly higher added value to the
portfolio then when only the demand-side is paying.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
49
==PAGE:60==
50Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:61==
6
Conclusion
This thesis evaluates the impact of grid tariff structures on the value of battery storage sys-
tems within a portfolio of renewable assets. The disparity between the benefits of adding
storage to VRE portfolios and their challenging profitability is highlighted, particularly for
battery storage systems that can stack revenue streams like time-arbitrage and ancillary
services. Grid tariffs pose a barrier to profitability by distorting price signals and imposing
double taxation. Therefore, exemptions have been put in place for storage operators in
many countries, but storage operators do cause costs to the grid. In order to guide fu-
ture tariff development, analysis is needed of the impact and policy implications of these
structures. A modelling framework is developed to assess portfolio performance under
uncertainty, incorporating intraday stochasticity. Three archetypical tariff structures are
examined: a fixed volumetric tariff, a dynamic tariff on charging and a double taxation
scenario. These are compared against a base case with no tariffs. Both a low and high
tariff level is considered, as some jurisdictions incur public service obligations through
grid tariffs. These cases are tested using price scenarios from 2019 and 2023 to provide
insights under different price volatility conditions.
A first conclusion is made on the intraday trading of the portfolio. The used forecast
data to create the price and VRE scenarios is highly accurate, as it concerns forecasts
aggregated over the whole of Germany. Added to this, the portfolio used in the test case is
mixed with both solar and wind, further reducing the volatility due to a portfolio effect. This
causes the intraday differences in the portfolio output to be very small, which is reflected
in a revenue contribution of 0.06% of the intraday trading to the overall revenue of the
portfolio. This opens two pathways for future research. First of all, more local effects
could be taken into account, with forecasted and realised production data on portfolios
from one specific area, instead of the publicly available forecasts by the TSO. Secondly,
the model can be used to evaluate strategic behaviour of a portfolio operator, performing
market arbitrage between the day-ahead and the intraday market.
The revenue of the portfolio is expressed based on the performed ”activity”, such as gener-
ation, ancillary service and arbitrage, to allow a better understanding of the added revenue
by the battery to the portfolio. For the 2019 case, the contribution of the ”ancillary” and
”arbitrage” service, which equals the battery revenues, is equal to ≈15%. However, the
distribution between the ancillary service and the arbitrage service changes considerably
with the tariff structures, with an increasing importance for the ancillary stream when the
tariffs disturb the price signal. A similar effect is seen for 2023 data, although to a lesser
extent.
Proceeding, the battery profit is defined as the income from the arbitrage and ancillary
revenue streams, minus the tariff costs applied to the charging and discharging of the
batteries. This profit is the total added value of the battery to each portfolio, depending
on the tariff scheme. When comparing with the battery profit of the base case, the profit
decrease is in general higher for the fixed tariffs than for the dynamic tariffs. This holds
both in 2019 and 2023, both for a low tariff and a high tariff where public service obligation
tariffs are included.
However, when examining the origin of these losses, stark differences are seen between
years and tariff levels. The losses can be broken down into value transferred to the TSO,
and welfare losses, which represent value that could not be extracted due to the distur-
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
51
==PAGE:62==
bance of the price signal. For low tariffs in 2019, this welfare loss is constrained to ≈10%
of the base case profit. But with increasing tariff level, the welfare loss increases to 22%,
which is double the amount of TSO transfer. This transfer itself decreases, due to less
activity on the market by the battery. This is also seen when comparing the expected av-
erage portfolio outputs. The base case tends to follow the typical peaks of the daily price
pattern, while absorbing the surplus solar power in the middle of the day. With decreasing
flexibility and increasing tariff levels, attaining this pattern becomes increasingly difficult.
The battery falls back on providing ancillary services almost completely in the high fixed
tariff case. In other words, with higher tariff levels, the portfolio owner has more losses,
the TSO gains less income and welfare losses increase, diminishing the purpose of these
public service obligations.
These conclusions are nuanced by the case of 2023, where the welfare loss stays well
below the TSO transfer, even for the high tariffs. This is due to the fact that 2023 al-
ready shows a high arbitrage opportunity, leading to the conclusion that the disturbance
of tariff structures decrease in an already volatile environment. Moreover, as the capacity
reservation prices are higher in 2023, the ancillary stream has a higher weight and damp-
ens the value loss due to less efficient arbitrage. Prices are expected to become more
volatile with more VRE in the future, but still, the right tariff structure stays important, as
the dynamic tariff leads to lower welfare losses and profit losses.
In both years, the introduction of a tariff introduced some welfare loss, but this welfare
loss is minimised with the dynamic tariff. When increasing the tariff to include public
service obligations, the welfare loss in 2023 approximately increases tenfold, while the
TSO transfer only doubles. Evidence from both years thus indicate the inefficiency of
these high fees, providing arguments for an exemption.
Next, the role of the ancillary markets revenue is addressed. Ancillary services have
been regarded as an extra revenue stream for storage operators, but the analysis of the
different tariff structures shows that this revenue stream can also be seen as a fall-back
revenue in case the tariff structures become more prohibitive, limiting the welfare loss.
One of the main limitations of this study is that capacity reservation bids are automatically
accepted, providing a stable replacement income. To address this, an extra analysis has
been done for the case in which bidding on the aFRR capacity markets is not allowed. This
scenario demonstrates a case where the portfolio is under ”total exposure” of the tariffs,
as the only allowed revenue stream is arbitrage on the spot markets. For the base case
of each year, this results in a battery profit loss of 36% and 47% respectively, reflecting
the higher dependence of the 2023 scenarios on the ancillary stream. This is in line with
literature, where the ancillary markets are seen as an important driver of battery value.
Moreover, the welfare losses relative to the base case profit increase, with a minimum
of 102% and a maximum of 170% with respect to the scenarios with ancillary revenue
included, signifying the importance of the ancillary revenue from both a private profit and
social welfare perspective.
This analysis addresses the limitation of the certain ancillary service acceptance, and
provides an interval for the profit and welfare losses, ranging from ”full protection”, with
the certain replacement income of the ancillary markets, to the ”full exposure” scenario.
These boundaries makes the conclusions more robust and broadly applicable.
Lastly, the case of ”double taxation” is examined. It essentially divides a certain grid cost
over the load and generation customers on the grid, as currently in place in Belgium.
Double taxation in this regard is not unjustified, as this is not an increase tariffs for a
storage operator, but rather a redistribution of the cost that would otherwise have to be
52Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:63==
paid on the charging side alone. Contrary to both remarks against this practice made
by the storage sector and the EU commission, the examined form of double taxation can
provide a slight benefit. When shifting fees from the charging side to the discharging side,
an effective discount is provided because of the round trip efficiency of the battery, as less
power is coming out than in. This discount is limited, because of the limited discharge fee,
but increases with decreasing battery efficiency. In the examined case, a slight increase
of 0.37% in battery profit is seen when compared to the fixed tariff on only the charging
side. In effect, a battery operator might prefer to pay fees based on discharge, rather than
charging. However, this is limited by EU regulation. Still, for a standalone storage unit,
this double charging might be preferred, as it balances the effects of a low efficiency with
a lower effective tariff.
The value of the overall portfolio decreases, as tariffs are now also paid on the VRE
production. However, the impact on the portfolio profit is limited for the low tariff, equating
to a loss of less than 3%. The impact on production schedule and subsequent welfare
losses is limited, and are similar to the fixed tariff case. A slight increase in curtailment of
VRE is observed, but this is minimised by the BESS, and stays below 0.2% of the total
available VRE.
The main pathways for future research include examining the behaviour of tariff structures
for a strategic operator and incorporating capacity activation. While this study addresses
these limitations by providing upper and lower bounds, it does not account for the poten-
tial change in the value of the ancillary stream when activation is included. Additionally,
the BESS has been modelled at an abstract level, increasing its application potential for
other flexible systems but failing to consider battery degradation. It is expected that tariff
structures will impact degradation through their effect on arbitrage behaviour, suggesting
a potential trade-off between battery value and tariff costs. More research is needed to
assess the magnitude of these effects. Lastly, the results obtained here consider one
portfolio. In order to enable broader conclusions on welfare losses and optimal grid tariff
design, a long term horizon is needed, which takes metrics like revenue adequacy and
decreasing arbitrage value into account.
In summary, this thesis underscores the impact of grid tariff structures on BESS + VRE
portfolios. By comparing the effects of fixed and dynamic volumetric tariffs on both private
profits and welfare losses, the study provides valuable insights for policymakers and in-
dustry stakeholders. This is the first time such a comparison has been made for grid-scale
BESS + VRE portfolios, serving as a valuable contribution to the literature. Additionally,
the impact of one of the most common ”double taxation” uses has been tested, nuancing
the general critique on the practice among policymakers and industry. Additionally, the
state-of-the-art in VPP modelling is expanded through the inclusion of intraday bidding.
The limitation of the guaranteed ancillary revenue as fall-back option is addressed by pro-
viding lower and upper bounds for the private profit and welfare losses. Lastly, pathways
for future research have been proposed.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
53
==PAGE:64==
54Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Fit for 55 - The EU’s plan for a green transition - Consilium. URL: https://www.
consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/green-deal/fit-for-55/.
[2]
A. A. Solomon, Daniel M. Kammen, and D. Callaway. “The role of large-scale energy
storage design and dispatch in the power grid: A study of very high grid penetration
of variable renewable resources”. In: Applied Energy 134 (Dec. 2014), pp. 75–89.
ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: 10.1016/J.APENERGY.2014.07.095.
[3]
David Newbery. “Efficient Renewable Electricity Support: Designing an Incentive-
compatible Support Scheme”. In: Energy Journal 44.3 (May 2023), pp. 1–22. ISSN:
19449089. DOI: 10.5547/01956574.44.3.DNEW.
[4]
Dimitrios Zafirakis, Konstantinos J. Chalvatzis, and Giovanni Baiocchi. “Embodied
CO2 emissions and cross-border electricity trade in Europe: Rebalancing burden
sharing with energy storage”. In: Applied Energy 143 (Apr. 2015), pp. 283–300.
ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: 10.1016/J.APENERGY.2014.12.054.
[5]
Felix Baumgarte, Gunther Glenk, and Alexander Rieger. “Business Models and
Profitability of Energy Storage”. In: iScience 23.10 (Oct. 2020). ISSN: 25890042.
DOI: 10.1016/J.ISCI.2020.101554.
[6]
Peter D. Lund et al. “Review of energy system flexibility measures to enable high
levels of variable renewable electricity”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Re-
views 45 (May 2015), pp. 785–807. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: 10.1016/J.RSER.2015.
01.057.
[7]
Dimitrios Zafirakis et al. “The value of arbitrage for energy storage: Evidence from
European electricity markets”. In: Applied Energy 184 (Dec. 2016), pp. 971–986.
ISSN: 03062619. DOI: 10.1016/J.APENERGY.2016.05.047.
[8]
European Commission et al. Study on energy storage – Contribution to the security
of the electricity supply in Europe. Publications Office of the European Union, 2020.
DOI: doi/10.2833/077257.
[9]
Stefan Lamp and Mario Samano. “Large-scale battery storage, short-term market
outcomes, and arbitrage”. In: Energy Economics 107 (Mar. 2022), p. 105786. ISSN:
0140-9883. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENECO.2021.105786.
[10]
Overview of Transmission Tariffs in Europe: Synthesis 2020. Tech. rep. Brussels:
ENTSO-E, 2020.
[11]
Toby Brown, Ahmad Faruqui, and Léa Grausz. “Efficient tariff structures for distribu-
tion network services”. In: Economic Analysis and Policy 48 (Dec. 2015), pp. 139–
149. ISSN: 0313-5926. DOI: 10.1016/J.EAP.2015.11.010.
[12]
Severin Borenstein. “The economics of fixed cost recovery by utilities”. In: The Elec-
tricity Journal 29.7 (Sept. 2016), pp. 5–12. ISSN: 1040-6190. DOI: 10.1016/J.TEJ.
2016.07.013.
[13]
Network tariff structure for a smart energy system. Tech. rep. Brussels: EURELEC-
TRIC, May 2013.
[14]
The Way Forward for Energy Storage Grid Fees :General Overview and Best Prac-
tices Across Member States The Way Forward for Energy Storage Grid Fees. Tech.
rep. Brussels: European Association for Storage of Energy, July 2022.
[15]
ACER Report on Electricity Transmission and Distribution Tariff Methodologies in
Europe. Tech. rep. Ljubljana: European Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy
Regulators, Jan. 2023.
[16]
Ontwerpbesluit alternatieve transportrechten. Mar. 2024. URL: www.acm.nl.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
55
==PAGE:66==
[17]
TS Brinsmead et al. “Future energy storage trends: An assessment of the eco-
nomic viability, potential uptake and impacts of electrical energy storage on the
NEM 2015–2035”. In: aemc.gov.auTS Brinsmead, P Graham, J Hayward, EL Rat-
nam, L ReedmanReport Prepared for the Australian Energy Market Commission,
2015•aemc.gov.au (2015). URL: https://www.aemc.gov.au/sites/default/files/
content/fa7a8ca4-5912-4fa9-8d51-2f291f7b9621/CSIRO-Future-Trends-Report.pdf.
[18]
Dan Gardiner et al. “Quantifying the impact of policy on the investment case for
residential electricity storage in the UK”. In: Journal of Energy Storage 27 (Feb.
2020), p. 101140. ISSN: 2352-152X. DOI: 10.1016/J.EST.2019.101140.
[19]
Kevin Milis, Herbert Peremans, and Steven Van Passel. “Steering the adoption of
battery storage through electricity tariff design”. In: Renewable and Sustainable En-
ergy Reviews 98 (Dec. 2018), pp. 125–139. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: 10.1016/J.
RSER.2018.09.005.
[20]
Jon Gustav Kirkerud, Erik Trømborg, and Torjus Folsland Bolkesjø. “Impacts of elec-
tricity grid tariffs on flexible use of electricity to heat generation”. In: Energy 115 (Nov.
2016), pp. 1679–1687. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENERGY.2016.06.147.
[21]
Dogan Keles and Joris Dehler-Holland. “Evaluation of photovoltaic storage systems
on energy markets under uncertainty using stochastic dynamic programming”. In:
Energy Economics 106 (Feb. 2022), p. 105800. ISSN: 0140-9883. DOI: 10.1016/J.
ENECO.2021.105800.
[22]
Thomas Mercier, Mathieu Olivier, and Emmanuel De Jaeger. “The value of electricity
storage arbitrage on day-ahead markets across Europe”. In: Energy Economics 123
(July 2023), p. 106721. ISSN: 0140-9883. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENECO.2023.106721.
[23]
Abiola I. Adebayo et al. “Impacts of transmission tariff on price arbitrage operation
of energy storage system in Alberta electricity market”. In: Utilities Policy 52 (June
2018), pp. 1–12. ISSN: 0957-1787. DOI: 10.1016/J.JUP.2018.04.001.
[24]
Claire Bergaentzlé et al. “Electricity grid tariffs as a tool for flexible energy systems:
A Danish case study”. In: Energy Policy 126 (Mar. 2019), pp. 12–21. ISSN: 0301-
4215. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENPOL.2018.11.021.
[25]
Wafa Nafkha-Tayari et al. “Virtual Power Plants Optimization Issue: A Comprehen-
sive Review on Methods, Solutions, and Prospects”. In: Energies 2022, Vol. 15,
Page 3607 15.10 (May 2022), p. 3607. ISSN: 1996-1073. DOI: 10.3390/EN15103607.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/10/3607/htm%20https://www.mdpi.
com/1996-1073/15/10/3607.
[26]
Kaushik Das et al. “Optimal battery operation for revenue maximization of wind-
storage hybrid power plant”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 189 (Dec. 2020),
p. 106631. ISSN: 0378-7796. DOI: 10.1016/J.EPSR.2020.106631.
[27]
Rujie Zhu et al. “Optimal Participation of Co-Located Wind–Battery Plants in Se-
quential Electricity Markets”. In: Energies 16.15 (Aug. 2023). ISSN: 19961073. DOI:
10.3390/EN16155597.
[28]
Jose L. Crespo-Vazquez et al. “A machine learning based stochastic optimization
framework for a wind and storage power plant participating in energy pool market”.
In: Applied Energy 232 (Dec. 2018), pp. 341–357. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: 10.1016/
J.APENERGY.2018.09.195.
[29]
Rujie Zhu et al. “Enhancing profits of hybrid wind-battery plants in spot and bal-
ancing markets using data-driven two-level optimization”. In: International Journal
of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 159 (Aug. 2024). ISSN: 01420615. DOI:
10.1016/j.ijepes.2024.110029.
56Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:67==
[30]
Huajie Ding et al. “Integrated bidding and operating strategies for wind-storage sys-
tems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 7.1 (Jan. 2016), pp. 163–172.
ISSN: 19493029. DOI: 10.1109/TSTE.2015.2472576.
[31]
Kittisak Jermsittiparser. “Bidding and offering strategies for integration of battery
storage system and wind turbine”. In: Electricity Markets: New Players and Pricing
Uncertainties (Jan. 2020), pp. 247–261. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-36979-8{\_}12.
[32]
Yuwei Wang, Huiru Zhao, and Peng Li. “Optimal Offering and Operating Strategies
for Wind-Storage System Participating in Spot Electricity Markets with Progressive
Stochastic-Robust Hybrid Optimization Model Series”. In: Mathematical Problems
in Engineering 2019 (2019). ISSN: 15635147. DOI: 10.1155/2019/2142050.
[33]
Morteza Rahimiyan and Luis Baringo. “Strategic Bidding for a Virtual Power Plant
in the Day-Ahead and Real-Time Markets: A Price-Taker Robust Optimization Ap-
proach”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 31.4 (July 2016), pp. 2676–2687.
ISSN: 08858950. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2015.2483781.
[34]
F. Javier Heredia, Marlyn D. Cuadrado, and Cristina Corchero. “On optimal par-
ticipation in the electricity markets of wind power plants with battery energy stor-
age systems”. In: Computers & Operations Research 96 (Aug. 2018), pp. 316–329.
ISSN: 0305-0548. DOI: 10.1016/J.COR.2018.03.004.
[35]
Luis Baringo and Morteza Rahimiyan. “Virtual Power Plants and Electricity Markets:
Decision Making Under Uncertainty”. In: Virtual Power Plants and Electricity Mar-
kets: Decision Making Under Uncertainty (Jan. 2020), pp. 1–381. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-030-47602-1.
[36]
TRANSMISSIENETTARIEVEN 2020-2023. Nov. 2019.
[37]
Besluit tot wijziging van het besluit (Z)141218-CDC-1109/7 tot vaststelling van de
tariefmethodologie voor het transmissienet voor elektriciteit en de elektriciteitsnet-
ten met een transmissiefunctie. Mar. 2018. URL: https://www.creg.be/nl/publicaties/
andere-b1718.
[38]
Preisblätter Netznutzung 2023. Dec. 2022.
[39]
§ 118 EnWG Übergangsregelungen Energiewirtschaftsgesetz. July 2005. URL: https:
//www.buzer.de/118_EnWG.htm.
[40]
ANMELDELSE - TARIFMETODE FOR NETTARIFFER FORTSO-TILSLUTTET FOR-
BRUG (REVIDERET DECEMBER 2023). Dec. 2023.
[41]
Aktuelle tariffer. URL: https://energinet.dk/el/elmarkedet/tariffer/aktuelle-tariffer/.
[42]
METODE: NETTARIFFER FOR FORBRUG TILSLUTTETTRANSMISSIONSNET-
TET (REVIDERET DECEMBER 2023). Dec. 2023.
[43]
Tarifering af batterianlæg tilsluttet elnettet. URL: https : / / energinet . dk / om - os /
arrangementer/tarifering-af-batterianlaeg-tilsluttet-elnettet-121223/.
[44]
EXR.M.DKK.EUR | ECB Data Portal. URL: https : / / data . ecb . europa . eu / data /
datasets/EXR/EXR.M.DKK.EUR.SP00.A?chart_props=W3sibm9kZUlkIjoiMzIyNzA4IiwicHJvcGVydGl
3D%3D.
[45]
Tarievenbesluit TenneT 2023. Nov. 2022. URL: www.acm.nl.
[46]
Nettarieven Elia | CREG : Commissie voor de Regulering van de Elektriciteit en het
Gas. URL: https://www.creg.be/nl/professionals/toegang-tot-het-net/elektriciteit-
transmissie/nettarieven-elia.
[47]
BMWK - Kabinett bringt Abschaffung der EEG-Umlage auf den Weg. URL: https:
//www.bmwk.de/Redaktion/DE/Pressemitteilungen/2022/03/20220309-kabinett-
bringt-abschaffung-der-eeg-umlage-auf-den-weg.html.
[48]
Bundesnetzagentur - Homepage - KWKG-Umlage. URL: https://www.bundesnetzagentur.
de/SharedDocs/A_Z_Glossar/K/KWKG_Umlage.html.
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
57
==PAGE:68==
[49]
Bundesnetzagentur - Homepage - Offshore-Netzumlage. URL: https://www.bundesnetzagentur.
de/SharedDocs/A_Z_Glossar/O/Offshore-Netzumlage.html.
[50]
Bundesnetzagentur - Homepage - Umlage Stromnetzentgeltverordnung (§ 19 StromNEV-
Umlage). URL: https://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/SharedDocs/A_Z_Glossar/P/
Par19_StromNEV_Umlage.html.
[51]
Bundesnetzagentur - Homepage - Umlage für abschaltbare Lasten. URL: https:
//www.bundesnetzagentur.de/SharedDocs/A_Z_Glossar/A/AbschaltbareLasten_
Umlage.html.
[52]
Emil Kraft et al. “Stochastic optimization of trading strategies in sequential electricity
markets”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 308.1 (July 2023), pp. 400–
421. ISSN: 0377-2217. DOI: 10.1016/J.EJOR.2022.10.040.
[53]
Dogan Keles et al. “Comparison of extended mean-reversion and time series mod-
els for electricity spot price simulation considering negative prices”. In: Energy Eco-
nomics 34.4 (July 2012), pp. 1012–1032. ISSN: 0140-9883. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENECO.
2011.08.012.
[54]
Andreas Wagner. “Residual Demand Modeling and Application to Electricity Pric-
ing”. In: SSRN Electronic Journal (Mar. 2012). DOI: 10.2139/SSRN.2018908. URL:
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2018908.
[55]
Dogan Keles et al. “A combined modeling approach for wind power feed-in and
electricity spot prices”. In: Energy Policy 59 (Aug. 2013), pp. 213–225. ISSN: 0301-
4215. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENPOL.2013.03.028.
[56]
Ioannis Karatzas and Steven E. Shreve. “Brownian Motion”. In: (1998), pp. 47–127.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4612-0949-2{\_}2.
[57]
Energy Profile Germany. Tech. rep. Masdar City: IRENA, Aug. 2023.
[58]
Technology Data for Energy Storage. Tech. rep. The Danish Energy Agency, Apr.
2024. URL: https://ens.dk/en/our-services/technology-catalogues/technology-data-
energy-storage.
[59]
ENTSO-E Transparency Platform. URL: https://transparency.entsoe.eu/.
[60]
Indices | EPEX SPOT. URL: https://www.epexspot.com/en/indices.
[61]
Datacenter FCR/aFRR/mFRR. URL: https://www.regelleistung.net/apps/datacenter/
tendering - files / ?productTypes = FCR , aFRR , mFRR , ABLA & markets = CAPACITY ,
ENERGY & fileTypes = DEMANDS , RESULTS , ANONYMOUS _ LIST _ OF _ BIDS &
dateRange=2024-05,2024-05.
[62]
Sebastian Just and Christoph Weber. “Pricing of reserves: Valuing system reserve
capacity against spot prices in electricity markets”. In: Energy Economics 30.6 (Nov.
2008), pp. 3198–3221. ISSN: 0140-9883. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENECO.2008.05.004.
58Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
==PAGE:69==
Investigating the impact of current and future tariff structures on the value and scheduling of portfolios with
storage and renewable production assets
59
==PAGE:70==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Produktionstorvet, Building 424
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
