==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings
STUDENT
Sabrina Hötzendorfer - s222865
SUPERVISORS
Lars René Lindvold
Lars Grüner-Nielsen
Jakob Janting
July 5, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings
Master Thesis
5. July 2024
By
Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic citation,
including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
Department of DTU Electrical and Photonics Engineering , 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Electrical and Photonics En-
gineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. in Advanced Materials and Healthcare Engineering.
Sabrina Hötzendorfer - s222865
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
Signature
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
Date
ii
==PAGE:4==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Abstract
This project focuses on optical sensors utilizing optical fibers. Optical fiber biosensors (OFBS) are
increasingly being proposed for biomedical and chemical applications due to their inherent advantages
over traditional sensors. An experimental investigation was carried out if Long Period Fiber Gratings
(LPFGs) fabricated with a new thermal-based technique using an electrically heated wire first described
by Akrami et at.[1] can be used to sense changes in surrounding refractive index (SRI). In recent years,
LPFGs have been gaining popularity and being developed for their unique spectral response, used in
optical communication systems and for sensors. The mechanism of the LPFG formation and the bend-
ing effects on the fiber were studied. It is shown that the current method allows a low-cost fabrication
of grating writing with high flexibility in the grating range between 395 to 650 µm. However, a high
fabrication inconsistency has been demonstrated, leading to continuous adjustments of the parameters
to ensure the reproducibility and consistent quality of the LPFGs. Furthermore, microscope images
revealed that the taperings triggered by annealing of internal stress showed irregular behavior making
precise perturbation in the refractive index (RI) challenging. While pursuing the experiments, bending
effects had a significant impact on the sensitivity of the LPFGs regarding the SRI. Various fiber hold-
ers were designed to study and mitigate the effects of bending to successfully reduce the impact to a
level that allowed for reproducible measurements of changes in the SRI. Simultaneously with the exper-
imental work, simulations of the PMC by semi-analytical solving of the Wave Equation and destructive
analysis of the coupled mode by imaging the transverse field distribution were conducted. Despite some
limitations in the simulation, most parts of the results were confirmed with theoretical evidence. A shift
in wavelength and change in depth of the resonance dip in the spectrum was successfully measured for
different gratings periods at an SRI below the cladding RI. Some parts of the results were not completely
understood and further investigation should be conducted. After demonstrating sensitivity to the SRI,
various coatings, including gelatin-based hydrogel and PVA films, were investigated. When combined
with a KI solution, a chemical reaction resulting in a significant increase in refractive index was mea-
sured. The resonance dips weakened due to the high refractive index and varying swelling properties of
the coatings. The iodine led to undesirable chemical reactions when mixed with PVA. Therefore further
investigations regarding finding more suitable coating materials or iodine replacement are necessary.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Acknowledgements
Lars René Lindvold, Senior Researcher, DTU
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Lars, for introducing me to this project and pro-
viding me with the opportunity to explore this exciting topic. His expertise and guidance have been
invaluable throughout the project, steering me in the right direction. His enthusiasm and genuine passion
for his work have been particularly motivating, especially during challenging moments.
Lars Grüner-Nielsen, Research Specialist, DTU
I am also deeply grateful to my supervisor, Lars, for his close guidance and patience throughout this
project. His support and advice were invaluable in helping me carry out the work. Knowing that I could
always consult him and that he was always willing to listen to my questions and concerns provided
tremendous support along the way. I greatly appreciate his problem-solving approach and his ability to
generate new ideas for project improvement.
Jakob Janting, Senior Researcher, DTU
I would also like to express my gratitude to Jakob for supervising this project. His weekly advice and
guidance were instrumental in helping me carry it out, and I am thankful for his willingness to be a
sounding board for ideas and potential solutions.
My dearest family and friends
I could not have undertaken this journey without the trust of my family, who have been my rock during
my studies abroad. I also want to thank my grandpa for sparking my interest in technology by allowing
me to help him build go-karts in his shed. I would especially like to thank my friends in Copenhagen, who
have been my moral support. My journey of studying in Denmark would not have been the same without
their support and the incredible memories we created together. I also want to express my gratitude to my
friends from Austria, who have been with me for years. They have never doubted me and have always
stood by my side with valuable advice and unwavering support.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Wave Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Optical Fibers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Optical Fiber Biosensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Mechanism of LPFG formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Refractive index measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Bending tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Materials and Methods
20
3.1
Fiber specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Refractive Index Liquids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Bending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Fiber Holders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Phase matching curve modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.7
Coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results and Discussion
33
4.1
Fabrication of LPFG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Bending tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Mode Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Phase matching curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5
Refractive Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Conclusion
59
6
Future Prospects
60
v
==PAGE:7==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
1
Introduction
Biosensors are crucial for monitoring human and environmental health due to their ability to detect
chemical and biological substances with high accuracy and efficiency. A bioreceptor and a transducer
are the two main components of a biosensor. [2]. Finding a suitable material for the biological target is
a fundamental technological step when designing a biosensor. Considering the properties of the result-
ing compounds, it is crucial to select the transducer based on the chemical or physical changes induced
by the molecular interaction between the biological target and the bioreceptor. The recognition process
involves producing or consuming light, heat, and chemical substances, which are converted into measur-
able signals.[3] Depending on these processes, the transducer for the biosensor can be selected. Recog-
nition processes range from optics, electrochemistry, or thermotics.[4]. This project is focused on optical
sensors based on optical fibers. In biomedical and chemical applications optical fiber biosensors (OFBS)
are being proposed on a growing basis due to their inherent benefits over traditional sensors. They are
immune to electromagnetic interference, are remote-controllable, are capable of multiplexing[5], and re-
quire minimal sample volumes due to their compact and small size [6]. The typical working principle of
OFBS relies on monitoring changes in the surrounding refractive index (SRI). These changes are caused
by the biological target binding to the surface of the fiber. This leads to alterations in the detectable
spectrum.[7]. To enhance the biosensor’s sensitivity to the SRI a geometrically modification of the sens-
ing area can be performed to create a strong evanescent field. This project focused on long-period fiber
gratings (LPFGs), which are used in applications within optical communication systems and sensors be-
cause of their unique spectral response. They are used in sensing for example strain, refractive index, or
temperature. Along the length of the fiber, a periodic perturbation of the refractive index (RI) is created
and the period ranges normally from hundred microns to millimeters. Compared to other gratings, longer
periods lead to higher sensitivity and simpler fabrication processes.[1] Figure 1.1 illustrates an optical
fiber biosensor based on long-period fiber grating. The optical fiber acts as a bioreceptor by detecting
changes in SRI caused by molecular interaction through the target on the fiber’s surface. This change in
SRI can be detected by a shift in the resonance wavelength in the output spectrum.[4]
Figure 1.1: Illustration of an optical fiber biosensor based on long-period fiber grating [4]
The long periods lead compared to conventional fiber Bragg-gratings (FBG) to higher sensitivity
and simplify the fabrication process [8]. Numerous techniques have been developed for the production of
Page 1 of 65
==PAGE:8==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
LPFGs, like using an ultra-violet (UV)-laser light, requiring photosensitive fibers, which are expansive
and difficult to monitor or mechanically produced LPFGs, which are inexpensive and simpler but can
not produce short grating periods. Thermally-induced LPFGs using electric-arc discharge or CO2-laser
irradiation are more flexible and can be used in almost all types of fibers, but require expensive equip-
ment. Therefore the DTU together with the Danish Optical Fiber Innovations (DOFI) company have
developed a new thermal-based technique for the fabrication of LPFGs by using an electrically heated
wire described by Akrami et al.[1]. This method allows low-cost fabrication of well-known point-by-
point grating writing with high flexibility and it can be used to write LPFGs types of fibers, such as
single-mode fibers and few-mode fibers. In this project, a standard single-mode fiber (SSMF) with a
diameter of 125 µm will be used to reproducible detect changes in the SRI, both below and above the
cladding refractive index. Patrick et al [9] suggests that the best results in sensing can be achieved by
choosing the SRI near the cladding refractive index. To achieve high sensitivity for biochemical sensing,
the biosensors are coated with chemically responsive materials such as different polymers, which are
sensitive to for example pH or salinity.[10]
Page 2 of 65
==PAGE:9==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
2
Background
2.1
Wave Optics
Light propagation can be explained in waves and travels with the speed of light co in free space.
While traveling in a medium with a refractive index n ≥1 the light waves will be reduced in speed:
c = co
n
(2.1)
The wavefunction u(r,t) describes an optical wave mathematically with a function of position r =
(x,y,z) and time t and satisfies a partial differential equation called the wave equation:
∇2u −1
c2
∂2u
∂t2 = 0
(2.2)
with the Laplacian operator:
∇2 = ∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2 + ∂2
∂z2
(2.3)
in Cartesian coordinates. A potential optical wave is any function that satisfies Equation 2.2. A wave-
function with harmonic time dependence:
u(r, t) = a(r)cos[2πνt + φ(r)]
(2.4)
demonstrates a monochromatic wave, where a(r) is the amplitude, φ(r) is the phase, ν is the frequency
(cycles or Hz), ω = 2πν is the angular frequency (radians or s−1) and T = 1/ν = 2π/ω is period (s).
The wave can be described completely using the complex wave function U(r,t), while the wave function
u(r,t) describes only its real part. The complex wave function must satisfy the wave equation:
∇2U −1
c2
∂2U
∂t2 = 0
(2.5)
Substituting Equation 2.4 into Equation 2.5 is leading to the Helmhotz Equation:
∇2U + k2U = 0
(2.6)
with:
k = 2πν
c
= ω
c
(2.7)
as the wavenumber. The wavelength can be obtained by:
λ = c
ν
(2.8)
Page 3 of 65
==PAGE:10==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
While propagating through a medium of different refractive indices, the frequency of a monochro-
matic wave remains the same, but its velocity changes according to Equation 2.1, and the wavelength
and wavenumber are altered as
λ = λo
n
(2.9)
and
k = nko
(2.10)
The Maxwells Equation
For dielectric materials, the propagation of light in optical fibers is governed by the Maxwell equation.
This includes the description of the electrical field vector E [V/m], the magnetic induction vector B
[Wb/m2], or the magnetic field vector H [A/m]. This propagates through a material and interacts with
the material in a nonlinear way. Maxwell‘s equation exists in macroscopic and microscopic form. The
macroscopic form is also known as Maxwell‘s equation in matter with a free charge density ρf [C/m3],
free current density Jf [A/m2], the displacement field vector D [C/m2], and the magnetic field vector
H.[11]
∇· D = ρf
(2.11)
∇× E = −∂B
∂t
(2.12)
∇× H = ∂D
∂t + Jf
(2.13)
∇· B = 0
(2.14)
2.2
Optical Fibers
Over the past several decades technological advancements in the fabrication of optical fibers have
allowed a loss of ∼3.4 % or ∼0.15 dB when light is guided through 1 km of silica-glass at a wavelength
of maximum transparency. Optical fibers are dielectric waveguides in cylindrical form, fabricated from
low-loss materials like silica glass SiO2. As illustrated in Figure 2.1 optical fibers consist of a core
and a cladding. The core has a slightly higher refractive index than the cladding material, allowing the
transmission of light along the fiber. Light rays in the core that show greater angles than the critical angle
at the core-cladding boundary undergo total internal reflection, allowing guidance without refraction into
the cladding. Total internal reflection can be explained by Snell‘s Law. The slightly higher refractive
index in the core can be achieved by doping the SiO2 with a low concentration of other materials for
example titanium, germanium, or boron) and the cladding consisting of pure SiO2. For strengthening the
fiber and other functionalities, a third layer is a coating out of different polymers. The light that is guided
through the optical fiber propagates as modes. While maintaining its transverse spatial distribution and
Page 4 of 65
==PAGE:11==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
polarization, each mode travels along the z−axis with a distinct group velocity and propagation constant.
Optical fibers with a small core diameter are called single-mode fibers because they can only support a
single mode in the core. The core diameters of single-mode fibers are around 4 −9 µm. Multimode
fibers support more modes through larger core diameters. An effect, called modal dispersion limits the
communication systems speed of multimode optical fibers. This effect can be reduced by grading the
refractive index of the fiber core.[12][13]
Figure 2.1: An optical fiber is a cylindrical dielectric waveguide with an inner core with a radius of a and refractive index of
n1 and an outer cladding with a radius b and refractive index of n2. The refractive index of the cladding is lower than the
core [12]
A guided ray is a ray incident from the air if, upon refraction into the core, it makes an angle θ with
the fiber axis that is smaller than θc. Applying Snell‘s law at the air-core boundary, 1 · sinθa = n1 sin θc,
which leads to an acceptance angle of the fiber
θa = sin−1NA
(2.15)
where the numerical aperture (NA) of the fiber is given by
NA =
q
n2
1 −n2
2 ≈n1
p
2△
(2.16)
since n1-n2 = n1∆and n1+n2 ≈2n1 [12]
The cone of external rays that are guided by the fiber is determined by the acceptance angle. Total
internal reflection happens only to rays incident at angles smaller than θa. They are refracted into the
fiber but are only guided for a short distance. The dependence of the ray’s path through the fiber on the
numerical aperture and the acceptance angle is visualized in Figure 2.2.[12]
Page 5 of 65
==PAGE:12==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 2.2: (a) Rays within the acceptance angle will be guided by total internal reflection (b) Impact of a small or large NA
on light-gathering capacity [12]
Refractive Index Profiles
By grading the refractive index of the fiber core modal dispersion can be reduced. The values of the
grading are maximum at its center and minimum at the core-cladding boundary. Step-index fibers are
called fibers with a constant refractive index. In Figure 2.3 the index profile of both step-index fiber and
graded-index fiber are visualized. In graded-index fiber (GRIN fiber) with radial distance travel velocity
increases from the core axis due to decreasing refractive index. Therefore rays of greater inclination to
the fiber axis can travel faster and the travel time of different modes can be equalized. This report will
focus only on step-index fibers.
Figure 2.3: Cross section and refractive index for step-index fiber (left) and graded-index fiber (right). Core parameters are
radius a and refractive index n1, cladding parameters are radius b and refractive index n2, and a SRI of nD [14]
For step-index fibers the refractive indices of the core and the cladding differ only slightly, therefore
the fractional refractive-index change can be written as [12]
∆≡n2
1 −n2
2
2n12
≈n1 −n2
n1
<< 1
(2.17)
Page 6 of 65
==PAGE:13==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Guided waves
For the determination of electric and magnetic fields of guided waves, the Maxwell equation as well
as the boundary conditions for cylindrical dielectric core and cladding can be used. There are certain
solutions for all waveguides, known as modes (determined by a distinct propagation constant, a charac-
teristic field distribution in the transverse plane, and two independent polarization states). As mentioned
in previous chapters an optical fiber can be described as a dielectric medium with a refractive index n(r).
In step-index fibers in the core (r < a) n(r) = n1 and in the cladding (r > a) n(r) = n2. In a GRIN fiber,
the refractive index n(r) in the core is a continuous function but has a constant value n(r) = n2 in the
cladding. In both fibers, the cladding is surrounded by a coating (seen in Figure 2.3). For both cases, it
can be assumed, that the outer radius for the cladding b is large enough. Therefore it can be taken to be
infinite for considerations of the light in the core and near the core-cladding boundary. Monochromatic
electric and magnetic fields can be described by the Helmholtz equation:
∇2U + n2(r)k2
oU = 0
(2.18)
where
ko = 2π
λo
(2.19)
Figure 2.4: Cylindrical coordinate system to the Helmholtz equation
The cylindrical coordinate system (see in Figure 2.4) of the Helmholtz equation is written as:
∂2U
∂r2 + 1
r
∂U
∂r + 1
r2
∂2U
∂ϕ2 + ∂2U
∂z2 + n2k2
oU = 0
(2.20)
where:
U = U(r, ϕ, z)
(2.21)
The modes that are guided in the fiber are traveling in the z-direction with a propagation constant β, so
the dependence of U to z is of the form e−jβz. They travel periodically in the angle ϕ with period 2π and
Page 7 of 65
==PAGE:14==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
can be written in the harmonic form e−jlϕ with an integer l:
U(r, ϕ, z) = u(r)e−jlϕe−jβz
(2.22)
with l = 0, ± 1, ± 2,...
That leads combined with Equation 2.20 to an ordinary differential equation for the radial profile u(r):
d2u
dr2 + 1
r
du
dr + (n2(r)k2
o −β2 −l2
r2)u = 0
(2.23)
For step-index fibers, the wave is guided if the propagation constant is smaller than the wavenumber in
the core (β < n1ko) but bigger than the wavenumber in the cladding (β > n2ko). Two quantities can be
defined:
k2
T = n2
1k2
o −β2
(2.24)
and
γ2 = β2 −n2
2k2
o
(2.25)
with that it can be said for guided waves that k2
T and γ2 are positive and kT and γ are real and Equation
2.23 can be written separately for the core and the cladding:
d2u
dr2 + 1
r
du
dr + (k2
T −l2
r2)u = 0, r < a(core)
(2.26)
and
d2u
dr2 + 1
r
du
dr + (γ2 −l2
r2)u = 0, r > a(cladding)
(2.27)
These differential equations are well known and their solutions compromise the family of Bessel func-
tions. Functions that approach at r = 0: ∞in the core and r →∞in the cladding are excluded and
therefore bounded solutions can be obtained:
u(r) ∝



Jl(kTr), r < a(core)
Kl(γr), r > a(cladding)
(2.28)
In Equation 2.28 Jl(x) is the Bessel function of the first kind and Kl(x) is the Bessel function of the
second kind and both order l. Two examples of the radial distribution u(r) are visualized:
Page 8 of 65
==PAGE:15==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 2.5: Two examples of radial distributions u(r) from Equation 2.28 for l = 0 and l = 3. The shaded area represents the
core and the unshadowed area the cladding. Larger values for kT and γ lead to a greater number of oscillations in u(r) [12]
The rate of change of u(r) in the core and the cladding are determined by kT and γ respectively.
An increase in kT increases the oscillation of the radial distribution in the core. An increase in γ means
more rapid decay and decreases the penetration of the wave into the cladding. The sum of the squares of
the parameters is a constant:
k2
T + γ2 = (n2
1 −n2
2)k2
o = (NA)2 · k2
o
(2.29)
The field penetrates more deeply into the cladding when kT increases and γ decreases. The fiber param-
eter or V parameter governs the number of modes of the fiber and their propagation constants. To define
V kT and γ can be normalized:
X = kTa, Y = γa
(2.30)
to define:
X2 + Y 2 = V 2
(2.31)
where V = NA · koa, from which
V = 2π a
λo
NA
(2.32)
Writing the axial components of the electric- and magnetic field complex amplitudes Ez and Hz in the
form of Equation 2.22. At the core-cladding boundary r = a, the condition of these components must
be continuous. This establishes a relation between the coefficients of proportionality in Equation 2.28,
so that there will be only one unknown for Ez and Hz. The remaining components Eϕ, Hϕ, Er, and
Hr are because of the Maxwell equation determined in terms of Ez and Hz. Two additional equations
are yield through the continuity of Eϕ and Hϕ at r = a. The two unknown Ez and Hz are related to one
equation, the second one provides a condition that the propagation constant β must satisfy. This is called
the dispersion relation. It is an equation for β with known parameters n1 and n2 and the ratio a/λo. The
dispersal relation or characteristic equation has multiple solutions yielding discrete propagation constants
βlm, m = 1,2,.. for each azimuthal index l, and each solution represents one mode. The corresponding
values of kT and γ govern the spatial distributions in the core and cladding can be denoted as kTlm and γlm
Page 9 of 65
==PAGE:16==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
and therefore the modes are described by the indices l and m. They are characterizing the azimuthal and
radial distributions and the function u(r) also depends on both l and m. Corresponding to the two states
of polarization, there are two independent configurations of the E and H. Guided rays are approximately
parallel to the fiber axis when fibers are weakly guided with n1 ≈n2 or ∆<< 1. This means the guided
waves are approximately transverse electromagnetic (TEM) in nature since the longitudinal components
of the electric and magnetic fields are far weaker than the transverse components. Then, orthogonal states
of polarization are formed by the linear polarization in the x and y directions. The two polarizations of
LPlm have the same spatial distribution and travel with the same propagation constant, and the linearly
polarized mode is usually denoted as LPlm. In Figure 2.6 the transverse field distribution of some modes
is visualized.
Figure 2.6: Visualization of transverse field distribution LPlm for a few modes. Red and blue colors show a relative difference
in sign between the fields [15]
The characteristic equation for weakly guided fibers is approximately equivalent to the conditions
that the scalar function u(r) from Equation 2.28 and has a continuous derivative a r = a and is continuous.
The conditions are satisfied if:
(kTa)J‘
l(kTa)
Jl(kTa)
= (γa)K‘
l(γa)
Kl(γa)
(2.33)
The derivatives J‘
l and K‘
l of the Bessel functions satisfy the identities
J‘
l(x) = ±Jl∓1 ∓lJl(x)
x
(2.34)
Page 10 of 65
==PAGE:17==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
K‘
l(x) = −Kl∓1 ∓lKl(x)
x
(2.35)
The characteristic equation can be derived by substituting these identities into Equation 2.33 with the
help of the normalized parameters of X and Y.
X Jl±1(X)
Jl(X)
= ±Y Kl±1(Y )
Kl(Y ) , Y =
√
V 2 −X2
(2.36)
The single unknown variable is X and the equation remains the same if l is replaced with -l. The char-
acteristic equation can be solved by graphically plotting its right- and left-hand sides (RHS and LHS)
versus X and finding the intersections. Each fiber mode with a distinct value of X corresponds with an
intersection point and is visualized in Figure 2.7. The values are denoted Xlm and once this is found, the
corresponding decay parameters γlm, the propagation constants βlm, radial distribution functions ulm(r)
and transverse propagation constants kTlm can be determined.
Figure 2.7: Graphic construction of the left and right-hand sides from Equation 2.36 are plotted as functions of X. For every
intersection point a solution exists.[12]
In Figure 2.7 it is shown that with increasing V, the number of intersections (modes) increases as
well. The (l,m) mode is allowed of V > Xlm and the mode reaches the cutoff point when V = Xlm. The
propagation constant for the region 0 < Xlm < V can be calculated with this approximation:
βlm ≈n1ko[1 −X2
lm
V 2 ∆]
(2.37)
2.3
Optical Fiber Biosensors
In this chapter, a brief introduction to different optical fiber sensing methods will be mentioned for
comparison reasons. In this thesis, only long-period fiber gratings are used.
Evanescent field sensing
Optical fiber biosensors are working on the principle of monitoring changes in the SRI. This change can
be produced by biological targets binding on the fiber‘s surface and the alterations can be detected in a
spectrum. The sensitivity to the SRI can be enhanced by geometrically modifying the OFBS or machin-
Page 11 of 65
==PAGE:18==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
ing it into microstructures. This generates a strong evanescent field in the sensing area. Examples of
sensing the evanescent field include U-shaped, D-shaped, tapered optical fibers, Mach-Zehnder interfer-
ometers, lossy mode resonances, surface plasmon resonance, Lab-on-Fiber devices, Bragg gratings, and
long-period fiber gratings.[4][7]
Optical Fiber Bragg Grating
Optical FBG sensors can measure changes in refractive index, strain, temperature, bending, or pres-
sure. FBGs are used for many applications including commercial technology, civil health monitoring,
temperature sensors, and pressure sensors for extremely harsh environments.[16] The advantages of the
sensors are their lightweight, high sensitivity, long-term reliability, immunity to electromagnetic and
radio-frequency interference, and small size.[17] The grating is a photo-induced permanent periodic re-
fractive index variation along the propagation axis of a single-mode fibers core. This short segment is
a few millimeters long and when illuminated with a broadband optical signal, a signal will be reflected
and the wavelength of the signal is given as:
λB = 2neffΛ
(2.38)
with the grating period Λ, the effective RI neff of the fiber core and the Bragg-wavelength λB. The FBG
sensor reflects a particular wavelength λB of light and transmits all others, as shown in Figure 2.8.[17]
Figure 2.8: Optical Fiber Bragg Grating in the core of a single-mode optical fiber, periodic refractive index variation along
the propagation axis of the fiber core, and spectral response of the input and the transmitted and reflected output. [17]
.
FBG sensors are becoming increasingly popular due to advantages such as small size, lightweight, pas-
sive nature, immunity to electromagnetic and radio-frequency interference, high sensitivity, and long-
term reliability
Page 12 of 65
==PAGE:19==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Long Period Fiber Grating
An LPFG is formed by a periodic modulation of refractive index in the fiber core with a period be-
tween Λ = 100 and 1000 µm.[4] They are used within sensors and optical communication systems due
to their spectral response.[18]. LPFGs have been demonstrated as strain, temperature, and refractive
index sensing. Compared to conventional FBG, the fabrication of LPFGs leads to simpler processes and
higher sensitivity.[8] The most common method to produce LPFGs is using an ultra-violet (UV)-laser
light through an amplitude mask, which requires photosensitive fibers and several expensive steps and it
is difficult to monitor the final resonance wavelength in real-time.[18]. Another method to improve the
quality is mechanically produced gratings using laminated plates. This method is cheap and simple but
is not able to achieve short grating periods and may decay over time.[10] Another more flexible method
is thermally-induced fabrication using electric-arc discharge or CO2 laser irradiation. It is more flexible
and can be used in almost all fiber types because it does not need photosensitivity and pretreated pro-
cessing. The disadvantage of this technique is, that expensive equipment is needed.[19][20] The periodic
perturbation causes a coupling of the light between the fundamental core mode (LP01) and the cladding
modes (LPlm). This produces a change in the transmission spectrum of the LPFG in the form of resonant
attenuation bands centered at discrete wavelengths.[21] In Figure 2.9 the periodic perturbation Λ is vi-
sualized as black lines through the fiber. The fiber consists of the core (with nc), the cladding (with ncl),
and a polymer coating (with nco). The path of the light that is traveling through the core fiber changed
the way of traveling when arriving at the perturbation.
Figure 2.9: Fiber cross-section with core (nc), cladding (ncl) and polymer coating (nco). At the fabrication spot of the LPFG,
the coating is removed. A guided mode travels through the core and is capable of escaping into the cladding when colliding
with the grating.[22]
The phase matching condition between the effective propagation constants β01 and βlm of the LP01
and LPlm modes respectively can be stated as [23]
β01 −βcl = 2π
Λ
(2.39)
Page 13 of 65
==PAGE:20==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
The refractive indices (neff) of the modes LP01 and LPlm can be stated as:
neff,c = β01λ
2π and neff,cl = βlmλ
2π
(2.40)
Through the effective indices of LP01 and LPlm modes the resonant wavelengths (λres) can be deter-
mined. With both Equations 2.39 and 2.40, following expression can be obtained:
Λ =
λres
neff
c
−neff
cl
(2.41)
Λ can be constant for a specific LPFG and neff,c depends on the refractive index of the core and
the cladding while neff,cl is dependent on the refractive index of the cladding as well as the SRI of
the cladding. The basic principle of biological detection is that the resonance characteristic is affected
by the effective RI of the cladding region. Therefore the SRI changes represent a shift in resonance
wavelength.[24][4]
2.4
Mechanism of LPFG formation
During the heat-induced fabrication process of LPFGs to induce perturbations in the refractive in-
dex of the fiber cladding, changes can occur in the mechanical and thermal properties as well as the
dimensions of the fibers. The mechanisms underlying these changes will be explained in this chapter.
Residual stress
During the fiber fabrication process, residual elastic stress is developed in optical fibers. Elastic stress
can be divided into thermal stress, draw-induced stress, and UV-induced stress. A higher refractive
index of the core in contrast to the cladding has to be formed by adding dopants. This leads to differ-
ent thermophysical properties of the core and cladding. Furthermore the glass transition temperature,
thermal expansion coefficient, and viscosity will vary across the fiber cross-section due to non-uniform
cooling or heating during the fabrication process leading to a temperature gradient. As a result, draw
and thermal-induced stress are developed in the fiber. Radial variations in the thermal expansion co-
efficient of the fiber due to variations in dopant concentrations lead to thermal stress. Dopands such
as Germania which is used in this work increase the thermal expansion coefficient of silica glass. At
high temperatures, the glass components are in mechanical equilibrium when a fiber is drawn, but while
cooling down it thermally contracts. Regions with higher thermal expansion coefficients experience
more contractions, while regions with lower thermal expansion coefficients experience less contractions.
Therefore pure silica glass regions experience compressive axial stress while doped regions experience
tensile axial stress. The residual stress in the cladding is lower than that in the core due to the larger
cross-sectional area in the cladding to satisfy mechanical equilibrium. In single-mode fiber cores axial
thermal residual stresses are in the order of 20 MPa. The second mechanism that produces residual stress
is draw-induced mechanical stress. The viscosity of the glass varies with dopant concentration. During
Page 14 of 65
==PAGE:21==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
cooling, the cladding solidifies first due to higher viscosity while the core remains relatively soft. Draw
tension borne by the high-viscosity glass so it elastically stretches and the low-viscosity glass flows to
conform to the dimensions of the elastically stretched high-viscosity glass. By cooling down further,
the core solidifies and the draw tension vanishes, leading to opposed elastically contracts of core and
cladding. Therefore the low-viscosity glass is in axial compression while the high-viscosity glass is in
axial tension. Draw-induced residual mechanical stresses are due to the cross-sectional area being larger
in the cladding than in the core.[25][26][27]
Tapering
Applying tensile force to an optical fiber while applying a heat source can lead to reducing the diameter
also called tapering the fiber. The outer cladding diameter and the interior core structure are normally
reduced at the same ratio which is known as the taper ratio. In Figure 2.10 the reduced diameter of the
optical fiber is visible (Reduction from 125 µm to 102 µm in diameter). SSMF tapers can be categorized
as strong and weak. In strong tapers, the signal is guided by the cladding surface due to reduced core
diameter, while in weak tapers guidance of the optical signal in the core is still possible. Tapers must
be adiabatic and made gradually enough so the optical signal does not couple into lossy radiation modes
and it reduces excess loss.[25]
Figure 2.10: Tapering of a fiber with a decrease in diameter from 125 µm to 102 µm [28]
In SSMF an enlargement or reduction of the mode field diameter (MFD) of the guided mode is
possible depending on the diameter reduction from the tapering.[29] The MFD describes the width of
the intensity profile. A larger fraction of light is coupled into the fiber if the incident beam matches
the intensity profile of light propagating down a single-mode fiber. In regions with a strong taper, the
fundamental mode field reacts sensitively to the refractive index outside the fiber. If it is surrounded by
lossy medium for example high refractive index polymer coatings, it will be stripped out of the fiber.[25]
Page 15 of 65
==PAGE:22==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
2.5
Refractive index measurements
One method of utilizing LPFGs for sensing applications involves altering the SRI and examining
the resulting wavelength shift of the resonance dip. In this chapter, the anticipated changes as reported
in the literature will be investigated.
To propose an LPFG sensor, sensitive to the SRI, investigations on how the transmission spectrum will
be affected, have to be carried out. Zhe Zhang et al.[30] described a highly reflective long-period fiber
grating sensor that allowed both transmission and reflection. The grating was about 470 µm with a
grating length of 40 periods (18.8 mm). In Figure 2.11 (left) the transmission spectrum shows a resonant
wavelength of 1547.7 nm with a depth of around 20 dB. Measurements were taken with SRI in the range
of 1.3333 to 1.43939. In Figure 2.11 (right) the changes in the transmission spectrum with increasing
SRI are visualized. With increasing RI the dip moves to a lower wavelength and the intensity in dB
decreases. Reaching the RI of the cladding (1.44539) the dip disappears, but with increasing RI after
that, the resonant dip deepens again. This happens because for higher SRI than the cladding, the resonant
conditions change.[31][32]
Figure 2.11: Transmission and reflective spectrum of an LPFG with a grating of 470 µm and 40 periods (left) and changes in
transmission spectrum with SRI ranging from 1.333 to 1.43939 (right) [30]
In another experiment described by Heather J. Patrick et al. [9] seven LPFGs with periods ranging
from 200 to 350 µm and 2.5 cm of length were produced. They showed a dip between 15-25 dB. With
an increase in the SRI from 1 to 1.44 a blue shift of the center wavelengths is visualized in Figure 2.12
(a). Reaching once again the RI of the cladding (between 1.45 and 1.46) an abrupt change was observed.
The cladding modes are expected to no longer be discrete guided modes, therefore the coupling nearly
disappears for highest order modes and the coupling spectrum spreads. For SRI above 1.46 coupling to
cladding mode structure reappears. With increasing RI the highest-order bands increase in strength. The
shortest wavelength coupling bands remain visible over the whole range of RI measurements.
Page 16 of 65
==PAGE:23==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 2.12: Broad-band transmission spectrum from a LPFG with a grating of 275 µm between (a) RI 1-1.45 and (b) 1.46-
1.72 [9]
In Figure 2.13 the change in center wavelength and attenuation of the most sensitive band of an
LPFG with a grating of 275 µm is shown. Looking at the top graph, the wavelength drops from 1550 nm
to 1450 nm within the range of 1.33 to 1.44, with a rapid jump to 1560 nm above an RI of 1.44. After that
wavelength increases slowly to 1565 at RI 1.72. The transmission loss remains steady for the RI ranging
from 1 to 1.44, with a rapid jump from -25 to around -2 dB. The transmission is slowly decreasing with
an increase of RI from 1.45 to 1.72. This graph gives evidence that the LPFG is particularly sensitive to
RI change in the region 1.4 to 1.45.[9]
Figure 2.13: Top: for LPFG with grating 275 µm the center wavelength of the longest wavelength attenuation band as a
function of SRI (1-1.72). Bottom: Attenuation loss [dB] as a function of SRI (1-1.72) [9]
Page 17 of 65
==PAGE:24==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
2.6
Bending tests
Research concerning the influence of the bending mechanism was examined to distinguish changes
in the resonance dip caused by variations in the SRI from those induced by bending. As mentioned in
previous chapters the resonance wavelengths and the strength of the coupling process can be sensitive to
SRI, temperature, and strain. Bending of the fiber induces large phase shifts and changes in the coupling
strengths since the fiber cladding diameter is much greater than the wavelength of light. Furthermore, the
inherent sensitivity of the mode-coupling to small perturbations in the core and cladding makes the LPFG
highly sensitive to bends.[24] Several studies show the detection of bending-induced wavelength shift
and observe resonance mode splitting fibers with a large core concentricity error when producing LPFGs.
In one experiment a four-point bend system was designed, attaching a fiber with an LPFG to a metal plate
and bending the fiber by pressing the center of the metal plate with a micrometer driver (shown in Figure
2.14). The experiment showed resonance splitting starting at a curvature of 0.4 m−1. Bending the LPFG
further, each peak splits into two peaks and it seems that higher-order modes exhibited a higher bending
sensitivity. Depending on the initial mode coupling strength, the transmission loss of the split modes
increases or decreases. In Figure 2.14 the grating in (b) had a higher single loss peak without bending
(around 10 dB) and its split peak gradually decreased at the long wavelength side, but the other peak at
the short wavelength increased. The second grating (Figure 2.14 (a)) had only a transmission loss at 3
dB, during bending both split peaks grew simultaneously to around 10 dB.[33]
Figure 2.14: Illustration of the bending system (left), spectral evolution of grating (a) and (b) by increasing bending curvature.
[33]
In terms of coupling strength, this can be explained by the coupled mode theory [34]. According to
this, the transmission of the LPFG at the phase matching condition can be expressed by
Tm = 1 −|sin(kmL)|2
(2.42)
with the coupling strength of kmL for the mth cladding mode. The light is completely coupled to the
cladding mode with the coupling strength is π/2 which means 100 % transmission loss, while if the cou-
Page 18 of 65
==PAGE:25==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
pling strength is π, all the light is coupled back to the core and zero transmission loss is indicated.[33] In
a second experiment described by H. Patrick et al. [35], an LPFG on a 25 cm section of fiber was fixed
between two translation stages without a twist (seen in Figure 2.15). By moving one of the translation
stages the fiber gets bent. The effect of bending was measured. The broken line shows a bending of 1/r =
2.3 m−1 and rotation θ = 0° and the dotted line shows bending of 1/r = 2.3 m−1 and rotation θ = 180°. In
Figure 2.15 left the centre wavelength against curvature at θ = 0° (black triangle) and 180° (white dots)
for curvatures from 0 to 4.4 m−1 is shown. This study shows that sensing of curvatures up to 4.4 m−1
can be demonstrated and a curvature change as small as 2 × 10−3m−1 can be detected.
Figure 2.15: Illustration of bending test with two translation stages, the evolution of LPFG attenuation band center wavelength
against curvature (left) and spectrum of LPFG attenuation band for curvature and rotation (right) [35]
Page 19 of 65
==PAGE:26==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Fiber specification
For the fabrication of thermally induced LPFGs, a Standard single mode fiber was used. Important
parameters of the fiber are listed below. Both refractive indices are stated at a wavelength of 1550 nm.
• core radius a = 4.5 µm and cladding radius b = 62.5 µm
• core refractive index nc = 1.4492 and cladding refractive index ncl= 1.4444
3.2
Experimental Setup
The experimental setup for the fabrication of thermally induced LPFGs and the mode imaging
consists of the following parts. For the connection of the fiber to the light source and optical spectrum
analyzer, different tools including a Fusion splicer and a fiber cleaver were used.
• SLED Exalos (EXS210066-01) (1425 - 1675 nm)
• Tenma programmable DC Power Supply
• BK PRECISION Digital Multimeter 2831E
• Computer
• Anritsu Optical Spectrum Analyzer MS9710C
• Standard Single Mode Fiber (SSMF)
• Translation Stage
• Weight 4.8 g
• Wavelength Tunable Laser Diode Source (photonetics)
• XYZ-stage holder
• Lens (focal length: 4.51 mm)
• Computer
• Infrared Camera (InGaAs CCD camera)
• Abbe Refractometer, Polskie Zaklady Optyczne (PZO)- RL3
Page 20 of 65
==PAGE:27==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
The setup for LPFG fabrication is described by P. Akrami et al.[28]. It introduces a heat-induced
fabrication method that is simple, effective, and low-cost. By periodically heating the fiber point-by-
point with an electrical current through a platinum wire enclosing the fiber, the LPFGs are created with
a grating period ranging from a few hundred microns to millimeters.[1] A schematic diagram of the
experimental setup used in this thesis for the fabrication of thermally-induced LPFGs is shown in Figure
3.2. Using an SSMF, the wire will be heated up periodically to 1500 K while in contact with the fiber.
This induces perturbations of the refractive index of the fiber cladding leading later on to the desired
change of the spectrum. Figure 3.1 shows an image of the experimental setup. It shows the translation
stage and the SSMF mounted into the heated omega-shaped wire.
Figure 3.1: Translation stage for the fabrication process of the LPFG writing, the fiber is enclosed within the heated platinum-
iridium wire and kept straight through a hole in the holder adding a 4.8 g weight to the fiber. To avoid twisting of the weight
and fiber during the process, a wooden holder was stuck to the table
A light source (SLED) with a range of 1450-1650 nm, is connected to a SSMF. The fiber is con-
strained through a fiber holder and fixated with tape to ensure contact with an omega-shaped platinum-
iridium (70-30 platinum-iridium) wire. The melting point of this alloy is 1825°C [36]. The omega-
shaped wire, with a diameter of 0.25 mm, is mounted onto a translation stage that is connected to a
computer for controlling the power supply and voltmeter. This alloy was selected due to its high melting
Page 21 of 65
==PAGE:28==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
point and excellent deformability. The deformability of the wire is crucial, as it must be periodically
adjusted and manually shaped into the correct omega-shaped configuration. In the area, where the fiber
touches the wire and gets heated up during the fabrication process, a length of around 5 cm will be
marked, to strip away the polymer coating of the fiber. This ensures a secure fabrication process because
due to the high temperature, the polymer coating can catch fire during the heating process. Below the
translation stage and the heating area, the fiber is straightened by a second fiber holder, which positions
the fiber through a customized hole and applies a weight of 4.8 g, corresponding to a tension of 0.047
N. To create the periodic structures, the fiber is exposed to a selected current for 5 seconds before being
moved to the next position using the translation stage. The distance to the next position depends on the
chosen grating period, which ranges between 300 and 650 µm. At the other end, the SSMF is connected
to an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) to monitor the transmission spectrum during the fabrication of
each grating.
Figure 3.2: Sketch of the setup (created in Inkscape) used to fabricate LPFGs. The SSMF is sliced to the SLED, taped to a
holder before entering the translation stage with the heated wire, and is held straight by the fiber holder through a small hole
and the applied weight. At the other end, the SSMF is sliced to the OSA.
For the fabrication process the Thermal LPG writing, DOFI, and DTU, Version 28/6-2023 applica-
tion is used to execute the process. The graphical user interface and an example of the chosen parameters
that are controlled by the application are shown in Figure 3.3. Before starting the LPFG writing, a refer-
ence measurement of the transmission spectrum of the fiber without any grating has to be measured. In
this example, an LPFG with a period of 610 µm with a number of 20 periods was written. The time for
heating (s), pause before OSA scan (s) and time before measure resistance (s) remains the same for all
Page 22 of 65
==PAGE:29==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
experiments. A maximum dip in dB of 20 was chosen, so the program will stop when reaching this value
even before reaching 20 periods. The power was set to 6.8 W. This value has to be adjusted over time,
due to changes in the average resistance. The average resistance will increase after every writing pro-
cess, due to thermal fatigue of the wire. The wavelength is set from 1450 to 1650 nm with a wavelength
resolution of 0.5 nm. The average resistance is chosen from previous writings and has to be calculated
through Ohms law the first time using a new wire.
Figure 3.3: Graphical user interface for the thermal LPFG writing
The heated wire and the applied temperature are regulated by the magnitude of the applied current.
The electrical power can be specified in the program (as shown in Figure 3.3), and thus the heat rate of
the wire can be expressed as:
Page 23 of 65
==PAGE:30==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Q = P
V
(3.1)
With the electrical power dependent on the current and resistance P = I2R and the volume V. As
mentioned before, it has to be taken into account, that due to periodically heating the wire during the
fabrication process, the resistance of the wire changes over time because deformations and chemical
reactions occured. With Ohm law and Equation 3.1 in combination with monitoring the average voltage
during each grating, this offset can be calculated and the settings are adjusted accordingly. The continu-
ous heating of the wire will eventually cause it to break, necessitating a manual replacement. A detailed
analysis of the temperature distribution of the implemented 3D geometry of the heated wire in COM-
SOL Multiphysics has been carried out by P.Akrami et al [1]. Figure 3.4 shows the simulation of the
temperature distribution of the 3D geometry with a color bar in values of K as well as the temperature
distribution at the fibers axial direction at different times between 0 and 1 second. At the end of each
fiber, a cooling element is attached.[25]
Figure 3.4: COMSOL simulation of the omega-shaped fiber including the heat distribution at the fibers axial direction at
different times [1]
An OFS four-mode step-index fiber instead of SSMF was used. The heat flux of the fiber can be
modeled with a combination of the three main heat transfer mechanisms (conduction, radiation, and
convection):
Q = hc(Tamb −T) + εσB(T 4
amb −T 4) + k(Tamb −T)
(3.2)
To calculate the heat flux Q the convective heat transfer coefficient hc, the ambient temperature Tamb, the
surface emissivity ε, the Stefan-Boltzmann constant σB and the thermal conductivity k are in use.
Each fabrication cycle of an LPFG is accompanied by splicing the SMF to connection modules at both
ends, the light source, and the OSA. The fusion of optical fibers consists of a series of tasks. The first step
is to remove the polymer coating with a stripper followed by cleaving the fiber ends to achieve flat fiber
end faces. This process is mostly combined with cleansing the fiber ends with isopropanol to remove
residuals of the polymer coating. The fiber ends are placed into holders in the splicer to laterally and in
some cases rotationally align the fibers about their axes. The fiber ends are heated up till the softening
point and pressed together. In this work, the slice was taped on a wooden stick to protect the fiber from
Page 24 of 65
==PAGE:31==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
tensile force and rotation. In Figure 3.5 the fusion of the SSMF is visualized. In A aligned fibers with
the corresponding angles are shown. The angles should not exceed 1.00 ° for a sufficient fusion. After
the fibers are aligned the splice occurs and in B the final slipe with a loss of less than 0.01 dB is seen.
[25]
Figure 3.5: Splicing process: In the right image the alignment of the fibers before the splicing is shown in x and y direction
with the angles of the spliced fiber. If the angles are below 1°, the fiber will be spliced together, to the left the connected fiber
is visualized
A reference spectrum of the SLED light source has to be captured by the OSA before starting
the fabrication process of the LPFG. In the range between 1450 and 1650 nm, the signal was captured
by the OSA and is shown in Figure 3.6. All Figures from the resonance spectra were created directly
after the fabrication of the LPFGs with the Thermal LPG writing, DOFI, and DTU, Version 28/6-2023
application or were plotted using Spyder (Python 3.11) for further polynomial interpolation and fitting
of the measured signal.
Figure 3.6: Reference spectrum from the SLED signal in the range between 140 and 1650. This spectrum will be used as a
reference for all fabrication processes of LPFGs.
During each heating process, an individual grating is fabricated. The power settings were adjusted
Page 25 of 65
==PAGE:32==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
accordingly to produce a resonance dip of -20 dB, within a range spanning 20 to 40 gratings. After
the fabrication of each single grating, the spectrum was captured and stored by the OSA. The resulting
transmission spectra exhibited a distinct dip at the resonance wavelength, indicative of transmission
power loss (resonance dip). In Figure 3.7 transmission spectra of fabricated LPFGs in the range of 540-
580 µm are shown. The blue line (-1) in the legend in Figure is 3.7 the reference measurement shown in
Figure 3.6. On the right side, a resonance dip of -22 dB at around 1550 nm compared to the reference
measurement was produced with 25 periods. On the left side, two similar resonance dips of -23 dB at
1500 nm and 1650 nm are produced with 19 periods.
Figure 3.7: Examples of transmission spectra of two fabricated LPFGs. Right: 540 µm grating period, left: 580 µm grating
period. The first line is the reference measurement of the SLED shown as a linear function at zero. After every grating,
another spectrum is recorded, starting with 0.
3.3
Refractive Index Liquids
For refractive index measurements on the LPFG, a refractive Index Liquid Set from Cargille Labo-
ratories is used. Due to the unknown age and handling of the set, the refractive index of the liquids will be
measured with an Abbe refractometer. In Table 3.1 the refractive index from the data sheet (nD) at 589.3
nm and 25° C, the refractive index at 1550 nm and 25 ° C (calculated with the Cauchy Equation[37]:
Cauchy Equation at 25°C:
A + B
λ2 + C
λ4
(3.3)
the coefficients A, B, and C can be found in the data sheets from Cargille Laboratories, Inc. [38]) and
the measured refractive index at 589.3 nm and 21.5 °C are shown. In the last column, the difference
between the value from the data sheet and the measured value is calculated.
Page 26 of 65
==PAGE:33==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
nD
n1550
nmeas
∆
wavelength
589.3 nm
1550 nm
589.3 nm
-
temperature
25
25
21.5
-
Series AA
1.452
1.442
1.448
0.004
Series AA
1.456
1.446
1.472
-0.016
Series A
1.460
1.450
1.455
0.005
Series A
1.464
1.453
1.459
0.005
Series A
1.468
1.457
1.462
0.006
Series B
1.690
1.652
1.688
0.002
Table 3.1: Cargille Laboratories Refractive Index Liquids Set: RI from the data sets [38] at 589.3 nm and 25 °C, RI values at
1550 nm and 25 °C, calculated by the Cauchy Equation [37], and measured values at 589.3 nm at 21.5 °C and difference of
the theoretical value to the measured value at 589.3 nm
The second set of samples were prepared by creating a mixture of water and ethylene glycol (EG).
The refractive index of water (Sample S1) was measured at 1.3325, while ethylene glycol (Sample S5)
was measured at 1.4458, making intermediate values within this range feasible. The refractive index
values are presented in Table 3.2. To conduct measurements at an even higher refractive index, an ad-
ditional sample of glycerol was prepared, exhibiting a refractive index of 1.4715. All refractive index
measurements were performed using an Abbe refractometer at room temperature and a wavelength of
589.3 nm.
Sample
Mixture
Measured value (589.3 nm)
Estimated value (1550 nm)
∆
S1
100 % water
1.3325
1.3151
0.0174
S2
25 % EG + 75 % water
1.3640
1.3421
0.0219
S3
50 % EG + 50 % water
1.3950
1.3692
0.0258
S4
75 % EG + 25 % water
1.4195
1.3962
0.0233
S5
100 % EG
1.4458
1.4232
0.0226
S6
100 % Glycerol
1.4715
1.4604
0.0111
Table 3.2: List of samples: Mixtures of ethylene glycol and water and Glycerol, measured values at 589.3 nm with Abbe
Refractometer, and estimated values at 1550 nm carried out with Spyder (Python 3.11), the difference between the measured
value and the estimated value at different wavelengths
To estimate the refractive indices of MilliQ (MQ) water [39], ethylene glycol [40][41], and glycerol
[42], the dispersion formulas from the RefractiveIndex.Info website were utilized [43][44]. In Figure 3.8,
the original dispersion formulas from the database are plotted in blue for all three liquids. Subsequently,
using the experimental values (red dots) measured with the Abbe refractometer, an estimation of the
dispersion formulas was performed, and estimated values for the refractive indices at 1550 nm were
calculated.
Page 27 of 65
==PAGE:34==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 3.8: Dispersion function (blue) of Ethylene glycol (left), MQ water (in the middle), and Gylcerol (right), including one
experimental value (red dot) and the estimated function (orange), estimation and interpolation was carried out with Spyder
(Python 3.11)
To estimate the refractive indices of the mixtures of water and ethylene glycol in the first step the
mole fraction formula [45] was used:
x =
Mol%EG
Mol%EG + Mol%water
(3.4)
to calculate in the next step the refractive index of mixtures [46]:
nmixture = nwater × (1 −x) + nEG × x
(3.5)
All the measured and estimated values of the six samples are combined in Table 3.2.
3.4
Bending
Bending tests on the fabricated LPFG using the experimental set-up [1] were carried out in this
project. For tests regarding the bending of the LPFG different tools and diameters were used. The first
measurements were taken with diameters in mm: 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, and 100. Due to the brittle properties
of the LPFG after fabrication without the polymer coating, only measurements with 100 and 60 mm were
taken out. With smaller diameters, the fiber broke. The next measurements were taken with diameters in
cm: 15, 23, 24, 27 and 30 cm.
3.5
Fiber Holders
First experiments were carried out immersing the fiber into a small container approximately 4 cm
in height to change the SRI. The container was filled with tap water (n = 1.3154 at 1550 nm) and
isopropanol (n = 1.3738 at 1550 nm), and the fiber was submerged in the liquid [43]. These preliminary
measurements revealed significant bending of the fiber due to immersion, which resulted in distortion of
the measurements. To differentiate between spectral changes caused by fiber bending and those due to
variations in the SRI, specialized holders were designed and implemented to minimize fiber bending as
much as possible.[44] The first holder was constructed using wooden sticks with elevated ends to secure
Page 28 of 65
==PAGE:35==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
the fiber. This design ensures that the fiber is taped onto the holder while allowing the grating to remain
untouched and fully surrounded by the liquid. A sketch of the fiber holder and the placement of the fiber
was created in SolidWorks and is shown in Figure 3.9
Figure 3.9: Sketch from the wooden stick as a fiber holder including the fiber in its right position. The fiber will be taped on
both ends to avoid bending
The second holder was designed using microscope plates with thin glass plates glued on top to
create a narrow cavity. This cavity accommodates the section of the fiber containing the grating. The
design leverages the capillary forces [47] to ensure that the liquids used to alter the SRI are encapsulated
within the cavity, thereby surrounding the fiber with the liquid. In Figure 3.10, the tape applied to both
ends is colored in green. This setup is intended to slightly elevate the fiber, thereby ensuring it is fully
surrounded by the liquid. In the right image, a sectional view through the middle of the fiber is depicted,
illustrating the holder and the fiber in the cavity, slightly elevated by the tape.
Figure 3.10: Sketch of the fiber holder made out of microscope plates (BK-7 glass): small glass plates are glued onto it to
create a small cavity in between (left). The right image shows a sectional view through the middle of the fiber, illustrating the
cavity and position of the fiber
To enhance the sensitivity of the grating, some LPFGs were coated. A similar glass holder was
designed, with the fiber taped onto another microscope plate (see sketch in Figure 3.11). The tape was
again utilized to slightly elevate the fiber, ensuring complete coating coverage. In the accompanying
figure, the holder is shown with the tape colored yellow, and the coating is shown in the middle of the
plate surrounding the fiber.
Page 29 of 65
==PAGE:36==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 3.11: Sketch of a glass holder with different coating attached on the fiber and glass holder in the middle of the holder.
Tapes in yellow are on both sides to elevate the fiber to enclose it completely by the coating
3.6
Phase matching curve modeling
A simulation of the phase matching curves was performed using the equations outlined in Chap-
ter 2.2. The process began by evaluating the left and right-hand side functions, which rely on Bessel
functions, to calculate the propagation constants. From these constants, the effective refractive index
and the grating characteristics were determined for wavelengths ranging from 1450 to 1650 nm. A
semi-analytical approach was employed for these calculations, which allowed solutions exclusively for
guided modes. Simplifications were made by independently calculating the areas between the core and
the cladding and between the cladding and the surrounding medium. This approach neglects the core of
the second model, leading to slight inaccuracies in the solutions.
• Core- cladding: A core radius of a = 4.5 µm, a refractive index of the core nc = 1.4492 and a
refractive index of the cladding ncl = 1.4444 was used.
• Cladding-surrounding medium: A cladding radius of b = 62.5 µm a refractive index of the
cladding ncl = 1.4444 and a refractive index of the surrounding ns = 1 of air was used.
The next step involved adjusting the SRI to the estimated values for samples 1-5 from Table 3.2 at 1550
nm. Due to the constraint that only guided modes can be calculated, sample 6 was excluded from this
simulation because its refractive index is higher than that of the cladding. In Figure 3.12 different LP
modes (LP02-LP06 and LP12-LP16) in air are visualized with the grating period in µm and the wavelength
in nm.
Page 30 of 65
==PAGE:37==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 3.12: Simulation of the PMC in the range of 1450-1650 nm for ranging from LP02 to LP06 and from LP12 to LP16
3.7
Coating
By coating LPFGs it significantly enhances their effectiveness and sensitivity in various sensing
applications, particularly for measuring refractive index changes. The primary benefit of coating LPFGs
lies in the modification and enhancement of the evanescent field.[21] Equipping an LPFG with a chem-
ically responsive coating, the detection of biological targets can be achieved. Additionally, coatings
provide a protective layer for the fiber, enhancing its durability and stability.[4][46] Coatings can also
make LPFGs more sensitive to particular refractive indices. By selecting appropriate coating materials,
the sensor’s response can be optimized for detecting changes within a specific refractive index range,
making it more effective for targeted sensing applications.[48] Two coating solutions were produced by
Senior Researcher Lars René Lindvold. The first coating was a gelatine hydrogel (RI ≈1.5 at 589.3 nm)
[49], mixed with silver nitrate (AGNO3 to trigger a chemical reaction and Formaldehyde as a crosslinker:
A 4 % w/v gelatine film was produced by dissolving 2 g of gelatine (Sigma Aldrich G−2500 gelatine,
gel strength 300, type A) in 50 ml MQ water in a glass beaker on a magnetic stirrer on a hot plate. The
gelatine swelled for 5 minutes before the temperature was raised to 50 °C. To crosslink the gelatine it
was dissolved in water with 50 µl of formaldehyde solution (Sigma Aldrich F8775, 36,5 −38 %) for 30
Page 31 of 65
==PAGE:38==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
min. This prevented the gelatine from dissolving in water and only swell. 30 µl of the gelatine solution
was added to the LPFG (taped on the glass holder) with a pipette and was cooled down overnight to
evaporate the water. To sensitize it with silver ions, 10 ml of AgNO3 solution (Volumetric, Reag. Ph.
Eur., 0.1 M AgNO3 (0.1N), Honeywell FlukaTM, Volumetric, Reag. Ph. Eur.) was added to the gelatine
solution. In all the procedures, the magnetic stirring rod was kept at 400 RPM before cooling down. The
second coating consisted of Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with a RI = 1.4839 at 589.3 nm [44]: A 4 % w/v
of PVA (Sigma Aldrich product 363162, Molecular weight 146.000 to 186.000, 98 to 99 % hydrolyzed)
was dissolved in MQ water. The PVA is conditioned in cold MQ water in a beaker on a magnetic stirrer
and hotplate for 5 minutes before the temperature is raised to 90 °C. The swollen PVA granules dissolved
within one hour. The solution can then be cooled down to room temperature, while the PVA solution
remains fluid. 30 µl of the solution was added to the LPFG and dried overnight, yielding a clear PVA
film on the LPFG. The particular PVA used for coating the fiber is unique because it allows water and
ions to penetrate the film without dissolving the film. To observe a change in refractive index due to a
chemical reaction a potassium iodide solution (10 % in MQ water) with a measured RI = 1.3470 was
prepared. 1 g of KI (Sigma Aldrich, product number: P-8256, 99% pure) was dissolved in 10 ml MQ
water.
Page 32 of 65
==PAGE:39==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Fabrication of LPFG
In the first step LPFGs were produced using the setup from Figure 3.1 and 3.2 with a period grating
Λ in the range of 300 to 650 µm. The aim was to achieve a resonance dip at a wavelength of 1550 nm
with a transmission power loss of around -20 dB. A wavelength of 1550 nm is widely used for optical
fibers due to low attenuation, it is less prone to dispersion and LPFGs can effectively interact with
various environmental factors, such as refractive index changes [50]. Figure 4.1 shows the first results
of resonance dips taken by the OSA with a grating period of 650 µm and 40 periods. Before starting the
thermally-induced grating on the fiber, a reference measurement of the SLED signal is measured and is
visualized as a straight line at zero. The legend marks the reference measurement as -1 (blue line). After
that, a measurement is carried out after every single grating. Figure 4.1 (left) shows a small dip at 1475
nm (0.2 dB power loss), a dip at 1530 nm (1.1 dB power loss) and a high dip at 1640 nm (2.6 dB power
loss) with a power of 6.2 W, (right) show a small dip at 1525 nm (2.5 dB power loss) and a high dip at
1625 nm (15 dB power loss) with a heater power of the wire of 6.3 W. To increase the transmission power
loss to around -20 dB the heater power has to be increased and the grating period decreased to move the
dip to a lower wavelength (around 1550 nm). This should be achieved with a number of periods between
20 and 40. As soon as the -20 dB power loss is reached, the fabrication of LPFG stops. This is intended
to ensure that at values below -20 dB, the resonance dip signal starts to weaken again.
Figure 4.1: First fabrication of LPFG with a grating period of 650 µm, left: the power of 6.2 W with the highest dip at a
power loss of -2.9 dB, right: the power of 6.3 W with the highest dip at a power loss at -17 dB
Problems
During the fabrication process and optimization of the parameters, some problems occurred. Parameters
that had to be considered are the signal strength of the resonance dip, a linear reference line at zero,
a uniform build-up of the resonance dip, and the correct depth and position of the resonance dip in a
Page 33 of 65
==PAGE:40==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
reproducible way. The transmission loss at other wavelengths should not exceed -5 dB. Nevertheless,
the area between the dips, should not exceed -5 dB (see examples 3.7). Figure 4.2 shows examples of
transmission spectra with undesirable signals with a grating of 650 µm and a heater power of 6.2 W. In
a well-defined setting, the transmission power loss (y-axis) should be similar in all three measurements.
The first measurement (left) shows a power loss of -20 dB with 29 periods. While the reference line (-1,
blue) was constant at zero, the signal of the first grating period started already at -15 dB. At a wavelength
of 1625 nm, one dip below -20 dB was formed, but the loss at all other wavelengths was too high to form
a desirable dip. The transmission loss of the second LPFG (in the middle) shows a low signal (-3.5 dB
with 40 periods) with a similar loss at all other wavelengths. The third LPFG (right) shows a small dip
at 1625 nm, but the maximum power loss is at -1.2 dB. this leads to the conclusion, that the setup is not
stable. Next to the parameters already mentioned, the position of the fiber at the translation stage has to be
investigated as well. The uneven distribution of transmission loss between the individual measurements
could indicate that the fiber has more contact with the heated wire at the beginning and reduced contact
at the end. In all three measurements, the signal after the first measurement (orange line) experiences a
higher loss than the following signals.
Figure 4.2: LPFG produced while trying to achieve the right parameters leads to some problems of the spectrum. All three
spectra used a power of 6.2 W, grating period: 650 µm
While producing the LPFGs, in some measurements, the reference line showed deviant behavior.
Figure 4.3 demonstrates two LPFGs with a period grating of 650 µm and a heater power of 6.3 W.
In these examples, the reference measurement did not have a linear behavior (-1, blue). The spectra
are building up an artificial dip at 1450 nm, following the behavior from the reference signal. Upon
thorough observation, it was noted that problems emerged when fabricating LPFGs immediately after
turning on the SLED without allowing any stabilization period. This observation suggests the necessity
for a stabilization period for the SLED, estimated to be approximately five minutes, before starting
measurements. Ensuring this waiting period effectively prevented the occurrence of any artificial dips
in the data. This indicates that the initial instability of the SLED likely contributes to measurement
inaccuracies, which can be mitigated by allowing the SLED to stabilize fully before use. Figure 4.4
highlights another issue encountered during the fabrication process.
Page 34 of 65
==PAGE:41==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.3: Transmission spectra from two LPFG with a grating period of 650 µm and a power of 6.3 W. Both show an
irregular behavior for the blue reference line (-1)
The reference line exhibits normal behavior, maintaining a linear function at zero. However, a
significant transmission power loss is observed immediately after the first period written on the fiber.
The first spectrum (left) reveals no dip after 20 periods. In the left LPFG, no dip is visible after 20
periods, referable to the high loss. Contrarily, in the right LPFG, a transmission dip forms at 1625 nm
with a loss of -11 dB, although the transmission loss remains high across other wavelengths. These
findings suggest that the fiber has substantial contact with the heating wire during the initial gratings,
which diminishes over time. This could be traced back to a clogged hole, which serves as a holder for
the fiber (see the setup in Figure 3.1 and 3.2). The hole was obstructed by tape and coating residues.
Resolving this blockage was crucial for the improvement of the fabrication process and for reducing
transmission losses at undesirable wavelengths. The issue was traced to a clogged hole, which serves
as a holder for the fiber, obstructed by tape and coating residues. Resolving this blockage is crucial
for improving the fabrication process and reducing transmission losses. Another observation was that
during some fabrication processes, the weight straightening of the fiber rotated around the fiber axis,
resulting in undesirable outcomes as pictured in 4.4. Therefore a wooden holder was mounted on the
table (see Figure 3.1 to stabilize the weight during the heating process. Furthermore, care was taken
not to introduce any twists into the fiber beforehand, as twisting could further add to contact issues and
transmission inconsistencies. After the fabrication process, the part of the fiber with the LPFG written
on it was discolored black. After analysis under the microscope, no reason for the discoloration could
be found. The initial assumption was that despite cleaning the fiber with isopropanol, residues of the
coating remained on its surface. These residues were then likely to burn onto the fiber during the process.
These could lead to further reasons, distorting the spectra. For this reason, a further cleaning step was
introduced. Before mounting the fiber on the translation stage, the fiber was cleaned in an ultrasonic bath
with isopropanol, ensuring that no coating residuals remained on the fiber. However, the discoloration
persisted, suggesting the presence of carbon or platinum residues from the wire.
Page 35 of 65
==PAGE:42==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.4: Transmission spectra from two LPFG with a grating period of 650 µm and a power of 6.3 W. Both show a high
transmission power loss starting from period 1
After solving the above-mentioned problems, LPFGs between 650 and 330 µm could be fabricated.
Figure 4.5 illustrated two transmission spectra of LPFGs with a grating period of 610 µm and a heater
power of 6.25 W. Both show a small dip at 1460 nm with a transmission loss around - 5dB and a deep
well-defined dip at the preferred wavelength of 1550 nm. In the right transmission spectra, the dip is
around -24 dB with an overall transmission loss of around -2 dB. In the right spectra, the dip is around
-27 dB with an overall transmission loss of 0 dB.
Figure 4.5: Two LPFGs with a grating period of 610 µm and a power of 6.25 W. Both showing a deep well-defined dip at
1550 nm with almost no transmission loss at other wavelengths
Given the extensive number of LPFG fabrications and the corresponding increase in heating cycles,
the wire inevitably experiences fatigue. This is evidenced by the gradual rise in average resistance from
0.178 Ωto 0.227 Ω, necessitating continual adjustments to the heating power to achieve consistent re-
sults. After several months, the wire eventually broke, requiring the installation of a new wire in the
translation stage. This replacement process involved realigning the fiber position and recalibrating the
initial resistance. The initial resistance can be determined using Ohm’s Law. To verify the perturbation
Page 36 of 65
==PAGE:43==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
on the fiber cladding, microscope images were taken from the fabricated LPFG. In Figure 4.6 (left), the
fiber exhibits visible tapering caused by the heating process during fabrication, resulting in a reduced
cladding diameter. The right image shows the fiber surrounded by a gelatin coating, revealing a three-
dimensional tapering with a distinct notch in the fiber’s diameter. This notch is more pronounced and
extends across the entire fiber cross-section on the right side, while on the left side, another notch is
visible in the upper part of the cladding, indicating it does not extend across the entire cross-section.
These observations may explain the challenges encountered during the fabrication of LPFGs. In some
instances, even when using identical parameters, different spectral outcomes were observed, particularly
in the transmission power dimensions, as discussed in Figure 4.1). One possible reason for the variability
in results is the alignment of the fiber, which may result in better contact with the heating wire at certain
positions. The translation stage can be adjusted in both the x and y axes at the fiber holders situated
above and below the heating area (see Figure 3.2).
Figure 4.6: Microscope images of two LPFGs. The left image displays an LPFG with a grating period of 610 µm, highlighting
tapering caused by the heating process. The right image shows an LPFG with a grating period of 540 µm, coated in gelatin
hydrogel for chemical sensing. This image reveals two three-dimensional taperings, indicating an inconsistent fabrication
process
4.2
Bending tests
Multiple spectrum measurements using different holders suggest that bending the fiber, particularly
in the area where the polymer coating was removed and the LPFG was inscribed, results in significant
spectral distortion. Consequently, a literature review was conducted (see Chapter 2.6), followed by
experiments to investigate the effects of bending. Figure 4.8 presents the original spectrum of an LPFG
with a grating period of 600 µm with a resonance dip at 1530 nm. Three spectrum measurements were
carried out, bending the fiber in different ways. The first measurement is a random bending that occurred
while taping the fiber on the wooden holder (seen in Figure 4.7).
Page 37 of 65
==PAGE:44==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.7: Image of the wooden fiber holder: the fiber is taped at both ends. The fiber is bent in between the tapes and in the
red window the black discoloration can be seen.
Subsequently, the LPFG was bent to diameters ranging from 10 to 100 mm. Due to the brittle
nature of the inscribed LPFGs, measurements were only successfully conducted at 100 mm and 60 mm
diameters. All fibers broke during measurements at 60 mm or 40 mm diameters. The transmission
spectra confirm the findings from previous research by Liu et al.[33] and Patrick et al. [35]. Deep dips
in the transmission spectra were observed to weaken and split into two separate dips on either side of the
original dip.
Figure 4.8: Measurement of bending effects on the LPFGs with a 100 mm and 60 mm radius and a random bending.
A second experiment was conducted using an LPFG with a grating period of 610 µm and a primary
resonance dip at 1555 nm with a depth of approximately -24 dB. Additionally, a weaker dip was observed
at 1465 nm with a depth of -7 dB. In this experiment, the fiber was bent to diameters ranging from 15
cm to 30 cm. The results of the six spectra are presented in Figure 4.9. The bending effects exhibited
Page 38 of 65
==PAGE:45==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
similar patterns to those observed in the millimeter range, where both dips split into two smaller dips on
either side of the original. However, in this range, the dips are deeper, indicating that while the bending
effects are not as pronounced, they remain significant enough to avoid bending in this diameter range.
Figure 4.9: Measurement of bending effects on the LPFGs with radii of 15, 23, 24, 27, and 30 cm.
Summarizing these experiments and investigations from other experiments reveals, that even slight,
imperceptible bends can significantly alter the depth and position of the resonance dip. These uncer-
tainties must be factored into all subsequent measurements. In the following chapters, various liquids
and fiber holders were tested to observe changes in the resonance dip’s depth and position as the SRI
was varied. Throughout these experiments, the findings from this chapter were carefully considered,
emphasizing the importance of avoiding fiber bending and exploring new solutions to minimize bending
while working with LPFGs.
4.3
Mode Imaging
To enhance understanding of the measurements and subsequent simulations of the phase matching
curves, the modes within the fiber were analyzed for three LPFGs with different grating periods. The
experimental setup is illustrated in Figure 4.10. Initially, the fiber must be precisely cleaved at the starting
point of the grating. On the other side, the fiber is connected to a laser and then leads to the XYZ stage
in the image and is fixed with a magnet. The cleaved end of the fiber is aligned to point directly at a lens.
Positioned behind the lens, an infrared camera captures the signal emitted from the fiber. The laser can
be tuned to the specific wavelength where the resonance dip is located.
Page 39 of 65
==PAGE:46==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.10: Experimental setup used for mode imaging experiments [51]
Figure 4.11 provides a more detailed view of the LPFG’s placement between the stage and the lens.
On the left side of the image, the stage with a magnet securing the fiber is placed, with the fiber directed
towards the lens on the right. The LPFG must hang free in the air, without touching the stage, to prevent
signal distortion.
Figure 4.11: Image of LPFG placed on the XYZ stage [51]
Figure 4.12 shows an illustration of the transverse field distribution for a few of the lower-order
guided LPl,m modes. The red and blue colors show the intensity distribution. This serves as a comparison
for the imaged modes of the LPFGs which will follow in this Chapter.
Page 40 of 65
==PAGE:47==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.12: Overview of images of possible modes imaged with the infrared camera [51]
Three LPFGs with a grating period between 540 - 600 µm were imaged. Figure 4.13 shows the
transmission loss of an LPFG with a grating period of 600 µm (right). The resonance dip is at 1540 nm
with a depth of -23 dB. With a number of 29 periods, the length of the LPFG is 17.4 mm. On the left,
the mode is imaged at 1540 nm. Comparing the mode image with the different modes from Figure 4.12,
it could be either LP0,4, LP1,3 or LP1,4.
Figure 4.13: Left: Transmission loss spectrum of LPFG 600 µm, right: mode image from the IR-camera showing either
LP0,4, LP1,3 or LP1,4
Figure 4.14 shows the transmission loss of an LPFG with a grating period of 580 µm (right). The
resonance dip is at 1500 nm with a depth of -23 dB. A second resonance dip at 1650 nm with a depth
Page 41 of 65
==PAGE:48==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
of -21 dB can be seen as well. With a number of 19 periods, the length of the LPFG is 11 mm. On the
left, the mode is imaged at 1500 nm. Comparing the mode image with the different modes from Figure
4.12, the mode imaged here is probably LP0,4. This leads to the conclusion, that in Figure 4.13 the mode
is probably as well LP0,4, because the dip visualized at 580 µm in Figure 4.14 is the same as visualized
in Figure 4.13. When decreasing the grating period, the dip is moving to lower wavelengths, therefore it
can be the same dip first at 1540 nm (Λ = 600) and then moving to 1500 nm (Λ = 600).
Figure 4.14: Left: Transmission loss spectrum of LPFG 580 µm, right: mode image from the IR-camera showing probably
LP0,4.
Figure 4.15 shows the transmission loss of an LPFG with a grating period of 540 µm (right). The
resonance dip is at 1560 nm with a depth of -24 dB. With a number of 14 periods, the length of the LPFG
is 7.6 mm. On the left, the mode is imaged at 1540 nm. Comparing the mode image with the different
modes from Figure 4.12, it could be either LP0,4, LP1,3 or LP1,4.
Figure 4.15: Left: Transmission loss spectrum of LPFG 540 µm, right: mode image from the IR-camera showing either
LP0,4, LP1,3 or LP1,4
Page 42 of 65
==PAGE:49==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
4.4
Phase matching curve
The phase matching curves were simulated and plotted with Spyder (Python 3.11) to understand
and compare the results from the mode imaging and the Fabrication of the LPFG spectra. The calcula-
tions began with the numerical aperture (Equation 2.26), solving the right-hand side (RHS) and left-hand
side (LHS) using the first and second orders of Bessel functions. Examples of these intersections are il-
lustrated in Figure 2.7, which were used to determine βlm (Equation 2.37). These simulations were
conducted within the wavelength range of 1450 - 1650 nm for both the core and cladding, utilizing a
dataset of 20 points. A SSMF only supports one mode in the core, resulting in a single solution at l = 0
and m = 0. Figure 4.16 (left) displays the intersection of the core mode (LP0,1) at a wavelength of 1450
nm with a V parameter of 1.298. No other modes are accepted in the core, as indicated by the absence
of additional intersections in the middle image. This demonstrates the fundamental mode’s exclusivity
within the core under these conditions. The cladding, due to its larger radius, supports a multitude of
modes. Consequently, the simulations for the cladding modes were limited to l = 6 and m = 6. In the
right image, an example is shown for l = 0, m = 1 in the cladding at a wavelength of 1450 nm with
a V parameter of 282.27. This illustrates that the cladding can accommodate numerous intersections
(modes). From βlm for both the core and the cladding, the effective refractive indices neff and grating
period for each mode at a certain wavelength can be simulated using Equation 2.40 and 2.41
Figure 4.16: Left (orange) and right (blue) hand sides from Equation 2.36 to find intersections (modes) for the core for LP0,1
(left) and LP1,1 (middle) with a V parameter of 2.298 and the cladding for LP0,1 (right) with a V parameter of 282.27 at the
wavelength 1450 nm
In Figure 3.12 the phase matching curves for different cladding modes (LP02-LP06 and LP12-LP16)
in air, with the SRI are visualized. This overview allows for the selection of a grating period Λ to achieve
mode coupling at the desired wavelength of 1550 nm. Starting with a grating period of 650 µm, Λ was
gradually decreased to identify coupled modes with a deep resonance dip, advantageous for later sensing
applications. Resonance dips around 1550 nm were located at grating periods of 610, 540, 460, and 395
µm. The next step involved changing the SRI to the estimated values at 1550 nm from Table 3.2. Figures
4.17 to 4.20 illustrate how changes in the SRI affect the phase-matching curves. In Figure 4.17 (left) the
PMCs for LP02 are displayed at a wavelength of 1550 nm (0.0 at the x-axis). The right image shows that
at 1550 nm with an SRI of 1 (air), the grating period should be 687.36 µm. The wavelength change for
Page 43 of 65
==PAGE:50==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
LP02 is minimal, with a shift of 0.05 nm at RI = 1.3151 and 0.22 nm at RI = 1.4232 compared to air.
Figure 4.17: PMCs for LP02 (left) with different SRI (see Table 3.2 estimated values for 1550 nm) at 1550 nm (0.0 at the
x-axis), right image: grating period is 687.36 µm at 1550 nm and RI = 1, with the change in wavelength corresponding to the
change in SRI
In Figure 4.18 (left) the PMCs for LP04 are displayed at a wavelength of 1550 nm (0.0 at the x-axis).
The right image shows that at 1550 nm with an SRI of 1 (air), the grating period should be 590.5 µm.
The wavelength changes 0.75 nm at RI = 1.3151 and 1.75 nm at RI = 1.3962 compared to air. Compared
to LP02 at RI = 1.3962 the difference changed from 0.12 to 1.75 nm. The higher the modes, the less
likely it gets, that the modes are guided for higher SRI. Therefore, only PMC until RI = 1.3962 can be
plotted and the difference in wavelength visualized.
Figure 4.18: PMCs for LP04 (left) with different SRI (see Table 3.2 estimated values for 1550 nm) at 1550 nm (0.0 at the
x-axis), right image: grating period is 590.5 µm at 1550 nm and RI = 1, with the change in wavelength corresponding to the
change in SRI
In Figure 4.19 (left) the PMCs for LP05 are displayed at a wavelength of 1550 nm (0.0 at the x-axis).
The right image shows that at 1550 nm with an SRI of 1 (air), the grating period should be 522.18 µm.
The wavelength changes 1.5 nm at RI = 1.3151 and 1.8 nm at RI = 1.3421 compared to air. Compared to
LP02 at RI = 1.3421 the difference changed from 0.06 to 1.5 nm. For this mode, only three PMCs until
RI = 1.3421 are guided.
Page 44 of 65
==PAGE:51==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.19: PMCs for LP05 (left) with different SRI (see Table 3.2 estimated values for 1550 nm) at 1550 nm (0.0 at the
x-axis), right image: grating period is 522.18 µm at 1550 nm and RI = 1, with the change in wavelength corresponding to the
change in SRI
In Figure 4.20 (left) the PMCs for LP14 are displayed at a wavelength of 1550 nm (0.0 at the x-axis).
The right image shows that at 1550 nm with an SRI of 1 (air), the grating period should be 557.94 µm.
The wavelength changes 1 nm at RI = 1.3151 and 1.75 nm at RI = 1.3692 compared to air. Compared
to LP02 at RI = 1.3692 the difference changed from 0.08 to 1.75 nm. This means, that for sensing
differences in SRI as a change in wavelength, a larger difference in wavelength is desirable. For this
mode, only three PMCs until RI = 1.3692 are guided.
Figure 4.20: PMCs for LP14 (left) with different SRI (see Table 3.2 estimated values for 1550 nm) at 1550 nm (0.0 at the
x-axis), right image: grating period is 557.94 µm at 1550 nm and RI = 1, with the change in wavelength corresponding to the
change in SRI
The simulations employ a semi-analytical approach to solve the wave equation. When simulating
the PMCs with different SRIs, it was observed that the closer ns approaches the cladding refractive index,
the more the curves disappear. This issue stems from a significant limitation of the semi-analytical
solution: while numerical solutions can simulate all modes, the semi-analytical approach is restricted
to simulating only guided modes. Additionally, some simplifications were made in the semi-analytical
Page 45 of 65
==PAGE:52==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
simulation. For the cladding modes, only the parameters for the cladding were used, excluding the core.
Given its relatively small size compared to the cladding and its surroundings, it is assumed that the core
can be neglected, especially considering that the translation stage also has a certain degree of inaccuracy.
Figure 4.21 presents an example of the PMC for different SRI using the LP04, mode, simulated with
a numerical solution to obtain results for all six values (simulated by Research Specialist Lars Grüner-
Nielsen). This mode was selected because, based on the mode imaging discussed in Chapter 4.3, LP04
mode is the most likely coupled mode in the fabricated LPFGs.
Figure 4.21: PMCs for LP04 (left) with different SRI (see Table 3.2 estimated values for 1550 nm), right image: grating
period is 576 µm at 1550 nm and RI = 1.3, with the change in wavelength corresponding to the change in SRI [52]
When comparing the two solutions for the LP04 mode shown in Figure 4.18 the grating period at
an SRI of 1 at 1550 nm is 590.5 µm, with a wavelength shift of 1.25 nm as the SRI increases to 1.3962.
In contrast, Figure 4.21 indicates a grating period of 575 µm at an SRI of 1 at 1550 nm, with a shift
of around 1 nm at an SRI of 1.3962. This indicates a difference of approximately 15 µm in the grating
period between the two solutions. Considering the simplifications made and the inherent uncertainty
of the translation stage, this difference can be considered minor. However, it seems that the numerical
approach predicts a larger wavelength shift for increasing SRI compared to the semi-analytical approach.
This suggests that larger wavelength shifts should be anticipated in the experiments. With these results,
the mode images from Chapter 4.3 can now be compared with the simulations. The spectral behavior
of the LPFGs with 600 µm and 580 µm grating periods suggests that both are coupling to the same
mode. The mode image for the LPFG with a 580 µm grating period clearly resembles an LP04 mode,
while the mode image for the LPFG with a 600 µm grating period is less distinct and could potentially
be an LP14 mode (see Figures 4.13 and 4.14). By comparing these images with the simulation results,
which indicate grating periods in the range of 575 to 590 µm, the evidence supports that the LP04 mode
is likely coupled. For the LPFG with a 540 µm grating period, the mode image also suggests either an
LP04 or LP14 mode. Considering that the grating period at SRI = 1 at 1550 nm is approximately 558 µm
according to Figure 4.20, and slightly lower at around 530 µm in the numerical approach, it is likely that
the LP14 mode is coupled in this instance.
Page 46 of 65
==PAGE:53==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
4.5
Refractive Index
The next goal of the project was to measure changes in the SRI in a reproducible manner. Changes
in refractive index can be triggered by variations in salinity, pH levels, or chemical reactions. Before
exploring different coatings to enhance the fiber’s sensitivity and effectiveness for these properties, it
is essential to test the LPFGs for changes in the refractive index itself. This ensures that any effects
observed are due to the coatings and not inherent changes in the refractive index of the fiber. Initial
experiments involved submerging the fiber into different liquids (tap water and isopropanol), as detailed
in Chapter 3.5. It is important to note that the refractive index values of these two liquids were the-
oretical and not experimentally measured. Additionally, the necessary bending of the fiber resulted in
severe distortions in the measurements, making the results non-reproducible. The resonance dip nearly
vanished due to the bending and rotation of the LPFG. Consequently, further literature reviews and ex-
periments focusing on the effects of bending were conducted (see Chapters 2.6 and 4.2). During the
fabrication process, the polymer coating was removed from the fiber over a length of around 5 cm to
prevent it from catching fire. This area was marked with black color to ensure the correct positioning
of the fiber in the translation stage. The black marks are visible in Figure 4.7, positioned to the left
and right of the LPFG. During the experiments, it became evident that the unprotected, uncoated area is
more susceptible to bending and must be kept straight to prevent bending-related effects. The next step
involved conducting literature research to better understand the expected spectral changes when varying
the refractive index. Chapter 2.5 clarified that the behavior differs depending on whether the SRI is lower
or higher than the cladding RI. When increasing the SRI below 1.444, the resonance dip is expected to
shift left towards lower wavelengths and decrease in depth until it vanishes. As the SRI continues to
increase past the cladding RI, the resonance dip should reappear, grow in depth, and shift right towards
higher wavelengths. Therefore, to demonstrate the sensing properties of the LPFG, it is essential to use
samples with an RI both below and above the cladding RI. Considering the bending effects and ensuring
the complete immersion of the LPFG in the liquids, various solutions for fiber holders were developed.
These holders are designed to keep the unprotected, uncoated part of the fiber straight and prevent rota-
tion while ensuring that the section with the grating period remains free from contact with any material
to avoid unwanted spectral alterations. Additionally, the LPFG must be entirely submerged in the solu-
tions, as any exposed sections to air or other materials could affect the experimental results. The final
step was to identify suitable coating materials to enhance sensitivity to refractive index changes. The
LPFGs were coated on a glass holder (see Figure 3.11) using silver nitrate in gelatin hydrogel (RI ≈
1.5) and a PVA (RI = 1.4839) coating. Given the high refractive indices of these materials, significant
spectral changes are anticipated. After the coatings dried, MQ water and a KI solution (RI = 1.3470)
were applied. Initially, a change in refractive index is expected due to the water (RI = 1.3325), followed
by a chemical reaction between the silver nitrate and the KI solution. After the chemical reaction, an RI
= 2.20 is expected [53].
Page 47 of 65
==PAGE:54==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Cargille- Refractive Index Liquids
Initial measurements were conducted using the Cargille refractive index liquids listed in Table 3.1. Due
to the unknown age and storage conditions of these liquids, a reference measurement was performed. It
is important to note the temperature difference; the datasheets reference a temperature of 25°C, while
our laboratory temperature was 21.5°C. The third sample, with an RI of 1.456 at 589.3 nm, was ex-
cluded from further experiments due to a significant discrepancy between the measured and expected
values (-0.016). The difference for the remaining liquids ranged from 0.002 to 0.006. Although it was
not possible to measure the refractive index at the desired 1550 nm directly, values from the datasheets,
calculated using Equation 3.3, were employed, ranging from 1.442 to 1.652. Given the temperature dif-
ference and the values measured at 589.3 nm, it can be assumed that the actual refractive index values
are slightly lower than those reported in the datasheets. Comparing them to the cladding refractive index,
only the first liquid has an RI below the cladding RI, with the remaining liquids estimated to be either di-
rectly at or slightly above the cladding RI. For all measurements, the LPFG was taped to a wooden stick
(as shown in Figure 4.7) to keep it as straight as possible. The liquids were then dripped onto the fiber
to measure the spectrum. After each liquid was measured, the fiber and wooden holder were thoroughly
cleaned with isopropanol to remove any residues from the previous liquids. The results are displayed in
Figure 4.22. The measurements suggest that the first two liquids (blue and green) have refractive indices
below the cladding RI, as indicated by the resonance dip becoming shallower and shifting slightly to the
left. For the last three liquids, the dip is almost non-existent, which implies that their refractive indices
are either slightly below or above the cladding RI.
Figure 4.22: Transmission loss spectra of LPFG 540 µm with changing SRI between 1.442 to 1.652 on the wooden fiberholder
To determine the minimum value of the resonance dip, polynomial interpolation and fitting were
Page 48 of 65
==PAGE:55==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
applied to the regions surrounding the resonance dip. The results are as follows:
• For RI 1.442, the minimum value is -23.90 at a wavelength of 1548.63 nm.
• For RI 1.450, the minimum value is -18.11 at wavelength 1547.33 nm.
• For RI 1.453, the minimum value is -9.74 at wavelength 1552.72 nm.
• For RI 1.457, the minimum value is -9.29 at wavelength 1553.02 nm.
• For RI 1.652, the minimum value is -9.81 at wavelength 1552.03 nm.
Applying liquids to the fiber introduces uncertainty regarding the extent of LPFG coverage in liquid
versus exposure to air. Additionally, during the experiments, significant spectral changes were observed
in response to minimal positional adjustments of the fiber. This indicates that undetectable bending may
still be occurring, even if it is not visible to the naked eye. To address this issue, a second solution was
implemented by constructing a glass holder with a small cavity for the fiber. This design introduced the
capillary forces to ensure the liquids are captured within the cavity, thereby fully covering the fiber. This
solution is shown in Figure 4.23.
Figure 4.23: Glassholder for RI change measurements: the part of the fiber with the fiber grating is placed within the 2 mm
slit between the smaller glass plates
The results are not as clear as in the first measurement. While the dip decreased in magnitude and
moved to the left between the first two values (blue to green), the value of RI = 1.453 is increasing but
still moving to the left. Comparing the values of RI = 1.457 to RI = 1.652, the dip is moving to the right
and increases in magnitude would indicate that the RI is increasing and is above the cladding RI. The
results are visible in Figure 4.24.
Page 49 of 65
==PAGE:56==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.24: Transmission loss spectra of LPFG 540 µm with changing SRI between 1.442 to 1.652 on the glass fiberholder
The results are as follows:
• For RI 1.442, the minimum value is -33.77 at a wavelength of 1554.33 nm.
• For RI 1.450, the minimum value is -25.96 at wavelength 1550.99 nm.
• For RI 1.453, the minimum value is -28.91 at wavelength 1550.39 nm.
• For RI 1.457, the minimum value is -18.43 at wavelength 1549.082 nm.
• For RI 1.652, the minimum value is -24.17 at wavelength 1551.24 nm.
Both experiments were repeated at least three times, consistently yielding similar results. However, due
to numerous uncertainties regarding the condition of the liquids and the actual refractive indices influ-
enced by wavelength and temperature differences, alternative approaches were necessary. Additionally,
the oily nature of the liquids posed a risk of leaving residues in the glass cavity. Consequently, it was
essential to find liquids with fewer uncertainties and easier handling. Moreover, it was discovered that
the Abbe refractometer used to determine the refractive index of the liquids was incorrectly calibrated.
This miscalibration leads to the conclusion that the measurements obtained cannot be trusted.
Ethylene Glycol and Glycerol samples
Because of the above-mentioned reasons, the samples listed in Table 3.2 were introduced. Initial experi-
ments were conducted using the first five samples, which are mixtures of water and ethylene glycol. To
include a value above the cladding RI, a sixth sample consisting of 100 % glycerol was also introduced.
All these samples were measured with a calibrated Abbe refractometer. Subsequently, a curve following
Page 50 of 65
==PAGE:57==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
the dispersion formulas and the experimental values was fitted, as shown in Figure 3.8 to find an esti-
mated value at 1550 nm. The refractive indices for the mixtures were estimated using the Equations 3.4
and 3.5. To avoid contamination from the oil-based liquids used in previous experiments, a new glass
holder was fabricated. The LPFGs were placed into the glass holder cavity and after every measurement,
the glass holder was cleaned in the ultrasonic bath to avoid residues from previous samples. Further-
more, before applying a new sample, a spectrum was measured with the fiber placed in the glass holder
but before adding a liquid to evaluate the placement and potential bending on the fibers. In Figure 4.25
reference measurements (left) and measurements of the Ethylene Glycol mixtures (right) from an LPFG
with a grating period of 610 µm are visualized.
Figure 4.25: Transmission loss spectra of LPFG 610 µm. Left: reference measurement with the fiber placed already on the
glass holder but before applying the liquids. The first measurement (before) was measured before applying the first liquid (RI
= 1.3151), B12: reference measurement with the fiber placed into the glass holder before applying the second sample (RI =
1.3421). Right: measurements of the spectra with changing SRI between 1.3151 to 1.4232 on the glass fiberholder
The results are as follows:
• For RI 1.3151, the minimum value is -12.39 at a wavelength of 1547.62 nm.
• For RI 1.3421, the minimum value is -15.14 at wavelength 1549.66 nm.
• For RI 1.3692, the minimum value is -18.53 at wavelength 1548.52 nm.
• For RI 1.3962, the minimum value is -20.97 at wavelength 1549.97 nm.
• For RI 1.4232, the minimum value is -23.71 at wavelength 1551.35 nm.
Despite taping the fiber as straight as possible into the glass holder (as shown in 4.23, the reference mea-
surements revealed significant changes in depth and minor changes in wavelength. These measurements
were taken without applying any liquids and involved repeatedly placing the fiber into the holder in be-
tween the samples and cleaning the holder. This suggests that small differences in the placement of the
fiber result in light bending within the cavity. Even though all the samples have an RI below the cladding
RI, the resonance dip increases in depth and shifts to the right, towards higher wavelengths, as the RI
increases. It is important to ensure that the reference measurements taken before each sample are as
Page 51 of 65
==PAGE:58==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
consistent as possible. The movement of the spectrum should be analyzed in relation to these reference
measurements. Based on these findings, special attention was paid to this in further experiments, so that
the reference measurements are as consistent as possible. In Figure 4.26 (left) a reference measurement
was carried out with no variety in wavelength and only minor changes in depth of an LPFG with 610
µm grating period. In the right image, the spectra with changing SRI between 1.3151 to 1.4232 are
visualized.
Figure 4.26: Transmission loss spectra of LPFG 610 µm. Left: reference measurement with the fiber placed already on the
glass holder but before applying the liquids. The first measurement (before) was measured before applying the first liquid (RI
= 1.3151), B12: reference measurement with the fiber placed into the glass holder before applying the second sample (RI =
1.3421). Right: measurements of the spectra with changing SRI between 1.3151 to 1.4232 on the glass fiberholder
The results are as follows:
• For RI 1.3151, the minimum value is -15.27 at a wavelength of 1546.26 nm.
• For RI 1.3421, the minimum value is -19.60 at wavelength 1550.59 nm.
• For RI 1.3692, the minimum value is -24.89 at wavelength 1552.85 nm.
• For RI 1.3962, the minimum value is -27.23 at wavelength 1552.85 nm.
• For RI 1.4232, the minimum value is -24.95 at wavelength 1551.26 nm.
Similar observations can be made as in Figure 4.25, that even though all the samples have an RI below
the cladding RI, the resonance dip increases in depth and shifts to the right, towards higher wavelengths,
as the RI increases for the first four samples. Only the fifth sample at RI = 1.4232 changes direction,
both in-depth and wavelength shift. This would suggest, that around this wavelength, the cladding RI
was surpassed. In Figure 4.27 the experiments were repeated using LPFG with a grating period of 540
µm. In the left image, a reference measurement was carried out with a minor variety in wavelength and a
minor variety in depth. In the right image, the spectra with changing SRI between 1.3151 to 1.4604 are
visualized.
Page 52 of 65
==PAGE:59==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.27: Transmission loss spectra of LPFG 540 µm. Left: reference measurement with the fiber placed already on the
glass holder but before applying the liquids. The first measurement (before) was measured before applying the first liquid (RI
= 1.3151), B12: reference measurement with the fiber placed into the glass holder before applying the second sample (RI =
1.3421). Right: measurements of the spectra with changing SRI between 1.3151 to 1.4604 on the glass fiberholder
The results are as follows:
• For RI 1.3151, the minimum value is -21.41 at a wavelength of 1538.66 nm.
• For RI 1.3421, the minimum value is -22.42 at wavelength 1539.96 nm.
• For RI 1.3692, the minimum value is -24.89 at wavelength 1541.22 nm.
• For RI 1.3962, the minimum value is -32.68 at wavelength 1541.53 nm.
• For RI 1.4232, the minimum value is -22.29 at wavelength 1538.93 nm.
• For RI 1.4604, the minimum value is -27.55 at wavelength 1541.81 nm.
Similar observations can be made for a lower grating period of 540 µm. The first five samples followed
the same pattern, the the resonance dip increases in depth and shifts to the right, towards higher wave-
lengths, as the RI increases. The fifth sample changes again in the direction both in depth and wavelength
shift. This time, the sixth sample (RI = 1.4604) was introduced, with a higher RI than the cladding RI. It
can be observed, that compared to RI = 1.4232 (sample 5), the dip deepens again and shifts to a higher
wavelength. The experiment was repeated three times with similar LPFGs, consistently yielding similar
results. In Figure 4.28 the experiments were repeated using LPFG with a grating period of 395 µm.
In the left image, a reference measurement was carried out with no variety in wavelength and a minor
variety in depth. In the right image, the spectra with changing SRI between 1.3151 to 1.3692 are visu-
alized. During the cleaning process of the fiber, the LPFG broke, therefore only three samples could be
measured.
Page 53 of 65
==PAGE:60==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.28: Transmission loss spectra of LPFG 395 µm. Left: reference measurement with the fiber placed already on the
glass holder but before applying the liquids. The first measurement (before) was measured before applying the first liquid (RI
= 1.3151), B12: reference measurement with the fiber placed into the glass holder before applying the second sample (RI =
1.3421). Right: measurements of the spectra with changing SRI between 1.3151 to 1.3692 on the glass fiberholder
The results are as follows:
• For RI 1.3151, the minimum value is -24.21 at a wavelength of 1529.35 nm.
• For RI 1.3421, the minimum value is -24.64 at wavelength 1530.72 nm.
• For RI 1.3692, the minimum value is -25.63 at wavelength 1531.48 nm.
Similar observations can be made for a lower grating period of 395 µm. The three samples measured
followed the same pattern, the the resonance dip increases in depth and shifts to the right, towards higher
wavelengths, as the RI increases. The experiment was repeated a second time, yielding similar results.
According to the simulations of the phase-matching curves in Chapter 4.4, the wavelength shift is ex-
pected to increase as the grating period decreases. This trend was observed in both the semi-analytical
and numerical approaches. When comparing the shift in wavelength at a grating period of 610 µm the
difference between sample 1 (RI = 1.3151) and sample 4 (RI = 1.3962) is 6.59 nm. For a grating period
of 540 µm, the same comparison shows a difference of only 2.87 nm. Similarly, the wavelength shifts be-
tween sample 1 (RI = 1.3151) and sample 3 (RI = 1.3692) are 6.59 nm for a 610 µm grating period, 2.56
nm for a 540 µm grating period, and 2.13 nm for a 395 µm grating period. Interestingly, the experimental
results show an opposite trend compared to the simulations. It should be noted that for larger grating pe-
riods, the resonance depth was narrower compared to smaller grating periods, making it more sensitive to
wavelength changes. Additionally, due to time constraints and the breakage of two fibers, fewer LPFGs
with smaller grating periods (395 µm) were fabricated and tested. The reproducibility of sensing the SRI
using ethylene glycol samples in the glass holder was confirmed, but some aspects remain unclear. Con-
trary to simulations and literature, which suggest that for an SRI below 1.444, the resonance dip should
shift to lower wavelengths and decrease in depth, the opposite behavior was observed. Additionally, the
wavelength shift was expected to increase with a decreased grating period (Λ), but instead, it decreased.
Possible reasons for these inconsistencies include unseen bending effects within the glass cavity. These
Page 54 of 65
==PAGE:61==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
bending effects might be minimized by taping the fiber further from the glass holder, left and right of
the uncoated part, ensuring less bending. Another method to reduce bending effects involved "pressing"
the fiber to one side of the glass holder. This approach provided more consistent spectra but introduced
the potential issue of the fiber touching the glass, which has a high refractive index (≈1.5) and could
influence the measurements. Uncertainty also arises from the possibility that the fiber changes posi-
tion when liquids are added to the cavity, potentially due to the capillary effect, which could increase
bending effects. Furthermore, the grating period may not be uniformly distributed around the fiber’s
perimeter because the wire contacts the fiber at only one point. The placement of the grating within
the cavity could also impact measurements. For instance, if the grating is positioned at the bottom, it
might touch the glass and not be fully surrounded by the liquid, potentially attenuating the sensing effect.
Chemical sensing
After successfully demonstrating reproducible results for various LPFGs with different grating periods,
the experiments showed that in cases, using ethylene glycol mixtures (Table 3.2) and the glass plate
holder, the resonance dip shifts to a higher wavelength and deepens until the samples have a refractive
index similar to the cladding. Following this, the LPFGs were coated with different materials. The
fibers were taped onto glass holders (see sketch in Figure 3.10) to ensure the coating could completely
enclose the fiber. The coatings were dried for at least 24 hours. The first coating applied was a gelatin
hydrogel, which, due to its hydrophilic properties, allows liquid samples to be applied directly onto the
coating without the need for a cavity to hold the liquids in place. Silver nitrate AgNO3 was added to the
gelatin hydrogel during the coating process to enable a chemical reaction in subsequent experiments. A
10% KI solution in MQ water was also prepared. The objective is to form the compound silver-iodide
(AgI), facilitating a measurable change in the refractive index. The refractive index of AgI is around
2.20 at 589.3 nm.[53]. Figure 4.29 presents the measurements of the transmission loss, initially showing
the results with only the gelatin coating (blue). Previously, the resonance dip had a depth of -26 dB,
but after applying the coating, only a shallow dip of approximately -6 dB was observed. This outcome
was neither anticipated nor desired, as the high refractive index of gelatin was not initially considered.
However, upon observing the result and subsequently reviewing the refractive index of dried gelatin (≈
1.5), it became clear that the observed transmission loss is directly related to the material’s refractive
index. After adding water to the coating, the refractive index decreases to a certain extent. The spectrum
shows a shift of 2.62 nm to higher wavelengths and the dip deepens by 2.68 dB. This outcome aligns
with both the literature and the simulations of the PMCs, which indicate that for a decreasing SRI (be-
low the cladding RI), the dip shifts to higher wavelengths and increases in depth. However, it does not
align with the experimental results obtained earlier in this chapter. In the next step, the KI solution with
an RI = 1.3470 was added to the coating. The chemical reaction between the silver ions and the iodide
should increase the SRI. The spectrum (red) shows a shift of 23.48 nm to a lower wavelength, but a small
increase in depth compared to the first measurement (blue). This suggests an increase in the refractive
Page 55 of 65
==PAGE:62==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
index. However, it is challenging to determine the exact refractive index within the coating. Although
the surface water was removed after the second measurement (green), it is unclear how much water re-
mained absorbed within the coating. Despite these uncertainties, a chemical reaction between the silver
ions and iodide forming the inorganic compound could be observed. The experiment was repeated three
times, showing similar results for all of them. The results in Figure 4.29 are as follows:
• For Gelatine silver nitrate coating, the minimum value is -5.86 at a wavelength of 1551.09 nm.
• For MQ water, the minimum value is -8.54 at wavelength 1553.71 nm
• For 10% KI, the minimum value is -6.94 at wavelength 1527.61 nm
Figure 4.29: LPFG 540 µm coated with gelatine hydrogel with added silver nitrate: spectrum with dried gelatine hydrogel
(blue), spectrum after adding MQ water onto the coating (green), and spectrum after adding a 10% KI solution onto the
coating (red)
In Figure 4.30 the glass holder with yellow tapes for minor elevation of the fiber is shown. In between
the tapes, the LPFG is coated with the gelatine hydrogel with added silver nitrate. The image was taken
after adding the 10 % KI solution. Before that, the coating was clear and colorless, after that due to the
chemical reaction the yellow-brown color was visible, which confirmed that the silver ions formed an
inorganic compound with the iodide[54].
Page 56 of 65
==PAGE:63==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.30: Image of the glass holder with the LPFG taped onto it: color change is visualized after adding KI solution to the
silver nitrate gelatine hydrogel coating
Due to the undesirable effect of the gelatine hydrogel on the depth of the dip, the following LPFG
was coated with a PVA film (as shown in Figure 4.31). Despite the similar SRI (1.4839 at 589.3 nm), the
spectrum shows only a transmission loss of around 3 dB compared to the original value (-17.84 instead of
-21 dB). By adding water to the coating, the resonance dip gets weakened to -14.6 dB and shows a shift
of 1.05 nm to higher wavelengths. While the shift in wavelength follows the results from Figure 4.29,
the depth in resonance dip does the opposite. Considering the small signal from the gelatin hydrogel
and the even smaller change in depth, the results obtained with the PVA film appear more reliable. The
next step involved adding the KI solution to observe changes in the refractive index within the coating.
After adding the solution, the spectrum quickly showed that the dip was vanishing. After 30 seconds, a
dip appeared at 1473 nm but disappeared shortly thereafter, which was highly unexpected. Additionally,
it was observed that the PVA film seemed to dissolve upon the addition of the KI solution. Research
confirmed that PVA forms different complexes with iodine, causing physical deformation. The original
state of the PVA film cannot be maintained because the compressional strain exceeds its yielding strain
[55]. Due to the destructible deformation of the PVA film by adding iodine, the experiments were not
repeated. The results in Figure 4.31 are as follows:
• For PVA film, the minimum value is -17.84 at a wavelength of 1537.69 nm.
• For MQ water, the minimum value is -14.60 at wavelength 1538.74
• For 10% KI, the minimum value is -12.38 at wavelength 1538.94 nm.
• For 10% KI after 30 seconds, the minimum value is -14.92 at wavelength 1473.14 nm.
Page 57 of 65
==PAGE:64==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.31: LPFG 540 µm coated with a PVA film: spectrum with dried PVA film (blue), spectrum after adding MQ water
onto the coating (green), spectrum after adding a 10% KI solution onto the coating (red), spectrum of adding a 10% KI
solution after waiting for 30 seconds.
The results from both coatings indicate that the PVA film is more suitable for chemical sensing, as it
provides a more stable and distinct signal after the coating is applied. However, due to the physical
deformation of the PVA film upon the addition of iodine, an alternative solution needs to be considered.
Possible alternatives to potassium-iodide (KI) are sodium-chloride (NaCl), potassium chloride (KCl),
potassium-bromide (KBr), or sodium-bromide (NaBr) to form with the silver ions one of the compounds
AgCl or AgBr. Both would have a similar high refractive index as AgI, 2.0099 for AgCl and 2.1831 for
AgBr at 1550 nm. However, it is expected that the change in the refractive index might be lower with
these alternatives [44]. Furthermore, by comparing the depths of the resonance dips in Figures 4.29 and
4.32, insights into the swelling properties of gelatin-based hydrogels and PVA films can be obtained.
Despite the similarity in refractive index, 85 % of the depth could be obtained with the PVA film, while
only 21 % of the depth with the gelatine-based hydrogel could be obtained. Gelatin-based hydrogels
have a higher swelling capacity compared to PVA [56]. In Figure 4.32 an LPFG coated with PVA film
is shown. the image was taken after adding the KI solution. Before that, the coating was clear and
colorless, after that due to the chemical reaction the dissolved and deformed coating was visible.
Page 58 of 65
==PAGE:65==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
Figure 4.32: Image of the glass holder with the LPFG taped onto it: Dissolution is visualized after adding KI to the PVA film
coating
5
Conclusion
This project explored the fabrication of LPFGs with a thermally induced method with an electri-
cally heated wire to develop an OFBS for monitoring changes in the SRI. Throughout the fabrication
process, several unforeseen challenges occurred, leading to valuable insights, which led to continuous
adjustments of the parameters to ensure the reproducibility and consistent quality of the results. Con-
sequently, LPFGs with the desired parameters were successfully fabricated within the range of 395 to
650 µm, enabling the successful continuation of the project. The two primary phenomena associated
with this are fiber tapering and the annealing of internal stress. The unpredictable and irregular nature
of these taperings makes precise perturbation in the refractive index challenging. During the initial trial
measurements of changes in SRI, it became evident that bending effects had a more significant impact
than anticipated. Investigating these effects, both theoretical and experimental, delayed the main work
and remained a focus throughout the project. Despite ongoing challenges in eliminating the influence of
bending, various fiber holder designs were developed to mitigate these effects. This effort successfully
reduced the impact of bending to a level that allowed for reproducible results. For comparison and val-
idation of the results collected by the fabrication of the LPFGs and studying the transmission spectra, a
destructive analysis to image the coupled mode of the LPFG, was carried out with some of the LPFGs,
and simultaneously to all the practical work, of a semi-analytical simulation of the PMCs were con-
ducted. This method was initially considered to be the most suitable, as it provides sufficiently accurate
results, but is not too complex or time-consuming. LP02 to LP06 and LP12 to LP16 were successfully
simulated with the surrounding medium of air. However, a significant limitation emerged when the SRI
approached the cladding index. The method can only provide solutions for guided modes, meaning that
Page 59 of 65
==PAGE:66==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
as the SRI nears or exceeds the cladding RI, it fails to produce solutions. A simulated PMC, using the
numerical approach, was used for comparison, revealing a difference of around 15 µm for the LP04, in
addition to providing some insight into the behavior of unguided modes. Considering the simplifications
in the semi-analytical approach and the inherent uncertainties from the translation stage, this discrep-
ancy can be regarded as minor enough to validate the simulations. Together with the simulation of the
PMCs as well as the imaged modes, a coupling of the modes LP04 and LP14 was most possibly con-
firmed. By diminishing the bending effects by the design of different fiber holders, sensing of changes
in the refractive index below and above the cladding index was successfully carried out at a grating pe-
riod of 395 µm, 540 µm, and 610 µm. By increasing the SRI, a shift of the resonance dip to a higher
wavelength and an increase in the depth was measured at for LPFGs. While reproductivity can be con-
firmed, the experimental data is behaving differently than the theoretical simulation, and the literature
predicts. More research has to be carried out to investigate this behavior to point out more parameters
that could influence that behavior. Possible influences could be the high refractive index of the glass
holder or the irregular perturbations of the taperings on the fibers. After proving the reproducibility of
the LPFGs themselves, different coatings were produced, including gelatine-based hydrogels and PVA
films. By adding silver nitrate (AGNO3) to the hydrogel, combined with a 10 % KI solution, forming the
compound AgI was successfully detected by an increase in refractive index triggered by the chemical
reaction. Furthermore, by comparing the results gained from the gelatine-based hydrogel and the PVA
film, the influence of the swelling properties of the coating on the spectrum could be visualized.
6
Future Prospects
A significant process in understanding the fabrication process, bending effects, and spectral behav-
ior of the LPFGs was demonstrated in this report. To improve the reproducibility and to explore more
suitable coatings, more studies are required. First of all, to improve the regularity of the tapering to
secure precise perturbation in the refractive index, the parameters of the fabrication of the LPFGs could
be more investigated. The experiments conducted to sense the change in refractive index focused more
on SRI below the cladding RI. Creating a well-deformed range of SRI around the cladding RI as well as
above could give more insights about the behaviors in this area. The final fiber holder used for the exper-
iments consists of BK-7 glass with a refractive index of ≈1.5. It was not completely understood, how
much the holder was influencing the measurements and could have affected the results, which were not
completely understood. Therefore more holders could be explored to both, concentrate more on avoiding
bending effects and ensuring the fiber is completely immersed in the liquid and is not touched by the
holder itself. The most uncertainties in the measurements were triggered by the fact, that the fiber and
holder had to be cleaned after every measurement, therefore the position had to be changed. An inves-
tigation into the possibility of not changing the position of the fiber in between the measurements could
give great insights into the behavior of the spectrum only influenced by the SRI. Due to time constraints
Page 60 of 65
==PAGE:67==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
not all possibilities in coating materials could be explored, because due to the high RI of the coatings,
the resonance dip was weakened a lot by the coating. Furthermore, more alternatives to the KI solution
could be exploited by using the compounds AgBr or AgCl instead for the chemical reaction.
References
[1] P. Akrami, L. G. Nielsen, L. S. Rishøj, and K. Rottwitt, “Fabrication of heat-induced long-period
gratings for mode conversion in few-mode fibers,” in Next-Generation Optical Communication:
Components, Sub-Systems, and Systems X, G. Li and K. Nakajima, Eds.
SPIE, 3 2021, p. 4.
[2] S. Mittal,
H. Kaur,
N. Gautam,
and A. K. Mantha,
“Biosensors for breast cancer
diagnosis:
A review of bioreceptors, biotransducers and signal amplification strategies,”
Biosensors & bioelectronics, vol. 88, pp. 217–231, 2 2017. [Online]. Available:
https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27567264/
[3] P. Mehrotra, “Biosensors and their applications â A review,” Journal of Oral Biology and Cranio-
facial Research, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 153–159, 5 2016.
[4] J. Cai, Y. Liu, and X. Shu, “Long-Period Fiber Grating Sensors for Chemical and Biomedical
Applications,” Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), vol. 23, no. 1, 1 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36617140/
[5] P. Roriz, S. Silva, O. Frazão, and S. Novais, “Optical Fiber Temperature Sensors and Their Biomed-
ical Applications,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 7, p. 2113, 4 2020.
[6] N. Polley, S. Basak, R. Hass, and C. Pacholski, “Fiber optic plasmonic sensors: Providing sensitive
biosensor platforms with minimal lab equipment,” Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 132, pp.
368–374, 5 2019.
[7] F. Esposito, A. Srivastava, L. Sansone, M. Giordano, S. Campopiano, and A. Iadicicco, “Label-
Free Biosensors Based on Long Period Fiber Gratings: A Review,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 21,
no. 11, pp. 12 692–12 705, 6 2021.
[8] A. Kersey, M. Davis, H. Patrick, M. LeBlanc, K. Koo, C. Askins, M. Putnam, and E. Friebele,
“Fiber grating sensors,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 1442–1463, 1997.
[9] H. J. Patrick, A. D. Kersey, and F. Bucholtz, “Analysis of the Response of Long Period Fiber
Gratings to External Index of Refraction,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 16, no. 9, p. 1606, 9 1998.
[Online]. Available: https://opg.optica.org/jlt/abstract.cfm?URI=jlt-16-9-1606
[10] F. Esposito, “(INVITED)Chemical sensors based on long period fiber gratings: A review,” Results
in Optics, vol. 5, p. 100196, 12 2021.
Page 61 of 65
==PAGE:68==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
[11] K.
Rottwitt
and
P.
Tidemand-Lichtenberg,
Nonlinear
Optics:
Principles
and
Ap-
plications.
CRC
Press,
2014.
[Online].
Available:
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/
nonlinear-optics-principles-and-applications
[12] B.E.A. Saleh and M.C. Teich, FUNDAMENTALS OF PHOTONICS, third edition ed., G. Boreman,
Ed.
University of Central Florida, Boston University, Columbia University: Wiley Series in Pure
and Applied Optics, 2019.
[13] R. Paschotta, “Fibers - an encyclopedia article,” in RP Photonics Encyclopedia.
RP Photonics
AG, 2006.
[14] FOSCO, “GEOMETRICAL-OPTICS DESCRIPTION OF STEP-INDEX AND GRADED-
INDEX OPTICAL FIBERS,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.fiberoptics4sale.com/blogs/
wave-optics/step-index-optical-fibers
[15] J. M. S. Frank Bucholtz, “A Brief Introduction to Core Modes in Optical Fiber,” Naval Research
Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Avenue, SW Washington, DC 20375-5320, Tech. Rep., 3 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/trecms/pdf/AD1124366.pdf
[16] L. Raijmakers, D. Danilov, R.-A. Eichel, and P. Notten, “A review on various temperature-
indication methods for Li-ion batteries,” Applied Energy, vol. 240, pp. 918–945, 4 2019.
[17] G. Han, J. Yan, Z. Guo, D. Greenwood, J. Marco, and Y. Yu, “A review on various optical fibre
sensing methods for batteries,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 150, p. 111514,
10 2021.
[18] A. M. Vengsarkar, N. S. Bergano, C. R. Davidson, J. R. Pedrazzani, J. B. Judkins, and P. J. Lemaire,
“Long-period fiber-grating-based gain equalizers,” Optics Letters, vol. 21, no. 5, p. 336, 3 1996.
[19] D. Davis, T. Gaylord, E. Glytsis, S. Kosinski, S. Mettler, and A. Vengsarkar, “Long-period fibre
grating fabrication with focused CO2 laser pulses,” Electronics Letters, vol. 34, no. 3, p. 302, 1998.
[20] G. Rego, “Arc-Induced Long Period Fiber Gratings,” Journal of Sensors, vol. 2016, pp. 1–14, 2016.
[21] Xuewen Shu, Lin Zhang, and I. Bennion, “Sensitivity characteristics of long-period fiber gratings,”
Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 255–266, 2002.
[22] A.
B.
Skov,
“Suppression
of
Raman
scattering
in
optical
fibers
via
long
period
gratings
-
DTU
Findit,”
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/62dddf81a9458e54e402243c?single_revert=%2Fen%2Fcatalog%3Fq%
3DAndreas%2BBaltzer%2BSkov%26show_single%3Doff%26utf8%3D%25E2%259C%2593
Page 62 of 65
==PAGE:69==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
[23] W. Gan, Z. Xu, Y. Li, W. Bi, L. Chu, Q. Qi, Y. Yang, P. Zhang, N. Gan, S. Dai, and T. Xu, “Rapid
and sensitive detection of Staphylococcus aureus by using a long-period fiber grating immunosen-
sor coated with egg yolk antibody,” Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 199, p. 113860, 3 2022.
[24] A. Vengsarkar, P. Lemaire, J. Judkins, V. Bhatia, T. Erdogan, and J. Sipe, “Long-period fiber grat-
ings as band-rejection filters,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 58–65, 1 1996.
[25] A. D. Yablon, Optical Fiber Fusion Splicing, W. T. Rhodes, Ed.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, vol. 103.
[26] N. A. M. Nazal, K.-S. Lim, M. K. A. Zaini, H.-Z. Yang, and H. Ahmad, “Formation of enhanced
regenerated grating in few-mode fiber by CO_2 laser pretreatment,” Applied Optics, vol. 56, no. 36,
p. 9882, 12 2017.
[27] M. K. Annuar Zaini, Y.-S. Lee, K.-S. Lim, N. A. Mohd Nazal, M. H. Zohari, and H. Ahmad,
“Axial stress profiling for few-mode fiber Bragg grating based on resonant wavelength shifts during
etching process,” Journal of the Optical Society of America B, vol. 34, no. 9, p. 1894, 9 2017.
[28] P. Akrami, L. G. Nielsen, L. S. Rishøj, and K. Rottwitt, “Fabrication of heat-induced long-period
gratings for mode conversion in few mode fibers,” Lyngby, 5 2020.
[29] J. F. B. Andrew M. Kowalevicz, “Beam Divergence from an SMF-28 Optical Fiber,” 10 2006.
[Online]. Available: https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA456331.pdf
[30] L. Qi, C.-L. Zhao, J. Yuan, M. Ye, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, and S. Jin, “Highly reflective long period fiber
grating sensor and its application in refractive index sensing,” Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical,
vol. 193, pp. 185–189, 3 2014.
[31] Y. Koyamada, “Numerical analysis of core-mode to radiation-mode coupling in long-period fiber
gratings,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 308–310, 4 2001.
[32] D. Stegall and T. Erdogan, “Leaky cladding mode propagation in long-period fiber grating devices,”
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 343–345, 3 1999.
[33] Y. Liu, J. Williams, and I. Bennion, “Optical bend sensor based on measurement of resonance
mode splitting of long-period fiber grating,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 12, no. 5, pp.
531–533, 5 2000.
[34] H. Haus and W. Huang, “Coupled-mode theory,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 79, no. 10, pp.
1505–1518, 1991.
[35] H. Patrick, C. Chang, and S. Vohra, “Long period fibre gratings for structural bend sensing,” Elec-
tronics Letters, vol. 34, no. 18, p. 1773, 1998.
Page 63 of 65
==PAGE:70==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
[36] L. MatWeb, “MatWeb Material Property Data, Pt-20% Ir Alloy, Hard.” [Online]. Available: https://
www.matweb.com/search/datasheet.aspx?matguid=6fb5c0e1b7ca4c5f8dcd1e62fac406f9&ckck=1
[37] E. Co¸skun, K. Sel, S. Özder, and M. Kurt, “Refractive index and extinction coefficient determina-
tion of an absorbing thin film by using the continuous wavelet transform method,” Applied Optics,
vol. 47, no. 27, p. 4888, 9 2008.
[38] Cargille-Sacher Laboratories Inc., “Cargille- Refractive Index Liquids,” 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cargille.com/refractive-index-liquids/
[39] S. Kedenburg, M. Vieweg, T. Gissibl, and H. Giessen, “Linear refractive index and absorption
measurements of nonlinear optical liquids in the visible and near-infrared spectral region,” Optical
Materials Express, vol. 2, no. 11, p. 1588, 11 2012.
[40] E. Sani and A. DellOro, “Optical constants of ethylene glycol over an extremely wide spectral
range,” Optical Materials, vol. 37, pp. 36–41, 11 2014.
[41] E. Sani and A. Dell Oro, “Corrigendum to: Optical constants of ethylene glycol over an extremely
wide spectral range [Opt. Mater. 37 (2014)],” Optical Materials, vol. 48, p. 281, 10 2015.
[42] J. Rheims, J. Köser, and T. Wriedt, “Refractive-index measurements in the near-IR using an Abbe
refractometer,” Measurement Science and Technology, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 601–605, 6 1997.
[43] M. N. Polyanskiy, “Refractiveindex.info database of optical constants,” Scientific Data, vol. 11,
no. 1, p. 94, 1 2024.
[44] Mikhail Polyanskiy, “RefractiveIndex.Info,” 2008. [Online]. Available: https://refractiveindex.
info/
[45] CK-12, “14.12: Mole Fraction CK-12 Chemistry for High School,” 2 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Introductory_Chemistry/Introductory_Chemistry_
(CK-12)/14%3A_The_Behavior_of_Gases/14.12%3A_Mole_Fraction
[46] P. Dzingai, W. W. Focke, S. Ramjee, P. Khosa, and R. A. Nobunga, “Correlating the Density and
Refractive Index of Ternary Liquid Mixtures,” Journal of Solution Chemistry, vol. 52, no. 11, pp.
1301–1317, 11 2023.
[47] K. Oh, “Lab-on-chip (LOC) devices and microfluidics for biomedical applications,” in MEMS for
Biomedical Applications.
Elsevier, 2012, pp. 150–171.
[48] B. JIAN YANG, M.SC., “SENSITIVITY ENHANCED LONG-PERIOD FIBER GRATING
BASED PHOTONIC DEVICES FOR BIOSENSING,” McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Tech. Rep., 9 2007.
Page 64 of 65
==PAGE:71==
Optical fiber chemical sensing based on long period gratings - s222865 - Sabrina Hötzendorfer
[49] S. Calixto, N. Ganzherli, S. Gulyaev, and S. Figueroa-Gerstenmaier, “Gelatin as a Photosensitive
Material,” Molecules, vol. 23, no. 8, p. 2064, 8 2018.
[50] Genuine
Modules,
“What
is
1550
nm
wavelength?”
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.genuinemodules.com/what-is-1550-nm-wavelength_a4308#:~:
text=The%201550%20nm%20wavelength%20is%20a%20specific%20range%20of%20light,
due%20to%20its%20various%20advantages.
[51] L. Grüner Nielsen, “Imaging of LPG cladding modes,” private communication, 4 2024.
[52] L. Grüner Nielsen and L. Lindvold René, “LPG simulating effect of surrouding index,” private
communication, 6 2024.
[53] H. I. Bjelkhagen, Silver-Halide Recording Materials, Theodor Tamir, Ed.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1 1993, vol. 66.
[54] Thermo Scientific Chemicals, “Silver iodide, 99%, pure, Thermo Scientific Chemicals.” [Online].
Available: https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/210420250
[55] H. O. Ha and D. S. Kim, “Color change of an iodinated poly(vinyl alcohol) film by physical defor-
mation,” Journal of Applied Polymer Science, vol. 133, no. 10, 3 2016.
[56] K. Labus, L. Radosinski, and P. Kotowski, “Functional Properties of Two-Component Hydrogel
Systems Based on Gelatin and Polyvinyl AlcoholâExperimental Studies Supported by Computa-
tional Analysis,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 22, no. 18, p. 9909, 9 2021.
Page 65 of 65
