==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Electro: Department of Electrical and Photonics
Engineering
Quantitative Assessment of the Impact of Relative Humidity on
the Vibro-Elastic Properties of a Violin
Author: Nicholas Benson
Date: July 20, 2024
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
Thank you to everyone who assisted me along the way through this project, without whom this would
not have been possible. First and most importantly, thank you to my advisors Jonas Brunskog, John
Heebøll, Jeremy Marozeau, and Knud Erik Meyer. To Knud for provided space in his laboratory for
the climate chamber, interest, and encouragement. To Jeremy for pushing me in directions I would
not have thought of myself. To John for providing the violin, sponsoring the project, helping prepare
the climate chamber, and move the lab. And finally to Jonas for his expertise and mentorship in
the field of vibrations and for making himself available to help answer all my questions.
Extended thank yous go to Henrik for his help with fabrication of the wood blocks. Jørgen Skotte
for providing the wood samples used for testing on the blocks. Thank you to Romain Viala for
providing the most detailed published understanding of violin finite element models and his 3D
model for free. Thank you to all the other masters students in my office who kept me sane, working
for so many hours alone would have driven me insane, and their presence helped me greatly. Last,
thank you to my family and partner Johanne for their consistent support throughout this journey.
i
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
1
3
Theoretical Background
2
3.1
Wood material properties . . . . .
2
3.2
Material property change with
moisture content . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3
Violin FRF . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.4
FRAC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Methods
6
4.1
Climate Chamber . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Experimental Methods . . . . . . .
7
4.2.1
Wood Blocks . . . . . . . .
7
4.2.2
Violin . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Equipment and Calibration . . . .
11
4.4
Simulation Methods
. . . . . . . .
11
4.4.1
Wood Blocks . . . . . . . .
11
4.4.2
Violin . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Results
13
5.1
Wood blocks experimental . . . . .
14
5.2
Wood blocks simulated . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Violin experimental . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Violin simulated
. . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Discussion
32
6.1
Wood Blocks
. . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Violin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
Conclusion
34
A Appendix:
Velocity measurements
on wood blocks
37
B Appendix:
Measurements
on
broken Violin
39
List of Figures
1
Detailed parts of a violin that
effect the acoustic properties: the
top plate (TP), back plate (BP),
f-holes (F), bridge (B), sound post
(SP), bass bar (BB), and ribs (R)
[1]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Quarters of wood as cut for use in
violin plate manufacturing. [9]
. .
3
3
Ortotropic
material
property
directions on a quartered block
for violin plate. [5] . . . . . . . . .
3
4
The
compliance
matrix
for
orthotropic
materials
with
material properties aligned in a
Cartesian coordinate system [10]. .
4
5
All eight wood samples of the scale
during the drying process. . . . . .
8
6
Wood block on shaker for FRF
evaluation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
7
Violin under test in the climate
chamber. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
8
Violin Model in COMSOL . . . . .
13
9
Mass
over
time
in
climate
chamber while drying wood blocks.
14
10
Mass
over
time
in
climate
chamber while hydrating wood
blocks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
11
Density of spruce and maple wood
blocks when at equilibrium with
low,
ambient,
and high levels
of
humidity
with
dotted
lines
showing published data of average
wood density. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
12
Screenshot
of
the
relative
humidity (blue) and temperature
(red) in the climate chamber while
drying wood blocks.
. . . . . . . .
16
13
Screenshot
of
the
relative
humidity (blue) and temperature
(red) in the climate chamber while
hydrating wood blocks. . . . . . . .
16
14
FRF of spruce sample with fibers
aligned in the long direction of
the
sample
with
measurement
compared to simulation. . . . . . .
17
15
A closer look at the first resonance
peak in the plot above. . . . . . . .
18
ii
==PAGE:5==
16
FRF
of
spruce
sample
with
radial direction aligned in the
long
direction
of
the
sample
with measurement compared to
simulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
17
FRF of maple sample with fibers
aligned in the long direction of
the
sample
with
measurement
compared to simulation. . . . . . .
19
18
FRF
of
maple
sample
with
radial direction aligned in the
long
direction
of
the
sample
with measurement compared to
simulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
19
A closer look at the first resonance
peak in the plot above . . . . . . .
20
20
First
bending
mode
of
the
longitudinal spruce sample.
. . . .
22
21
Lowest frequency mode of the
longitudinal spruce sample.
. . . .
22
22
First bending mode of the radial
maple sample. . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
23
Second bending mode of the radial
maple sample. . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
24
Third bending mode of the radial
maple sample. . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
25
Mass of the violin in the climate
chamber as it was dried then
hydrated.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
26
Screenshot
of
the
relative
humidity (blue) and temperature
(red) in the climate chamber while
drying then hydrating the violin. .
25
27
Example of the variation between
measurements in a single humidity
condition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
28
Average FRF of the violin in
dry, ambient, and wet humidity
conditions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
29
A closer look at the FRF for A0,
B1+, and B1- modes.
. . . . . . .
27
30
Coherence of all measurements for
ambient, dry, and wet conditions. .
28
31
FRAC results compared between
average FRFs for each humidity
condition tested between 270 and
2800 Hz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
32
FRAC results compared between
average FRFs for each humidity
condition tested across the entire
spectra between 1 and 6400 Hz. . .
30
33
Simply
supported
vs
fixed
boundary
conditions
for
a
simulated violin FRF under dry
conditions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
34
FRF of the bridge mobility for
a violin with changes in material
properties based on dry, ambient,
and wet conditions. . . . . . . . . .
32
35
Velocity
of
longitudinal
spruce
block
under
three
humidity
conditions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
36
Velocity of radial spruce block
under three humidity conditions. .
38
37
Velocity
of
longitudinal
maple
block
under
three
humidity
conditions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
38
Velocity of radial maple block
under three humidity conditions. .
39
39
The violin with separated top plate. 39
40
Broadband FRF of the violin for
initial ambient measures as well as
wet and ambient measures after
the top plate separated from the
ribs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
41
A closer look at the A0, B1+, and
B1- modes in the FRF of the violin
for initial ambient measures as
well as wet and ambient measures
after the top plate separated from
the ribs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
42
FRAC
results
for
the
initial
ambient, damaged ambient, and
damaged wet measurements. . . . .
41
iii
==PAGE:6==
1
Abstract
This study investigates the influence of humidity on the acoustic properties of violins through
experimental measurements and computational simulations. The research examines how changes in
wood’s moisture content effects the resonant frequencies and damping characteristics of violin wood.
Initial tests were performed on wood blocks cut from tone wood to determine the material properties,
followed by tests on a complete violin. This research is significant because it provides quantitative
data on how humidity changes affect the frequency response function of a violin, addressing a gap
in existing knowledge.
The samples were placed in a climate controlled chamber for several weeks to adjust between dry
and wet conditions. The findings show that dry wood has lower damping and higher frequency
resonances due to a higher stiffness and lower density. The opposite is true for wet wood. This
makes a dry-state violin more responsive and favorable. Simply altering the amount of moisture in
the wood had a shift in the resonance peak of the violin by up to 8%.
These results suggest that luthiers should consider their local climate when selecting materials, and
musicians should be mindful of moisture effects when traveling, as humidity can cause structural
damage and alter the sound and playability of their instruments. This research provides valuable
insights to the violin’s response, and quantifies the adaptability of tone wood across different levels
of humidity.
2
Introduction
Violins have significantly influenced the music world for centuries. Mastering the fabrication and
playing of this complex instrument can take years. Despite its long history, the search to find the
best materials and methods for producing a violin with superior sound and playability is ongoing
[1]. Numerous construction parameters impact a violin’s quality, and this study focuses on one
often beyond the control of the luthier or musician: humidity. Wood, as a living material, adapts
to its climate, and changes in humidity can alter the violin’s sound.
A year prior to this research, a thesis from the same department investigated how violins change
when they are exposed to vibration over a long period of time [2]. Their results showed little change
in the frequency response of the violin. This change was theorized to be caused by the difference
in humidity between tests as the instrument was stored alternately above ground and in a damp
cellar. This observation inspired the current study.
Wood is hygroscopic, meaning the attraction between wood and water is so high it is impossible
to completely separate the two [3]. Changing humidity will effect the material’s density, material
properties, and could also cause warping when swelling or contracting. These all will change the
violin to varying degrees because it is known that "the moisture content has a significant influence
on the acoustic behavior of wooden instruments" [4].
This study will combine the extensive research on violins and wood properties. It involves both
experimental work and simulations to complement observed changes. Important prior works include
but are not limited to Masoa’s use of 3D scanning of violins, and their method for material properties
1
==PAGE:7==
will be expanded to include changes in moisture [5]. Data from the US Department of Agriculture
for including average ratios of material properties between different species of wood [6]. Ahmed, who
performed experiments on wood that was thermally dried in an oven, but not on actual instruments
[7]. And finally Viala, who performed the most extensive finite element testing on violins [8]. This
is a short list of the most important people whose work helped shape the direction of this thesis.
Figure 1 below illustrates the main components of a violin that have an effect on the sound. These
are all mode out of wood, and will be effected by the incoming and outgoing moisture. The sound
of a violin comes from the strings being bowed or plucked to the side, transferring vibrations into
the body via the bridge. The bridge is held in place at one foot from the sound post, causing a
rocking motion. The bass bar adds mass to the side with more motion, increasing projection. The f
holes allow for the cavity to resonate, and also allow twisting of the wood increasing the compliance
and improving the dynamics [1]. Understanding the sound production mechanism is crucial before
examining how it can be altered.
Figure 1: Detailed parts of a violin that effect the acoustic properties: the top plate
(TP), back plate (BP), f-holes (F), bridge (B), sound post (SP), bass bar (BB), and
ribs (R) [1].
Taking all of this into account, the study investigates the relationship between humidity levels and
the vibrational characteristics of a violin and if changes in material properties modeled in COMSOL
can reflect the experimentally observed differences.
3
Theoretical Background
3.1
Wood material properties
Wood selection for instrument fabrication is a process that begins with the lumberjack determining
which trees have wood of a high enough quality. When the tree is felled, it is then cut into quarters
as shown in Figure 2 and shipped to customers who craft the wood into instruments. It is cut this
way, as it minimizes the amount of warping in the wood [8].
2
==PAGE:8==
Figure 2: Quarters of wood as cut for use in violin plate manufacturing. [9]
Then, the quartered wood is cut and carved in the shape of violin plates as shown in Figure 3. For
analysis purposes, the cylindrical coordinate system that describes the material properties of wood
can be approximated by a Cartesian system because the wood planks are thin compared to the
curvature of the growth rings. The three directions are now longitudinal (along the fiber direction),
radial (from the center to the edge of the tree), and tangential (along the growth rings). This
assumes the material properties are homogeneous and isotropic along all three axes.
Figure 3: Ortotropic material property directions on a quartered block for violin plate.
[5]
This lets us apply the known tensor derived from Hooke’s Law for orthotropic materials shown in
Figure 4. This describes the relationship between normal and shear stresses and strains. There are
nine material properties needed to fully describe the material; three Young’s moduli, three shear
moduli, and three Poisson’s ratios.
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 4: The compliance matrix for orthotropic materials with material properties
aligned in a Cartesian coordinate system [10].
3.2
Material property change with moisture content
The nine material properties needed in othrotrpic materials are all unknown at this point, and some
known relations are needed to provide a unique solution. The first step was utilizing published ratios
between all these material properties for both spruce and maple. The US Department of Agriculture
has thoroughly documented these ratios for wood with a moisture content (MC) of twelve percent.
Table 1: Common Young’s Modulus and material property ratios for both spruce and
maple wood. Figure made by [5] and values from [6].
These ratios have also been used before in violin simulation, but did not account for the change
in humidity, so more steps were taken [5]. Therefore, a method was developed for adjusting these
ratios based on the MC of wood. Based on prior research, when wood is held between 10 and 20
percent relative humidity, it’s moisture content is between 2 and 4 percent [3]. The climate chamber
held at a steady 20 percent relative humidity for the dry tests, so we will assume that the blocks
were at an MC of 4 when the reached equilibrium. Then, by
MC = 100 × mass −drymass
drymass
, [11]
(3.1)
4
==PAGE:10==
we can solve for the dry mass at an MC of 0. With the dry mass known, we can calculate the MC of
the blocks under ambient and wet conditions by inserting their mass into the same equation. Now
that the MC of the wood is known at each state, the material property ratios for 12 percent MC
were adjusted by the empirically determined formulas,
EMC
L
= E12
L [1 −0.015(MC −12)]
EMC
R
= E12
R [1 −0.03(MC −12)]
EMC
T
= E12
T [1 −0.03(MC −12)]
GMC
RT = G12
RT [1 −0.03(MC −12)]
GMC
TL = G12
TL[1 −0.03(MC −12)]
GMC
LR = G12
LR[1 −0.03(MC −12)], [12]
(3.2)
where the superscript denotes the humidity condition and the subscript denotes the direction in
which the elastic or shear modulus is applied. These equations can be used with reliability since
in the MC range tested, all properties are quite linear [13]. Now, all properties except the Young’s
modulus in the longitudinal direction are replaced with the ratios published in Table 1. The poisons
ratios were assumed to be the same across humidity since they are less sensitive than the moduli, and
no equation was found describing their relationship with moisture. Now for each humidity condition,
the properties of the spruce and maple are tuned properly, and all properties are adjusted by altering
only the longitudinal modulus, reducing the problem from nine variables to one.
For the violin, a similar process was performed for adjusting the material property ratios. First,
the non wooden components totaling in 26 grams were subtracted form the total mass of the violin
[14]. Then, we assume that the MC of the violin and the woodblocks are the same at the ambient
humidity. We also assume that the ebony used in the finger board has the same MC as the spruce
and maple as it could not be independently measured. We assume the violin and the wood blocks
have the same MC in ambient conditions, so with this value, we solve for the violin’s dry mass
using Equation 3.1. From there, we determine the MC of the violin when wet and dry based on its
mass. The modulus of the wood blocks, determined through simulation, is used to back-calculate
the average Young’s modulus of both wood types at 12 percent MC. These values are then used to
adjust all material properties in the violin simulations for the correct MC.
3.3
Violin FRF
The frequency response function (FRF) of a violin serves as a fingerprint of a violin, showing how
it will react under stimulus. Measuring the FRF is the common method to assess an instrument’s
response and gives insight to the construction and quality of the instrument [5]. The key factors
in the FRF to see the quality of the violin are the primary mode shapes, the A0, the center bout
rotation (CBR), B1-, B1+ and the bridge hill.
• A0 Mode: The lowest frequency mode, around 200 Hz, corresponds to the Helmholtz resonance.
• CBR Mode: The twisting of the body and poor acoustic radiator, usually around 400 Hz.
• B1- and B1+ Modes: Correspond to the two largest peaks in the FRF, around 450 and 530
Hz respectively.
• Bridge Hill: A collection of resonance peaks forming a hill typically between 2000 and 3000
Hz.
5
==PAGE:11==
The violin is measured up to 6.4 kHz to capture all these effects. As for what is the best sounding and
most desirable frequencies for these resonances is outside the scope of this paper, but is investigated
by many people, and there is no clear answer. Subjective preference will play a role, and people
often look to old Italian violins from famous luthier Stradivarius, and people today try to imitate
the FRF from these violins.
A simple test that will be looked at is the frequency separation between the two main peaks, the
B1- and B1+ modes. It has been recorded that depending on the distance between these peaks,
the quality of the violin can be assessed [15]. This separation is shown in below in Table 2.
Table 2: Frequency separation and tone character for a violin. Figure from [1], data
from [15].
The just noticeable difference in the frequency shift for the B1- and B1 + peaks is 4% and 3%,
respectively, so seeing how far the shift is from wet to dry will show if these peak shifts will be
noticeable to the average listener [16].
3.4
FRAC
An additional method that will be used to assess the difference in FRFs will be by implementing
the frequency response assurance criterion (FRAC) equation. This is a method of comparing two
response function with the same discrete frequencies to output a scalar value between zero and one
describing how similar the signals are. This has been done in many fields and also in previous violin
comparisons [2] [8].
FRAC =
Pω2
ω1 H1(ω)H∗
2(ω)
2
Pω2
ω1 H1(ω)H∗
1(ω) Pω2
ω1 H2(ω)H∗
2(ω)[17]
(3.3)
4
Methods
The two methods of analysis involved experimental procedures as well as extensive simulation in
COMSOL. The implementation of both of these methods is broken into several sections below.
4.1
Climate Chamber
A climate chamber previously used to test face masks during COVID was chosen for humidity
testing in this project due to its proven stability of temperature and humidity over long periods of
time. It is a plastic walled chamber with a removable front cover that screws into place. The edges
of this front cover were then covered with tape to ensure a complete seal of the chamber. There
are a few holes in the back that are required for the wiring, and these are also sealed with tape.
Since a major unknown was the amount of time required for the wood to reach equilibrium with the
humidity level, the wood blocks, and then the violin, both had their moisture content monitored
6
==PAGE:12==
with the simple method of measuring the mass. When the wood is in equilibrium with dry or humid
conditions, it will stop absorbing or releasing water, and the mass over time should be stabilized.
Therefore, when the samples were tested, first the humidity was monitored to make sure there were
no leaks or issues, then the mass of the wood was recorded.
When samples were being dried, four desiccant bags were placed in the chamber. These absorb
more than enough moisture for the volume of the chamber but several were used to ensure stability
in case one ever became saturated. When opening the chamber after several days of absorbing
moisture (including newly introduced moisture that is introduced every time the chamber is opened
to record the mass and collect samples for measurement), the bags become stiff with water and
were squeezed until they became loose again inside in order to still be effective absorbers.
Introducing moisture into the chamber for humid testing was a much simpler process. Four rags
were stitched together into loops that could be hung from wooden pegs resting in a pool of distilled
water. Capillary action within the fibers of the fabric, ordinary kitchen towels, drove the water
continuously up the suspended rags, which in turn was offset into the air. This cycle of drawing up
water, and releasing into the chamber could last as long as the pools were full of water ensuring a
stable highly humid chamber.
For both humidity conditions, three fans were placed in the chamber at slight angles to help promote
circulation of air. This will help speed up the process of not only altering the humidity condition,
but also allowing more air to pass over the wood to reduce the time it takes for the samples to come
into equilibrium.
4.2
Experimental Methods
The experimental setup was adapted from the original method used by Hella [2]. This involves the
use of a shaker, force transducer, and laser vibrometer. The shaker and the force transducer excite
one side of the wood and the velocity on the other side is measured, which gives the mobility.
4.2.1
Wood Blocks
To help determine the material properties of wood under different humidity conditions, first, simple
tests were performed on rectangular blocks of wood. First, the right samples of wood needed to be
obtained; these were generously donated by a local luthier Jørgen Skotte. Several samples of both
spruce and maple were granted. This is because traditionally the top plate, bridge, sound post, and
bass bar are made from spruce, and the back plate and ribs are made of maple. Once processed
into the desired shape, eight samples were procured. The four unique types of samples were cut
both in the longitudinal and radial directions of the wood labeled as spruce longitudinal, maple
longitudinal, spruce radial, and finally maple radial. There were doubles of each sample to ensure
reliability, and a backup in case one broke. Each sample then had a hole tapped into the middle to
be screwed onto the force transducer. The eight samples are all together in Figure 5.
7
==PAGE:13==
Figure 5: All eight wood samples of the scale during the drying process.
As you can see, the radial blocks were all tapered. This is due to the standard when purchasing
wood quarters for manufacturing of violins. The finished violin plates are convex, so less wood
height is needed on the outside edge. These samples were included because, even though they will
not follow simple rectangular bending mode shapes, they will be able to be recreated in COMSOL
for determining material properties. One block under test is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Wood block on shaker for FRF evaluation.
The blocks were left in the climate chamber until their mass came close to equilibrium, indicating
that there was no more moisture needed to be absorbed or released. This was done with a 0.1 gram
8
==PAGE:14==
precision by a Kern ems scale. They were then put into a climate controlled box for transport to
the vibrolab in building 354 at DTU. Samples were kept in the climate controlled cooler that had
matched conditions of the climate chamber. Then, one by one, the samples were screwed onto the
force transducer and their frequency response was measured. It was previously believed that a force
transducer would not work on these samples due to the low mass of the blocks. Initial tests were
done by screwing samples directly to the shaker and then normalizing by the velocity of the shaker
without the sample. After getting very strange results in only the reading the velocity on top of the
blocks, measurements were repeated with the improved force transducer method, but only on the
blocks with the most clear frequency responses were used, so the number of samples decreased from
eight, to four, with only one of each of the types of wood remaining. Time was then only available
to reproduce the wet and ambient conditions as these showed the most significant changes. This
velocity analysis and incorrect method however, is outside the main scope of this thesis, but more
details, results, and learning from these failed experiments is in Appendix A.
4.2.2
Violin
Testing for the violin was much more stressful and closely monitored since it is a delicate instrument
and can break under this extreme humidity load. It was placed into the climate chamber on a wooden
frame as shown in Figure 7. The boundary conditions on the violin were chosen to be similar to those
when playing. They include the same supports on the bottom that are on a normal neck rest, and
a thick string situated under the stiffest part of the body where it meets the neck to have minimal
influence. This simulates what the violin would sound like when played in fifth position with the
thumb on the back with the fingers curling over the front of the finger board. More logistically,
this choice was made as it ensures the violin remains flat, which simplifies alignment of the force
transducer and laser vibrometer. This Figure also shows the shaker inside of the climate chamber
with the connecting rod to ensure linear application of the force as well as the force transducer
making contact with the E string side of the bridge. If you look closely, you can also see the red
dot from the laser directly opposite the force transducer on a small piece of reflective tape on the
G string side of the bridge.
The shaker looks rigidly attached in the Figure but it is not. This would cause a vibrational short
circuit into the frame the violin is resting on and ruin the measurements. It is attached to a tripod
and suspended through a connecting rod via a hole cut into the back of the chamber. This ensures
that the closest unintended vibrational connection between the shaker is all the way through the
connecting rod, legs of the tripod, through the concrete floor, up the legs of the table, into the frame
and then the violin. This path is long with many impedance changes, and the large mass of the
floor ensures sufficiently little leakage into the system. The strings were damped by use of a plastic
card placed loosely between the strings. It is placed loosely, because then it works more effectively
as a damper as when tight, the vibrations travel through the card, and the strings response show
up as resonance peaks in the FRF.
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 7: Violin under test in the climate chamber.
Since the violin and climate chamber were several hundred meters from the vibrolab, and measurements
could not be performed as quickly as for the wood blocks, the lab was torn down and reassembled
in the cellar of building 414. This allowed less time for the violin to interact with the ambient air
and change material properties. The procedure for each measurement on the violin was as follows:
• Calibrate the accelerometer
• Open the chamber
• Tune the violin
• Record the mass
• Calibrate the laser and force transducer
• Damp the strings
• Measure several times
• Re-calibrate
• Seal chamber
Several measurements were produced because there is some measurement uncertainty attributed to
the placement of the force transducer. If the force transducer is not firmly pressed to the violin, it
will bounce and lose connection, causing a large drop in the coherence of the mobility. Therefore,
the violin was pre-stressed into the force transducer by gently pushing it into the shaker. This
10
==PAGE:16==
ensured that there was constant connection during the vibrational load and high coherence. This
does however cause some variability in the results so many spectra will be averaged over to give a
better picture of the FRF of the violin.
4.3
Equipment and Calibration
To perform the measurements, FFT analysis was done through the B&K Pulse type 3560 data
acquisition unit which was fed through the Pulse Noise and Vibrations software. The accelerometer
and the force transducer were connected to the Nexus 2692 charge preamplifier. The calibration
was performed before and after every measurement to make sure the equipment used was stable,
and if it was not, to show to what degree the measurement uncertainty can be quantified due to
differences in calibration. The force transducer (B&K type 8230) and the laser vibrometer (Polytec
type PDV-100) were both calibrated off of a B&K type 4375 accelerometer. The accelerometer was
calibrated with the B&K type 4294 calibrator that produces a known velocity of 10 mm/s at a
frequency of 159 Hz. It is attached with a thin layer of bee wax and the sensitivity is adjusted in
the Pulse system. Calibration for this step uses a flat-top window that will measure the amplitude
of a single frequency with more precision [18]. All the other calibration and measurements use a
hanning window for it’s frequency resolution.
Next, the force transducer was calibrated off of the accelerometer by using the shaker and a known
mass. White noise excitation was driven into the system exciting the force transducer, known mass,
and accelerometer. The mass of the accelerometer plus that of the mass was measured and the
output spectra is a rearrangement of Newton’s second law of motion, m = F/a. The sensitivity of
the force transducer was then adjusted until the ratio measured was equal to the mass. Since the
entire spectra was recorded, the frequency of 1000 Hz was chosen to be calibrated as there is more
noise at higher frequencies and this provided a consistent set up for calibration.
Finally the laser was calibrated from the accelerometer. Reflective tape was placed on top of the
accelerometer, still on the known mass, and the laser aimed at the top. The cross spectra was then
measured, and the sensitivity of the laser was adjusted until it matched the velocity reading of the
accelerometer. This is the ratio V/V , so it is calibrated when the transfer function was equal to
one.
4.4
Simulation Methods
Finite element simulation was performed as a way of determining the material properties of wood
in a non destructive testing method by matching the FRF in the vibrational testing. The finite
element models were all evaluated in COMSOL.
4.4.1
Wood Blocks
First simulation was performed on the blocks. These were simple geometric shapes that were easy
to create using the built-in COMSOL geometry tools. Only a quarter of the block was modeled
to save computation time as two symmetric boundary conditions greatly reduced the number of
elements needed as the simulation speed increased (only one symmetry condition could be used for
the tapered blocks).
After geometry was made, the ratios of the materials were assigned as described in section 3. The
boundary conditions were then assigned to the model as free since the block was suspended. A dot
11
==PAGE:17==
at the center of the block is denoted to measure the velocity magnitude in the vertical direction
to match what is being performed by the laser vibrometer. Then a small circle was drawn at the
bottom of the block equal to the size of the force transducer and assigned as a boundary load. The
value of the force is equal to 1 N. This was done so that when the velocity is measured at the top,
when dividing by a unit force of 1 for each frequency, we are recording the mobility directly from
the velocity.
Next, meshing was performed. To determine the required resolution, first a eigen frequency study
was performed with a very fine mesh.
Then the eigen frequencies and mode shapes could be
visualized and determined. The highest frequency of interest is 12.8 kHz to match the measurement
results, so the highest eigen frequency within this limit was found, then the mesh was updated to
include six elements per wavelength of this bending mode to accurately capture it in simulation [19].
This helped optimize the time needed in each simulation. The mesh was also improved in resolution
around where the force was applied since it is a relatively small area and accurately capturing this
is and important step in ensuring high simulation quality.
Finally, to determine the material properties, only two parameters were adjusted between trials
of dry, ambient, and wet. The density was determined from measuring the mass and volume of
the blocks, and this was updated for each humidity condition.
Then, a parametric sweep was
performed on the modulus in the longitudinal direction until the resonant frequencies for the lowest
order bending mode matched the measurements. The lowest frequency was chosen since it is the
longest wavelength and least sensitive to slight differences in the placement of the laser during
measurements. This was done for four blocks, the spruce in the longitudinal and radial directions,
and the maple in the same directions.
4.4.2
Violin
The violin model is a drastically more complicated shape than wood blocks, and cannot be easily
done with the limited features in the COMSOL geometry tab. To prevent reinventing the wheel, a
violin model that has been developed specifically for finite element method with accurate geometry
was developed by Viala R for research purposes [20]. They were kind enough to publish for free the
3D computer aided design model on Sketchfab, a website with user uploaded models. Their model
was based on a template from luthier M. Fauconnier. This model was a full violin and was adapted
in Solidworks to be more applicable for my research. First, the model was trimmed until only the top
plate, back plate, sound post, bridge, and bass bar remained. These are the most important factors
in determining the FRF of the violin. The side walls were neglected for two reasons. First, the glue
between the plates is a large unknown, the damping and other properties were not determined in
this study and including them would lead to more inaccuracies and uncertainty than I considered
value they would add. Secondly, the side ribs transfer a small amount of vibration to the back plate
as compared to the excitation delivered form the sound post. The simplified model is shown below
in Figure 8.
12
==PAGE:18==
Violin viewed form the side
Violin from an isometric view
Figure 8: Violin Model in COMSOL
The other main assumption made was to neglect the pretension in the bridge that is caused by the
large forces exerted by the strings onto the bridge. This could safely be assumed due to prior work
on FEA where it was found that pre-stress had little effect on the dynamic behavior of the violin
[8]. Including the pre-stresses also led to instabilities in their simulation, so based on their findings,
they will be neglected for my simulations.
The violin plates in reality have a nonuniform thickness, and are carefully carved out in certain
places to give less stiffness and alter the sound. To speed up simulation, the violin in COMSOL will
use shell physics on the plates so they are modeled as infinitely thin with a prescribed thickness.
The thickness chosen was 2.8 mm as this is the average thickness in the plates, and while this will
not provide perfect results, it will allow for more rapid testing.
Next, the material properties were imported into the model based on the calculated MC as described
in section 3. The bridge, bass bar, and sound post are all modeled out of spruce wood, similar to
the top plate. However, the sound post has fibers that run in the long direction of the post, so
special care was taken to ensure that the orthotropic wood properties were in the correct direction
for each element in the simulation. The back plate is the only maple element in the simulation.
To excite the system, a small circle was drawn on the side of the bridge and a unit force was assigned
perpendicular to the bridge, the same excitation as in the experiment. Next, a probe is placed on
the other side of the bridge that measures the magnitude of the velocity. This will give a FRF of the
violin that is similar to the experiment and serves as verification. Since the force is constant across
the entire spectra, the velocity probe is directly measuring the mobility. Finally, the boundary
conditions for the plate’s edge will be altered to see the effect of a fully fixed condition vs simply
supported on the FRF.
5
Results
There are several results for all tests performed that will be broken down into four sections below.
First, the results of the wood blocks will be presented followed by the violin. Both will cover the
experimental results followed by the simulation results.
13
==PAGE:19==
5.1
Wood blocks experimental
After recording the ambient results of the wood blocks, they were then placed into the climate
chamber to be dehydrated. The time it would take them to come into equilibrium with low moisture
conditions was unknown, so they were periodically monitored to have their mass recorded as shown
below in Figure 9. As time goes on, the mass will asymptotically approach equilibrium, and then
the experiment will be concluded. After two weeks of drying, it was determined that the blocks
were sufficiently stable under dry conditions, and then after measuring, the hydrating process was
started.
Figure 9: Mass over time in climate chamber while drying wood blocks.
The blocks were left in humid conditions for 2 fewer days than when drying since the mass between
days eight and twelve was nearly identical as shown in Figure 10. The blocks were then taken out
and transferred to the lab to have their results recorded.
Figure 10: Mass over time in climate chamber while hydrating wood blocks.
With the mass recorded, we could now calculate the density and MC of the wood once it was in
equilibrium with its surroundings. The density was simple to calculate by dividing the mass in
14
==PAGE:20==
each state by the volume of the blocks. Since the masses of the blocks were individually recorded,
Figure 11 shows the density of both spruce and maple under dry, ambient, and wet conditions. The
dotted line shows the published value for the average density of this type of wood at twelve percent
MC [6]. The spruce is higher in density at all points and this is believed to be due to the heavier,
higher quality wood used when constructing violins. The wood needs to have no knots or unusual
patterns with very straight fibers and even annual ring growth to be good enough quality to be
used as tone wood [8]. However, the maple is close to the reported value and rises above it in the
wet condition.
Figure 11: Density of spruce and maple wood blocks when at equilibrium with low,
ambient, and high levels of humidity with dotted lines showing published data of average
wood density.
The MC was then calculated. This could be done by assuming a four percent moisture content
of the wood blocks when in equilibrium with a twenty percent relative humidity as described in
section 3. Figure 12 shows the stable reading of 20 percent relative humidity during the drying
process with spikes back up to ambient when tests were performed. The results for the MC of both
the wood blocks and the violin are displayed below in Table 3. The MC for the wet blocks is close
to previous results that stated, at 90 percent RH, the MC is between 20 and 21 [3]. The climate
chamber was kept at an average relative humidity of 96%, as seen in Figure 13, so a value of 24.83
is close to what is expected. MC was calculated separately for the spruce and maple samples, but
they were within 1% of each other, so only the average combined results are displayed.
Table 3: Moisture content of the wood blocks and the violin based on mass from
Equation 3.1.
Moisture Content in %
Dry
Ambient
Wet
Wood Blocks
4.00
7.08
24.83
Violin
5.54
7.08
10.87
For easier comparison, the results of the MC from the violin tests are also included above. The
assumption here is that the wood will have the same moisture content in the ambient state for both
the blocks and the violin since the humidity was the same before both measurement sessions. Then,
based on the mass change of the violin, excluding all non-wooden components, the MC could be
calculated. As we can see, the violin experienced less mass change due to the shorter time left in the
climate chamber. The violin’s lower variation is due to the shorter amount of time in the chamber
along with the treatment on the finish on the outside of all the plates slowing moisture exchange.
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 12: Screenshot of the relative humidity (blue) and temperature (red) in the
climate chamber while drying wood blocks.
These two figures of temperature (red) and humidity (blue) show the high quality of the climate
chamber. Four tests were performed on the wood blocks while they were drying to see the drift in
the measurement results. The change between the last two tests was very small, which served as
another indication that the blocks were very close to equilibrium. The humidity took less than an
hour to come back into equilibrium when the chamber was opened for testing, and the variation was
kept within three percent for both dry and wet conditions. The temperature was also very stable,
with a variation of about one degree throughout the test period.
Figure 13: Screenshot of the relative humidity (blue) and temperature (red) in the
climate chamber while hydrating wood blocks.
The measured and simulated results for the wood blocks FRF will now be presented in the next
several plots. All plots have the same color scheme, with the measured ambient condition in black,
the simulated ambient in green, the measured wet in dark blue, and the simulated wet in light blue.
Only wet and ambient tests are presented due to failure to correctly measure the mobility the first
time the dry tests were performed. The drying process is still useful for calculation of the moisture
content and density which will be used for simulation of the violin. The dry results also showed less
of a change than the wet results, since the change in mass and stiffness was much smaller, because
16
==PAGE:22==
the blocks under ambient conditions are already relatively dry. For more information on the initial
tests with dry results, refer to Appendix A.
Figure 14: FRF of spruce sample with fibers aligned in the long direction of the sample
with measurement compared to simulation.
First, the longitudinal results of the spruce (fibers running along the long axis of the beam) will
be shown in Figure 14 and Figure 15. Looking at the results from ambient to wet, we can see a
frequency shift in the first resonance from 4600 to 3800 Hz. This is a significant change. This is the
clearest example of how great the effect of moisture can have on the vibrational characteristics of
wood. Looking at the first resonance in the wet measurement, there appears to be an anti-resonance
right after the resonant peak. However, this is a measurement artifact. The force transducer and
laser vibrometer measured a slightly different resonance peak for unknown reasons, so the interaction
between these two signals being slightly different created an artificial anti-resonance that can be
ignored. It is unclear why this happened for only some of the measurements but could be due to
the laser not being level, or not measuring directly above the force transducer, or other unknown
reasons.
Looking at the higher resonances, we can see that there is a lot of activity, and it is not clear
which mode we are looking at for each peak. There is twisting and several different moduli meaning
simple beam bending theory cannot be implemented. The beams are also thick, so thin beam theory
doesn’t apply. This is why the simulation was tuned to the lowest resonance peak. It is also worth
noting that the resonant peaks of the higher modes are not as high as the lowest order modes. We
are measuring with only a 2 Hz resolution, so we are likely not measuring the true resonance peak,
but the amplitude of higher order modes appears to be lower.
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 15: A closer look at the first resonance peak in the plot above.
Now, looking at the other spruce block, the radial sample, in Figure 16. The stiffness will be much
lower in the long direction of the beam where the lowest frequency bending mode will occur since
the fibers are on the short axis. This is clear when comparing resonant frequencies from 4600 Hz in
the longitudinal case to just 1500 Hz for ambient conditions. This comparison is not entirely fair
however, since the geometry of the blocks is not identical, and the geometry has a strong influence
on the measured resonance. We still can see the trend of a decrease in resonance frequencies as we
change conditions from ambient to wet. The curves are very similar to each other with a horizontal
shift.
Figure 16: FRF of spruce sample with radial direction aligned in the long direction of
the sample with measurement compared to simulation.
Now looking at the maple samples. The same trends can be observed, as every resonance decreases
with an increase in moisture content. First, the longitudinal results are shown in Figure 17. This
sample was the lowest quality of all samples tested. It had an uneven surface with thickness varying
18
==PAGE:24==
between a few millimeters. After measurements were concluded, it was also noted that the fibers
were not perfectly straight and had some bending, meaning that the longitudinal properties could
not be perfectly measured. Either way, we can still recognize the same patterns from the other
samples.
Figure 17: FRF of maple sample with fibers aligned in the long direction of the sample
with measurement compared to simulation.
Figure 18 and Figure 19 both show the radial maple results. The second figure highlights the first
bending mode, we can see very clearly a difference in amplitude of the resonant peaks. This shows
that not only does the density change, but the internal damping does as well since an increase in
damping will cause a decrease in the resonance amplitude. From this observation, it was decided to
calculate the damping factor of the first resonance from all four samples in both humidity conditions.
These calculations were done by the 3 dB bandwidth method where we measure the amplitude at
resonance, and divide the half power bandwidth by the resonant frequency.
These results are
tabulated below in Table 4
Figure 18: FRF of maple sample with radial direction aligned in the long direction of
the sample with measurement compared to simulation.
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 19: A closer look at the first resonance peak in the plot above
The damping factor is measured with a high degree of uncertainty.
This is due to the coarse
frequency resolution of 2 Hz meaning that we will not measure the true resonance and underestimate
the true amplitude. The values for the wet results can be trusted more since they are more damped,
the resonance peak will be less sharp and the measured and true value will be closer in amplitude.
Despite this, this table still shows that the damping is higher for the wet sample in all four cases,
about twice as high. The main outlier in these results is the ambient damping factor for S Along.
This peak was very high and very narrow, giving a very small damping factor. It is unclear is this
is where a true peak was closely measuring giving a high amplitude, or if the damping is different
for this sample due to its high uniformity and quality compared to the others.
Table 4: Calculated damping factor for measurement results on wood blocks tested both
along and across the fiber direction for spruce and maple.
Sample
ηambient
ηwet
S Along
0.00087
0.0204
S across
0.0204
0.0461
M Along
0.012
0.0279
M across
0.0172
0.042
Finally for the experimental results, a quick look at the calibration data provides additional commentary
on the reliability and uncertainty in the measurements.
To calibrate the accelerometer, force
transducer, and laser vibrometer, a gain was applied in the software. These gain values are tabulated
in Table 5. The calibration was performed both before and directly after the measurement. As we
can see, there is less than one percent drift in the ambient measurements across all the equipment. In
the wet measurements, the accelerometer sensitivity drifted by 1.3% while the transducer remained
the same and the laser showed a drift of 1.5%.
This gives a higher unreliability in the wet
measurements than the dry. It is unclear why this drift occurred but some possible explanations
include a change in the amount of bees wax on the accelerometer or heating up of the equipment.
20
==PAGE:26==
Table 5:
Sensitivity adjustment during calibration of the testing performed on
woodblocks
Gain in Pulse
Accelerometer
Force Transducer
Laser
Ambient - pre
3.16
245m
202m
Ambient - post
3.16
246m
203m
Wet - pre
3.17
248m
204m
Wet - post
3.13
248m
201m
5.2
Wood blocks simulated
Looking back at the previous six figures and focusing on the green and light blue curves, we can see
how the simulation results compare to the measured. By adjusting the density and stiffness tensor
based on the MC as well as known ratios, the results were tuned by a parametric sweep of the
longitudinal modulus which controls all other values in the tensor (see section 3). This resulted in
extremely accurate estimations of the first bending mode frequency, with maximum center frequency
variation of only 2 Hz. This is most clear in the two zoomed in figures. To model the differences in
damping, the ambient results used a value of 1% and the wet results a value of 2%. This is based
on the calculated damping factors above but due to the high uncertainty, this rough estimate was
applied. It also has little effect on the results since it will only cause a change in the resonance
amplitude and not the frequency at which it occurs.
While the resonance peak is matched almost perfectly, it then leads to the question as to why the
anti-resonance is not as accurately simulated. This is due to the locality of anti-resonances which
can change in frequency greatly with position, so the exact matching of these is not taken much
into account.
As frequency gets higher and higher, the model has a harder time matching the experimental results.
This is most clear in Figure 18 where the first peak is nearly perfect, then the second peak is off
by 10s of Hz, then the third and fourth peaks do not accurately reflect what happened in the
measurements. This can be do a number of different reasons. First, we note that the resonance
peaks in the measurement are much lower in amplitude than predicted in the model. This can be
due to a nonuniform damping across frequency which is not accounted for in the COMSOL model.
Wood has been proven to increase damping with frequency, but it is unclear if this is the only reason
the peaks are so low in amplitude or not [21].
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 20: First bending mode of the longitudinal spruce sample.
Figure 20 to Figure 24 show the simulated eigenfrequencies from COMSOL. This shows the shape
of the mode at different resonances and highlights where the motion is large and small. The purple
color indicates where the motion is greatest, and the white indicates the nodal lines – where there
is no motion. The displacement in the figures is heavily exaggerated but helps show that which
modes correspond to which resonant peaks. It is quite easy to predict the simple modes form the
perfectly rectangular blocks, but the radial samples are tapered at one end making prediction and
identification of modes difficult.
Figure 21: Lowest frequency mode of the longitudinal spruce sample.
There is a small bump in the measurements of the S2 longitudinal block around 3800 Hz and 3200 Hz
for the ambient and wet conditions respectively. It was unknown what was causing this until the
eigen frequency analysis revealed that the first twisting mode occurs at this frequency and is shown
above in Figure 21. The measurement location and excitation position in the simulation is perfectly
in the center of the block, so there is no measured excitation and the simulation curves have no
bump from this mode. In practice however, the measurement location was marked by hand, so
naturally not perfectly centered, so this twisting will have a little bit of response in the middle of
the beam. Even if the measurement location was perfectly in the middle, the material properties are
not homogeneous throughout the wood block, and imperfections can lead to the true mode shape
taking slightly different form as the fibers are organic.
22
==PAGE:28==
Figure 22: First bending mode of the radial maple sample.
The maple modes are less symmetric due to the uneven geometry, the resonance peak is not perfectly
in the center of the beam, and the tip has higher deflection. This further shows why the models were
tuned to the lowest resonance, as slight changes in measurement location would have the lowest
impact on the output of the FRF due to the longer wavelength
Figure 23: Second bending mode of the radial maple sample.
Looking at Figure 24, we can see already for the third bending mode, that the wavelength is
becoming much smaller. This can also be the reason that we do not see as many resonance peaks
in the measurements as we do in the simulations. We could be measuring in the wrong location
and missing a mode entirely since the peak displacement is not in the geometric center of the beam.
This problem is also impacted form the non-uniformity inherent in wood.
Figure 24: Third bending mode of the radial maple sample.
23
==PAGE:29==
The results for the elastic modulus after tuning all four simulation models with ambient and wet
conditions are tabulated below in Table 6. As we can see, there is a large variation in properties
from sample to sample. The increase in mass will also cause a decrease in the resonant frequency,
but this alone was not enough to match measurements, it is the combined effect of changes in mass
and stiffness that determine the new response of wood. These results align with the theory that an
increase in MC causes a decrease in stiffness and resonant frequency.
Table 6: Simulated material properties.
Sample
S along
S radial
M along
M radial
EL Ambient [GPa]
17.3
14.1
7.5
10.3
EL Wet [GPa]
16.3
10.8
6.3
9.9
Now that these results were obtained, it is necessary to plug them in Equation 3.1 to solve for the
equivalent stiffness of wood at an MC of 12. This was done so that we can use the average E12
L
with violin’s MC for accurate simulation. The large variation between the results can be partially
explained by differences in the quality of the wood used for the samples. The higher stiffness of
the spruce blocks makes sense because they are cut from tone wood originating from climates with
relatively low temperatures. This results in a smaller annual growth, resulting in a denser wood
with higher stiffness [22]. If there were more time, it would be interesting to perform more common
destructive testing methods on additional wood samples to see how closely these vibrational testing
methods are to characterizing the moduli of wood. There is also a difference in the dynamic and
static stiffness that is overlooked here.
Table 7: Calculated average longitudinal Young’s modulus at twelve percent MC based
on the simulated values in the table above.
Calculated Averages
Spruce
Maple
E12
L [GPa]
15.4
9
5.3
Violin experimental
Now after characterizing the wood blocks, it is time to see how this is manifested in the more
complex violin. Over the course of several weeks, the mass (Figure 25) and FRF were recorded.
The ambient results are recorded on day 1, labeled as Ambient. Three dry measurements were
made on days 5, 6, and 7. These are labeled as dry 1, dry 2 and dry 3. Measurements were not
taken on day 3 since the mass change was not yet significant. The measuring procedure leaves the
chamber exposed to ambient conditions for about 90 minutes, so it was decided to remain closed
for as long as possible when interesting results were likely not to be found.
After measuring the Dry 3 results on day 7, the climate chamber had the dehydration bags removed
and the humidity was raised to 94% as shown in Figure 26. There were two wet measurements
performed which occurred on day 9 and day 11. The first will be denoted as Wet and the second
will be denoted as Wet Damaged. The violin was pushed to its limit, and on the final day the glue
connecting the top plate to the ribs dissolved under the high humidity and a quarter of the plate
was detached from the body. These results are interesting, but outside the main scope of this thesis
so are recorded in Appendix B.
24
==PAGE:30==
Figure 25: Mass of the violin in the climate chamber as it was dried then hydrated.
Figure 26 also demonstrates the stability of the temperature and humidity during testing periods,
with spikes back to ambient humidity when the chamber was opened and testing was performed.
For reasons unknown, the temperature rose by 1.5°C over the testing period. This could be due to
the development of mold in the chamber in high humidity which releases gas as it grows, but this
is unknown.
Figure 26: Screenshot of the relative humidity (blue) and temperature (red) in the
climate chamber while drying then hydrating the violin.
To measure the FRF of the violin in each state, ten measurements were taken and averaged. Between
each trial the violin was removed, and set back down on the force transducer as there needs to be
some stress applied to stay in contact throughout the measurement. This stress has slight variability
due to human error, but the results in Figure 27 show that there is very little variation between the
measurements under the same conditions.
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 27:
Example of the variation between measurements in a single humidity
condition.
In order to have a 1 Hz resolution, a frequency span from 1 to 6.4 kHz was made. This will capture
all important modes as well as the bridge hill. The broadband FRF of the violin in ambient, final
dry, and wet conditions is below in Figure 28. As we can see, there is variation between conditions,
but the overall shape remains the same, meaning it will still sound like a violin.
Figure 28: Average FRF of the violin in dry, ambient, and wet humidity conditions.
To have a better idea as to what is happening with the most important B1- and B1+ resonances,
Figure 29 shows the response from 190 to 700 Hz. Here we can clearly identify three separate
peaks. First, the A0 breathing mode centered at 220 Hz, the B1- at 435 Hz and the B1+ at 510 Hz.
Similar to the results on the wood blocks, we can see that an increase in MC causes a decrease in the
resonant frequencies and vice versa. This can be seen not only the three resonances mentioned, but
also at the intermediate resonant peaks between. This also now confirms that an decrease in MC
causes an increase in the resonant peaks as shown by the dry curve which was not demonstrated
with the wood blocks.
For unknown reasons, the B1+ resonance is the same between dry and
ambient conditions, but all other peaks are slightly higher in frequency.
26
==PAGE:32==
Figure 29: A closer look at the FRF for A0, B1+, and B1- modes.
To better understand the reliability of the measurements, the coherence of all measurements was
recorded and is displayed in Figure 30. As we can see, the coherence in the ambient measurements
is excellent, staying close to one everywhere except at resonance peaks. The coherence for dry and
wet conditions is good, but not perfect. It stays above 0.9 everywhere except at resonance which
still indicates high quality measurements. It should be noted that there is a strange drop at 3 kHz
that was recorded in both dry and wet conditions, as well as previous measurements made in a prior
thesis on the same equipment [2]. It is predicted that this is due to a resonance that exists within
the arm extending off of the shaker connecting to the force transducer, as this also showed up in
preliminary calibration measurements that included the arm with the force transducer (it was later
removed), but this is not confirmed.
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 30: Coherence of all measurements for ambient, dry, and wet conditions.
In addition to the changes in center frequency with humidity, the change in damping was also
calculated for the three primary modes tabulated in Table 8. Here we see the same effect that was
observed with the wood blocks where the damping increases with MC for both bending modes. The
B1- mode for the ambient case was unable to be calculated due to modal overlap and two peaks
being present at this frequency. The second acoustic mode (A1) is also near this frequency, so it is
likely that the other peak is present here. Violinists prefer a lower damping as it provides a more
responsive instrument and is easier to play making the dry conditions favored for this feature [1].
The A0 acoustic mode however, showed a similar damping for all three conditions. These calculated
values are not perfect due to the limited frequency resolution, so the error is high and these can be
considered as being nearly identical due to the 0.04 variation. This may be due to the mode being
the acoustic Helmholtz mode, and even though the properties of air change with humidity, the tests
were performed with the front cover of the climate chamber removed, meaning the air was ambient
in all three tests. It is then unclear why the damping was unaffected but the center frequency was.
28
==PAGE:34==
As wood changes MC, it swells and this will effect the internal volume as well as the area between
the f-holes which both alter the resonant frequency, but further research will have to be done to
know why this shift occurred.
Table 8: Calculated damping factor for measurement results on violin of A0, B1-, and
B1+ modes.
Mode/Humidity
ηdry
ηambient
ηwet
A0
0.034
0.030
0.031
B1-
0.010
N/A
0.019
B1+
0.029
0.019
0016
There was a simple proposal made to determine the subjective quality of a violin based on the
distance between the two main resonance peaks. Table 9 below shows the center frequency for
these two primary modes, as well as the difference between them and the corresponding quality.
However, these results tell us little because the difference was exactly the same between ambient
and wet conditions and similar for dry conditions. The dry frequency separation is rated slightly
worse, but is still bright and carrying like the other two conditions. This shows that the frequency
separation has more to do with the violin construction that it does changes in humidity, this is held
pretty constant.
Table 9: Frequency separation of the two main resonance peaks B1- and B1+ with
separation and corresponding tonal rating from [15].
Humidity Condition
B1- [Hz]
B1+ [Hz]
Difference [Hz]
Rating
Dry
445
514
69
Bright, fine and carrying
Ambient
437
515
78
Bright and carrying
Wet
413
491
78
Bright and carrying
As described in section 3, the just noticeable difference for the B1- and B1+ peaks is 4 and 3
percent. The differences between the wet and ambient conditions is above this percent so it will be
noticeable to hear the difference between these instruments. The gap between the center frequencies
was smaller than this threshold for ambient and dry conditions, so if these peaks were the only
difference between the two FRFs, the difference could not be easily discerned. There are many
more changes in the frequency responses than just these two peaks, so I believe listeners would be
able to tell the difference between the dry and ambient violins being played, but further research
would have to be done to confirm this.
The next two heat plots in Figure 31 and Figure 32 are the results showing the FRAC results for
comparisons between the ambient, three progressive drying, and wet conditions. The only difference
in processing the two plots is the frequency range used in the calculation. The first has a limited
frequency range from 270 to 2800 Hz as proposed in prior work [2], and the following is a broadband
analysis over the entire recorded frequency range. As we can see, the broadband analysis gives a
slightly higher correlation between all signal comparisons due to the higher similarity between
signals above 2000 Hz. The overall message from both plots is the same; the greater the difference
in MC, the less correlated the FRFs will be. This is most obvious by seeing the highest correlation
is between ambient and dry1, which are very similar in MC, and the lowest FRAC is for wet and
dry3. This helps provide commentary on the FRF, showing quantitatively how similar or different
the curves are.
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 31: FRAC results compared between average FRFs for each humidity condition
tested between 270 and 2800 Hz.
Figure 32: FRAC results compared between average FRFs for each humidity condition
tested across the entire spectra between 1 and 6400 Hz.
In Table 10 are the calibration results from before and after the measurement for each humidity
condition. This helps show the level of uncertainty in amplitude for all measurements. The wet
conditions showed the lowest amount of drift in instrumentation while the dry and ambient showed
similar levels. The change is still less than 1% for the accelerometer, force transducer, and laser, so
the results can be trusted with relatively high accuracy.
30
==PAGE:36==
Table 10: Sensitivity adjustment during calibration of the testing performed on violin.
Gain in Pulse
Accelerometer
Force Transducer
Laser
Ambient - pre
3.08
240m
199m
Ambient - post
3.10
242m
200m
Dry - pre
3.17
252m
205m
Dry - post
3.16
249m
203m
Wet - pre
3.15
247m
203m
Wet - post
3.16
247m
204m
5.4
Violin simulated
The boundary conditions play an important part in simulations. It was postulated that simply
supported conditions may be the best and simplest approach to modeling the edge of the top
and bottom violin plates.
This is due to the restriction of vertical translation imposed by the
ribs of the violin body, but allowing rotation to still occur. Previous work has simulated with fixed
supports, but this prevents any rotation or translation at the edge of the body that is unrealistically
constrained [23]. Therefore, the first comparison made was made on dry MC with fixed and simply
supported conditions presented in Figure 33. As we can see, having fixed supports drove the B1-
and B1+ from realistic values of 450 and 550 Hz down to 370 and 470. Based on these results, all
following simulation will use simply supported boundary conditions.
Figure 33: Simply supported vs fixed boundary conditions for a simulated violin FRF
under dry conditions.
Finally, the three curves in Figure 34 show the simulated mobility at the bridge from the three
humidity conditions. As we can see, there is a shift down for all peaks as the wood is simulated
with increased density and decreased stiffness based on the higher MC. The first resonance of the
ambient peak is very low in amplitude, but this is likely due to not simulating at the true resonance
based on the low frequency resolution. The wet curve shows a great decrease in center frequency
for both curves. The curve for the wet and ambient conditions has a lower frequency resolution
than the other two simulations due to a preliminary analysis with 10 Hz spacing. Then, when a
2 Hz analysis was performed, the internet dropped, and the model was not saved losing eight hours
of modeling work. Due to time limitation, there was not time to recreate the model to find the
31
==PAGE:37==
true resonance peaks. This is not much of an issue, however, since this graph still demonstrates the
decrease in frequency which was the goal of this analysis. The model is oversimplified with only
the top and back plates, sound post, bridge, and bass bar, so the goal of the simulation was not to
match the measurement results, but to show that the trends could be replicated.
Figure 34: FRF of the bridge mobility for a violin with changes in material properties
based on dry, ambient, and wet conditions.
6
Discussion
6.1
Wood Blocks
All of the results above demonstrate that increasing the MC of wood will cause a decrease in
the resonant frequencies of all peaks as well as an increase in the damping. The ambient peak
frequency depends on the violin construction, and a decrease or increase in the resonance peaks
may be favorable, but lower damping will always be more desirable.
To see how well our assumptions about the MC of wood and the simulated values of the modulus
worked, Table 11 shows my calculated values for the longitudinal Young’s modulus for both types
of wood along with values provided from three sources also characterizing tone wood for violins.
Table 11: The average simulated moduli along with values used from other violin
researchers.
Comparing EL [GPa]
Spruce
Maple
My analysis
15.4
9
KTH [1]
15
10
Viala [8]
14
12.93
Masoa [5]
9.9
12.6
The results obtained show that we are close to estimating the same modulus as the first two sources,
particularly for spruce. With a sample size of only two for simulating the properties, these results
show that we are well within the high variation of wood properties, and the chosen methods work.
Masoa’s values are trusted the least, not only because they are the most different, but because they
32
==PAGE:38==
also used values from the average modulus for both types of wood, ignoring the fact that spruce
wood used for sound boards is made of higher quality wood than standard spruce.
The simulation’s overestimation of the FRF amplitude at high frequency can be explained by a
combination of several differences between real and simulated wood. Errors exist in the location
of the shaker and laser placement. The material properties are also non uniform from sample to
sample and even throughout the same sample. The damping and moduli are also non linear with
frequency which is ignored in simulation for simplicity [8]. With all of these factors combined, we
can appreciate the accurately of the low frequencies while understanding the limitations at high
frequencies.
Another limitation in the results include neglecting expansion and contraction with moisture when
calculating the density. This results in a slight overestimation of the density for wet conditions
and an underestimation for the dry density. Simulating with a different density would result in a
different estimation of the Young’s Modulus. This effect is worst for the wet condition where the
change in size with estimated MC is around 5% [11]. Still, we were able to simulate an accurate
modulus, but this gives highest uncertainty to the wet estimates and if performed again, the volume
would be more closely monitored for the wood samples.
6.2
Violin
During the humidity tests, the violin was pushed to its limit. During dry tests, the wood on the
tuning pegs shrunk so much that even when fully pressed in, the E string could not be held under
tension due to the lack of friction. In the wet tests, the violin was pushed to failure with separation
of the top plate from the rest of the violin. This accurately captured both extremes of humidity
where the instrument loses quality due to breaking down.
One of the weaknesses in the analysis is the matching of the violin simulations to the experiments.
The simulation underestimated some resonance peaks while overestimating others. Table 12 shows
these differences and overall these results are satisfactory, but not exceptional. It illustrates that
the change in material properties and density is what is driving the difference in frequency, but
there may be some oversimplification with the current model geometry.
Table 12: Difference between the simulated and measured B1- and B1+ resonance peaks.
Sim. Error [Hz]
Dry
Ambient
Wet
B1-
7
-42
-23
B1+
36
20
-61
The results with the highest difference is the wet condition which makes sense.
This was the
condition with the largest change in properties, so any error in the assumptions of moisture content
will be amplified with more change in MC. One limitation is the lack of tools to measure the MC
directly, but the method developed proves to produce results similar to published values.
The violin FRF measurements are very clear in showing the extent the FRF is expected to shift with
these three humidity conditions. Future work could include a subjective study with auralizations of
the violins with different MC based on the FRFs. This would help show which violin sound people
prefer and give a more qualitative insight to the change in sound. More work could also be done
creating a more accurate simulation with additional geometry as well as research into characterizing
33
==PAGE:39==
the glue and boundary conditions at the neck. The addition of air would also be useful to see the
change in the A0 and A1 breathing modes as these are not present in the current vibrational analysis
and it is not understood why they shifted by so much.
Determining which condition produces the best sound is impossible to say with certainty, but
violinists prefer a responsive instrument meaning low damping, so based on these findings dry
is predicted be the most preferred by players.
It is hard to say beyond this which violin will
sound better as the frequency peaks are all in the expected range, and their spacing remains quite
consistent.
Luthiers could use these findings by using different types of wood for different climates. To achieve
a violin with equal sound and quality in a wet climate, it should be constructed from wood with
a higher modulus as the moisture will decrease the stiffness. When constructing violins in these
countries, I suggest measuring the equilibrium MC of wood in your climate, and then calculating
the stiffness required for your wood to match the properties of the violin whose sound you are trying
to imitate. The wetter the country, the stiffer the wood should be.
If in a dry climate, less action needs to be performed, because the changes in wood are smaller.
However, to match the sound of a desired violin, the wood should be slightly less stiff than those
constructed in a wetter climate using the same method above. The largest risk with this method
is the violin will have a great change if transported from it’s native conditions risking both damage
and large change in tone character.
One effective method to achieve stiffer wood would be through thermally drying in an oven. This
will limit total resorption of water providing a lower MC than untreated wood at the same relative
humidity [24]. This is a good strategy to ensure violins maintain lower damping in humid climates.
7
Conclusion
Humidity significantly impacts both the properties of wood and the response of a violin. Adding
moisture reduces the wood’s stiffness, increases its mass, and adds damping. The FRAC heat plots
demonstrate that greater changes in MC result in greater changes in the frequency response. My
method involved initially estimating the MC based on relative humidity and then updating the
wood property ratios at twelve percent MC using an empirical equation. This approach yielded
simulated results consistent with previous research verifying the validity.
Overall, the methods, experiments, and simulations were successful in showing how the relationship
between wood and moisture is manifested in a musical setting. There were clear demonstrations of
the effect on the wood blocks and violin in both experimental and simulation domains. Wood is a
living material, and the environmental conditions play a part in shaping the sound.
34
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
E. V. Jansson, Acoustics for violin and Guitar Makers. Kungl. Tekniska högskolan, Dept. of
Speech. Music and Hearing, 2002.
[2]
H. D. Flocken, “Can forced vibrations transform the sound of new violins?” Ph.D. dissertation,
2023.
[3]
J. E. Reeb, “Wood and moisture relationships,” Oregon State University, 1995.
[4]
J. Göken, S. Fayed, H. Schäfer, and J. Enzenauer, “A study on the correlation between wood
moisture and the damping behaviour of the tonewood spruce,” Acta Physica Polonica A,
vol. 133, pp. 1241–1260, May 2018. doi: 10.12693/APhysPolA.133.1241.
[5]
M. Yokoyama, “Coupled numerical simulations of the structure and acoustics of a violin
body,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 150, no. 3, pp. 2058–2064,
Sep. 2021. doi: 10.1121/10.0006387. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-
pdf/150/3/2058/15352547/2058\_1\_online.pdf.
[6]
D. Green, J. Winandy, and D. Kretschmann, Wood handbook: wood as an engineering material.
1999, pp. 4.1–4.45.
[7]
S. A. Ahmed and S. Adamopoulos, “Acoustic properties of modified wood under different
humid conditions and their relevance for musical instruments,” en, Appl. Acoust., vol. 140,
pp. 92–99, Nov. 2018.
[8]
R. Viala, “Towards a model-based decision support tool for stringed musical instrument
making,” Ph.D. dissertation, Materials and structures in mechanics, 2018.
[9]
Fiddlover. (Sep. 2022), [Online]. Available: https://fiddlover.com/blogs/news/do-you-
know-how-the-wood-used-to-make-the-violin-is-sawed.
[10]
I. eFunda. “Hooke’s law.” (), [Online]. Available: https://www.efunda.com/formulae/solid_
mechanics/mat_mechanics/hooke_orthotropic.cfm.
[11]
A. R. Ågren. (2024), [Online]. Available: https://www.swedishwood.com/wood-facts/about-
wood/wood-and-moisture/#:~:text=The%20average%20moisture%20content%20in%20a%
20piece%20of%20wood%20can,hammer%20electrodes%20with%20insulated%20probes..
[12]
D. GUITARD and F. EL AMRI, “Modèles prévisionnels de comportement élastique tridimensionnel
pour les bois feuillus et les bois résineux,” Annales des Sciences Forestières, vol. 44, no. 3,
pp. 335–358, 1987. doi: 10.1051/forest:19870305.
[13]
C. C. Gerhards, “Effect of moisture content and temperature on the mechanical properties of
wood: An analysis of immediate effects.,” Wood and fiber Science, vol. 14, no. 1, 1982.
[14]
D. A. Langsather, Instrument weight and performance... for a superior sound quality, Oct.
2020.
[15]
C. M. Hutchins, “A measurable controlling factor in the tone and playing qualities of violins,”
J. Catgut Acoust. Soc., 2nd ser., vol. 1, no. 4, 1989.
[16]
C. Fritz, I. Cross, B. C. Moore, and J. Woodhouse, “Perceptual thresholds for detecting
modifications applied to the acoustical properties of a violin,” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 122, no. 6, pp. 3640–3650, Dec. 2007. doi: 10.1121/1.2799475.
[17]
R. J. Allemang, “The modal assurance criterion – twenty years of use and abuse,” Sound and
vibration, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 14–23, 2003.
35
==PAGE:41==
[18]
S. Gade and H. Herlufsen, “Technical review: Windows to fft analysis (part 1),” Brüel Kjær,
1987.
[19]
S. MARBURG, “Six boundary elements per wavelength: Is that enough?” Journal of Computational
Acoustics, vol. 10, no. 01, pp. 25–51, Mar. 2002. doi: 10.1142/s0218396x02001401.
[20]
R. Viala. “Violin cad for virtual prototyping.” (Feb. 2024), [Online]. Available: https://
sketchfab.com/3d-models/violin-cad-for-virtual-prototyping-3756eb4e0c174157a8b049742f624b27.
[21]
T. Ray, “Selection of wood based on acoustic properties for the solid body of electric guitar,”
Archives of Acoustics, Jul. 2023. doi: 10.24425/aoa.2019.126351.
[22]
M. D. Stanciu, C. Coşereanu, F. Dinulică, and V. Bucur, “Effect of wood species on vibration
modes of violins plates,” European Journal of Wood and Wood Products, vol. 78, no. 4,
pp. 785–799, May 2020. doi: 10.1007/s00107-020-01538-5.
[23]
V. G. Gliga, M. D. Stanciu, S. M. Nastac, and M. Campean, “Modal analysis of violin bodies
with back plates made of different wood species,” BioResources, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 7687–7713,
Aug. 2020. doi: 10.15376/biores.15.4.7687-7713.
[24]
A. Pfriem, “Thermally modified wood for use in musical instruments,” Drvna industrija,
vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 251–253, 2015. doi: 10.5552/drind.2015.1426.
[25]
U. G. Wegst, “Wood for sound,” American Journal of Botany, vol. 93, no. 10, pp. 1439–1448,
Oct. 2006. doi: 10.3732/ajb.93.10.1439.
36
==PAGE:42==
A
Appendix: Velocity measurements on wood blocks
The initial measurements on the wood blocks were conducted over a month. It was initially believed
that the addition of a force transducer would not be possible, so only velocity readings were made.
Below are the four figures matching the same wood blocks samples with the mobility measured. All
four of these measurements caused a lot of confusion, as they do not have a clear first resonance
followed by an anti resonance, they all have a peak followed by a flat section, then another peak.
It was not possible to tell which peak corresponded to the true resonance and which was a part
of the system. When measuring only the velocity, the amount of force acting on each frequency
is neglected and it is not a measurement of only the wood, but the response of the entire system
including the shaker.
First is the longitudinal spruce block in Figure 35. The peak around 2000 Hz is not a true resonance
and is part of the system. This is only known by it turning into an anti resonance when measuring
the mobility. This also shows how little the dry results shift compared to the wet.
Figure 35: Velocity of longitudinal spruce block under three humidity conditions.
Next is the radial spruce velocity reading in Figure 36. Here it is easier to see how the higher
frequency has higher amplitude than in the mobility meaning that the force must be higher to
excite these higher order modes.
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 36: Velocity of radial spruce block under three humidity conditions.
Figure 37 and Figure 38 show the results for the maple blocks. Despite these not showing the
true response of only the wood under load, it is still useful to illustrate the differences between
the humidity conditions. The relative shift in curves is similar to that of the mobility, the wrong
properties are simply being evaluated here.
Figure 37: Velocity of longitudinal maple block under three humidity conditions.
38
==PAGE:44==
Figure 38: Velocity of radial maple block under three humidity conditions.
B
Appendix: Measurements on broken Violin
By the final wet test on the violin, the top plate was partially detached from the ribs as shown in
Figure 39. Despite this, measurements were still performed to see how the instrument would change.
After several weeks, the broken violin was tested again to see show it would respond. This gives
three curves in the figures below, the original ambient measurement, and broken measurements with
the violin in wet and ambient conditions.
Figure 39: The violin with separated top plate.
Looking at the entire spectra, the most noticeable difference is the lack of clear resonance peaks
with the top plate separated. Interestingly, the overall shape of the FRF is similar, and the violin
when played was not significantly different. It was slightly weaker, but still sounded like a violin.
39
==PAGE:45==
Figure 40: Broadband FRF of the violin for initial ambient measures as well as wet and
ambient measures after the top plate separated from the ribs.
Looking at the zoomed FRF below in Figure 41, the differences in primary resonance peaks becomes
clearer.
The A0 mode at 210 Hz is not significantly altered despite the air cavity becoming
compromised.
The B1- and B1+ modes however are greatly altered.
The damping is highly
increased and the center frequency is shifted greatly.
The matched mode in both broken cases
at 400 Hz is assumed to be the A1 mode since the wood properties will have little impact on this
mode but this is not certain.
The instrument is comprimised and does not meet the standard
criteria expected for a quality instrument.
Figure 41: A closer look at the A0, B1+, and B1- modes in the FRF of the violin
for initial ambient measures as well as wet and ambient measures after the top plate
separated from the ribs.
Finally, the FRAC for all three of these signals was calculated and is shown in Figure 42. The
difference between all three signals is nearly the same, which shows that the curves are not similar,
but are equally dissimilar.
Surprisingly, these ratings are higher than for some of the curves
40
==PAGE:46==
presented for the violin before it was broken.
This is assumed to be due to the broken violin
curves following the average value of the ambient curve more closely, without large peaks. High
differences in amplitude will cause greater differences between curves, and without these peaks, the
curve is actually rated as more similar.
Figure 42: FRAC results for the initial ambient, damaged ambient, and damaged wet
measurements.
41
