==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal
analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
Author: Lasse Leth Skovsgaard Berthelsen
Supervisor: Irfan Kuvvetli
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI
Detector Modules
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Lasse Leth Skovsgaard Berthelsen
Supervised by
Irfan Kuvvetli
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Irfan Kuvvetli, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Space Research and Technology, Elektrovej, Build­
ing 327, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five and a half months from the 15th of February to
the 30th of July 2024 at the Department of Space Research and Technology, at the Tech­
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Lasse Leth Skovsgaard Berthelsen ­ s213457
Signature
Date
ii
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The overlap between extreme astronomical events and cancer tumour diagnostics is that
of high­energy photon detection. One detector capable of covering this part of the elec­
tromagnetic spectrum is the CZT drift strip detector.
At DTU Space, three such modules have been developed for use in Molecular Breast
Imaging (MBI), and this thesis presents the development and implementation of a near­
real­time signal analysis procedure for these detector modules. The methodology in­
volves the creation of an On­The­Fly (OTF) procedure that incorporates data handling,
pre­processing, event sorting, position algorithms, and post­processing of pulse heights
and positions using Python and LabVIEW software. Extensive testing was conducted
using slit­beam, pencil­beam, and full­illumination experiments to validate the system’s
performance. The results demonstrate the system’s capability to accurately determine
event positions in near­real­time. This result will be useful in the generation of training
data for an Artificial Neural Network in the near future.
The implementation of this near­real­time signal analysis procedure is a significant step
towards more efficient and precise radiation detection, with potential applications in med­
ical imaging and high­energy astronomy.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
As with any big project, this thesis would not have been possible without the immense
support and help from those around me. Particularly, I would like to thank my supervisor,
Irfan Kuvvetli, for his great help during the entire project, helping me figure out the intrica­
cies of the physics behind it all, and fixing things in the laboratory. Likewise, I would like
to thank Selina Owe for all of her help, insights, and suggestions during the project.
I would also like to give a heartfelt thanks to my fellow dorm mates. Their continued
encouragement has helped me immensely, and all the fun we’ve had has helped me
keep my motivation high. Similarly, my friends have lent me their supportive shoulders
whenever I had to vent or complain, and they’ve brought me higher than I could have
gone without their support. So in no particular order and in no way a complete list; thank
you, Sebastian, Martha, Julie, Johann, Mathias, Daniel, and Rasmus.
My sister, whom I can always rely on, also deserves praise. She has helped me time and
time again, and for that, I will always be grateful. Thank you for believing in me, and for
your ever­useful tips.
To everyone who contributed to this thesis in one way or another, thank you. Your support
and encouragement have been crucial to my success.
iv
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Artificial neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
X­ray and gamma radiation interaction with matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Photoelectric absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Compton scattering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Pair production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Radiation detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Detector characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Signal formation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
The Shockley­Ramo theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2.4
Drift strip detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Methods
17
3.1
3D MBI detector modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.1.1
Signal formation and event types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2.1
Radioactive sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2.2
Collimators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2.3
Detector module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.4
Circuit board stack and tower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.5
High­speed digitisers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.6
Laboratory computer and software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3
On­The­Fly procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.1
Data handling by LabVIEW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3.2
Pre­processing of the data samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3.3
Event sorting algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3.4
Position algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.3.5
Cathode windowing method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.3.6
Post­processing of the pulse heights and positions . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.3.7
Event plotting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4
Results
35
4.1
On­The­Fly procedure settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
Test cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2.1
Slit­beam experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2.2
Pencil­beam experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.2.3
Full­illumination experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Discussion
45
5.1
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.1.1
Implementation with the artificial neural network
. . . . . . . . . . . 46
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
v
==PAGE:8==
5.1.2
Inclusion of detector calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.1.3
Plotting speed optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.1.4
Alternative plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.1.5
Switching programming language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.1.6
Inclusion of multiple interaction events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
A Supplementary plots
55
B LabVIEW Hierarchy
57
vi
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The quest for accurate and efficient radiation detection has led to significant advance­
ments in detector technology, with Cadmium­Zinc­Telluride (CZT) drift strip detectors stand­
ing out due to their high resolution and effectiveness in the energy range colloquially called
the MeV gap. This thesis focuses on the development of a near­real­time data analysis
procedure tailored for the CZT drift strip detectors developed and tested at DTU Space.
The applications of the detectors are manifold, with a particular interest in both the field
of high­energy astronomical observations and as a medical diagnostic tool.
In the latter of the two, Molecular Breast Imaging (MBI) is a powerful tool in the early
detection and characterisation of breast cancer tumours [1]. Unlike conventional mam­
mography, MBI provides functional imaging by detecting gamma radiation emitted from
radio­tracers absorbed by malignant cells. The efficacy of MBI in identifying small tu­
mours and dense breast tissue makes it a crucial new technology in the fight against
breast cancer. The use of CZT detectors in MBI promises improved image quality, diag­
nostic accuracy, and a lower radioactive dose for patients, potentially transforming clinical
outcomes.
In the realm of astronomy, the detection of high­energy photons is essential for under­
standing various celestial phenomena. CZT drift strip detectors offer the sensitivity and
resolution required for observing and analysing hard X­rays and soft gamma rays from
astronomical sources. In literature, the overlap between these two ranges is sometimes
called the MeV gap, since there historically has been a lack of observational tools capa­
ble of measuring photons in this range. The gap lies in the range from ∼100 keV to 100
MeV. The past and present missions observing in the regime around the MeV gap are
illustrated in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Sensitivity of past and current missions observing in the X­ray and gamma
regime. The “MeV Gap” is in the range of 100 keV to 100 MeV. From [2].
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
1
==PAGE:10==
The capabilities of the CZT detectors could prove vital for missions aiming to explore the
origins of cosmic high­energy photons, study black hole activity, and investigate other
high­energy astronomical events. The use of novel CZT detector technology enables
astronomical missions to extend their spectral coverage to regions that few previous de­
tectors could cover. The detectors developed at DTU Space are capable of measuring
photons ranging in energies from around 100 keV up to a few MeV in the MeV gap. The
3D position of the photon’s interaction with the detector material can be found using a
set of equations, and the modules developed at DTU are specifically for MBI – therefore,
the detectors are often called the 3D MBI detector modules. Before the drift strip detec­
tors developed at DTU Space can be used in commercial and scientific applications, they
have to be a full­fledged package solution. This thesis is considered research conducted
as a preliminary step in the framework of the i­RASE (Innovative Radiation Sensing and
Exploitation) project. The i­RASE project seeks to create a System­in­Package solution
for X­ray detection applications. This involves a high spatial and spectral resolution of
the detectors themselves and the signal processing being embedded in the hardware
through the use of artificial neural networks (ANN). For an ANN to work properly, it has to
be trained on large amounts of data – this challenge is what this thesis seeks to overcome.
The primary objective of this thesis is to develop a near­real­time data analysis procedure
called the “On­The­Fly” (OTF) procedure that computes the photon interaction positions
and plots them in near­real­time. The large sets of results can then be used as training
data for the ANN in a future project, thus bringing the i­RASE project closer to fruition. The
current status of the experimental setup allows for data to be captured and processed at
a later time. This is beneficial for evaluating the individual detector’s capabilities, short­
comings, etc. However, as a part of the i­RASE project, the signal processing has to be
done in the hardware, thus it has to be done in near­real­time, rather than manually by
the user.
1.1
Artificial neural networks
While artificial neural networks are not the focus of this thesis, it is relevant to understand
how the two will interconnect within the framework of the i­RASE project. Neural networks
take some input values and essentially guess the correct value based on some weights
kept in the hidden layers (which share some resemblance to neurons, hence the name),
see Figure 1.2. During the training phase of the ANN, the output will be compared to
correct values, and the weights are then refined based on the difference. These correct
values are often called the “ground truth”, and are essentially what is being fabricated
by the OTF procedure in this project. Developing this OTF procedure to find real­time
interaction positions involved the implementation of algorithms and software tools that
have been made before the start of the project, as well as tools developed during the
process. It also involved a large degree of familiarity with the experimental setup, both in
terms of the physical aspects and the software used.
2
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:11==
...
Figure 1.2: Illustration of an ANN. The inputs in this project will be the sample data from
the experimental setup, and the output will be the interaction position on the detector.
With the above in mind, it is clear that several milestones have had to be reached to suc­
cessfully implement an OTF procedure. The current software had to be altered, new tools
needed to be developed, etc. Therefore, the milestones for the project are formulated as
follows:
1. Develop a method to extract data from the pre­existing laboratory software as photon
interaction events occur.
2. Construct an On­The­Fly procedure for the processing and calculation of the inter­
action positions within the detector.
3. Plot the results from the algorithms in near­real­time.
Beyond these major milestones for the OTF procedure, an effort to measure leakage
currents was also made with the express purpose of evaluating detector performance.
This was largely done in the initial phases of the project and helped to increase familiarity
with the system. The results from those tests are not included in this paper but were used
in another project.
The structure of the thesis will be as follows: The necessary theory of the physics required
to understand high­energy photon interactions with matter and the workings of drift strip
detectors are detailed in Chapter 2. A description of the utilised methods, including the 3D
MBI detector modules, the laboratory setup, an overview of the OTF procedure design,
and the underlying algorithms are found in Chapter 3. Following that, the results from
developing the OTF procedure are presented in Chapter 4, along with some test cases to
showcase the procedure. Future works, shortcomings of the procedure, improvements,
and perspectives are given in Chapter 5, followed by the conclusion in Chapter 6.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
In the following chapter, the underlying theory relevant to the project is presented. This
includes a detailed description of the three main types of high­energy photon interactions
with matter: photo­electric absorption, Compton scattering, and pair production. Addi­
tionally, the principles of radiation detectors and a description of their characteristics are
discussed. Following that, the Shockley­Ramo theorem is presented, which explains how
to determine the induced charge on the electrodes by a moving charge within the detector
material, along with relevant equations. Lastly, the principles of drift strip detectors are
covered.
2.1
X­ray and gamma radiation interaction with matter
Generally, high­energy photons are too energetic to be detected with regular camera sen­
sors, such as regular cameras that often utilise Complementary Metal–Oxide–Semiconductor
(CMOS) sensors, since their ability to stop photons is simply too low. Instead, when more
dense materials are used (that have higher stopping power), the photons’ interactions
with the material produce secondary effects, such as charge generation or light emission
within the material. These can then be measured to infer the presence and properties of
the high­energy photons. Such materials are semiconductors or scintillating materials.
Photons with high energy can interact with matter in a number of ways, and the interac­
tions can be considered either elastic or inelastic. In the first case, no transfer of energy
occurs, and thus only the direction of the incident photon is changed. This means that
interactions of this type are not of importance going further since they do not result in any
changes to the detector material and will thus not be detectable.
The type of interaction depends on the energy of the incident photon, the atomic number
of the material, and the collision angle between the incoming photon and the interacting
medium. The dominant interaction type for a given energy and atomic number can be
seen schematically in Figure 2.1, and as can be seen, there are three primary types of
inelastic interactions. The lines indicate equal probabilities of an interaction of the type
on either side.
While these three interaction types are not the only ways for photons to interact with
matter, they are dominant in the relevant energy band discussed earlier, i.e. the lower
end of the MeV gap. For a more detailed overview of photon/matter interaction, see [4].
2.1.1
Photoelectric absorption
In photoelectric absorption, which is dominant at lower photon energies, see Figure 2.1,
the photon is completely absorbed by the atom it strikes. During this interaction, the atom
emits a photoelectron from one of its shells – this electron carries off energy from the
interaction. Naturally, the atom is thus ionised, since one of its electrons has just been
ejected. The missing electron can then rapidly be replaced with electrons from the outer
shells or from neighbouring atoms, emitting their excess energy as photons as they relax
into the lower orbits. These photons’ energies are characteristic for the atom and the
respective shells involved. Alternatively, an Auger electron can be released from an even
higher shell as a part of the relaxation. The energy of the ejected photoelectron, Ee−, is
the difference between the incident photon energy, hν and the binding energy, Eb, of the
electron
Ee−= hν −Eb.
(2.1)
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Relative importance of the three interaction types, based on incident photon
energy, hν in MeV, and atomic number, Z. Figure obtained from [3].
A schematic view of photoelectric absorption can be seen in Figure 2.2. Point (1) is the
absorption of the incident photon with the subsequent ejection of the photoelectron, while
(2) marks the relaxation of the upper electron and its release of a characteristic X­ray
photon. The emitted X­ray photon can subsequently interact with the matter, such as the
electrons in the outer shells, causing Auger electrons to be ejected.
N
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
Ejection of a K - shell 
electron
Incident high - 
energy photon
X - γ
γ
M
L
K
(2)
(1)
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
Figure 2.2: Schematic overview of photoelectric absorption. (1) The incident photon is
absorbed, and the photoelectron is ejected from the K­shell. (2) The L­shell electron
ejects an X­ray photon and relaxes to the K­shell. Adapted from [5].
6
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:15==
2.1.2
Compton scattering
For the middle of the energy range, the scattering of the photon is dominant. The specific
type is Compton scattering, where the incident photons interact with an electron. The
photon deposits energy to the electron that is ejected at an angle, ϕ, with respect to the
incident photon path, see Fig. 2.3. The incident photon is scattered at an angle, θ, and
its new energy, hν′ can be found as [4, Eq. 2.17]
hν′ =
hν
1 +
hν
m0c2 (1 −cos θ),
(2.2)
where m0c2 = 0.511 MeV is the rest mass of the electron. This expression assumes that
the electron, with which the interaction occurs, is at rest. If a bound electron is considered
instead, the energy found with Equation 2.2 for a fixed angle is dispersed into a narrow
distribution around that energy.
The energy of the recoil electron, Ee−can be found as the difference between the incident
photon energy, hν, and the scattered photon energy, hν′:
Ee−= hν −hν′.
(2.3)
In the case of a very shallow deflection (θ ≃0◦), only a small fraction of the initial photon
energy is parted to the electron. In the case of back scattering (θ = 180◦), the maximum
amount of energy is transferred to the recoil electron.
φ
hν
Incident photon
hν’
θ
Figure 2.3: Left: Schematic overview of Compton scattering with electron at rest. A frac­
tion of the initial energy is parted to the recoil electron, while the photon is scattered at an
angle θ. Right: Differential scattering cross section, with increasing incident energies. At
higher energies, scattering backwards becomes unlikely. Adapted from [6].
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
7
==PAGE:16==
2.1.3
Pair production
If the incident photon’s energy exceeds twice the mass of an electron at rest (that is,
Ee−= 511 keV ×2 = 1.022 MeV), electron­positron pair production can occur1. The
likelihood of this interaction occurring increases with larger energies, which also explains
why it is not immediately dominant in Fig. 2.1. The interaction takes place near the
nucleus of the interacting material, where the photon is replaced by an electron and its
antiparticle, a positron. They split the 1.022 MeV, while all the energy that is in excess is
converted to the particles’ kinetic energy. Given the nature of the positron, it will rapidly
annihilate with an electron and produce two new photons in positron­electron annihilation
that travel in opposite directions, both having energies of 511 keV. For an illustration of
pair production, see Fig. 2.4.
N
e
e-
e-
e-
Incident photon 
E > 1.022 MeV
γ
(1)
e+
γ
γ
(2)
e-
Figure 2.4: Schematic illustration of pair production. The photon disappears and is re­
placed by an electron and a positron (1). The positron annihilates with an electron at
some later point (2), where two photons are created.
2.2
Radiation detectors
With the three main interaction types covered, the next step is to describe the material
with which the photons interact – the detector. While there are a multitude of different
ways to detect photons, the list of options decreases as the energy band of interest is
set in the X­ray and gamma ray section of the spectrum. For photons in this part of the
spectrum, the viable options include, but are not limited to, ion gas chambers, scintillator
detectors, and semiconductor crystals. In the following section, the various characteristics
relevant for all detector types are presented, followed by an overview of the specifics of
semiconductor crystals for use in high­energy photon detection.
2.2.1
Detector characteristics
For all detectors, a number of characteristics are common. They describe the basic traits
of the detectors, and while the underlying working principle of the detectors might vary to
a great degree, they can still be compared to some extent with these characteristics.
1Although other types of pair production exist, such as muon­antimuon production, the term usually refers
to pairs of electron­positrons.
8
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:17==
2.2.1.1
Full Width at Half Maximum
Generally, how good a detector characteristic is can often be described briefly by the Full
Width at Half Maximum (FWHM), which quantifies the width of a measurement distribu­
tion, e.g. a measurement of energy received from a monochromatic source or the spatial
distribution of measurements. The detector will not be ideal, and thus the monochromatic
energy will appear smeared out, see Fig. 2.5. For a typical type of measurement distribu­
tion, the Gaussian distribution, such as the one in Figure 2.5, the FWHM can be found with
the variance, σ, as FWHM = σ
√
8 ln 2 ≈2.35 σ. By dividing the FWHM with the source
centroid, e.g. energy E0, the resolution of the detector can be defined as R = FWHM/E0
[4]. This implies that a detector with good resolution has a very narrow spread. The cause
Source spectrum
FWHM
Measurement 
distribution
Energy
n(E)
E
0
N0
N  /2
0
0
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the FWHM of a Gaussian distribution of an idealised source.
of the deviation from the ideal measurement is due to noise, e.g. statistical, electronic,
thermal noise, and material imperfections. The combined effect on the total FWHM of
the measured spectrum from all the sources of noise can be described as the sum of the
effects from each of the sources of noise:
(FWHM)2
tot = (FWHM)2
stat + (FWHM)2
noise + (FWHM)2
drift + . . .
(2.4)
It is therefore clear that a detector with low thermal noise can still be affected by the statis­
tical noise. A detector with a narrow FWHM is better capable of detecting closely situated
photo­peaks, than a detector with a wide FWHM.
Electronic and thermal noise comes from the system setup – analog­to­digital convert­
ers, leakage currents, etc. Almost every component in the setup will add some amount
of noise. The detector material itself can have electrons freed due to thermal processes,
which can be interpreted as signal fluctuations. These types of noise can be mitigated
through various means, such as ensuring isolation between components, or lowering the
voltages applied, and cooling the detector.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
9
==PAGE:18==
Statistical noise arises from the fact that, while the photons can have virtually any energy,
the photon interaction in the material frees a discrete quantity of charge carriers. From
[4], the resolution, R, of a simple Poisson distribution is:
R

Poisson = 2.35
√
N
,
(2.5)
where N is the number of charge carriers. This means that with more charge carriers
generated, the resolution becomes increasingly better. Naturally, it follows that it is de­
sirable to then have low binding energy of electrons in the detector material, so many
charge carriers are generated with each interaction. For real detectors, it is possible to
achieve better resolution than that expected with Poisson statistics. The divergence of
the observed variance from the Poisson statistics can be expressed as a factor, the Fano
factor, F, as [4]:
F =
observed variance in N
Poisson predicted variance(= N)
(2.6)
The resolution of a detector that is limited only by the statistical noise then becomes:
R

Statistical limit = 2.35
r
F
N
(2.7)
Material imperfections can lead to charge carrier trapping, i.e. the electrons or holes
can become stuck or recombine during the migration towards the charge collection sites.
Both of these will lead to a loss of signal. One example of material imperfections are grain
boundaries in the material’s crystal structure, which can cause charge carrier trapping, see
e.g. [7, 8].
2.2.1.2
Spectral resolution
The ability of a detector to distinguish between two source energies is often referred to
as its spectral resolution. For an otherwise monochromatic input energy, the output en­
ergy spectrum will be broadened, shifted, and in other ways affected by the measurement
setup, like by the effects described above. If two source energies are measured by the
system and the signals from them overlap too much, they can become indistinguishable
– the system has too poor spectral resolution. As a rule of thumb, if the energies are sep­
arated by more than one FWHM and they are distinguishable, the system has adequate
spectral resolution [4].
2.2.1.3
Spatial resolution
The spatial resolution of a detector refers to how well one is able to determine the location
of the photon interactions with the material, similarly to how spectral resolution was de­
fined. Some detector types have very poor spatial resolution, such as radiation counters
(e.g. Geiger counters), while other detector types can achieve better resolution by seg­
mentation in the material via, e.g. pixels or segmented electrode strips. If the electrodes
are present on both sides of the detector material, the two­dimensional position can be
found by identifying the intersection of the triggered electrodes, with spatial resolution
equivalent to the strip pitch. For pixelated detectors, the spatial resolution is limited by
the physical dimensions of the pixels. Naturally, sensitivity in the third dimension can be
achieved through measurements of interaction depth, e.g. by measuring the time between
the initial interaction and the charge collection.
The spatial resolution is generally defined by the same terms as the spectral resolution,
that is, the two positional distributions have to be distinguishable – a good example of this
would be a telescope being able to visually separate two stars closely situated. In the
framework of this project, it is measured as the FWHM in millimetres, and as such, the
narrower the FWHM, the more closely situated interactions can be resolved separately.
10
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:19==
2.2.2
Signal formation
To explain the signals from the various interaction types, it is necessary to better under­
stand the principle of how such a signal gets formed after the photon interacts with the
material. To this end, imagine the following model detector: It is a cube consisting of a
semiconducting material with planar electrodes on either side – a cathode and an anode
– with a positive bias of the anode so that a linear electric field falls across the detector,
see Fig. 2.6. In this scenario, a high­energy photon strikes the detector, which leads
Figure 2.6: Top: A schematic of a simple drift detector. Two planar electrodes are placed
on either side of the cubic semiconducting material. A photon, γ, strikes the material,
and the resulting charge carrier cloud moves due to the linear voltage bias across the
material. Bottom: The linear weighting potential across the material, from the negatively
biased cathode to the positively charged anode. From [9].
to an interaction of the three types described in Section 2.1, where the photon deposits
energy into the material. This interaction creates a cloud of pairs of electrons and holes.
The electric field over the detector now forces these charge carriers to move across the
detector – electrons move towards the anode and holes move towards the cathode.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
11
==PAGE:20==
This movement induces a charge on the electrodes, and it is used to infer knowledge about
the interaction. The inducing of a signal lasts until all the charge carriers are collected.
Conventionally, in order to find the induced charge on the electrodes, the Poisson equation
has to be solved, [6]:
∇2φ = ρ
ε,
(2.8)
with φ denoting the electric potential, ρ is the charge density, and ε is the dielectric constant
of the material. If the charge carriers are assumed to be free­moving, i.e. experience no
trapping, the charge density is 0. This reduces the right­hand side of Equation 2.8 to
zero. An appropriate Laplacian operator, ∇2, can be chosen for the specific geometry of
the detector as well as suitable boundary conditions. With those, the Laplace equation can
be solved, and depending on the complexity of the geometry it may require numerical tools
to solve. From this, the electric potential is found for any point in the detector material,
and it can be used to find the electric field via,
E = −∇φ
(2.9)
The calculation of the induced charge requires the instantaneous electric field, E, at each
point along the path of the moving charge, q. Subsequently, the induced charge, Q, can
be determined by integrating the normal component of E over the surface, S, of the
electrode:
Q =
I
S
εE · dS.
(2.10)
All of this is somewhat complicated and not computationally light. A more simple method
was developed by two independent authors, see [10, 11], which will be introduced in the
following section.
2.2.3
The Shockley­Ramo theorem
Given that the electric field has to be found using the gradient of the potential and that
complex geometries can complicate the process, the entire method is somewhat impracti­
cal. To alleviate this, an alternative method was developed, known as the Shockley­Ramo
theorem, named after its two independent authors, [10] and [11], respectively. The fol­
lowing can be seen as a brief introduction to the theorem and is by no means a fully
comprehensive explanation – for that, see e.g. [9].
The calculation of the induced charge within a detector due to the movement of charge
carriers involves the utilisation of the weighting potential, φ0. This weighting potential is
not a tangible physical potential within the detector; rather, it serves as a mathematical
tool to streamline the calculation process.
The induced charge on an electrode equals the product of the carrier charge and the
change in weighting potential along the charge carrier’s trajectory [9]:
Qi = −q(φ0(xf) −φ0(xi)),
(2.11)
where xf and xi are the final and interaction positions within the detector.
Regardless of detector geometry, determining the weighting potential, φ0, entails solving
the Laplace equation, incorporating the following boundary conditions:
1. Set the voltage of the electrode of interest to unity
2. All other electrodes are set to zero
3. Ignore charge trapping
12
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:21==
Then the Laplace equation can be solved: ∇2φ = ρ/ε becomes:
∇2φ = 0,
(2.12)
since the charge density ρ becomes zero. This is then used in Eq. 2.11 to find the charge
induced over the trajectory of the charge cloud. Note that it is independent of the applied
electric field over the detector. The total induced signal will be the sum of the electron and
the hole contribution, Qe and Qh, respectively:
Qtot = Qe + Qh
(2.13)
In the example depicted in Fig. 2.6, the weighting potential is linear, as illustrated at the
bottom of the figure. When electrons, carrying charge q, are freed at interaction location
Z, they induce a charge Qi,e = −q(1 −Z) on the anode, whereas holes induce a charge
Qi,h = −qZ. The induced charge on either electrode equals the free charge, q, assum­
ing both holes and electrons move without hindrance. This principle holds, even if the
weighting potentials have different shapes.
Naturally, the weighting potential distribution is not always linear – it is, in fact, beneficial
if the potential is not linear but rather focused around the collecting electrode: Instead of
a single planar electrode, imagine smaller squares of electrodes – pixels. These pixels
will have considerably more compact weighting potentials, see Fig 2.7. As the charge is
Figure 2.7: Left: Depiction of a detector with pixelated anodes (red) and a planar cathode
(green). Right: Calculated weighting potentials for three pixels, P1, P2, and P3, calculated
along the axis perpendicular to pixel P1. All pixels have sizes that are 10% of the detector
thickness. From [6].
induced when the charge carriers move through the potential, the transient signal formed
on P2 and P3 will now be considerably smaller than that for P1. For smaller pixels relative
to the detector thickness, the weighting potential becomes increasingly compact – known
as the small pixel effect, and can be seen in Figure 2.8. Given that the induced charge
depends on both the electrons and the holes, it can have a severe impact on detector
performance if the detector material has poor mobility of one of the charge carriers. This
is the case for some semiconducting materials – such as CdZnTe. The case of the model
detector used earlier (Figure 2.6), which has a linear weighting potential, will serve as an
example. Assuming the charge carriers experience no trapping whatsoever, the induced
signal will form a photo­peak at the photon energy, hν, see Figure 2.9.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.8: Weighting potentials of three different pixelated electrode sizes. For increas­
ingly smaller (relative to the detector thickness) pixels, the weighting potential becomes
more compact. From [6].
Linear weighting potential
Compact weighting potential
Figure 2.9: Left: Energy spectra of two cases with no trapping and no hole contribution.
Right: Energy spectrum with no hole contribution. As can be seen, there is only a slight
tailing effect, attributed to interactions close to the anode side of the detector, where they
do not travel through the entire weighting potential. Adapted from [6].
The photo­peak will be broadened as described in Section 2.2.1. However, if there is no
contribution from the holes, the spectrum will be a distribution from zero to the photon
energy. If, instead of a planar anode, segmented anodes such as pixels are used, this
effect can largely be mitigated with the small pixel effect. With the more compact weighting
potential, the majority of the charge is induced very close to the anode. Therefore, the
holes contribute very little to the final signal, while the electrons still contribute fully, as
can be seen in Figure 2.9.
This means, that even with poor electron hole mobility, the weighting potentials and the
small pixel effect can create a good detector. One such type of detector is the drift strip
detector.
14
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:23==
2.2.4
Drift strip detectors
As mentioned earlier, some detector types utilise semiconducting materials and elec­
trodes to detect photons. In Section 2.2.3, the small pixel effect was introduced. This
effect can be used in a variety of ways, one of which is to use narrow electrode strips
acting as the “pixels”. Utilising this, it becomes possible to determine the position of inter­
action between the incoming photon and the detector material. The weighting potential
of drift strip detectors is very different from that shown in Figure 2.6. An example from
an earlier iteration of the detector modules used in this framework can be seen in Figure
2.10. Generally, the cathodes have a large negative bias, whereas the drift strips have a
lower bias. This results in a force pushing the charge cloud towards the anode side. As
the cloud approaches the anode side, the drift strips help guide the charge cloud towards
the anodes. As can be seen in Figure 2.10, the majority of the weighting potential of the
anodes is situated very close to the anode in order to utilise the small pixel effect.
Anodes
Cathodes
Drift strips
Figure 2.10: The weighting potentials of the 20x20x5 mm 3D MBI test modules developed
at DTU Space. These detectors can be seen as the predecessors to the ones used in
this work. Adapted from [6].
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
15
==PAGE:24==
Generally, it can be beneficial to have the electrodes on either side be perpendicular to
those found on the opposing side, i.e. the front­facing electrodes running vertical while the
back­side electrodes are running horizontally. This is useful in determining the position of
photon interactions. Such is the case for the detectors in this project.
As a rough estimate, the interaction position’s component in the x­direction can be deter­
mined by checking the primarily activated anode. The determination of the other directions
utilise the cathode signal and the drift time. The specifics of the position algorithm will be
explained in Section 3.3.4.
16
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:25==
3
Methods
The primary goal of this work is to implement a near­real­time analysis procedure for the
3D MBI Detector Modules. This procedure has been dubbed the On­the­Fly (OTF) pro­
cedure. Before explaining how this near­real­time analysis is achieved, all the necessary
components in the experimental setup are explained: First, the 3D MBI Detector Modules
will be introduced, followed by the various components making up the experimental setup.
After that, an overview of the various algorithms used in the data treatment will be given.
Lastly, a walk­through of the OTF procedure will be given.
3.1
3D MBI detector modules
The detector modules used in this project are semiconductor drift strip detectors, as de­
scribed in 2.2.4. Since they have been developed with the specific intention of serving
as detectors for diagnosing breast cancer tumours, using the Molecular Breast Imaging
technique, the detectors are referred to as the 3D MBI Detector Modules. Three modules
currently exist, which have been developed in collaboration with the company Kromek.
These modules are based on earlier prototypes, see e.g. [12], with the key difference
being the change in size. The 3D MBI detector modules are made from a bulk crystal of
cadmium­zinc­telluride (CdZnTe – CZT for short), cut into 40×40×5 mm blocks. Each of
these crystal blocks has a number of electrodes on either side, see Figure 3.1. A picture
of one of the detector modules can be seen on the cover page of this project.
Figure 3.1: Sketch of the electrode setup for the 40x40x5 mm 3D MBI detector modules
used in this work. Anodes are shown in red, cathodes in blue, and drift strips in black.
From [13].
The front­facing side has 20 cathode strips, while the backside has 99 electrodes. With the
current setup of the detector system, every third of these electrodes is an anode, while
the others are drift strips with varying electrical bias: The drift strips closest to anodes
will, under normal operating voltages, have a bias of ­50 V, while the central strips have
a bias of ­100 V, see Figure 3.2 for an electrical diagram of the biasing setup. Each set
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
17
==PAGE:26==
of anodes and surrounding drift strips are referred to as a drift cell, although they are not
physically separated from the rest of the cells through other means than an electric field.
Three drift strips will act as a combined strip with an effective voltage of ­150 V, acting to
Figure 3.2: Sketch of the bias setup for the drift strips and anodes of the detector modules,
specifically for the three­drift strip configuration. The electric bias on the drift strips ensures
that the charge cloud is guided towards the anodes, following the electric field lines, shown
as dashed grey lines. From [6].
push the incoming charge cloud towards the anodes. It is also possible to use a different
setup for the detector, where instead of three electrode strips combining into one, five can
be combined. This requires physically changing one of the circuit boards (described in
Section 3.2.4) and was not used during this project.
The photon interactions mentioned in Section 2.1 will generate various signals in the de­
tector, which will appear differently in the measuring software.
3.1.1
Signal formation and event types
The following presents the various event types that can be detected. The physical inter­
actions are those described in Section 2.1 and will appear differently as the digital signal,
depending on where and how the photons strike the detector material (i.e. the interaction
type). As described in Section 2.2.3, a signal is induced on all electrodes, not just the
anodes – this can be seen in the following examples, where the electrode signals are
grouped. The simplest of the following event types is the single interaction that occurs
inside a single drift cell, followed by the more complex event types.
3.1.1.1
Single­interaction events
This type of interaction occurs wholly within one drift cell, and only one interaction takes
place. It is the simplest event type and is therefore used as the benchmark for many of
the tests later in the project. An example of such an event can be seen in Figure 3.3.
The interaction, is in this case, photo­electric absorption, and the event is also the most
frequent with the given radioactive sources, see Section 3.2.1. The position algorithms
described later in Section 3.3.4 only work for this type of event in their current form.
18
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:27==
3.1.1.2
Single­cell, multiple interactions events
Like the event type before, this type also occurs within a single drift cell; however, multiple
interactions are occurring within it, such as Compton scattering. Typically, two interactions
occur for such an event, often a Compton scatter followed by photo­absorption. The
digital signal from such an event could look like that seen in Figure 3.4. It should be
noted that the time it takes the charge cloud to reach the electrodes – the drift time –
for the two interactions is in the order of a hundred nanoseconds, whereas the time delay
between the interactions themselves is only a few nanoseconds. In other words, the order
in which the interactions occur is essentially irrelevant, only their relative proximity to the
anodes matters. It is the interaction that happens closest to the anode that arrives first,
not the interaction that occurs first. This event type can be distinguished by a step­like
appearance of the anode signal.
3.1.1.3
Multiple cells, multiple interactions event
This event type is an extension of the previous, one that now involves more than one
drift cell. This could occur if a photon Compton scatters in one drift cell and another
interaction occurs in the neighbouring cell. It is distinguished by a clear signal on more
than one anode channel. An example of the signal can be seen in Fig. 3.5. Another case
where this type would be the result would be that of two separate photons interacting
independently in the detector material simultaneously.
3.1.1.4
Cosmic events
This type of event is characterised by a very high signal strength, sometimes in more than
one anode channel. Similarly, many cathode and drift strip signals are often elevated
due to the cosmic ray having very high energy – often in the range of several MeV. The
signal can appear similar to that shown in Fig. 3.6. The source of these events are not
the radioactive sources used normally in the experiments, but rather from extraterrestrial
sources, as the name suggest. These can either be particles from the Sun, or from galactic
sources such as supernovae.
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600
800
1000
ADC channels
Anodes
0
100
200
300
Sample [4 ns]
Cathodes
0
100
200
300
Drift strips
Figure 3.3: Example of a single interaction event. As can be seen, a single anode channel
has a clear elevated signal, while the neighbouring drift cells also show a slight increase.
Some cathode channels are also activated, corresponding to those closest to the interac­
tion site. Anodes are shown in the left plot, cathodes in the central plot, and drift strips in
the right plot.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
19
==PAGE:28==
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600
800
1000
ADC channels
Anodes
0
100
200
300
Sample [4 ns]
Cathodes
0
100
200
300
Drift strips
Figure 3.4: Example of a single­cell, multiple interaction event. A clear step­like shape of
the anode signal is indicative of two charge clouds arriving at the anode at different times.
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600
800
1000
ADC channels
Anodes
0
100
200
300
Sample [4 ns]
Cathodes
0
100
200
300
Drift strips
Figure 3.5: Example of a double event with multiple interactions. The give­away is the
multiple activated anodes. Their plateaus do not always coincide, however, the explana­
tion is similar to the one given for single­cell multiple interactions events.
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600
800
1000
ADC channels
Anodes
0
100
200
300
Sample [4 ns]
Cathodes
0
100
200
300
Drift strips
Figure 3.6: Example of a cosmic event. The very high amplitude is the telltale sign of
such an event, as is the elevated signal in both cathodes and drift strips.
20
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Experimental setup
The laboratory setup used in this project is described in great detail in other works, see e.g.
[13, 6], and has been left largely unaltered. The following is meant as a brief introduction
to the components that play a key role in this project. The key components include but
are not limited to, the radioactive source, the collimators, the detector module, the tower,
the high­speed digitisers, and the laboratory computer with the LabVIEW software. These
components can be seen in the sketch of the laboratory setup in Figure 3.7.
Detector
Collimator
Collimator
Biasing board
Pre-
amplifiers
5x daisy-
chained SIS 
3316
digitisers 
Laboratory computer
Velmex x, y, z 
motors
Radioactive
source
80xSL data 
points
Detector tower
64x electrode 
signals
80x channel
signals
Figure 3.7: Sketch of the key components in the laboratory setup. The radioactive source
is shielded by high­density bricks for safety. The detector module can be switched out,
and the bias configuration board can also be changed. The sample length, SL, can be
set in the front panel of the LabVIEW program on the computer, see Section 4.1, along
with other parameters.
3.2.1
Radioactive sources
The first crucial component of the experimental setup is the radioactive source. It is placed
in front of the detector, where it acts as the generator of the high­energy photons that inter­
act with the detector material. For this project, three radioactive sources were available,
spanning a range of photon energies for the calibration and testing of the detectors. The
sources, their decay modes, their products, and the respective photon energies can be
seen in Table 3.1. Of the three sources available, the 137Cs source was the most com­
monly used for the experiments in this project.
3.2.2
Collimators
The nature of the radioactive sources is such, that photons are emitted in a wide angle.
This means that the entire surface of the detector can be illuminated with high­energy
photons. This is not always desirable, however, and in such cases, it is necessary to
collimate and block off parts of the photon beam. This can be achieved by using a material
with high stopping power, such as lead or tungsten, shaped into blocks, see e.g. Figure
4.8. These bricks will then block off most of the beam and shape it as desired – often
as slit­beams, see Figure 4.3. The use of the collimators is optional and depends on the
specific experiment. If they are not needed, it is possible to move the detector and tower
in front of a second, uncollimated source. After passing by these optional collimators, the
photon beam will hit the detector.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
21
==PAGE:30==
Source
Decay Mode
Decay product
Photon energy [MeV]
57
27Co
EC
57
26Fe
0.136
0.122
0.014
137
55 Cs
β−
137
56 Ba
0.662
241
95 Am
α
237
94 Np
5.486
Table 3.1: Overview of the radioactive sources, and their primary decay modes, available
in this project. Adapted from [4].
3.2.3
Detector module
The most interesting aspect of the experimental setup is, arguably, the detector. The
photons from the radioactive source interact with the CZT crystal, and a charge cloud
is generated via one of the interaction modes from Section 2.1. This charge cloud is
pushed towards the anodes, and according to the Shockley­Ramo theorem, see Section
2.2.3, a charge is induced on the electrodes on the detector. The specifics of the detector
modules were given in Section 3.1. Functionally, there is no difference between each
detector module, but as was found in [13], there are differences in their performance.
Most of the testing done in this project was done with detector module 2. These induced
charges are then pre­amplified in the structure behind the detector, called the tower.
3.2.4
Circuit board stack and tower
The detector itself is mounted on a stack of printed circuit boards (PCB). The top PCB
facilitates the connection from the detector pins to the PCB below and allows for an effi­
cient change of the detector module. The PCB below applies the correct voltage biases
to the electrodes on the detector module. This stack of PCBs is itself mounted on the
pre­amplifying tower, which ensures that the signal can be converted to a digital signal
later. The entire structure is cooled via air fans mounted in various locations to ensure
optimal performance. The entire tower can be positioned with a set of three linear motors
for full 3D movement. The PCBs can be seen in Figure 3.8. The tower houses the pre­
amplifiers, that ensure that the signals generated are of sufficient strength by amplifying
the charge for each channel. The signal is then sent to the high­speed digitisers.
Figure 3.8: Image of the PCB stack, with a detector module mounted. The top PCB is
the detector mounting plate, while the thinner, bottom PCB is the biasing board. Image
by Irfan Kuvvetli.
22
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:31==
3.2.5
High­speed digitisers
The signals generated on the electrodes, as described in Section 2.2.3, are fed into the
high­speed analog­to­digital converter (ADC). There are five digitisers, all of the same
type: Struck Innovative Systeme (SIS) SIS3316 [14], each with 16 channels. They are
daisy­chained for a total of 80 channels, although only 69 of those channels are used for
signals – 20 channels for the cathodes, 24 for the anodes, and 25 for the drift strips (with
the common three drift strip configuration biasing board). The digitisers can function in
two different modes, sampling at a frequency of either 125 or 250 MHz with 16­ or 14­
bit ADC resolution, respectively. The offsets and gain of the digitisers are set so that a
channel with 0 V input corresponds to approximately 8000 ADC channels (amplitude).
The value roughly increases by one channel per keV energy deposited by the photon. An
example of the pulses of a single drift cell event can be seen in Figure 3.9, with the data
taken directly from the laboratory PC software. After the analog­to­digital conversion, the
signal from the 80 channels is fed into the laboratory computer, where the data can be
treated and saved in the appropriate data formats.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Sample no.
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
11000
12000
Amplitude [ADC channels]
Sample raw data
Figure 3.9: Raw data taken directly from the laboratory PC software. This is a single
interaction event, where only one anode (shown in a darker blue) has a clear increase.
3.2.6
Laboratory computer and software
The laboratory computer is connected to the high­speed digitisers with a 10 Gigabit Eth­
ernet connection for fast data transfer. For the laboratory computer, two primary software
tools were utilised in this project. The laboratory setup had a functioning set of LabVIEW
programs developed by SIS, which were ready­to­use, and had been further modified in
earlier projects, see e.g. [13]. Beyond those programs, the positioning algorithms devel­
oped by [15] have been implemented in Python in earlier works, and these have been
utilised and modified for this project.
3.2.6.1
LabVIEW programs
The laboratory computer has software for controlling the various aspects of the experimen­
tal setup. The position of the tower can be adjusted, the sampling rate can be switched,
measurements can be started using the computer, etc. All of this is accomplished using
the provided National Instruments Laboratory Virtual Instrument Engineering Workbench
(LabVIEW) programs. Some of these are provided, as is, by SIS as a part of the SIS3316
data management, while others have been made to facilitate specific needs, such as lin­
ear motor control, [13]. LabVIEW is a visual programming language, that has two main
aspects: The front panel where the results are often shown and the block diagram, where
functions are connected via wires to facilitate the flow of data variables, etc. For an ex­
ample of some code in the block diagram in LabVIEW, see Figure 3.10. As the data from
the digitisers is sent to the laboratory computer, the LabVIEW code handles the data in
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.10: Sample of a LabVIEW code block diagram, taken from the modified sam­
ple_sis3316_md_llsb.vi. The main modifications are encapsulated by the grey box slightly
above the centre.
its binary format. The amplitudes of all the channels are converted to human­readable
numbers and are saved in a .dat­file for later treatment, among several steps conducted.
The top­level LabVIEW program for controlling the setup is dubbed the wrapper. It ini­
tialises the system and runs all the necessary commands for the system to work. On
the front panel of the wrapper, the channel amplitudes of the raw data can also be seen,
similar to those seen in Figure 3.9. The LabVIEW program relies on several sub­.vi’s –
sub­functions used by the overarching wrapper. The entire structure of this hierarchy of
functions can be seen in Figure B.1. The overall complexity of the provided LabVIEW
programs, in combination with the limited time frame for this project, meant that a com­
plete understanding of the program and its sub­programs was unfeasible. It is, as such,
treated at times as a “black box”.
3.2.6.2
Sample buffer
The digitisers constantly sample the voltages of all 80 channels in a fixed interval of either
4 or 8 ns, as specified by the user. The voltage measured is converted to ADC channels
(amplitude) and stored in a First In, First Out (FIFO) queue (acting as a cyclic buffer) with
a user­defined length set by the variable sample length in the wrapper. Should any of the
channels surpass the user­defined trigger threshold, the cyclic buffer will continue mea­
suring all channels to capture the entire signal pulse. The system will save the entire set of
channel amplitudes from a sample number before the event occurs, as also specified by
the user in the variable pre­trigger delay. A schematic overview of such an event can be
seen in Figure 3.11. This event is then quickly moved into the event bank, another cyclic
buffer of user­determined size, often in the order of 100 or more. The system then awaits
a new event that deposits enough energy for the thresholds to be exceeded, records it and
moves it to the event bank. When enough events have been stored in the bank, the bank
is dumped into a memory file of the .dat format. This bank is great for the rapid temporary
24
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:33==
...
4
5
86
4
5
4
5
8
56
84
87
88
87
86
Signal [ADC ch]
75
50
25
0
Trigger delay = 6
Sample length= 12
Old samples
OUT
New samples
IN
Trig. threshold
Figure 3.11: Schematic overview of the cyclic buffer implemented in the LabVIEW code.
New sample values enter on the right, and the whole stack shifts. Adapted from [13].
storage of many events, but given the requirement for treatment of each individual event,
the bank size is decreased to one. The effect of this is that every event will individually
be put into the .dat file, rather than a larger group of events.
3.2.6.3
Python
For the data processing beyond what is being done in the provided LabVIEW code, Python
is used. This programming language was chosen based on the author’s familiarity, the
available libraries, and the simplicity of implementation, both on other machines and in
various other software programs (such as in LabVIEW). The event sorting algorithm from
Section 3.3.3, and all of the position algorithms described in Section 3.3.4 are imple­
mented in Python, among other steps.
3.3
On­The­Fly procedure
With all of the necessary experimental setup covered, the On­The­Fly (OTF) procedure
can be explained in depth. To fully explain how the procedure works, a top­down approach
is used: Firstly, the entire OTF method is presented in a flowchart. Following that, each
of the steps is explored in depth, where the various algorithms are explained, as are the
data formats, outputs, etc.
The initial data conversion is done in LabVIEW, i.e. extracting the ADC signal, etc. The
algorithms for event sorting and position determination are implemented in Python, while
the plotting of the positions and the histograms are again done in LabVIEW.
Given the many various steps in the OTF procedure, a comprehensive overview can only
really be given with a flowchart depicting all the steps involved – see Figure 3.12. As
can be seen, the procedure involves 6 major steps shown as the squares: The LabVIEW
“black box” that generates the samples; the data pre­processing; event sorting; position
calculation; post­processing; and finally plotting. Each of these steps will now be ex­
plained.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
25
==PAGE:34==
Event 
sorting 
algorithm
Pre-
processing
Position 
algorithm
Plotting
Post-
processing
LabVIEW
Data 
handling
Samples
80x1xSL
Pulse heights
1x80
Offset-cor. 
samples
Position
1x3
Pulse heights
1x80
Offset-cor. 
samples
Event 
type = 
0
Figure 3.12: Flowchart of the OTF procedure. Tiles in yellow are steps done in LabVIEW,
while green tiles are done in Python. Arrows indicate data flow.
3.3.1
Data handling by LabVIEW
Whenever a photon from the radioactive decay of one of the sources described in Section
3.2.1 strikes the detector material, it will interact in one of the ways described in Section
2.1. The analog signal measured will be generated according to the Shockley­Ramo
theorem, see Section 2.2.3, and the subsequent digitised signal is passed through a data
pipeline in the LabVIEW program. Here, the binary data stream is converted and normally
saved in data banks (clusters of events stored together) that can later be read and handled
in other software. This LabVIEW code has been provided as­is by SIS and, as such, is
considered in the “black box” regime. A few major changes have been made in order for
the OTF procedure to work: The bank size – the number of elements to cluster together
– is set to 1. This means that every event measured by the system is passed through
as they occur, rather than storing them as a group. Furthermore, the LabVIEW sub­.vi
“sample_sis3316_md.vi has been modified to enable access to the channel amplitudes
of all 80 SIS3316 channels, see Figure 3.10. A wire branching that is normally fed to a
different sub­.vi, is additionally fed into a custom­made .vi where the Python functions are
called. Every time a new event occurs, the data is thus parsed to the Python functions.
At this point, the data is an array that has the dimensions 80 by 1 by SL, where SL is the
sample length specified by the user in the wrapper.
3.3.2
Pre­processing of the data samples
As the event data is passed to the Python function “data_handling”, the array is transposed
so the dimensions are 1 by 80 by SL, so that the pre­existing Python functions from [13,
6] can be utilised without any major changes. While the data from the 80 channels has
been treated by the LabVIEW program, it still needs to be corrected for the offsets in the
raw data, see Figure 3.9. The offset correction is done by taking the mean amplitude of
the first 1/6 of the sample length for all channels. All data points are then subtracted from
this mean value so that they are all shifted to zero ADC channels in amplitude, see Figure
3.13. After this step, the height of the pulse can be found for all 80 channels. This is done
via:
PH = Apeak −Ainitial,
(3.1)
where PH is the pulse height, and A is the mean value of the peak and initial values,
respectively. The mean value is taken over the initial and final 1/6 of the sample length
values, e.g. for a sample length of 360, the first 60 values will be used to find the mean.
This value has been found empirically in [13]. The number of samples saved before
the pulse can be adjusted in the LabVIEW wrapper via the variable trigger delay, and
as a rule of thumb, it should be half the sample length. After this step, there are two
26
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:35==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Sample no.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Amplitude [ADC channels]
Figure 3.13: Example of the signal on all 80 channels after being offset corrected.
data products – an array with dimensions of 1x80xSL that contains the offset­corrected
electrode amplitudes, and a 1x80 array that contains the pulse heights for all channels.
3.3.3
Event sorting algorithm
Before finding the interaction position of the event, the event must be categorised ac­
cording to the types of events specified in Section 3.1.1. The offset­corrected signal can
generally appear similar to the events shown in Figures 3.3­3.6. In order to automate
the process of determining the event type, an algorithm has been developed (see e.g.
[6]) based on the number of active anodes, the pulse heights calculated earlier, etc. The
function used to determine the event type returns a key for the event, as specified in Table
3.2.
Key
Event Type
0
Single event
1
Multiple interactions, single cell
2
Multiple interactions, multiple cells
3
Cosmic event
­1
Undefinable
Table 3.2: Event sorting keys, and their corresponding type.
The event sorting algorithm works in the following way:
1. Find the number of activated anodes.
2. If the pulse height is greater than 2 MeV, the event key is 3.
3. If the number of activated anodes is 1, calculate the number of peaks in the
gradient of the signal (i.e. the current), see Figure 3.14.
4. If the number of peaks in the current is greater than 1, the event key is 1.
5. If the number of peaks in the current is equal to 1, the event key is 0.
6. If the number of activated anodes is greater than 1, the event key is 2.
The algorithm for event sorting also temporarily smooths the data in order to deal with the
minor fluctuations that appear. This is done with a Savitzky­Golay filter that uses convo­
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
27
==PAGE:36==
0
100
200
300
Sample no.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Amplitude [ADC ch]
Anode signal amplitude
0
100
200
300
Sample no.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Gradient [ADC ch]/[8 ns]
Charge gradient
Figure 3.14: Left: Example of anode signal. Right: The gradient of the signal. The
gradient of a charge signal is the current induced. This particular event is a Compton
scatter, as can be seen by the step­like charge signal – it would thus be considered an
event with key 1.
lution with a polynomial in order to keep the overall signal shape but remove fluctuations.
The degree of the fitting polynomial was found experimentally in [13]. Given that the po­
sition algorithm only works for single interaction events, only events with key 0 are used
going forward, shown as the diamond in the flowchart (Figure 3.12).
3.3.4
Position algorithms
To find the interaction position of the photon within the detector material, a set of algo­
rithms has been developed based on a set of equations, discussed in length e.g. [6, 15].
While there have been strides in improving the algorithms, the simplest versions of the
algorithms were initially implemented, but as the project progressed, more features were
included. Many of the improvements made to further enhance these algorithms can be
found in [13]. The following is a brief introduction to the position algorithms and is valid
for single­cell events with one interaction occurring1, as described in Section 3.1.1. The
coordinate axes of the detector are defined as follows: The x­axis runs perpendicular to
the anodes, see Figure 3.15, while the y­axis runs along the depth of the detector, starting
at the anode plane and going upwards towards the cathode plane. The z­direction runs
perpendicular to the cathodes. The equation to find the position for each of the three axes
is presented in the following.
3.3.4.1
x­position
To determine the x­position that runs along the cathode direction, the activated anode
signal can be used to determine a first estimate of the x­position. The x position is largely
determined by the activated anode’s number, with the inclusion of the empty edge of the
detector (where there are no electrodes). Since the charge cloud induces a signal on
all electrodes, it is possible to determine the position in the x­direction more accurately
by using the neighbouring drift strips. If the interaction occurs slightly closer to the left
side of the anode, the left drift strip current will be larger than that on the right. With the
amplitudes of the current signal, the crude estimation of the position can be refined while
including the electrode pitch (inter­electrode distance) using the following equation from
[6]:
xpos = 0.4 +

xtrig + F ADR −ADL
ADR + ADL

Pan −Pan
2 ,
(3.2)
1This event type is by far the most common with the given experimental setup – thus, the other event
types are disregarded in the following. In the future, it should be possible to include events of other types,
see Section 5.1.
28
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:37==
x-position
z-position
y-position
x
y
z
x
z
yx
x
z
y
x
z
yx
Figure 3.15: Illustration of the 3D MBI detector with definitions of the x­, y­, and z­position.
The x­axis goes perpendicular to the anodes, the z­axis runs perpendicular to the cath­
odes, and the y­axis goes along the depth from the anode side to the cathode side. From
[6].
where ADL and ADR are the inverted current signals of the drift strips to the left and the
right of the activated anode, respectively. The value 0.4 is the distance from the edge of
the detector to the first electrode in mm, while Pan is the anode­side pitch of 1.6 mm, and
xtrig is the activated anode number. The drift strip current signal is found by taking the
time derivative of the charge signal.
3.3.4.2
z­position
Using the centre­of­gravity method, the position along the z­axis, that runs along the cath­
ode direction can be determined. From [6] adapted from [15], the position can be esti­
mated using all cathode pulse heights, Cj, and cathode pitch, Pca:
zpos =
PJ
j=1 j Cj
PJ
j=1 Cj
Pca −Pca
2 .
(3.3)
It should be noted that this particular equation is best suited for small detectors since it
includes signals from all cathodes. Should the interaction occur close to one side of the
detector, the furthest cathode will only contribute to the noise of the system. A new version
was developed, see [13], where only the signals from four cathodes on either side of the
interaction location are considered – a windowed cathode amplitude method. As stated
earlier, the version without this windowing was initially implemented in this work, but the
method was included in the final version presented here, see Section 3.3.5.
3.3.4.3
y­position
In order to determine the y­position, i.e. the depth of the interaction, the cathode signals
can be utilised again. The equation used to calculate the depth is given as, [15]:
ypos =
PJ
j=1 Cj
Am
dCZT ,
(3.4)
where Cj (j = 1, 2, . . . , J) is the pulse height of cathode j found with Equation 3.1 and
Am is the pulse height of the activated anode. The thickness of the detector is dCZT .
Similarly to the z­position, the cathodes far from the primarily activated cathode will not
contribute to the overall signal but only add noise. To alleviate this, the windowing method
can also be used for the y­position, which will increase precision. The cathode windowing
method will be described in the following.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
29
==PAGE:38==
3.3.5
Cathode windowing method
A way to decrease the effect of noise in the y­ and z­positions is to only include the signal
from cathodes close to the cathode with the largest signal, i.e. taking only a “window” of
cathode signals, see [13]. For small detectors, such as the generation of detectors prior
to the ones used in this project – the 20x20 mm modules – the signal from all cathodes
was used in the calculation of the y­ and z­coordinates (Eq. 3.3 and 3.4). An example of
cathode signals used can be seen in Figure 3.16. It is clear that if all cathodes are included
when calculating the sum of cathode signals, all the noisy parts of the low­amplitude
cathodes are going to be included. This part, however, holds no relevant signal, and thus it
is beneficial to only include the cathodes immediately surrounding the peaking cathode – a
windowing method is utilised, shown in orange in Figure 3.16. This windowing algorithm
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Cathode no.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Amplitude [ADC channels]
Cathode signals
Windowed cathodes
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Sample no.
100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Amplitude [ADC channels]
Sum of cathode signals
Sum of windowed cathodes
Figure 3.16: Example of cathode signals, and how they are summed. Top: Pulse heights
of cathode signals are shown in blue and the windowed cathodes around the peak in the
signal are shown in orange. The windowed signal would then be used to calculate the
y­ and z­position. Bottom: The summed signal of all the cathodes and the windowed
cathodes. The effect of including fewer cathodes can be seen as lower overall noise.
also includes a check for the case where the peaking cathode number is close to the
edge. In such an event, the lower or upper window edge is simply set to either 1 or 20,
respectively. The effect of the windowing is clear as a decrease in spread, and thus the
effect of noise will not become as pronounced in the y­ and z­coordinates calculated.
3.3.6
Post­processing of the pulse heights and positions
The result of the position algorithm done in Python is a set of three coordinates and the 80
pulse heights for that event, which are sent back to the LabVIEW program. This position
can be plotted as is, but whenever a new event occurs, it will be overwritten in the memory.
To alleviate this, the position and pulse heights are saved in a cyclic buffer. This buffer
is somewhat reminiscent of the original cyclic buffer used earlier to save the incoming
events: The position and pulse heights for the current event were calculated and moved
to LabVIEW, where they are appended in an array. If the length of these arrays exceeds
a user­defined threshold, the oldest value is deleted in a FIFO order, see Figure 3.17. For
each new event, the position and pulse heights of that event are added to the array. After
this is done, the pulse heights of the relevant anodes can be used to get an idea of the
30
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:39==
incoming photon energies, and the interaction locations can be plotted as the events tick
in. If the event key is not 0, an empty set of data will be parsed from the Python function –
these entries are not included in the FIFO buffer and will be skipped in the code. After the
post­processing step in LabVIEW, it is now possible to plot the results from the Python
functions in the LabVIEW environment.
New values
in
Oldest values
out
Figure 3.17: Illustration of the FIFO buffer. Two cases of this type of buffer are used, one
for the positions and one for the pulse heights for all 80 channels. The maximum length
of these buffers can be defined by the user in the sub­.vi OTF_plotting.vi.
3.3.7
Event plotting
For plotting the events, LabVIEW is significantly faster than the commonly used Mat­
plotlib.Pyplot with continuously updated figures, at least for the testing done earlier in this
project. Therefore, the plotting is kept in the LabVIEW environment and can be seen on
the front panel of the sub­.vi OTF_plotting.vi. On this panel, three plots can be seen, as
depicted on Figure 3.18.
The first of the plots is a 2D scatterplot that shows the x­ and z­positions of the last N
events, where N is the position buffer size. This plot can be used to get an idea of where
on the detector the interactions occur. An example of a slit­beam striking the detector
can be seen in Figure 3.18a. The plot is made using the standard XY graph function on
LabVIEW after the x­ and z­position data is clustered.
Furthermore, histograms of the pulse heights for the 24 anodes can be seen, where the
last M events will be shown, with M being the anode histogram buffer size. This gives an
idea of the energies of the interacting photons, as the digitisers are calibrated so that 1
ADC channel is approximately 1 keV. An example of the histograms can be seen in Figure
3.18b. Often, the photo­peak of the tests conducted with the 137Cs source were located
at ∼740 ADC channels.
The interaction position in three dimensions can be plotted in three 2D­histograms, one
for the x­ and z­coordinates similar to the scatterplot in Figure 3.18a, and side views from
the x­, y­direction, and the z­, y­direction, where the interaction depth can be seen. An
example of this set of histograms can be seen in Figure 3.18c. These histograms are
made using the third­party LabVIEW software Advanced Plotting Toolkit2, that allowed
for a simple implementation of its functionalities. This addition might be sub­optimal for
this procedure, as discussed later in Section 5.1.3, but for the purposes of this project it
is an adequate solution.
2https://advancedplotting.github.io/
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
31
==PAGE:40==
All of the above plots are updated with every single­cell, single interaction event, accord­
ing to the event sorting algorithm, see Section 3.3.3, and will run continuously until the
program is either manually stopped in the wrapper or reaches the user­defined time limit.
With all of the above steps, it is possible to plot single­cell events as they appear and
monitor the detector behaviour. Below, a set of plots from a sample of a brief exposure
can be seen.
32
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:41==
(a) 2D scatterplot of the interaction posi­
tions.
(b) Anode histograms of the pulse heights.
(c) 2D histograms of the interaction positions, in the x­y­,
the x­y­, and the z­y­direction.
Figure 3.18: Examples of a slit­beam measurement for an exposure of 300 seconds plot­
ted in the front panel of the OTF_plotting sub­.vi.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:43==
4
Results
The main aspect of the thesis was to generate a method for near­real­time analysis of
the measured signals from the detector to find interaction positions of events as they
occurred. With the procedure developed, this was achieved. It is now possible to view the
photons’ interaction location as they appear. As an added bonus, the anode pulse height
histograms can be monitored simultaneously in near­real­time. The flowchart presented
in Figure 3.12 shows the major steps involved, and the sections following explain the
workings of the implemented algorithms.
In this section, the OTF procedure will be presented, along with a brief user guide to the
various aspects. A few example cases will be presented to illustrate the procedure working
under various conditions. Screen captures of the plots are presented for several time
steps to encompass the gradually changed plots. Video clips of several of the experiments
are also available.
4.1
On­The­Fly procedure settings
There are a few user­defined variables that are specifically related to the OTF procedure
that can be adjusted in the LabVIEW program OTF_plotting.vi’s front panel, see Figure
4.1. These are the buffer sizes (i.e. the maximum length of the FIFO queues mentioned in
Section 3.3.6). Beyond these, it is also possible to adjust the number of bins used for the
two histogram types in OTF_plotting.vi. For the 1D histograms of anode pulse heights,
the number of bins can be set which will be used by all 24 plots. For the 2D histograms,
the number of bins used for each axis can be adjusted as well as an option to normalise
the histograms.
Figure 4.1: User­defined settings for the plotting done in front panel of OTF_plotting.vi.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
35
==PAGE:44==
The other settings for the system are changed in the wrapper’s front panel, see Figure 4.2.
The settings have been mentioned earlier – the main settings are the sample length, the
pre trigger delay, the trigger threshold, the exposure time (dubbed “Run for X seconds”),
and the file path for the final data file. There is also the option to not save the data in a file,
by toggling the button next to the file path, see Figure 4.2. In order to show the procedure
working as intended, a few examples will be shown in the following, showcasing different
experimental scenarios with varying setups.
Figure 4.2: User­defined settings for the experiment. These settings are found on the
front panel of the LabVIEW wrapper.
4.2
Test cases
Here, example cases of the OTF procedure are presented. They serve as a showcase of
how the OTF procedure performs and what it can be used for – the tests are not meant as
a part of a new characterisation of the detectors. Given that the detectors have already
been thoroughly characterised and evaluated in earlier works, notably [13], there is little
more to be learned using the OTF procedure. Those results do, however, serve as an
important baseline and comparison for the OTF procedure. For all of the following test
cases, only the second detector module has been tested due to time constraints. The OTF
procedure results will generally be compared to the “offline analysis”, i.e. the analysis tools
developed for Python in earlier works – those tools include calibration files for energy and
position and are hence treated as the comparative results for the OTF procedure.
4.2.1
Slit­beam experiments
One of the common experimental setups used in the laboratory is the slit­beam setup.
The experimental setup of the radioactive source and collimators, etc., is shown in Figure
4.3. The tungsten blocks shape the beam into a thin line. This line is stationary, but with
the Velmex linear translation motors, the detector can be moved in all three dimensions.
The detector is oriented so the beam will hit along the z­axis, cutting across the cathodes,
see Figure 3.15.
36
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:45==
A
B1
B2
C
D
E
F
F
Figure 4.3: Photograph of a part of the laboratory setup used for the slit­beam experiment.
(A) The radioactive 137Cs source. (B1) The tungsten collimator, and (B2) the tungsten
blocks that create the beam slit. (C) The 3D MBI detector module and biasing board,
covered by a metal optical shield. (D) The tower that contains the pre­amplifiers. (E) A
laser pointer for lining up the slit­beam onto the detector. (F) Lead bricks in red and yellow
are used to shield the operating personnel.
The slit­beam was placed so it covered the entire detector height in the z­direction, and
targets the anode slightly left of the centre of the detector, close to anode no. 10. The
program was initiated from the wrapper, and the measurements were started. After one
second, the script was stopped, and screenshots of the three plots were captured, see
Figure 4.4. The script was then restarted, and after 60 seconds (59 plus the initial second),
it was stopped again. Again, screenshots were taken, and the previous procedure was
repeated after 240 seconds, for a total of 300 seconds. The plots can be seen in Figure
4.4. After one minute of plotting, the slit is very clear, and already an emerging photo­
peak can be seen in the anode histogram. After five minutes, the photo­peak and the
interaction positions were fully visible against the background. Given that the ADC gain is
not calibrated perfectly, the photo­peak appears at ∼720 ADC channels, which is slightly
higher than the expected value of 662 keV for the 137Cs source, see Table 3.1. In [13], a
method for calibrating the gain of the pulse­heights exists, but due to time constraints, it
has not been implemented in this work – see Section 5.1. Sped­up videos of the entire
exposure duration are available1 showing the same plots as seen in Figure 4.4.
During an experiment with a similar setup, but using the offline tools, the spatial resolution
can be found with this slit­beam setup. It is found by fitting a Gaussian to the summed
signal in the direction of the beam and calculating the FWHM of that, as described in
Section 2.2.1. This was also attempted here with this setup, using the positions from the
OTF procedure. The 2D histogram for the x­y­directions was summed in the y­direction,
and a Gaussian was fit to the data, see Figure 4.5. The FWHM was found using Equation
2.4 and was found to be 0.6 mm, close to the expected spatial resolution of the detector
modules of ∼0.5 mm from [13]. The discrepancy can be attributed to the slit­beam striking
the detector at a slight angle, as can be seen in Figure A.1.
1https://figshare.com/s/4ba956c7b53166d15006
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
37
==PAGE:46==
1 s
60 s
300 s
Figure 4.4: Time series of the slit­beam along the z­axis, showing the three different plots
after approximately one, 60, and 300 seconds. For the anode histograms, only the primary
anode histogram is shown, since the remaining 23 anodes are virtually empty. The 2D
histograms auto­scale the plots, so while there are still interactions happening next to the
slit beam, they are not as dominant.
16.75
17.00
17.25
17.50
17.75
18.00
18.25
18.50
X position [mm]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Counts
Summed along the y-direction
Gaussian fit
FWHM =  0.60 mm
Figure 4.5: The FWHM of the slit­beam experiment with the beam going across the z­axis
with an exposure of 300 s.
Similarly to the spatial resolution, the spectral resolution can be found by fitting a Gaussian
– this time to the anode histogram data. In the offline analysis, the data would be corrected
using the energy calibration files, but as mentioned earlier, this was not included in this
work. In terms of relative spectral resolution, it is of little consequence, as this can still
be determined. The anode pulse height histogram with the Gaussian fit can be seen in
Figure 4.6. The spectral resolution was found to be 1.75% at 662 keV, which is largely
comparable to the result seen in [13].
38
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:47==
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
Pulse heights [ADC ch]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Counts
Anode 10 ADC pulse heights
Gaussian fit
FWHM =  12.93 ADC ch, 1.75 %
Figure 4.6: Pulse height histogram of anode 10 in the experiment with the slit­beam going
along the z­axis. A Gaussian was fitted to this to find the spectral resolution using Equation
2.4. Note that the data is not energy­calibrated.
A similar experimental setup was repeated, but the detector and tower were rotated 90
degrees to facilitate a test with the beam along the x­axis. Videos for this setup are also
available online2, and stills can be seen in Figure 4.7. As can be seen, the angle was
slightly off. Since the purpose of these experiments is only to showcase the capabilities
of the OTF procedure, it is of little consequence. Furthermore, it is clear from Figure 4.7
1 s
60 s
300 s
Figure 4.7: Time series of the slit­beam along the x­axis. Note that the signal on the
anodes is spread out over all anodes, unlike the setup for the scan along the z­direction.
The anode histograms have therefore been omitted here since they hardly show any clear
signal.
that one of the anodes seems unresponsive – there is no indication of any interactions
near anode 16. Using the offline analysis tools yields the same results, as can be seen in
Figure A.2, as well as in later experiments, such as that shown in Figure 4.12. This lack of
2https://figshare.com/s/c6b3162b6f70d1580e1e
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
39
==PAGE:48==
signal can most likely be attributed to a faulty pin connector from the detector PCB to the
tower stack, as the anode was fully working in [13]. This issue was also seen in previous
works, e.g. [12], and is fixed by disconnecting the detector module and reconnecting it,
ensuring the pins are fully engaged.
4.2.2
Pencil­beam experiments
Another type of beam that can be used to test the capabilities of the OTF procedure is that
of a thin “pencil­beam” where another set of tungsten blocks can be used to cut off more
of the slit­beam. The setup was identical to the one in Figure 4.3, except for the addition
of the tungsten block shown in Figure 4.8, placed first in the beam­line. This second set
of tungsten blocks shapes the beam into a rectangle of ∼1x4 mm. With this setup, the
A
B
Figure 4.8: The tungsten blocks used to create the pencil­beam shape. The left blocks
(A) are placed so the beam takes a horizontal beam shape, and the right­most blocks (B)
are the ones used previously to create the vertical beam shape. The beam of photons
then takes a rectangular shape with dimensions of ∼1x4 mm.
small rectangular area will be illuminated on the detector’s front­facing plate. Using this,
three experiments were conducted, one where the beam was kept static and two where
the detector was moved around. For the case of the static beam, the exposure was set
to 20 minutes, illuminating close to anode 8. The resulting 2D histogram can be seen
in Figure 4.9, along with a comparison to the offline analysis equivalent histograms. As
can be seen, there is virtually no difference between the two methods. The other pencil­
beam experiments involved moving the detector around. The first of the two involved
moving the beam path so it created a square, as seen in Figure 4.10. This experiment was
done mainly as a demonstration of the flexibility of the OTF procedure. The movement
increments were made manually every 10 seconds. Videos are also available for this
experiment3. Already, with such an exposure, the path is quite clear on the 2D histogram
and could be made even clearer by simply having a longer exposure time between the
movements of the detector. Furthermore, since the analysis was done offline, it could be
possible to remove background noise, making it even clearer.
3The video is available at https://figshare.com/s/8f9541d8a9ad4698e72c.
A video of the second experiment with the moving pencil beam described later is also available here.
40
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.9: 2D histograms of the static pencil­beam experiment, with an exposure time
of 20 minutes. Left: Results from the OTF procedure. Right: Results from the offline
analysis. Note that the apparent discrepancy in intensities is due to an increase in the
number of bins used in the offline analysis.
A
B
Figure 4.10: (A) planned path of the beam. Achieved by moving the tower in small incre­
ments every 10 seconds. (B) Resulting 2D histograms of the experiment.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
41
==PAGE:50==
The final experiment involved moving the path but having turned the buffer size down, so
only the last 100 events are shown in the 2D histograms. With this setup, it is possible
to see the current beam position and not where it was at earlier stages of the exposure.
This test was designed to show how the detector could be used to track the movement of
a target, even with quite low exposure times.
10 s
300 s
600 s
Figure 4.11: Movement test with the decreased 2D histogram buffer size, so only the past
100 events are shown. This enables the view of the current beam position, not the past
positions.
The path was started in the top left of the detector, moving it downwards gradually, and
before the bottom was reached, the path was moved slightly to the right. Stills from the
experiment can be seen in Figure 4.11.
These pencil­beam experiments have been deemed a success, with the flexibility of the
OTF procedure showcased with some dynamic experimental setups – both the static
beam and the beams that were moved around were detectable, even for very short expo­
sure times.
4.2.3
Full­illumination experiment
For the final test, a full­illumination (in literature also called a flood illumination) test is
conducted. This is done to mimic a characterisation of one of the detector modules. The
detector is moved away from the original beam path and in front of an uncollimated 137Cs
source, so that the detector is illuminated across the entire surface. The exposure time is
set up significantly to ensure that the majority of the detector has had some interactions
occur, in this case, 30 minutes. Normally, the exposure can be set significantly higher
than this, or be a combination of several scans in either the x­ or z­direction. The data
was saved in the same manner as previously and compared to the results found using
the offline tools.
Similar to what was found during the slit­beam along the z­axis, anode 16 seems to be
unresponsive. This was not seen in earlier works, and this is a known issue in the exper­
imental setup. The pin connectors that connect the detector PCB to the tower have been
found to be faulty at times, and loose connections can cause this issue – again, this was
seen previously in e.g. [12].
42
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.12: Left: 2D histograms of the full­illumination of 30 minutes, using the offline
tools on the data from the OTF procedure. Anode 16 has a clear lack of signal, similar to
that found in the experiment with the slit­beam along the x­axis, e.g. Figure A.2. Right:
Figure 6.2 from [13], showing a similar experiment but for longer exposure. It is clear that
all the anodes seem to be functioning correctly.
With the near­real­time OTF analysis procedure showcased in the above examples, it
has been shown that the procedure is working as intended. The different cases show
potential setups that are normally used in the laboratory setting. They could potentially
also be used in the upcoming stages of the i­RASE project to train the ANN. While the
method seems to work, the procedure still has shortcomings, which will be covered in the
following chapter.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:53==
5
Discussion
With the OTF procedure described and demonstrated, the next logical step is to ascertain
how well it performs compared to the offline analysis. Given the requirement for process­
ing speed, the OTF procedure has been kept in a simple state – the improvements made
in earlier projects often include fitting Gaussians to find centroid values or convolutions
to smooth out data, all of which are computationally heavy compared to the otherwise
“simple” calculations for the positions. Taking all of the above into consideration, it seems
natural that the results from the OTF procedure might be of somewhat lower quality than
those calculated in the offline analysis. This was investigated by comparing the positions
of the OTF procedure and the positions from the offline analysis on the data file from the
same experiment. The setup used was that of a full­illumination of the detector, using one
of the 137Cs sources, and measuring for 30 minutes. All positions that were outside the
physical boundary of the detector have been excluded. That is, values beyond 40 mm for
the x­ and z­axes and 5 mm for the y­axis. The residuals in the two sets of positions can
be seen in Figure 5.1.
0.25
0.00
0.25
x
 : 0.07884,
median: -0.00076 
1
0
1
Residual values [mm]
y
 : 0.13429,
median: -0.02924 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Event no.
10
0
10
z
 : 1.34767,
median: 0.00026 
Figure 5.1: Residuals of positions calculated with the offline tools and those found with
the OTF procedure. The test setup was the one used in the full­illumination experiment
in Section 4.2.3. The total exposure time was 30 minutes. The units of the standard
deviation and median values are all in mm.
For all three axes, the positions seem to be quite well determined, with median values
close to 0. The standard deviation of the residuals seems to be quite small as well, es­
pecially for the x­direction. This stems from the robustness of the determination of the
position with the primarily activated anode from Equation 3.2. The two neighbouring drift
strip signals help adjusting the estimate further, and given that the only type of events that
are being treated are single­cell events. These events generally appear rather simple in
their electrode signals, and therefore it is to be expected that the determination of the
x­position is rather straightforward.
For the y­ and z­positions, the mean values of the residuals between the offline and OTF
methods are generally small; however, their standard deviations are larger. For the z­
positions, there seem to be some outliers where the position found in the OTF procedure
is very different from the offline calculated position. Whether this is the effect of the cal­
ibration or some issue with the cathode windowing technique, see Section 3.3.5, is not
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
45
==PAGE:54==
known currently. However, given that the number of outliers in this data set of ∼3000
events is only around 2%, it is acceptable for general position determination.
The y­position residuals seem more noisy than the other two directions. This is almost
as expected, as the y­position is calculated with Equation 3.4 – the mobility of the charge
carriers within the detector material can affect the induced signal severely. This can be
corrected, if the electron­hole mobility is understood and can be included in the calibra­
tion, which, as stated earlier, has not been included in this work due to time constraints.
Creating good calibration maps for the depth of interaction for each of the detectors can
be tricky. It might require a scan of the depth, which means that the detector and tower
has to turned 90o around the z­axis, which is not achievable without adjustments to the
experimental setup. The current system allows for linear translation in the x­, y­, and
z­directions, and rotation around the beam path axis.
The spatial and spectral resolution of detector module 2 was tested in Section 4.2.1 for
the 137Cs source, and the results were comparable to those found in [13], namely a spatial
resolution of 0.6 mm and a spectral resolution of 1.75%. The pencil­beam test conducted
are not suited of estimations of the spatial resolution of the detector module, as the width
of the beam is too large with the setup created using the tungsten collimators.
In the offline analysis done in the aforementioned work, a comprehensive calibration is
conducted, including adjusting the positions and energies, which is not possible with the
current OTF procedure. The calibration for energy depends on interaction location, which
in turn also depends on the gain of each electrode. Energy calibration maps and gain val­
ues for all electrodes for each of the three detector modules can be found in the appendix
of [13].
With the results found with this sample of the near­real­time signal analysis procedure, it
is clear that it performs adequately compared to the conventional methods. The main ad­
vantage of the method naturally lies in the ability to get continuously updated insights into
the detector module’s behaviour. This was an aspect that was previously not available.
While it is evident that there are still some parts of the procedure that needs polishing, the
overall capabilities of the method seems adequate for quick assessment of the detector
module behaviour.
5.1
Future works
While the near­real­time signal analysis is now possible, it is by no means fully complete.
There are a number of aspects that could be improved or expanded upon, as well as some
natural next steps for the future of the project. Some of the aspects will be covered in the
following.
5.1.1
Implementation with the artificial neural network
The goal of the thesis was to create a near­real­time signal analysis procedure to find the
interaction positions of high­energy photons in order to train an ANN in the near future.
This is the next obvious step for the i­RASE project. Concurrently with this thesis, an­
other thesis has been written, [16], in which an ANN has been trained with pre­existing
data captured during earlier works. With this near­real­time procedure in place, it is thus
possible to generate new sets of “ground truth” for the ANN to compare its predictions to.
When the ANN has been properly trained and is fully capable of predicting the positions
of the photon interactions, it could be implemented within the hardware of a future detec­
tor module, thus bringing the i­RASE project closer to fruition. While the major milestone
of creating a near­real­time signal analysis procedure is considered reached, there are
still many aspects that can be improved upon. This is quite evident, given that the OTF
46
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:55==
procedure mainly deals with the simplest interaction cases, nor does it include all of the
calibrations and other improvements made in [13].
5.1.2
Inclusion of detector calibration
In the work done in [13], several steps were taken to calibrate the detectors that account
for differential gains on the anodes and cathodes. The positions are corrected in relation to
the interaction location and the energy of the interaction, among other factors. While these
methods are great for the offline analysis, it is impossible to include all of these methods in
the OTF procedure. Perhaps an adequate first step would be to include a simple method
for calibrating the pulse heights to fit the expected energies, using Gaussian fits to a large
sampling of events caused by the available radioactive sources. This method should be
included in the data pre­processing, and most of the functionalities are already present in
the previously developed script. It was not included in this work due to time constraints,
but it should not pose a major challenge to implement. For the purposes of this initial
testing, it was deemed non­crucial, as the photo­peak is simply shifted to slightly higher
values – it is still quite evident on the energy histograms. There are calibration maps for
all three detectors developed in [13], see Figure 5.2, that are used to correct the positions
and energies based on the initial position estimate. These were used in the offline analysis
but should be implementable in the near­real­time analysis as well.
The sophisticated methods of calibration often rely on a set of interactions, which is inher­
ently very different from the approach used in this work, where single events are treated
one at a time. A hybrid method might be developed in the future, where the best of both
methods could be combined into one. The ANN might also be able to account for these
calibrations with enough training on adequate data.
5.1.3
Plotting speed optimisation
It was noticed after the implementation of the 2D histogram plotting that the speed at
which new events could be treated decreased significantly. Prior to the implementation
of the three 2D histograms, around 10 events per second could be processed and plot­
ted in the LabVIEW script OTF_plotting.vi, but after, the norm lies around three events
per second. This is most likely due to the third­party software used (Advanced Plotting
Toolkit, by Heliosphere Research LLC) to produce the 2D histograms. It might be that the
functionalities therein are not optimised for continuous plotting or that the sub­.vi’s used
are computationally heavy. The decrease in refresh speed can also be attributed to the
hardware in the laboratory computer – given that the calculations required to create the
2D histograms are computationally heavy, it might be a lack of available computer pro­
cessing power. Whatever the case, it poses a major hindrance to the OTF procedure and
should be dealt with to optimise the speed at which new events can be processed.
5.1.4
Alternative plots
While the anode pulse height histograms are of great use, it would be convenient to be
able to switch to the other electrodes. A system could be implemented, so the user could
change a parameter in the LabVIEW front panel of the plotting .vi, and a different set of
electrodes would be presented. This could be useful for gauging the cathodes or seeing
how the drift strips are behaving. This change should not pose a great challenge to im­
plement, but it is considered a minor overall improvement. The LabVIEW code required
for this is also not necessarily straightforward.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.2: x­z energy correction values for detector module 1, 2 and 3. Black spaces
are locations where interactions are ignored, due to dead electrodes. As can be seen,
detector module 2 has the least major deviations of the three. These maps could be
included in the OTF procedure in a future version. From [13].
5.1.5
Switching programming language
Rather than working both in LabVIEW and in Python, it might be prudent to switch en­
tirely to a programming language that is more widely used and easier to adapt to future
changes. Given the complexity of working in the LabVIEW environment, in combina­
tion with the “black box” aspect of the code used currently, it would be wise to remake
the current functionalities from the ground, but in a simple and logical script. Currently,
almost all of the sub­.vi’s used by the LabVIEW wrapper are not fully understood, and
trying to understand code that someone else has made can be a challenge, especially
given the scarcity of comments made in the LabVIEW code. Currently, if there are any
major complications with the software, going forward is difficult without the assistance of
the technical personnel from SIS. If the code was written in a different programming lan­
guage that was easier to follow and comments were more readily available, this might be
completely avoidable in the future.
48
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:57==
All the same functionalities that are available in LabVIEW can, in theory, be made in
Python, and given the availability of pre­existing libraries and online assistance on online
fora, Python is an obvious candidate for an alternative programming language. Alterna­
tively, the entire program could be made in C, a programming language known for its
speed – to such an extent that many Python libraries often utilise C to speed up their
functions, such as NumPy1, a Python library which was used extensively throughout this
project. Recreating the whole data processing pipeline in a different language would be a
major undertaking, but a text­based program would potentially serve the project well in the
long run. Naturally, the previous items on this list of future improvements include things
that would not be relevant should the project switch to be entirely based on Python or
another text­based language. Still, the plotting should be optimised to such a degree that
it does not slow down the code. This issue was seen in the initial phases of the project,
where some of the plotting was tested in a pure Python environment using the ubiquitous
Matplotlib.Pyplot functions. Using another plotting library might solve this issue, such as
PyQtGraph2.
5.1.6
Inclusion of multiple interaction events
In the version presented in this thesis, the position algorithm from Section 3.3.4 is not
capable of handling events that are not single­cell events. In the future, it should be
possible to include Compton scattering events and similar multiple cell, multiple interaction
events. For multiple cell events, the events could be treated as two separate events and
their energies summed together. It might be harder to split the two interactions fully for
Compton scattering in a single cell. Each “step” of the anode signal (see Figure 3.4)
should be treated as two events. Depending on the location of the interaction, the signals
might overlap too much.
For positions, two or more sets would have to be found – for the x­positions, Equation
3.2 should give an indication of the positions. There might be some overlap in the drift
strip signals between the two activated anodes, which would have to be corrected. For
the z­position, things might get more complicated, as the cathode signals might overlap
too greatly. Similarly, for the y­position, the cathode signals could overlap too much to
distinguish the two positions. It might be possible to deconvolve the charge cloud signals
using some mathematical techniques, but they might be too computationally heavy to
conduct in near­real­time.
A simulation tool was recently developed, that is capable of mimicking the electron cloud
of a photon interaction. This tool might be used in combination with the ANN from [16] to
cover all type of events, in an efficient and more computationally light way.
1https://numpy.org/
2https://www.pyqtgraph.org/
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion
With all the work presented in this thesis covered, it can be concluded that the develop­
ment of a near­real­time signal analysis procedure for the 3D MBI Detector Modules has
been a success. The detectors are CZT drift strip detectors developed at DTU Space in
collaboration with Kromek and are useful in applications such as high­energy astronomy
and Molecular Breast Imaging.
The development of the On­The­Fly (OTF) procedure stands out as the pivotal achieve­
ment of this work. Previously, the signal analysis had to be done only after measurements
were completed. With the development of the OTF procedure, it is now possible to get
near­real­time insight into the detector modules. This includes information about where
high­energy photons strike the detector and an estimate of the deposited energy of the
photons to the material. This can be used to further the readiness of the 3D MBI Detector
Modules for the i­RASE project.
Moreover, this work is an important first step for the integration of an Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) into the signal processing of the detector modules. The OTF procedure
will be combined with an ANN in the near future to achieve the major milestone of the
i­RASE project of potentially enabling in­hardware signal processing. While there are
still many challenges to overcome, the tools developed here can be used to further the
understanding of the detector’s capabilities.
Future research should focus on handling multiple interaction events, optimising plot­
ting speeds, and considering the transition to a different programming language, such
as Python, for enhanced performance and maintainability. These steps will further the
progress made and continue to push the boundaries of the 3D MBI Detector Modules.
In conclusion, this thesis not only advances the current state of the 3D MBI Detector
Modules but also sets a foundation for future work aimed at improving radiation detection
for critical applications in medicine and astronomy.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Henrik Bendix. Feb. 2022. URL: https://www.dtu.dk/english/news/all-news/nyhed?
id=77e2d697-b18a-4311-807c-fa80acbf203d.
[2]
Carolyn Kierans, Tadayuki Takahashi, and Gottfried Kanbach. “Compton Telescopes
for Gamma­Ray Astrophysics”. In: Handbook of X­ray and Gamma­ray Astrophysics.
Ed. by Cosimo Bambi and Andrea Santangelo. Singapore: Springer Nature Sin­
gapore, 2022, pp. 1–72. DOI: 10.1007/978- 981- 16- 4544- 0_46- 1. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-4544-0_46-1.
[3]
Boris Kharisov and Oxana Kharissova. “Radiation Synthesis of Materials and Com­
pounds”. In: CRC Press, Feb. 2013. Chap. Main Ionizing Radiation Types and Their
Interaction with Matter.
[4]
Glenn F Knoll. Radiation Detection and Measurement. 4th ed. Chichester, England:
John Wiley & Sons, Aug. 2010. ISBN: 978­0­470­13148­0.
[5]
Nuclear power ­ Interaction of Gamma Radiation with Matter. URL: https://www.
nuclear- power.com/nuclear- power/reactor- physics/interaction- radiation- matter/
interaction-gamma-radiation-matter/.
[6]
Selina R. H. Owe. “Development of 3D Imaging Detectors for High Energy Astron­
omy Instrumentation”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, Oct. 2023.
[7]
I. Vladimirov et al. “Energy barriers at grain boundaries dominate charge carrier
transport in an electron­conductive organic semiconductor”. In: Scientific Reports
8.1 (Oct. 2018). ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-33308-y. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-33308-y.
[8]
S. Howalt Owe, I. Kuvvetli, and C. Budtz­Jørgensen. “Carrier Lifetime and Mobility
Characterization Using the DTU 3­D CZT Drift Strip Detector”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Nuclear Science 68.9 (2021), pp. 2440–2446. DOI: 10.1109/TNS.2021.3068001.
[9]
Zhong He. “Review of the Shockley–Ramo theorem and its application in semi­
conductor gamma­ray detectors”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research 463.1 (2001), pp. 250–267. ISSN: 0168­9002. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0168-9002(01)00223-6. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0168900201002236.
[10]
W. Shockley. “Currents to Conductors Induced by a Moving Point Charge”. In: Jour­
nal of Applied Physics 9.10 (Oct. 1938), pp. 635–636. ISSN: 0021­8979. DOI: 10.
1063/1.1710367. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1710367.
[11]
S. Ramo. “Currents Induced by Electron Motion”. In: Proceedings of the IRE 27.9
(1939), pp. 584–585. DOI: 10.1109/JRPROC.1939.228757.
[12]
S. R. H. Owe et al. “Evaluation of CZT Drift Strip Detectors for Use in 3­D Molecular
Breast Imaging”. In: IEEE Transactions on Radiation and Plasma Medical Sciences
7.2 (2023), pp. 113–123. DOI: 10.1109/TRPMS.2022.3220807.
[13]
Benjamin N. Hauptmann. “Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D
MBI Detector Modules”. Supervisor: Irfan Kuvvetli. DTU Space, 2024.
[14]
SIS3316 16 Channel VME Digitizer. Struck Innovative Systeme. 2019.
[15]
C. Budtz­Jørgensen and I. Kuvvetli. “New Position Algorithms for the 3­D CZT Drift
Detector”. In: IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 64.6 (June 2017), pp. 1611–
1618. DOI: 10.1109/TNS.2017.2696574.
[16]
Michał Kossakowski. “Development and Performance Evaluation of Artificial Neural
Networks for Signal Processing in Radiation Detectors”. Supervisor: Søren Hauberg.
DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, 2024.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:63==
A
Supplementary plots
Figure A.1: Zoom of the 2D histogram of the slit­beam experiment presented in Section
4.2.1, showing the slight tilt of the beam. The beam alignment seems to be off by ∼1o.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.2: 2D histograms of the test with the slit­beam going along the x­axis, made
using the offline analysis tools. Anode 16 seems unresponsive. The exposure time was
300 seconds.
56
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:65==
B
LabVIEW Hierarchy
Figure B.1: Hierarchy of the wrapper .vi in LabVIEW and all its dependencies, excluding
the sub­.vi’s for the plotting done by the third­party software in the OTF_plotting.vi. The
features added in this project are shown in the top left, marked with the red box.
Developing a near­real­time radiation detector signal analysis for the 3D MBI Detector Modules
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.space.dtu.dk
