==PAGE:1==
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibil­
ity Through Comprehensive Energy System
Modeling: A Flow­Based Market Coupling Ap­
proach
Master Thesis ­ Antoine Museur
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy Sys­
tem Modeling: A Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Antoine Museur
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen
DTU Management
János Hethey
Ea Energy Analyses
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for graduation in the
above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Akademivej
Bygning 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared in the period from January 2024 to July 2024 at the Depart­
ment of Technology, Management and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in collaboration with Ea Energy Analyses. It is in partial fulfillment for the degree
Master of Science in Sustainable Energy.
I declare that this thesis was composed by myself, that the work contained herein is my
own except where explicitly stated otherwise in the text, and that this work has not been
submitted for any other degree or professional qualification except as specified.
Antoine Museur ­ s222828
Signature
Date
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
To establish a single, interconnected electricity market between countries, the European
Union is currently implementing Flow­Based Market Coupling as the new approach for
electricity transmission. In this framework, all physical flows and constraints are taken
into account in the market clearing algorithms, which leads to more accurate price signals
and an overall increased social welfare.
In this study, the Flow­Based Market Coupling approach is first implemented as an add­
on to the Balmorel energy system model, using specific data published by the ENTSO­E
in the European Resource Adequacy Assessment 2023. Other parameters of the model,
such as generation capacities, demand levels and transmission capacities, are also mod­
ified to fit to the ENTSO­E scenarios.
The effect of Flow­Based Market Coupling on the energy system in then studied, through
a comparison with a simulation not including this new approach. It is shown that by opti­
mizing the cross­border electricity transmission, the Flow­Based Market Coupling creates
an electricity price convergence in the system, while allowing for a better integration of
renewable energy sources and decreasing the overall system costs.
Finally, two offshore hubs are studied under Flow­Based Market Coupling, showing that
this optimized approach allows for more renewable generation through a better use of the
connections, hence increasing the capture price and the feasibility of such projects.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank deeply my two supervisors, Rasmus Bo Bramstoft
Pedersen at DTU Management and János Hethey at Ea Energy Analyses. From the
shaping of the project to always relevant and encouraging inputs during my work, their
help and guidance has been crucial during the whole project.
I feel extremely grateful that Ea Energy Analyses accepted to collaborate with me on my
thesis. Despite allowing me to use their resources, primarily the Balmorel model but also
their IT infrastructure, Ea provided me with access to a wealth of knowledge and exper­
tise from the numerous colleagues who were consistently available and eager to assist.
Without other particular order than my recent chats in Teams, I would like to extend my
gratitude to Max, Phil, Dimi, Anne Sofie, Daniel, Francesco, Katja, Nina, Jens Christian,
Anant and Victor. Being integrated in such a wonderful company was a lovely experience,
both on professional and social aspects.
This is also the occasion to thank my student job colleagues in Ørsted, for their under­
standing support when the thesis was sometimes taking priority on my tasks there.
I of course want to thank my roommates Jade, Maël and Jurek, as well as my friends, for
making my time in Denmark so enjoyable and fulfilling.
Last but not least, I want to thank my parents, as well as my girlfriend Marie, for love,
support, trust, freedom of choice, advices and everything else. And to some extent for
providing me with a roof and an external monitor when I went back to France to finish the
writing of my thesis!
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review and ENTSO­E dataset
2
2.1
Flow­Based Market Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
ENTSO­E Flow­Based Market Coupling dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Offshore Energy Hubs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
10
3.1
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.1.1
Geographical scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.1.2
Temporal scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Energy system modeling with Balmorel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Balmorel model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.2
Flow­Based Market Coupling setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2.3
Computing Flow­Based domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.4
Transmission capacity data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2.5
Demand and generation capacity data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2.6
Weather data integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2.7
Offshore setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Simulation procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Study scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Results
23
4.1
Effect of the Flow­Based Market Coupling add­on . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.1.1
Electricity prices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.1.2
Electricity generation & Share of renewables . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.1.3
System costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Offshore energy hubs under Flow­Based Market Coupling . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2.1
Electricity generation in the offshore hubs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2.2
Hourly study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2.3
Capture prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Discussion
33
6
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
36
A Demand and capacity input data
38
B Electricity generation in 2030
39
C Hourly study of congestion in offshore hubs
40
D Average electricity prices
41
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
In its goal to reach carbon neutrality by 2050, the European Union aims to establish a sin­
gle, interconnected electricity market that ensures a reliable, affordable, and sustainable
energy supply. Flow­Based market Coupling is a central piece of this electricity network,
designed to enhance the economic efficiency of the grid by optimizing the use of cross­
border transmission capacities. Flow­Based Market Coupling allows for better integration
of physical flows and constraints, which results in more accurate price signals and in­
creased social welfare across interconnected markets. However, the implementation of
Flow­Based Market Coupling is complex due to the nature of electricity flows, which obeys
to physical laws rather than commercial contracts.
Offshore energy hubs are also part of the solution to the transition to a greener energy
landscape. These hubs, strategically located in offshore areas, can be built around current
or future offshore wind farms, which is a technology already in use in most of Europe, and
especially in the Nordics.
This thesis investigates the feasibility of offshore energy hubs through a detailed energy
system model, which was modified to integrate the principles of Flow­Based Market Cou­
pling. By comparing this power transmission framework to the Net Transfer Capacity
usual one, and analyzing the impact on electricity prices, generation patterns and system
costs, the study aims to provide comprehensive insights into the potential benefits and
challenges associated with offshore energy hubs under Flow­Based Market Coupling.
The project was done using the Balmorel model, a flexible and detailed tool for energy
system analysis.
Chapter 2 presents the theory of Flow­Based Market Coupling from the existing literature,
as well as the ENTSO­E dataset used to integrate it to the Balmorel model. In chapter
3, the geographical and temporal scope of the project are detailed, before describing the
whole methodology to develop Flow­based Market Coupling in the Balmorel model, and
integrate coherent ENTSO­E scenarios as input data. Chapter 4 presents and compare
the results of three scenarios, first assessing the effect of Flow­Based market Coupling on
the system and then looking in more depth at two particular offshore energy hubs. Finally,
chapter 5 discusses the strengths and weaknesses of the study so far.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Literature review and ENTSO­E dataset
This chapter aims to provide a theoretical background to the work that was done in this
study, both from scientific literature and from the ENTSO­E reports and data.
2.1
Flow­Based Market Coupling
To achieve its emissions reductions targets, as well as to maintain a reliable and afford­
able supply of electricity, the European Union (EU) is aiming at a single, interconnected
electricity market between countries. This includes two majors principles: regional mar­
kets (often at the country level) seen as copper plates for electricity, and market coupling
between regional markets. As demonstrated by Van den Bergh et al. [1], coupling differ­
ent electricity markets allows for an increase of the overall economic efficiency. However,
it is not so straightforward, since electricity transmitted between two points doesn’t au­
tomatically take the shortest path between those two points but rather spreads out in all
parallel circuits in the network according to Kirchhoff’s laws, as shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Commercial (in orange) vs physical (in blue) flows in the Nordic grid. Power
is injected in NO3 and consumed in SE2 [2]
As a result, the constructed transmission capacity between two regional markets cannot
be made fully available to commercial trade because some of this capacity will in reality
be used by other flows from trades between or within other regional markets. These limi­
tations could be overcome by investing in new transmission capacity, but those are capital
intensive and often have a diminishing marginal value, making an unlimited expansion of
the grid not realistic, as explained by Energinet et al. [2]. The problem of making trans­
mission capacity available to the market is then called cross­border capacity allocation.
Several capacity allocation methods exist, amongst them are the nodal market clearing,
the Net Transfer Capacity (NTC) method, and the Flow­Based Market Coupling (FBMC).
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
2
==PAGE:9==
In the current NTC method in the EU, Transmission System Operators (TSOs) take the
physical flows into account when calculating the available transmission capacity to be
allocated on each bidding zone border by reducing the amount of capacity available. If
some of the forecasted trades are not realized, some reductions of capacity on some lines
might be useless and decrease the economic efficiency. However, Flow­Based Market
Coupling allows for better acknowledgement of the physical flows and constraints, which
leads to an optimized utilization of the scarce transmission capacity, and hence more
accurate price signals and an increased social welfare. FBMC is the EU’s chosen frame­
work to couple different electricity markets, and is therefore the method explored in more
depth in this study. In the FBMC approach, all physical flows are internalized into the
market, meaning that several commercial exchanges over the network have to compete
for a given transmission capacity, even when not related to this transmission line at first.
In Flow­Based Market Coupling, the market coupling algorithm receives transmission con­
straints not as NTC, but rather as Remaining Available Margins (RAM) and zonal Power
Transfer Distribution Factors (PTDF). While the RAM represents the free margin for every
transmission capacity, the PTDF represents the effect of an increase of the flow between
two points on a given branch. After defining a set of Critical Network Elements & Con­
tingencies (CNECs, the network elements that are the most susceptible to be congested
during operation), the PTDFs are grouped into a matrix giving the impact of cross­border
transmission lines on all CNECs. The selection process of relevant CNECs is not in the
scope of this work, but is explained in Schönheit et al. [3]. As presented by Kristiansen
[4], the flow­based constraint in the market coupling algorithm is as in Equation 2.1.
RAMCNEC ≥
∑
z
PTDF zone
CNEC,z · NPz
∀CNEC
(2.1)
where RAMCNEC is the RAM associated with a specific critical element or contingency
(in MW), PTDF zone
CNEC,z is the PTDF of zone z on the critical element CNEC (in %), and
NPz is the net import/export of zone z (in MW).
The RAM and zonal PTDF factors are determined by the TSOs before the market clear­
ing, with calculation starting two days before delivery, and ending the morning day­ahead.
They can then be used in the day­ahead market clearing. Van den Bergh et al. [1] demon­
strates that using the nodal PTDF (resulting from a DC power flow analysis of the electricity
grid, not detailed in this study), the zonal PTDF can be calculated as in Equation 2.2.
PTDF zone
CNEC,z =
∑
n
PTDF node
CNEC,n · GSKn,z
∀CNEC, ∀z
(2.2)
where PTDF node
CNEC,n gives the linear relationship between injections in the grid at node n
and flows through CNEC, and GSKn,z is the Generation Shift Key of node n in zone z,
giving the nodal reaction to a change in zonal balance (Equation 2.3).
GSKn,z =
d Pn
d NPz
∀n, ∀z
(2.3)
with Pn the grid injection at node n. This project will not study in further detail how can
GSKs be determined, but this can be found in Schönheit et al. [3].
Zonal PTDFs are an approximation of the real grid, with an inherent accuracy loss by
grouping nodes into zones. Moreover, GSKs are based on predictions of the market
outcome, as the actual outcome didn’t happen yet where they are calculated. This can
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
3
==PAGE:10==
lead to deviations between flows that are seen in the FBMC algorithm output, and the
actual flows in the grid. The transmission capacity available to the market hence has to
integrate some safety margins, and is calculated through Equation 2.4.
RAMCNEC = F max
CNEC −F ref
CNEC −FAVCNEC −FRMCNEC
∀CNEC
(2.4)
where F max
CNEC is the maximum allowable flow on the CNEC, F ref
CNEC is the reference flow
(by commercial transactions outside the day­ahead power exchange), FAVCNEC is the Fi­
nal Adjustment Value (additional margin due to complex remedial actions by knowledge or
experience from TSOs, can be positive or negative), and FRMCNEC is the Flow Reliability
Margin (safety margin to compensate from approximations made in the FBMC methodol­
ogy, flow deviation due to load­frequency control, or the use of a linear grid model). Boury
[5] gives more information on the RAM calculations, which won’t be detailed here.
In the FBMC methodology, a zonal geography is considered (nodes are aggregated), but
all (critical) lines are taken into account, as shown on Figure 2.2,
Figure 2.2: Zonal network in FBMC [1]
where the network consists of 3 nodes and 12 lines. The FBMC parameters (PTDF and
RAM) define what is called the flow­based domain, in which each boundary refers to a
critical line (Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3: 2D representation of an NTC and flow­based domains [1]
In FBMC, the allowable commercial capacity between two zones is not independent any­
more from the ones between other zones (unlike in the NTC method). As the physical
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
4
==PAGE:11==
characteristics of the grid have a better representation in the FBMC method, the FBMC
parameters can be determined with less safety margins. Hence, the flow­based domain
is likely larger than the NTC domain. As Lang et al. [6] demonstrated, this allows for more
electricity flowing overall, and leads to an increased social welfare, as well as higher re­
liability, stability and robustness. CREG [7] notes that there is also a price convergence
on the network, resulting from optimized cross­border flows.
2.2
ENTSO­E Flow­Based Market Coupling dataset
2.2.1
Overview
The ENTSO­E is the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity.
It promotes closer cooperation across Europe’s TSOs to support the implementation of
the EU’s energy policy and achieve Europe’s energy and climate policy objectives, which
are changing the very nature of the power system. The ENSTO­E delivers several pan­
European outlooks of the power system, in both the short, mid and long­term. Amongst
them is the annual European Resource Adequacy Assessment (ERAA), which is a proba­
bilistic assessment of adequacy (the ability of the power system to always fulfil demand),
up to ten years ahead (the modelled years are 2025, 2028, 2030 and 2033).
In the Edition 2023 of the ERAA [8], Flow­Based Market Coupling is introduced to model
the grid limitations on cross­zonal trade. This is done considering several Capacity Cal­
culation Regions (CCR), surrounding the Core region, as in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Capacity Calculation Regions in the ERAA 2023 [9]
FBMC is applied directly to the Core region, but in other regions (such as the Nordic coun­
tries), all connections to adjacent areas are either HVDC or radial AC interconnections.
Power flows on HVDC connections are manageable and in a radial AC network, unlike in
a meshed AC one, power cannot fan out (which is the main reason for adopting FBMC).
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.5: Radial and meshed topology of a transmission system [10]
These other regions are then included to the scope through Advanced Hybrid Coupling
(AHC), to integrate them in the meshed AC grid that the Core is. AHC is a flow­based
approach to couple these different types of systems, where the power flows coming from
a radial AC or an HVDC interconnection are competing for transmission capacity with all
the other flows in the system and become a part of the FB system (opposed to Standard
Hybrid Coupling (SHC), where these flows from radial AC or HVDC are granted priority
access in the meshed AC transmission grid, hence having a less flexible system).
In the ERAA 2023, the Core region then consists of the bidding zone border between
the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Czech Republic, France, Germany,
Hungary, Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia. Countries around this
Core (Bosnia, Bulgaria, Denmark, Great Britain, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Norway, Serbia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland) keep their NTC transmission scheme, but are connected to
the Core through AHC as shown Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: FBMC topology in the ERAA 2023 [8]
In classic FBMC (Core regions), NPz in Equation 2.1 corresponds to the net position of
zone z with respect to all the other Core zones. However, in AHC, these variables now
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
6
==PAGE:13==
refer to set points of external flows into the Core CCR. This general Equation 2.1 then
leads to Equation 2.5.
RAMCNEC ≥
∑
zCore
(PTDFCNEC,z · NPz)
+
∑
zAHC
(PTDF AHC
CNEC,z · F AHC
z
)
∀CNEC
(2.5)
where PTDF zone
CNEC,z is now PTDFCNEC,z for the Core for a simplification purpose, and
Core and AHC zones have been split to acknowledge for the difference presented above.
F AHC
z
is the external AHC flow from an NTC zone to the Core region. For the Core
regions, NPz is the global net position of the zone, and is the sum of the net position
with Core (sum of exchanges with other Core zones, NP Core
z
) and exchanges with NTC
regions via AHC (F AHC
z
), as in Equation 2.6.
NPz = NP Core
z
−
∑
AHC
F AHC
z
∀z
(2.6)
with a ”−” sign because F AHC
z
are the flows to the Core regions. Combining Equations
2.5 and 2.6, the Equation 2.7 is then obtained.
RAMCNEC ≥
∑
zCore
(PTDFCNEC,z · NP Core
z
)
+
∑
zAHC
(PTDF AHC∗
CNEC,z · F AHC
z
)
∀CNEC
(2.7)
with
PTDF AHC∗
CNEC,z = PTDF AHC
CNEC,z −PTDFCNEC,z
∀z
(2.8)
Finally, the sum of net positions of Core regions with respect to Core has to be equal to
zero (Equation 2.9).
∑
zCore
NP Core
z
= 0
(2.9)
Equation 2.7 is the final equation used in the ERAA 2023 dataset, and all the data provided
by the ENTSO­E refers to this equation.
2.2.2
Flow­Based domains
A flow­based domain is the solution space for the net positions of zones, for a given time
unit. It defines the limitation for exchange between zones. The flow­based domain is
defined by a set of linear constraints (Equation 2.7) across monitored networks elements.
These monitored (critical) elements can be both within or across zones, and by including
relevant contingencies, the N­1 security constrains (introduced to keep the power system
in a secure state when an outage of a single component occurs, as described by Shokri
Gazafroudi et al. [11]) of the grid can be represented. This leads to a set of CNECs, as
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
7
==PAGE:14==
described in section 2.1, to each of which is associated a RAM. The complete method
to compute the FB domains is described in the Annex 2 ­ Methodology [9] of the ERAA
2023, but can be summarized as follows:
1. Definition of the list of CNECs which could limit cross­zonal trade
2. Computation of an initial hourly market dispatch, which is given to a grid model to
perform load flow analysis
3. Selection of representative hours, based on a clustering process, to calculate mean­
ingful (representative of enough hourly situations) but different (to cover a wide
range of network situations) domains
4. Calculation of the reference loading of grid elements for chosen hours, by a load
flow calculation on the grid model
5. Flow­based domains computation: nodal PTDFs are derived from the grid model,
and then zonal PTDFs using Equation 2.2. RAMs are also calculated using the
output of the grid model, using Equation 2.4. FB domains are then post­processed,
to identify their convex hulls and filter the remaining constraints, resulting in a smaller
set of constraints.
6. Assignment of one FB domain to every time step in each Climate Years (CY)
7. FB domain enlargement for other years (the domains were calculated on year 2025),
as NTCs value are expected to increase over the coming years, through grid ex­
pansion projects. This is done by increasing the RAM of each CNEC, following the
trends identified in NTC evolutions. PTDF values are not changed over years.
Figure 2.7: Flow­based domain enlargement on a 2D projection of domains [9]
This whole process results in 16 flow­based domains (four per target year).
2.2.3
Data provided
Alongside the ERAA 2023 report and annexes, the ENTSO­E provides a lot of data that
was used for their analysis. Concerning FBMC, the dataset includes for each FB domain
(numbered from 1 to 4), all the PTDF values needed in Equation 2.7, for each CNEC. Are
also given RAM values for each CNEC depending on FB domains, and this for all target
years (2025, 2028, 2030, 2033). Finally, the ENTSO­E provides a FB domain assignment
to every time step for each climate years between 1982 and 2016. One thing to note at
this point is that the CNEC IDs are not identical from one FB domain to the other, meaning
that the CNEC ID 1 in FB domain 1 is not necessarily the same as the CNEC ID 1 in FB
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
8
==PAGE:15==
domain 2. There are in total 381 CNECs in FB domain 1, 379 in domain 2, 371 in domain
3 and 355 in domain 4.
Beside the flow­based data, ENTSO­E also provides overall demand time series in every
climate years, for each target year, as well as some capacity development scenarios
from the pan­European market database (PEMMDB). Some climate data from the pan­
European wind and solar generation database (PECD [12]) is also provided. This data
includes capacity factors for offshore and onshore wind, solar PV, concentrated solar
power (CSP) with or without storage etc. in every climate year, for each of the 4 target
years.
2.3
Offshore Energy Hubs
Alongside an improved electricity transmission system, one of the key suppliers of re­
newable electricity to reach net­zero pathways in Europe is wind energy, and especially
offshore wind farms. However, there are several ways to connect these offshore wind
farms to the shore. The simpler one is to radially connect each wind farm to the shore
of the corresponding country, but one could imagine connecting wind farms to several
different countries (and hence different markets), as they are placed in between these
regions. In this configuration, two types of setup can be found.
In the Home Market (HM) setup, the offshore wind farms are considered to be part of the
domestic onshore bidding zones (their home market). Consequently, the direct impact of
the flow from the offshore sites to the home market on grid elements is ignored. In order
to mitigate the potential congestion on the grid that may result from this configuration,
redispatch measures might be necessary. In contrast, the Offshore Bidding Zone (OBZ)
approach explicitly considers the flows to the home market, incorporating more constraints
directly into the market calculation and reducing the need for redispatch.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
9
==PAGE:16==
3
Methodology
This chapter presents the methodology of the study. It starts with the geographical and
temporal scopes, and then describes the Balmorel energy system model and the imple­
mentation of FBMC that was developed in it. It also describes the input data that was
used in the model, and the simulation procedure.
3.1
Scope
3.1.1
Geographical scope
As presented in subsection 2.2.1, the ERAA 2023 study was done considering 24 coun­
tries in total. However, a reduced geography was used for the present study: the countries
included were Denmark, Germany, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Czech Republic,
Austria, Switzerland, France, Belgium, Netherlands, Great Britain, Italy and Spain.
Figure 3.1: Geographical scope of the study in the Balmorel model
This was done mainly to reduce the computational time of the different simulations, and
also acknowledging for a lack of data for these countries from different sources.
Moreover, to get closer to the ENTSO­E data that doesn’t have the exact same split as Bal­
morel, some regions were aggregated (by having an infinite transmission value between
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
10
==PAGE:17==
them, so that they are considered as a single region by the model). All the German re­
gions, DE_CS, DE_ME, DE_NE and DE_NW are then aggregated into one region, which
will be called DE_R in the following, and NO_MW, NO_SW and NO_SE are aggregated
into NO_S.
3.1.2
Temporal scope
In chapter 2, the distinction was made between target years and climate years. On one
hand, target years are the years that are modeled in this study, and for which results are
analyzed. They are namely 2028, 2030 and 2033. The ERAA 2023 dataset also included
FBMC data in 2025, but it was chosen to not model this year as it is almost certain that no
offshore energy island will be active by next year, and some scenario data was missing for
this year. Climate years, on the other hand, refer to historical years when the climate and
weather behaved in a specific way. It is a way to model wind and solar data (both hourly
generation profiles and annual full load hours) consistently through different studies. For
this entire study, the climate year 1995 is considered, chosen as a common year between
FBMC data from the ERAA 2023 and other scenario data that were used.
3.2
Energy system modeling with Balmorel
In this section, the energy system model will be introduced, together with the main as­
sumptions, the implementation of FBMC and the input data.
3.2.1
Balmorel model
Balmorel is an optimization model for analyzing the electricity and combined heat and
power sectors [13]. It is an open­source model coded in GAMS [14]. The version used
in this work has been further developed by Ea Energy Analyses [15], and the main part
of the input data (if not stated otherwise) is the March 2024 version of the base dataset
used and maintained by Ea Energy Analyses.
Balmorel is a bottom­up partial equilibrium model which optimizes both generation, trans­
mission and consumption of electricity and heat under a perfect competitive markets as­
sumption. It solves an optimization problem to find the least­cost energy system (mini­
mizing generation costs of electricity and heat, fuel and externality costs, generation and
transmission investments costs and unit commitment costs), under a set of constraints
that shape the solution space (electricity and heat demand, generation capacity of all
technologies, transmission lines capacity, storage, unit commitment and policies).
Balmorel has three levels of geography included into each other: countries, regions (parts
of countries, where the electricity demand is defined, and between which the electricity
transmission occurs) and areas (parts of regions, where heat demand and energy gener­
ation are defined). Each region is considered as a copper plate for electricity, which can
flow freely through it. A Balmorel year consists of 52 weeks (or seasons), each having 168
hours (or time steps), making it 8736 time steps in total. While Balmorel has full foresight
within a year (the model is optimizing a whole year at a time), it is not able to anticipate
future years.
About energy generation and demand, Balmorel makes a distinction between annual lev­
els (full load hours and annual energy demand), and profiles with higher time resolution
(normalized hourly profiles). These two parameters are independent and can be defined
separately. Balmorel operates a linear scaling of the profiles to align them to the annual
metric.
Among others, generation and transmission capacities can be either exogenous to the
model (defined in the input data, as scenarios), or endogenously built by the optimization
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
11
==PAGE:18==
model. The same goes for existing capacities, which are included until the end of their
lifetime, or until it is economically optimal to shut them down.
Additionally, it is possible to restrict the solution space in addition to the physical con­
straints using policies. Policies can represent political or assumed limitations, such as
a restriction of investments in a specific technology, or physical limitations (for instance
the maximum offshore wind capacity in a given area due to topology). In this particular
study, policies were used to restrict regions to follow the generation capacity scenarios
according to the ENTSO­E data.
3.2.2
Flow­Based Market Coupling setup
Flow­Based Market Coupling integrating the ENTSO­E data was developed as an add­on
to the Balmorel model, which can be activated or not depending on the simulations. After
defining sets such as CNEC_ID and FB_ID to define all the possible CNECs (from 1 to 381)
and FB domains (from 1 to 4), two other sets RRR_CORE(RRR) and RRR_CORE_WO_DE(RRR
) (RRR being all the regions in the model) define respectively the regions that are in the
Core, and the same Core regions without Germany. PTDF and RAM values, described
in subsection 2.2.3, are included in the model as parameters: RAM(FB_ID,CNEC_ID,YYY)
and PTDF(FB_ID,CNEC_ID,RRR,RRR). As the RAM values depend on the year modeled, a
last parameter RAM_Y(FB_ID,CNEC_ID) is created and assigned every year using (Y being
the current year):
1
RAM_Y(FB_ID, CNEC_ID) = RAM(FB_ID, CNEC_ID , Y);
Listing 3.1: Assignement of yearly RAM values
Finally, the set FB_links(RRR,RRR) is also defined, which is linking all the regions for
which transmission is calculated through FBMC and not NTC. This allows to change all
transmission capacities on lines now calculated with FBMC to an infinite value for years
after 2027:
1
XKINI(YYY,IRE,IRI)$(YVALUE(YYY)>2027 and FB_links(IRE,IRI))
=
999999;
Listing 3.2: NTC values set to infinite values if affected by FBMC
with IRE and IRI being the regions in the simulation, and YYY the years in the model.
With all these elements, the overall FBMC equation QFlowBased(CNEC_ID,IS3,T) which
is adapted from Equation 2.7, can be written as in Listing 3.3:
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
12
==PAGE:19==
1
QFlowBased(CNEC_ID ,IS3,T)..
2
SUM(FB_ID$FB_DOMAINS(IS3,T,FB_ID),RAM_Y(FB_ID, CNEC_ID))
3
=G=
4
SUM(FB_ID$FB_DOMAINS(IS3,T,FB_ID),
5
* regions in CORE (except DE_CS)
6
SUM(IRE$(PTDF(FB_ID, CNEC_ID , IRE, "CORE") and not sameAs
(IRE, "DE_CS")),
7
PTDF(FB_ID, CNEC_ID , IRE, "CORE") * SUM(RRR_CORE$(
IXKINI_Y(IRE,RRR_CORE) OR IXKN(IRE,RRR_CORE) OR
IXKN(RRR_CORE ,IRE)), (VX_T(IRE,RRR_CORE ,IS3,T) -
VX_T(RRR_CORE ,IRE,IS3,T))))
8
* specific calculation for DE
9
+ SUM(DE_R,
10
PTDF(FB_ID, CNEC_ID , "DE_CS", "CORE") * SUM(
RRR_CORE_WO_DE$(IXKINI_Y(DE_R,RRR_CORE_WO_DE) OR
IXKN(DE_R,RRR_CORE_WO_DE) OR IXKN(RRR_CORE_WO_DE ,
DE_R)), (VX_T(DE_R,RRR_CORE_WO_DE ,IS3,T) - VX_T(
RRR_CORE_WO_DE ,DE_R,IS3,T))))
11
* regions not in CORE
12
+ SUM((IRE, IRI)$(PTDF(FB_ID, CNEC_ID , IRE, IRI) and not
sameAs(IRI, "CORE") and (IXKINI_Y(IRE,IRI) OR IXKN(IRE,
IRI) OR IXKN(IRI,IRE))),
13
PTDF(FB_ID, CNEC_ID , IRE, IRI) * (VX_T(IRE,IRI,IS3,T)
- VX_T(IRI,IRE,IS3,T)))
14
)
15
;
Listing 3.3: FBMC equation in GAMS
The right­hand side of Equation 2.7 had to be further split to accommodate for the different
setups. The FB domain ID corresponding to the current season and time step is first
selected in line 4, and 3 different calculations happen then:
• from line 5, the PTDF is multiplied with the net position with Core (sum of exchanges
with other Core regions, including the 4 German ones) of all Core regions (except
Germany).
• from line 8, the PTDF for Germany in Core is multiplied with the net position of Ger­
many with the other Core regions. The differentiation is made because exchanges
between German regions are not to be included in this net position calculation.
• from line 11, regions not in Core are accounted for by simply multiplying the PTDF
by the net flow from one region to the other.
In these three steps, a condition on IXKINI_Y or IXKN is added to only consider the existing
transmission lines, and not add useless constraints to the model. Finally, as VX_T(IRE,
IRI,IS3,T) is the positive flow from IRE to IRI (and is equal to 0 when the flow is from
IRI to IRE, while VX_T(IRI,IRE,IS3,T) would be positive), having (VX_T(IRE,IRI,IS3,
T)- VX_T(IRI,IRE,IS3,T)) allows to consider the net flow from IRE to IRI (that can be
positive or negative).
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
13
==PAGE:20==
3.2.3
Computing Flow­Based domains
In ENTSO­e data, FB domains time series are given for every climate years, as described
in subsection 2.2.3. The goal of this part is to compute a FB domain assignment depend­
ing on the input data that is given to the model, to be able to model different scenarios
that given climate years.
According to the ERAA 2023 Methodology [9], the determinant factors for assigning an
FB domain to a certain time step are the total load and the Renewable Energy Sources
(RES) generation (including solar, wind, run­of­river hydro). Indeed, these are the param­
eters that influence the most the grid state (as all the other generation capacities can be
controlled to adapt to these), and hence the flow­based solution space. Using the data
provided, it is then possible to train a machine learning model to compute the FB domain
corresponding to the inputs at this time step. Indeed, the features are known (load and
renewable generation), same as the label (FB domain), but nothing in the data provided
is giving information about how to link these.
In the FB domain assignment data, it can be seen that FB domains 1 and 2 are only
assigned in the summer, and FB domains 3 and 4 only in the winter.
FB_ID
Season
Dates
Time steps
Total
1 & 2
Summer
1st of April ­ 1st of October
[2161:6552]
4392
3 & 4
Winter
1st of October ­ 1st of April
[1:2160] ∪[6553:8760]
4368
Table 3.1: Distribution of FB domains over seasons. There are not the same amount of
time steps in each season.
Two machine learning models would then need to be trained, for summer and winter time
steps. As each model only needs to decide between two labels, classification methods
can be used [16].
As described in subsection 2.2.3, the PECD data distributed with the ERAA 2023 includes
capacity factors for different technologies. However, it can be seen in the ERAA Assump­
tions [17] that offshore and onshore wind, with solar PV, are the most important renewable
technologies in the system.
Figure 3.2: Distribution of RES technologies in the system, across all target years and
all climate years
The choice is then made to use only offshore wind, onshore wind and solar PV as features
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
14
==PAGE:21==
for the classification models. Total load represents a large amount of additional data and
will not be included in the features in a first time. For offshore wind, there are capacity
factors for 35 different regions, 48 for onshore wind, and 47 for solar PV. This gives a total
of 130 features for the models.
As the capacity factors are available for every climate year (35 in total) in each target year
(4 in total), and every time there are 4392 data points for summer, this gives a total of 4392
* 35 * 4 = 614880 data points per feature. The feature matrix shape is then (614880,130)
for summer, and (611520,130) for winter, following the same principle but with 4368 data
points per technology.
Figure 3.3: Diagram of the summer feature matrix. Red numbers indicate number of
rows, while blue numbers indicate number of columns.
To prepare the label vectors, the FB domain assignments for each climate years are
placed one after the other, and stacked four times (to account for the four target years).
This can be seen as the process of only one column of Figure 3.3, and results in the same
number of rows as the feature matrix.
Several machine learning models were trained and tested to find the most adapted one,
using an accuracy score (fraction of correctly classified sample). The data was split in
training and testing dataset using a 80/20 ratio. For the summer dataset, the results were
as follows:
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
15
==PAGE:22==
Model
Accuracy
Logistic regression
70%
Support Vector Machines
72%
Random Forest
98%
Table 3.2: Models tried and their accuracy for the summer dataset
It appears that the Random Forest algorithm then allows for the best accuracy, which can
be better visualized using so­called confusion matrices:
Figure 3.4: Random Forest Confusion Matrix (summer), with an accuracy of 98.5%
The same type of model was then trained on the winter dataset, with these results:
Figure 3.5: Random Forest Confusion Matrix (winter), with an accuracy of 98.1%
The top­left and bottom­right corners show the number of labels that were correctly pre­
dicted by the model.
Some tuning of the hyperparameters was tried using halving, to improve even more the
accuracy of the two models, but the computational time was way too important (more than
several days), so this was not pursued as it is not the most important part of this work.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
16
==PAGE:23==
This part has then proven that offshore wind, onshore wind and solar PV capacity factors
are actually enough to determine the FB domains (and to some extent the state of the
system) with high accuracy, while the total load is a less important parameter.
3.2.4
Transmission capacity data
As the FBMC parameters were calculated for a specific grid setup and load scenarios,
these scenarios have to be included in the model to be fully coherent. However, the de­
mand dataset of the ERAA 2023 is not specific enough, as it only includes overall demand
time series per climate years, without detail about how this demand is split between con­
ventional demand, electric vehicles etc. which is a split that is usually done in Balmorel.
Even if it’s not a perfect solution, the choice was then made to use data from two different
studies from the ENTSO­E, the ERAA 2023 for the transmission data and the Ten­Year
Network Development Plan (TYNDP) 2022 [18] for the generation and demand data.
The ERAA 2023 provides comprehensive NTC values for the transmission lines in the
grid. All this data was then included in the model, in the XKINI table. As mentioned in
subsection 3.2.2, the NTC values for all the transmissions that are calculated through
FBMC (when this option is enabled) were increased to an infinite value, so that they don’t
constrain the model anymore.
3.2.5
Demand and generation capacity data
As mentioned, the generation and demand data were included from the TYNDP 2022
dataset. TYNDP includes several scenarios, namely the National Trends, Distributed
Energy and Global Ambition.
Figure 3.6: Scenario framework for TYNDP 2022
The National Trends scenario is based on TSOs (bottom­up) data up to 2040 translating
national policies and strategies as stated in the end of 2020 and focusing on the sole
electricity methane and hydrogen carriers. Distributed Energy and Global Ambition sce­
narios are based on a holistic view of the European energy system up to 2050 factoring
stakeholders’ feedback collected during the Draft Storyline Report consultation process
and bilateral engagement with a wide range of sectors.
For this study, the choice was made to use the National Trends scenario data for 2025,
and the Global Ambition scenario later on in 2030 and 2040 (as the data was not de­
tailed enough in the National Trends scenario). Values for 2028 and 2033 were com­
puted through linear interpolation. The demand data was included in the DE and DH_P2X
tables, while the generation capacity data was defined in a list of policies (CAPFBMC) that
are adding equal constraints to the capacities.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
17
==PAGE:24==
The weekly electricity demand in the system in 2030 is shown in Figure 3.7. There is a
total net consumption of 4553 TWh in the system.The hourly profile in each country is
variable, and the weekly demand of the system changes throughout the seasons (here
representing weeks), from 122 TWh in the winter to 65 TWh in the summer. France,
Germany and Great Britain are the overall top three consumers.
Figure 3.7: Weekly net electricity demand (in TWh) by country in 2030
The installed power capacities for each of the countries in 2030 are shown in Figure 3.8.
The largest share of existing capacities in the system is solar, with an overall share of
24.2%, followed by offshore wind with 20.2% and onshore wind with 17.3%. Then comes
natural gas with 10.8%, hydro with 7.6% plus 1.7% of pumped hydro, hydrogen with 5.5%,
nuclear with 4.9%, biogas with 3.9%, biomass with 2.1%, waste with 0.3% and coal with
1.1%. In total, this adds up to 1.74 TW of installed power capacities over the 15 countries
in 2030.
Figure 3.8: Overall installed power capacity (in GW) by fuel and country in 2030
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
18
==PAGE:25==
The evolution of demand and capacities over the target years, according to the ENTSO­E
scenarios set as input data, can be seen in the Appendix in Figure A.1 and Figure A.2.
3.2.6
Weather data integration
The PECD weather data was included in the model using some work developed by Rør­
bæk Kruse [19] in his master thesis (and further in Ea). This allows to choose which
climate year to take into account in the model, and hence the capacity factors for wind
and solar.
3.2.7
Offshore setup
For the need of the study, two offshore energy islands are created in parallel to all the
already existing offshore wind farms. To avoid creating from scratch two fictional ones,
the study is re­using and modifying two offshore wind farms already existing in the model
and connected to Denmark: NordSoeenI and RoenneB.
Figure 3.9: Offshore islands setup. Values along the transmission lines are the
capacities (in GW)
RoenneB was originally already connected to DK_E and DE_NW, so these two transmis­
sions lines are kept. However, NordSoeenI was only connected to DK_W in the base data,
and a second transmission line to DE_NE is then created endogenously. To come up with
values to fix the capacities of these four transmission lines, a preliminary investment run
(BB2, see below) was made, and the transmission capacities that were invested in by the
model at the end were kept and fixed as endogenous values (without any investment in
transmission capacity allowed anymore for these lines). Indeed, the goal of this work is
not to study how FBMC would impact the need for more or less transmission capacity,
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
19
==PAGE:26==
but it’s impact on the system itself.
The generation capacity of the two offshore wind farms is not fixed, and the model invests
in these two hubs to respect and optimize the overall offshore wind capacity policies that
were set up in subsection 3.2.5.
Figure 3.10: Offshore wind capacity (in GW) in the two energy islands
3.3
Simulation procedure
The energy system is simulated following a certain procedure, which splits the different
tasks and reduces the overall computational time.
First, an investment run is made (using a BB2 model) with a reduced time resolution of
26 weeks and 12 hours per week. Time aggregation is applied to group and average time
steps with similar characteristics. This run optimizes across the entire year, and is made
to determine the investments needed to fulfill all scenarios.
Second, an operation run is made (BB1 model). The time resolution is higher here, with
52 weeks and still 12 hours per week. Time aggregation is still used, and this run pulls
capacities from the BB2 one to optimize the dispatch at a higher detail level. The opti­
mization is still done across the entire year. This is done to plan the storage optimally
over the years (including hydro, power­to­X and batteries), and results in an assignment
of storage start and end levels for each week, which will be passed on to the next run.
Third, a dispatch run is made (BB3 model), considering all 52 weeks and 168 hours per
week and without any time aggregation. This run pulls capacities from the BB2 and stor­
age and hydro levels from the BB1, and then optimizes each week individually to optimize
dispatch on an hourly basis. The foresight of the model is limited to one week, but this
run ensures that demand is satisfied within each hour while complying with all other con­
straints.
All of this is needed to reach the point of hourly optimization, because the FBMC data
from the ERAA 2023 is available on an hourly basis. A NTC BB3 run was then run first
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
20
==PAGE:27==
(without enabling the FBMC add­on), and other BB3 runs including FBMC can then be
analyzed for comparison.
3.4
Study scenarios
The BB2 and BB1 simulations are done once, and kept the same for all the next BB3 sim­
ulations. From this point, three different scenarios are studied through BB3 simulations:
• NTC scenario: contains all the input data (generation, demand, transmission ca­
pacities) described above, including the offshore islands setup described in sub­
section 3.2.7. This simulates a Home Market setup, as the transmission capacity
from the wind farms is quite high and does not limit the generation of the two offshore
hubs.
• FBMC scenario: same input data as NTC, and has the FBMC add­on enabled.
• FBMC­Offshore scenario: same input data and setup as FBMC, but with the two
offshore energy islands (mentioned in subsection 3.2.7) included in the PTDF matrix.
This simulates the Offshore Bidding Zone setup, as flows on the transmission lines
from the offshore hubs are now considered.
The two energy islands are not taken into account in the FBMC dataset from ENTSO­E,
so there are no PTDF values already associated to it. The hypothesis is then made that
looking at transmission lines that have similar connection points onshore than the offshore
islands ones, the PTDF values can be used again to describe the effect of the new lines
on the grid.
Figure 3.11: Transmission lines association for PTDF matrix
Some transmission lines (in red on Figure 3.11) are then chosen for their similarities with
the transmission lines to the offshore islands, and some columns are added to the PTDF
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
21
==PAGE:28==
matrix as summarized in Table 3.1. The type of dashes shows the association, for example
the line between NordSoeenI and DE_NW (in black, long dashes) is represented in the
PTDF matrix using the coefficients from the line between NO_SW and DE_NW (in red,
long dashes).
Offshore island
Offshore transmission line
PTDF values used from:
NordSoeenI
NordSoeenI ↔DK_W
NL_R ↔DK_W
NordSoeenI
NordSoeenI ↔DE_NW
NO_SW ↔DE_NW
RoenneB
RoenneB ↔DK_E
DK_E ↔DE_NE
RoenneB
RoenneB ↔DE_NE
DK_E ↔DE_NE
Table 3.3: Coefficients used to include the offshore islands in the FBMC setup
For RoenneB, the same coefficients are used two times, because it is assumed that the
onshore connections of the offshore island are globally the same as the already existing
line between DK_E and DE_NE. The offshore island and its lines can then be seen as an
”additional” transmission line between these two regions.
Conversely to the general FBMC setup, where all the NTC values of transmission lines
switched to FBMC are set to infinite values (Listing 3.2), these new lines are not included in
the whole FBMC setup of RAM and PTDF. Setting these lines to an infinite capacity would
then risk overpassing the actual thermal capacity of the lines in some conditions, and
having unrealistic electricity flows in some hours, as the grid is not perfectly represented.
A conservative assumption to keep the actual NTC values (in addition to the new FBMC
constraints on these lines) is then made.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
22
==PAGE:29==
4
Results
4.1
Effect of the Flow­Based Market Coupling add­on
This section studies the changes in the system when the FBMC add­on is enabled, com­
paring the scenarios NTC and FBMC. When displaying monetary results, the symbol €
represents real 2022 euros, as this is the value of money that was chosen in the Balmorel
setup.
4.1.1
Electricity prices
The annual average electricity prices in the system in 2030, for the two scenarios NTC
and FBMC, are shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Annual electricity prices in 2030 in all regions of the system
In the NTC scenario, the average electricity prices are quite high, around 100 €/MWh in
several regions (Austria, Switzerland, Czech Republic, Germany, Spain, Italy, Poland),
while they are way lower in the rest of the system (down to 40 €/MWh in Norway). This
indicates that the data used from the ENTSO­E for generation, demand and transmission
does not form a very balanced scenario. A large share of renewables in the north of
Europe lowers the costs in these regions, while the rest of Europe keeps higher prices.
Additionally, a not important enough transmission capacity between countries would not
allow this electricity generation to flow correctly from the north to the south.
A convergence of prices can be seen in the FBMC scenario. Indeed, as stated in sec­
tion 2.1, FBMC optimizes the cross­border electricity flows, generally increasing the over­
all electricity transmission in the system. This results in lower prices in the previous high­
prices regions, and conversely higher prices in previous low­prices zones. Because of the
particular topology that was shown in Figure 2.6, the price convergence around 70 €/MWh
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
23
==PAGE:30==
is mostly seen in the CORE regions, because these are the ones all connected together
through FBMC. The two regions NO_S and SE_S provides interesting observations: as
they are connected to the Core through AHC in the FBMC scenario, the prices in these
regions increases a lot to get closer to the value of convergence of the Core, while the
other Norwegian and Swedish zones keep prices closer to one in the NTC scenario (as
they are still connected via NTC to the southern regions of their country).
The overall difference in prices in this graph (in average a 20% difference, ranging from 3%
to 39% depending on countries) indicates that the NTC values provided by the ENTSO­
E, and input in the model, are quite conservative, accounting for safety margins to avoid
physical overloading. This results in the NTC values being lower than the theoretical
maximum thermal capacity of the lines, which is confirmed when looking at the NTC values
in the base Ea Energy Analyses dataset. This is also coherent with the observation made
about the high difference in prices in the NTC scenario. FBMC, which usually already
allows for more transmission overall, has an even bigger impact in this case, because it
frees the system from a lot of these safety margins. This is seen in Figure 4.2, where the
overall electricity exports between countries is higher in the FBMC scenario than in the
NTC one. Some countries which don’t have a lot of interconnections with others, such as
Great Britain, Italy or Spain, see their annual transmission capacity greatly increased by
FBMC.
Figure 4.2: Net electricity exports from countries in 2030
Figure 4.3a and Figure 4.3b show the electricity prices in more detail via price duration
curves in every region, in 2030. It can be seen in Figure 4.3b that FBMC first allows for
less price spikes in the system (only 12h in 3 regions in the FBMC scenario, against 25 to
39h in 6 different regions in the NTC scenario). Indeed, under FBMC, the system opera­
tors have a more detailed understanding of network constraints (including thermal limits,
voltage limits, and stability constraints), and can better manage congestion by allocating
transmission capacities more accurately. This results in fewer unplanned constraints, and
more predictable grid conditions, which reduces price peaks due to sudden congestion
issues. This also reduces the need for corrective action, and overall decreases prices
volatility.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
24
==PAGE:31==
The duration curves also confirm the convergence of prices that was observed in Fig­
ure 4.1. It can be seen that the plateau around 110­120 €/MWh disappears in the FBMC
scenario, with prices instead gently decreasing to the second plateau (around 40 €/MWh).
The total area between the highest and the lowest curves diminishes, which indicates that
all prices are converging overall.
(a) Price duration curves in the NTC scenario, in 2030
(b) Price duration curves in the FBMC scenario, in 2030
Figure 4.3: Price duration curves in 2030 in NTC and FBMC scenarios
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
25
==PAGE:32==
4.1.2
Electricity generation & Share of renewables
The total distribution of electricity generation in 2030 can be found in the Appendix, in
Figure B.1 and Figure B.2, along with the share of renewables. The evolution of this share
of renewable sources from the NTC to the FBMC scenario can be seen in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Change in the share of electricity from renewable sources in 2030, from the
NTC to the FBMC scenario
By making better use of transmission capacities, FBMC facilitates the integration of re­
newable energy sources, with an average increase of around 4% of the electricity gener­
ation from renewable sources (while renewable capacities are the same between the two
scenarios). With more consistent renewable generation, the supply side of the market
becomes more stable, also contributing to lower price volatility.
Dynamic allocation of transmission based on actual grid conditions and renewable gener­
ation forecasts allows for a more efficient system, which reduces the likelihood of bottle­
necks in the grid, which is one of the factors preventing renewable energy from being fully
utilized. With FBMC, all the countries share in a better way their renewable resources,
smoothing out the supply and improving the overall system reliability.
Another major challenge for the development and integration of renewable energy sources
is curtailment, which can be seen in the two scenarios in Figure 4.5. The overall electric­
ity curtailment decreases from 65 TWh in the NTC scenario to 31 TWh in the FBMC one,
which is a significant decrease. This decrease happens mostly for offshore wind energy,
while onshore wind and solar (which are already the most interconnected ones, due to
being onshore), almost do not present any curtailment anymore. However, hydropower
curtailment increases by around 5 TWh when switching to FBMC, which can be explained
by different factors. One is that the optimization model might prioritize wind and solar gen­
eration due to lower marginal costs than hydropower, making them being dispatched first
and lowering the transmission capacity available for hydropower. Moreover, hydropower
is often located in more remote places (mountainous regions) which can be further away
from major consumption centers, making the dispatch of wind and solar to these zones
more efficient. Finally, conversely to wind and solar energy, hydropower is controllable
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
26
==PAGE:33==
and can be ramped up or down more easily, making it also useful for ancillary services
such as frequency regulation. This is even more useful in periods of high renewable gen­
eration, to ensure the stability of the system.
Figure 4.5: Electricity curtailment by renewable energy sources in 2030
Globally, Europe aims to increase the share of renewable energy in its electricity mix.
FBMC supports these policies by providing the necessary grid flexibility and efficiency to
integrate higher levels of renewable generation.
4.1.3
System costs
Different system costs in 2030 in the two scenarios are shown in Figure 4.6. The fixed
costs (capital costs for new generation units, fixed O&M costs) are not displayed, as they
don’t vary between the two scenarios which are based on the same capacities. For each
scenario, the three first bars (variable O&M cost, fuel cost and congestion rent) refer to
the left axis (in billion €), while the last hatched bar refer to the right axis (in million €).
The total system costs decrease from the NTC to the FBMC scenario, from 103 billion € to
79 billion €. As explained in subsection 4.1.2, as transmission capacity is increased and
used more efficiently in FBMC, the least­cost generation capacity (renewable sources)
can be dispatched first to fill the same demand. FBMC also reduces the need for costly
redispatch operations, where more expensive generation units must be brought online
to resolve local bottlenecks. This leads to lower variable operation & maintenance and
fuel costs as cheaper generators can run more consistently. Cross­border trade is also
increased in FBMC, which allows regions with lower­cost generation to export electricity to
higher­cost regions, decreasing the need for expensive thermal units. As the overall flow
of electricity is increased in FBMC, transmission costs double between the two scenarios
to reach 74 million €. However, this is not on a scale to be compared with the rest of the
system costs.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.6: System costs in the system in 2030, for the NTC and FBMC scenarios
Finally, congestion rent, which represents the flow on a line multiplied by the price delta
between the two regions linked by this line, also decreases from 38 to 28 billion € in the
FBMC scenario. Congestion rent is only positive when there is a price difference between
two regions, meaning that the line is congested. As electricity prices converge in the
overall system (hence decreasing price deltas) in FBMC, while electricity flows increase,
both of these measures affect the congestion rent. However, it can be understood that
the reduction of the congestion rent is also due to less congestion in the system, because
the system operators have a more detailed understanding of network constraints and can
manage congestion more proactively.
4.2
Offshore energy hubs under Flow­Based Market
Coupling
This section studies the effect of FBMC on the integration of the two specific offshore
energy islands described in subsection 3.2.7, comparing the NTC and FBMC­Offshore
scenarios.
4.2.1
Electricity generation in the offshore hubs
Figure 4.7 shows the total electricity generation and electricity curtailment in the offshore
hubs NordSoeenI and RoenneB in 2030 in the two scenarios NTC and FBMC­Offshore.
As expected after the previous part on the effect of FBMC on the system, and especially
on renewable integration, the two offshore wind farms produce more electricity. They have
respectively a 1.1 and 1.2% increase in production, which does not seem so much but
would have an impact when considering all the renewable energy sources on the system.
These percentages change to 2.1 and 1.4% in 2033 while the generation capacity in the
wind farms does not change, meaning that the overall increase in transmission in the
system between 2030 and 2033 also has an impact on the production of the wind farm
thanks to FBMC. Indeed, the FBMC constraints affecting the transmission lines from the
offshore hubs are slightly less restrictive when overall transmission capacity increases.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
28
==PAGE:35==
The increase in electricity generation between the two scenarios is exactly what is not
curtailed anymore, as shown on Figure 4.7b, improving the efficiency (and overall eco­
nomical feasibility) of these offshore wind farms.
(a) Electricity generation
(b) Electricity curtailment
Figure 4.7: Electricity generation and curtailment in the offshore hubs in 2030
4.2.2
Hourly study
As the NTC values have been kept for the transmission lines of the two offshore hubs,
on top of the FBMC constraints (cf. section 3.4), it can’t be known directly if the NTC or
the FBMC constraints are limiting the lines, or both or none of them. A first idea to study
this would be to look at the raw data from the model, where levels and marginal values of
every equation can be found. Studying the value associated with the FBMC equations,
it would be possible (as it is known to which critical element one equation refers to) to
know if the FBMC inequalities are at their limit (the marginal value would be positive),
indicating congestion from the FBMC constraints. However, the generation of the basis
file, containing all the raw data, was disabled in the simulation earlier in the project (cf.
chapter 5 for more explanation), so this data is unfortunately not available.
However, this study can be done using other measures, though slightly less accurately.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
29
==PAGE:36==
Indeed, the NTC values of the transmission lines are known (Figure 3.9), and it is also
known that a price difference occurs between two regions when the transmission line
between these two regions is congested (shadow prices). Studying these two measures,
it is then possible to determine which factor is constraining a given transmission line.
Flow on the line
Price delta
Equals 0
Different from 0
At the NTC value
×
Congested by NTC
Under NTC value
Not congested
Congested by FBMC
Table 4.1: Scenarios of congestion on a transmission line
However, in reality (and in the Balmorel model) the price delta is not exactly equal to 0
when the line is not congested, so all the hours would end up in the ”Different from 0”
column if this rule was applied strictly. The limit is then fixed to 0.5 €/MWh for a start,
and the number of hours when the price delta is greater than this limit while the flow
on the line is not maxed (not at the NTC value) is assessed, before lowering the limit
gradually to 0.1 €/MWh. When this number starts increasing sharply, it means that the
uncertainty between congestion by FBMC and low price delta due to no congestion is
too high, meaning that the price delta limit has reached a bottom value. The two graphs
showing this process for 2030 can be found in the appendix, in Figure C.1 and Figure C.2,
whereas the final price delta limits can be seen in Table 4.2.
Offshore hub
To region
Price delta limit (in €/MWh)
NordSoeenI
DK_W
0.18
NordSoeenI
DE_NW
0.26
RoenneB
DK_E
0.18
RoenneB
DE_NE
0.25
Table 4.2: Price delta limits chosen for the 4 transmission lines
With these limits set for the price deltas, the lines are effectively congested by FBMC
during 302 hours for NordSoeenI ↔DK_W, 686 hours for NordSoeenI ↔DE_NW, 1435
hours for RoenneB ↔DK_E and 35 hours for RoenneB ↔DE_NE.
Out of a total of 8736 hours in a Balmorel year (52 weeks of 168 time steps each), this
shows that FBMC doesn’t add so much more constraints to the system, and actually allows
the thermal maximum capacity of the transmission lines to be used most of the time for
these offshore hubs.
4.2.3
Capture prices
Capture prices represent the actual power price achieved by renewable energy genera­
tors. Indeed, it can often be the case that during hours of peak renewable production, the
demand is not sufficient for the power generated. Spot prices can then be below baseload
prices, leading to less revenue for the owners of the renewable energy generators. Using
the output of the Balmorel simulations, capture prices can be calculated as the electricity
sales divided by the total generation (including curtailment), and can be seen in Figure 4.8.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.8: Captures prices in the two offshore hubs for the 3 target years, depending on
scenario
The first observation is that the capture prices in both scenario and both offshore wind
farm are higher in 2028 than in the other target years. This can be explained by overall
higher electricity prices in the system in 2028 in all scenarios, as shown in the appendix in
Figure D.1. This could be due to the demand and generation capacity input data for this
year defined as an interpolation between the National Trends scenario in 2025 and the
Global Ambition one in 2030 (as explained in subsection 3.2.5), while the transmission
capacity data is coherent throughout the target years.
Figure 4.9: Captures rates in the two offshore hubs for the 3 target years, depending on
scenario
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
31
==PAGE:38==
To see less impact from these price disparities, the capture rate can be calculated, by di­
viding the previous capture price by the actual electricity price in the given region, as seen
in Figure 4.9. It can be seen that in both offshore hubs, in all target years, the capture rate
is higher in the FBMC­Offshore scenario than in the NTC one. This goes with the reduction
of curtailment, as by reducing congestion in the system, FBMC allows the offshore hubs to
export more energy when generation is high. By optimizing the cross­border flows, FBMC
also allows the offshore wind electricity to reach higher­prices markets more effectively
and avoid situations of local over­supply of renewables, increasing the average price at
which the offshore wind farm can sell electricity.
The decrease in capture rates from 2028 to 2030 is mainly explained by the increase of
generation capacity in the two hubs between these two years. Indeed, the more wind
energy generation capacity is present in one region, the more electricity will be generated
during peak wind hours, leading to even lower prices, and eventually more curtailment of
these renewable energy sources. To prevent this from happening, investments in storage
facilities alongside renewable sources, buying electricity when it is cheap and reselling
it when renewable production is lower would keep the capture rates from falling too low.
Newer types of electricity demand, such as hydrogen production facilities or heat pumps,
could also be part of the solution to form more autonomous energy hubs. This is even
more needed as most countries in Europe are building more and more renewable energy
generators, diminishing the opportunities to trade renewable production surpluses with
neighboring countries.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
32
==PAGE:39==
5
Discussion
In this chapter, the main results are put into a broader perspective. The limitations of the
study are discussed, alongside suggestions for further studies.
The main part (in terms of both time and efforts) of this work was spent on the mod­
elling phase of the Flow­Based Market Coupling add­on to Balmorel and the integration
of ENTSO­E data to the model, in a search for an overall coherent input data in the model.
Even if the original project plan was to spend a rather equal time on the modelling and on
the analysis parts, especially applied to offshore energy hubs, this report and its structure
tries to represent in the best way possible the real distribution of the work that was done.
It is also worth noting that when simulations were started to be run in this project, the BB3
runs encountered an issue when attempting to generate the Basis output file containing
all the raw data about equations etc., taking a way too important amount of time for this
project. This is maybe due to the very important number of new equations that were added
in the model by the FBMC add­on. Using an optional parameter developed by Ea Energy
Analyses, the computing of this Basis file was then disabled, but it would have been helpful
and more accurate when analyzing hourly the effects of FBMC on the transmission lines
from the offshore hubs.
The integration of Flow­Based Market Coupling in the Balmorel model, which is originally
calculating cross­border flows through a NTC approach, shows interesting and coherent
results but would gain in being more flexible and adaptable to different scenarios or stud­
ies. This was the goal of the machine learning work done in subsection 3.2.3, but was not
the main objective of this study. It would be interested to study the convergence of prices
allowed by FBMC in a base scenario that is not so unbalanced, as the quite important
difference in prices between NTC and FBMC here is maybe hiding some other interesting
results, needing deeper analysis. The NTC values from the ENTSO­E are also quite con­
servative, making the difference in electricity transmission really noticeable between the
scenarios. In the FBMC dataset from the ERAA 2023, the PTDF values are not altered
over the different target years, although the development of the power system over years
would influence the topology of the grid, thereby potentially modifying the PTDFs. How­
ever, the results of the FBMC add­on still show that FBMC allows for a better integration
of renewable energy sources, as well as reduced overall system costs.
When studying the impact of FBMC on the offshore wind hubs, the main hypothesis is on
the definition of PTDF values for the transmission lines from the offshore hubs to shore.
As unfortunately no offshore hubs were included specifically in the FBMC dataset from the
ERAA, the choice to take factors from ”transmission lines with similar position” was made
as it seemed like the most logic and feasible option to effectively model these hubs as
offshore bidding zones. As a transmission line doesn’t have only one but two connections,
these chosen PTDF values make the flows from the offshore wind farms considered as
intended, but also add some other constraints to the network that are probably not realistic.
Taking these lines into account when calculating the PTDF matrix using a grid model would
actually probably slightly change the whole matrix.
As to further research, a study of the change in redispatch implied by the integration of
FBMC would be interesting, but this would require a grid model and was outside the scope
of this work. With more time allocated to the analysis part of this work, it would have been
interesting to study congestion in the model in more depth, for example assessing the
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
33
==PAGE:40==
most often congested lines in the NTC scenario, and study their evolution in the FBMC
scenario. The task was also not made very easy by the FBMC dataset from the ERAA,
where a given CNEC_ID does not represent the same critical element in all the FB do­
mains (which is varying at every time step). It would also have been interesting to study
potential differences between the two offshore energy hubs, as for example NordSoeenI
has its biggest transmission capacity linked to Denmark, while RoenneB has its biggest to
Germany. Intrinsically, these countries have different capacities and market behavior, and
they are also considered differently in the FBMC dataset from the ENTSO­E (Germany
is in the Core, while Denmark is connected to it through AHC). Assessing the economic
feasibility of offshore hubs through a proper feasibility study would also have been inter­
esting. Finally, the impact of storage and/or hydrogen production facilities on the capture
prices of offshore energy hubs would be a relevant follow­up to this work, defining hybrid
hubs in Balmorel.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
34
==PAGE:41==
6
Conclusion
The main part of this study was the modelling and integration to the Balmorel model of
the Flow­Based Market Coupling approach for cross­border power transmission, through
a detailed and complete methodology to provide coherent scenarios based on ENTSO­E
dataset released with the European Resource Adequacy Assessment 2023.
In the first part of the results, it was shown that Flow­Based Market Coupling creates a
clear convergence of electricity prices in the system, as more transmission of electricity
is allowed overall. Flow­Based Market Coupling is also beneficial for renewable energy
production facilities, as it facilitates their integration by allowing a more flexible use of the
grid, and hence less curtailment of these sources. This approach also decreases system
costs by reducing congestion, and also facilitating the use of lower­cost generation.
In offshore energy hubs, Flow­Based Market Coupling leads to more electricity generation
overall, improving the overall transmission capacity available to connect these hubs to the
shore. The capture price of the offshore energy hubs, which is one of the main parameter
to assess the feasibility of such projects, is also increased under Flow­Based market
Coupling.
While offshore energy hubs, especially under Flow­Based Market Coupling, present a
promising pathway towards a sustainable and interconnected European electricity mar­
ket, their successful implementation requires addressing technical, economic and regula­
tory challenges. Future research could focus on the change in redispatch implied by the
different power transmission framework, but also investigates in more depth congestion
in the system. Hybrid offshore hubs, coupling storage or hydrogen production facilities to
renewable energy sources, would also be a relevant follow­up.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
35
==PAGE:42==
Bibliography
[1]
Kenneth Van den Bergh, Jonas Boury, and Erik Delarue. “The Flow­Based Market
Coupling in Central Western Europe: Concepts and Definitions”. In: The Electricity
Journal 29.1 (Jan. 1, 2016), pp. 24–29. ISSN: 1040­6190. DOI: 10.1016/j.tej.2015.
12.004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S104061901530004X.
[2]
Energinet et al. Supporting Document for the Second Amendment of the Nordic
Capacity Calculation Region’s Proposal for Capacity Calculation Methodology in
Accordance with Article 20(2) of Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 of 24 July
2015 Establishing a Guideline on Capacity Allocation and Congestion Management.
2020. URL: https://consultations.entsoe.eu/markets/cacm_article12_amended_da_
id_ccm_nordic_ccr/.
[3]
David Schönheit et al. “Toward a Fundamental Understanding of Flow­Based Mar­
ket Coupling for Cross­Border Electricity Trading”. In: Advances in Applied Energy
2 (May 2021), p. 100027. ISSN: 26667924. DOI: 10.1016/j.adapen.2021.100027.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2666792421000202.
[4]
Tarjei Kristiansen. “The Flow Based Market Coupling Arrangement in Europe: Im­
plications for Traders”. In: Energy Strategy Reviews 27 (Jan. 1, 2020), p. 100444.
ISSN: 2211­467X. DOI: 10.1016/j.esr.2019.100444. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2211467X19301373.
[5]
Jonas Boury. “Methods for the determination of flow­based capacity parameters:
description, evaluation and improvements”. PhD thesis. May 30, 2015. DOI: 10.
13140/RG.2.2.23785.70248.
[6]
Lukas Maximilian Lang, Bettina Dallinger, and Georg Lettner. “The Meaning of Flow­
Based Market Coupling on Redispatch Measures in Austria”. In: Energy Policy 136
(Jan. 1, 2020), p. 111061. ISSN: 0301­4215. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2019.111061.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421519306482.
[7]
CREG. Study on the functioning and price evolution of the Belgian wholesale elec­
tricity market – monitoring report 2018. URL: https://www.creg.be/sites/default/
files/assets/Publications/Studies/F1958EN.pdf.
[8]
ENTSO­E. ERAA 2023 | ENTSO­E – ERAA 2023. URL: https://www.entsoe.eu/
outlooks/eraa/2023/.
[9]
ENTSO­E. Annex 2 ­ Methodology | ENTSO­E – ERAA 2023. URL: https://www.
entsoe.eu/outlooks/eraa/2023/report/ERAA_2023_Annex_2_Methodology.pdf.
[10]
Zonetti Daniele. “Energy­based modelling and control of electric power systems with
guaranteed stability properties”. PhD thesis. Apr. 15, 2016. URL: https://theses.hal.
science/tel-01321857.
[11]
Amin Shokri Gazafroudi, Fabian Neumann, and Tom Brown. “Topology­based ap­
proximations for N−1 contingency constraints in power transmission networks”. In:
International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems 137 (May 1, 2022),
p. 107702. ISSN: 0142­0615. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . ijepes . 2021 . 107702. URL: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142061521009297.
[12]
Murcia Leon and Juan Pablo. “Pan­European wind and solar generation time series
(PECD 2021 update)”. In: (May 10, 2022). Publisher: Technical University of Den­
mark. DOI: 10.11583/DTU.c.5939581.v3. URL: https://data.dtu.dk/collections/Pan-
European_wind_and_solar_generation_time_series_PECD_2021_update_/5939581.
[13]
The Balmorel Open Source Project ­ Home. URL: https://www.balmorel.com/.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
36
==PAGE:43==
[14]
Frauke Wiese et al. “Balmorel open source energy system model”. In: Energy Strat­
egy Reviews 20 (Apr. 1, 2018), pp. 26–34. ISSN: 2211­467X. DOI: 10.1016/j.esr.
2018.01.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2211467X18300038.
[15]
Balmorel user guide. Ea Energianalyse. URL: https://www.ea-energianalyse.dk/en/
publications/3063/.
[16]
Roshan Kumari and Saurabh Kr. “Machine Learning: A Review on Binary Classi­
fication”. In: International Journal of Computer Applications 160.7 (Feb. 15, 2017),
pp. 11–15. ISSN: 09758887. DOI: 10 . 5120 / ijca2017913083. URL: http : / / www .
ijcaonline.org/archives/volume160/number7/kumari-2017-ijca-913083.pdf.
[17]
ENTSO­E. Annex 1 ­ Input Data & Assumptions| ENTSO­E – ERAA 2023. URL:
https : / / www . entsoe . eu / outlooks / eraa / 2023 / report / ERAA _ 2023 _ Annex _ 1 _
Assumptions.pdf.
[18]
TYNDP 2022 Scenario Report – Introduction and Executive Summary. URL: https:
//2022.entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/.
[19]
Jens Christian Rørbæk Kruse. “Resilience of weather dependent energy systems
under extreme generation and demand scenarios”. In: (). URL: https://www.ea-
energianalyse.dk/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/JensChrKruse_thesis.pdf.
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
37
==PAGE:44==
A
Demand and capacity input data
Figure A.1: Annual electricity demand (in TWh) in the system over the target years
Figure A.2: Overall installed power capacity (in GW) in the system over the target years
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
38
==PAGE:45==
B
Electricity generation in 2030
Figure B.1: Electricity generation and share of renewables (in %) in 2030 in the NTC
scenario
Figure B.2: Electricity generation and share of renewables (in %) in 2030 in the FBMC
scenario
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
39
==PAGE:46==
C
Hourly study of congestion in offshore
hubs
Figure C.1: Number of hours of 2030 when the flow on the line from NordSoeenI is not at
NTC value and the price delta with DE_NW and DK_W is above limit, depending on the
limit fixed
Figure C.2: Number of hours of 2030 when the flow on the line from RoenneB is not at
NTC value and the price delta with DE_NW and DK_W is above limit, depending on the
limit fixed
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
40
==PAGE:47==
D
Average electricity prices
Figure D.1: Average electricity prices in the whole system in the three target years, de­
pending on scenarios
Assessing Offshore Energy Hubs’ Feasibility Through Comprehensive Energy System Modeling: A
Flow­Based Market Coupling Approach
41
