==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
July 2024
By 
Marta Lorente Romero
Assessing and Cultivating an 
Innovative Mindset at Rovsing A/S
Unleashing
Innovation
==PAGE:2==
Thesis specifics
English title
Unleashing Innovation: Assessing and Cultivating an Innovative Mindset at 
Rovsing A/S

Danish title
Slip innovationen løs: vurdering og kulturanisering af et innovativt mindset 
hos Rovsing A/S

Author 
Marta Lorente Romero | s222811

Supervisor
Carina Lomberg

Education
Master of Science in Technology Entrepreneurship

Confidentiality
Kindly note that this thesis in confidential, and any form of copying or 
disclosure without prior written permission is strictly prohibited 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
Acknowledgements 
First of all, I would like to thank Rovsing not only for giving me the opportunity of writing 
my master thesis with them, but also of working with them as a student assistant during 
the entirety of the studies of my master’s degree at DTU. Which has given me enough 
experience and insight on the company’s work culture and environment to be able to 
successfully write this thesis. Of course, Rovsing is nothing without all its amazing 
employees, a wonderful team of people that have encouraged me throughout the whole 
process, I cannot thank them enough for believing in me. Especial mention to my 
supervisor in Rovsing, Sergio Parreño, whose guidance and feedback have been pivotal 
in the development of this thesis. 
I would also like say a heartfelt thank you to my DTU supervisor, Carina Lomberg, for 
sharing her expertise, time, and dedication, and for always providing relevant feedback. 
Finally, I would like to extend my appreciation to all my friends and family who have 
supported (and suffered) me through this journey.  
Thank you for all for your unvaluable support.  
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
Abstract 
This master thesis focuses on the development of an innovation strategy for the Danish 
company Rovsing A/S. A literature review on the methods and tools for this purpose 
sets the base for the creation a four steps innovation plan that will start by 
understanding why this innovation plan is necessary for the company, the next step will 
be to analyze the current state of the company’s capabilities and identify opportunities 
by conducting a SWOT analysis.  
From this analysis, three of these opportunities will be further evaluated to understand 
the potential and risks that would entitle to pursue each of them. The first opportunity 
is to optimize the company project management process, for this purpose a tailored 
project management plan is designed for the company combining two innovative 
project management methods, the lean and the agile methodology. The second option 
to consider is Mergers and Acquisitions, the approach to analyze it is to perform desk 
research to identify the best approach and understand the risks. The last option to be 
analyzed is market expansion, three different industries are considered the electrical 
vehicle, the unmanned aerial vehicle, and the defense aircraft by using the market 
opportunity navigator.  
Based on the information obtained from performing this analysis, some 
recommendations on possible courses of action will be given to the company, which 
will have the ultimate decision of the development of a business plan to take this 
innovation strategy to the next step and implementation. 
Keywords 
Innovation, SWOT analysis, market expansion, opportunities. 
 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
Table of Contents 
1. 
Introduction ................................................................................................... 5 
2. 
Literature review ............................................................................................. 5 
2.1. 
Why? ...................................................................................................... 7 
2.2. 
What? ..................................................................................................... 8 
2.3. 
How? .................................................................................................... 16 
3. 
Company introduction .................................................................................. 22 
3.1. 
Rovsing description ............................................................................... 22 
3.2. 
Innovation at Rovsing ............................................................................. 24 
4. 
Competitors analysis .................................................................................... 25 
5. 
Innovation budget ........................................................................................ 27 
6. 
Application of the framework ........................................................................ 28 
6.1. 
Why? .................................................................................................... 28 
6.2. 
How? .................................................................................................... 29 
6.2.1. 
Step1: Analysis of the current capabilities ........................................ 29 
6.3. 
What? — Step 2: Analysis of opportunities ....................................... 33 
6.3.4. 
Step 2.1: Selection of opportunities ................................................. 43 
6.3.5. 
Step 3: Development of a plan ......................................................... 44 
6.3.6. 
Step 4: Implementation and monitoring ........................................... 44 
7. 
Discussion ............................................................................................... 45 
8. 
Conclusion ............................................................................................... 46 
References ...................................................................................................... 48 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
1. Introduction 
The purpose of this thesis is to explore different opportunities for the development of 
an innovation strategy that will be tailored to the requirements of the Danish company 
Rovsing A/S. Rovsing is a SME founded in 1992, that develops testing equipment for 
satellites for the European market. Despite their long trajectory, they are still 
considered a small company. For several years now, they have worked towards 
expanding the business, and they consider that the implementation of an innovation 
strategy would expedite this growth. However, due to its small size, Rovsing lacks an 
R&D department and the resources necessary to independently develop this strategy. 
For this reason, a research on innovation methods will be conducted along with the 
analysis of some opportunities that the company deems to be potentially interesting 
for their growth. The desired outcome is to identify the most suitable opportunities and 
define the course of action for innovation that would present the less risk for the 
company. 
2. Literature review 
Innovation is surrounded by uncertainty and risk and involves a high probability of 
failure. However, by using a systematic approach and following a structured plan the 
chances of failure are considerably reduced (Cheong et al., 2024; Keeley et at., 2013).  
Having an innovation strategy can save small businesses from collapse and it positively 
contributes to the company’s growth (Luamba et al., 2021). As well as contributing to 
an increased business performance, which can be achieved by investing on product 
innovation and process innovation. Product innovation will increase the competitive 
advantage of the company, however on the long term this is not enough as competitors 
will eventually catch up. Improving the internal processes, on the other hand, will 
improve the company’s capabilities and its ability to adapt to change, giving it an 
advantage to adapt faster to market changes (Neely & Hii, 1998). 
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
The Innovation360 group was founded in 2015 in Stockholm by Magnus Penker, who 
developed an innovation framework based on his knowledge acquired during his 
studies at Henley Business School (Innovation360 Group, 2020a). This framework 
served only the base for the development of his innovation framework and tools known 
as the InnoSurvey®, which is a complete innovation analysis that aims to illustrate 
through a visual spider web graph the current innovative capabilities of a company, 
assessing weaknesses and strengths in order to develop a tailored business model and 
strategy to follow (Innovation360 Group, 2020b). This complete analysis however can 
only be performed by this company or one of their partners. For this reason, a shallower 
approach will be taken on this methodology, focusing only on the framework and 
adjusting it to the best convenience for the development of this thesis. The 
Innovation360framework designed by Penker will be accordingly explained in the 
following sections and can be seen in figure 1: 
The reason why this framework was chosen is because it has a broad approach to all 
the different aspects to consider when developing an innovation strategy, and it offers 
Figure 1 The innovation320 Framework.  
Source: Innovation360 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
the possibility to bring in different tools that can be used to analyze each question and 
that adapt better to the company’s conditions. Therefore, it will be only used as a 
reference for the development of a tailored framework specifically for the design of an 
innovation strategy for Rovsing. Several adjustments will be done to the Innovation360 
framework, such as reducing the number of questions to only three and moving the 
content of the analysis from one question to another.  This new framework that will be 
explained in detail bellow can be seen in figure 2:  
2.1. 
Why? 
On the original framework, the first question aims to analyze topics such as 
incremental and radical innovation strategy and market strategies.  However, it has 
been deemed that those topics are out of the scope of the main question and won’t be 
discussed in this section. 
Therefore, question number one, will have the only purpose of understanding why the 
company needs an innovation strategy. The method to obtain this answer will be by a 
simple discussion with the company regarding their needs and objectives towards the 
future.  
Figure 2 Innovation framework for Rovsing A/S 
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
2.2. 
What? 
To answer this second question, the original framework suggests a list of seven types 
of innovations to analyze. However, it is considered that this list is not accurate and 
thorough enough as there are several other areas of innovation. For instance, the Doblin 
10 types of innovation, offers a more complete list of innovations. Therefore, it will be 
addressed instead. In addition, open innovation strategies for SMEs and incremental 
and radical types of innovations will also be described in this section.  
 
2.2.1. 
Doblin 10 types of innovations 
The Doblin 10 types of innovation theory was developed by Jay Doblin in 1980, and over 
the course of 30 years it has been polished and adapted into the book Ten types of 
innovation: The discipline of building breakthroughs by Keeley et al. in 2013. This 
framework was designed to identify the most suitable kinds of innovation that a 
company should pursue, based on their capabilities, and successful innovations in the 
same industry. This method recommends, not focusing only on one single innovation, 
but to use in a very organized and structured manner at least three to five kinds of 
innovation in order to achieve the maximum innovative potential and competitiveness. 
In fact, this framework emphasizes that innovation is more about discipline and 
following a thoroughly designed and structured plan, than it is about creativity or 
groundbreaking ideas. 
These innovations, which are described below, are divided into 3 categories, that go 
from a more internal approach to a closer to the customer approach (see figure 3).  
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
| CONFIGURATION 
The first category is classified under Configuration, which focuses on the internal work 
of the company, how they operate and how they do business. This category includes 
four types: 
Profit model 
It focuses on finding new ways of obtaining profit by understanding the customer’s 
pains and needs and challenging the standard or normative business models in the 
industry.  
 
Network 
Networking aims to create strong relationships with other companies and even 
competitors to take advantage of their knowledge, such as learning from their 
processes or technology, and opening doors to new markets.  
In the book by Keeley et al. (2013) networking is mentioned to be an open innovation 
approach, this topic will be expanded upon in the following section. 
Figure 3 Doblin ten types of innovation 
Source: Ten types of innovation: The discipline of 
building breakthroughs 
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
 
Structure 
Innovations in structure focus on improving the company’s functioning. This could 
include creating new departments, offer incentives to motivate employees or investing 
it their continuous formation by offering courses. This innovation often requires high 
investment, but the results are hard to copy by competitors and will benefit the 
company for years. 
 
Process 
Innovating in processes focus on improving the way in which the product is developed. 
This implies to optimize the process as much as possible in order to save as much time 
and money as possible. In this case, standardizing processes or implanting lean 
production can help achieve this objective. The lean methodology is briefly mentioned 
in this chapter of the book by Keeley et al. (2013) as a useful tool to use when developing 
process innovation, and it will be further developed on the “how?” section of this thesis. 
|OFFERINGS 
The second category is Offerings, and it focuses on the products or services that the 
company has to offer. It includes two types of innovation: 
 
Product Performance 
This innovation focuses on the quality and uniqueness of the product to make it 
withstand in the market. Working towards improving the product, adding new features, 
or developing a completely new product. When doing product performance 
innovations, there are some common ideas to consider such as making the product 
easier to use, more sustainable or giving customization options. 
This innovation is one of the easiest one to be copied by competitors and thus the 
competitive advantage will not last long, as products with the same features will shortly 
be released into the market.  
 
 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
Product System 
Product system has a focus on product connectivity, in the sense of combining or 
connecting products that work good on their own to create an even better product or 
service. Innovations of this type could be creating modular products, interconnecting 
platforms or developing extensions that can be incorporated into already existing 
products. 
| EXPERIENCE 
The third and last category is Experience, and it is closely related to the relationship 
with the customer, how they engage with the company and how they see it. This 
category includes four types: 
 
Service 
This innovation focuses on giving the best experience to the customer when using the 
product. Making sure it is easy to use and to understand the functionality. In order to 
achieve a pleasant and reassuring experience there are some innovative paths that can 
be followed, such as offering customer support, product maintenance or including 
guarantees and information. In this digital era, much of this can be done online which 
optimizes and simplifies the process. 
 
Channel 
Innovations in the channel focus on the way that the company reaches their customers. 
Making it easy and convenient it is for customers to buy the product when they need it. 
Having different channels for that matter can make the experience nicer for the 
customers, having for instance both a physical store and selling online, while also 
selling without intermediaries to minimize costs. 
 
Brand 
Brand innovations aim to make the company more recognizable and withstand from 
competitors. Being more appealing and desirable for customers so that the prefer to 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
buy from the company. Investing in advertising, and communication is key in addition 
to other ideas such as standing by some company values and being consistent and 
transparent in this regard. 
 
Customer engagement 
Customer engagement innovations focus on understanding the customer and 
developing a relationship with them. Having meaningful interactions with customers 
and earning their trust. This also applies to delivering good quality products, and being 
able to show the care that goes into every step of the process when the customer 
purchases to improve their experience. 
As mentioned before, the Doblin 10 types of innovation theory recommends using 
between 3-5 kinds of innovations, which is known as sophisticated innovation. If there 
is an aim in achieving a true competitive advantage, it is essential to deeply understand 
each type of innovation, identifying in similar industries which innovations are often 
overlooked, and put together a well thought and thoroughly designed plan to implement 
them. This kind of innovation is of course harder to pursue as it requires a high 
investment both in terms of money and time, but the result will be prolonged over time. 
On the other hand, when using simple innovations, which means using only one or two 
innovations, it is easier for competitors to copy the strategy, which makes the 
competitor advantage shorter. On those lines, using only innovations focusing on the 
product or technology are greatly discouraged as the will not bring good enough results 
(Keeley et al. 2013). Hervas-Oliver et at. (2014) share this same though, claiming that 
innovation is more than developing a new technology or product, it also involves 
organizational and process improvement, which will result in an overall improvement 
of productivity and quality. 
2.2.2. 
Open innovation 
Another approach on innovation, which was briefly mentioned above is open 
innovation, which has been described as an approach that fits SMEs as it seeks for 
knowledge and information outside of the company. For this reason, it is suitable for to 
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
SMEs since they often lack the resources or internal structure to solely rely on their 
knowledge (Hossain & Kauranen, 2016; Lee et al., 2010).  
This internal way of innovating is known as closed innovation, this approach fits better 
to bigger companies as they have the more resources to invest on strategies hiring an 
internal R&D department that use their internal knowledge and technologies to develop 
new innovations. 
Therefore, as described before, open innovation utilizes both internal and external 
strategies to obtain knowledge and information from external sources and exploit 
existing technology (Van De Vrande et al. 2009). This can be done in several different 
ways that are thoroughly described in the literature, specifically Van De Vrande et al. 
(2009) conducted a literature review where they identify and provide a description to 
each activity. 
In this review they identify three different activities that can be included in this internal 
strategies or technology exploitation, which are those that can be done within the 
company: 
 
1. Venturing 
 When a company decides to pursue new ventures, it means that they come up with 
new opportunities for using the current company’s technology or opening to other 
markets or businesses. 
 
2. Internal IP 
If the company owns patents or other IP, they could benefit from it by out-licensing to 
other companies within the same or similar industry. 
 
3. Involving employees  
Fomenting employees’ creativity and innovative thinking by creating an environment 
where they feel safe to share their ideas and encouraging this behavior. This could be 
done by installing idea boxes or starting internal competitions. 
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
The same literature review by Van De Vrande et al. (2009) also provides five external 
strategies for open innovation, which are those that look for new technologies and 
knowledge from external sources: 
 
1. Networking 
As it has been presented before, networking is a type of innovation and when focusing 
on open innovation is one of the most commonly mentioned throughout the literature. 
It is an easy and cheap way to obtain valuable information from external and relevant 
sources. Networking can be done in two directions, horizontal and vertical. 
Horizontal networking is done between companies within the same industry or in 
different industries but operating at a similar level. This includes competitors or 
research institutions, like universities. This networking can lead to collaborations 
where beneficial knowledge is obtained for both parties; however, it is often the biggest 
company which benefits the most. In addition, these collaborations can reduce the 
opportunity to compete against the bigger companies (Lee et al., 2010). These 
collaborations become more important during the commercialization stage rather than 
on earlier stages (Hossain & Kauranen, 2016; Lee et al., 2010). According to research, 
horizontal networking is the most common for SMEs that work with an open innovation 
model as they tend to network with customer, rather than with suppliers (Hossain & 
Kauranen, 2016). 
Vertical networking is done between companies on the same industry but operating on 
a different level, or company involved in the supply chain like providers or distributors. 
This networking is useful as it can bring knowledge on industry standards, market 
trends and the opportunity to identify new opportunities to innovate.  
 
2. Customer involvement 
Similarly to the previous one, customer involvement can also be correlated to one of 
the ten types of innovation presented before. In this case, it is the same as customer 
engagement. Much information can be gathered to be implemented by the company by 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
engaging with customers by actively communicating and listening to their needs and 
suggestions, and looking at how they innovate in their technologies.  
 
3. External participation 
External participation includes investing in other companies in order to benefit from 
their technologies and innovations in addition to reconsidering or repurposing 
discarded technologies. 
 
4. Outsourcing an R&D department 
As SMEs often do not have enough resources to hiring a an internal R&D department, 
there are other alternatives like outsourcing it for determined periods of time to take 
care of the innovation process and it does not require to be maintained by the company. 
Buijs (1986) explains in his paper Innovation can be taught the Project Industrial 
Innovation, a program in which consultants were hired inside different companies to 
teach innovation with the goal of making the companies able to innovate on their own. 
This one-time training would allow companies to obtain the necessary knowledge to be 
able continue innovating on their own after the program was concluded. This program 
was successful as it is proved by most companies continuing with their innovation 
process. 
 
5. Inward IP licensing  
This means acquiring intellectual property from other companies, such as copyright, 
trademarks, or patents to be able to use it within the company. 
2.2.3. 
Incremental and radical innovation 
When engaging in innovative activities they can also be divided into two types, radical 
or incremental, based on how drastic the outcome of these innovations is (Cardinal, 
2001). Most commonly companies will strive to achieve radical innovation, but due to 
several factors like resources or organizational constraints, it is more likely that they will 
take incremental changes (Kettinger et al., 1997). 
==PAGE:17==
16 
 
Radical innovations are those that involve major changes for the company, high 
investment, high risk, uncertainty, and groundbreaking ideas (Kettinger et al., 1997; 
Hussain, 2024). They affect aspects of the company that are non-routinary, like the 
creation of a new technology or pursing a new market. When attempting radical 
innovation, having a multidisciplinary team influences positively the success of the 
project, as well as a good communication and working dynamics of the team (Kettinger 
et al., 1997).  
Incremental innovations, on the other hand, are those that involve minor changes, less 
risk and investment (Kettinger et al., 1997; Hussain, 2024). They consist of making 
small changes or improvement to already existing process or technology. These 
changes often affect routinary aspects, however despite being small changes, they can 
have a considerable impact (Kettinger et al., 1997).  
2.3. 
How? 
The last question of the Innovation360 framework looks into the leadership styles, and 
it is meant to perform the assessment, which measures 66 capabilities to create a 
structured spiderweb graph that illustrates the areas where the company needs to 
improve their performance. Lastly, it provides a four-step the outline for the 
development of an innovation process plan. 
For this thesis, the only part that will be utilized from the Innovation360 framework is 
the development of the innovation process. However, the steps will be modified to 
adapt to Rovsing’s necessities, giving way to the following plan to develop an innovation 
strategy for Rovsing: 
• Step 1: Evaluation of current capabilities 
• Step 2: Analysis of opportunities 
o Step 2.1: Selection of opportunities 
• Step 3: Development of a plan 
• Step 4: Implementation and monitoring 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
This plan will be conducted in the following sections of this document, where all the 
details about it will be explained, from the tools used for each step to the results 
obtained. 
Additionally, two other project management methods used in innovation will be 
described in this section in order to obtain a boarder overview and understanding of the 
steps on innovative processes. The two methods that will be discussed are the Lean 
method and the Agile method. 
2.3.1. 
The lean method 
The Lean method was already mentioned in the previous question of the framework as 
a method to optimize the process innovation (Keeley et al. 2013). This method is well 
known by the constant improvement philosophy intrinsic of the process. It was 
developed by Taiichi Ohno and established in the Toyota Production System. It is often 
used as a project management method for highly demanding industries and there are 
5 main steps in the process and all of them have the customer at the core (see figure 
4):  
 
 
 
Figure 4 The Lean method 
Source: The Lean Way 
==PAGE:19==
18 
 
1. Define Value 
In this step the goal is to identify what brings value to the company and what activities 
do not contribute to this value (waste-activities). Value should be understood as the 
end product that the customer is paying for, and the efforts needed to achieve the end 
product (Krasteva, n.d.). In order to properly conduct this step, it is also necessary to 
identify the waste activities, and divide them into necessary waste and pure waste. 
Necessary waste are those activities that regardless of not adding value to the end 
product are necessary to ensure that the best quality is delivered, this includes, testing. 
Pure waste are those activities that do not bring any value and can be removed from the 
process in order to save resources (Naydenov, n.d.). 
 
2. Map value stream 
After the value is clear, the next step is to map all the activities in the process in order 
to achieve this value. The most used tools for this step are Kanban boards, where all 
the activities can be visualized and classified according to their status or level of 
completion (Krasteva, n.d.).  
 
3. Create flow 
Once all the activities are mapped, it is time to create a flow. This step is especially 
important as it helps to identify bottlenecks. To avoid wasting time, which is not adding 
any value, an early identification of a bottleneck is essential. When all the activities are 
mapped and are being tracked, it is easy to spot activities with a deadline that are stuck 
and must be completed before the beginning of a new activity (Krasteva, n.d.) This might 
also help find recurrent bottlenecks and act on them to continuously improve 
processes and increase productivity.  
 
4. Establish pull 
When the flow of work is clearly detailed, the next step is to work on a pull system, 
where all employees have an overview of the tasks that are not being worked on and 
their priority and can assigned themselves to those tasks when they are done with the 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
previous one. On a push system, tasks would be externally assigned to each employee 
by the manager (Krasteva, n.d.). 
 
5. Pursuit perfection 
The last step and the core part of the method is continuous improvement. By constantly 
checking and adjusting the activities to optimize the processes, removing those 
activities that are not generating value and focusing on improving those that generate 
the most value. This step should be constantly reiterated to achieve the best results 
from the method (Toneva, n.d.; Krasteva, n.d.). 
2.3.2. 
The agile method 
As a complementary help to this method, sometimes it is recommended to use the 
agile method, specifically the stand-up meetings, to keep track of what every employee 
is working on and what they have planned to do next. This way there is a common 
understanding of the status of the process at all times and the employees feel 
responsible of the tasks that the assign to themselves as they have to report progress 
daily (Krasteva, n.d.).  At the same time, this Agile methodology, that goes far beyond 
these meetings, also contains principles from the Lean method, such as the constant 
improvement philosophy (Garg, 2020).  Nevertheless, this method can also be used on  
its own as a project management method to boost innovation and counts with six steps 
(see figure 5): 
==PAGE:21==
20 
 
 
 
1. Develop a plan  
The first step on this method is to create a plan including the objectives and goals and 
the steps to achieve those (Indeed Editorial Team, 2023), while always having in mind 
the value that it will bring to the client (Adobe Communications Team, 2022) 
 
2. Product Roadmap Creation  
When the plan is created, it is time to create the roadmap where all the deliverables 
and activities to achieve the final product are clearly specified.  All the team must have 
access to the overall view of these activities as they will choose what to work on from 
the lists of tasks. A feature of agile methodology is “sprints”, which delimited periods of 
time (1-3 weeks) when the activities are carried out 
 
3. Application design together with the client  
A unique feature of agile methodology is “sprints”, which are delimited periods of time 
(1-3 weeks) when the activities are carried out with a clear objective in mind. During 
each sprint it must be clear what tasks will be performed, who will work on each and 
Figure 5 The Agile method 
Source: Hackr.io 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
how it will be done. It is important to make sure that the workload is possible to be 
finished in that period of time (Adobe Communications Team, 2022; Indeed Editorial 
Team, 2023). Good communication between the team is key during these sprints 
(Adobe Communications Team, 2022).  
 
4. Daily stand-up meetings 
As previously mentioned, a principle of the agile methodology is daily meetings where 
the employees report their progress on the previous day and what the intend to work on 
next. This is a way of keeping employees accountable for their tasks and detecting 
possible bottlenecks earlier. These meetings should be kept short at around 15 minutes 
in total. 
 
5. Sprint review meetings and retrospective 
After the sprint is completed and the work is done, it is time to hold two more extensive 
meetings. One should be with the client, to show the progress and obtain valuable 
feedback to apply on the next sprint. These meetings with the client are important as it 
will allow to adjust the product accordingly to their feedback before delivering a final 
product. The second meeting is with the employees, to discuss the overall sprint, what 
went good and wrong and how can the process be improved for the next time. 
 
6. Product release and support 
The last step of this method is to work on the final product applying all the feedback 
obtained by the client after every meeting at the end of a sprint to finish it and deliver it 
to the client. If needed further support can be provided to the client after the delivery, 
which can be taken as an opportunity to identify improvements on the process (Indeed 
Editorial Team, 2023). 
==PAGE:23==
22 
 
3. Company introduction 
3.1. 
Rovsing description 
Rovsing A/S is an aerospace company founded in 1992, it is based in Denmark and its 
headquarters are located in Glostrup, in the outskirts of Copenhagen. The company’s 
main business is to provide Electrical Ground Support Equipment (EGSE) and test 
systems for satellites and their payloads. The company has developed their own 
hardware products that offer a broad selection of solutions to meet the most common 
testing needs in the aerospace industry. These products are designed as modules that 
can be either used and purchased individually or integrated in a rack that offers a 
complete set of testing and simulation solutions tailored to each client and their 
specific needs for the project. 
Rovsing has, as well, the expertise to offer other services such as Independent Software 
Validation & Verification activities (ISVV), which means that the software included in 
the equipment has been crafted and thoroughly tested in order to ensure it meets the 
quality and requirements expected for the project. 
The company geographical market is broad, providing their systems and services to 
clients that operate all over Europe and the United Stated in the space market. Offering, 
in addition, on-site engineering support, sending the most qualified manpower to assist 
their clients in their headquarters or desired location in cases when specialized 
assistance is needed. 
The company makes business on a design-bid-build model. The European Space 
Agency (ESA) launch develops projects that are assigned to prime contractors, such as 
Airbus or Thales Alenia Space, which are two of Rovsing’s biggest clients. Once the 
prime contractor has developed ESA’s project, it requires testing. Therefore, the prime 
contractor, launches to tenders a contract for the development of testing equipment, 
detailing the project specifications and requirements to a number of companies who 
specialize in this field. Rovsing will bid the contract by sending their best proposal to 
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
the client to demonstrate their capability to fulfill each specified requirement for the 
project (see figure 6). There are various positive outcomes to these bids. In some cases, 
Rovsing will win the bid and work on the project as prime contractor. Alternatively, they 
may work as subcontractors for the project’s prime contractor. It is also important to 
remark that, when working with the European Space Agency (ESA) they adhere to an 
industrial policy and geographical return. This means that, ESA allocates projects to 
countries in a way that returns the investment proportionally to each member’s country 
contribution. As a result, the country awarded the project cannot outsource work to 
other countries, ensuring the investment benefits only the country chosen by ESA (The 
European Space Agency, n.d.-b).  
Rovsing’s revenue comes from selling their products to the clients on the space 
industry on a project basis. The bid proposal framework has the disadvantage of 
competing against other companies, requiring Rovsing to adjust their proposal price 
while considering potential competitors. This framework limits both the project 
revenue and the percentage of the final revenue that will be allocated to R&D. It is in 
rare occasions that the money that comes from a client is spent on innovation. For this 
reason, Rovsing depends on public money from the government or different 
organizations in order to increase their budget for innovation. This includes programs 
such as General Support Technology Programme (GSTP) from ESA, which offers money 
to help further develop promising technologies that are still in a development stage, to 
ensure that they can be ready to use in further missions (The European Space Agency, 
n.d.-a). Making sure that a technology is 100% reliable before launching it into space is 
vital, as little to no reparations can be done after that. This concept completely aligns 
Figure 6 Diagram of project assignation flow 
==PAGE:25==
24 
 
with Rovsing’s business to provide technologies that allow testing any satellite or 
spacecraft before it is sent into space. 
3.2. 
Innovation at Rovsing  
As a small company with little resources, there is a need to prioritize where to spend 
the money and energy in order to keep the business afloat. While working on innovation 
might bring bigger benefits to the company in the long run, it is hard to see the benefits 
immediately. Whereas when working on a project that will be delivered to the client, the 
benefits from spending money on its development are guaranteed.  
In addition to the lack of resources, they also face the challenge of uncertainty.  
Investing on an innovation that would result in no benefits for the company, could be 
critical for their future. There are many factors to be considered before investing on the 
development of a new product such as profitability, how easy it would be sold in the 
market and obsolescence. 
As an example of current open innovation strategies that Rovsing is implementing, they 
are collaborating with university students in order to obtain valuable external 
information that could benefit the company by staying up to date with the state-of-the-
art technology and market trends. At the moment of writing this thesis, there are three 
students collaborating with Rovsing, two of which are writing their respective Masters’ 
thesis, and one which is working as an intern.  
Lastly, considering the article by Churchill and Lewis (2002) where they describe the 
five stages of growth for small companies, together with the challenges that come with 
each stage, Rovsing is currently at stage V of growth, the company has been in the 
market for 22 years, therefore it is consolidated enough and has successfully managed 
to survive and succeed. However, as mentioned in the article, the company has not 
managed to maintain an entrepreneurial spirit, which lead to an ossification stage, 
which means that the company has lost its ability to innovate and there is certain 
reluctancy to taking major risks. This puts the company at a disadvantage compared to 
other rapidly growing companies which are able to react faster to change. 
==PAGE:26==
25 
 
4. Competitors analysis 
Looking into the competitors’ landscape can be a useful strategy to obtain information 
about what other companies are doing differently, identify their competitive advantage, 
or learn from their technologies, and utilize this information to improve. When analyzing 
the Rovsing’s current competitive landscape, there are several companies around the 
world that provide similar testing equipment for satellites and other aircrafts. There are 
two main competitors in Europe, Celestia STS and Clemessy. In the United Stated there 
are a few more, being the most remarkable, Marvin Tests Solutions, Keysight and NST. 
The companies in the United States, however, are not primary competitors as they 
target a different market outside of Europe. Nonetheless, they are included in this 
analysis as the objective is to identify potential opportunities that Rovsing could 
implement. 
As a first impression, the biggest difference with the previously mentioned competitors 
is that all of them are big companies that operate in several different markets apart from 
the aerospace sector. There are various common denominators in markets that these 
companies target, these similarities are understandable since the technologies used 
in this industry are similar and so are the opportunities for its application. These 
markets include the defense/military sector, antennas and communication, radar 
systems and the electric automobile sector, among others. 
Having a closer look into each individual company, Clemessy has a clear approach on 
open innovation which they share on their website, they foster a culture of collaboration 
both with “manufacturers and suppliers” and with “laboratories and universities” 
(Eiffage Énergie Systèmes, n.d.).  In addition, their innovation model also has a focus 
on saving and optimizing resources; to do so they target five different categories and 
work on incremental changes to achieve the best performance: Infrastructures, 
maintenance, logistics, production, and research and development (Eiffage Énergie 
Systèmes, n.d.). This approach reminds of the one described by Keeley et at. (2013), 
where they encourage to use at least 3-5 innovations in an organized and strategic 
==PAGE:27==
26 
 
manner, and not focus only on product development. As it can be learnt from their 
innovation strategy, they have a clear focus on optimization on several levels, from 
product performance to making their building structure and logistics run smoothly, and 
including sustainability, optimizing resources and energy performance (Eiffage Énergie 
Systèmes, n.d.).  
Rovsing can benefit from Clemessy’s innovation approach by developing a similarly 
structured plan and learning from their strategies. As a recommendation, looking into 
the building management and optimization could be a good starting point, as Rovsing 
lacks organizational structure in the lab are, which production more time consuming. 
In addition, this constant improvement strategy, suggest that Clemmesy could possibly 
be using the Lean methodology in their project management, which could also be 
implemented by Rovsing. 
Celestia’s aerospace portfolio they have a wide offering of products and EGSE software, 
which will be expanded by the end of 2024. These new products will present a bigger 
competitive advantage with Rovsing, as their performance will be better than Rovsing’s 
products. In their website, Celestia also showcases their effective innovation with the 
development of the radiofrequency equipment that will be used in lunar 
communications, this project has granted them contracts with Europe and the USA 
(Celestia, 2024). There is a clear focus on product development on Celestia’s 
innovation side. Contrary to Clemmesy, they do not openly share their innovation 
strategy, even though there might be a well-structured plan which probably involves 
investing in an R&D department as it is often involved to product development 
innovation (Hoffman et al., 1998; Hossain & Kauranen, 2016; Van De Vrande et at., 
2009). This might not be the only strategy as R&D alone has been proved to not have 
correlation with companies’ growth in a large percentage of cases (Hoffman et al., 
1998). In the past, there has been a commercial relationship between both companies, 
as Rovsing used to purchase some of Celestia’s products to incorporate them in their 
racks. This is not done anymore in the present; however, it could serve as the bridge for 
some networking strategies that could lead to future partnerships or collaborations in 
==PAGE:28==
27 
 
order to learn more about their innovation, like R&D alliances, despite these are more 
likely to happen between noncompeting companies (Van De Vrande et al., 2009)  
Marvin Test Solutions’ innovation is also worth commenting as they have been awarded 
the Military & Aerospace Electronics Innovators Awards in 2020 for the development of 
unique testing solutions for armament and munitions (Marvin Test Solutions, nd.). This 
innovation is again associated to product development, which suggests that Marvin 
Test Solutions, might also have an R&D department in charge of product and 
technology development, in addition to some other strategies that are not shared with 
the public. Initiating a networking strategy with them, could not only benefit the 
company in terms of acquiring knew knowledge, but it could be also an approach to the 
USA market, which is not very open for Rovsing at the moment.  
5. Innovation budget  
Additionally, as Rovsing has a limited budget to allocate for R&D, a brief research on 
how to prioritize innovation budget will be conducted to determine the best practice on 
how much money it is recommended to invest into each type of innovation. 
According to Power & Stanton (2014), companies often do not spend adequate 
amounts of money on innovation. When allocating money, every-day necessities take 
the biggest toll and not enough is left for innovation. According to several companies 
that participated in a conference, around 5% of the budget should be spent on 
incremental improvements, this will benefit the company as it will improve their 
efficiency. 10% should be allocated to sustaining innovations to improve effectiveness 
by smaller breakthrough changes. Finally, 10% should be allocated to radical 
innovation, which will translate on the company’s growth (Power & Stanton, 2014). 
Therefore, according to the participant companies, a total of 25% of the revenue should 
be invested in innovation (see figure 7).  
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
6. Application of the framework 
6.1. 
Why? 
Rovsing has been in the market since 1992, yet they still are a small company. They have 
decided that it is time to be more innovative because they consider that they are not 
progressing and growing as fast as they would like. The aerospace sector is highly 
competitive, and they would like to outstand from their competitors and be able to 
receive more projects. It is because of this competitiveness that they would also like to 
expand their market opportunities and look into some other potential industries where 
their technologies could be used, and where they are not reliant on winning the bid for 
working on a project. This situation creates an impression of uncertainty and 
dependency, as ESA is in full control on the creation of projects and the decision of the 
awarded companies to work on them. For this reason, Rovsing would like to expand to 
other markets where they can have an active approach on the search for customers and 
having the sense control and decision making on their ability to grow and earn benefits 
and the direction in which the company is going. 
In order to create an innovation strategy, Rovsing needs to understand first what the 
current situation of the company is, and which areas require more attention and 
innovation. To do so, it is important to understand all the types of innovations previously 
75%
5%
10%
10%
Every-day expenses
Incremental innovation
 Radical innovations
Sustaining innovations
Figure 7 Suggested budget allocation 
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
presented to identify which ones are more suitable for the company, and later create a 
strategy on how to implement them. 
The objective of this strategy is to set the ground for the company to improve their 
overall performance, make them more competitive, accelerate their growth and 
increase their profit. If this initial plan is successful, the company will be able to reinvest 
the benefits on further development and improvement of their capabilities.  
6.2. 
How? 
6.2.1. Step1: Analysis of the current capabilities 
A preliminary overview of Rovsing’s innovation was explained in a previous section. 
However, in order to fully understand the depths of the current status of the company a 
SWOT analysis (see appendix A) was conducted by holding a brainstorm workshop with 
five representative employees of the company (the CEO, the Software lead, one System 
engineer/Project manager, one Hardware engineer and one Technician). The SWOT 
analysis has the objective of identifying the internal strengths and weaknesses of the 
company and the opportunities and threats. Following that, a survey (see appendix B) 
was conducted with a bigger sample of the employees, a total of 14 answers, in order 
to validate the statements from the SWOT analysis and evaluate to which extent it 
influences and affects them. 
The information obtained from the SWOT analysis will be relevant in order to further 
analyze the innovative opportunities that Rovsing has while knowing whether or not 
they can be pursued with the current capabilities, or which obstacles they need to be 
overcome first. 
From the strength analysis four main takeaways were identified: 
- 
We have a strong team with high expertise knowledge. 
- 
We have good leadership and planning which makes us able to adapt to changes 
in a short span of time.  
==PAGE:31==
30 
 
- 
We have a brand name: We have good reputation among customers as our 
systems consistently work. 
- 
We have a trusted and established supplier base. 
From the weaknesses analysis the following statements were identified: 
- 
Nobody takes the responsibility to assign themselves and assume ownership of 
improvement processes. 
- 
We do not have an evaluation process to follow when facing change. 
- 
We have tunnel vision. We lose track of other important factors when there is a 
change in task priorities. This is linked to a lack of “learning from our mistakes” 
culture. 
- 
We do not have a lab-responsible of having a complete overview of all the 
departments and projects needs and keeping track of stock. 
- 
Due to our small size: we are more vulnerable, and our team is not 
multidisciplinary enough. 
After analyzing these statements, it was deemed that the common factor root-cause in 
almost all the weaknesses of the company is the lack of resources, which can be 
divided into three deficiencies: money, time and people. 
There is high consciousness among employees that there is a need of change and 
improvement in processes and routinary actions in order to optimize their productivity 
and efficiency. However, these changes seem to have a hard time getting to be 
implemented or even being developed. The reason for this is because there is not an 
assigned person who will assume the responsibility and take ownership of the 
improvement processes. In general, the workload of all employees is quite big. Being a 
small company comes with having many responsibilities aside from the ones that 
already come with your position. This overload of work is a drawback for volunteering 
on taking even more responsibilities like taking care of improvement processes.   
Therefore, the company would greatly benefit from prioritizing on the development of 
process innovation strategies, which would result in the improvement of employees’ 
==PAGE:32==
31 
 
performance and productivity, which translates into saving time and money (Hervas-
Oliver, 2014). As a matter of fact, as previously stated, innovating in processes is as 
important or even more that innovating in the product or technologies, as these 
improvements are harder to copy by competitors (Neely & Hii, 1998; Keeley et at., 
2013), and developing an organized and structured plan is fundamental to achieve a 
successful process innovation strategy (Hervas-Oliver et at., 2014)  
There is a strong and fast responding leadership, this allows to have a projected clear 
vision of the road ahead to follow to complete the project. The employees have a full 
understanding of their tasks at all times as they are assigned to them weekly during 
production meetings with the project manager and the rest of team. However, as it is 
only normal, unexpected events occur. When it happens, these events often are 
attended as a priority to be delt with before continuing to follow the designed plan. This 
switch of focus causes a tunnel-vision effect that prevents the company from keeping 
an overview on the rest of the important tasks that need to be fulfilled. Sometimes, 
these unexpected events turn out not to be an emergency even though they are treated 
like so. As stated by Power and Stanton (2014) spending time on analyzing the root-
cause of a problem can help saving money in the long run, which will benefit the budget 
for innovation. Therefore, there needs to be established a proper evaluation of 
priorities. Failing to do so also makes employees use time that could have been spent 
on completing their designated tasks that were carefully planned to meet the 
deadlines.  
In line with this previous weakness goes a lack of “learning from mistakes” culture. After 
a project is completed, it would be convenient to look back at what went wrong and 
what went right and document it so that it can be avoided or replicated in the future. 
While this practice has been previously used in the company, it is not always done for 
all projects. 
There is a weakness in the lab area in general, which is due to a lack of space and 
organization. There is also a lack of overview on the stock that is currently stored in the 
==PAGE:33==
32 
 
lab, however a solution for this is on the way, an ERP system to keep track of the stock 
and prevent over purchasing and give use to already in-house components rather than 
using different ones. A better organization and use of their resources would help 
employees to utilize their working hours in a more efficient way, saving time and money. 
The company has a strong team, with high expertise and knowledge on the sector. The 
employees are highly polyvalent, which is a valuable quality in a small company where 
there are some gaps to fill. A broad diversity of skills allows the company to fully utilize 
their employees in different areas without the need for hiring a new department. On the 
other hand, the fact of having employees changing tasks could negatively be affecting 
their focus and efficiency. In addition to this, the team, despite possessing a wide range 
of skills, all have an engineering background, which gives them a quite standardized 
way of thinking.  
This can be linked to the prior knowledge theory, people with different knowledge and 
experiences will find different opportunities related to what they have previously learnt 
(Shane, 2000). Having a multidisciplinary team could greatly benefit innovation as it 
would bring different perspectives and ideas (Buijs,1977; Hossain & Kauranen, 2016). 
However, a culture of employees’ involvement should also be implemented, in order to 
motivate and encourage employees which will help to stimulate their creativity (Scozzi 
et al., 2005; Van De Vrande et al., 2009). Another approach to scape this prior 
knowledge barrier when looking for innovative opportunities is to conduct proper 
research on the different markets, learn about customer needs and pains and have 
thorough understanding of the technology capabilities in order to identify potential 
entry points (Gruber et al., 2013).  
As a positive note, the company has obtained a good brand name, being trusted by their 
customers as the systems are consistently reliable. In addition, they have a solid and 
reliable base of suppliers, who provide quality products. This could be used to the 
company’s advantage for networking strategies. Either for further developing already 
existing relationships or to access new markets through new partnerships, having a 
==PAGE:34==
33 
 
strong brand name is beneficial for the company. Having a strong base like this, it would 
be fairly easy for the company to exploit this opportunity, by simple improvements on 
how they are presented to the world, for instance, making clear the company’s values 
and standing by them, as suggested by Keeley et al. (2013) or making their website more 
accessible and appealing to other industries.   
6.3. 
What? — Step 2: Analysis of opportunities  
The SWOT analysis in combination with the competitor analysis served to open up to a 
wide range of different possibilities that the company could pursue to expand their 
horizons and become more innovative.  
The first idea that will be analyzed comes from the weaknesses section, and it is the 
development of a method to optimize Rovsing’s project management process. The 
other two ideas that will be analyzed come from the opportunities section. The different 
opportunities that were discussed on this section can be divided into four categories: 
market 
expansion, 
business 
expansion, 
product 
expansion 
and 
networking/collaboration. After careful consideration, two of these ideas were deemed 
attractive enough to be further explored. The first one is mergers and acquisitions 
(M&As) inside the networking/collaborations category, and the second one is market 
expansion with a focus on three potentially interesting industries: electric vehicles, 
unmanned aerial vehicles and defense aircrafts. 
6.3.1. 
Current processes optimization 
Optimization of internal processes can be greatly beneficial for SMEs as it can help 
improve their capabilities and their and readiness to adapt to the constantly changing 
market requirements (Neely & Hii, 1998). This is translated into better business 
performance and competitive advantage (Luamba et al., 2021). 
For this reason, Rovsing should consider implementing strategies that focus on this 
area of innovation. In order to provide some guidelines on this matter an example a 
framework on project management optimization will be tailored for Rovsing’s 
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
consideration. According to the information obtained from the SWOT analysis the 
company struggles to keep a proper overview of the whole project plan whenever an 
unexpected event occurs that interferes with the designed plan. This previously 
explained tunnel vision effect switches the efforts into working on this new task without 
considering first if it actually should be treated as a priority. For this reason, a suggested 
framework for project management will be described below. This framework is a 
tailored combination of the Lean and Agile methods that adjusts better to Rovsing’s 
way of working.   
Step 1: Analysis of the current capabilities  
This step has already been performed for the innovation process. The SWOT analysis 
was conducted to identify the weaknesses and strengths and provide the company with 
useful information that can be used in order to improve their project management 
process.  
Step 2: Create map value stream with suggestions for improvement 
In this step all the activities for the project should be listed while keeping in mind during 
this process to identify opportunities to optimize each of them. For this task some tools 
such as kanban boards can be used to facilitate the process and have a clear overview. 
Step 3: Create a flow 
Once all the activities are listed a plan should be put in place to accomplish the project, 
setting up deadlines and assigning the activities to the employees. Contrary to the 
original methodology that suggests that employees assign tasks to themselves, for 
Rovsing’s it works best that project managers assign the tasks to each employee, and 
it is not deemed that this culture should be changed. Ideally, it should be more 
reinforced, and only allow project managers to assign tasks after having carefully 
considered the priority and which employee should take care of it. 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
35 
 
Step 4: Daily stand-up meetings 
Currently Rovsing has weekly meetings where the project manager and his team meet 
to discuss and assign the tasks for the week. However, having shorter daily meetings 
could benefit the process as delays or bottlenecks can be identified earlier, tasks can 
be reassigned or rescheduled accordingly, and all the team is aware of the project 
status at all times.    
Step 5: Pursuit perfection 
This has been identified as a weakness in the SWOT analysis, Rovsing lacks a “learning 
from previous mistakes” culture, which leads to making the same mistakes over again 
in different projects. Putting in place a strategy to identify not only the mistakes but also 
the accomplishments could benefit Rovsing to optimize their project management 
process.  
6.3.2. 
Mergers and acquisitions 
The term M&As refers to the agreement between two companies to become one. 
Depending on which method is used the result will be different, when there is a merge, 
both companies will be combined together resulting in a new company. If there is an 
acquisition, one company will buy the other one, and the second one will be absorbed 
into the first one. With this strategy, companies can gain access to the markets, 
technologies and customers that the other party already had (Sun Acquisitions, 2023). 
Similarly to networking, M&As can be done in two directions. Horizonal integrations 
consist of merging or acquiring a company that operates at the same level, by doing this 
the competition in the market is reduced (Hayes, 2024). Vertical integrations on the 
other hand, are done with companies that operate on a different level, which could 
result in the integration of some part of the production of the product (Hayes, 2024).  
M&As are often pursued to learn from good operating methods, diversify operations, 
enter new businesses or spread risks, among other motives (Chiu et al., 2022). During 
the workshop, Rovsing had a suggested approach to research on this opportunity which 
==PAGE:37==
36 
 
would be to acquire a small company in one of the ESA member countries, where they 
would be able to outsource part of the production development process at a cheaper 
cost than in Denmark, and that are an interesting match in terms of acquiring 
knowledge on their processes and their technology. Therefore, the research was 
focused on that direction. 
There are currently 22 member countries in ESA, in a first screening six countries were 
considered to be potentially interesting for Rovsing to look for a company to acquire. In 
order to identify them, those countries with a high GDP per capita were excluded from 
the list and those with the lowest were ranked from lowest to highest GDP (see figure 8 
left). After looking into the GDP, the next factor that was taken into account was the 
minimum wage. Taking those same six countries, a new rank was created from lowest 
to highest salary (see figure 8 center). However, since Rovsing employees’ profiles are 
mostly engineers, the average salary was also consulted as it might result in a more 
realistic approximation to the actual cost of employment (see figure 8 right). 
Looking into these numbers the top three countries where Rovsing could initiate their 
search for small companies to acquire are Romania, Poland and Greece as in those 
countries the production cost would be significantly lower than in Denmark. 
Considering that, at the time of writing this thesis, Denmark has a GDP of 68,9000$ 
positioning it as the 6th country with the highest GDP in Europe (Rao, 2024b), and the 
average wage is 42,0 €/h (Rao, 2024a).  
Figure 8 GDP per capita in the six selected European countries (left) Minimum monthly wage (center) Average 
hourly wage (right) 
Sources: Visual capitalista (Rao, 2024b) – (Statista, 2024) – Visual capitalista (Rao, 2024a) 
==PAGE:38==
37 
 
There are several factors to consider in order to find a good match in a cross-border 
M&A and increase the chances of success, for instance both companies should have 
compatible corporate cultures, and both of them should see significant benefits from 
the transaction (Chiu et al., 2022). Finding the right time and strategy for bidding is also 
an important factor to consider when acquiring a company. In fact, hostile bidding has 
actually been proved to have better results than other bidding types such as friendly or 
white knight (Cartwright & Schoenberg, 2006). In addition, an acquisition requires the 
investment of significant sums of money and time, the rule of thumb in order to 
formalize an acquisition of a company, is to buy at least 30% of their equity (Chiu et al. 
2022). Regarding the process, an acquisition can be divided in four stages: “planning 
stage, negotiation stage, execution stage, and integration stage” (Chiu et al. 2022). It 
can take companies up to five years to complete the process of integration and in a 
majority of cases the integration will not be completely successful even after that time 
(Galpin, 2008).  
As any kind of innovation, it does not come without risks. Despite being a valid 
approach to acquire knowledge from an external source, the long-term benefits of 
M&As are questionable (Cartwright & Schoenberg, 2006). Investing in M&As does not 
guarantee to add value to the company. What is more, the successful rate is only of 20% 
(Chiu et al., 2022). The most common reasons for failure in cross-borders M&As are 
poor culture compatibility and integration, and difficulty to retain the high-managerial 
employees from the acquired part (Cartwright & Schoenberg, 2006; Chiu et al., 2022). 
Other factors that might be affected by an acquisition process, are a drop in 
productivity as employees will feel a sense of uncertainty, and customers becoming 
restless as through the turbulent process of integration (Galpin, 2008). For this reason, 
the implementation of incremental changes during the integration part is important, as 
well as keeping a good leadership, by sending a senior manager from the buying 
company to the acquired one. Integration part is the most critical, any bad movements 
during this process can lead to bad results (Cartwright & Schoenberg).  
==PAGE:39==
38 
 
As a final remark, on the study conducted by M&As De Man & Duysters, G. (2005) on 
the impact of M&As on innovation, they concluded that the innovation levels after and 
M&A have a neutral or negative effect, they remain practically the same, but the 
expenses are reduced.  
6.3.3. 
Market expansion 
The last option to be analyzed is to target different markets where the technology 
currently accessible at Rovsing could be used without having to undergo major 
changes. During the brainstorm for the opportunity section of the SWOT analysis 
several ideas were brought to the table, and coincidentally many of them match with 
markets that the competitors are already following. This could indicate that there is 
easy access and compatibility for space industry companies. From all the 
opportunities suggested, Rovsing chose the three markets that they thought more 
interesting to do further research upon them. The three markets that have been 
analyzed are the electric vehicle (EV), the unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) also known 
as drones, and the aircraft defense industry.  
The tool that will be used for this analyze each of them is the market opportunity 
navigator (see appendix C). However, since the first step of identifying potential 
opportunities has already been done, the analysis will start from the second step, 
which focuses on evaluating the attractiveness of the market to decide whether it is a 
good opportunity to pursue or if it would present a risk to do so. 
==PAGE:40==
39 
 
Regarding the numbers on the market volume for all three options, both the global 
market and the European market have been considered to make sure they follow 
similar trends. All of them they show optimistic numbers, with a projected increase in 
the following decade (see image 5 & 6).  
Since the current market of Rovsing is majorly based in Europe those numbers will be 
analyzed with deeper care. At a first glance the market with the considerable biggest 
volume and projected growth is the electric vehicle. Defense aircrafts current market is 
also significantly big; however, the expected growth is the lowest of all. Lastly, the drone 
market is the smallest, but it is expected to steadily grow during the following decade. 
It is important to remark, however, that the electric vehicle market is expected to have 
the biggest growth in China (Statista, 2023b), which as market completely unknown to 
Rovsing. In Europe the leading country in the electrical vehicle market is Germany, with 
companies that are also important players, such as Volkswagen, BMW, Mercedes-Benz 
and Audi (Statista, 2023a). There is an increasing tendency in Europe, as the population 
seems to be growing interest towards this environmentally friendly mean of 
Figure 5 Global market size and expected growth 
Figure 6 European market size and expected growth 
==PAGE:41==
40 
 
transportation. In fact, the Netherlands and Norway are committed to incentivize this 
market with the goal of solely selling EV by 2030 (Deuten et al., 2020). Rovsing could 
find a place in this market as a provider of testing equipment for the EV, as they are 
subject to several performance tests, for instance the motor needs to pass thermal 
tests, vibration and shock test, noise emission and efficiency tests, for which 
specialized motor test equipment is used (Undale, 2023). The battery of the EV is also 
constantly subject to improvements to achieve the most efficient performance and 
reduce their cost to make it more accessible (Statista, 2023b) therefore, it needs testing 
(Undale, 2023). Rovsing has experience in the battery testing area as they have 
developed their own Battery Simulator system. In the case of the EV battery, the 
equipment needed is an inverter tester, to test the power, efficiency and reliability, as 
well as thermal chambers to test the temperatures reached by the battery, cycle testers 
to test the battery performance after being charged and discharged over time and 
impact testers (Undale, 2023). Being the electric vehicle the combination of the 
automotive industry and the electrical industry, it has to comply with the certifications 
for both industries, meaning that it requires both ISO and IEC standards. Just to 
mention a few, for performance testing the following homologations are offered by a 
competitor: ISO 12405, ISO 18243, ISO 15118, IEC 62660 (Dekra, n.d.-b). The list of 
homologations for the EV is extensive and intricate, which can be difficult to navigate 
without proper knowledge of the industry. In addition to this barrier, there is also the 
fact that currently Rovsing does not have any point of contact or business relationship 
with any of the European leader companies, on any company in general, in this industry. 
As for the UAV market, there are multiple applications for the UAV according to their 
size, from recreational use, photography, agriculture and, conveniently enough, military 
and defense use, being the latest the current leading market for UAV (Expert Market 
Research, 2023b). The reason for this being, they are a safer option for conducting 
combat operations without risking the safety of the military personnel and accessing 
difficult to reach or dangerous areas (Skyquest, 2024). They can also be used in 
surveillance or reconnaissance missions in a cost-effective, easy and agile way. 
==PAGE:42==
41 
 
However, this is presenting a hinder to military aircrafts, which growth is being affected 
by the increasing demand of UAV (Fortune Business Insight, 2024). The leading 
companies in the European UAV market according to Expert Market Research (2023a) 
include Northrop Grumman Corp. and BAE Systems Plc., which are not among Rovsing 
acquaintances, but other important players on the list like Thales S.A. and Airbus SE 
are recurrent customers for Rovsing. Additionally, Lockheed Martin Corp. and Boieng 
Co., two more leader companies, have also worked with Rovsing in previous projects. 
The testing for those UAVs used for military or defense purpose is crucial in order to 
understand their limitations, since their performance must be optimal to minimize risks 
and obtain accurate results (Biokinetics, 2024). Due to the rapid changing and 
improving of the UAVs, the testing equipment used also needs to be able to adapt 
quickly to the new technologies (Biokinetics, 2024). In addition, looking at competitors 
such as Applus laboratories or Dekra, in order to actually become a worthy competitor 
Rovsing might have to get certifications like EU 2019/945 which is a required standard 
for drone testing in Europe (Applus laboratories, n.d.; Dekra, n.d.-a). The types of testing 
performed to drones are broadly categorized among other in functionality, 
performance, environmental and safety (Biokinetics, 2024) and they can be performed 
indoors (in a lab) or outdoors (in flight mode). An interesting area of testing for Rovsing 
to explore would be on the performance category, such as the propulsion and motor 
testing equipment which can help to improve the UAV efficiency, such as achieving 
longer flight time, reduced vibration or increasing payload weight (Nagel, 2023).  
Lastly, the aircraft defense industry which, out of the three options, is projected to be 
the one with the less growth in the next decade. One of the reasons for this slow growth 
being, as mentioned before, the increased demand for UAV, which is a cost-effective 
and safer solution to conventional piloted aircrafts. Rovsing has recently initiated an 
approach to this industry and is working on some projects with the military but so far 
without leaving the space sector. Therefore, the same testing equipment for satellites 
is being manufactured for this project, and it is not presenting an opportunity to 
innovate on new solutions. The leader companies in this industry in Europe are Airbus 
==PAGE:43==
42 
 
SE, BAE Systems Plc., Leonardo S.p.A., Safran SA and Thales Group, which opens many 
doors for Rovsing into this industry, since two of the major players in the industry are 
already big Rovsing’s customers with successful results in every project, and a third 
one, is also a more recent current customer of Rovsing. Therefore, this industry might 
have the easiest access for Rovsing, regarding the customer barrier. However, when it 
comes to testing equipment, the layer of complexity grows considerably bigger, as 
defense aircrafts and all the subsystems are, on their own, complex pieces of 
machinery. The variety of tests that an aircraft must pass is wide, ranging from electrical 
and mechanical tests to radar and communications (National Instruments Corp., 
2023). Some of the solutions offered by competitors include data management, radio 
frequency signal testers, protocol solutions, and endurance. Reliability in testing 
defense aircrafts is crucial since the success of a mission greatly relies on the 
performance of the aircraft (LaVine, 2024). The certification needed for this industry is 
ISO 9001(LaVine, 2024) which is the same both for the aerospace and defense sector. 
Therefore, this presents an advantage for Rovsing since the company is already 
compliant with this standard. Similarly to the other industries analyzed, the aircraft 
systems are constantly evolving, and they require testing solutions that adapt to this 
ever-changing environment, obsolescence is a big challenge that companies working 
in this sector constantly face and it is especially critical in this highly demanding 
industry (Astronics Corporation. n.d.; National Instruments Corp., 2023). Some 
competitors, which are well aware of this situation have already implemented 
strategies to mitigate this obsolescence obstacle. In this sense, Rovsing would be in a 
slight disadvantage, since as mentioned previously, obsolescence is a challenge they 
are already facing in their sector, as they lack the capability to adapt quickly to the 
market changes. 
Considering the previous analysis, the market that would present the less risk to pursue 
would be the drone testing equipment market. The recommended strategy for this 
approach would be to initiate conversations with the two leading companies with 
whom Rovsing has an already stablished a solid business relationship. The objective of 
==PAGE:44==
43 
 
these conversations should be to understand in depth the test procedures for drones, 
which are their needs and pains regarding drone testing equipment, learning the areas 
where there is room for improvement or where there are not current solutions available 
in the market. With this information, Rovsing could develop innovative testing 
equipment for the drone industry that adapts to the specific requirements of the 
customers.  
6.3.4. Step 2.1: Selection of opportunities 
After having finalized this research on both opportunities that Rovsing considered more 
interesting, being the first one M&A and the second one market expansion. The 
conclusion is that the safest option to pursue by the company is market expansion on 
the drone industry. 
M&A seems to be the riskiest move, since it involves a lot of time and money invested. 
However, this big investment is very likely to not bring the desired results as most M&As 
fail in the long-term and the impact on innovation performance does not seem to be 
affected positively. Therefore, this option would be warmly recommended to not be 
further considered. 
This leaves the focus on the second option which is market expansion. As it was already 
determined from the research performed in the above section, the possible safest 
option to consider pursuing from the three analyzed is the UAV industry. Rovsing 
already has business relationships with two of the leader companies in this industry, 
since they also have business in the space industry and are customers of Rovsing. This 
could be an advantage to Rovsing, since they hold a good reputation with both 
customers, which could open the door to insightful conversations regarding the UAV 
industry and create an entry point to the market for Rovsing. Additionally, this market 
has a promising projected growth in the market in the following decade, and there are 
considerably fewer regulations that Rovsing would have to obtain.  
==PAGE:45==
44 
 
6.3.5. Step 3: Development of a plan 
The third step of this innovation strategy involves the development of a plan for its 
effective implementation. In this case, the company should determine, based on the 
prior analysis, which opportunities are worth pursuing. Alternatively, they may choose 
to explore other opportunities after careful consideration. It is important to note that 
the analysis and selection of opportunities presented in this thesis are intended solely 
as recommendations. It is ultimately Rovsing that must make an informed decision on 
this matter. 
Therefore, the company should be responsible for deciding and developing a plan 
according to their decision that fits their requirements and expectations. However, 
there are some guidelines on important factors that should be included in the plan.  For 
instance, if the company decides to pursue market expansion, this plan should include 
strategies such as initiating an approach to customers, to obtain valuable information 
such as pains and needs and to identify potential opportunities, it should also include 
an analysis of their technology readiness for the market and mitigation strategies to 
address the risks. Additionally, it should include a suitable timeline with milestones and 
a detailed financial plan for resource allocation. 
Additionally, in order to achieve the full potential of an innovation strategy the company 
should consider including more that one type of innovation in their plan, ideally 
focusing on internal process innovation. This will make the strategy harder to copy by 
other companies and give them a long-term competitive advantage. 
6.3.6. Step 4: Implementation and monitoring 
The last step of the process is to implement the plan designed in the previous stage by 
the company. The final recommendation for the company during this stage is to keep in 
mind the lean principle of seeking perfection, in order to optimize their resources and 
to identify areas of improvement. 
==PAGE:46==
45 
 
7. Discussion 
It was the impression from the conversation held during the SWOT analysis workshop 
that Rovsing’s idea of innovation is to make bold moves, such as exploring new market 
opportunities or participating in M&As, which are two options that have been analyzed 
in this thesis. Despite being aware of their internal weaknesses, like some of their 
internal processes or their documentation, as they were pointed out during the 
workshop, the innovation opportunities suggested did not consider tackling any of 
those aspects. On the contrary, most of the ideas that came out during the discussion, 
where opportunities that have to be pursued outside of the company. This mindset is 
not uncommon, as it matches with the previously mentioned study by Kettinger et al. 
(1997) that states that companies mostly strive for radical changes when tackling 
innovation, disregarding often other opportunities that require incremental changes, 
but can lead to big innovations. There is more to innovation than groundbreaking ideas 
and the development of new products. In fact, as presented by Keeley et al. (2013) 
product innovation is one of the weakest types of innovation, since it is relatively easy 
to be copied by competitors. In the book they defend that the best approach to 
innovation is a carefully designed strategy that combines the use of several types of 
innovation and is implemented following a well-organized plan.  
This does not mean, however, that Rovsing should completely dispose of their idea of 
pursuing new markets or outsourcing their production process. Those ideas could still 
be implemented together with other strategies that would make the company grow 
from within, such as the project management suggestion or a strategy to avoid 
obsolescence. Having a strong and solid base in the company before embarking on 
other ventures could have a big difference on the successful rate. As seen during the 
market analysis, there is a clear tendency on all the markets to constantly and quickly 
change, which presents a challenge for the companies developing the testing 
equipment, as they must grasp on those changes equally fast and adapt accordingly. 
Unfortunately, Rovsing, due to their small size and lack of resources, has difficulties 
keeping up with these changes at a faster pace than their competitors. For this reason, 
==PAGE:47==
46 
 
it is considered that in order to have higher chances of success when entering a new 
market, there should be a strategy in place to improve this weakness first. Otherwise, 
having to keep up with the changes of two different markets without the proper 
resources might become too big of a burden for an SME. 
As a further recommendation, if Rovsing would still like to pursue the idea of 
outsourcing parts of their production, there are other strategies that could be put in 
place. In the book Ten types of innovation by Keeley et al. (2013) they provide an 
example of a company which had outsourced their production to 50 different 
companies as part of their innovation strategy. In the book by Keeley et at. (2013) this is 
classified as a “structure” type of innovation. This proves the fact that M&A are not the 
only option when considering outsourcing production and could set the foundation to 
further research on other possibilities to pursue this idea.   
8. Conclusion 
This thesis explored the development of an innovation strategy for Rovsing through the 
creation of a framework that served as the basis to explore different tools and methods 
that helped on the implementation of this strategy.  
The SWOT analysis performed served to assess the current capabilities of the company 
and identify those areas where innovation could benefit the company, and three 
different potential opportunities were identified and analyzed.  
A tailored project management plan was developed by combining both the lean and 
agile methodologies and adjusting the steps to adapt to the company’s work culture. 
The objective of this strategy is to help the company to keep the overview of the project 
plan and prevent the tunnel vision effect that is sometimes experienced when 
unforeseen events occur while working on a project 
The option of M&A was explored as an opportunity to outsource parts of the product 
development at a lower price and acquire relevant knowledge and technologies from 
other companies. The three best fits to initiate a further search for good matches are 
==PAGE:48==
47 
 
Romania, Polonia and Greece as the three of them are ESA member countries and have 
the lowest GDP in Europe. However, this option implies great risks and investment, as 
the implementation stage of most acquisitions tends to prolong for several years and 
rarely succeed. 
Market expansion was the last opportunity analyzed, in this case the options were EV, 
AUV and defense aircrafts. From the research performed it was it was concluded that 
the UAV market has the most potential due to the current market volume and expected 
growth, the ongoing business relationships with the European leader companies and 
having less barriers of adoptions, such as the required ISO certifications in the market. 
However these conclusions should be taken as a recommendation, and the company 
should make an educated decision on which opportunities the consider worth 
pursuing. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
48 
 
References 
Adobe Communications Team. (2022, March 18). Beginner’s Guide to Agile Project 
Management. Abobe Experience Cloud blog. 
https://business.adobe.com/blog/basics/agile 
Applus laboratories. (n.d.). Open category Drone testing and certification. Applus 
Laboratories. https://www.appluslaboratories.com/global/en/what-we-do/service-
sheet/open-category-drone-testing-and-certification 
Astronics Corporation. (n.d.). Military Test Equipment. 
https://www.astronics.com/test-systems/military-test-equipment 
Biokinetics. (2024, March 27). What factors are assessed with drone testing. 
Biokinetics. https://biokinetics.com/what-factors-are-assessed-with-drone-
testing/#:~:text=Safety%20testing%20is%20a%20necessity,and%20comprehensive%
20risk%20mitigation%20strategies. 
Buijs, J. A. (1987). Innovation can be taught. Research policy, 16(6), 303-314. 
Cardinal, L. B. (2001). Technological innovation in the pharmaceutical industry: The 
use of organizational control in managing research and development. Organization 
science, 12(1), 19-36. 
Cartwright, S., & Schoenberg, R. (2006). Thirty years of mergers and acquisitions 
research: Recent advances and future opportunities. British journal of management, 
17(S1), S1-S5. 
Celestia. (2024, March 15). Celestia innovations lead the way in lunar 
communications. Celestia. https://celestia-tech.com/news/celestia-innovations-
lead-the-way-in-lunar-communications/ 
Cheong, C. W. H., She, L., Ma, L., Karim, S., Chan, L., Chong, P. L., Choong, P. W., Gan, 
C. C., Gultom, N. D., Homer, S. T., Hossain, S. M., Leong, K. Y., Nga, J., Piprani, A. Z., 
Poon, W. C., Singh, J., Tehseen, S., & Wong, E. M. L. (2024). Building a culture of 
==PAGE:50==
49 
 
innovation: Innovation 360°. Global Business and Organizational Excellence. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/joe.22255 
Churchill, N. C., & Lewis, V. L. (2002). The five stages of small business growth. 
Entrepreneurship: Critical Perspectives on Business and Management, 3, 83. 
De Man, A. P., & Duysters, G. (2005). Collaboration and innovation: a review of the 
effects of mergers, acquisitions and alliances on innovation. Technovation, 25(12), 
1377-1387. 
Dekra. (n.d.-a). Drones and unmanned aerial vehicle testing and certification. 
https://www.dekra.com/en/drones-and-unmanned-aerial-vehicle-testing-and-
certification/#accordion_Further%20Directives 
Dekra. (n.d.-b). Electric Vehicle testing. https://www.dekra.com/en/electric-vehicle-
testing/ 
Deuten, S., Vilchez, J. J. G., & Thiel, C. (2020). Analysis and testing of electric car 
incentive scenarios in the Netherlands and Norway. Technological Forecasting and 
Social Change, 151, 119847. 
Eiffage Énergie Systèmes. (n.d.). Industries du futur. Clemessy. 
https://www.clemessy.com/industries-du-futur 
Expert Market Research. (2023a). Europe Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) market 
report and Forecast 2024-2032. 
https://www.expertmarketresearch.com/reports/europe-unmanned-aerial-vehicle-
uav-market 
Expert Market Research. (2023b). Global Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) Market Size 
https://www.expertmarketresearch.com/reports/unmanned-aerial-vehicle-uav-
market 
Fortune Business Insight. (2024). Military Aircraft Market Size (No. FBI102771). 
https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/military-aircraft-market-102771 
==PAGE:51==
50 
 
Galpin, T. (2008). From the deal world to the real world: maximizing M&A value after 
the deal is done. Business Strategy Series, 9(2), 57–64. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/17515630810857021 
Garg, S. (2020, April 12). Benefits of agile methodology. 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/benefits-agile-methodology-saransh-garg/ 
Gruber, M., MacMillan, I. C., & Thompson, J. D. (2013). Escaping the prior knowledge 
corridor: What shapes the number and variety of market opportunities identified 
before market entry of technology start-ups? Organization Science, 24(1), 280–300. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1110.0721 
Hervas-Oliver, J. L., Sempere-Ripoll, F., & Boronat-Moll, C. (2014). Process innovation 
strategy in SMEs, organizational innovation and performance: A misleading debate?. 
Small business economics, 43, 873-886. 
Hoffman, K., Parejo, M., Bessant, J., & Perren, L. (1998). Small firms, R&D, technology 
and innovation in the UK: a literature review. Technovation, 18(1), 39-55. 
Hossain, M., & Kauranen, I. (2016). Open innovation in SMEs: a systematic literature 
review. Journal of Strategy and Management, 9(1), 58–73. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/jsma-08-2014-0072  
Hussain, T. (2024, January 17). Incremental and Radical Innovation: the Critical 
Difference. Innovate Now. https://innovatenow.app/incremental-and-radical-
innovation-the-critical-difference/ 
Hayes, A. (2024, February 20). Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A): Types, Structures, 
Valuations. Investopedia. 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/mergersandacquisitions.asp#:~:text=The%2
0terms%20%22mergers%22%20and%20%22,banner%20of%20one%20corporate%2
0name. 
==PAGE:52==
51 
 
Indeed Editorial Team. (2023, January 27). The 6 Agile Methodology Steps for Project 
Management. Indeed. https://uk.indeed.com/career-advice/career-
development/agile-methodology-steps 
Innovation360 Group. (2020a, July 12). Our story - Innovation360. Innovation360. 
https://innovation360.com/about/our-story/ 
Innovation360 Group. (2020b, October 9). Innovation Management System | Business 
Model Innovation. Innovation360. https://innovation360.com/innovation-analytics/ 
National Instruments Corp. (2023, February 20). Defense aircraft. 
https://www.ni.com/en/solutions/aerospace-defense/aircraft.html 
Neely, A., & Hii, J. (1998). Innovation and business performance: a literature review. 
The Judge Institute of Management Studies, University of Cambridge, 1, 57. 
Keeley, L., Pikkel, R., Quinn, B., & Walters, H. (2013). Ten types of innovation: the 
discipline of building breakthroughs [E-book]. Wiley. 
Kettinger, W. J., Teng, J. T. C., & Guha, S. (1997). Business Process Change: A study of 
Methodologies, techniques, and tools. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 
21(1), 55. https://doi.org/10.2307/249742 
Krasteva, I. (n.d.). The 5 lean principles: Reduce waste and drive growth. 
Businessmap. https://businessmap.io/lean-management/implementing-lean-
principles#:~:text=The%20five%20principles%20of%20Lean,)%2C%20developed%2
0by%20Taiichi%20Ohno. 
LaVine, D. (2024, April 18). Aerospace Test Systems | Defense Test Systems. Viewpoint 
Systems. https://www.viewpointusa.com/test-measurement/aerospace-defense-
test-systems/ 
Lee, S., Park, G., Yoon, B., & Park, J. (2010). Open innovation in SMEs—An 
intermediated network model. Research Policy, 39(2), 290–300. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2009.12.009  
==PAGE:53==
52 
 
Luamba, D. S., Blye, M. L., Mwema, I. E. M., Williams, I. A., James, K., & Chagadama, J. 
(2021). The benefits of innovation for small businesses. International Journal of 
Business & Management Research, 9(4), 425–432. 
https://doi.org/10.37391/ijbmr.090405 
Nagel, L. (2023, September 9). How a thrust stand can help improve drone 
performance. Tyto Robotics. https://www.tytorobotics.com/blogs/articles/why-test-
your-drones-motors-and-propellers 
Naydenov, P. (n.d.). 7 Wastes of Lean: How to Optimize Resources. BusinessMap. 
https://businessmap.io/lean-management/value-waste/7-wastes-of-lean 
Power, B., & Stanton, S. (2014, September 24). How to prioritize your innovation 
Budget. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2014/09/how-to-prioritize-your-
innovation-budget 
Rao, P. (2024a, April 4). Mapped: Average Wages Across Europe. Visual Capitalista. 
https://www.visualcapitalist.com/average-wages-across-europe-map/ 
Rao, P. (2024b, May 6). Mapped: Europe’s GDP per capita, by country. Visual 
Capitalista. https://www.visualcapitalist.com/mapped-europes-gdp-per-capita-by-
country/ 
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. 
Organization Science, 11(4), 448–469. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.11.4.448.14602 
Sun Acquisitions. (2023, November 15). M&A and Innovation: Exploring the power of 
mergers and acquisitions in driving technological advancements. 
https://sunacquisitions.com/blog/ma-and-innovation-exploring-the-power-of-
mergers-and-acquisitions-in-driving-technological-
advancements/#:~:text=Mergers%20and%20acquisitions%20often%20involve,and%
20opportunities%20of%20different%20needs. 
Skyquest. (2024). Global military aircraft market. In Skyquest (SQMIG20A2185). 
https://www.skyquestt.com/report/military-aircraft-
==PAGE:54==
53 
 
market#:~:text=Military%20Aircraft%20Market%20Insights,period%20(2024%2D2031
). 
Statista. (2023a, October). Electric Vehicles - Europe | Market Data & Analysis. 
https://www.statista.com/outlook/mmo/electric-vehicles/europe 
Statista. (2023b, October). Electric vehicles - Worldwide | Market Data & Analysis. 
https://www.statista.com/outlook/mmo/electric-vehicles/worldwide 
Statista. (2024, July 4). Monthly minimum wage rates in European countries in the first 
half of 2024. https://www.statista.com/statistics/1450177/monthly-minimum-wage-
rate-european-countries/ 
The European Space Agency. (n.d.-a). About the General Support Technology 
Programme (GSTP). Retrieved May 15, 2024, from 
https://www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/Space_Engineering_Technology/Shaping_the_
Future/About_the_General_Support_Technology_Programme_GSTP 
The European Space Agency. (n.d.-b). Industrial policy and geographical distribution. 
Retrieved May 18, 2024, from 
https://www.esa.int/About_Us/Business_with_ESA/How_to_do/Industrial_policy_and
_geographical_distribution 
Toneva, M. (n.d.). What Is Continuous Improvement? The Complete Guide. 
BusinessMap. https://businessmap.io/lean-management/improvement/what-is-
continuous-improvement 
Scozzi, B., Garavelli, C., & Crowston, K. (2005). Methods for modeling and supporting 
innovation processes in SMEs. European Journal of Innovation Management, 8(1), 
120–137. https://doi.org/10.1108/14601060510578619 
Undale, R. (2023, March 28). Electric Vehicle testing equipment - The key to ensuring 
safety and efficiency. EVreporter. https://evreporter.com/ev-testing-equipment-the-
key-to-ensuring-safety-and-
efficiency/#:~:text=EV%20Motor%20Testing%20Equipment&text=One%20of%20the
==PAGE:55==
54 
 
%20most%20important%20is%20the%20dynamometer%20test.,test%20equipment
%20is%20thermal%20testing. 
Van De Vrande, V. V., De Jong, J. P., Vanhaverbeke, W., & De Rochemont, M. M. (2009). 
Open innovation in SMEs: Trends, motives and management challenges. 
Technovation, 29(6–7), 423–437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2008.10.001  
 
