==PAGE:1==
Embedding Resilience in Modelling and
Analysis of Sustainable Transportation
Modes; Case Study of Electric Mobility
Spring 2024
Master Thesis
Sasha Mantel - s222742
July 31, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In the effort to decarbonise transportation, the transition to electric mobility has been at the heart of the
mobility strategy for governments and international agencies. But this rapid expansion of a multidimensional,
complex system comes with challenges. This thesis aims to approach electric mobility as an ecosystem, con-
sidering all the components necessary for its development and operation. Then to perform a risk analysis,
based on thorough literature research and supported by interviews from relevant stakeholders of the sector.
It highlighted risk dynamics linked to a politicized transition driven by government ambitions, and specific
challenges within uncertainty and assumptions, purchasing barriers, communication, stakeholder multiplicity,
supply chain complexity and sustainable sourcing. This analysis lead to a second contribution; an assessment
of the existing research, frameworks, projects, and decision-making tools created around urban resilience. It
required establishing what are the essential needs for a resilience tool tailored for such an ecosystem, followed
by the creation of an exhaustive list of criteria. Four tools has been assessed, highlighting some consequent
gaps in decision-making support for local governments to enhance electric mobility resilience, and resulted in
the proposition of a set of functions and parameters recommendations for the future creation of a resilience
tool. The results of this study provide a comprehensive framework and resources to further assess risk areas
and threats within the electric mobility ecosystem. Additionally, they propose a groundwork for developing
a functional tool specifically designed to streamline the evaluation and monitoring of the resilience of electric
mobility at the city level.
1
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis was prepared at the department of Technology, Management and Economics at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree in Transport
& Logistics.
Acknowledgement
I would like to acknowledge and thank both my supervisors Daphne Tuncer, and Anders Fjendbo Jensen,
for their support throughout the thesis. Their guidance and advice kept me on track and helped me understand
and tackle the different challenges. I would also like to thank the 5 interviewees who took the time to share
their expertise and points of view for the study. Further, I want to thank Mathilde Ferrari and Victor Schmitt
for proofreading my work with a critical eye.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Risk Cartography
7
1.1
Introduction and definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.1
Define the electric mobility ecosystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.2
Scope of research for the literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.3
Risk categorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.4
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Results and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.1
Final Categorization for the Risk Cartography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.2
Risk cartography reading through interviews
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2
Frameworks and tools for resilience
22
2.1
Definition of resilience, and setting in the context of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.1.1
Challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.1.2
Context and progress on resilience in cities, and on transport systems
. . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.1
Constructing a Criteria Grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.2
Assesment of existing tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.3
Towards a new tool adapted to emerging transportation ecosystem and electric mobility .
25
2.3
Results and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3.1
Criteria Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3.2
Tool assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.3.3
Proposition of a functional tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3
Conclusion
35
4
Appendix
36
3
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
1
Structure of the electric mobility ecosystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Final Categorization for the Risk Cartography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Share of the global market with policy coverage, 2022
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
EV adoption in Australia (orange) in comparison with the diffusion of innovations curve (purple)
17
5
EV Market Typology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Forecast of global Supply-Demand balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7
Overview of matrix construction with the event cycle in the horizontal direction and system
domains listed vertically . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
8
Tool for resilience: features and keywords
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
9
Generic Type of function for modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
10
Tools distributed in the features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
11
Risk Reduction Planning and Monitoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
12
Example of a qualitative resilience profile in the City Resilience Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
List of Tables
1
Interview respondents: presentation and characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Identified Risks in the category People Centric
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Identified Risks in the category EVs market stability and growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Identified Risks in the category Sovereignty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Identified Risks in the category Supply Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6
Identified Risks in the category Forecast & Uncertainty
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7
Identified Risks in the category Smart & Connected Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
8
Identified Risks in the category Consumer perception & Confidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
9
Identified Risks in the category Technology & Innovation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
10
Identified Risks in the category Environment and natural resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
11
Essential criteria identified for a resilience strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
12
Visual summary of the tool assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
13
Functional tool for resilience: function recommendation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:6==
Introduction
The development and introduction of sustainable transport modes in cities is at the heart of the transition
to a more sustainable way of living, considering the significant carbon footprint of transportation. As stated by
the 11th Sustainable Development Goal (SDG), there is a need to “Make cities and human settlements inclusive,
safe, resilient and sustainable”. The European Commission Mobility Strategy (2020) points out the necessity of
making our transport system sustainable and reducing its emissions, while also highlighting the need for it to
be truly resilient against future crises.
Probably one of the main challenges of this transition is the electrification of the car fleet, as highlighted by
the first flagship of this strategy; “Boosting the uptake of zero-emission vehicles, renewable & low-carbon fuels
and related infrastructure”. Electric Vehicles (EVs) are the most advanced and massively adopted technology
to replace Internal combustion engine (ICE) in the market today. The first waves of early adopters emerges
in the 2010s, followed by mass adoption, with an increase in car sales share from less than 1% in 2015 to
18% in 2023 for Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV) and Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV), according to
IEA. This strategy translates into practical measures : the ban on the sale of any new vehicle with Internal
Combustion Engine (ICE) in 2035 in Europe and several states of the US, along with transition policies and
incentives for the purchase of electric cars. Currently the sales trend is in favour of the plug-in hybrid market
; the first quarter of 2024, the share of BEV sale has decreased while the PHEV got a boost with an increase
of 7,5% in the sales [1]. There is therefore a need to develop and introduce new mobility services. But this
ongoing transition in mobility is happening in a particular and unstable context of crises and rapid changes.
In this context, it is necessary to be aware of the risks associated with the development of electric mobility. It
is an ecosystem that relies on relatively new and fast-evolving technologies and innovations, a multiplicity of
stakeholders, substantial material requirement including critical materials, and major investments in terms of
infrastructure and development. As the electric transition in the car industry began more than a decade ago,
drawbacks and arising risks has already been observed. For instance, overestimated sales forecasts, abandoned
charging networks that were not profitable, bottleneck in the charging station installation development at the
level of the connection to the distribution network, interoperability challenges and impact of electric mobility
on the electric grid.
The advantages of considering electric mobility as a global ecosystem is too link its multiple components and
their needs, which allows to embed the context of risks of diverse nature. The capacity of the system to face,
resist and adapt to disaster and disruption is defined as resilience. If we want to build services that provide
the expected sustainability impact but while being resilient to risks, one approach is to define resilience as a
constraint to these developments. It requires two steps; first to determine the risks for electric mobility at the
ecosystem level, then determine factors of resilience. This thesis brings 3 contributions to this discussion. It
provides a cartography of the existing and potential risks surrounding the electric mobility ecosystem. Then it
defines the resilience criterion, needed at the scale of the city, to mitigate these risks, and look into available
frameworks and tools to address them. Finally, it provides recommendations to create a new tool for the re-
silience of the electric mobility ecosystem, adapted to its challenges and needs.
Part 1 : Risk Cartography
The groundwork to create resilient ecosystems for electric mobility services is to identify and define the
different risks that may occur. The methodology consists of a review of research papers, official reports and
industrials journals, in order to identify potential areas of risks. It is followed by a classification and clustering
of the various risks identified, and resulted in 33 risks grouped into 9 areas : people-centric, EV market stability
and growth, sovereignty, supply chain, forecast and uncertainty, smart and connected infrastructure, consumer
perception and confidence, technology and innovation, and finally, environment and natural resources.
To further investigate the criticality of the risks and the current measures in place within the ecosystem,
the review is followed by interviews with several stakeholder representatives. We focus on 4 specific areas out
of the 9 for the interview process, selected for their relevance and as they best fitted the interviewees domain
of expertise. These interviews highlighted different criticality for each risks, and the way they are currently
mitigated into the stakeholders’ activities (projects, research or planning strategy). The analysis also crosses
the interviews findings with technical literature and quantitative surveys, to compare the opinion from the
stakeholders and the current research on the different topics.
Part 2: Frameworks and tools for resilience
In a second steps the cartography of risk must be translated into resilience factors. The narrower framework
5
==PAGE:7==
of the city has been chosen in this study to create those criterion. The analysis also relies on a literature review
on resilience. This review specifically focuses on the resilience of transportation networks and systems, as well
as resilience applied to multidimensional and multiple-stakeholder systems.
The result is a criteria table that encompasses the different components that needs to be addressed when
considering the resilience of a city towards the rapid development of electric mobility. These criterion are used
to compare and evaluate several frameworks and tools developed by public institutions and research, aimed
to support decision-makers and organizations in the development of electromobility. The evaluated tools are
chosen so that we have a broad overview of what is available. They have in common to aim at a relatively
holistic approach of the resilience of the system they are assessing, while each tackling the problem with a
different angle; the stakeholder collaboration, the infrastructure, or specific type of risks. This tool evaluation
can serve as an initial step in identifying the needs for developing city resilience in the context of the rapid
growth of electric mobility. It shows a lacks for adapted and specific tools towards transportation ecosystem.
Therefore, a proposition of the first steps for a functional model to assess, monitor and prepare is elaborated
at the end of this study.
As shown in the analysis, addressing resilience of a multi-dimensional and complex system is still a rather new
approach. But it is necessary to look at these systems holistically, to be able to strengthen their capacity to
absorb and adapt in the face of crises, whether they arise as sudden shock or long-term, increasing stress or
disruption.
6
==PAGE:8==
1
Risk Cartography
1.1
Introduction and definitions
A risk can be defined as a hazard, arising from a natural or anthropogenic event, that has a probability
to happen and to impact one or several assets. The term widely used today in the context of risk assessment
is disaster risk, where disaster refers to a disruptive event from which a community can not recover alone.
Therefore disaster risk, as defined by the UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) is The potential
loss of life, injury, or destroyed or damaged assets which could occur to a system, society or a community in
a specific period of time, determined probabilistically as a function of hazard, exposure, vulnerability and capacity.
Several dimensions characterize a risk and are relevant when assessing it. They are highlighted in the above
definition, and the one of the Urban Risk Assessment (URA) report from the World Bank [2]. The first is the
description of the event at the origin of the loss. Then the occurrence of this event in the past, as well as the
probability to occur. A risk assessment also looks at the assets potentially affected, and the type of impact. It
can vary from material and financial assets to human lives. Finally, each risk exists in a specific geographic and
time scale. These dimensions can be measured and quantified in specific cases. This is often the case for known,
anticipated natural disasters, or foreseeable, seasonal health risks, and are studied and monitored mainly in crit-
ical areas [3]. Some risks can also be identified, but without reliable past events (new risk, or quantitative data
to estimate their impact or probability of occurrence. Each of these dimensions can be difficult to specify and
assess. As the URA comments, The definition of disaster risk reflects the concept of disasters as the outcome of
continuously present conditions of risk. Disaster risk comprises different types of potential losses that are often
difficult to quantify. Nevertheless, with knowledge of the prevailing hazards and the patterns of population and
socioeconomic development, disaster risks can be assessed and mapped, in broad terms at least.. This strategy
is called Disaster risk assessment, and paves the way to risk management and reduction.
Electric mobility, as the tip of the spear of the energy transition and a main element of the European
mobility strategy, bears significant stakes, relies on heavy investments, multiple stakeholders, and high demand
for material and infrastructure. There are multiple studies regarding a specific risk or specific assets linked to
electric mobility. For instance, the capacity of the electrical grid to absorb the demand increase is linked to the
development of this new mode [4], or the impact of different business models and technology adopted for the
public charging infrastructure. The life cycle of the battery, which represents up to 40% of the average price of
an electric vehicle, and is built from several critical materials, also raises concerns and is the subject of specific
reports edited by organizations such as McKinsey [5] or The Global Battery Alliance [6], or academic papers
such as Key Challenges and Opportunities for Recycling Electric Vehicle Battery Materials from A.Beaudet &
Al. [7]. However, there is a gap between specific studies and global risk assessment frameworks developed by
international public and private institutions. There is a lack of comprehensive material that addresses electric
mobility as an ecosystem and systematically examines the potential risks that could impact it.
This first
contribution proposes a methodology for a global approach to the different risks and their possible impacts.
This methodology is used on a broad literature review, to develop a risk cartography. Then it explores the
criticality and the mitigation already in place for those identified risks through insights from the ecosystem.
1.2
Methodology
The methodology for this risk cartography relies on 2 main intakes, literature review and structured inter-
views. To undertake comprehensive research, it defines the ecosystem being analyzed (electric mobility) and
outlines the scope of research for identifying potential risks. Finally, the risks are categorized, which allows for
better understanding and future use of the results.
1.2.1
Define the electric mobility ecosystem
Mapping the ecosystem is a preliminary work to pinpoint possible disturbances and their potential impacts,
without overlooking essential parts of the ecosystem or interdependencies that could cause chain reactions.
This enables a more effective and targeted approach to risk management. Electric mobility encompasses various
components that have been categorized into: Stakeholders, Assets, Flows, and Other Structural Features. Below
are detailed the different elements. Figure 1 has been created to illustrate the structure of the ecosystem.
Stakeholders
3 different categories of stakeholders are identified :
7
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1: Structure of the electric mobility ecosystem
• Organizations : Public and private organizations must be taken into account; energy-related, i.e. elec-
tricity production distribution network operators; related to mobility planning and in charge of mobility
development; involved in car distribution, servicing, and maintenance; involved in the charging infrastruc-
ture; managing public amenities with car parks; or finally from industry sectors that have incorporated
electric mobility into their development strategies (logistics, tourism, etc.)
• Individuals: EV owners, potential consumers, and the remaining population are all part of the ecosystem
but interact differently with policies, infrastructure, and time scales. A telling example is the relation-
ship between individuals and the available recharging infrastructure. EV owners are direct users of the
infrastructure; therefore, they are dependent on its proper functioning, pay for the service, and their charg-
ing habits directly influence the infrastructure. Potential consumers are individuals who might consider
buying EVs. Their decision is highly influenced by the current and future development of a robust and
reliable infrastructure. The capacity of the grid to absorb the impact of electric mobility shortly depends
on the behavior of potential buyers. Finally, the remaining population refers to all individuals who are
not direct or potential users of the infrastructure. Their interaction with it is indirect, but they must
still be considered in urban planning and the location of the charging station in public spaces. Moreover,
public charging infrastructure is heavily subsidized by public funds and relies on political decisions that
need public support. Therefore, the infrastructure depends on a positive image of electric mobility and a
population that supports policies favoring the continuous development of the ecosystem.
• Communities: EVs user associations, neighbourhoods.
Assets
• Physical Assets: Public and private charging infrastructure, the electric fleet which encompasses in-
dividual vehicles and professional fleets, the specific technology like battery technology, the renewable
energy sources and production sites, the EVs production sites, and the maintenance and service centers.
• Intellectual Assets: EV-related patents, charging technology, algorithms for battery management and
charging station management, energy optimization processes, software to operate the car, data linked to
EVs utilization and customer behavior, approvals and certification and training programs (technical, for
8
==PAGE:10==
decision-making and EV-adoption and awareness campaigns).
Flows
Flows are essential elements of the ecosystem as they refer to the different exchanges, tangible and
intangible, between the different assets and stakeholders. Most of them are necessary for the good functioning
and development of the system, and that’s why an efficient way to identify risks is to assess flow weaknesses
and possible causes for a flow reduction or even shutdown.
• Information: Data exchange, communication channels, knowledge transfer and sharing.
• Financial Flows: Investments, revenue streams, financial transactions. Ex: financial investments in
infrastructure, investment in research for battery cells
• Material Flows: Supply chains, logistics, resource distribution
Other Structural Features
This section lists the elements of the ecosystem that are not directly stake-
holders, assets, or flows but play an essential part in the structuring and development of the assets, and the
interaction between the stakeholders.
• Interactions and Relationships: How stakeholders are communicating with one another, their com-
munication channels as well as oral and written partnerships.
• Policies and Regulations: They can structure the ecosystem. First, operationally, by setting the role
of each stakeholder, infrastructure standards, constrain prices and grant financial aids. But also in its
development, with short and long-term development strategies, target in the number of cars and charging
points, regulations on public parking equipment and new buildings, and financial incentives to buy EVs.
• Value Propositions: Electric mobility is considered a dynamic and growing field, with an environmental
goal to replace more polluting modes of transportation. The development of the ecosystem relies on new
initiatives and ideas to keep the market dynamic and attractive, to attract new types of users, and to
identify new types of use. For instance, smart charging, V2G, and car-sharing platforms are innovations
incorporated into the ecosystem as they have an impact on EVs image, sales, and public acceptance.
• Processes and Activities: It relates to all the operational processes from raw material extraction,
manufacturing, and assembly, to marketing and sales of the products (vehicles, charging stations and
smart charging solutions...), and all the strategic activities: Planning, research and development of the
infrastructure.
This category is an important part of the ecosystem and relies mainly on knowledge
sharing, people experience and well-documented processes.
1.2.2
Scope of research for the literature review
The literature review aims at a broad risk identification. Are taken into account risks linked to acute and
sudden disruption, such as crises and natural disasters, as well as continuous and escalating disturbance that
could lead to unstable, unwanted situations. The identification of a risk comes with the identification of the
potential elements of the ecosystem impacted. This part does not consider a specific geographic scope; the
ecosystem is considered as a whole, to encompass cross-border issues, worldwide dangerous trends, or cascading
consequences of a potential event that could have an impact on other parts of the world. Electric mobility is an
extremely globalized sector, and it is important to consider the issues of sovereignty and geopolitical influence,
which can have a powerful impact.
The sources for the literature research are diverse. It includes academic articles, mainly with a strong pres-
ence of electrical and network, sociology and behavior analysis, supply chain, and geopolitical research. They
analyze part of the ecosystem, or all of it from a specific angle. Then, industry journals, written by experts
in the industry analyze current trends and estimate future ones. Some articles directly pinpoint a risk or an
issue, and aim at assessing their impact. Others follow a different structure but identify through the analysis,
obstacles or potential undesired events, that are identified as a cause of a risk for this study. It also includes
articles from traditional media. While these may be less scientifically rigorous, they provide valuable insights
as they often reflect the commonly perceived risks by the general population. Comparing these perceptions
with the actual risks studied by industry experts and researchers offers an interesting perspective. Finally, the
bibliography includes files and reports from various official institutions (governments, development agencies,
9
==PAGE:11==
intergovernmental agencies, ...). Refer to the bibliography for more details. 4.
The review resulted in a total of 48 pre-identified risks.
1.2.3
Risk categorization
Risk categorization is essential in risk management, and allows for an efficient risk ranking to perform disas-
ter reduction. According to Morgan & Al. (2000)([8]), the complexity of risk allows for numerous categorization
alternatives, but the choice must be motivated by the objective behind categorization. Additionally, the possi-
bility of overlapping between the categories has to be taken into account. The risks need to be grouped into a
manageable number of categories, and they suggest testing several categorization methods as the categorization
system chosen will have a significant impact on the cognitive frames used later (on risk ranking for instance).
To come up with a relevant categorization, 3 methods were considered:
• To group them by assets potentially impacted
• To group them by initiating events, or sources
• To associate several keywords to each of them and consider each keyword as a potential category
The first and second methods are classical categorization, but while trying those alternatives, several issues
arise. Classifying by assets creates a lot of overlapping, as some risks are very broad and appear in 2 or more
categories. Several of the risks identified lack a clear definition of the assets impacted. In addition, the power
of the potential impact of different risks for one asset can be very unbalanced.
Classifying by sources also raises structural issues, as the sources can be very multiple, and difficult to single
out when the risk-related events are global, and on a long-term scale. A good example is the risk of a modal
shift from public transport to electric mobility: this situation would be the consequences of a complex mix of
processes in social behavior, lack of a reliable and attractive public transport system, misleading communication
on the challenges of electric mobility in the ecological transition, ... finally, the complexity of the events at stake
involved often several layers, which lead to redundancy within the category.
The last categorization method gives better flexibility in the final number of categories, and the distribution
of the risks. The idea is 1. to assign several keywords to each pre-identified risk, 2. to create a category with
each of the keywords, grouping all the risks tagged with the keyword, 3. to extract a subset of categories that
fulfills 5 requirements: almost none or no risk present in 2 different categories (no overlap), coherence inside
a category, not too much variability on category size, a manageable number of category, and all pre-identified
risk included in the subset. Finally, within the category some pre-identified risks are merged as they are very
similar, making the results more synthetic and readable.
1.2.4
Interviews
Scope and field research
The interview goal is to complete and challenge the result of the literature
review. Because of time and resource constraints, specific categories were targeted in the search for potential
interviewees.
The requirements for the search of candidates are global or partial expertise in the targeted
categories, with enough experience to have a critical point of view on the risk identified, and English or French
speakers.
Structure
The interviews last 45 minutes and are structured the following way:
• Introduction to the project
• Introduction of the interviewee: Their role and responsibilities, their position, their field of expertise
towards the development of electric mobility, the different stakeholders they are interacting with, and
what type of partnership or relationship. The objective is to situate them in the ecosystem defined before.
• Discussion on 3 to 5 identified risks linked to the field of expertise. The discussion is open but aims at
answering one or several of the following questions :
– According to [the interviewee], do you recognize this as a threat to the ecosystem?
– Could you assess its probability to occur?
10
==PAGE:12==
– Could you assess its impact?
– Is this risk taken into account in your current work, and if so, to what extent: identified, evaluated,
monitored, part of a risk reduction strategy, or a risk mitigation process?
– How is accountability distributed among these stakeholders in managing potential risks and chal-
lenges?
• Unaddressed Risks: In this open-discussion segment of the interview, the interviewee can identify any
additional challenges or potential risks that were not mentioned earlier. This stage aims to ensure that
the literature review has not overlooked any crucial aspects of the ecosystem.
An example of an interview document can be found in the appendix (4)
Presentation of sectors and expertise
In total 5 interviews have been conducted during the study. The
diversity of the respondent resides in their field of expertise, location, years of experience, and in the type of
organization they work for (public or private, for commercial or public interest purposes). They are listed in
Table 1.
ID
Organization Type
Location
Role
R1
Transport and logistics company
offering
global
transport
and
warehousing services worldwide
Michigan, US
General Manager at the Electrification & Mo-
bility Competence Center
R2
Transport and logistics company
offering
global
transport
and
warehousing services worldwide
Michigan, US
Vice President of Automotive Key Accounts
R3
Technical University,
Department of Technology,
Management and Economics
Denmark
PhD in Human Behaviour and Transportation
Science: transport technology adoption study
on electric mobility
R4
Technical University,
Department of Wind and Energy
Systems
Denmark
Postdoc, research on renewable energy usage
for EVs, the impact of EVs on the electric net-
work
R5
Public Environment and Energy
Management Agency
France
Alternative Fuels Engineer in the Transport &
Mobility Department
Table 1: Interview respondents: presentation and characteristics
1.3
Results and analysis
The section is structured as follows: the risk cartography is the final result after the identification and
categorization, and the modifications from the interview process. Then, the interview intakes are discussed and
analyzed, as well as cross-referenced with several resources.
1.3.1
Final Categorization for the Risk Cartography
The categorization results in 33 identified risks, distributed in the 8 categories below.
Figure 2: Final Categorization for the Risk Cartography
11
==PAGE:13==
Each of these categories is detailed in the next sections.
People Centric (Health, work, inequalities, ownership..)
The development of electric mobility involves profound social consequences in several aspects. Access to
mobility and associated infrastructure will be affected. Like the ecological transition as a whole, there is a
need to ensure that the EV transition incorporates a dimension of social justice. In addition, economic and
technological change will have a direct impact on individuals through the work and health prism.
1. Access Disparities
Rising inequalities towards access to EVs and mobility between
socio-economic classes (inequalities) [9]
2. Territorial Disparities
Rising territorial inequalities towards access to a reliable charging
infrastructure (inequalities) [9]
3. Right to repair
EVs owners losing their “right-to-repair” their vehicle because of
compliance, privacy, or lack of certified dealership [9]
4. Industry Reshape (Work)
Complete reshape of the automotive industry (+energy industry),
leading to plant relocation and shift in companies’ skill require-
ments [9]
5. Safety
Increased possible damages for occupants during car crashes due
to heavier vehicles, electrolyte leakage, chemical reactions [10] [11]
Table 2: Identified Risks in the category People Centric
EVs market stability and growth
For a successful transition of the transportation sector and to reduce emissions and achieve net zero in 2050,
the electric mobility market needs to grow and prosper at a frantic pace. Government ambitions and targets
rather than demand are precipitating its growth, creating vulnerabilities and risks. The IEA Global EV Outlook
[12] reports that in 2023, more than 90% of global sales of light-duty vehicles (LDVs) were covered by a policy
that encourages EV uptake. (See Figure 3)
6. Policy Driven Transition
Market destabilized by volatile and over-ambitious public policies
/ Market transition unsuccessful because not market-driven [9]
[13]
7. Industry Reshape (Financial)
Financial Risk linked to the complete reshaping of the automotive
industry (+energy industry) [9] [12]
8. Battery Recycling Market
8. The battery recycling market struggles with economic viability
and capacity issues, hindered by long, expensive processes and the
lack of recycling facilities. [12] [5] [7]
9. Workers Shortage
Shortage of workers in various trades crucial to the electric mo-
bility market (install and maintain recharging infrastructure, sell
and repair electric cars) [14] [15]
Table 3: Identified Risks in the category EVs market stability and growth
12
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3: Share of the global market with policy coverage, 2022
From the IEA Global EV Outlook 2023
EV = electric vehicle; LDV = light-duty vehicle; HDV = heavy-duty vehicle; 2/3W = two/three-wheeler;
EVSE = electric vehicle supply equipment; RoW = rest of the world
Sovereignty
As stated by the IEA [12], the EV market has been “shaped by different levels of policy support, corporate
activity, consumer preference and awareness, driving patterns, and cultural specificities”. Moreover, today 5.8%
of European EVs are from China, and expected 12 to 20% in 2030. In this context, questions about sovereignty
need to be addressed.
10. Market Dependency
Increasing dependency of the European EV market on countries
such as China for the production of EVs and associated infras-
tructure [9] [5]
11. Accountability System
Ambiguous/Misunderstandings in the accountability system re-
garding key responsibilities may result in the formulation of ob-
solete regulations [12] [4]
Table 4: Identified Risks in the category Sovereignty
Supply Chain
Electric mobility relies on a complex and international global supply chain which includes among other things
raw materials and critical metals dispatch, electric vehicles and charging devices production and distribution.
Numerous events, natural or man-made, are a threat to this ecosystem.
12. Geopolitics
Geopolitical events leading to supply chain disruption. [16]
13. Natural Disasters
Natural Disasters leading to supply chain disruption [17]
14.
Product/Material Competi-
tion
Increased competition with other industries for essential products
(battery) and critical minerals (renewables) [9]
15. Prices
Supply chain crisis increasing the production price [9] [18]
Table 5: Identified Risks in the category Supply Chain
13
==PAGE:15==
Forecast & Uncertainty
Number of electric vehicles in service, the ratio of users recharging at work, the share of the electric vehicle
market, number of charge points in service... The EV transition relies on modeling and trajectories, from local
to international levels. These hypotheses are the starting point for implementing public policies, making deci-
sions, and ensuring that the development of the infrastructure will match the current and future needs. That’s
why their degree of accuracy and certainty is so crucial.
16. Governments Targets
The ambitious target on the number of sales is not met in 2035.
One of the numerous transitions associated with the success of the
EV transition (energy, telecom, mining, recycling, transportation)
does not reach sufficient targets. [9]
17. Production Capacity
The production industry is not ready for the demand in battery
supply (plant capacity and/or supply chain stakeholders) [12] [5]
18. User Demand & Needs
Poor urban planning/implementation of the necessary infras-
tructure because users’ habits and needs were poorly fore-
seen/anticipated. [19] [20] [21]
Table 6: Identified Risks in the category Forecast & Uncertainty
Smart & Connected Infrastructure
Charging infrastructure for electric mobility is a crucial issue for a successful transition. An efficient and
reliable recharging network is necessary not only for users’ convenience but also to increase demand by reducing
potential buyers’ concerns. The acceptable ratio of risk/security regarding the charging network while buying
an EV is not met for a lot of users today.
19. Upgrading and Reinforcement
The electric grid cannot support the increasing demand from EV
charging because of transformer or cable overload [4][22] [23]
20. Grid Capacity
EV charging stations needs in electricity reach the maximum dis-
tribution interconnection load limit
21. Cybersecurity
Cyber attacks on the vehicle system or the charging network, lead-
ing to a data breach, or loss of control of the equipment [24] [25]
Table 7: Identified Risks in the category Smart & Connected Infrastructure
Consumer perception & Confidence
The efforts of car manufacturers and governments to make the transition, are pointless if potential users
and public opinion on electric cars do not follow. Currently, interest in buying an electric vehicle is low (e.g.
14% of drivers in the UK [9]) and does not always translate into an actual purchase. In addition, expected and
unexpected risks could arise from the transition to EVs, linked to unforeseen individual user behavior.
22. Modal Shift
Risk of capturing public transport users instead of the main goal
to decarbonize transportation by switching ICE users.
23. User Confidence
The race to make new cars as technologically advanced as possible
is at the expense of their reliability and reduces user confidence.
[9] [26]
24. Consumer Behaviour
Fail in communication for the implementation of good consumer
behaviours [20] [27] [28]
Table 8: Identified Risks in the category Consumer perception & Confidence
14
==PAGE:16==
Technology & Innovation
Electric cars were invented more than 100 years ago, but over the last 20 years, the technology has evolved at
an entirely different pace, driven by environmental incentives and technological advances in battery autonomy.
There are many challenges associated with the development of this technology, from obtaining the necessary raw
materials to the increasingly complex software implemented in the vehicle to make it more attractive. According
to some carmakers, the technology will not be mature enough for the ICE ban in 2035.
25. Battery
Battery technology improvement is not sufficient/doesn’t reach
expected efficiency [6]
26.
Critical Mineral Extraction
Method
Reliance on existing extraction methods and technologies for crit-
ical minerals, not being scalable or sustainable enough to meet
the demand at the required scale by 2030 [9]
27. Standards & Interoperability
Public EV charging market facing technological and compliance
challenge [29]
28. Safety
Technological challenges due to heavier vehicles, risk of electrolyte
leakage or chemical reactions [10] [11]
Table 9: Identified Risks in the category Technology & Innovation
Environment and natural resources
The transportation sector is responsible for about a quarter of the EU’s total GHG emissions. Its transition
is crucial to reach net zero emissions in 2050, and the strategy to do that includes a successful transition from
ICE to electric vehicles.
29.
Rebound effect & additional
fleet
Increase of the pressure on material resources: The EV does not
replace ICE but adds up to the national car fleet.
Significant
rebound effect linked to EV purchases. [30]
30. Urban spaces
Mismanagement creates over-utilisation of urban spaces, for
charging installation or parking [21]
31. Battery Recycling
Battery Recycling Processes are not mature enough to absorb
growing needs. [7]
32. Metal Crisis
A metal crisis (lithium) increases the total price of an EV. [12]
33. Emission Relocation
Poor end-of-life management of batteries and EVs. Particularly
their export to developing countries, leading to the relocation of
transportation-related emissions and waste. [9]
Table 10: Identified Risks in the category Environment and natural resources
1.3.2
Risk cartography reading through interviews
The qualitative interviews complete the cartography. The following remarks and findings come from the
confrontation between the literature review and the interviews. To ease the lecture the inputs from the interviews
are referenced by their ID as presented in table 1.
A politicized transition driven by government ambitions
The influence of governments and interna-
tional institutions in the transition to electric cars is a critical vector in the cartography. It is the main cause of
several identified risks (6, 11, 16). Additionally, at a deeper level, it underlies many other risks due to the very
short development timeline. It has been set out in the interviews and bibliography, that there is a general worry
that the necessary technology (battery, metal extraction) and the necessary infrastructure along the life cycle of
the equipment won’t be "ready". The planning for the development of the charging infrastructure has to scale
up very fast, without a reasonable time to proof test the system and the process. For instance, connection to
the distribution network is currently a huge bottleneck for the development of the charging networks in France
(R5). Additionally, charging behavior is not yet stable recognised the 5th respondent [20]. Given the significant
capital investment in each charging station, an error in its location or the type of charger installed can quickly
become a critical issue for companies still scaling up. At the same time, only installing public chargers in dense
15
==PAGE:17==
areas where the demand is easily identified, can also increase the inequalities between territories. A possible
mitigation of this risk is to develop broad networks of charging stations so that the profitability of the stations
situated in dense areas can balance the loss of the underused ones in less crowded places. This is why financial
aid for these projects from France is now focusing on broad network projects and requires a minimum amount
of charging points and a minimum geographic coverage in their tenders (R5).
In the interviews, this risk is largely recognized and is evoked as too much politicization of the development
(R1, R2, R3, and R4), which translates into several issues. First politics have a very large influence on the
industry via taxes on the automotive industries, or requirements to be eligible for purchase bonuses (R1). For
instance, in the US and Europe, governments have strengthened their requirements to have part of the car pro-
duced and assembled locally, in order the relocate the production. Then automakers have to follow through to
still be certified for financial purchase incentives. Automakers have been running on those government financial
incentives, completely integrating the tax implications/incentives in their long and short-term strategies and
there is a real challenge to start making cash flow from production to be viable (R1). This politicization also
induces misinformation on electric mobility for the population, as it’s being utilized in political campaigns (R4).
Their advocates will sometimes build up too much expectation of electric mobility as the only solution to reduce
transportation emissions, or on the reduction in sales prices. On the other side, opponents could exaggerate the
problems linked to the criticality of the materials or concerns about interoperability, and build higher purchase
barriers. The information is often contradicting, and there is a lack of neutral sources (R2, R3).
Finally, the interviews underline a lack of suited regulations, making the market hard to navigate. In the
supply chain, the transportation of batteries is always regulated the same way, even though the technology can
be very different (R1). The regulations vary a lot in every continent/country, as the focus changes between
sovereignty, sustainability, or other agendas. Standardization and regulations make it hard to develop global
products worldwide. Automakers are focusing on national markets (as Stellantis with the European market)
(R2).
Overall the ecosystem is threatened and weakened by a top-down transition. But the ambitious goals of this
transition are more and more trusted within the ecosystem, and despite a lack of preparation and experience
in several places, there is optimism. While more and more automakers are now aligned with the target to ban
the sale of new ICE cars in 2035 (R2), the stakeholders also rely on the development of the 2nd hand market
for EVs along with 10 additional years for the automakers to expand the catalog of vehicles(R4), a decrease of
car ownership in big cities thanks to an expected mode shift to public transport in big cities, an increase of car
sharing behavior (R3),...
The influence of public authorities in the transition to electric cars poses significant risks because of the
rapidity of the timescales, the unpreparedness of the technologies, and the disparity in infrastructure development,
accentuated by politicization and regulatory inconsistencies.
Risks incurred by uncertainty and assumptions
The electric mobility ecosystem is growing at a fast
pace, globally. There is an increase in the market share for EVs, mainly in China, in Europe, and in the US
[12]. As the demand for cars needs to be followed by production from automakers, and a sufficient and reliable
charging network, forecasts in the number of sales, the current fleet, and assumptions on the utilization and
charging habits are essential to plan and meet the demand. But first of all, even if the number of EVs increases
fast, the EVs still represent only 3.2% of the world car stock in 2023 according to IEA. The scenario can be
calculated on market data, policy drivers, and technology perspectives. However, significant uncertainty sur-
rounds the associated supply chain, ongoing political support, and the geopolitical landscape, with China being
a critical stakeholder in the ecosystem’s development (R1, R2). Additionally, charging behavior estimates are
based on statistics from the first wave of EV owners, who primarily charged at home, and there are very few
studies available on public infrastructure users [20]. Respondent 5 gives as an example the mistakes made in a
study by the Electricity Transmission Network in France (RTE) in 2019, underestimating the impact of heavy
mobility on the electric transition. In the UK, underestimating the number of electric car sales has resulted in
an undercapacitated charging network in some areas. Now, the country needs to accelerate and scale up the
expansion of the network to meet demand [19]. This is an illustration of risk 18. User Demand & Needs. Then,
it is crucial to understand that uncertainties in forecasts also significantly impact the capacity to understand
and mitigate risks such as Consumer Behavior (24), risks related to smart and connected infrastructure (19 to
21), and production capacity (17).
16
==PAGE:18==
The ecosystem faces risks such as underprepared infrastructure and consumer behavior challenges due to
significant uncertainties in forecasts relying on inaccurate data.
Major obstacles to purchasing, with no short-term solution
Despite the strong investments in electric
mobility, technological progress, and financial incentives, electric cars are still an expensive product, and all the
interviews align to say that it is the major purchase barrier today. While the expected strategy is to scale up
the production of vehicles and batteries to match the price of ICE cars, there are several obstacles to overcome.
Firstly, the strain on raw materials required for EV production, particularly rare metals, could challenge the
initial predictions of a decrease in the average price of electric vehicles. The price of EVs tends to increase
(R5). It is a reason why in December 2023, General Motors had to increase the price of its entry-level model,
or the cheapest electric car in the US. Additionally, automakers continue to concentrate their sales efforts on
the luxury segment [9].
The secondhand market for EVs remains underdeveloped and struggles to gain public confidence (R2, R5).
Globally, the financial investment in a car is huge (the 2nd biggest after housing) and people don’t trust the
technology enough, the pace of innovation in electric mobility tends to create mass confusion (R3). On the
technology adoption curve, EVs are still in the early adopters stage, but cars are not frequently replaced, and
the market struggles to convert this trend into mass purchasing (see Figure 4). The possibility of charging the
vehicle at home is also an essential argument as the public doesn’t trust the public infrastructure today (R3,
R4). Moreover, respondent 2 underlined a cultural factor. US EVs market shares are very slow to increase and
there is a real gap in sustainability concerns and community-minded purchases compared to other countries
(Europe). While in Norway, the governmental subsidies stopped years ago and the BEVs market share is still
strongly increasing.
Figure 4: EV adoption in Australia (orange) in comparison with the diffusion of innovations curve (purple)
Source: Planning for the majorities: are the charging needs and preferences of electric vehicle early adopters
similar to those of mainstream consumers?, Lavieri & Al. [20]
This reluctance to buy creates a risk in the particular studied ecosystem, because of the decision of a ban
of the ICE in the EU in 2035. Without a reliable 2nd hand market, trust built in the technology, and afford-
able EVs, this deadline could become a real obstacle to the essential right to access mobility (As stated in the
Identified Risk 1). To build user confidence, social and qualitative studies, as well as quantitative modeling are
essential to understand the behavior of new owners and potential customers, as the one led by the 4th respon-
dent of the interview process. While these studies help identify the disincentives and incentives for purchase, the
time required for the population to build trust in the technology is difficult to shorten. Effective communication
is a crucial tool, but it can exacerbate the problem if misused.
The high cost of electric cars remains a major purchase barrier, compounded by raw material strains and
price increases. The underdeveloped secondhand market and low public confidence in EV technology further
challenge mass adoption, and the risk is aggravated given the impending ICE ban in the EU in 2035.
17
==PAGE:19==
Communication as a mitigation tool and a risk factor
As explained in the previous paragraph, building
customer trust is essential for developing the ecosystem, and effective communication is crucial for achieving
this. However, the multiplicity of communication mediums and the contradicting opinions are creating mass
confusion and can give opposite results (R2). The political dimension adds a level of mistrust, see paragraph
1.3.2. Mainly, the issue lies in the gap between communication and actual development. In Europe, the EU
Commission and the countries announce targets for the number of charging points by 2030. However, respon-
dents 4 and 5 highlight unequal access to fast and slow chargers across regions, a charging system characterized
by a diversity of stakeholders, leading to various business models and cost schemes, multiple interfaces, and a
maintenance system that is not scaled up to meet the demand. For the vehicles, as stated in Identified Risk
23, automakers are racing to implement the latest technologies and software in their vehicles, but they are not
always mature enough, leading to multiple issues and callbacks [9]. The communication on good consumer
behavior is also essential considering the impact of electric mobility on the grid (R4). But as the ecosystem is
developed prematurely, this impact is still being analyzed and the recharging instructions vary and contradict
each other.
Gaining the trust of consumers is essential, but communications that are contradictory and sometimes at
odds with actual development are a source of confusion, undermine confidence and complicate consumer behavior
guidance.
Stakeholder multiplicity is a risk area at several levels
The promising development of the electric
mobility ecosystem brought a lot of stakeholders into the process. While this diversity has positive aspects, like
the multiplicity of options of electric vehicles, it also makes the governance and the landscape very complex to
navigate, as much for the users as for the decision-makers and strategy planners. This multiplicity is reflected in
the article from Jagani & Al. (2024) [31], that underlines a variety of stakeholders and the National EV Market
categorized along 2 dimensions: the Innovation Impact Scale and the Market Transformation Scope (See Figure
5). The idea has been taken up by respondents 1 and 2 both highlighting the challenge linked to the diversity
of stakeholders in the EVs industry and the supply chain.
Figure 5: EV Market Typology
Source : The Electric Vehicle Supply Chain Ecosystem: Changing Roles of Automotive Suppliers, Jagani & Al.
They identified 2 types of automakers in the EV industry: the "legacy OEMs", such as Stellantis or General
Motors, traditional ICE car automakers, well established in the automotive industry. These actors opened a
new branch for EVs, that usually represent a small share of their global business.
The second type is the
BEVs-only manufacturers, with very different business models. It is a lot of startups, and industry disrupters,
that take the example of the success of the pioneers in this segment, Tesla. Both types face challenges and
are subject to risk. Legacy automakers, although they can rely on significant resources from their primary
business, are facing big challenges in this transition as they need profound transition not only in their product
18
==PAGE:20==
development, supply chain, and manufacturing processes but also in their customer’s target, and there is a
clear decrease of brand loyalty when it comes to EVs. While the new BEV industries are starting from a white
page, they are tackling a market that is very capital and material intensive with fewer resources, that has long
been dominated and little challenged, except perhaps when Asian manufacturers entered the Western market.
They often lack supply chain experts, need to manage investors day to day requirements, and therefore must
focus on short-term strategy while they need to plan ahead (R2). Respondent 1 also underpins a huge risk in
the reshaping of the industry because of these new immature stakeholders producing their first models. For
instance, the American company Fisker Automotive, created in 2007, faced a lot of issues in the production of
their first vehicle, leading to the suspension of their federal loan in 2011. If those companies bankrupt, they
leave a problem in maintenance, and repair, on a product that has a 20-year life expectancy on average.
The issue also exists on the infrastructure side, as stated by respondents R4 and R5. When small charging
station installers arise, at best they are bought by bigger stakeholders, or they bankrupt, leaving numerous
charging points not maintained, as well in the private spaces with home chargers, or the public spaces. In
France, the number of stakeholders in the charging ecosystem is closely followed by the government via the
Directorate General for Enterprises (DGE). Moreover, public tenders to install charging networks are now re-
questing a strong guarantee of financial health (R5).
Finally, at the strategic level, the multiplicity of public authorities involved, and the overlap of mobility
strategies and planning at different geographic and time scales (European Commission, National Strategy, local
authorities, local communities, private companies strategies..) also requires a high level of collaboration to
create coherent and navigable charging networks, to mitigate risk linked to interoperability and user confidence.
This diversity of stakeholders, as much in the EVs industry as the charging infrastructure, bringing different
value propositions and business strategies, creates a potential for risk as the electric mobility ecosystem is very
capital intensive and faces a very quick technology evolution, creating instability in the market. There is a need
to balance short-term with grant and tax money with long-term development strategy. Linked to the average
life expectancy of the goods involved and the necessity for a high level of reliability on the maintenance and
customer service (software update), these considerations bring up the identified risks: 7. Industry Reshape
(Financial), 3. Right to Repair, 27. Standard and Interoperability, but is also linked to safety concerns (risks 5
and 28).
Various stakeholders increase the complexity of the governance and the decision-making for strategic plan-
ning, increasing risks linked to market instability, infrastructure maintenance, and interoperability.
Navigating several layers of complexity in supply chain and raw materials
For legacy OEMs as
much as for new stakeholders, the supply chain transition or implementation is a critical risk area. Electric
mobility is characterized by a large and deep supply chain, which is often not globally understood. An elec-
tric car is composed of more parts than an ICE, with much more materials, and more expensive, making the
supply chain extremely deep and risks hard to anticipate. As a node of this network, companies usually don’t
have the full big picture.
An example from respondent 2 is the semi-conductor crisis that started in 2020
and was poorly anticipated by automakers because they were not buying semi-conductors but a lot of diverse
semi-finished products containing semi-conductors. Additionally manufacturing EVs, and specifically batteries,
is very energy-intensive. The industry comes up with unbalanced solutions by prioritizing cost savings in one
area without thinking of other supply chain challenges. A striking example is the risk identified by the first
respondent is the cell plants needing cheap electricity abundantly. There is a tendency to build plants in remote
places to access cheap hydroelectricity (for example in Sweden, Norway or the US), but it will later imply a lot
of challenges for the supply chain (inbound and outbound transportation costs, highly dependent workforce, ...).
Because every product relies on new technology, inventory planning is a huge challenge as stock is expensive and
quickly obsolete. In addition, plants always need to upgrade their equipment, because technology is evolving.
And this equipment is almost exclusively produced in Asia (South Korea, Malaysia). Then, there is the raw
material and semi-finished goods accessibility.
In addition to the competition between the multiple stakeholders in the sector, the products, in particular
batteries, are also highly coveted by other sectors undergoing rapid transition, such as renewable energies and
information and communication technologies.
To hedge the business, battery manufacturers’ strategy is to
not be labeled as automotive suppliers but to get into other markets (energy stock, temporary solution for
grid limitations). They need to diversify their portfolio to ensure they will sell their production considering
19
==PAGE:21==
the uncertainty in the forecast (R1). On top of the competition between sectors, the criticality of these raw
materials also comes from the capacity of extraction. The generic example is lithium, an essential metal for
battery production and other components of the car. According to the second respondent, today shortages are
not a big problem, but will be an issue in the future. Looking at the forecast and monitoring from the Raw
Materials Information System (RMIS), implemented by the European Commission, the huge increase in demand
for rare metals like lithium and the heavy investment and time necessary to intensify extraction (Figure 6),
for nickel for instance, present a considerable risk. In addition, these productions are usually localized in very
few countries and present significant sovereignty concerns [16][32]. Other monitoring bodies also exist at the
national level like in France with the French Observatory of mineral resources for Industrial Sectors (OFREMI)
(R2).
(a) Lithium [t LCE]
(b) Nickel [t]
Figure 6: Forecast of global Supply-Demand balance
Source : RMIS
Supply chain concerns represent a significant risk area due to the deeply complex layering of production,
intense competition for raw materials and semi-finished goods, and the use of critical raw materials.
The
ecosystem face "traditional" supply chain risks such as geopolitical and natural threats (risks 12 and 13). But it
also overlaps with other sectors in its needs in raw material and components, and faces the risk of product and
material competition (risk 14). The expansion of the ecosystem, along with the other sectors it competes with,
increases considerably the demand and therefore raises the likelihood of other identified risks, such as critical
mineral extraction (risk 26) and the metal crisis (risk 32).
Both the legacy OEMs and the new automakers are facing supply chain transition or implementation chal-
lenges, making the risks difficult to anticipate, due to the complexity and depth of the electric vehicle supply
chain, competition for raw materials and the evolution of technology.
Sustainable sourcing obstacles
Sustainability concerns in the development of the electric mobility ecosys-
tem are key. Today public opinion is lukewarm on the sustainability of electric vehicles, and rightly so, given
the intensity and criticality of the materials used. According to respondent 5, the main environmental impact
in the life cycle of a charging station today comes from the origin of the electricity used to charge the vehi-
cles. In the public tenders for charging networks in France, they have strict requirements on the origin of the
production and usually request a power purchase agreement (PPA). Currently, they don’t have any criteria for
material sourcing, even though the respondent recognizes the sustainability challenges linked to sourcing and
charging station manufacturing. The other respondents align on this and underline that without regulation,
sustainable sourcing is a choice that is difficult to make in a fast-evolving, competitive market when other com-
petitors are not sensitive to that. For respondent 1, sustainability in the sourcing of battery raw materials is
highly unbalanced from one producer to the other (for instance, it is an important focus at Northvolt, but their
batteries are much more expensive than a producer like CATL). But with the battery representing on average
40% of the price of the EVs, customers (automakers) will often choose the cheaper and most efficient battery.
Another sourcing challenge is the high dependency on Asian raw materials: semi-conductors, parts suppliers,
and plant equipment are coming from a few countries (China, Malaysia, North Korea). Essential raw materials
are located in fragile geopolitics areas (automotive is 70% of the lithium market share, with a clear dominance
of China in lithium processing). Sustainable sourcing requests resources: money, research, and time, and is
highly unbalanced from one company to another, leading to important price gaps in the battery market. The
regulations are not following the pace of the new technology created, and sustainable sourcing is an investment
in the future, hard to make when the companies need short-term development to keep producing and exist in
20
==PAGE:22==
the suppliers’ landscape. Risks arise from an unbalanced situation between today’s economic reality and risk
reduction needs.
Material intensity and environmental impact pose significant challenges. The lack of regulation and the high
cost of sustainable sourcing complicate efforts and lead to unfair competition between companies, creating risks
when it comes to balancing economic realities and sustainable development needs.
1.4
Conclusion
The risk cartography is built on a thorough literature review and insight from different stakeholders of
the ecosystem. The analysis emphasizes the importance of having a global look when looking at the risk. If
we take the example of a single charging station, risk can arise from technology considerations, (electrical,
software), cyber-security, urban planning, consumer behavior, integration to the grid in terms of capacity but
also compliance, ... Identifying those risks in the global ecosystem gives better chance to perceive the root
cause, and find efficient mitigation processes.
The categorization ensures the identification of “threat areas”, and can be used as an exhaustive mapping of
possible sources when performing a risk analysis. With a complete evaluation of risk areas, it is now possible
to evaluate, create, or use tools that aim at improving the response of the system to disaster or increasing
stress. The interview inputs underpinned some particular assessment processes and risk monitoring, but there
is a clear lack of systemic, and specific focus on the potential risk in electric mobility, which can be explained by
the reality of a frantic pace in the industry and a top-down transition that doesn’t give enough time and space
for preparation to possible disruptions. In the current context, there is a growing focus on broader questions
surrounding the capacity of ecosystems, particularly urban areas and cities, to adapt to and mitigate the impact
of potential disasters. This shift in focus translates into the emergence, since the beginning of the 2010s, of the
concept of resilience. The second part of this study aims to apply the findings from the risk cartography to a
specific geographic scope (e.g., a city or urban area; within the European Union). It will assess the existing
resilience efforts within research, and projects led by global organizations, identify necessary actions, and explore
how can these resilience strategies be adapted to support the transition to electric mobility.
21
==PAGE:23==
2
Frameworks and tools for resilience
2.1
Definition of resilience, and setting in the context of the study
Resilience defines a system’s capacity to proactively anticipate and adapt to stress and changing conditions,
and demonstrate robustness and rapid recovery when faced with disruptions. It involves both preparedness
and prevention to reduce and minimize the impact of a shock, as well as recovery activities to return to a
pre-disaster state or another stable state. Resilience has been studied in multiple fields, such as psychology,
sociology, ecology, and engineering systems.
The study of resilience holds significance when applied within a specific context and system, and requires a
comprehensive and in-depth understanding of this system. It is possible to construct the resilience of a system
at several levels: organizational, social, economic, and engineering [33]. Adaptation, learning, preparedness, and
collaboration need to be considered to develop a model of resilience. The generic stages of such a model are the
definition of the system and identification of critical functions, the definition of the threat and the potentially
impacted assets, the selection of resilience factor and performance indicators, the evaluation of those indicators
(score calculation), and finally the set up of guidelines that will 1. improve the preparedness of the ecosystem
and 2. improve its capacity to recover.
2.1.1
Challenges
A challenge that is raised in literature research, and that is relevant to the context of the study, is the one
of assessing, and improving resilience in multidisciplinary, multidimensional system domains, as underlined in
the article from Salomon & Al., 2022 [34]. Resilience implies the ability of a system to adapt to respond to its
operational goals continuously. Systems tend to increase in complexity and in depth, and emerging issues arise.
The growing number of components not only increases complexity but also interactions, and a disaster can
have an indirect impact on several elements of the system. The term multidimensional fragility was raised and
was defined by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) as “the combination of
exposure to risk and the insufficient coping capacity of the state, system and/or communities to manage, absorb
and mitigate those risks”. A clear understanding of the interaction and flows between the various components
is essential to improve a system’s resilience effectively. A systematic approach is also advised in the article. The
proposed approach depends on a quantitative measure of resilience applied to engineering systems. Assessing
the resilience of complex systems with engineering but also social, politic and economic dimensions, requires
additional effort in modeling components and interactions, as well as researching relevant parameters for mea-
suring resilience. Another interpretation of resilience complexity is illustrated in the paper Resilience Matrix
for Comprehensive Urban Resilience Planning[35], that proposes 2 dimension matrix, with the four general
management domains of any complex system (physical, information, cognitive, social), and the four stages of
disaster management (plan/prepare, absorb/withstand, recover, adapt). According to the authors, this matrix
better acknowledges an event’s temporal components and explicitly captures a system’s capacity across the
timeline (see Figure 7).
Figure 7: Overview of matrix construction with the event cycle in the horizontal direction and system domains
listed vertically
Source : Resilience Matrix for Comprehensive Urban Resilience Planning
To create a robust approach, several factors must be considered. The social dimension of the ecosystem
brings challenges, like the diversity of interpretations of the components, and the subjectivity inherent in the
22
==PAGE:24==
social dimension, such as perceived risk or resilience. For instance, a highly urbanized community can see as
high risk the lack of a robust public charging system, while it might be perceived as low risk by one coming
from less dense areas where installing charging systems at home is easier, which will affect overall resilience
strategies.
Another challenge is the multidisciplinary nature of the issues, which are the results of various
intertwined causes. For instance, the lithium battery life cycle brings economic, environmental, geopolitical, and
social behavior considerations. Finally, the multiplicity of stakeholders also comes with different, and sometimes
contradictory expectations and objectives prioritization. In the electric mobility transition, government agencies
set ambitious goals for EV sales for the next years, and automakers are investing resources in the development
of new models. However, neighbor communities might rather focus on reducing car use in their district, and
electricity transmission and distribution operators may fear that the transition will be too rapid so they will
not be able to manage the absorption of demand smoothly. This complexity necessitates a comprehensive and
flexible framework to effectively address and integrate these varied aspects.
There are also operational challenges.
Research into resilience and risk reduction often finds that local
governments tend to allocate resources to day-to-day operations, current problems, and developments with
short-term outcomes, leaving little time and resources for risk reduction, mitigation, or system resilience projects
[36] [2].
2.1.2
Context and progress on resilience in cities, and on transport systems
In the context of urban mobility, transport systems face various disruptions compounded by high population
and asset densities, highly interconnected infrastructures, and the coexistence of diverse communities and social
entities in shared spaces. Resilient urban mobility systems ensure the reliability and safety of transport net-
works, are necessary to support economic stability and improve the quality of life of residents. By setting a focus
on resilience, cities can respond to unforeseen events more quickly and in a more organized way, maintaining the
continuity of the movement of people and goods, which is essential for sustainable urban development and the
successful integration of emerging technologies such as electric mobility. Decision-making and adaptive capacity
are keys to building urban mobility resilience[37].
The increasing focus on the resilience of specific systems such as cities or transport systems has led to two
parallel dynamics. The first one is the development of resilience tools, answering to a specific and localized risk.
It can target a particular disaster, for instance, a storm tracking and decision support tool was developed to help
the decision-making in the timing and extent of evacuations. It can also target a specific asset, like a screening
tool designed to assess the initial or relative risk and resilience of a tunnel to a range of hazards, including
natural hazards, such as fire and floods [38]. On the other side, arises international initiatives from organiza-
tions such as the Rockefeller Foundation and the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR),
with a top-down approach to city resilience that envisions the city as a complex multidisciplinary system. The
current framework in use for the UNDRR is the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030,
and The Rockefeller Foundation developed the City Resilience Framework. These provide a set of frameworks
that include characteristics and priorities for building resilient cities. At the European level, projects on urban
resilience are initiated by the European Commission in several sectors such as food systems (Cities2030), en-
ergy systems (RESPONSE), and for urban transport systems, the Resolute project: RESilience management
guidelines and Operationalization appLied to Urban Transport Environment. They want to define guidelines,
and state they aim to "adapt and adopt the identified concepts and methods from the defined guidelines for their
operationalization and evaluation when addressing Critical Infrastructure (CI) of the Urban Transport System
(UTS)". Although they focus on the infrastructure, the project presentation emphasizes that "resilience is not
about the performance of individual system elements but rather the emerging behaviour associated to intra and
inter system interactions".
The development of specific tools is essential for addressing clearly identified risks and advancing technology
for future monitoring and screening needs. However, these tools alone are not sufficient to ensure resilience in
broad and complex systems. They must be integrated into a comprehensive global resilience strategy, serving as
operational components within a larger framework. The top-down, worldwide and European-wide projects for
defined frameworks are also setting an essential global strategy to build resilience with a systematic and syn-
ergistic angle. However, developing new and specific ecosystems such as electric mobility requires a mesoscopic
scale approach. First, the rapid pace of development requires an approach that is specific enough to establish
operational functions within a short timeframe. Additionally, these ecosystems depend on new technologies,
social behaviors, policies, and strategies, which introduce new and unknown risks. This likely necessitates an
adapted resilience approach. The tool must address the following questions: What are the essential needs? How
can resilience be modeled as constraints on development? What are the practical functionalities?
23
==PAGE:25==
This study contributes to this approach by first looking at several available frameworks and tools that could
back up the decision-makers to build resilience for the ecosystem of electric mobility at the scale of a city.
An assessment is carried out, according to criteria adapted from the work undertaken in the first part. This
assessment highlighted clear shortcomings in those existing tools. It would appear necessary to work on the
establishment of a practical tool for public authorities, and mobility organizers, to plan and identify areas for
improvement to support the establishment of an electric mobility ecosystem that is resilient in the face of current
and future challenges.
2.2
Methodology
2.2.1
Constructing a Criteria Grid
The objectives of this section are the assessment of an existing tool for decision-making and a proposition
of a new tool. As exposed in the last section, it is essential to have a framework for evaluating existing and
potential future tools. Therefore, a criteria list has been created. This framework serves three purposes:
• Translate the Risk Cartography from the first part into practical questions, specifically adapted to the
scope of a European city and local public authorities.
• Establish criteria to build or assess a functional tool tailored to the resilience of an emerging mobility
ecosystem.
• Provide a basis for evaluating different planning and decision-making tools.
The criteria are created from the risk cartography and categorized into components. They are formulated
as questions that aim to identify the system’s resilience factors. Only the risks that fall within the chosen scope
of a city are considered in the criteria. For instance Supply Chain threats, or Sovereignty consideration are
estimated as out of scope, as the stakeholder and the geographic space at stake aren’t falling into city planning
strategy consideration. The risks that falls into the environmental and natural resources categories are not all
considered in scope. The rebound effect or the urban spaces mismanagement (risk 29 and 30, see Table 10) are
issues that need to be considered in city development strategies. For instance, in urban planning decisions. But
for wider environmental risks the approach taken here is to consider them as a global problem, of which the
development of the electric mobility ecosystem within the city will be part of the solution, as stated in national
environmental strategies like the French one (Stratégie Nationale Bas Carbone, or SNBC).
2.2.2
Assesment of existing tools
Choice of tools
The tools that will be assessed in the study have been chosen with the following criteria :
• A literature review has been conducted to synthesize the different dimensions of resilience along with a
quick overview of different tools available (see [39], [38], the projects mentioned in 2.1 and the different tools
assessed below). In the context of urban resilience, a tool can address various types of features, which can
be categorized into framework, assessment or evaluation, guidelines and action, visualization, awareness,
and communication. Since the goal of the tool assessment is to examine resilience comprehensively, the
tools evaluated must include an assessment of the current situation at a minimum, in addition to at least
one other feature. The different categories and their associated keywords are presented in Figure 8.
• The tool must have a multidisciplinary approach to resilience. It should evaluate various dimensions of
resilience, including social, economic, environmental, and infrastructural aspects. It also has to consider
multiple stakeholders from multiple sectors, their coordination, and integration in the process. Finally,
the tool needs to propose a strategy that considers the interactions between different components of the
system and the cause-and-effect relationships among them, thereby addressing risk as a multidimensional
issue.
• The time scale and scope must be compatible with the ecosystem looked at. The tool must propose a
short and long-term strategy, and be flexible to adapt to different cities within the European Union.
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 8: Tool for resilience: features and keywords
Evaluation Method
Four tools were ultimately chosen and assessed. The evaluation scale was designed to
determine, for each criterion formulated as a question, whether the tool’s suggested process could provide a
satisfactory answer. This scale comprises four levels: Irrelevant, No, Partial, or Yes. Irrelevant: indicates
that the criteria is not intended to be answered by the tool, according to its stated objectives. No implies
that the criteria is not addressed by the tool, despite fitting within the description of the tool’s objectives.
Partial means that the question is addressed but either misses an essential part or is difficult to adapt to a
specific ecosystem, such as electric mobility. Finally, Yes: indicates that the tool fully or almost fully answers
the question. This evaluation framework ensures a comprehensive analysis of each tool’s capability to meet the
defined criteria. The results have been displayed in comprehensive tables. The objective is not to assign a global
score or determine the best tool. The assessment aims to determine if the components, identified as essential to
assess and build resilience for electric mobility, are undertaken in tools designed for global resilience purposes,
or the gap in terms of a specific and operational approach.
2.2.3
Towards a new tool adapted to emerging transportation ecosystem and electric mobility
Translating criteria into practical function
As the different tools assessed confirmed a lack of adaptability
to the specific needs of the electric mobility ecosystem resilience, the final contribution of the study is to go
one step forward into the process of building a functional tool that can be implemented in cities through public
authorities. 4 generic types of functions are considered to assess each criteria, inspired by the MAPE-K loop,
reference control model for autonomic and self-adaptive systems [40]: Monitor, Analyse, Plan, and Execute (see
Figure 9).
Figure 9: Generic Type of function for modeling
Parameters recommendation
For each function, input and output parameters were suggested based on
interview insights and the frameworks and tool assessments conducted. The input parameters represent the
data required to run the function, while the output parameters are the expected metrics. These outputs will
need to be further detailed in the model guidelines. Specifically, for each parameter, the results obtained must
address the criteria, which are formulated as questions. These parameters are currently recommendations, and
as we develop the functional structure, additional input parameters will likely be needed, along with intermediate
results.
25
==PAGE:27==
2.3
Results and analysis
2.3.1
Criteria Table
The different components defined by the risk cartography, and their objectives are the following:
• Stakeholder Landscape: Identify and understand the stakeholder landscape.
• Infrastructure: Assess the infrastructure, including charging infrastructure, car dealerships, and the
electric grid, while considering geographical and city specifics such as network lifespan, electric source
availability, public parking space, and car usage. Additionally, evaluate the availability of essential services.
• Population Behavior: Analyze the preparedness of the population, behavior changes, and incentives.
Develop tools for awareness and communication to support behavior change.
• Public Instances: Examine the juridical and political context. Identify the targets and commitments
of higher public instances (region, state). Determine the available decision-making tools, necessary data,
and its availability. Assess the juridic tools required to support and monitor implementation.
• Social Community: Perform a social community assessment, including evaluating EV user groups,
associations among citizens, and events related to electric mobility.
• Qualifications Skillset: Determine the essential qualifications and skillsets required, both on a technical
level and for decision-making/target-oriented tasks, and assess their availability.
For each component, 2 to 3 criteria are built. The results are shown in Table 11.
Components
Criteria
Stakeholder Landscape
1.1 Which stakeholders are involved in the system ?
1.2 Do stakeholders use an integrated/coordinated approach?
1.3 Which stakeholder holds which responsibility ?
Infrastructure
2.1 Is the physical infrastructure capable of meeting system needs and capacity,
and can it recover/adapt to changing conditions?
2.2 Is there a sufficient and suitable supply of essential vehicles? Is the service and
maintenance network for these vehicles adequate?
2.3 What is the relevant data for planning & operations and is it available?
Population Behavior
3.1 Is the population ready to adapt their behavior to electric cars?
3.2 How is the transition toward electric cars incentivized for the population?
3.3 What are the tools available for population awareness and communication?
Public Instances
4.1 What is the regulatory landscape set up by higher public authorities?
4.2 What decision-making tools are available? What data is necessary and is it
available?
4.3 What juridic tools are available ?
Social Community
5.1 Does the city have EVs users’ group or citizen association?
5.2 Are there events/actions undertaken by the citizen?
Qualification Skillset
6.1 Does the city have the necessary and qualified workforce to undertake technical
tasks and services?
6.2 Are the necessary qualifications for decision-making, policy enforcement, and
organizational management accessible?
Table 11: Essential criteria identified for a resilience strategy
Link to the risk cartography
The criteria table aims at tackling the potential risk identified in the risk
cartography, when those apply to the scope of the city.
Risks associated with the technology, design, and
safety of the EVs and the infrastructure, production and manufacturing, sourcing, sale and business strategy
of automakers, sovereignty, supply chain until the final delivery and national and international policy making
are considered out of scope, as the institution responsible are not involved at the scale of the city and will
coordinate with national and international organisms rather than local authorities.
The questions linked to fair, and efficient urban planning, are part of the Qualification Skillset Component
and Public Instances. While the development strategy needs to be coordinated at an international, national,
26
==PAGE:28==
and regional level, it also needs to be adapted at the local scale, by considering geographical and city specifics
such as socio-economic representation, network life span, electric source availability, public parking space, car
usage, vulnerability to flood or earthquakes . . .
The right to repair, the safety of individuals, and the accountability system relate to the components Public
Instances. Social behavior risks such as population readiness, rebound effect, or modal shift, are part of the
component Population Behavior. The city, as an entity, has a role to play in the resilience of communities and
population preparedness and readiness to change. It has communication means and can adapt the communica-
tion and incentive strategy to the local social identity, and the current maturity towards the electric mobility
transition. Another risk that encompasses several geographical scales is Battery Recycling. In Europe, the
responsibility for recycling electric vehicle batteries primarily falls on manufacturers and importers of electric
vehicles, following the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directive and the Battery Directive.
These regulations mandate that producers take responsibility for the entire lifecycle of their products, including
end-of-life collection and recycling. However, at the city level, it is essential to ensure that the collection and
sorting infrastructure is prepared to handle the demand. Additionally, effective communication campaigns must
be implemented to raise public awareness about the importance of life cycle and recycling vehicle batteries or
home charging stations.
Criteria Adaptable to other ecosystems
This criteria table is created to support decision-making at the
city scale, for the resilience of the electric mobility ecosystem. But the criteria are formulated in a way that
makes this contribution easily adaptable for similar rising transportation ecosystems, with a similar structure
as indicated in the Figure 1.
2.3.2
Tool assessment
The different tool are the Maturity Model, the Urban Risk Assesment, the French Regional Plan for Electric
Vehicle Charging Infrastructure, and the City Resilience Index.
They are distributed in the different type
features they answered in Figure 10, as explained in the methodology section (see 8).
Figure 10: Tools distributed in the features
The four tools assessed are presented, with their principal characteristics and objectives, and the results of
their assessment. Then, a summary is displayed in Table 12. The details of the assessment for each tool, with
references to their documentation, are available in the appendix
Maturity Model
The Maturity Model is a model proposed by R.Gimenez & Al. in the paper A maturity
model for the involvement of stakeholders in the city resilience building process[41]. They identified a gap in the
understanding of how to ensure the stakeholder’s involvement and coordination when building the resilience of
a city, and developed a maturity model that aims at helping the local government to do so. They define the
maturity model as a process that identif[ies] the ideal path for the evolution of a process from an initial stage
to a more advanced stage, passing through a number of intermediate stages.
The model states that stakeholder involvement and coordination are at the heart of the process of build-
ing resilience in cities. The maturity model is targeted at local governments, and proposes a recommended
and logical sequence for cities to follow, to enhance their resilience level by involving various stakeholders in
the resilience-building process. The model is built in the frameworks of international initiatives such as the
one mentioned above. They identified 4 principles, collaboration and networking, awareness and commitment,
27
==PAGE:29==
learning, and training and preparedness. They emphasize the importance of collaboration of the various sectors
when building resilience, and the efficiency of a shared understanding of community risks.
The decision-maker first assesses the city maturity stage in building resilience within the 5 stages described
by the model from unrecognized stage to proactive stage. Then the model gives guidelines to further bring the
city to the next maturity stage in their process to build resilience, on the next stakeholders to involve, the
collaboration to develop, the policies to implement in terms of awareness and commitment, learning, training
and preparedness. The assessment of the Maturity Model as an operational tool to build resilience specifically for
electric mobility shows that the components Stakeholder Landscape and Social Community are fully integrated
in the approach, the component Public Instances and Population Behavior are partially integrated, and the
other components are out of scope of the objectives of the model. Several limits are identified. The assessment
is mainly focused on stakeholder collaboration and therefore couldn’t be relevant for all the components of the
table. Citizens are identified as a key stakeholders, but not in a behavior change/adaptation point of view. Until
the proactive stage (the last stage of the maturity model) there is no mention of their potential actions within
the resilience plan. The paper assesses the lack of operationalization in practice to forecast and prepare cities
for future challenges. Moreover, the model has been built by collaborating with relevant representatives from
6 European cities but there is no documentation on a further application or practical case of implementation.
A strength of this tool is the multi-stakeholder vision and the identification of 4 complementary principles that
need to be considered to engage a complete resilience plan, as well as an approach to build resilience regarding
punctual and acute potential shocks, as well as continuous and increasing long-term stress.
Urban Risk Assessments
The Urban Risk Assessment is a methodology developed by the World Bank in
2012,
Urban Risk Assessments, Understanding Disaster and Climate Risk in Cities[2]. The report first pro-
vides a comprehensive overview of urban risk assessments, the Integrated URA tool for City Management, and
the translation into further steps of Action Planning and Implementation. Several case studies are presented
worldwide. The URA is a framework for carrying out urban risk assessment.
The URA methodology aims at establishing a common foundation upon which urban risk assessments could
periodically be performed, with the ultimate objective to quantify risk and monitor progress toward improved
resilience. The first part of the report targets the policymakers and suggests measures that will improve the
understanding and monitoring of urban risk, the second part provides guidance for practitioners, with details on
the approach and the methodology. They state the importance of an iterative process to understand vulnerabil-
ity and buil resilience, which includes a thorough urban risk assessment. They also recognize the importance of
being proactive in the sector of risk, as climate change linked to inadequate urban management will exacerbate
the risks and lead to increasing disasters.
The assessment relies on three levels of complexity to adapt to the different available resources of the cities,
and 3 pillars: institutional, hazard, and socio-economic assessment. Then the assessment is implemented in a
Planning and Monitoring strategy, presented in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Risk Reduction Planning and Monitoring
Sources: Urban Risk Assessments, Understanding Disaster and Climate Risk in Cities [2]
28
==PAGE:30==
The assessment of the Urban Risk Assesment tool as an operational tool to build resilience specifically
for electric mobility shows that the components Stakeholder Landscape, Public Instances, and Qualification
Skillset are fully integrated into the approach, the component Infrastructure, Population Behavior, and Social
Community are partially integrated but not adapted for such an ecosystem. Several limits are identified. The
URA is a very high-level assessment tool. The tool focuses mainly on risk understanding and assessment, and
therefore lack the operationalization of improvement processes. Additionally, the URA report predominantly
addresses disaster and climate change-related risks. To encompass other types of risks, such as those linked
to social behavior or economic stress, significant adaptations of the tool and modifications to the stakeholder
landscape are necessary. Despite these limitations, the URA provides valuable guidelines for establishing an
institutional framework and assessing key stakeholders when developing a risk reduction strategy, along with
the necessary technical support to undertake the risk assessment. The multiplicity of the hazards, the sectors
at risk, the scales at which a risk is felt and must be responded to, the assets to monitor, and the stakeholders
at play are well taken into account and allow for a global assessment of the city as a system.
SDRIVE
The Regional Plan for Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure (Schéma Directeurs pour les In-
frastructure de Recharge de Véhicules Electriques in French, or SDIRVE) is a planning document that has to
be created by the local authorities responsible for mobility in France, to coordinate the development of the
charging infrastructure on the territory. The minister of the ecological transition provided a guide to create this
development plan, which is the main document used to assess the SDIRVE in this study.
While the SDIRVE is not directly focused on risk and resilience, the stated objectives of this document are
to help the local governments coordinate public and private charging infrastructures, develop an offer coherent
with local policies on mobility, air quality, and climate protection, town planning and energy; and adapted to
changing recharging needs for local and transit traffic. Therefore it aims to support the development of the
infrastructure that proactively takes into account the complexity of the ecosystem, is flexible to a changing
environment, and accounts for the current and future needs.
The drafting of this planning document includes five stages: Scoping the approach (time and geographic
scale, stakeholder involved, development schedule, ..), a diagnostic that encompasses an inventory of existing
infrastructure and an assessment of needs, defining the strategy, the operational objectives and the timetable,
validation of the plan and finally periodical updates.
The assessment of the Urban Risk Assessment tool as an operational tool to build resilience specifically for
electric mobility shows that the component Stakeholder Landscape is fully integrated into the approach, and
the components Infrastructure and Public Instances are integrated but are focused on charging infrastructures,
therefore would need to be extended to the rest of the ecosystem. Population Behavior and Social Community
are poorly integrated: social behavior is not taken into account, while a coordinated and collaborative approach
to charging EVs would need to encompass effective communication and study of population charging habits
and behavior towards EVs.
Overall, the SDIRVE lacks a comprehensive social approach.
While it focuses
on developing charging infrastructure, this alone is insufficient to assess the entire ecosystem. However, the
coordinated stakeholder approach in the planning process is very thorough, and the proposed development
effectively considers current and future policies and technological change.
City Resilience Index (CRI)
The City Resilience Index is a measuring tool that provides a resilience score
based on 4 dimensions: Health and well-being, Economy and Society, Infrastructure and Environment, Lead-
ership and strategy [42]. The Rockefeller Foundation and ARUP developed the assessment after five years of
research on city resilience, addressing the need for a holistic approach to articulate and measure urban resilience.
The assessment is primarily based on the 52 factors they identified for city resilience, which are detailed in their
brochure [36].
This tool has been developed to measure and monitor various resilience factors to identify weaknesses and
track improvements over time. It uses a system approach in opposition to an asset-based approach. According
to them, it relates better to the notion of resilience because it takes into account urban assets or systems,
and, to varying degrees, considers man-made infrastructure, the natural environment, urban management, and
human behavior. They state that various approaches exist, but they mostly examine the resilience of individual
sub-systems rather than attempting to consider the resilience of the city as a system in itself. This promotes
a sectoral approach and means that interdependencies between different systems at different scales, and the
governing structures that influence the way systems work, are not easily considered.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 12: Example of a qualitative resilience profile in the City Resilience Index
Sources : City Resilience Index website www.cityresilienceindex.org
The CRI is intended primarily for city governments and aims to measure relative performance over time
rather than comparison between cities.
The tools does not provides an overall score but a set of indicators, variables and metrics that can be used by
cities to measure their resilience and compare their performance over time. There are 52 indicators, categorized
into 12 goals, themselves distributed in the four dimensions mentioned above. For each indicator, qualitative
assessment of the mechanisms and processes in place, and quantitative metrics are measured. The results are
displayed in 3 graphics; a qualitative resilience profile (example on Figure 12, a quantitative resilience profile,
and a completeness profile.
The assessment of the City Resilience Index tool as an operational tool to build resilience specifically for
electric mobility shows that all the components are partially integrated. The broad assessment of the tool
covers several dimensions, angles and stakeholder interactions left out in the other tools. It also emphasizes the
importance of the city’s interactions with external assets and components. For instance, stakeholder coordi-
nation includes the factor 6.5: Interaction with regional and global economy, while economic interactions with
encompassing systems are not included in the other tools. It strengthens a holistic approach and a systematic
view. While the tool emphasizes a global system, it has little flexibility in the methodology and utilization,
making it difficult to adapt to a sub-system of the city such as electric mobility. The tool shows limitations on
the questions linked to social behavior adaptation to the evolution of the system. While it aims at visualizing
the evolution of the resilience system, it lacks detail-oriented questions to sufficiently consider the rapid changes
occurring within the city’s sub-systems.
Synthesis of the results
Table 12 shows the summary of the tool assesment. The color code is the following:
grey = Irrelevant, light green = Yes, light orange = Partial, dark orange = No. The visual summary highlights
global strengths and weaknesses for the assessment of the electric mobility system in the tools and also allows
for tool comparison. The Stakeholder Landscape component is overall well integrated into the approach, as well
as the consideration for Public Instances. The infrastructure is partially integrated but the methodologies tend
to focus on the charging network development and integration, while not being focused on the dealership and
30
==PAGE:32==
maintenance network. In a fully market-driven mobility ecosystem, the risk is moderate as equipment would
develop in response to market demand. However, in the context of electric mobility, this criterion requires
close monitoring. The development is politically driven, and without incentives, dealerships and maintenance
centers might prefer to focus on ICE vehicles, which present less risk, require no transition, and provide a larger
market for them. The Population Behavior component is poorly embedded. As stated in the introduction
of the criteria, the local governments have a role to play in the monitoring of the population behavior local
governments have a frontline position in reaching out to citizens about the need for and challenges of transition.
Social Community also lacks, at least partially, in the assessment.
As D.P.Aldrich & Al.
(2015) state in
their article that Social Capital and Community Resilience are underutilized resources that strongly influences
resilience at the communal level [43]. While the article focus on natural disaster response and discovery, the
application to other type of stress stays highly relevant.
31
==PAGE:33==
Components
Criteria
MM
URA
SDIRVE
CRI
Stakeholder Landscape
1.1 Which stakeholders are in-
volved in the system ?
1.2 Do stakeholders use an inte-
grated/coordinated approach?
1.3
Which
stakeholder
holds
which responsibility ?
Infrastructure
2.1 Is the physical infrastruc-
ture capable of meeting system
needs and capacity, and can it
recover/adapt to changing condi-
tions?
2.2 Is there a sufficient and suit-
able supply of essential vehicles?
Is the service and maintenance
network for these vehicles ade-
quate?
2.3 What is the relevant data for
planning & operations and is it
available?
Population Behavior
3.1 Is the population ready to
adapt their behavior to electric
cars?
3.2 How is the transition toward
electric cars incentivized for the
population?
3.3 What are the tools avail-
able for population awareness
and communication?
Public Instances
4.1 What is the regulatory land-
scape set up by higher public au-
thorities?
4.2 What decision-making tools
are available? What data is nec-
essary and is it available?
4.3 What juridic tools are avail-
able ?
Social Community
5.1 Does the city have EVs users’
group or citizen association?
5.2 Are there events/actions un-
dertaken by the citizen?
Qualification Skillset
6.1 Does the city have the nec-
essary and qualified workforce
to undertake technical tasks and
services?
6.2 Are the necessary qualifica-
tions for decision-making, policy
enforcement, and organizational
management accessible?
Table 12: Visual summary of the tool assessment
This assessment shows some limits. It fails to underline the level of complexity and difficulty in adapting
the methodology to the specific ecosystem of electric mobility. For instance, the SDIRVE is overall answering
fewer criteria than the CRI. However, it is already developed with a focus on electric mobility, while the City
Resilience Index has a global overview of the city as a system, where the transportation network as a whole is
already only a subsystem in the assessment. If those tools were to be adjusted to electric mobility resilience
assessment, it will probably be easier to extend the functionalities in the SDIRVE, than radically reduce and
change the focus of the CRI factors. A further development of this assessment method could be to improve
32
==PAGE:34==
the 4-stage scale or to add an assessment dimension related to the accuracy of the tool in its answer to the
criteria. The result of this assessment underlines the lack of an accurate and complete tool that tackles all the
dimensions identified as essential to building resilience in cities and facing the transition to electric mobility.
2.3.3
Proposition of a functional tool
The final contribution of the study is to propose the structure for a functional tool based on the criteria
table presented earlier in the study (11). The same way the criteria are flexible and could be adapted for other
types of emerging mobility ecosystems, the functions are generic and can be used as a basis for a resilience tool
focused on other transportation. However, it is important to remember that the criteria were developed on the
basis of a risk analysis that focused specifically on the areas of risk associated with electric mobility. If such a
study were to be used for another type of transport, certain essential criteria could be overlooked.
Table 13 presents the different functions. There are between 1 and 3 associated to each criterion, color-
coded according to the type of function (see in Methodology, Figure 9). Then, the input and output parameters
suggestions are specified for the electric mobility ecosystem. To ease the reading, the parameters are available
in the appendix 4.
The functions are in majority from the type "Analyse", as the first objective of the tool is to identify and
investigate key elements of the ecosystem that are subject to risk. As stated in the Urban Risk Assessment
report [2], resilience and risk reduction rely heavily on a thorough understanding of the ecosystem’s weaknesses,
i.e. where threats exist. Cities can plan and react better if the location and nature of risks are known and if
risk assessment and management are integrated into urban development and management programs.
2.4
Conclusion
The study and implementation of resilience for urban systems, particularly cities, have emerged over the last
decade as the most effective response to the increasing complexity and number of threats and risks facing these
systems. International organizations have established a framework for urban resilience. This study focuses
specifically on the resilience of emerging transportation ecosystems in cities, such as electric mobility. The
literature review on resilience highlighted the need for a specific and operational tool that city governments can
use to assess and monitor resilience. A list of criteria answering the essential needs of this tool has been drawn
up, providing a grid for assessing various resilience tools. It revealed significant gaps in several criteria in the
existing tools, and the necessity to adapt those tools to the specific ecosystem. Finally, these criteria have been
translated into practical functions, paving the way for the development of a tailored tool designed to enhance
the resilience of urban electric mobility systems.
33
==PAGE:35==
Components
Criteria
Function
Stakeholder
Landscape
Identify an exhaustive list of potential stakeholders
1.1 Which stakeholders are involved in
the system ?
Determine their current and future involvement in
the system development
Develop and clarify any hierarchic system, influence
and communication channels between the stakehold-
ers
Develop a stakeholder coordination plan
1.2. Do stakeholders use an
integrated/coordinated approach ?
Assess the efficiency of the communication network
1.3 Which stakeholder hold which re-
sponsibility ?
Determine roles for each stakeholders
Infrastructure
Estimate the demand in vehicles
Estimate the current and future supply network
2.1 Is the physical infrastructure
capable of meeting system needs and
capacity, and can it recover/adapt to
changing conditions?
Estimate the current and future car maintenance
system capacity
Estimate system needs
Estimate system capacity
Assess system robustness
2.2 Is there a sufficient and suitable
supply of essential vehicles? Is the
service and maintenance network for
these vehicles adequate?
Identify data sources
Standardise data collection
2.3 What is the relevant data for
planning & operations and is it
available?
Population
Behavior
Identify human factors
3.1 Is the population ready to adapt
their behavior to electric cars?
Identify pain points for users in the charging process
3.2 How is the transition toward electric
cars incentivized for the population?
Identify the current and future financial incentives
Identify communication resources and tools
Identify communication channels
3.3 What are the tools available for
population awareness and
communication?
Assess communication media
Public
Instances
Identify all the development and regulations with
an impact, and requirements on the local system
4.1 What is the regulatory landscape
set up by higher public authorities?
Assess new strategies
Identify the guidelines and tools in place that are
considering the development of the system
Identify the gap in the data necessary to use these
tools
4.2 What decision-making tools are
available? What data is necessary and
is it available?
Implement the lacking data collection process
Investigate legal gaps involving electric vehicles
4.3 What juridic tools are available ?
Assess legal frameworks on energy resources
Social
Community
Identify the different groups and communities re-
lated to the system
5.1 Does the city have EVs users’
group or citizen association?
Identify their resources and objectives
Identify the events and actions that are organized
5.2 Are there events/actions
undertaken by the citizen?
Identify their resources and objectives
Qualification
Skillset
Estimate the current and future workforce avail-
able for installing and maintaining charging infras-
tructure, and for EV service and maintenance
Estimate the current and future needs in workforce
by conducting gathering data through surveys, inter-
views, or consultations with companies
6.1 Does the city have the necessary
and qualified workforce to undertake
technical tasks and services?
Develop necessary training programs
Identify the resources and needs in expertise, in the
authorities responsible for mobility planning devel-
opment plan
6.2 Are the necessary qualifications for
decision-making, policy enforcement,
and organizational management
accessible?
Deliver training courses on electric mobility to the
stakeholders involved in its development
Table 13: Functional tool for resilience: function recommendation
Green = Monitor, Pink = Analyse, Blue = Plan, Orange = Execute
34
==PAGE:36==
3
Conclusion
This study aims to be an exploratory work on the resilience of electric mobility, with a particular focus on
urban areas. The approach involved analyzing electric mobility as an ecosystem, performing a comprehensive
risk analysis, and integrating resilience considerations into the development and implementation of electric mo-
bility in urban settings.
The risk analysis emphasized the importance of a holistic view when assessing risks, allowing for a new cat-
egorization of identified risks. This exhaustive evaluation serves as a detailed mapping of potential risk sources,
enhancing the ability to identify root causes and develop effective mitigation strategies. This approach facili-
tates the evaluation and creation of tools aimed at improving system responses to disasters and increasing stress.
In the second part, it focuses on cities and urban areas within the European Union. The study reviewed re-
silience strategies for urban transportation systems. The findings highlighted the existence of specific tools and
frameworks and identified the need for a tool tailored to emerging transportation systems like electric mobility.
The assessment revealed that essential dimensions, such as social behavior and community involvement, are in-
adequately addressed by current tools, which are often too broad to tackle the specific challenges of the electric
mobility ecosystem. Consequently, the basis for a functional tool is proposed, with recommended functions and
parameters to meet all identified essential criteria.
The methodical approach to this complex, multidimensional problem involved defining the ecosystem and
conducting interviews to produce an exhaustive risk analysis. Given the rapid evolution of the system, both in
tangible and intangible aspects, unknown risks and unanticipated cascading consequences may emerge. While
the top-down approach has numerous advantages, it is also important to consider its limitations. Modeling such
a large-scale system with numerous hard-to-quantify factors introduces significant uncertainty. Developing a
fully operational resilience tool could require considerable additional work and may encounter challenges related
to the subjectivity of objectives.
This study opens several paths for further research. First, the broad-level risk analysis can be detailed further
by investigating specific characteristics of each risk, such as their probability of occurrence, the time scale for
expected stress increases, and a thorough evaluation of impacted assets and involved stakeholders. The flexible
criteria outlined can be adapted to other emerging transportation systems that rely on developing technology
and material-intensive equipment. The final contribution lays the groundwork for creating a fully functional
decision-making tool or incorporating resilience factors into electric mobility strategies as system constraints.
Lastly, the top-down approach proposed in this study can be validated by applying it to a real system, such as
conducting a risk analysis and resilience assessment on a European city. This application would highlight the
strengths and weaknesses of the model, providing practical insights for further refinement.
35
==PAGE:37==
4
Appendix
Appendix A: Detailed interview process: example of a Supply Chain Expert
Interview
Goal:
- To have insight from different point of view, on specific risks linked to the development of electric mobility in
cities
- To get a better understanding of stakeholder interaction and roles within the ecosystem and related to those risks
Introduction:
• Can you give me a quick introduction to your role and responsibilities ? How is your position and/or
expertise linked to the development of electric mobility (broad : can be the renewable sector, the grid)?
What kind of entities/institution/companies are you interacting with?
• 3-5 Identified Risk linked to the expertise field; According to your experience is there a risk?
How
would you assess its probability to occur? what are the stakeholders involved, and how accountability
is distributed among these stakeholders in addressing potential risks and challenges? Supply Chain –
selected risks
– Geopolitics:Geopolitical events leading to supply chain disruption.
– Natural Disasters: Natural Disasters leading to supply chain disruption
– Product/Material Competition:
Increased competition with other industries for essential prod-
ucts (battery) and critical minerals (renewables)
– Prices Supply chain crisis increasing the production price
– Government Targets One of the numerous transitions associated to the success of the EV transition
(energy, telecom, mining, recycling, transportation) does not reach sufficient targets) - The ambitious
target on number of sales are not met in 2035.
– Production Capacity The production industry is not ready for the demand in battery supply
(plant capacity and/or supply chain stakeholders)
– User Confidence The precipitation of the EV transition by a top down approach, do not
ensure the good implementation of new consumer behaviours
– Consumer Behaviour The race to make new cars as technologically advanced as possible is at the
expense of their reliability, and reduces user confidence.
– Battery Recycling The business of recycling battery does not become economically viable/ does
not have enough capacity
• Is there other challenges, potential hazards related to mentioned assets that need to be addressed according
to you ?
• Additional questions :
– How do you perceive the risk management in the electric mobility landscape today?
Is there a
proactive process for risk assessment and mitigation ?
– How those risk are taken into account today, is there projects, research that takes places to build
resilience? What networks, expertise are necessary, at which operational level?
36
==PAGE:38==
==PAGE:39==
Appendix B : Tool assessment, Maturity Model
==PAGE:40==
Appendix C : Tool assessment, Urban Risk Assessment
==PAGE:41==
Appendix D : Tool assesment, Schéma Directeur pour less Infrastructures de Recharge de Véhicule Electrique
==PAGE:42==
Appendix E : Tool assessment, City Resilience Index
==PAGE:43==
Appendix F : Parameters Recommendation for resilience tool, Stakeholder Landscape
==PAGE:44==
Appendix G : Parameters Recommendation for resilience tool, Infrastructure
==PAGE:45==
Appendix H : Parameters Recommendation for resilience tool, Population Behavior
==PAGE:46==
Appendix I : Parameters Recommendation for resilience tool, Public Instances
==PAGE:47==
Appendix J : Parameters Recommendation for resilience tool, Social Community
==PAGE:48==
Appendix K : Parameters Recommendation for resilience tool, Qualification Skillset
==PAGE:49==
References
[1]
Strategy\& and PwC Autofacts®. Electric Vehicle Sales Review Q1-2024. url: https://www.strategyand.
pwc.com/de/en/industries/automotive/electric-vehicle-sales-review-2024-q1.html (visited
on 07/25/2024).
[2]
Eric Dickson et al. Urban risk assessments : understanding disaster and climate risk in cities. June 22,
2012.
[3]
Ville de Paris. Dossier Départemental sur les Risques Majeurs (DDRM) Paris. May 30, 2022. url: https:
//www.paris.fr/pages/qu-est-ce-qu-un-risque-majeur-5466.
[4]
Grid Integration of Electric Vehicles – Analysis. IEA, Dec. 14, 2022. url: https://www.iea.org/
reports/grid-integration-of-electric-vehicles/executive-summary (visited on 03/29/2024).
[5]
James Eddy, Alexander Pfeiffer, and Jasper van de Staaij. The 2040 outlook for EV battery manufac-
turing | McKinsey. June 3, 2019. url: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/oil-and-gas/our-
insights/recharging-economies-the-ev-battery-manufacturing-outlook-for-europe (visited on
03/29/2024).
[6]
Jakob Fleischmann et al. Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular. Global Battery Alliance, 2023.
[7]
Alexandre Beaudet et al. “Key Challenges and Opportunities for Recycling Electric Vehicle Battery Ma-
terials”. In: Sustainability 12.14 (Jan. 2020). Number: 14 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing
Institute, p. 5837. issn: 2071-1050. doi: 10.3390/su12145837. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-
1050/12/14/5837 (visited on 03/30/2024).
[8]
M. Granger Morgan et al. “Categorizing Risks for Risk Ranking”. In: Risk Analysis 20.1 (Feb. 2000),
pp. 49–58. issn: 0272-4332, 1539-6924. doi: 10.1111/0272-4332.00005. url: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0272-4332.00005 (visited on 07/11/2024).
[9]
N.Charette Robert. “The EV Transition Explained”. In: IEEE Spectrum (Mar. 31, 2023).
[10]
Karl Vogel. Nebraska experts weigh highway safety and electric vehicles |. url: https://engineering.
unl.edu/news/240131/mwrsf_evs_safety/ (visited on 03/29/2024).
[11]
Michael L. Anderson and Maximilian Auffhammer. “Pounds That Kill: The External Costs of Vehicle
Weight”. In: The Review of Economic Studies 81.2 (2014). Publisher: [Oxford University Press, The Review
of Economic Studies, Ltd.], pp. 535–571. issn: 0034-6527. url: https://www.jstor.org/stable/
43551573 (visited on 03/29/2024).
[12]
International Energy Agency. Global EV Outlook 2023: Catching up with Climate Ambitions. Global EV
Outlook. OECD, Apr. 26, 2023. isbn: 978-92-64-85692-9. doi: 10.1787/cbe724e8- en. url: https:
//www.oecd-ilibrary.org/energy/global-ev-outlook-2023_cbe724e8-en (visited on 03/29/2024).
[13]
“Voiture électrique : la France souhaite atteindre 800 000 ventes dès 2027”. In: Le Monde.fr (May 5, 2024).
url: https://www.lemonde.fr/economie/article/2024/05/05/voiture-electrique-la-france-
souhaite-atteindre-800-000-ventes-des-2027_6231749_3234.html (visited on 07/12/2024).
[14]
EV TechSafe Technician Forecasts - March 2023. Institute of the Motor Industry (IMI), Apr. 11, 2023. url:
https://tide.theimi.org.uk/industry-latest/research/ev-techsafe-technician-forecasts-
march-2023 (visited on 03/29/2024).
[15]
Keith Bradsher. “China’s Electric Car Factories Can’t Hire Fast Enough”. In: The New York Times (Dec. 8,
2023). issn: 0362-4331. url: https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/08/business/china-electric-
vehicles.html (visited on 03/29/2024).
[16]
Marina Yue Zhang. The highly charged geopolitics of lithium | East Asia Forum. East Asia Forum. Mar. 1,
2023. url: https://eastasiaforum.org/2023/03/01/the- highly- charged- geopolitics- of-
lithium/ (visited on 07/12/2024).
[17]
Disaster prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan et al. “Analyzing and simulat-
ing supply chain disruptions to the automobile industry based on experiences of the Great East Japan
Earthquake”. In: Journal of Integrated Disaster Risk Management 5.2 (Dec. 2015), pp. 42–69. issn:
21858322. doi: 10.5595/idrim.2015.0102. url: https://www.idrimjournal.com/article/11676-
analyzing-and-simulating-supply-chain-disruptions-to-the-automobile-industry-based-on-
experiences-of-the-great-east-japan-earthquake (visited on 07/12/2024).
48
==PAGE:50==
[18]
Phil LeBeau. EV battery costs could spike 22% by 2026 as raw material shortages drag on. CNBC. May 18,
2022. url: https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/18/ev- battery- costs- set- to- spike- as- raw-
material-shortages-drags-on.html (visited on 03/29/2024).
[19]
Electric vehicle charging market study. UK: Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), Feb. 29, 2024.
url: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/electric-vehicle-charging-market-study-
final-report/final-report (visited on 07/12/2024).
[20]
Patricia Sauri Lavieri and Gabriel Jurado Martins de Oliveira. “Planning for the majorities: are the
charging needs and preferences of electric vehicle early adopters similar to those of mainstream consumers?”
In: Oxford Open Energy 2 (Feb. 1, 2023), oiad001. issn: 2752-5082. doi: 10.1093/ooenergy/oiad001.
url: https://doi.org/10.1093/ooenergy/oiad001 (visited on 07/12/2024).
[21]
Piyaruwan Perera, Kasun Hewage, and Rehan Sadiq. “Electric vehicle recharging infrastructure planning
and management in urban communities”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 250 (Mar. 20, 2020), p. 119559.
issn: 0959-6526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119559. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0959652619344294 (visited on 07/26/2024).
[22]
Tim Unterluggauer et al. “Impact of cost-based smart electric vehicle charging on urban low voltage power
distribution networks”. In: Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks 35 (Sept. 1, 2023), p. 101085. issn:
2352-4677. doi: 10.1016/j.segan.2023.101085. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2352467723000930 (visited on 07/12/2024).
[23]
Jos van der Burgt et al. “Grid impact of charging electric vehicles; study cases in Denmark, Germany and
The Netherlands”. In: 2015 IEEE Eindhoven PowerTech. 2015 IEEE Eindhoven PowerTech. June 2015,
pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/PTC.2015.7232234. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/
7232234 (visited on 07/12/2024).
[24]
Yosra Fraiji et al. “Cyber security issues of Internet of electric vehicles”. In: 2018 IEEE Wireless Com-
munications and Networking Conference (WCNC). 2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC). ISSN: 1558-2612. Apr. 2018, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/WCNC.2018.8377181. url:
https://ieeexplore- ieee- org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/document/8377181/?arnumber=8377181
(visited on 07/12/2024).
[25]
Inna Skarga-Bandurova, Igor Kotsiuba, and Tetiana Biloborodova. “Cyber Security of Electric Vehicle
Charging Infrastructure: Open Issues and Recommendations”. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on
Big Data (Big Data). 2022 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). Osaka, Japan: IEEE,
Dec. 17, 2022, pp. 3099–3106. isbn: 978-1-66548-045-1. doi: 10.1109/BigData55660.2022.10020644.
url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10020644/ (visited on 07/12/2024).
[26]
Jack Ewing. “As Automakers Add Technology to Cars, Software Bugs Follow”. In: The New York Times
(Feb. 8, 2022). issn: 0362-4331. url: https://www.nytimes.com/2022/02/08/business/car-software-
lawsuits.html (visited on 07/12/2024).
[27]
Ran Bi et al. “Influence of Charging Behaviour Given Charging Station Placement at Existing Petrol
Stations and Residential Car Park Locations in Singapore”. In: Procedia Computer Science. International
Conference on Computational Science 2016, ICCS 2016, 6-8 June 2016, San Diego, California, USA 80
(Jan. 1, 2016), pp. 335–344. issn: 1877-0509. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . procs. 2016 . 05. 347. url: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050916307657 (visited on 07/12/2024).
[28]
Anant Atul Visaria et al. “User preferences for EV charging, pricing schemes, and charging infrastructure”.
In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 165 (Nov. 1, 2022), pp. 120–143. issn: 0965-8564.
doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2022.08.013. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0965856422002099 (visited on 07/12/2024).
[29]
Katharina Csillak and Mariana Moreno Kuhnke. “An Interoperability Framework for electromobility (IN-
FRA): The main results from the USER-CHI framework implementation in a new spotlight”. In: Open
Research Europe 2 (May 25, 2022), p. 65. issn: 2732-5121. doi: 10.12688/openreseurope.14510.1. url:
https://open-research-europe.ec.europa.eu/articles/2-65/v1 (visited on 04/02/2024).
[30]
Steve Sorrell, Birgitta Gatersleben, and Angela Druckman. “The limits of energy sufficiency: A review of
the evidence for rebound effects and negative spillovers from behavioural change”. In: Energy Research &
Social Science 64 (June 1, 2020), p. 101439. issn: 2214-6296. doi: 10.1016/j.erss.2020.101439. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214629620300165 (visited on 07/12/2024).
49
==PAGE:51==
[31]
Sandeep Jagani, Erika Marsillac, and Paul Hong. “The Electric Vehicle Supply Chain Ecosystem: Changing
Roles of Automotive Suppliers”. In: Sustainability 16.4 (Jan. 2024). Number: 4 Publisher: Multidisciplinary
Digital Publishing Institute, p. 1570. issn: 2071-1050. doi: 10.3390/su16041570. url: https://www.
mdpi.com/2071-1050/16/4/1570 (visited on 04/09/2024).
[32]
RMIS. Battery supply chain challenges. Europeean Commission, Mar. 2023. url: https://rmis.jrc.
ec.europa.eu/analysis-of-supply-chain-challenges-49b749 (visited on 07/16/2024).
[33]
Seyedmohsen Hosseini, Kash Barker, and Jose E. Ramirez-Marquez. “A review of definitions and measures
of system resilience”. In: Reliability Engineering & System Safety 145 (Jan. 1, 2016), pp. 47–61. issn: 0951-
8320. doi: 10.1016/j.ress.2015.08.006. (Visited on 02/09/2024).
[34]
Julian Salomon et al. “Multidimensional resilience decision-making for complex and substructured sys-
tems”. In: Resilient Cities and Structures. Resilience of Civil Infrastructure to Multiple Hazards and Cli-
mate Change 1.3 (Sept. 1, 2022), pp. 61–78. issn: 2772-7416. doi: 10.1016/j.rcns.2022.10.005. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2772741622000333 (visited on 07/26/2024).
[35]
Cate Fox-Lent and Igor Linkov. “Resilience Matrix for Comprehensive Urban Resilience Planning”. In: ed.
by Yoshiki Yamagata and Ayyoob Sharifi. Vol. 65. Book Title: Resilience-Oriented Urban Planning Series
Title: Lecture Notes in Energy. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 29–47. isbn: 978-3-
319-75797-1 978-3-319-75798-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-75798-8_2. url: http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/978-3-319-75798-8_2 (visited on 04/09/2024).
[36]
City Resilience Index : Understanding and measuring city resilience. The Rockefeller Foundation - ARUP.
[37]
Jaziar Radianti. “Towards European Dimensions of City Resilience”. In: Information Technology in Dis-
aster Risk Reduction. Ed. by Yuko Murayama et al. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication
Technology. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 104–118. isbn: 978-3-319-68486-4. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-68486-4_9.
[38]
Evangelia Gaitanidou, Maria Tsami, and Evangelos Bekiaris. “A review of resilience management appli-
cation tools in the transport sector”. In: Transportation Research Procedia. 3rd Conference on Sustainable
Urban Mobility, 3rd CSUM 2016, 26 – 27 May 2016, Volos, Greece 24 (Jan. 1, 2017), pp. 235–240. issn:
2352-1465. doi: 10.1016/j.trpro.2017.05.113. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2352146517303964 (visited on 04/09/2024).
[39]
Bruria Adini et al. “Striving to be resilient: What concepts, approaches and practices should be in-
corporated in resilience management guidelines?” In: Technological Forecasting and Social Change 121
(Aug. 1, 2017), pp. 39–49. issn: 0040-1625. doi: 10.1016/j.techfore.2017.01.020. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0040162517301026 (visited on 04/25/2024).
[40]
Paolo Arcaini, Elvinia Riccobene, and Patrizia Scandurra. “Modeling and Analyzing MAPE-K Feedback
Loops for Self-Adaptation”. In: 2015 IEEE/ACM 10th International Symposium on Software Engineering
for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems. 2015 IEEE/ACM 10th International Symposium on Software
Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems. ISSN: 2157-2321. May 2015, pp. 13–23. doi: 10.
1109/SEAMS.2015.10. url: https://ieeexplore- ieee- org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/document/
7194653/?arnumber=7194653 (visited on 07/23/2024).
[41]
Raquel Gimenez, Leire Labaka, and Josune Hernantes. “A maturity model for the involvement of stake-
holders in the city resilience building process”. In: Technological Forecasting and Social Change 121
(Aug. 1, 2017), pp. 7–16. issn: 0040-1625. doi: 10.1016/j.techfore.2016.08.001. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0040162516302037 (visited on 04/25/2024).
[42]
The Rockfeller Foundation and Arup. City Resilience Index - Resources. 2018. url: https : / / www .
cityresilienceindex.org/#/resources (visited on 06/02/2024).
[43]
Daniel Aldrich and Michelle Meyer. “Social Capital and Community Resilience”. In: American Behavioral
Scientist 59 (Feb. 1, 2015), pp. 254–269. doi: 10.1177/0002764214550299.
50
