==PAGE:1==
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality
with Application to Juggling
Master Thesis
by Kacper Błażej Gąsior
DTU Human Centered Artificial Intelligence
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
Master Thesis
September, 2024
By
Kacper Błażej Gąsior
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Elek-
trovej, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five and a half months at the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Kacper Błażej Gąsior - s222755
Signature
Date
ii
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the effectiveness of Virtual Reality (VR) as a tool for motor skill ac-
quisition, using juggling as an example. VR is a cutting-edge technology that gets more
accessible and continuously gains popularity in various fields like healthcare [1] or educa-
tion [2]. Apart from the popular application being gaming and entertainment, it is more and
more used in different industries as a tool for skill acquisition. One particular type of skill
that is very interesting is motor skills. Virtual reality allows for creating a fully controllable
environment, that can be adjusted to the individual needs of every user [3]. This study
focuses on the skill of juggling. It is relatively complex and requires good hand-eye co-
ordination and the ability to control multiple objects at the same time [4]. The decision to
choose this particular skill is also due to the fact that the researcher had experience as a
juggler and public performer. This allowed for the development of a VR juggling simulator
with features that help with the most important aspects of performing this skill and quick
testing of every iteration, reducing the development time.
This thesis aims to answer the question of whether motor skill acquisition in VR can give
comparable results to the traditional methods in a real-world environment. The user ex-
perience aspect of training was also evaluated, comparing these two environments with
each other. Twenty participants were divided into two groups and had 30 minutes to train
3-ball juggling, with a goal of doing a 3-ball flash. Half of the participants practiced in the
real world. After getting the initial instructions, they were presented with an animation
visualizing the 3 ball cascade pattern. The second group trained in VR in the juggling
simulator developed for this study. Apart from allowing the user to toss balls from one
hand to the other, multiple features were implemented to enhance the learning process,
like slow motion, balls stopping in mid-air, etc. The performance was measured by con-
ducting 2 tests in real-world conditions, with a 3-minute break in between. In both tests,
participants had 10 attempts to do a 3-ball flash. Each attempt was registered, and the
final performance was calculated, giving an estimate of how well a person has learned the
skill. Each participant answered one questionnaire before the test and one after, answer-
ing questions about the frustration level they have experienced throughout the training
process, how much they have enjoyed it, etc. The correlations between ball sports expe-
rience and other aspects were calculated, together with the significance levels, providing
information needed for the evaluation.
The group that practiced in real-world conditions achieved an average score of 7.7 and
7.4 3-ball flashes in the first and second tests, respectively. The average score of the VR
group being 0.9 and 3, showed that this technology might not be capable of giving com-
parable results in immediate performance after the training. An interesting observation,
was that the group that trained in the virtual environment showed a noticeable improve-
ment in the second test, indicating that they have learned the foundations of juggling, but
couldn’t immediately transfer the skills learned in VR to the real world. The results of the
questionnaire showed that training in VR was more enjoyable, suggesting that it can be a
great tool for aiding with real-world skill acquisition, encouraging people to try new skills
in more user-friendly conditions and at their own pace.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Fiona Bríd Mulvey, Senior Researcher, Department of Health Technology, Hearing Sys-
tems Section, DTU
Thank you, Fiona, for dedicating part of your free time to guide me on the topic of ex-
perimental design, which was very new to me. The possibility of sharing my ideas for
teaching people juggling and brainstorming together the best way to test my hypothesis
was invaluable.
iv
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Goal of the thesis
5
2.1
Research focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Research goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Foundations of Skill Acquisition in Real World and Virtual Environments
9
3.1
Process of learning new skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Juggling as a Motor Skill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Virtual Reality (VR) and Related Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Learning skills in VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Previous Work on Learning Motor Skills in XR on Example of Juggling
27
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Overview of Key Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Detailed Analysis of Each Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Implementation
31
5.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Hardware: Oculus Quest 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
Software Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.4
Implementation Ideas and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6
Methods
45
6.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
Study Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.3
Measurement and Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.4
Questionnaires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.5
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
Evaluation
49
8
Discussion
55
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Bibliography
59
A Appendix
67
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, virtual reality (VR) has seen rapid advancement in various areas other
than just gaming and entertainment. Nowadays, industries like healthcare and education
start taking advantage of this technology as well. One of the most promising applications
of VR is in skill acquisition, where immersive environments can be modeled to simulate
real-world conditions, allowing users to practice without the limitations of physical space
and materials. The potential of VR is found in its ability to offer a fully controllable in-
teractive learning environment that suits the individual requirements by providing instant
feedback and the ability to adjust the complexity of the task for each user individually.
This makes VR a promising choice for skill acquisition tools across multiple fields. One
area where VR is showing good potential is in motor skills training, which often involves
eye-hand coordination, timing, and spatial awareness. Mastering motor skills often re-
quires a lot of repetitive practice, which can be inconvenient and costly, especially when
the skill requires extra equipment, coaching, or access to the physical training space is
limited. VR offers a controllable environment where skills can be practiced regardless of
physical resources and allows for practicing anywhere at any time.
Figure 1.1: Surgery in VR [5].
This thesis focuses on the application of VR in motor skill training, using juggling as an
example. It is a complex motor skill that requires good timing, hand-eye coordination, and
the ability to track multiple objects at the same time. Its repetitive nature and the fact that it
doesn’t require much movement make it a great candidate for studying the effectiveness
of skill training in VR. In this thesis, a VR juggling simulator was developed to investigate
if VR is capable of teaching juggling and giving comparable results to traditional methods.
Additionally, this skill was also chosen due to the researcher’s personal experience as
a juggler. The deep understanding of the learning process and knowledge of common
mistakes and difficulties, as well as the key techniques to fix them, provided a solid foun-
dation for building a quality juggling simulator. The motivation for this research comes
from the fact that VR gains popularity as a tool for education and training, especially in
areas where real-world practice is impractical, expensive, or inaccessible. VR is capable
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
1
==PAGE:10==
of providing a controlled environment that can be adjusted to the individual needs of the
user, allowing for manipulation of the difficulty level and practicing at their own pace. In
the case of juggling, VR can remove the frustration that is often associated with the ac-
tion of picking up the balls after dropping them on the ground by providing a feature of
resetting the balls to users hands with just a button press. Additionally, this technology
allows for the introduction of advanced features that are not possible in the real world,
like slow motion or a complete pause of the environment around the user. All of this can
help learners understand the skills more thoroughly, being able to study them and prac-
tice at their own pace. However, while VR offers a number of unique advantages over the
traditional approach to learning with physical objects, it also comes with some limitations
caused by the current state of the available hardware. Relatively heavy headsets with
unpleasant weight distribution, limited field of view, and lack of tactile feedback are a few
of the key constraints of the VR technology that are yet to be fixed. The main concern
is if these limitations don’t prevent VR from providing comparable or even better learning
results than the traditional training methods.
This and the other studies investigate the topic of the efficiency of VR training simulators
because of the growing need for accessible and efficient training solutions, especially in
places where traditional learning methods are impractical, resource-intensive, or inacces-
sible to the majority of people. VR has the potential to make skill training not only available
to a larger audience but also cost-effective. The goal of this study is to answer the ques-
tion of whether this technology can provide a virtual training environment that will give
results comparable to the traditional approach, on the example of juggling. A skill that
requires coordination and timing. This study aims to evaluate the efficiency of training in
VR by comparing the performance of participants that trained in a virtual environment to
those that trained in real life. Additionally, the user experience aspect of training will be
investigated by examining factors such as frustration and enjoyment. This will allow for
a deeper understanding of the advantages and drawbacks of this technology, providing
invaluable information on what can be improved in future training simulators. VR allows
for extra enhancements that would be impossible in real-world conditions, such as slow
motion, and this study raises a question about its role in the aspect of learning skills in
a virtual environment. While features like this one offer clear advantages in theory, their
impact on the actual learning may be more complicated. Slow motion can, on the one
hand, help the user understand the technique better, but does it negatively influence the
learner’s ability to adjust to the conditions of the real world?
The structure of this thesis is designed to address the key questions and provide a com-
prehensive evaluation of the data collected from the experiments. The first chapters will
introduce the theory behind different aspects of motor skill learning and VR, necessary
to fully understand the complexity of the problem and the proposed solutions. This is fol-
lowed by a detailed explanation of what juggling is, what the main challenges of learning
this skill are, and why it was chosen as the focus of this study. Next, the implementation
of the VR juggling simulator is described, outlining and explaining the various features
integrated into the simulator to enhance the learning process. Finally, the design of the
experiment is described, followed by the evaluation of the collected results of the tests.
The discussion chapter summarizes key findings and talks about possible future studies
in this context.
This study contributes to the research on the topic of the capabilities of VR technology in
the aspect of skill acquisition, providing valuable insights into the design and implemen-
tation of a good VR training simulator. While the results may not prove that VR training is
more effective than traditional training methods, they highlight the potential of this tech-
2
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:11==
nology and suggest directions for future research. By covering both the advantages and
limitations of the VR juggling simulator, this study lays the groundwork for better and more
advanced VR training solutions.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:13==
2
Goal of the thesis
This chapter aims to provide an overview of existing work in the field of VR simulators,
specifically juggling simulators, and their efficiency compared to real life. It highlights the
areas this thesis aims to address and contribute to. It defines the specific goals to be
achieved, the questions to be answered, and the hypotheses to be tested.
2.1
Research focus
The primary focus of this thesis is to explore existing approaches in the area of VR training
simulators and investigate important aspects of learning skills, with a focus on motor skills,
juggling in particular. Based on this research, later implement a VR juggling simulator that
effectively teaches that skill, facilitating various features that VR provides. The simulator
is implemented in the Unity game engine and tested on the Oculus Quest 2 headset.
2.2
Problem statement
Virtual reality is a cutting-edge technology that is being incorporated in various fields,
getting more and more popular. One of the many applications of VR is in simulators and
training simulators. Designing a training simulator is a difficult objective because there
are various aspects to it. Learning is a big part of every person’s life. Mastering new skills
is a very broad topic. Different people prefer different ways of learning. Some memorize
best while listening, and others when they read [6]. Training skills sometimes have special
requirements in terms of props, environment, coaches, etc. This is one of the areas where
virtual reality comes in handy because the whole environment aspect can be controlled
and adjusted to fit the exact scenario [7]. But virtual reality isn’t only used to recreate
and simulate real life. Another trait of this technology is that it allows to alter the real-life
scenarios and allow for adjusting them to fit the user’s needs and current experience. It
allows for actions that are impossible in the real world, like slowing down the time, stopping
the time, or destroying a virtual environment without consequences. But virtual reality is,
of course, virtual. This influences the training experience. VR is a tool that can provide
a great level of immersion, but it isn’t that simple to achieve. The important aspect of
it is how the simulator itself has been implemented. How realistic does it feel? What
approaches have been chosen? Even with good technology, the simulation can poorly
simulate reality. And with that in mind, how well will the user learn and refine their skills
using this simulator?
2.3
Objective
The primary objective of this thesis is to create a virtual reality juggling simulator that not
only allows for juggling but also facilitates the learning process with an audio guide, slows
down the time, and more. Later, with the help of this software, the efficiency of learning
real-life skills with the use of virtual reality will be tested and compared with the results of
training in real life. The simulator will provide an essential introduction to the training of
juggling art. It will be a step-by-step tutorial that tracks the user’s progress, allowing for
a personalized flow of the practice. Learners’ performance will be monitored at all times,
allowing intelligent systems to provide users with helpful tips based on the mistakes they
make.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
5
==PAGE:14==
2.4
Hypothesis
The main hypothesis of this thesis is that training in virtual reality can give comparable
results to learning skills in real life. This technology has a few advantages, like for one, VR
allows for self-directed training and independence, but on the other hand, in some sce-
narios, training in pairs is more efficient than training in the simulator [8]. There are many
differences between learning the same skill in VR and in the real world. Each of these two
solutions has advantages and cons. In this thesis, some of them were discussed, and the
efficiency of learning how to juggle in both worlds was assessed based on the success
rate of juggling attempts during the final test, conducted in a real-world environment.
In addition to the main hypothesis, four others will be investigated, evaluating the differ-
ences between skill acquisition in virtual and real environments. It is hypothesized that
training in VR is more enjoyable than training in the traditional way, in the physical space.
Due to the immersion provided by the VR headset, the experience of juggling in the simu-
lator may feel more like a game than a simple training session, leading to a higher level of
enjoyment and engagement. Another hypothesis is that prior experience with a gamepad
or VR results in a better final performance. This is due to the fact that a participant who
has tried VR before will not spend time getting used to the new technology and will im-
mediately start learning the skill of juggling. Additionally, due to the way catching juggling
balls is implemented, prior experience with a gamepad should help with pressing the cor-
rect buttons in good timing. It is also hypothesized that training in VR is less frustrating.
This technology allows for smoothing out the learning curve by implementing extra fea-
tures like slow motion and adjusting difficulty level to the current experience level of the
user, allowing them to practice at their own pace. In juggling, the action of picking up
the balls gets frustrating quickly because it happens every time the ball is dropped. In
a virtual environment, balls can be re-positioned into users’ hands with a simple press
of a button. The last hypothesis is that ball sports experience has a strong influence on
the final performance of the participants, regardless of the environment they trained in.
Juggling requires good eye-hand coordination, which is also required and trained in most
of the ball sports. Hence, people that are good at handball or volleyball should have an
easier time learning juggling, leading to better final performance.
2.5
Research questions
To validate the hypothesis, the research will focus on several key questions:
1. How does the juggling performance of participants learning in a VR simulator com-
pare to the results of the group training in real life?
2. Is training in a virtual environment more enjoyable than in the physical environment?
3. How does prior experience with a gamepad or VR influence the training and final
performance of participants training in the simulator?
4. Is the frustration level after the training lower in the VR group compared to the real-
world group?
5. Does prior ball sports experience have an impact on the juggling performance of
participants? Is the impact greater in one of the groups?
2.6
Research goals and methods
This thesis aims to evaluate the efficiency of learning motor skills with the help of a VR
simulator, using juggling as an example. To achieve this, one group will train in a VR
juggling simulator and the other in the real world. At the end, their performance will be
6
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:15==
compared and evaluated. Additionally, this study explores the user experience (UX) as-
pect of learning in two environments, focusing on frustration, enjoyment, and the influence
of prior experience. This research seeks to answer the question of whether training in VR
can give comparable results to training in the real world. To address the research goals,
a number of research methodologies will be employed:
• Review of existing solutions: Investigate current solutions in the area of virtual
reality training, with a focus on motor skills, juggling in particular.
• Prototyping and User Testing: Develop prototypes of a VR juggling simulator that
also guides the learner step-by-step through the process of learning this skill. Test
with a small number of users, gain immediate feedback, and do iterative improve-
ments.
• Pilot testing: Test the final version of the simulator with a small group of people to
estimate the time required to complete the practice routine.
• Experimental testing: Using the insights from the pilot test, conduct the main study
with two groups: one trained using a VR simulator, and the other trained in real life.
• Evaluation: Evaluate the effectiveness of virtual reality training compared to prac-
tice in a physical environment and the user experience aspect of learning in the
simulator and the real world.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:17==
3
Foundations of Skill Acquisition in Real
World and Virtual Environments
3.1
Process of learning new skills
The neuroscience aspect of learning new skills
Neuroplasticity refers to the brain’s ability to transform. Throughout our whole lives, new
neural connections are formed when learning new skills [9]. This effect is especially rel-
evant when learning juggling. Developing this particular skill strengthens pathways re-
sponsible for timing, spatial awareness, and motor control [10]. Multiple studies show
that people who devote their time to learning juggling train their brains, increasing gray
matter in areas associated with motor control and hand-eye coordination [11]. Developing
skills with the help of virtual reality can further enhance neuroplasticity. By offering a more
controlled environment where the user can adjust the speed and complexity of the task, a
more focused practice is possible, making the creation of new neural connections easier.
Learning complex motor skills like juggling activates multiple different areas of our brain.
One of them is the motor cortex, which is responsible for initiating and planning voluntary
movements, but it also interacts with other brain regions like the cerebellum and basal
ganglia, which are responsible for maintaining balance and posture during the motion
[10]. Studies show that in the first steps of acquiring new skills, the prefrontal cortex is
strongly involved, indicating that our body strongly relies on the cognitive process. After
figuring out the basics of the new skill, the motor cortex and cerebellum get more involved,
indicating that the motion becomes more automated, and the focus is moved more into
fine-tuning it [12]. Putting learners in the virtual learning environment can enhance the
development of these brain regions. The level of immersion that VR creates ensures
engagement of the visual and auditory senses, providing more robust connections across
the brain areas involved in learning motor skills [13].
Types of learning
One type of learning is visual learning. It involves acquiring information through observa-
tion. This approach can be especially beneficial in learning how to juggle, because a big
part of learning this skill is understanding the pattern visually. In VR, learners can benefit
from seeing demonstrations of juggling in 3D space, from different angles, and in slow
motion. This allows them to focus on the nuances like the ball trajectory, hand position,
and timing. As much as roughly 65% of people are visual learners, which confirms the
importance of including visual elements in the learning process [14]. A feature popular
in racing games called ”ghosting,” which in that particular case includes a see-through
copy of the player’s car, but it drives perfectly, showing the player how he should handle
each part of the track. This can also be applied in the juggling simulator, where the user
could see balls moving in front of them like it was them juggling. Seeing the task being
performed from the first-person point of view is a great way of visualization since it’s the
closest to us performing.
Auditory learning focuses on listening. Some people process information easier when
they hear it instead of, for example, reading it in the text format [15]. In VR, auditory cues
can enhance the learning process by providing instructions and feedback while the person
is performing the skill. Audio cues can exist together with visual information, enhancing
the learning experience and improving memory retention. For juggling, rhythmic sounds
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
9
==PAGE:18==
like the ones coming from the metronome could help learners develop correct timing,
crucial for coordinating tossing and catching in the right flow.
Kinesthetic learning, also known as learning by doing, is an integral aspect of learning
physical skills like juggling. VR creates an interactive environment where users utilizing
controllers or hand tracking can experience kinesthetic learning without needing to own
the physical props, normally required to learn different skills. In the example of juggling,
balls. Users can interact with virtual objects and receive immediate feedback, like in the
real world. Creating a simulator precisely imitating real-world conditions might be able
to achieve similar effects to learning in real life. In VR, learners can repeatedly practice
the given task, in this case juggling, training muscle memory, and improving coordination,
preparing for real-life application [16].
Types of skills
Motor skills are divided into two groups. Gross and fine motor skills [17]. The first one
concerns bigger movements like coordinating legs and arms to walk. Fine motor skills
are about more precise actions like grabbing a cup or turning a key when opening a door.
In juggling, both types of motor skills are required to successfully coordinate hand move-
ments and precise catching and realizing the balls. VR simulators can offer experience
of both types of motor skills by allowing users to practice and refine their movement in a
controlled environment with many facilities, possible thanks to the nature of how digital
simulations work.
Cognitive skills are core skills used by the brain to complete day-to-day actions like read-
ing, speaking, or decision-making. This skill is also present when performing a motor skill.
In the example of juggling, the learner needs to anticipate ball trajectories and plan future
moves. Development of this skill trains our brain, increasing gray matter and creating new
neural connections [18].
Important aspects of learning motor skills
When it comes to training skills involving hand movement, eye-hand coordination is of-
ten a fundamental aspect of it. It is responsible for synchronizing visual input and hand
movement. Lacking this skill, or having a not really developed one, can be the cause of
problems catching balls correctly due to placing our hands in the wrong position and bad
timing. Juggling requires the ability to track the trajectory of each ball, anticipate the future
position of the ball, and prepare to catch it. The more developed this skill is, the less we
need to focus on it. For juggling training, it is crucial to be able to track multiple balls at
the same time. Successful juggling also depends on good timing and precision. Balls
need to be thrown and caught in a rhythmic flow. Another aspect falling under this criteria
is spatial awareness. Awareness of the surroundings, including position and distances
between different objects like hands and balls, and the environment around us is crucial
for preventing collisions between the balls, and for catching them precisely.
Feedback is an integral element of learning new skills. And especially motor and physical
skills. Receiving immediate feedback allows learners to understand their performance,
identify errors, and refine their moves. There are multiple ways of obtaining feedback,
including self-evaluation, coaches, and peers. Using a mirror can already help learners
review their performance. On the example of juggling, they could see better the trajectory
of the balls and their body position. A drawback of using a mirror with a skill that requires
a lot of focus is that the user can’t really focus on both their performance and reviewing
it at the same time. Recording a juggling session can be far more effective because first
the learner can fully focus on performing the skill and later review it on a video and see
the possible errors. Working with a coach or someone experienced in the skill that we are
10
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:19==
learning can be very valuable. For one, this doesn’t require sharing our focus between
the performance and a mirror, but it also can provide immediate feedback. A professional
supervising our performance can immediately locate our errors, also the non-apparent
ones, due to their extensive knowledge, but also provide us with invaluable advice on
how to fix the problems that we struggle with. It is a popular concept to practice and
train in groups. That is the case not only in group sports but also in the individual ones.
Practicing in groups allows for many valuable outcomes to happen [8]. Peers can look
at each other’s performance and learn from the ones that are achieving success. Better-
performing peers have already overcome some of the obstacles and often might be able
to help the others with them. A not-so-obvious type of feedback is kinesthetic feedback.
It includes the feel of the balls in hands, the sound of collision, or the sound of catching
the balls. Even the feel of the rhythm of the juggling pattern provides sensory feedback
that helps with skill development.
Another fundamental aspect of learning and mastering motor skills is repetition. VR al-
lows for continuous practice without the constraints and limitations of the physical world.
This helps with reinforcing neural pathways associated with juggling, leading to improved
performance and skill retention [19]. A fully controllable virtual environment allows for
adjusting the difficulty of the task, ensuring that learners are challenged but also stay
motivated, without the great frustration associated with the too-high complexity of a task.
3.2
Juggling as a Motor Skill
Juggling is a physical skill of manipulating objects for recreation, art, entertainment, or
sport. The most popular type of juggling is toss juggling, in which props such as balls,
rings, clubs, etc. are tossed into the air and caught. The patterns vary in their com-
plexity from simple three-object patterns to much more advanced performances involving
juggling with multiple different props in much more complex sequences.
Types of juggling
• Ball juggling: This is the most common form of juggling that people often think of
when they hear the word ”juggling.” It involves tossing multiple balls in a continuous
pattern. These patterns include the basic ”cascade,” which is the most basic and
popular sequence that we see when a person juggles.
• Club juggling: Another popular type of juggling. The audience often enjoys it a
lot, due to the size of the clubs and their spinning motion. Clubs come in different
shapes and sizes, and the rotational motion brings an added complexity to the skill
of juggling.
• Contact juggling: Contrary to toss juggling, in contact juggling objects are rolled
and manipulated on the hands and whole body of the performer. See-through acrylic
balls are popular for contact juggling due to the fact that they don’t show a spinning
motion when rolling on the body, allowing for very impressive performances, tricking
the brains of the audience.
• Diabolo: This type of juggling involves spinning a spool on a string attached to two
sticks held by the performer. The high spin velocity gives the diabolo the necessary
angular momentum to stay stable on the string. Tricks involve throwing the spool
up, and tricks can also utilize multiple spools.
Benefits of juggling
Contrary to what people might think, juggling isn’t just a funny skill solely for entertaining
the audience. Juggling comes with a number of benefits to our health and can help with
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
11
==PAGE:20==
(a) Ball juggling [20].
(b) Club juggling [21].
(c) Contact juggling [22].
(d) Diabolo [23].
Figure 3.1: Different types of juggling.
our everyday lives. It improves balance and hand-eye coordination [24] by requiring track-
ing multiple objects at the same time and using two hands to catch and throw the balls
simultaneously. Many studies also show that juggling increases gray matter in the brain,
improving cognitive function and neural connectivity [25] [26]. When juggling, a person
often needs to heavily focus on this action, which can have meditative effects because
they forget about other things, reducing emotional stress [27] and can even effectively
help treat anxiety [28]. The skill of juggling requires a lot of attention and focus, and when
developing this skill, this aspect is trained greatly [29].
3.3
Virtual Reality (VR) and Related Technologies
Virtual reality is a cutting-edge technology that is gaining more and more users, and bigger
companies like Meta are spending lots of resources on development in this area [30]. This
technology immerses users in a completely virtual environment, allowing for experiences
out of this world. Specialized VR devices create the sensation of being present in the
virtual environment and interacting with it in real-time. This whole experience is created
using a combination of visual, auditory, and often haptic feedback, allowing users to fully
immerse in the new world.
12
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:21==
Methods of interaction
VR users can interact with the environment in different ways:
Most of the headsets incorporate sensors that allow for 6 degrees of movement. It means
that a device is able to track the rotational and translational motion of the headset. This
tracking ensures that the user’s view is adjusted in real time, providing a seamless expe-
rience to the user.
Many VR sets include handheld controllers to allow users to interact with the virtual en-
vironment. These controllers are normally equipped with buttons, triggers, and joysticks.
With these features, the user has many ways of interaction, like picking up virtual objects,
pressing virtual buttons, and moving around the environment. Some more advanced con-
trollers, like the Valve Index’s Knuckles, can also track users fingers, providing an even
more immersive experience and allowing more nuanced interaction.
Some VR devices use cameras to track users hand and body gestures. This feature
allows for more natural interaction because the user is not required to hold anything in
their hands. Most of the time, with this feature, the user can interact with the virtual
objects like they would in the real world. They can catch and pick up objects.
Figure 3.2: Some VR headsets have hand tracking features implemented and don’t re-
quire controllers [31].
VR devices are often equipped with a microphone, allowing for controlling the application
with voice commands. This is particularly useful when the game requires hands-free op-
eration or when talking is an important part of the game, like in a public speech simulation.
VR devices
VR experience can vary depending on the headset we are using, but also on the devices
we use together with it, because each piece of the equipment has its own features and
capabilities.
Figure 3.3: Each headset is designed differently and can have various features like inte-
grated headphones [32].
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
13
==PAGE:22==
The main part of the VR experience comes from the headset. It provides visual and audi-
tory experiences. Head-mounted displays (HMDs) often feature high-resolution displays,
a wide field of view, and built-in speakers or jack ports for immersive sound. Many man-
ufacturers have their own designs and ideas for headstraps, and it’s an important part of
the headset because, due to its weight, it can quickly become uncomfortable to wear [33].
That is why weight distribution and well-thought-out strap position are crucial.
Controllers are often essential to interact in a virtual environment, but there are also cases
when gestures are enough. Nevertheless, controllers come in different shapes and sizes
and are often equipped with motion sensors, and some of them also have haptic feedback
technology. This is currently the most popular interaction system in VR.
Figure 3.4: VR controller [34].
Some VR headsets, like HTC Vive and Valve Index, require base stations or external
sensors to track the position of the headset and controllers. This technology is called
outside-in tracking, as opposed to inside-out tracking, which uses cameras built into the
headset to track hands movement. Base stations provide accurate tracking over large
areas [35] but are less portable than standalone headsets using inside-out tracking.
Figure 3.5: Some headsets require base stations that are responsible for tracking the
position of the controllers and headset [36].
VR headsets are often divided into two groups. Standalone and PC-linked. Standalone
headsets like Oculus Quest 2 are fully functional on their own and don’t require external
processing power or memory to run VR applications. PC-linked headsets like the Valve or
HTC Vive require connection to the computer to provide processing power and storage.
This forces the user to have the headset wired to the PC when using VR, but it comes
with the advantage of running more performance-intensive applications.
14
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:23==
Feature comparison of XR headsets
This section aims to compare different XR headsets that are suitable for developing and
testing a juggling simulator. XR technologies, including virtual reality (VR), augmented
reality (AR), and mixed reality (MR), offer immersive environments that can improve en-
tertainment and learning aspects of juggling. Exploring the capabilities and limitations of
different headsets is crucial for selecting the right platform for this application.
Figure 3.6: VR places the user in a fully virtual environment, and AR adds a digital overlay
to the real world [37].
Extended reality includes multiple technologies that blur the line between the real world
and the virtual environment. Virtual reality puts the user in a completely virtual environ-
ment, without the influence of the real world. Augmented reality overlays digital content
onto the real world. Mixed reality blends real and virtual elements interactively. Each of
these technologies offers different opportunities for creating an immersive juggling simu-
lator [38].
Comparison of XR Headsets
Feature
Oculus
Quest 2
Valve Index
HTC
Vive
Pro 2
Microsoft
HoloLens 2
Magic Leap
2
Resolution
1832x1920
2880x1600
2448x2448
2048x1080
1280x960
Refresh
Rate
90Hz
144Hz
120Hz
N/A
N/A
Tracking
Inside-out
Lighthouse
SteamVR
Inside-out
Inside-out
Controllers
Touch
Knuckles
Vive
Gesture/
Voice
Ctrl/Voice/
Gesture
FOV
100°
130°
120°
52°
70°
Comfort
Light
Adj.
Adj.
Light
Light
Battery
2-3h
Wired
Wired
2-3h
3.5h
Processor
Snapdragon
XR2
PC req.
PC req.
Snapdragon
850
Custom AR
HW
Software
Oculus
Store
SteamVR
Viveport
Microsoft
Magic Leap
SDK
Price
$299
$999
$799
$3500
Enterprise
Table 3.1: Comparison of XR headsets based on features relevant to juggling simulators.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
15
==PAGE:24==
XR headsets can be compared based on the following criteria:
• Display resolution and refresh rate: This is responsible for visual clarity and
smoothness of motion.
• Tracking system and accuracy: Precision of motion tracking
• Controllers and input methods
• Field of view: The size of the field of view
• Comfort
• Battery life
• Processing power
• Software ecosystem and development tools
• Price and accessibility
Oculus Quest 2 / Meta Quest 2 [39] The Oculus Quest 2 uses an LCD display with a
resolution of 1832 x 1920 pixels per eye. The 90Hz refresh rate offers smooth motion
that is crucial for a realistic experience in juggling simulation. This headset uses inside-
out tracking, which is a method often used in XR technologies, for tracking the position
of the headset and controllers. The difference between this and outside-in tracking is
the placement of cameras. Outside-in tracking requires external sensors, and inside-out
uses cameras that are built into the head-mounted displays. This technology is essential
for capturing the user’s movement in the real world and translating it into the virtual envi-
ronment. The inside-out tracking is a convenient solution, not requiring external sensors
while allowing for full range of motion. The Quest 2 comes with two Touch controllers,
one for each hand, that allow user input with the buttons located on the controllers and
accurately track hand and finger movement. Grip and trigger buttons are positioned in
a very good spot, allowing to accurately simulate the feeling of holding two balls in one
hand. Controllers also provide haptic feedback, which is useful for improving immersion
by creating the tactile sensation of interacting with objects in virtual reality. This headset
is relatively lightweight and includes adjustable straps, ensuring a secure fit. It features
a foam face pad, which is comfortable, but during longer sessions it gets wet from the
sweat, which makes it uncomfortable, especially when multiple people share the device
in turns. The Quest 2 supports many popular game engines like Unity and Unreal Engine,
which allow for creating virtual environments easily. These platforms offer all necessary
tools for developing all necessary juggling simulator features. This HMD has a relatively
low price, starting around 299 USD, making it accessible to a wide audience, including
gamers, developers, and other people.
Figure 3.7: Oculus (Meta) Quest 2 [40].
16
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:25==
Valve Index [41] The Valve Index headset contains dual LCD displays with a combined
resolution of 2880 x 1600 pixels and a refresh rate up to 144 Hz. This results in great visual
clarity and smooth motion for an immersive experience. This particular headset uses
external devices for tracking, called a lighthouse tracking system. This solution provides
submilimeter precision for head and controller movements. The Index controllers called
”Knuckles” feature advanced finger tracking technology, allowing for precise interactions
with the virtual environment. Besides that, it also provides haptic feedback for a more
immersive experience. This headset has been designed with an adjustable head strap
and balanced weight distribution. Thanks to this, it is suitable for longer sessions, which
are essential for training in skill development. Valve Index is compatible with SteamVR
and supports many VR applications and development tools. It is well integrated with Unity
and the Unreal Engine, making it good for development. This is a premium VR headset,
priced at around 999 USD for the whole set, containing the base stations, headset, and
controllers.
Figure 3.8: Valve Index [42].
HTC Vive Pro 2 [43] The Vive Pro 2 headset offers a 5K resolution (2448 x 2448 pixels
per eye) with a high refresh rate of 120Hz. It provides a wide 120-degree field of view and
exceptionally clean visuals. Requiring base stations, it uses the SteamVR tracking sys-
tem, delivering precise and reliable tracking of head and hand movements. This headset
comes with standard Vive controllers, allowing for responsive input and haptic feedback.
It also supports other controllers, like Valve Index Knuckles, when more nuanced inter-
action is required. Like many headsets, this one features an adjustable head strap and
face cushion, but the weight distribution may cause discomfort in long sessions. Besides
supporting a comprehensive Viveport and SteamVR ecosystem, it is well integrated with
Unity and Unreal Engine, allowing developers to leverage it’s potential. The HTC Vive
Pro 2 is priced at approximately 799 USD for the headset itself, with additional costs for
controllers and base stations. Full set costs 1,399 USD.
Figure 3.9: HTC Vive Pro 2 [44].
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
17
==PAGE:26==
Microsoft HoloLens 2 [45] The HoloLens 2 features see-through holographic lenses with
a resolution of 2048 x 1080 pixels per eye. This results in clear visuals of augmented re-
ality. This headset uses advanced spatial mapping technology, together with inside-out
tracking, allowing for accurate positioning of virtual content in the real world. The main
source of input in this headset is gesture-based. Hand-tracking and gesture recognition
allow for interacting with objects directly, enhancing immersion. Eye tracking and voice
commands provide extra methods of input. This headset has been designed for comfort,
featuring an adjustable headband. The device itself is lightweight, allowing for longer ses-
sions of experience. For development, Mixed Reality Toolkit (MRTK) is utilized, together
with the Unity engine, to create engaging AR applications. The HoloLens 2 product is
aimed at enterprises, and it’s priced at approximately 3500 USD.
Figure 3.10: Microsoft Holo Lons 2 [45].
Magic Leap 2 [46] The Magic Leap 2 comes with two 1080p displays, one per eye. The
field of view is 45 degrees horizontally and 55 degrees vertically. As an AR headset,
it uses spatial mapping and inside-out tracking to seamlessly blend digital and physical
environments. This headset supports gestures, voice commands, as well as controllers,
giving a freedom of choice depending on the usage. This headset features a balanced
weight distribution and adjustable straps. Magic Leap 2 offers Magic Leap’s SDK and
other tools for creating immersive AR applications. It also supports Unity and Unreal
Engine, allowing for the development of complex simulations. These glasses target en-
terprise solutions, and the price is over 3500 USD, but specific pricing is known after an
inquiry.
Figure 3.11: Magic Leap 2 [47].
Other notable devices
• Varjo XR-3 [48] Offering photorealistic mixed reality capabilities with 115-degree
field of view and dual 2880 x 2720 resolution displays and precise eye and hand
tracking, this headset is targeting enterprises and is priced accordingly.
• Pico 4 Pro [49] This headset provides good performance, and its price is competi-
tive. It futures high resolution displays and comes with 2 controllers.
18
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:27==
Applications of Virtual Reality
VR is already used in many areas and industries, and new applications are still emerging.
• Gaming and Entertainment: VR is broadly used in the game industry. It allows
users to experience a new level of immersion, letting them fully dive into the world
of the game they are playing. From exploring fantastical worlds and casting magical
spells to participating in realistic simulations.
Figure 3.12: VR is well known for its application in the game industry [50].
• Education: VR technology is getting popularity in the area of education because
it allows learners to experience situations that would be too dangerous, too expen-
sive, or impossible to access in the real world. For example, medical students can
practice surgeries in advanced VR simulators [16], and employees can get fire safety
training [51] and learn how to actually use a fire extinguisher and not only hear where
it is located in case of an emergency.
• Healthcare: In healthcare, VR is already used for pain management [52], physical
therapy [53], and therapy for phobias [54]. VR creates a controlled environment that
can be adjusted to each patient individually.
• Architecture and Design: Architects and designers use VR to create visualizations
of the projects [55] so clients have a better understanding of the future product, or
building, in the design phase. This can enhance collaboration in the design process
and reduce the number of errors and changes that often appear late when the client
sees a ready product.
• Real Estate: VR tours allow potential buyers to take a virtual walk around the prop-
erty to better experience its size and layout without needing to come in person [56].
• Virtual meetings and collaboration: Remote work is still a very popular concept,
so employers are looking for ways to maintain good-quality collaborations. Some
of them create virtual meeting spaces that allow for more immersive and interactive
cooperative experiences [57].
Summarizing, virtual reality is a very powerful technology that allows to experience im-
mersion using a number of advanced devices and interaction methods. This technology
has already found applications in many industries, and with the development of this tech-
nology, the number of applications is only going to grow.
Augmented Reality (AR)
Augmented reality is a technology that isn’t too far from VR. It adds overlaying digital
content like virtual objects, images, and other data to the user’s view of the real-world
environment [38]. Unlike in VR, the user isn’t put in a new environment, but he is kept
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.13: VR allows for more immersive virtual meetings and collaboration [58].
in a physical environment with extra features. Currently, this technology is often used
in mobile applications and wearable devices to provide extra information to the physical
world or create interactive gaming experiences.
Mixed Reality (MR)
Mixed reality, like the name suggests, is a combination of a real-world environment and a
computer-generated one. It allows these both to coexist and interact with each other [38].
In mixed reality, users can interact with both real-world and digital objects.
(a) View through MR headset [59].
(b) View through AR glasses [60].
Figure 3.14: MR renders digital objects and the real environment based on the information
from cameras on the headset, where AR glasses are see-through and show an additional
digital layer over real-world view.
Conclusion
These technologies have one important thing in common. They try to enhance user inter-
action with digital content and real-world ones. VR offers a completely virtual environment,
delivering full immersion; AR enhances real-world view, adding a digital overlay to the real
world; and MR offers interaction between both these worlds. Many fields like education,
healthcare, entertainment, and industry have already started to leverage the possibilities
of these technologies.
3.4
Learning skills in VR
Historical context
The first applications of VR for the purpose of teaching skills began in the mid-20th century,
in the aviation industry [61]. A simulator has been designed to train pilots safely in a
controlled environment. VR technology has been advancing since that time, and with
this process, more and more industries started applying this technology in their training
programs, such as medical training, military exercises, and corporate education. These
days, virtual reality has come to a point where more innovative and sophisticated solutions
are being built using haptic feedback, eye-tracking, and AI-driven adaptive learning [62].
20
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:29==
Applications of VR in different fields
Healthcare and Medical Training:
Nowadays, VR is a highly appreciated tool used to train medical students and surgeons
in performing complex operations [16]. One example of this is Osso VR [63]. Software
that allows surgeons to practice and master their skills in a controlled and safe environ-
ment without the risks associated with live surgery, like the potential death of a patient.
This technology not only refines surgeons’ skills, but more importantly, it improves patient
outcomes by reducing the number of errors occurring in real surgeries that affect people’s
lives. Another medical group using virtual reality for practice are doctors [64]. They fa-
cilitate this technology for practicing interactions with patients and improving their skills
of diagnosis. Patients in simulations have various symptoms, so doctors and nurses are
able to train their ability to diagnose and treat real-life patients.
Military and Defense:
VR is an innovative technology that has also found its application in military training. It pro-
vides soldiers with realistic combat scenarios, where they need to make quick decisions
or perform normally very dangerous maneuvers. Systems like the Dismounted Soldier
Training System (DSTS) [65] allow learners to practice in immersive environments, cre-
ated with attention to details, successfully simulating battlefield conditions, helping them
prepare for dangerous real-life combat situations. Another important aspect of fighting
on a battlefield is the help of heavy equipment and various vehicles. In most cases, their
handling is dangerous, and VR allows soldiers to practice flying fighter aircraft and driving
tanks in a safe environment before they need to handle real equipment.
Figure 3.15: Dismounted Soldier Tactical Maneuver Training System in VR [66].
Aviation and Aerospace:
Flying an aircraft is one of those experiences that can be simulated in virtual reality to
a great extent. In a virtual cockpit, pilots can practice in various weather conditions, go
through emergency scenarios, and even recreate specific flight paths [67]. This kind of
training helps pilots get the experience and build their confidence without the risk of an
accident involving other people and avoiding the costs of actual flight time.
Corporate Training and Professional Development:
In recent years, VR has been gaining popularity as a tool used for training soft skills such
as communication, leadership, teamwork, or negotiation [68]. Companies create simula-
tions in which the learner is placed in different scenarios, like a difficult conversation with
an employee, a team meeting, or a negotiation with a client. The immersion provided by
VR allows learners to experience the feelings of stress, fear, or stage fright as real as
they weren’t in a simulation. Going through these situations multiple times helps learners
get more confident and learn how to cope with these emotions. These are crucial skills
required in corporations, and VR training has been proven to help with it. Safety protocols
are essential in every industry. It is especially important in fields such as construction or
manufacturing. Before virtual reality simulations, scenarios like fires or chemical spills
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
21
==PAGE:30==
were only discussed, with instructions given on what to do in case of these emergencies.
The main problem of this approach is that it is very difficult to prepare for hypothetical situ-
ations that we have never experienced or even seen. In the example of a fire emergency,
in most cases, none of the employees knows how to use a fire extinguisher because there
needs to be a fire to use one. It is too expensive to use one for every safety training. This
creates a possibility that no one will actually know how to respond to an emergency be-
cause no one was properly prepared for this. Virtual reality allows for simulating real-world
scenarios, so employees can experience these situations in a controlled environment and
also use virtual props like a fire extinguisher to learn how to use them and gain confidence
[51].
Education:
VR has also found its application in the classroom environment. Students use it to under-
stand abstract concepts, like exploring the human body [69], visualizing chemical reac-
tions [70], or navigating through the solar system [71]. The immersion that virtual reality
headsets offer creates more authentic experiences. This helps students with learning lan-
guages by placing them in scenarios like ordering food in a restaurant or buying vegeta-
bles in a shop [72]. This kind of practice can help users build their confidence, improving
their language so that they are ready to use in real-world scenarios.
Types of skills that can be taught in VR
Motor skills
Motor skills depend greatly on muscle memory [73]. They often require precise move-
ments, and VR is highly effective in teaching skills like surgical operations [16], sport
techniques [74], and machinery handling [75]. For example, a VR simulator for surgeons
can precisely simulate an actual surgery, focusing on replicating the details of the real
world. This allows medical students to practice crucial procedures repeatedly. VR offers
the possibility of going through the practice routines repeatedly, without the physical and
financial costs of real-world practice. It also allows learners to experience scenarios that
could be too dangerous, too expensive, or just impractical to replicate in the real world.
Cognitive skills
Virtual reality can also be used to improve people’s cognitive skills [76], such as problem-
solving or decision-making. For instance, if a learner is put in a VR escape room simu-
lation, they are challenged to solve puzzles under time pressure, and with the high level
of immersion, even pressure caused by fear, in result improving their critical thinking. VR
simulations allow users to experience complex, dynamic environments and get their cog-
nitive abilities challenged in a controlled and safe space where they can make decisions,
test hypotheses, and get immediate feedback on their actions.
Soft skills
Soft skill development is something that people rarely associate with VR. Despite this,
the technology gets more and more popular as a training tool for enhancing these skills.
VR can simulate different scenarios, like, for example, a stressful business negotiation,
allowing learners to practice and improve their persuasive communication in a controlled
and risk-free environment [77]. It is often used for training other skills like leadership,
teamwork, or public presentations. VR simulators provide a controlled environment that
can be adjusted to the needs of every learner. They can practice their soft skills there re-
peatedly, receive instant feedback, and improve their technique without the pressures of a
real-world setting that stop people from even trying. This tool can encourage them by ad-
justing the settings of the simulation for an easier, less stressful scenario and progressing
together with the learner.
22
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:31==
Emotional and psychological training
Another interesting application of virtual reality is in the area of psychological training. It
is used for stress management, empathy training, and exposure therapy [78]. People
that find it difficult to be in a combat situation or a public presentation can use this tech-
nology to familiarize themselves with these experiences and prepare for the real-world
situations. VR scenarios can simulate these high-pressure situations and help learners
learn how to manage their stress responses effectively. By putting people in simulated
stressful situations or letting learners experience life from another person’s perspective,
we can improve their empathy, enhance emotional resilience, and improve their overall
psychological well-being.
Constraints and limitations of Virtual Reality
Money affects nearly every aspect of our lives to some extent, and that is also the case
in the topic of VR. Hardware such as headsets, controllers, or base stations can be ex-
pensive, and more advanced models often require powerful computers to run smoothly.
Additionally, limited field of view constraints users experience when they need to use their
peripheral vision. This, together with latency issues, can also be a cause of motion sick-
ness or discomfort [79]. Certainly, more expensive headsets reduce these problems by
extending the field of view or making more and more powerful standalone headsets, but
they are priced adequately. Currently, a big problem and a constraint of VR is the aspect
of locomotion. Every user has a different amount of space available when playing with
VR, so relaying on real-world movement is not the best option. On the other hand, many
controllers include a joystick that can be often used for moving around the environment,
but this causes many people to feel discomfort, or at least reduce the level of immersion,
because users can see that they are moving, but their body is static. There are already
solutions for this, like Disney’s HoloTile Floor [80], which is an omnidirectional treadmill
ground that would allow a user to naturally walk around in virtual reality without changing
their position in the real world. Unfortunately, this technology is still very new and not yet
commercially available. Once it becomes accessible, it is still going to be very expensive.
The effectiveness of transferring skills learned in VR to a real-world environment relies
strongly on the quality of the simulation. If the VR simulation doesn’t accurately mimic
real-world conditions, there is a big risk that learners won’t be able to easily transfer the
skills learned in VR to real-life situations. While VR is a very powerful tool, offering a high
level of immersion, over-reliance on it might lead to less real-world experience. People
might rely on their belief that they could do the same in the real world, but they just haven’t
had a chance to do so. For example, a surgeon who trains only in VR might lack the tactile
sensitivity that is required in real surgeries. It can be easily experienced in the real world,
but harder or impossible with the use of VR hardware.
Long VR sessions can lead to physical discomfort, including eye strain, headaches, or
dizziness [81]. These issues, apart from reducing the level of enjoyment, can limit the
duration and frequency of VR sessions, which are very important in training sessions.
Mastering skills benefits from long and undisturbed focus on the experience [82], and
discomfort caused by the nature of virtual reality and the current state of this technology
can make this impossible. The immersive nature of VR can be sometimes overwhelm-
ing for the users. This is particularly true when the user is placed in a complex or vivid
environment and needs to process a large amount of information in a short amount of
time.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
23
==PAGE:32==
Advantages of VR Over Real-Life Training
One of the biggest advantages of virtual reality is that any dangerous scenario can be sim-
ulated without the risks associated with it in real life. For example, surgeons can practice
complicated surgeries without risk of harming the patient, or firefighters can train without
the risk of getting burned by the fire. Training in VR can be more cost-effective compared
to traditional methods because it doesn’t require real-world props and every scenario can
be simulated. For example, aircraft pilot training normally would require an airplane for
tests, and fuel expenses need to be taken into account as well. In a simulation, once
the software is ready, it can be reused by others, saving a lot of resources. One of the
biggest advantages of virtual reality training is that the hardware is usually portable and
can be used anywhere in the world. It doesn’t have any environment requirements, mak-
ing it more accessible to people working remotely or living in locations without training
facilities. VR creates a fully controlled simulation, allowing for adjustment of settings like
difficulty to flatten the learning curve for beginners, but it can also just be modified to fit
learners style and pace. This allows for more effective learning outcomes.
In VR, learners can practice repeatedly without constraints of time or resources. This
allows for a bigger number of repetitions, leading to a more refined skill. For example, a
trainee surgeon can operate multiple times without the need for extra patients or to oc-
cupy an operating room. VR ensures that every learner experiences the same training
environment, conditions, and scenarios. This leads to more consistent training and allows
for better measurement of progress and comparison between trainees. This standardiza-
tion is particularly useful in fields like medicine or aviation, where each trainee can be
assessed on the same example, and everyone can go through every crucial scenario.
VR offers a great level of immersion, allowing it to capture learners’ more effectively than
traditional methods in the real world. High levels of engagement improve learners’ focus
on the training, helping them memorize the information better [83]. Immersion and game
elements of the training can also improve the trainee’s engagement [84]. For example,
fire protection training is currently a very boring lecture, focusing on the information where
the closest fire extinguisher is and where are the emergency exits. Not long after, many
people forget this information, but more importantly, they still don’t know how to use the
fire extinguisher. A VR fire protection training allows learners to find out how to use a
fire extinguisher and make decisions under the pressure of time and incoming fire. This
engaging environment makes the scenario more vivid and memorable.
Emerging Trends and Future Directions
AI can enhance VR training by adapting the environment in real-time based on the learner’s
performance. A person struggling with a task often needs help, so a simulator could show
some hints and adjust the difficulty of the task. On the other hand, a medical training pro-
gram could offer a more challenging operation to a person showing great performance.
A number of VR platforms already support multiplayer, allowing multiple users to interact
in the same virtual environment. This feature in the field of training simulators could help
remote workers collaborate on a task in a more interactive way, better simulating real-
world conditions with a focus on teamwork and collaboration. One of the main goals of
VR simulations is making them feel as real as possible. Developing technologies in haptic
feedback (simulating sense of touch) and sensory immersion (simulating smell and tem-
perature) can help to achieve that. For example, a firefighter could feel the temperature
rising when he gets close to the fire. MR and AR glasses create a hybrid environment with
elements from the real world and the virtual one. This allows for training on real-world ex-
24
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:33==
amples with extra digital features. For instance, a mechanic could use AR glasses when
learning how to repair an engine. Digital overlays appearing on top of it could guide them
through the repair process step by step, displaying information about each part and show-
ing the correct order of repairs.
Figure 3.16: Digital overlay seen through AR glasses can guide a person in their task [85].
Psychological and Physiological Impact of VR Training
While immersion offered by virtual reality enhances the learning experience, it can be-
come overwhelming for the user if the simulation is too intense or the session is too long.
Managing the cognitive load is a crucial aspect of designing a VR application. It is impor-
tant to find a balance between an engaging experience without making it too intense for
the user. VR is a great tool for helping people manage stress and anxiety by placing them
in a controlled environment, allowing them to experience stressful situations in a gradual
manner. For instance, VR exposure therapy is used to help people overcome their fears
and phobias by simulating the feared situation, starting with low-intensity experiences
[54].
Figure 3.17: VR exposure therapy helps with overcoming fears and traumas [86].
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:35==
4
Previous Work on Learning Motor Skills
in XR on Example of Juggling
4.1
Introduction
In recent years, the transfer of skills from VR or AR to real-life has caught a lot of attention
between researchers. Many studies investigated the effectiveness of learning motor skills
in virtual simulators compared to traditional real-life lessons in a physical environment [87]
[88]. Juggling is one of many examples of these skills, and this chapter reviews key studies
that have explored the topic of learning juggling in VR, focusing on their methodologies
and results. The reviewed studies include work on the transfer of skills learned in VR to
the real world, advantages of learning in a virtual environment, and specific benefits and
challenges of learning juggling in VR.
4.2
Overview of Key Studies
This section provides a brief summary of reviewed studies:
• Feedback from HTC Vive Sensors Results in Transient Performance Enhance-
ments on a Juggling Task in Virtual Reality [89] This study focuses on the impact
of instant feedback from virtual reality on juggling performance, showing temporary
improvements in the skill.
• Transfer of Juggling Skills Acquired in a Virtual Environment [90] This paper
examines how well the skills learned in a virtual environment transfer to a real-life
scenario, providing insights into the effectiveness of training motor skills with the
help of a digital simulation.
• The Use of Virtual Reality in Motor Learning: A Multiple Pilot Study Review
[91] This research reviews multiple pilot studies, providing insights into the efficacy
of learning different motor skills in VR, including juggling.
• Transfer of Skill from a Virtual Reality Trainer to Real Juggling [92] This study
focuses on the cognitive aspect of learning the skill of juggling in VR and reviews its
possible impact on real-life performance.
• Juggling in VR: Advantages of Immersive Virtual Reality in Juggling Learn-
ing [93] This paper covers the benefits of immersive VR environments for learning
juggling, focusing on the advantages this solution has over the traditional learning
methods.
• Juggling 4.0: Learning Complex Motor Skills with Augmented Reality Through
the Example of Juggling [94] This paper compares the use of AR and VR for
learning complex motor skills, for example, juggling.
4.3
Detailed Analysis of Each Study
Feedback from HTC Vive Sensors Results in Transient Performance
Enhancements on a Juggling Task in Virtual Reality
This study aimed to explore if the immediate feedback provided by HTC Vive sensors
leads to improvement of the juggling skill performed in VR. The hypotheses were that
the feedback would provide valuable help, resulting in learners dropping fewer balls and
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
27
==PAGE:36==
overall better performance. The experiment used HTC Vive sensors to track hands move-
ment during juggling tasks to provide immediate feedback. Learners’ performance was
assessed based on the number of throws and catches. The study showed that while the
immediate feedback helps participants’ and enhances their performance, it was only a
temporary improvement. When the feature was disabled, the performance was getting
worse. This suggests that while the VR feedback mechanism is helpful, it might need to
be constantly available to the user; otherwise, the impact can be only temporary. The
study investigates the impact of immediate feedback provided by VR very well. However,
the results show that having this feature short-term leads to only temporary improvements.
Further research focusing on finding a solution to make the improvement more permanent
would be very useful.
Transfer of Juggling Skills Acquired in a Virtual Environment
This study aimed to examine the effectiveness of learning the skill of juggling in a vir-
tual environment (VE) using Microsoft Kinect technology by later evaluating how well the
skill transfers to real-world juggling and examining the performance in both environments.
The research group created a VE juggling system and compared it with real-world jug-
gling training. Participants were divided into 2 groups, one training in VE and the other in
a physical environment. Both groups were allowed to watch a training video during the
test whenever they wanted. The non-VR group had 35 minutes of practice, and the VE
group had 30 minutes of VE practice and then 5 minutes of getting used to balls in real
life. Their performance was evaluated based on the number of correct consecutive jug-
gling throws and catches. The study found that the skills acquired by the VE group were
comparable to the ones of participants’ training in the real world. Additionally, VE learn-
ers’ reported a smaller level of frustration, suggesting that training in VE can be a more
encouraging environment, providing a more engaging and less stressful experience. This
study provides strong evidence for the transferability of juggling skills from VE to the real
world. However, the evaluation process, allowing for juggling with different numbers of
balls, could be the source of errors because we don’t know how well the person juggling
with 2 balls would do with 3 balls.
The Use of Virtual Reality in Motor Learning: A Multiple Pilot Study Review
This research aimed to assess the effectiveness of learning motor skills in VR, reviewing
multiple studies on motor skills acquisition in VR, and the effectiveness of this training,
focusing on common benefits and challenges. This paper reviewed multiple studies that
used VR for learning different motor skills, including juggling. The review shows that VR
is a great tool for learning motor skills, especially for tasks including complex movements
requiring good coordination, like juggling. The reviewed studies all together highlight the
importance of immediate feedback and show that VR training can be used to reduce the
fear of failure in learners due to a controlled environment. This study reviewed many
different studies, providing a good overview of the benefits and challenges of learning
motor skills in VR. However, because so many studies have been reviewed, it lacks the
in-depth analysis of different skill acquisitions, limiting the applicability of the information
to studies like this one.
Transfer of Skill from a Virtual Reality Trainer to Real Juggling
This study focused on the cognitive aspect of learning the skill of juggling and examined
if it can be effectively trained with the help of VR. The hypothesis of this paper is that this
technology will enhance the cognitive components of juggling skills. Participants were
divided into 2 groups. One trained in VR and real-world, and the other one only in the
real-world setting. The training process was 10 days, and then on the 11th day the results
were compared between the groups. The VR system focused on the spatial aspects
28
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:37==
of juggling, like the height of a throw or the rhythm of the throws. The study found that
participants learning in both VR and real life show comparable results to the group training
in real life only. Additionally, the research ran a test where participants needed to juggle
at a set pace. The VR-trained group showed better adaptation to the changes, indicating
that VR can effectively train cognitive components of complex motor skills. This study
investigates the possibilities of VR in the aspect of training cognitive components, showing
strong evidence that users can refine these skills successfully, allowing for enhancement
of complex skills training. However, we can’t forget about the physical aspect of learning
motor skills.
Juggling in VR: Advantages of Immersive Virtual Reality in Juggling
Learning
This paper aimed to explore the advantages of learning the skill of juggling in a completely
virtual environment. The hypothesis of this study was that VR offers valuable benefits not
available in the real-world environment. Participants in this study were divided into 2
groups. Both groups started with 3 balls and watched a short instructional juggling video.
In the following step, both groups had 55 minutes to train. The non-VR group was able
to freely watch the same video and stop, and the VR group could juggle in VR and ask
the supervisor to change the gravity. At the end, both groups have been evaluated based
on 10 attempts to do a 3-ball flash. The study showed that VR can teach the skill of jug-
gling in the real world, but the results were worse than the learners’ in the real world. In
the post-experiment questionnaire, the VR group showed a higher willingness to continue
and had more fun during the experiment compared to people juggling in the real world.
The research shows that virtual reality training has certain advantages over the traditional
learning process and that the learners get worse results in the end. However, VR users
have been trained on a specific simulator, allowing only for changing the gravity and to
juggle with 3 balls from the beginning. This requires more research, with different simu-
lators, also investigating which aspects of VR training can improve the learning outcome
and which can hinder it.
Juggling 4.0: Learning Complex Motor Skills with Augmented Reality
Through the Example of Juggling
This study aimed to compare the use of AR and VR technologies in learning complex mo-
tor skills, with the hypothesis that AR can offer some advantages over VR due to the fact
of more real-world interaction. The researchers developed an AR system using Microsoft
Kinect and HoloLens AR glasses. The software helped in the juggling training by giving
hints about the correct height of the throw. Participants trained in AR, and their perfor-
mance and feedback were evaluated. The study found that the AR system was able to
help participants throw a ball to the correct height using physical balls. It shows that AR
has the advantage of allowing for the interaction with real-world objects, teaching the skill
of juggling with real balls, while tracking the performance and providing digital feedback
and hints at the same time. This study offers valuable insights into the advantages of AR
technology, showing positive results. A comparison between the efficiency of learning the
motor skill in AR and VR would be invaluable.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:39==
5
Implementation
Software programs:
• Unity 2022.3.29f1
• Visual Studio Code 1.92.2
• Meta Quest Developer Hub 4.8.0
• Git 2.31
Hardware:
• Oculus (Meta) Quest 2
5.1
Requirements
The goal of the initial implementation and prototype was to create a working VR juggling
simulator that would allow users to learn the skill of juggling in VR, then test their skills
in real life and compare the results with the performance of the participants learning in
a traditional way. Great emphasis was placed on ensuring that the teaching aspect was
as similar as possible between VR and real-life training, besides the special features of
virtual reality like slowing down the time or stopping a ball in mid-air. The initial goal was to
create a simulator emulating real-life juggling as closely as possible, but after some user
testing, the emphasis was moved to teaching the user the correct movement, pattern, and
timing rather than focusing on the correct strength of the throw.
It was important to provide intuitive and responsive controls, closely simulating the ac-
tion of catching and releasing the balls. The software needed to accurately capture user
input and show real-time visual feedback, ensuring that the user knows if they caught
the ball or not and allowing them for easy mistake correction throughout the learning pro-
cess. Great focus was put on the interface being user-friendly and intuitive. The simulator
was supposed to encourage users to progress by smoothing out the learning curve and
implementing features that help with the frustrating actions associated with learning jug-
gling, like picking up the balls from the ground after each and every mistake. Multiple
user tests have been carried out to make sure that there are no bugs and points where
the user doesn’t know what to do and is left to themselves to ensure a seamless learning
experience, avoiding any disruptions.
The software was developed to run on widely available VR headsets, allowing for further
development and publishing the simulator publicly in the future. Another important as-
pect of the implementation was ensuring a scalable architecture, allowing for easy future
enhancements.
5.2
Hardware: Oculus Quest 2
The virtual reality headset used for the implementation of the juggling simulator and testing
was Oculus (Meta) Quest 2. While the decision was influenced by the availability of the
device, it offers a balanced combination of accessibility, performance, and affordability.
It is one of the most popular VR headsets, offering a great value-to-cost ratio. It is an
affordable device for a price of 199$, coming with 2 controllers, providing a good VR
experience.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
31
==PAGE:40==
The Meta Quest 2 was already available and ready to use. Its user-friendly interface and
easy setup made it a great choice for quick prototyping, development, and user testing.
My familiarity with the device has also allowed for quicker iterations and problem solving
during the development phase.
This is a standalone headset, meaning that it doesn’t require connection to a PC or ex-
ternal sensors. This portability and ease of use allowed for creating an accessible and
flexible setup for user testing and development in different locations.
Benefits
The Meta Quest 2 features a high-resolution display (1832 x 1920 px per eye) with a
refresh rate of 120 Hz. Good quality of visual feedback is crucial for a juggling simulator
focused on training hand-eye coordination. The display quality helps the user clearly see
the trajectory and motion of the balls. It also enhances the immersion, which can be
reduced when the quality is too low, by creating an environment of much worse quality
than real life.
Inside-out tracking technology uses built-in cameras, eliminating the need for external
sensors. This feature simplifies the setup and provides accurate tracking of the user’s
hand movement at the same time. This is a crucial aspect when dealing with a simulation
that requires precise control. The ability to track users hand and controller movements in
real-time allows for an effective learning experience in a virtual environment.
This headset operates wirelessly, allowing for unrestricted movement, which is particularly
important when learning motor skills. Lack of cables reduces the risk of entanglement and
allows the user to focus on the movement of their hands and body, enhancing immersion
and a realistic experience.
Controller ergonomics and placement of the grip and trigger buttons have the potential to
closely simulate the action of grabbing balls and successfully replicate the real feeling of
holding two balls in one hand.
Limitations
While the Meta Quest 2 is a powerful standalone device, these kinds of devices can have
problems when running programs that require more processing power. For the juggling
simulator, this means that complex physics calculations or high-fidelity graphics could
result in a lower frame rate. This limitation could affect the user’s ability to track the balls
and correctly predict their trajectory. However, making sure that the graphic settings of
the simulator are adjusted to provide better performance and following good programming
practices, together with profiling, would allow for good system performance.
All headsets have a smaller field of view (FOV) than our eyesight. Meta Quest 2 offers
approximately 97 degrees of horizontal and 92 degrees of vertical FOV, which is narrower
than some high-end headsets. In a juggling simulator where peripheral vision, especially
on a vertical axis, is very important for tracking multiple objects at the same time, this
limitation could and will affect the user’s awareness of the position of all juggling balls and
hands.
5.3
Software Programs
In the development process, it was crucial to choose the right tools that will allow for
smooth prototyping and ensure compatibility, flexibility, and ease of use. The primary soft-
ware used for creating the juggling simulator was Unity and Visual Studio Code, each com-
ing with important benefits that contributed to the successful development of the project.
32
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.1: Headsets differ significantly in their FOV [95].
Unity is a popular tool widely used in different industries like games, education, entertain-
ment, etc. It is known for its cross-platform compatibility and ease of use. One of the
main advantages of Unity in the aspect of creating a VR simulator is its ability to support
a wide variety of VR headsets, including all Meta headsets, HTC Vive, Varjo, Pimax, and
more. This allows developers to write the software once and deploy it across various VR
systems.
Figure 5.2: User friendly Unity Editor allows for quick development and debugging.
The built-in physics engine was crucial for developing a physics-based simulator with
accurate and natural motion of juggling balls in the virtual environment. The physics en-
gine supports real-time collision detection, rigid body dynamics, and much more. This
allows for creating a system that is immersive and offers experience and physical feed-
back closely resembling the real world.
Unity Asset Store [96] is a great source of different assets, which is invaluable when
there are no 3D artists, sound designers, etc. in the team. This significantly sped up the
development process and allowed me to focus on the programming side of the project
implementation. Combined with the user-friendly interface of Unity Editor, it makes this
tool great for designing simple and complex environments.
It integrates well with various external tools and software, enhancing its functionality. For
instance, Visual Studio is the default integrated development environment (IDE) for code
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
33
==PAGE:42==
editing, but other IDEs are also supported. For this project, Visual Studio Code (VS Code)
was chosen as the main IDE for writing and debugging the code. One of the main advan-
tages over other available solutions is its lightweight nature and faster performance. VS
Code was designed to be faster and more responsive than Visual Studio, which is benefi-
cial when working on a project requiring frequent iterations and testing. Another important
aspect of this tool is its reach ecosystem of extensions. This makes it a highly customiz-
able code editor, allowing for easy integration with Git, support of different programming
languages, or enhancing code linting and debugging capabilities. With the help of the VS
Code Unity extension, it seamlessly integrates with Unity, enabling all core features like
real-time debugging, auto-completion, and easy navigation between scripts.
Initially, the development and testing process involved connecting the Meta Quest 2 head-
set directly to the computer, using Unity’s ”Build and Run” feature to install the most recent
version of the simulator onto the headset. Unfortunately, testing by simply pressing the
play button in the editor wasn’t an option because my graphics card didn’t meet require-
ments for the Meta Quest Link feature. The ”Build and Run” method, as cumbersome as
it was, was straightforward and effective for initial testing. However, it required physical
connection to the computer for the installation time and admin rights in the headset to
enable developer mode, which became a limitation in certain scenarios. When the main
headset wasn’t available due to maintenance problems, a need to test on a friend’s Meta
Quest 3 came. When it turned out that I couldn’t enable developer mode due to lack
of administrative rights, the Meta Quest Developer Hub (MQDH) came in handy. The
MQDH allows developers to publish apps through official channels, nicely going around
the problem concerning the developer mode. Through this software, a Juggling Simulator
app was created, and a Beta test channel was set up. This approach allowed for installing
the most recent versions of the simulator on different devices easily, without needing to
connect them to the computer. The MQDH made it simple to manage multiple versions of
the simulator. When an issue with the current build was discovered, it was easy to move
to install a previous version of the app, allowing for a quick comparison and debugging.
This has also laid the groundwork for future plans of publishing the app on the App Lab.
5.4
Implementation Ideas and Challenges
Prototype 1
Event-driven architecture To maintain a clean project and avoid entangled cross refer-
ences between game objects, the simulator was created using an event-driven architec-
ture. It allowed for efficient management of responses to different events and triggering
events across various scripts as well. Each event was implemented as a scriptable object
with an added context menu option to trigger events directly from the editor. This ensured
smooth prototyping and debugging.
Score counter A crucial aspect of learning how to juggle is keeping track of the user’s
progress. The best way to keep track of the progress in this scenario is by counting
successful catches. A key aspect of the score system was defining what a ”bad catch”
was. A bad catch occurs when the user catches the ball with the same hand that threw it.
Points were reset when the user did something incorrectly. For example, a ball touched
the ground or the sealing. Or, as said before, when the catch was incorrect. The score
would also be reset if the ball failed to reach or exceeded a predetermined height.
Level management A level-based progression system was implemented to simulate the
guidance typically provided by a coach, ensuring that users focused on refining basic skills
before learning the more advanced ones. The level manager script was responsible for
34
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:43==
adjusting the parameters like the number of balls available to the user, gravity, and num-
ber of required catches to progress. Each level was represented as a scriptable object,
containing all necessary information about the level, allowing for easy management of the
level sequence, modification of level settings, and debugging.
Figure 5.3: Scriptable objects allowed for easy management of training levels and adjust-
ing their settings.
Bounding Box for Throw Accuracy A key aspect of juggling is throwing the ball with the
correct trajectory, to the right height, and with the proper force. To assist the user with
performing a good throw, a bounding box was added to the simulator. It was implemented
as a see-through box that was positioned in front of the user’s face. It provided a visual
guide for where the ball should peak during a correct throw. The color of the bounding
box changed to red when the ball started falling before reaching the correct height, or if
the ball exceeded the correct height, providing immediate feedback to the user. To deter-
mine if the ball was thrown too high, the height of the ball was continuously monitored on
every frame. If it exceeded the top boundary of the box, the system triggered the event
‘ballThrownTooHigh‘. Similarly, the system tracked the ball to determine if it was falling
before reaching the correct height. This was done by monitoring the vertical velocity of the
ball. When the velocity changed from positive to negative, the system checked the height
at that moment. If the ball didn’t reach the minimum required height, the ‘ballThrown-
TooLow‘ event was triggered. This real-time feedback helped users adjust their throws to
reach the correct height.
Figure 5.4: Bounding box visualized where a thrown ball should peak.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
35
==PAGE:44==
Ball Pattern Animation It is an essential aspect of juggling to understand the correct
throwing pattern. To know the correct trajectory and how to coordinate throwing one ball
after another. Most of the people are visual learners, and the easiest way for them to
understand the correct pattern of throwing the balls is to see it. To assist users in visualiz-
ing this pattern, an animation was created that demonstrated the projectile motion of the
balls. Rather than using the Unity animation system, it was created with Unity’s physics
system, where balls were moved towards the center, made dynamic, and then released
with a calculated force to achieve the correct arc, and at the end made kinematic again.
This approach ensured that the pattern closely resembled real-world physics.
Figure 5.5: Ball pattern animation in front of the user visualized the correct way of throwing
the balls.
Holding Multiple Balls in One Hand In the real world, juggling with three balls involves
holding two balls in one hand at the start. To replicate this in VR, the simulator allowed
users to hold two balls in one hand, each controlled with a different button. This is a very
rare feature in VR games because normally the user is allowed to hold a single object
with a Grip button. The position of the grip and trigger buttons on a VR controller made it
possible to closely mimic the physical experience of holding two juggling balls in a single
hand.
Figure 5.6: Design of the Touch controller and position of the grip and trigger buttons
relatively well resembled the feeling of holding real balls in hand.
36
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:45==
Haptic Feedback for Peripheral Vision Limitations One of the key aspects of juggling is
using peripheral vision [97]. In the beginning, most people tend to look at the ball going up
and down to their hand. This works when there is one ball, gets harder when there are 2,
but gets impossible when you are supposed to juggle with 3 balls. Professional jugglers,
when performing this skill, look at one point in front of them, a little above the height of their
head, where the balls peak. This allows them to have a reference point, where to toss
the balls, and use their peripheral vision to control the action of catching the balls. In VR,
there is a constraint of a limited field of view (FOV). Different headsets offer different fields
of view, and Meta Quest 2 has 97 degrees of horizontal and 92 degrees of vertical FOV
[39]. The FOV of human eyes is approximately 135 degrees vertically [98]. This limitation
results in no vision of the user’s hands when they are looking at the reference point in
front of them. The solution was to encourage the user to look at the correct spot, a bit
over the height of their head, and rely on feel when catching the balls. To accommodate
for the lack of the feeling of holding a ball (in VR, a person holding a grip button doesn’t
know if they are holding something or not), haptic feedback was implemented. A gentle
vibration was triggered as the ball approached the hand. When the user caught the ball,
a stronger vibration was triggered, indicating a successful catch.
Ball Reset Mechanism One of the main frustrations in learning to juggle is constantly
picking up dropped balls. Every mistake results in a ball dropping to the ground, followed
by a squat to pick it up. This can be physically exhausting in longer training sessions.
To address this, a feature was implemented that allowed users to reset the balls to their
hands with a button combination. It was important that it wasn’t triggered by accident and
didn’t conflict with the juggling routine. This action required holding the right number of
gripping buttons, depending on the number of balls in the level, and pressing the primary
button on the right hand. This resulted in balls appearing in the user’s hand, ensuring that
the reset action was intentional and did not disrupt the juggling flow.
Projectile Prediction and Trajectory Rendering One of the first things trainees need
to learn at the beginning of the journey with a new sport that uses the ball is the ball’s
movement and predicting its future location based on its motion. In juggling, the user
needs to be able to move their hand to the future position of the ball to catch it. It gets
even more complicated when they need to do it while throwing another ball and relying
strongly on peripheral vision. To facilitate this action, the system renders a projectile
through which the ball will travel, helping the user understand the ball’s movement and
put their hands in the correct position.
Figure 5.7: After the ball was released, the future projectile was rendered to help the user
prepare for catching the ball in the correct spot.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
37
==PAGE:46==
Slow Motion Mechanics One of the biggest challenges in learning how to juggle is the
speed that the balls move with and how quickly the actions need to be performed. To
help users with this difficulty, a slow-motion feature was implemented, giving them more
time to think and react. There are different approaches to slowing down the time for the
user. Initially, two were considered: reducing timeScale or decreasing gravity. In Unity, a
timeScale property is used for manipulating the time in the app. Duration of coroutines,
speed of animations, etc. are all influenced by it. Another aspect that is affected by this,
but not obvious, is the fact that when the timeScale is set to 0.5, the movement of the user’s
hands in VR is relatively 2 times faster, so the balls have 2 times bigger force on release.
Another way of slowing down the juggling routine for the user would be to decrease the
gravity acceleration. This action wouldn’t influence many other aspects, like the previous
option. This is the approach that most people go for when creating a juggling simulator.
Both of these approaches have one common side effect. When the gravity or timeScale is
reduced, the ball travels higher than intended. The goal of this feature was to give users
more time to think by slowing down the movement of the balls while allowing for learning
and getting used to correct hand movement. To counter the side effect, the approach of
changing the gravity acceleration was used as a base because it didn’t influence other
aspects of the simulator and only required adjusting the velocity of the ball on release,
relatively to the acceleration change. The formula for calculating adjusted speed was
deducted from the formula for the horizontal range of the projectile. Since in both cases
the range had to be the same, the new initial velocity v′
0 was calculated in relation to the
gravity multiplier m as follows:
R = v2
0 sin 2θ0
g
v2
0 sin 2θ0
g
= v′2
0 sin 2θ0
gm
v2
0 = v′2
0
m
v′
0 = v0
√m
1
private IEnumerator AdjustVelocityOnReleaseCoroutine(Hand releaseHand)
2
{
3
yield return new WaitForFixedUpdate();
4
if (ballRb.velocity.y < 1) yield break;
5
float rootOfCurrentSpeedMultiplier = simulationManager.
GetRootOfCurrentSpeedMultiplier();
6
ballRb.useGravity = true;
7
switch (simulationManager.GetDifficulty())
8
{
9
case Difficulty.Easy:
10
ballRb.velocity = CalculatePerfectVelocity(releaseHand == Hand
.Left ? rightHand : leftHand);
11
break;
12
case Difficulty.Medium:
13
ballRb.velocity = new Vector3(ballRb.velocity.x, ballRb.
velocity.y, 0) * rootOfCurrentSpeedMultiplier;
14
break;
15
case Difficulty.Hard:
16
ballRb.velocity = new Vector3(ballRb.velocity.x, ballRb.
velocity.y, ballRb.velocity.z) *
rootOfCurrentSpeedMultiplier;
17
break;
38
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:47==
18
}
19
}
Listing 5.1: Main methods responsible for the slow motion feature. Multiplying the initial
velocity by the root of the current speed multiplier results in a correctly slowed-down
movement of the ball. Difficulty levels were implemented for the convenience of testing
different approaches to facilitating the user’s ball release. Hard: natural movement of the
ball; Medium: ball doesn’t move on the Z axis; Easy: ball always travels to the correct
peak and falls at the right spot. In the final tests, the difficulty was set to Easy.
Conclusion after user testing The first prototype revealed several insights: Despite
the initial instructions, users often looked down at their hands instead of focusing on the
correct point in front of them, leading to frequent point resets and frustration. The lack
of sound for ball collision and throw reduced immersion. The learning curve was steep,
especially in stages where the user was supposed to juggle with multiple balls. A common
problem for the users was that they were tossing balls forward instead of just vertically.
A key conclusion was that tossing balls up in the VR simulation was harder than in real
life. Users highly appreciated the ball reset feature and the environmental design but
struggled with coordinating multiple balls, even in slow motion. The ghost ball pattern
animation ended up being confusing rather than helpful. Pattern animation was found
helpful, and testers suggested that it could be helpful if the hands that toss the animated
balls were also visible.
Prototype 2
Removal of Ghost Ball Pattern Animation Based on user feedback, the ghost ball pat-
tern animation was removed. This feature was found to be more confusing than beneficial.
Encouraging Correct Gaze Direction User testing showed that even though users were
instructed to look up while juggling, the need to look at the ball going into their hands was
stronger. Because of this, a gaze indicator was implemented. The users were told that a
simulator would display a prompt when they failed to look up for too long, resulting also
in a score reset. A 2D sprite animation would also be rendered, guiding the user to the
correct fixation point. It was important that the prompt and animation weren’t obstructed
by the environment, regardless of the user’s position. To ensure UI being rendered always
in front of the environment, a custom shader was used. It disabled writing to the depth
buffer and depth testing to achieve the desired effect.
Figure 5.8: Sprite animation appearing when the user looked away from the correct spot,
guided them back towards it.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
39
==PAGE:48==
Audio Feedback and Immersion To enhance immersion, sound effects from royalty-free
archives were added for ball collisions and throws. The sounds were triggered by collision
and release events. Additionally, lofi hip-hop background music was added to create a
nice atmosphere without distracting the user.
Stopping Balls in Mid-Air It was apparent from user testing that the slow-motion feature
was not helpful enough. A new feature was added where balls could be stopped in mid-air
at their peak to give users more time to react. In the case of juggling with two balls, the
first ball stops in mid-air when it reaches the peak, and its velocity is saved for the future.
When the user throws the next ball, the one hanging in the air continues with its saved
velocity, and the second ball flies normally without stopping. In the three-ball scenario,
first two balls stop in the air, and third flies normally. This feature allowed users to juggle
at their own pace. They start by learning to juggle in slow motion with balls stopping in
the air. When they reach the goal, the speed increases. When they pass the stage of jug-
gling in real time with the balls stopping in the air, they need to reach the goal without this
feature, starting again in slow motion. This allows for moderate progress and prevents
the buildup of frustration.
1
private void IsPeaking()
2
{
3
if (ballRb.isKinematic || ballCollidedWithEnvironment) return;
4
if (ballRb.velocity.y > 0)
5
{
6
isBallAscending = true;
7
}
8
else if (isBallAscending && ballRb.velocity.y <= 0)
9
{
10
isBallAscending = false;
11
if (simulationManager.GetShouldBallStopAtThePeak()
12
&& simulationManager.GetBallsThrownSincePreviousFlash() <= (
simulationManager.GetCurrentNumberOfBalls() - 1)
13
&& simulationManager.GetPreviouslyThrownBallId() == transform.
GetInstanceID().ToString())
14
{
15
StopBallAtThePeak();
16
}
17
}
18
}
19
20
private void StopBallAtThePeak()
21
{
22
isBallStoppedAtPeak = true;
23
velocityAtPeak = ballRb.velocity;
24
ballRb.velocity = Vector3.zero;
25
ballRb.useGravity = false;
26
}
27
28
29
public void ReleaseBallFromThePeak()
30
{
31
if (!isBallStoppedAtPeak) return;
32
ballRb.useGravity = true;
33
ballRb.velocity = velocityAtPeak;
34
}
Listing 5.2: Main methods responsible for the feature of balls stopping in mid-air.
40
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:49==
Disabling Balls Z-Axis Movement The main idea behind creating this simulator was to
make a virtual world that precisely simulates juggling in the real world. However, after
trying the simulator myself and seeing the testers use it, I came to the realization that the
force applied to the ball on release feels different than the force that would be applied to
a ball when thrown in real life. One of the main factors is that in traditional conditions, we
also use our fingers to give some upward or even a bit of a backward force that counters
the forward force coming from the movement of the arm. In VR, the problem of throwing
a ball forward is very apparent. To fix this, the simulator was modified to disable the ball’s
Z-axis movement upon release, making juggling in the simulator easier without breaking
the goal of teaching the motor skill correctly because VR doesn’t allow it to be exactly the
same anyway. The focus was put on teaching users the correct pattern and timing rather
than precise force application.
Conclusion After User Testing This prototype improved the user experience, but some
challenges remained. Users still didn’t know why their points were resetting. They didn’t
associate it with incorrect gaze direction. Despite disabling ball movement in the Z-axis,
coordinating multiple balls continued to be difficult. Even people experienced in juggling
struggled in VR. The addition of sound improved immersion, and the feature of balls stop-
ping in mid-air was a significant improvement, allowing users to practice at a more com-
fortable pace.
Prototype 3
Refinement of Gaze Direction Feedback The previous approach of resetting points
when the user looked away from the correct fixation point was replaced with a more user-
friendly and intuitive method: the screen would gradually turn black if the user looked away
from the correct point. This change effectively encouraged users to maintain correct gaze
without the frustration of losing points.
Figure 5.9: When the user started to look away from the correct looking angle, the picture
would start fading to black gradually, the further away the user looked.
Audio Guide Implementation To reduce the need for constant supervision, an audio
guide was implemented. This guide is a collection of instructions and feedback, provided
at the beginning of each level, that get played in the beginning of each level of the simu-
lator, making the simulator more standalone and automated.
UI Animation Tutorials A feature of resetting balls to hands was hard to explain only
verbally. To visually guide the user, UI animations were created using Adobe Illustrator and
the DoTween Unity package [99]. An illustration of VR controllers was created, together
with separate images of the buttons. The animation highlighted the correct buttons to
press, synchronized with the audio guide, improving the clarity of instructions.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.10: Animated illustrations of VR controllers visually guided the learner on their
usage.
Enforcing Perfect Velocity The issue of users struggling with throwing balls correctly
persisted, so to further simplify the juggling process, the simulator was modified to au-
tomatically calculate and apply the correct velocity for each throw. With this adjustment,
every ball reached its peak at a point in the same XY plane as the throwing hand, at
a height equal to the headset’s height plus 0.2 meters and positioned horizontally in the
middle between the left and right hands. The perfect velocity ensured that the balls would
always reach the correct distance, allowing users to focus solely on their hand movement
and catching. The correct velocity was calculated as follows: First, the time required for
the ball to travel from hand to peak height was calculated. Since the time for the ball
to reach the peak is equal to the time it takes to fall back to the hand (assuming no air
resistance), the calculation was simplified by setting the initial vertical velocity to zero:
y = v0yt −1
2gt2
t =
√
2h
g
Where h represents the peak height, and g is gravitational acceleration. The total time of
flight ttotal is then given by:
ttotal =
√
2h
g +
√
2(h −(hcatchingHand −hinitial))
g
42
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:51==
Given the total time of flight, the initial vertical (v0y) and horizontal (v0x) velocities were
calculated as follows:
Let dx be the horizontal distance between the initial ball position and the catching hand
position in the XZ plane:
v0x =
dx
ttotal
v0y = gttotal
Although this approach slightly reduced the users’ perceived control of the balls, the ma-
jority of the users didn’t notice it because they were too focused on juggling. The result
was highly successful, with users performing every throw with perfect velocity, and they
only needed to focus on their hand movement and catching. Consequently, this modifi-
cation made the bounding box feature obsolete, so it was removed.
1
private Vector3 CalculatePerfectVelocity(Transform handDestination)
2
{
3
float peakHeight = headset.position.y - transform.position.y +
peakHegithOffset;
4
Vector3 ballPosition = transform.position;
5
Vector3 handPosition = handDestination.position;
6
#if UNITY_EDITOR
7
peakHeight = 1.0f;
8
#endif
9
10
float gravity = -Physics.gravity.y;
11
12
Vector3 horizontalDirection = new Vector3(handPosition.x -
ballPosition.x, 0, 0);
13
float horizontalDistance = horizontalDirection.magnitude;
14
horizontalDirection.Normalize();
15
16
float verticalDisplacement = handPosition.y - ballPosition.y;
17
18
float timeToPeak = Mathf.Sqrt(2 * peakHeight / gravity);
19
20
float totalTime = timeToPeak + Mathf.Sqrt(2 * (peakHeight -
verticalDisplacement) / gravity);
21
22
float initialHorizontalVelocity = horizontalDistance / totalTime;
23
float initialVerticalVelocity = gravity * timeToPeak;
24
25
Vector3 initialVelocity = horizontalDirection *
initialHorizontalVelocity + Vector3.up * initialVerticalVelocity;
26
return initialVelocity;
27
}
Listing 5.3: Method responsible for calculating a perfect velocity for the released ball.
Conclusion after testing This prototype showed significant improvements.
The im-
proved gaze feedback eliminated user frustration, and the audio guide made the user
more standalone and didn’t require a supervisor to give the instructions on how to use
the simulator. However, users still needed guidance on how to improve their technique.
User testing showed that users feel tired of the training when expected to pass each and
every next level. It was brought up that the simulator should provide some motivation and
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
43
==PAGE:52==
gratification to further improve the user experience. The enforcement of perfect veloc-
ity greatly simplified the juggling process, leading to quicker progress for the majority of
testers.
Prototype 4
Intelligent Supervisor with Audio Hints One of the biggest advantages of learning with
a coach is that they can correct the learner’s mistakes in real-time. To mimic the real-time
feedback provided by the trainer, an intelligent supervisor feature was implemented. This
feature tracked the user’s performance and played the right audio hints. For example, a
hint was triggered if two balls collided frequently, meaning that the user didn’t throw the
balls in the correct pattern. The other hint guided the user to lower their hands when the
height of the controllers indicated that hands were above the user’s hips.
Encouraging Comments To encourage user motivation and satisfaction, encouraging
comments were recorded and implemented to be played after users passed each level.
This minor addition kept users engaged and helped to maintain a positive atmosphere
throughout the simulation.
44
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:53==
6
Methods
6.1
Participants
Twenty participants were recruited for this study and divided into two groups of 10 partic-
ipants each. The main requirement of the test was that the participants didn’t have any
prior experience in juggling. They needed to be between the ages of 25 and 35, with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Participants with any motor impairments or if they
had consumed alcohol in 24 hours before the test could not participate in the test. The
aim was to create two homogeneous groups to minimize the variability and ensure that
any differences in outcomes were the result of the training method (VR or real-world).
A pilot test was conducted with three participants to determine the appropriate duration of
the training session. Participants were instructed to finish all stages of VR simulation. On
average, it took 30 minutes to complete the training, giving a good estimate of how long
the training duration for the main study should be.
6.2
Study Design
The study was designed to compare the efficiency of motor skill acquisition in VR versus
a real-life environment on the example of a juggling skill. Both groups received the same
instructions at the beginning of the training session, with the only difference being the
medium of training and VR-specific features. Each person filled out a pre-study ques-
tionnaire, where demographic information was collected along with answers about prior
experience with ball sports. People that were about to train in the simulator were also
asked about their experience with VR and a gamepad.
Participants in the VR group trained using the VR juggling simulator, which included fea-
tures like slow motion, balls stopping in mid-air, and rendering projectile trajectories. An
intelligent supervisor system provided real-time audio feedback when the user made any
mistakes, such as when balls collided with each other or when the participant’s hands
were too high.
Figure 6.1: View in the VR juggling simulator.
Participants in the Real-Life (RL) group trained with real juggling balls. They received the
same instructions as the VR group and were presented with the same juggling animation
on a TV screen. It was visible throughout the training session. Real-time feedback was
provided by the experimenter, who played the same audio hints as the VR intelligent
supervisor on the same conditions.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.2: Participants training in the real world had an animation in front of them, pre-
senting the correct juggling pattern.
Both groups started with 1 ball and received a next ball upon achieving the set goal. After
30 minutes of training, participants’ juggling skills were tested. Each person, regardless
of the environment that they trained in, was instructed to do 10 attempts of 3-ball flash,
and was informed that the successful and failed catches will be registered. This was
followed by a 3-minute break when people were not allowed to juggle, and then the test
was repeated.
At the end, each participant filled out a post-study questionnaire, where they gave feed-
back about their experience.
6.3
Measurement and Data Collection
Different types of data were collected throughout the training and the tests to assess
performance and learning efficiency. The number of successful catches was registered
for each attempt during the training. For example, in a level with two balls, each attempt
could result in a score of 0/2, 1/2, or 2/2 catches. This was tracked across all levels
and attempts. The time required for each participant to finish each level was recorded,
providing a measure of the learning speed across the participants.
After the training session, participants went through a test that would assess their juggling
skills. They had 10 attempts to perform a 3-ball flash. Afterwards, participants had a 3-
minute break without a possibility of juggling, and then the test was repeated. The number
of successful flashes was recorded.
46
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:55==
6.4
Questionnaires
Participants completed a pre-study and post-study questionnaire to collect more informa-
tion about the users and their feedback after the training.
• Pre-Study Questionnaire: Collected demographic information (age, sex, vision
status), alcohol consumption in the last 24 hours, and experience with ball sports
(rated 1–5). Participants from the VR group were also asked about their prior expe-
rience with gamepad controllers and VR, both rated on a 1–5 scale. The first one is
an important measure because juggling in the simulator consisted mainly of press-
ing and releasing trigger and grip buttons on a controller at the right time, which is
very similar to using a gamepad.
• Post-Study Questionnaire: Collected participants’ feedback of their training expe-
rience. Both groups were asked about the level of frustration (1–5) and whether the
learning process was enjoyable (1–5). Additional questions differed between both
groups. Real-World Group rated the helpfulness of the juggling animation in front
of them and audio instructions. VR Group rated the helpfulness of the animation in
VR, audio guide, balls stopping in mid-air, and slow motion features.
6.5
Statistical Analysis
The following statistical measures and analyses were planned:
• Mean and Standard Deviation: Calculating the average performance (number of
successful x-ball flashes, time to complete levels) and the variability within each
group.
• T-test Comparing the means of the VR group and real-world group to assess the
differences in performance, learning speed, and questionnaire responses.
• Correlation Analysis Investigating any relationships between pre-study question-
naire responses (e.g., VR experience) and performance results.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:57==
7
Evaluation
Hypotheses:
1. Training motor skills in VR, on example of juggling, can give similar results in real-life
performance compared to traditional training.
2. Training motor skills in VR is more enjoyable to the trainee in comparison to learning
in real life.
3. The frustration associated with the learning process is lower in VR than in real life.
4. Prior experience with a gamepad or VR has a strong influence on the performance
in VR and the learning outcomes of participants learning in VR.
5. Prior experience with ball sports has a strong influence on the learning results in
both real-life and VR groups.
The main goal of this evaluation was to measure the efficiency of learning motor skills, for
example juggling, in a VR simulation compared to traditional real-life training. 20 partic-
ipants were tested, evenly split between VR and real-life groups, with an equal number
of men and women in both groups. Based on the results of the tests, several hypothe-
ses were investigated concerning performance, enjoyment, frustration, and the potential
impact of prior experience with VR, gamepad controllers, and ball sports on the learning
outcomes. To test the normality of the datasets, a Shapiro-Wilk test was performed on
all of them, due to the small number of participants. The results for all datasets showed
that they weren’t normally distributed, so the Mann-Whitney U test was used to evaluate
statistical significance.
To address hypothesis 1; whether VR can produce results comparable to real-world jug-
gling training, the performance scores between the two groups during the two tests were
compared. The outcomes showed a significant difference between the VR and real-life
groups. In the first test, the participants who trained in real life performed substantially
better, with an average of 7.7 successful 3-ball flashes out of 10 attempts. In contrast, the
VR group struggled initially, with an average score of only 0.9. The standard deviation was
relatively small for both groups in this first test (1.337 for the real-life group and 0.738 for
the VR group), showing that most participants within each group performed similarly. The
difference between the groups was statistically significant, as indicated by the p-value of
0.000157 from the Mann-Whitney U test. The second test was conducted after a 5-minute
break, in which the participant couldn’t train juggling. The real-life group kept their high
level of performance, with an average of 7.4 flashes and a slightly increased standard
deviation of 1.713. Interestingly, the VR group showed a significant improvement in the
second test, achieving an average of 3 successful flashes with a standard deviation of
1.155. However, despite this improvement, the gap between the two groups remained
statistically significant, with a p-value of 0.000329.
Group Type
Test 1
Test 2
Improvement Rate
VR
0.9
3.0
+2.1
Real Life
7.7
7.4
-0.3
Table 7.1: Average number of successful 3-ball flashes out of 10 attempts from 2 tests
and improvement rates for VR and Real-Life Groups.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 7.1: The results of the 2 final tests being an average number of successful 3-ball
flashes out of 10 attempts in each group.
These results indicate that while VR participants were able to improve their juggling per-
formance in real life after initial training in the VR environment, they still lacked the real-life
experience compared to those who trained in the traditional way. This suggests that while
VR can help with learning motor skills, it doesn’t match real-life training in terms of imme-
diate performance.
One of the more interesting observations was the difference in learning rates between the
first and second tests. On average, participants that trained in the VR simulator showed
an improvement of 2.1 successful 3-ball flashes. In contrast, the group that trained in
the traditional way showed a slight decline of 0.3 successful flashes on average between
the tests. This suggests that while VR learners may initially perform badly in a real-world
environment, they can adapt and improve faster with additional practice. To further inves-
tigate this, the Mann-Whitney U test was calculated, resulting in a p-value of 0.002496,
indicating that the difference in the progress between the two groups was statistically sig-
nificant. This suggests that while VR is no match to real-life training in terms of immediate
performance in real life, it can help learners improve quickly as they transfer their skills
from VR to a real-world environment.
Figure 7.2: Learning rate, being the average difference in number of successful 3-ball
flashes between the first and second tests in both groups.
50
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:59==
Another interesting aspect of the test was the amount of time that participants spent in
each level. Due to the design of the VR juggling simulator, which included features like
slow motion and balls stopping in mid-air, VR participants spent more time in initial levels
compared to those training in real life. With one ball, the real-life group spent an aver-
age of 44 seconds, and participants from the VR group spent significantly more time at
96 seconds, with a p-value of 0.0015 indicating a significant difference between the two
groups. The difference was even bigger with two balls, where the real-life group spent on
average 2 minutes and 59 seconds, compared to 7 minutes and 14 seconds for the VR
group, with a p-value 0.0065. This resulted in VR participants having less time for train-
ing juggling with 3 balls. The real-life group spent their last 23 minutes and 43 seconds
on learning how to perform the 3-ball flash, while the VR group spent only 18 minutes
and 35 seconds (p = 0.0233). Additionally, VR participants practiced juggling with three
balls under various settings, including reduced speed of the objects and balls stopping in
mid-air. When only considering the time spent juggling with three balls under conditions
simulating real-life, the VR group averaged 6 minutes and 28 seconds (388s) with a high
standard deviation of 453 seconds due to the difference in participant performance and
the fact that some of them didn’t reach the final level that simulated real-life conditions.
Figure 7.3: Amount of time (in seconds) spent with different number of balls in the training
session for each participant of the real-life group.
Figure 7.4: Amount of time (in seconds) spent with different number of balls in the training
session for each participant of the VR group.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
51
==PAGE:60==
To address hypothesis 2, whether training in VR is more enjoyable than learning in a
real-world environment, participants rated their enjoyment of the training process on a
scale from 1 to 5. The group that practiced in a virtual environment reported a higher
enjoyment level, with an average of 4.8, compared to the real-life group’s average of 4.1.
The difference was statistically significant, with a p-value of 0.0412. This suggests that
the VR environment could be more engaging or entertaining, possibly due to the fact of
experiencing something new and the feeling closer to playing a game with interesting
features like slow motion and the balls stopping in mid-air rather than simply learning
something.
Group Type
Enjoyment (1-5)
Frustration (1-5)
VR
4.8
1.6
Real Life
4.1
1.7
Table 7.2: Average Enjoyment and Frustration Levels for VR and Real-Life Groups.
Figure 7.5: Average enjoyment and frustration levels experienced during the training ses-
sion in both groups on a 1-5 scale.
As for hypothesis 3, both groups reported low levels of frustration, with the real-life group
averaging at 1.7 and the VR group at 1.6 on the 1–5 scale. There was no significant
difference between the groups, with a p-value of 0.85, indicating that learning juggling
wasn’t frustrating for participants in either of the environments.
Addressing hypothesis 4, whether prior experience with a gamepad or VR influenced the
performance of participant learning with the VR simulator. On average, the group had
relatively low experience with VR (mean 1.75 out of 5) and moderate experience with
gamepads (mean of 3.5). The correlation between VR experience and test performance
was weak and not statistically significant, with correlation coefficients of -0.14 and -0.2 for
the first and second tests, respectively. On the other hand, there was a noticeable corre-
lation between gamepad experience and performance of the VR group, with correlation
coefficients of 0.53 and 0.72 for the first and second tests, respectively. However, this cor-
relation was not statistically significant (p-values 0.65 and 0.2), suggesting that gamepad
experience might have an influence, but not strong enough to make a real difference.
52
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:61==
To address the last hypothesis, each participant was asked about their experience with
ball sports to later assess its impact on their juggling performance. There was no signif-
icant correlation between ball sport experience of the VR group and their final juggling
performance. However, for the participants that trained in real life, there was a strong
positive correlation between ball sport experience and performance, with correlation co-
efficients of 0.825 and 0.880 for the first and second tests, respectively. Both were sta-
tistically significant (p-values of 0.0033 and 0.0007). This indicates that prior experience
with ball sports had a noticeable impact on the performance of participants training in the
real world. Participants from the VR group, by contrast, did not show similar correlation,
suggesting that the virtual environment with implemented features allowed all participants
to learn at their own pace, allowing people without good eye-hand coordination to learn
without great difficulties with the help of the extra features of the virtual reality simula-
tor. During the training session, the number of successful catches was tracked in each
level for each attempt. Performance scores were calculated as the number of successful
catches divided by the number of balls in the level. For example, in a level with two balls,
a performance score of 0.5 would mean that, on average, one of the two balls was suc-
cessfully caught in each attempt. Both groups showed similar performance in the training
session. For the real-life group, the average performance for one ball was 0.95, 0.87 for
two balls, and 0.81 for three balls. The VR group showed similar results. An average
performance of 0.96 with one ball, 0.83 with two balls, and 0.81 with three balls. This sug-
gests that despite the environment and learning conditions, both groups achieved similar
results during practice. The difference in performance became significant when transi-
tioning from a VR environment to the real world, where participants needed to adjust their
skills to new conditions. Both groups were asked about their feedback on the audio guide
and animation presenting the correct juggling pattern. All participants rated both features
as very helpful. On average, participants that practiced in the real world rated the audio
instructions 4.2 and the pattern 4.3, whereas the participants from the VR group rated
the VR equivalents of the features 4.7 and 4.2. Most of the VR participants that rated the
audio guide 5 out of 5 had their hands too high during juggling; thus, they valued the audio
feedback instructing them to lower them.
Pattern animation
Audio Guide
4.3
4.2
Table 7.3: Average feature usefulness ratings for the real-life group on a 1-5 scale.
Learners from the group that trained with the VR simulator were also asked to rate the
usefulness of the slow motion and balls stopping in mid-air features. The first one received
an average score of 4.4; however, the second one was the most appreciated by the VR
participants. The overall feedback was that it gave them complete control over the pace
during juggling, where the slow motion still required them to throw the balls in the correct
rhythm. The last question these participants needed to answer was the usefulness of
training with the VR simulator. Most people gave it 4 or 5 points on a 1–5 scale, resulting
in an average of 4.6. The interesting fact about this is that people who were able to do
only 1 successful 3-ball flash or not even that still rated the simulator 5 out of 5, saying
that they really enjoyed the training and that they think it helped them a lot.
Pattern animation
Audio Guide
Slow Motion
Balls Stopping
VR training
4.2
4.7
4.4
4.8
4.6
Table 7.4: Average feature usefulness ratings for the VR group on a 1-5 scale.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:63==
8
Discussion
The goal of this study was to measure the efficiency of teaching motor skills using a VR
simulator using juggling as an example and see if the results are comparable with the
outcomes of training in the traditional way. While the conclusion from the tests is that
VR training is not comparable, it is difficult to draw these conclusions when a number
of findings highlight several factors that could have contributed to the differences in per-
formance. It would be very interesting and needed to further investigate these in future
research.
One of the key observations was the difference in how participants interacted with the
learning environment. The real-life group had benefited greatly from direct physical in-
teraction with the balls, and the fact that they were learning in the same environment the
final test was conducted. The VR group had extra features like slow motion and intelligent
feedback, which had a big influence on the learning outcome. The collected data suggests
that these features offer a great potential for learning motor skills, especially for refining
specific aspects of the technique, even though they did not lead to comparable results
with real-life training in this study. The results of the tests indicate that motor skills devel-
opment in VR is not yet capable of fully replicating the efficiency of real-life training, based
on the significant difference between the two groups. However, the progress seen in the
VR group between the first and second tests suggests that participants in VR were able
to transfer some of the newly learned skills into the real-world environment, although with
some problems. This may be because the controllers lack the tactile feedback of holding
a ball in hand, and small FOV results in limited peripheral vision in VR headsets. Juggling
is all about continuously tracking multiple objects [100], and these limitations of VR can
hinder the user’s ability to develop the spatial awareness and hand-eye coordination that
are crucial for mastering juggling in real life.
One of the interesting observations from the study was the strong correlation between par-
ticipants’ experience with ball sports and their performance in the real-life training group.
Ball sports require good hand-eye coordination and object tracking. Participants that had
more experience in it performed better in juggling tests. This correlation suggests that
spatial awareness and quick reflex developed in ball sports transfer well to the task of
juggling in real life. The performance of the real-life group was significantly better for par-
ticipants with prior coordination abilities, confirming that these foundational skills play a
crucial role in developing motor skills like juggling.
In contrast, the VR group didn’t show a strong correlation between ball sports experience
and juggling performance. This suggests that the VR juggling simulator might mitigate
the impact of prior coordination skills by facilitating features like slow motion or balls stop-
ping in the air. This may have helped participants lacking this skill to learn juggling at a
lower pace, adjusted to their abilities. In this test, it wasn’t possible to properly measure
the influence of VR experience on the results of the training due to the difficulty of find-
ing participants that are experienced with VR. The idea behind this study, measuring the
efficiency of VR training, is that in the future, this technology will be more popular, and
more people will be familiar with it. Thus, time spent on getting used to a new technol-
ogy would not be needed and could be spent on skill training. Another way of finding a
solution to this problem would be to make participants play some other games in VR, for
example, for an hour, where they would get used to the controllers and functioning in the
virtual environment itself, reducing the time needed to get used to this learning method.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
55
==PAGE:64==
Another important aspect that can’t be overlooked is that the result depended highly on
the simulator itself. Some futures like slow motion could have a positive influence on the
final performance of participants training in VR, but maybe other aspects like the number
of successful flashes needed to pass to the next level could be changed and further im-
prove the outcome of the learning process. It would definitely be very interesting to make
a study focused only on VR training and measure the influence of different features of
the simulator on the learning process. Observe what improves the skill development and
what slows down the progress and increases frustration.
One of the most important features in the simulator was slow motion. As described in the
implementation section, there are multiple ways of implementing it. An important aspect
of implementing slow motion in a simulation where we throw an object is how we want to
approach the force transfer and its amount relative to the time speed. When one of the
professional jugglers was testing the simulator, his feedback was that it felt very unnatural
that in slow motion the ball was reaching a lower peak than it should with the speed of
hand that threw the ball. This is because in this simulator, the velocity of the ball was
adjusted immediately after release, relative to the speed of the simulation, to make the
ball reach the same peak that it would at normal speed. This is contrary to what most
of the juggling simulators do, which is just slowing down the time or reducing the gravity,
resulting in a ball peaking much higher when the speed or gravity is lower. My idea was
that the ball should reach the same peak with the same hand motion, no matter the speed,
because I wanted people to learn the correct hand motion and gaze direction. Both of
these would change if the peak differed from normal conditions. It would be very valuable
to test both approaches and see what feels better to the users and what results in better
real-life performance.
Each participant from the VR group has trained on a Meta Quest 2 headset. It offers
approximately 97 degrees of horizontal and 92 degrees of vertical FOV [39]. There are
a number of headsets that offer a bigger one, but they are more expensive. FOV is one
of the most significant limitations of VR [101], especially in the aspect of learning how to
juggle. Because peripheral vision is so crucial in tracking multiple balls at the same time
[97], it would be very valuable to investigate if using headsets that offer a bigger field of
view positively influences the learning process, reducing the problem of not seeing the
balls falling into the user’s hand and predicting the projectile of the ball.
Many participants noted that the biggest difficulty of using the simulator was remembering
in which hand they have two balls and which button to release when juggling. It appears
so that the juggling simulator wasn’t just a medium that makes juggling easier due to slow
motion and other helpful features but ended up being a difficult arcade game where users
needed to get really skilled with the controller, subconsciously pressing and releasing the
correct buttons. This is an aspect that would be very difficult if the feature of holding two
balls independently was to be kept. Some juggling simulators don’t require the user to
actively hold the balls with any buttons [93]. They simply attach the ball to the hand when
they get close and get released when a sufficient upward force is applied to it. This ap-
proach has quite a few downsides. One being the fact that the user doesn’t learn when
to catch and release the ball, and the second one is that it doesn’t teach how to manage
two balls in one hand. Testing alternative input methods would allow for finding a solution
that reduces the negative influence of the controllers on the learning outcome.
56
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:65==
8.1
Future work
The results of this study provide valuable information for future research on VR as a tool
for motor skill training. While the current VR juggling simulator does not yet give results
comparable to traditional training, the significant progress seen in participants during the
second test indicates that with further improvements, VR could become a viable option for
skill development. The relatively fast improvement of VR participants’ skills also suggests
that VR can be a valuable starting point in learning. With the level of enjoyment that it
provides and the ability to smooth out the learning curve, it can be a great encouragement
for people that aren’t yet experienced with the sport. A larger testing group is essential to
confirm the findings of this study. Additionally, finding participants with more experience
in VR would allow for a more robust investigation of how big of an impact learning how
to use VR has on the process of training a skill and its outcomes. Seeing how big of an
issue was the lack of a full peripheral vision for VR users, future studies could examine
how more advanced VR headsets with a bigger field of view and better resolution impact
performance. This would help to determine how much the size of the field of view influ-
ences the learning process. The improvement of the juggling simulator will continue, and
the app will be published on AppLab to gain more feedback and help people learn how
to juggle. This will allow for testing various features of the VR simulator, such as different
methods of slow motion and helping the user with the correct velocity and direction of a
released ball.
8.2
Conclusion
VR, despite its limitations, shows great potential for facilitating motor skills training. As
the technology advances, it may one day provide an experience much more comparable
to the real world, without limitations of FOV or controllers that don’t provide quality tactile
feedback. VR still has a big advantage over some cases where running a training session
is impractical or just very challenging [102]. The study shows that VR is not yet capable of
delivering the same training outcomes as real-life training, but it suggests that it can serve
as a useful complementary tool to traditional methods. Particularly by offering features
that allow for smoothing out the learning curve and supporting individualized training. The
results of the study indicate that training in a virtual environment is indeed more enjoyable
to the user, but the frustration level was low and comparable in both training methods.
The impact of prior experience in VR requires more research on a bigger testing group
that has diverse prior experience with this technology. A few VR participants that had
used a gamepad in the past had better final results than others, but the influence of prior
experience wasn’t statistically significant, indicating that it didn’t have a strong influence
on the performance. As expected, in the group that trained in real life, participants that
had more experience with ball sports performed better compared to the ones with low
experience. However, an interesting observation was that in the VR group, prior ball
sports experience didn’t make any real difference on the learning outcome, suggesting
that VR with its extra features like slow motion allows for a smoother learning process
regardless of the coordination. In conclusion, this study provides a valuable contribution
to understanding what are the capabilities of VR and what are its limitations in the context
of motor skill development. While the results show that VR is not yet as effective as
traditional training methods for skills like juggling, the technology’s flexibility, accessibility,
the ability to fully control the training environment, and potential for improvement make it
a promising direction for future development in this field.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Marileen M. T. E. Kouijzer et al. “Implementation of virtual reality in healthcare: a
scoping review on the implementation process of virtual reality in various health-
care settings”. en. In: Implementation Science Communications 4.1 (June 2023),
p. 67. ISSN: 2662-2211. DOI: 10.1186/s43058-023-00442-2. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1186/s43058-023-00442-2 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[2]
Sam Kavanagh et al. “A systematic review of Virtual Reality in education”. en.
In: Themes in Science and Technology Education 10.2 (Dec. 2017). Publisher:
Themes in Science and Technology Education, pp. 85–119. ISSN: 1792-8788.
URL: https://www.learntechlib.org/p/182115/ (visited on 09/12/2024).
[3]
Generalized Structure for Adaptable Immersive Learning Environments | IEEE
Conference Publication | IEEE Xplore. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9598533 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[4]
Jakub Malik, Rafał Stemplewski, and Janusz Maciaszek. “The Effect of Juggling
as Dual-Task Activity on Human Neuroplasticity: A Systematic Review”. en. In:
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 19.12 (Jan.
2022). Number: 12 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, p. 7102.
ISSN: 1660-4601. DOI: 10.3390/ijerph19127102. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
1660-4601/19/12/7102 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[5]
Haptic feedback is making VR surgery feel like the real thing - The Verge. URL:
https://www.theverge.com/2018/8/14/17670304/virtual-reality-surgery-training-
haptic-feedback-fundamentalvr (visited on 09/16/2024).
[6]
I. J. Prithishkumar and S. A. Michael. “Understanding your student: using the
VARK model”. eng. In: Journal of Postgraduate Medicine 60.2 (2014), pp. 183–
186. ISSN: 0972-2823. DOI: 10.4103/0022-3859.132337.
[7]
Paul J. Gorman, Andreas H. Meier, and Thomas M. Krummel. “Simulation and Vir-
tual Reality in Surgical Education: Real or Unreal?” In: Archives of Surgery 134.11
(Nov. 1999), pp. 1203–1208. ISSN: 0004-0010. DOI: 10.1001/archsurg.134.11.
1203. URL: https://doi.org/10.1001/archsurg.134.11.1203 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[8]
The social aspect of learning | ITCILO. URL: https://www.itcilo.org/social-aspect-
learning (visited on 07/02/2024).
[9]
Kenneth Wesson. A Primer on Neuroplasticity: Experience and Your Brain | Brain
World. en-US. May 2020. URL: https://brainworldmagazine.com/a- primer- on-
neuroplasticity-experience-and-your-brain/ (visited on 08/11/2024).
[10]
Bogdan Draganski et al. “Neuroplasticity: changes in grey matter induced by train-
ing”. In: Nature 427 (Feb. 2004), pp. 311–2. DOI: 10.1038/427311a.
[11]
Yongmin Chang. “Reorganization and plastic changes of the human brain asso-
ciated with skill learning and expertise”. English. In: Frontiers in Human Neuro-
science 8 (Feb. 2014). Publisher: Frontiers. ISSN: 1662-5161. DOI: 10 . 3389 /
fnhum.2014.00035. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/human-neuroscience/
articles/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00035/full (visited on 09/12/2024).
[12]
Julien Doyon and H Benali. Reorganization and plasticity in the adult brain during
learning of motor skills. Vol. 15. Journal Abbreviation: Current Opinion in Neuro-
biology - CURR OPIN NEUROBIOL Pages: 1524 vol. 3 Publication Title: Current
Opinion in Neurobiology - CURR OPIN NEUROBIOL. Apr. 2005. ISBN: 978-0-
7803-9048-5. DOI: 10.1109/IJCNN.2005.1556102.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
59
==PAGE:68==
[13]
Roland Sigrist et al. “Augmented visual, auditory, haptic, and multimodal feedback
in motor learning: A review”. en. In: Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 20.1 (Feb.
2013), pp. 21–53. ISSN: 1531-5320. DOI: 10 . 3758 / s13423 - 012 - 0333 - 8. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-012-0333-8 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[14]
Soyiba Jawed et al. “Classification of Visual and Non-visual Learners Using Elec-
troencephalographic Alpha and Gamma Activities”. In: Frontiers in Behavioral Neu-
roscience 13 (May 2019), p. 86. ISSN: 1662-5153. DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00086.
URL: https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles / PMC6513874/ (visited on
09/12/2024).
[15]
Abbas Pourhosein Gilakjani. “Visual, Auditory, Kinaesthetic Learning Styles and
Their Impacts on English Language Teaching”. en. In: Journal of Studies in Edu-
cation 2.1 (Dec. 2011), p. 104. ISSN: 2162-6952. DOI: 10.5296/jse.v2i1.1007. URL:
http://www.macrothink.org/journal/index.php/jse/article/view/1007 (visited on
09/12/2024).
[16]
Pietro De Luca et al. “3-D virtual reality surgery training to improve muscle mem-
ory and surgical skills in head and neck residents/young surgeons”. en. In: Eu-
ropean Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology 281.5 (May 2024), pp. 2767–2770.
ISSN: 1434-4726. DOI: 10.1007/s00405- 024- 08573- 5. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00405-024-08573-5 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[17]
Sandy L. Gonzalez, Veronica Alvarez, and Eliza L. Nelson. “Do Gross and Fine
Motor Skills Differentially Contribute to Language Outcomes? A Systematic Re-
view”. In: Frontiers in Psychology 10 (Dec. 2019), p. 2670. ISSN: 1664-1078. DOI:
10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02670. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC6901663/ (visited on 09/12/2024).
[18]
Kirsten Hötting and Brigitte Röder. “Beneficial effects of physical exercise on neu-
roplasticity and cognition”. eng. In: Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 37.9
Pt B (Nov. 2013), pp. 2243–2257. ISSN: 1873-7528. DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.
2013.04.005.
[19]
Eran Dayan and Leonardo G. Cohen. “Neuroplasticity subserving motor skill learn-
ing”. In: Neuron 72.3 (Nov. 2011), pp. 443–454. ISSN: 0896-6273. DOI: 10.1016/
j . neuron . 2011 . 10 . 008. URL: https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles /
PMC3217208/ (visited on 09/12/2024).
[20]
Unsplash. Photo by Marco Bianchetti on Unsplash. en-US. Sept. 2021. URL: https:
//unsplash.com/photos/a-man-juggling-balls-into-the-air-K0312dHpn3Q (visited on
09/16/2024).
[21]
Photo by Los Muertos Crew on Pexels. en. URL: https://www.pexels.com/photo/a-
man-doing-juggling-8895399/ (visited on 09/16/2024).
[22]
Photo by Los Muertos Crew on Pexels. en-US. URL: https://www.pexels.com/
photo/man-balancing-a-crystal-ball-8895567/ (visited on 09/16/2024).
[23]
Photo by ￿￿￿￿￿￿on Pexels. en-US. URL: https://www.pexels.com/photo/an-
older-man-is-doing-a-juggling-act-with-two-balls-27695399/ (visited on 09/16/2024).
[24]
Pouya Mohammadi et al. “Real-time Control of Whole-body Robot Motion and Tra-
jectory Generation for Physiotherapeutic Juggling in VR”. In: 2018 IEEE/RSJ In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). ISSN: 2153-
0866. Oct. 2018, pp. 270–277. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2018.8593632. URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8593632 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[25]
P. Gerber et al. “Juggling revisited — A voxel–based morphometry study with ex-
pert jugglers”. In: NeuroImage 95 (July 2014), pp. 320–325. ISSN: 1053-8119.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.04.023. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S105381191400278X (visited on 09/12/2024).
60
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:69==
[26]
David J. Harris et al. “The effect of a virtual reality environment on gaze behaviour
and motor skill learning”. In: Psychology of Sport and Exercise 50 (Sept. 2020),
p. 101721. ISSN: 1469-0292. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . psychsport . 2020 . 101721. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1469029220300947 (visited
on 09/12/2024).
[27]
Manal Hasan Zainaldeen et al. “The influence of ball-juggling on emotional states,
blood pressure and sleep-quality among medical students during end-of-year exam
preparation”. In: Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice 30 (Feb. 2018),
pp. 64–67. ISSN: 1744-3881. DOI: 10.1016/j.ctcp.2017.12.004. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1744388117303584 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[28]
Toshihiro Nakahara et al. “Effect of juggling therapy on anxiety disorders in female
patients”. en. In: BioPsychoSocial Medicine 1.1 (May 2007), p. 10. ISSN: 1751-
0759. DOI: 10.1186/1751-0759-1-10. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/1751-0759-1-10
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[29]
Jakub Malik et al. “Effect of a juggling-based physical activity on postural stability,
reaction time, and attention focus in older adults: a randomized crossover study”.
In: European Review of Aging and Physical Activity 21.1 (May 2024), p. 15. ISSN:
1861-6909. DOI: 10.1186/s11556-024-00351-w. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s11556-024-00351-w (visited on 09/14/2024).
[30]
Extended Reality Market Size, Share & Growth Report, 2030. en. URL: https://
www.grandviewresearch.com/industry- analysis/extended- reality- xr- market- report
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[31]
What is virtual reality hand tracking? - VRX by VR Expert. URL: https://vrx.vr-
expert.com/what-is-virtual-reality-hand-tracking/ (visited on 09/16/2024).
[32]
HTC Vive Pro 2 Review. en. URL: https://www.pcmag.com/reviews/htc-vive-pro-2
(visited on 09/16/2024).
[33]
Eunjee Kim and Gwanseob Shin. “User discomfort while using a virtual reality
headset as a personal viewing system for text-intensive office tasks”. eng. In:
Ergonomics 64.7 (July 2021), pp. 891–899. ISSN: 1366-5847. DOI: 10 . 1080 /
00140139.2020.1869320.
[34]
Photo by Eren Li on Pexels. en-US. URL: https://www.pexels.com/photo/man-
playing-game-with-vr-controller-7241424/ (visited on 09/16/2024).
[35]
Yi Yang et al. “An Improved Method of Pose Estimation for Lighthouse Base Sta-
tion Extension”. en. In: Sensors 17.10 (Oct. 2017). Number: 10 Publisher: Multi-
disciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, p. 2411. ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10.3390/
s17102411. URL: https : / /www . mdpi . com /1424 - 8220/ 17 /10 / 2411 (visited on
09/14/2024).
[36]
VR Full Body Tracking Guide: Technological pros and cons. en. URL: https://
komete-xr.com/en/blogs/infos/vr-full-body-tracking-guide (visited on 09/16/2024).
[37]
Augmented Reality (AR) vs Virtual Reality (VR). en. Sept. 2022. URL: https://www.
xmreality.com/blog/augmented-reality-vs-virtual-reality (visited on 09/16/2024).
[38]
Saeideh Goharinejad et al. “The usefulness of virtual, augmented, and mixed re-
ality technologies in the diagnosis and treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder in children: an overview of relevant studies”. en. In: BMC Psychiatry 22.1
(Jan. 2022), p. 4. ISSN: 1471-244X. DOI: 10.1186/s12888- 021- 03632- 1. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-021-03632-1 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[39]
Oculus Quest 2: Full Specification. en. URL: https://vr-compare.com/headset/
oculusquest2 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[40]
Meta Quest 2 128GB Enterprise. en. URL: https://unboundxr.eu/b2b/meta-quest-
2-128gb-b2b (visited on 09/16/2024).
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
61
==PAGE:70==
[41]
Valve Index: Full Specification. en. URL: https://vr-compare.com/headset/valveindex
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[42]
Maximilian Schreiner. Valve Index im Test: Die beste aktuelle PC-VR-Brille? de-
DE. Dec. 2019. URL: https://mixed.de/valve-index-test/ (visited on 09/16/2024).
[43]
HTC Vive Pro 2: Full Specification. en. URL: https://vr-compare.com/headset/
htcvivepro2 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[44]
HTC Vive Pro 2 Full Kit VR Brille mieten ab 42,90 € pro Monat. URL: https://www.
grover.com/de-de/products/htc-virtual-reality-headset-htc-vive-pro-2-full-kit (visited
on 09/16/2024).
[45]
Microsoft HoloLens 2: Full Specification. en. URL: https : / / vr - compare . com /
headset/microsofthololens2 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[46]
Magic Leap 2: Full Specification. en. URL: https : / / vr - compare . com / headset /
magicleap2 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[47]
Magic Leap 2: Full Specification. en. URL: https : / / vr - compare . com / headset /
magicleap2 (visited on 09/16/2024).
[48]
Varjo XR-3: Full Specification. en. URL: https://vr-compare.com/headset/varjoxr-3
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[49]
Pico 4 Pro: Full Specification. en. URL: https://vr-compare.com/headset/pico4pro
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[50]
Benefits of playing Beat Saber and how to improve the skill – ZyberVR. URL: https:
//zybervr.com/blogs/news/benefits-of-playing-beat-saber-and-how-to-improve-the-
skill (visited on 09/16/2024).
[51]
Kun Zhang et al. “Design and implementation of fire safety education system on
campus based on virtual reality technology”. In: 2017 Federated Conference on
Computer Science and Information Systems (FedCSIS). Sept. 2017, pp. 1297–
1300. DOI: 10 . 15439 / 2017F376. URL: https : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org / document /
8104721 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[52]
Raphael Romano Bruno et al. “Virtual and augmented reality in critical care medicine:
the patient’s, clinician’s, and researcher’s perspective”. eng. In: Critical Care (Lon-
don, England) 26.1 (Oct. 2022), p. 326. ISSN: 1466-609X. DOI: 10.1186/s13054-
022-04202-x.
[53]
Hamid Bateni et al. “Use of Virtual Reality in Physical Therapy as an Intervention
and Diagnostic Tool”. In: Rehabilitation Research and Practice 2024 (Jan. 2024),
p. 1122286. ISSN: 2090-2867. DOI: 10.1155/2024/1122286. URL: https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10834096/ (visited on 09/14/2024).
[54]
C. Botella et al. “Treatment of flying phobia using virtual reality: data from a 1-year
follow-up using a multiple baseline design”. en. In: Clinical Psychology & Psy-
chotherapy 11.5 (2004). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/cpp.404,
pp. 311–323. ISSN: 1099-0879. DOI: 10.1002/cpp.404. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cpp.404 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[55]
M. E. Portman, A. Natapov, and D. Fisher-Gewirtzman. “To go where no man has
gone before: Virtual reality in architecture, landscape architecture and environ-
mental planning”. In: Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (Nov. 2015),
pp. 376–384. ISSN: 0198-9715. DOI: 10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2015.05.001. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S019897151500054X (visited on
09/14/2024).
[56]
Peter Abualzolof. Council Post: 5 Ways To Use Virtual Reality In Your Real Es-
tate Business. en. Section: Innovation. URL: https://www.forbes.com/councils/
forbestechcouncil/2022/10/05/5-ways-to-use-virtual-reality-in-your-real-estate-
business/ (visited on 09/14/2024).
62
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:71==
[57]
Britta Nordin Forsberg and Kathrin Kirchner. “The Perception of Avatars in Virtual
Reality During Professional Meetings”. en. In: HCI International 2021 - Posters.
Ed. by Constantine Stephanidis, Margherita Antona, and Stavroula Ntoa. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 290–294. ISBN: 978-3-030-78642-7.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-78642-7_39.
[58]
Zoom, but in VR: Why Spatial’s free meeting app feels like a leap forward - CNET.
URL: https://www.cnet.com/tech/gaming/zoom- but- in- vr- why- spatials- free-
meeting-app-feels-like-a-leap-forward/ (visited on 09/16/2024).
[59]
Sam Frish et al. Mid-Air Haptic Bio-Holograms in Mixed Reality. Pages: 352. Oct.
2019. DOI: 10.1109/ISMAR-Adjunct.2019.00-14.
[60]
AR Glasses for Navigation – Queppelin. en-US. URL: https://www.queppelin.com/
ar-glasses-for-navigation/ (visited on 09/16/2024).
[61]
History of VR – Timeline of Events and Tech Development – VirtualSpeech. en-US.
URL: https://virtualspeech.com/blog/history-of-vr (visited on 09/14/2024).
[62]
S Saranya et al. “Development of Virtual Reality Platform through Human Com-
puter Interaction using Artificial Intelligence”. In: 2024 3rd International Conference
on Applied Artificial Intelligence and Computing (ICAAIC). June 2024, pp. 283–
288. DOI: 10.1109/ICAAIC60222.2024.10575226. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/10575226 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[63]
How Osso Enterprise Works | Custom-developed VR modules. en. URL: https:
//www.ossovr.com/osso-enterprise (visited on 09/14/2024).
[64]
Ryan Antel et al. “The use of artificial intelligence and virtual reality in doctor-
patient risk communication: A scoping review”. In: Patient Education and Coun-
seling 105.10 (Oct. 2022), pp. 3038–3050. ISSN: 0738-3991. DOI: 10.1016/j.
pec . 2022 . 06 . 006. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0738399122002750 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[65]
ready2train™Dismounted Soldier tactical maneuver training system | Serious Sim-
ulations. en-US. URL: https : / / serioussimulations . com / ready2train/ (visited on
09/14/2024).
[66]
ready2train™Dismounted Soldier tactical maneuver training system | Serious Sim-
ulations. en-US. URL: https : / / serioussimulations . com / ready2train/ (visited on
09/16/2024).
[67]
Johanna Pirker. The Potential of Virtual Reality for Aerospace Applications. Pages:
8. Mar. 2022. DOI: 10.1109/AERO53065.2022.9843324.
[68]
K. Nihal et al. Enhancing Soft Skill Development with ChatGPT and VR: An Ex-
ploratory Study. Pages: 6. Nov. 2023. DOI: 10 . 1109 / RMKMATE59243 . 2023 .
10369130.
[69]
Natalia Sinou, Nikoleta Sinou, and Dimitrios Filippou. “Virtual Reality and Aug-
mented Reality in Anatomy Education During COVID-19 Pandemic”. In: Cureus
15.2 (), e35170. ISSN: 2168-8184. DOI: 10.7759/cureus.35170. URL: https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10029107/ (visited on 09/14/2024).
[70]
Virtual reality in the chemistry lab: experiments with VR goggles and controller |
Paderborn University. URL: https://www.uni-paderborn.de/en/news-item/127430
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[71]
Immersive Learning - Solar System Exploration - EON Reality - AI Assisted XR-
based knowledge transfer for education and industry. URL: https://eonreality.com/
immersive-learning-solar-system/ (visited on 09/14/2024).
[72]
Learn a Language in Realistic VR Scenarios with these Apps – VirtualSpeech. en-
US. URL: https://virtualspeech.com/blog/learn-language-vr-scenarios-apps (visited
on 09/14/2024).
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
63
==PAGE:72==
[73]
Stefan Pastel et al. “Training in virtual reality enables learning of a complex sports
movement”. en. In: Virtual Reality 27.2 (June 2023), pp. 523–540. ISSN: 1434-
9957. DOI: 10.1007/s10055-022-00679-7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10055-
022-00679-7 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[74]
Carlo Harvey et al. “A comparison between expert and beginner learning for motor
skill development in a virtual reality serious game”. en. In: The Visual Computer
37.1 (Jan. 2021), pp. 3–17. ISSN: 1432-2315. DOI: 10.1007/s00371-019-01702-w.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-019-01702-w (visited on 09/12/2024).
[75]
Yun-feng Wu et al. “The Virtual Reality Applied in Construction Machinery Indus-
try”. In: 8022 (July 2013), pp. 340–349. ISSN: 978-3-642-39419-5. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-642-39420-1-36.
[76]
Victòria Brugada-Ramentol, Amir Bozorgzadeh, and Hossein Jalali. “Enhance VR:
A Multisensory Approach to Cognitive Training and Monitoring”. In: Frontiers in
Digital Health 4 (June 2022), p. 916052. ISSN: 2673-253X. DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.
2022.916052. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9203823/
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[77]
How Companies Are Using VR to Develop Employees’ Soft Skills. URL: https:
//hbr.org/2021/01/how-companies-are-using-vr-to-develop-employees-soft-skills
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[78]
Debra Boeldt et al. “Using Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy to Enhance Treatment
of Anxiety Disorders: Identifying Areas of Clinical Adoption and Potential Obsta-
cles”. In: Frontiers in Psychiatry 10 (Oct. 2019), p. 773. ISSN: 1664-0640. DOI:
10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00773. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC6823515/ (visited on 09/14/2024).
[79]
Jelte E. Bos et al. “The effect of internal and external fields of view on visually
induced motion sickness”. In: Applied Ergonomics. Special Section - The First In-
ternational Symposium on Visually Induced Motion Sickness, Fatigue, and Pho-
tosensitive Epileptic Seizures (VIMS2007) 41.4 (July 2010), pp. 516–521. ISSN:
0003-6870. DOI: 10.1016/j.apergo.2009.11.007. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0003687009001586 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[80]
X et al. A floor that feels like magic? Just another marvel from this legendary Disney
inventor. en-US. Section: Lifestyle. Jan. 2024. URL: https://www.latimes.com/
lifestyle/story/2024-01-31/lanny-smoot-disney-inventor-holotile-floor (visited on
09/14/2024).
[81]
Alexis D. Souchet et al. “A narrative review of immersive virtual reality’s ergonomics
and risks at the workplace: cybersickness, visual fatigue, muscular fatigue, acute
stress, and mental overload”. en. In: Virtual Reality 27.1 (Mar. 2023), pp. 19–50.
ISSN: 1434-9957. DOI: 10.1007/s10055-022-00672-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10055-022-00672-0 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[82]
Beyond Distraction: Harnessing Deep Work for Lasting Impact. en-US. Section:
Career Counseling. Sept. 2024. URL: https://meda.foundation/beyond-distraction-
harnessing-deep-work-for-lasting-impact/ (visited on 09/14/2024).
[83]
Yangtao Kong. “The Role of Experiential Learning on Students’ Motivation and
Classroom Engagement”. In: Frontiers in Psychology 12 (Oct. 2021), p. 771272.
ISSN: 1664-1078. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.771272. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8569223/ (visited on 09/14/2024).
[84]
Manuel Ninaus et al. “The added value of game elements: better training perfor-
mance but comparable learning gains”. en. In: Educational technology research
and development 71.5 (Oct. 2023), pp. 1917–1939. ISSN: 1556-6501. DOI: 10.
64
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:73==
1007/s11423-023-10263-8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-023-10263-8
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[85]
Augmented Reality AR App Development Repair and Maintenance. URL: https:
//www.neuronimbus.com/blog/augmented- reality- in- repair- and- maintenance/
(visited on 09/16/2024).
[86]
Todesangst auf Knopfdruck. de. Apr. 2016. URL: https://www.stern.de/digital/
games/games-auf-virtual-reality-brillen--todespanik-auf-knopfdruck-6774672.html
(visited on 09/16/2024).
[87]
Stefan C. Michalski, Ancret Szpak, and Tobias Loetscher. “Using Virtual Envi-
ronments to Improve Real-World Motor Skills in Sports: A Systematic Review”.
English. In: Frontiers in Psychology 10 (Sept. 2019). Publisher: Frontiers. ISSN:
1664-1078. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02159. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/
journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02159/full (visited on 09/14/2024).
[88]
Paweł Dobrowolski et al. “Immersive Virtual Reality and Complex Skill Learning:
Transfer Effects After Training in Younger and Older Adults”. English. In: Frontiers
in Virtual Reality 1 (Jan. 2021). Publisher: Frontiers. ISSN: 2673-4192. DOI: 10.
3389/frvir.2020.604008. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/virtual-reality/
articles/10.3389/frvir.2020.604008/full (visited on 09/14/2024).
[89]
Filip Borglund et al. “Feedback from HTC Vive Sensors Results in Transient Per-
formance Enhancements on a Juggling Task in Virtual Reality”. en. In: Sensors
21.9 (Jan. 2021). Number: 9 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Insti-
tute, p. 2966. ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10.3390/s21092966. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/1424-8220/21/9/2966 (visited on 08/20/2024).
[90]
A P Hauge, C S Kragegaard, and E B Kj. “Transfer of Juggling Skills Acquired in
a Virtual Environment”. en. In: ().
[91]
Einat Yanovich and Omri Ronen. “The Use of Virtual Reality in Motor Learning:
A Multiple Pilot Study Review”. en. In: Advances in Physical Education 5.3 (July
2015). Number: 3 Publisher: Scientific Research Publishing, pp. 188–193. DOI:
10.4236/ape.2015.53023. URL: https://www.scirp.org/journal/paperinformation?
paperid=58638 (visited on 08/20/2024).
[92]
Rotem Lammfromm and Daniel Gopher. “Transfer of Skill from a Virtual Reality
Trainer to Real Juggling”. In: BIO Web of Conferences 1 (Dec. 2011). DOI: 10.
1051/bioconf/20110100054.
[93]
Jindrich Adolf et al. “Juggling in VR: Advantages of Immersive Virtual Reality in
Juggling Learning”. In: Nov. 2019, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 978-1-4503-7001-1. DOI: 10.
1145/3359996.3364246.
[94]
Benjamin Meyer et al. Juggling 4.0: Learning Complex Motor Skills with Aug-
mented Reality Through the Example of Juggling. Oct. 2018. DOI: 10.1145/3266037.
3266099.
[95]
Why Black Ops Cold War’s Field Of View Slider Is A Big Deal. URL: https://
gamerant.com/call- duty- black- ops- cold- war- field- view- slider- good/ (visited on
09/16/2024).
[96]
URL: https://api.unity.com/v1/oauth2/authorize?client_id=asset_store_v2&
locale=en_GB&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fassetstore.unity.com%2Fauth%
2Fcallback%3Fredirect_to%3D%252F%253Fsrsltid%253DAfmBOopdgunQGKhpr_
PfvUns8UNx5gIytPLYgI5MGrTXoew2-lPXEI1n&response_type=code&state=820e1bda-
51ab-4c2b-9ed6-00eb31c2a265 (visited on 09/14/2024).
[97]
Boost Your Hand-Eye Coordination with Juggling | Kings Juggler. en. URL: https:
//kingsjuggler.com/blog/3/how-juggling-helps-hand-eye-coordination (visited on
09/14/2024).
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
65
==PAGE:74==
[98]
Arindam Dey. “Perceptual Characteristics of Visualizations for Occluded Objects
in Handheld Augmented Reality”. PhD thesis. Aug. 2013.
[99]
DOTween (HOTween v2). URL: https://dotween.demigiant.com/ (visited on 09/14/2024).
[100]
Marika Berchicci et al. “Time-source of neural plasticity in complex bimanual coor-
dinative tasks: Juggling”. In: Behavioural Brain Research 328 (June 2017), pp. 87–
94. ISSN: 0166-4328. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . bbr . 2017 . 04 . 011. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166432817303613 (visited on 09/12/2024).
[101]
What is Field of View (FoV) in Extended Reality? — updated 2024. en. URL: https:
//www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/field-of-view-fov-in-extended-reality
(visited on 09/14/2024).
[102]
Fabio Richlan et al. “Virtual training, real effects: a narrative review on sports per-
formance enhancement through interventions in virtual reality”. In: Frontiers in Psy-
chology 14 (Oct. 2023), p. 1240790. ISSN: 1664-1078. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.
1240790. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10622803/ (visited
on 09/14/2024).
66
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:75==
A
Appendix
Participant
Test 1
Test 2
P3
1
2
P5
0
3
P6
0
1
P9
1
3
P10
2
4
P11
0
2
P17
1
5
P18
1
3
P19
1
3
P20
2
4
Average
0.9
3.0
Table A.1: VR Group Performance - number of successful 3-ball flashes out of 10 attempts
in each test.
Participant
Test 1
Test 2
P1
6
8
P2
7
7
P4
7
5
P7
9
8
P8
10
9
P12
7
9
P13
8
7
P14
6
4
P15
8
8
P16
9
9
Average
7.7
7.4
Table A.2: Real-world Group Performance - number of successful 3-ball flashes out of 10
attempts in each test.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
67
==PAGE:76==
Participant
Frustration
Enjoyment
P1
2
5
P2
1
4
P4
2
5
P7
1
4
P8
1
5
P12
2
3
P13
3
4
P14
3
4
P15
1
3
P16
1
4
Average
1.7
4.1
Table A.3: Frustration and enjoyment ratings during the training session on a 1-5 scale
for 10 participants from the real life group.
Participant
Frustration
Enjoyment
P3
1
5
P5
2
5
P6
1
5
P9
2
4
P10
1
5
P11
3
5
P17
1
5
P18
2
5
P19
2
5
P20
1
4
Average
1.6
4.8
Table A.4: Frustration and enjoyment ratings during the training session on a 1-5 scale
for 10 participants from the real life group.
Participant
Juggling pattern
Audio guide
P1
4
4
P2
4
5
P4
3
4
P7
4
4
P8
5
5
P12
5
4
P13
4
4
P14
5
4
P15
5
4
P16
4
4
Average
4.3
4.2
Table A.5: Usefulness of the features in the real-world training session on a 1-5 scale for
10 participants from the real life group.
68
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
==PAGE:77==
Participant
Pattern
Audio guide
Slow motion
Stopping balls
VR training
P3
4
5
4
5
5
P5
4
4
5
5
5
P6
5
5
4
5
5
P9
3
5
4
5
5
P10
4
4
4
4
3
P11
4
5
5
5
4
P17
4
5
4
5
5
P18
5
5
5
5
5
P19
4
5
5
5
4
P20
5
4
4
4
5
Average
4.2
4.7
4.8
4.7
4.6
Table A.6: Usefulness of the features in the VR training session on a 1-5 scale for 10
participants from the VR group.
Acquiring Physical Skills using Virtual Reality with Application to Juggling
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
