==PAGE:1==
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory
Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
Master Thesis
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Bioengineering
==PAGE:2==
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
Master Thesis
August, 2024
Yahya N. Farooqi
Cover photo: Generated by ChatGPT
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Computational Microbiology Department at
Novonesis, in collaboration with the Technical University of Denmark and DTU Biosustain, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Yahya N. Farooqi ­ s222502
Signature
Date
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In food microbiology, fermentation strains are used for their ability to influence the taste, texture, and
nutritional content of various types of food products. This ability is often the result of the secretion of
high­value metabolites, that change the chemical composition of the fermentation medium. The over­
production of these metabolites is difficult to achieve, due to the prohibition of using genetic engineering
techniques on microbes used in food fermentation, leading to the development of alternative methods to
increase metabolite overproduction. This thesis attempts to develop such a method, specifically in the
context of metabolite overproduction in Lactobacillus helveticus. Through the development of a compu­
tational pipeline, we employ strain specific genome­scale metabolic models to design ALE experiments
that can incur phenotypes that can lead to metabolite overproduction. Furthermore, we experimentally
implement these predictions in an ALE campaign to test if overproduction is occurring. Although metabo­
lite overproduction was not realized, the computational results reveal distinct metabolic pathways that
can be leveraged in future experiments to incur increased metabolite secretion.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Cheese production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Lactic Acid Bacteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Lactobacillus helveticus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Strain Improvement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
MARSI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Genome­scale Metabolic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Network Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
This Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Methods
11
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Genome­scale model reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
EvolveY Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Average Euclidean Distance Metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Experimental Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
Medium preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.2
Carbon Source Utilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.3
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution Campaign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.4
Biochemical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Results
18
3.1
EvolveY Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Experimental Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Growth Tests & Predictive Efficacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Discussion
39
4.1
Predicted optimization of succinate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Approach limitations and Future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
44
A Appendix
49
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Leveraging bacteria to produce high­value chemicals is a standard research theme in industrial mi­
crobiology, as it provides a sustainable and efficient method for the production of chemicals that are
used in everyday life [1]. Such chemicals include detergents [2], pharmaceuticals [3], and amino acids
[4], among others. Most modern industrial microbiology uses genetic engineering to optimize the produc­
tion of these target chemicals, as manipulating the genetic structure of microorganisms can yield much
higher yields of target products [5]. The food industry also uses microorganisms, mainly for the produc­
tion of fermented foods like cheeses, yogurts, and beverages. Within this industry, the overproduction
of certain chemicals from fermentation strains is an area of interest, as these chemicals are associated
with flavour, texture, and the nutritional content of these foods [6]. However, the overproduction of these
metabolites cannot be achieved through conventional genetic engineering, due to EU limitations on the
use of such tools in food products [7].
Despite these limitations, the overproduction of target chemicals is still achievable through other
means. One such strategy is adaptive laboratory evolution, which leverages natural evolutionary mech­
anisms to produce industrially relevant traits [8]. However, due to the conflict between cell growth and
target chemical overproduction, it is difficult to use evolution to overproduce compounds. In other words,
because there is often no positive evolutionary force selecting for target metabolite secretion, using
evolution to increase secretion is difficult to achieve. This masters thesis will attempt to address this
problem. Through using computational methods, we aim to create evolutionary conditions where spe­
cific metabolites will have a positive evolutionary pressure, leading to their eventual overproduction in
industrial strains relevant in cheese production.
1.1
Cheese production
Cheese is an ancient and diverse type of food. Rich in nutrients and flavour, it provided early humans
with a more stable form of milk that could be stored for longer periods. Given its ancient origins, this
food product has since developed into a variety of different flavour and texture profiles, found in many
regions of the world [9]. Given the diversity of cheeses, different methodologies are taken for its industrial
production. Nevertheless, broadly speaking modern cheese production begins with the selection of high­
quality milk, with the subsequent steps including acidification, coagulation, curd treatment, and draining
[9]. Acidification is the process whereby the lactose content of the milk is converted to lactic acid, usually
mediated by microbial fermentation [10]. This step acts to lower the pH of the milk, which helps in
downstream coagulation, prevents spoiling, and also contributes to the flavour formation and texture
of the cheese [9]. After this initial acidification, the product is then coagulated, usually by the addition
of the set of rennet enzymes. These enzymes, primarily chymosin, acts to cleave the kappa­casein
protein, which has the affect of changing the structural properties of the milk. The subsequent formation
of micelles allow for curdling to occur [11]. Once curdling has occurred, the resultant curd is then cut, with
whey (liquid by­product) being disposed of in the process. Subsequent steps are highly varied depending
on the specific cheese being made. These include salting, molding, and pressing, all of which significantly
influence the downstream texture and flavour of the cheese [9]. Ageing is also an important step, where
continued metabolic activity of the fermentation strains (over a period of weeks to years), along with other
factors, influences the flavour profile of the cheese [12].
1.1.1
Lactic Acid Bacteria
As mentioned, the acidification process in cheese production is mediated by microbial fermentation.
This fermentation is often performed by a starter culture of lactic acid bacteria (LAB), that can effectively
metabolize lactose and produce lactic acid throughout the fermentation process [13]. These LAB starter
cultures can include Lactococcus lactis, Streptococcus thermophilus, and Lactobacilli, such as L. del­
brukeii, and L. helveticus [9]. The choice of these strains, and combinations thereof, can profoundly
change the flavour and texture of the end product of cheeses. As noted by Melkonian et al. (2023), there
is a series of complex metabolic interactions between different LAB strains, meaning that the compo­
sition of LAB used in starter cultures will influence the resultant flavour profile of the cheese [14]. This
creation of flavours in cheeses is mediated through a series of biochemical pathways, including glycolytic,
proteolytic and lipolytic metabolism [15].
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
1
==PAGE:7==
Given that many essential amino acids are not available in milk based fermentation conditions, many
LAB are dependent on the proteolysis of casein proteins to release free amino acids to use in their
metabolism. This proteolysis is often mediated through the use of membrane bound extracellular pro­
teinases. After consuming the newly freed amino acids intracellular peptidases metabolize and integrate
these compounds into cellular metabolism [13]. Flavour compounds such as isovaleric acid and ben­
zaldehydel are both examples of flavour associated compounds which are the product of such amino acid
uptake, and are produced through various transamination pathways [16]. Another key flavour associated
molecule is 2­methylbutanoic acid, which is secreted by LAB strains like Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis
through the uptake and metabolism of leucine [17].
In addition to these amino acid based flavour associated chemicals, several metabolites closely as­
sociated with central carbon metabolism are associated with flavour. One such metabolite is acetate
[18], which is typically produced via pyruvate and acetyl­coA. Another central carbon metabolite that
contributes to flavour formation is succinate, which can be produced through the reductive TCA cycle
[19], and is known to contribute to an umami flavour profile [20].
1.1.2
Lactobacillus helveticus
Lactobacillus helveticus is a somewhat understudied species of lactic acid bacteria that is used in the
production of various dairy­based products, such as Swiss and certain Italian cheeses [21]. One distinct
contribution of L. helveticus is its contribution to the flavour profile of cheeses during the ripening process
(ageing). This flavour generation is traced to the aforementioned proteolytic system employed by L.
helveticus, which it is highly reliant on due to its numerous amino acid auxotrophies [22]. Its contribution to
flavour is characterized by the release of the aforementioned flavour associated metabolites via autolysis
and secretion [21]. Metabolically speaking, Lactobacillus helveticus is a thermophillic organism, suiting
it well for cheese fermentation’s that require high heat in their preparation. This species central carbon
metabolism, like other LAB, follows the Leloir pathway [23], with lactose being broken down into glucose
and galactose, with galactose being converted to glucose­1­phosphate via UDP­galactose.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
2
==PAGE:8==
.
Figure 1.1: Production of succinate, acetate, and lactate in L. helveticus central metabolism. Figure
adapted from Torino et al. 2005. [24]
As seen in figure 1.1, L. helveticus metabolism is primarily homofermentative, meaning that metabolism
ends with the conversion of pyruvate to lactic acid. L. helveticus also shows some flexibility in its carbon
metabolism, being able to metabolize citrate through lower metabolism, producing pyruvate through its
conversion to oxaloacetate and subsequent decarboxylation, also yielding carbon dioxide [24]. Further­
more, this species has been shown to grow well on maltose, sucrose, fructose, and several other carbon
sources between strains, indicating that this species is highly metabolically diverse [23].
Given a recent interest within Novonesis on enhancing flavour formation, particularly in the context of
L. helveticus, the ability to develop strain improvement methods to optimize for flavour formation within
industrial strains is a major research goal. Such strain improvement would entail the metabolic optimiza­
tion of the production of flavour associated molecules, which would work to enhance flavour formation in
the ripening process.
1.2
Strain Improvement
Due to restrictions on genetic engineering, many methods have been developed to improve strains
for their application in fermentation, with varying degrees of success. In the following section we will
explore different methods that can be used to improve strains without manipulating the genome.
1.2.1
MARSI
One such instance concerns the use of metabolite analogues to increase metabolite secretion. Car­
doso et al. (2018) developed a method named MARSI, or Metabolite Analogues for Rational Strain
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
3
==PAGE:9==
Improvement, where instead of directly manipulating genes to control metabolism, interference on the
metabolite level could be used to achieve the same end [25]. To do so, the authors developed a com­
putational pipeline that leverages genome­scale metabolic models to identify reaction knock­outs that
would incur a desired phenotype, and then systematically consult public databases to find metabolite
analogues that could competitively inhibit native enzyme usage of those reactions. In supplying these
metabolite analogues to culture medium, these metabolite analogues would hypothetically inhibit their
specified reactions, which could be leveraged for manipulating metabolism to incur metabolite overpro­
duction.
Despite being theoretically interesting, initial usage within the company (then Chr. Hansen) found
this method to be ineffective, particularly due to the lack of adequate metabolite analogues for the kinds
of reactions that would be targeted. Therefore, alternative methodologies should be explored, such as
adaptive laboratory evolution.
1.2.2
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution (ALE) experiments are a key tool to adapt industrial strains to be
better suited to certain industrially relevant environments, including temperature, pH, and turbulence,
among others. This method is particularly powerful as it leverages evolutionary processes to select for
populations with desired traits, thus by­passing rational designs that may not be totally sufficient due to
limited domain knowledge.
Such techniques have been used in food microbiology to yield strains with traits that can improve
fermentation outcomes. For example, Lactococcus lactis has been evolved to grow more optimally at
higher temperatures that better reflect its fermentation conditions by serially culturing strains in increasing
temperature conditions for 400 generations [26]. Adaptive laboratory evolution can also be coupled
with the addition of mutagens to increase the rate of mutagenesis in the population (thus increasing
the rate of evolution). This can be seen in a study conducted by Nyabako et al. (2020), where the
authors improved Lactobacillus acidophilus acid tolerance over 50 days, with the culture undergoing
ARTP mediated mutagenesis [27].
The issue with the previously mentioned methodologies is that selective pressures like temperature
and acid resistance are traits that are explicitly linked to population fitness. That is to say, as evolution
progresses, competitive exclusion will push the population towards those cells that can tolerate higher
temperatures or acidity levels. The same cannot be said for metabolites, as using this type of ALE
campaign cannot yield cells that produce more target compounds, without there being a direct incentive
to do so.
Given this limitation of traditional ALE, several techniques have been developed that can indeed link
metabolite secretion to cell fitness. For example, Konstandinitis et al. (2021) were able to device a co­
culture system where complementary auxotrophies between L. plantarum and S. cerevisiae were used
to exert a selective pressure for the production of riboflavin [28]. In this experiment, since L. plantarum
was auxotrophic for amino acids produced by S. cerevisiae, and that S. cerevisiae was engineered to be
auxotrophic for riboflavin, the L. plantarum population had their secretion of riboflavin linked to fitness, as
the population could not grow without secreting more riboflavin to increase S. cerevisiae growth, leading
to the production of more amino acids they could use for their own growth. This allowed for an ALE
campaign to ensue that could effectively select for the increased production of this metabolite.
Another method used to couple metabolite secretion to fitness concerns specifying particular culture
mediums, which can act to optimize pathways associated with metabolite overproduction. This method
was employed by Jouhten et al. (2022), in the development of their software named ”EvolveX”, a graph­
ical representation of which can be seen in figure 1.2.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
4
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: Graphical representation of EvolveX method. Figure adapted from Jouhten et al. (2022)
[29]
This software employs genome­scale metabolic models to identify a series of reactions that, under
certain environmental conditions, will have a selective pressure placed upon them. These reactions are
termed the tacking trait, and are associated with the production of a target metabolite in the application
environment, and are associated with biomass formation in the evolution environment. The idea is
this: in the application environment (where fermentation takes place), the secretion of a target metabo­
lite is associated with a certain set of reactions. If we could find a specific environmental condition that
could optimize, not for the full pathway (as it is not likely), but rather a subset of those reactions (tacking
trait), then through an ALE campaign we could optimize for that tacking trait due to its link to biomass.
Then, when switched back to the application environment, metabolite secretion would be optimized, as
the subset of reactions that were optimized are now being used for producing the target metabolite. As
can be seen in figure 1.2, the parental strain secretes the target metabolite using a set of 3 reactions.
These reactions, within the application environment, are not directly associated with growth, and thus
cannot be optimized for through ALE. However, using the EvolveX software, a specific medium (evo­
lution environment) was identified to be able to optimize for a subset of this original reaction pathway
(tacking trait, coloured red). What this means is that when grown in an ALE campaign in the evolution
environment, that subset will be optimized, as it is linked to growth. As seen in the figure, when switched
back to the application environment, the increased flux through the tacking trait will carry over into the
original metabolic network, as those reactions will have increased enzyme efficiency due to their selec­
tive pressure in the evolution environment, as increased enzyme efficiency in the evolution environment
would be selected for.
The aforementioned software, as well as MARSI, both use genome­scale metabolic models to better
understand and manipulate strain metabolism. In the following section, we will further explain what a
genome­scale model is, and how it can be used for strain improvement in the context of metabolite
overproduction.
1.3
Genome­scale Metabolic Models
Simply put, a genome­scale metabolic model (GEM) is a computational representation of metabolism.
More specifically, these models mathematically represent the reactions and metabolites within an organ­
ism through a matrix, with this matrix representing the stoichiometry of each reaction within the cell. A
simplified example of this can be seen in figure 1.3.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.3: Simplified example of the mathematical representation of a metabolic network
As can be seen, reaction 1 (R1) and reaction 2 (R2) are the columns of the matrix, whereas the
rows are representative of metabolites. The stoichiometry of each reaction is encoded in this matrix via
the numerical values of each matrix coordinate, such that ­1 represents consumption and 1 represents
production, and where 0 would mean no involvement of the metabolite in the reaction. Thus, we can
represent R1 mathematically by noting that in column one, metabolite A is consumed (­1) and metabolite
B is produced (1). This representation of the relationships between reactions and metabolites is termed
the ’stoichiometric matrix’.
1.3.1
Simulations
Once constructed, the resultant stoichiometric matrix can then be used to simulate metabolic flux
through the models reaction network. These simulations are the result of a linear optimization problem,
subject to linear constraints placed upon the stoichiometric matrix. The linear constraints placed upon
the stoichiometric matrix represent physical and biological laws that constrain the model to represent a
biological system. We can take for example the law of conservation of mass, which can be represented
by enforcing steady state onto the system. We can demonstrate this by taking the simplified example in
1.3, and subjecting the matrix to:
Sv = 0
Where S is our stoichiometric matrix, and v is the set of fluxes associated with each reaction, we can
see that:
Sv =
[−1
1
1
−1
] [v1
v2
]
=
[−v1 + v2
v1 −v2
]
= 0
What this constraint does is enforce that the fluxes of R1 and R2 are mass balanced, such that:
−v1 + v2 = 0,
v1 = v2
v1 −v2 = 0,
v1 = v2
Thus, the flux of R2 is tied in to the flux of R1, encoding the law of conservation of mass by ensuring
that the sum of incoming fluxes equals the sum of outgoing fluxes at each reaction node. The mass
balance constraint is the fundamental constraint of the model, as it grounds the reactions into a connected
steady state system. Further constraints can also be placed. For example, thermodynamic constraints
can be had, such that the direction of reactions are constrained to be irreversible or reversible. In addition
to this, other kinds of biological constraints can be had, for example, setting upper and lower bounds on
possible reaction fluxes to reflect biologically reasonable uptake and secretion can further constrain the
possible outcomes of a linear optimization. All of these constraints subject the solution of the objective
function to provide flux values that are biologically and physically realistic. We can summarize these
aforementioned linear constraints, and formalize an optimization problem as follows:
Maximize:
Z = cTv
Subject to:
Sv = 0
(Mass balance constraints)
virr ≥0
(Thermodynamic constraints)
vmin ≤v ≤vmax
(Biological constraints)
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
6
==PAGE:12==
Here, the objective function Z is defined by the multiplication of a vector c which consists of weights
which, when multiplied with the flux vector (the set of reaction fluxes), indicates which reaction the sys­
tem is optimizing for. This reaction is oftentimes the ’biomass’ reaction, a pseudo­reaction within the
model which represents the formation of biomass within metabolism, represented by the consumption
of metabolites that are required for biomass formation. The linear optimization problem defined here is
termed flux balance analysis (FBA), and is used to investigate the dynamics of a metabolic network. In
solving the linear optimization problem, that is, identifying which set of flux values optimize for biomass
formation, we can gain insights into how flux (defined as mmol/gDW/hour) is allocated within metabolism.
For example, we can change the available metabolites the model can metabolize by manipulating the
bounds on pseudo­reactions which introduce metabolites to the system (termed exchange reactions) to
see how different mediums influence the optimization of biomass. For example, if the exchange reaction
for leucine has its upper and lower bound set to 0 (effectively turning off uptake into metabolism), then
we can investigate if the metabolic model predicts a lowered growth rate (biomass reaction flux) or if it
remains unaffected, which could suggest that the model can competently synthesize leucine intracellu­
larly.
More than this, by setting the upper and lower bounds of biological reactions within the model to 0,
we can examine the metabolic shifts that occur before and after gene deletions. However, in performing
an FBA on a system that has some constraints (i.e. bounds) perturbed, we assume that the cell has
found the optimal solution to this new network configuration. In fact, we would expect the opposite from
a biological system, as the chances of a cell immediately finding the optimal solution after a gene deletion
is very low. To account for this, various algorithms have been designed that can take a perturbed sys­
tem, and using the unperturbed flux distribution as reference, can calculate a ’realistic’ flux distribution
of metabolism after a perturbation like a gene deletion has occurred. One such algorithm is MOMA (min­
imization of metabolic adjustments), which finds a solution that minimizes the Euclidean norm between
the perturbed systems solution space and the wild type reference [30]. The authors argue that a cell that
has been perturbed would want to minimally change its overall flux distribution in order to maintain the
least amount of disruption to its pre­existing metabolic architecture. Since a cell would not immediately
find the optimal solution to this new metabolic network, it will try to resist any large changes to the net­
work, which the authors argue is the most probable biological response to a unexpected perturbation.
Shlomi et al. (2005) provide a different algorithm named ROOM (Robust On/Off Minimization), stating
that cells would not want to minimize the overall Euclidean norm, but would instead want to minimize the
number of significant flux changes between states, as cells would want to minimize the overall cost of
adapting to this new system state [31].
Within an FBA simulation, there are many different solutions to the same linear optimization problem.
That is to say, there is more than one optimal flux distribution for the objective function. In order to
choose one of these flux distributions over another as being more likely, we can employ parsimonious
flux balance analysis (pFBA), where, within the solution space of the FBA, a minimization is performed to
yield the optimal solution with minimal absolute flux [32]. This is argued to be more biologically consistent,
as it finds the solution that maximizes enzyme efficiency in regard to biomass production, which is what
a biological system will aim for vis­à­vis evolution.
1.3.2
Network Reconstruction
The process of going from an annotated genome of an organism to the construction of a GEM is
termed ’reconstruction’. This process begins by taking the annotated genome for your species/strain of
interest and referencing a comprehensive knowledge base, such as the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG), where sequences from the genome are systematically identified with reactions
documented in the database. Based on the stoichiometric information provided from this database for
each gene identified in the annotated genome, a draft metabolic network can be built. The resultant
metabolic network is then curated and converted to a stoichiometric matrix, where metabolite consump­
tion and production is encoded per reaction [33]. This process of manual curation is very time consuming,
and for a company like Novonesis, which has hundreds of unique strains in its strain collection, recon­
structing GEMs of all strains is not feasible. However, tools have been developed for the automatic
reconstruction of GEMs from annotated genome files, which significantly increases the rate of model
reconstruction, but work with varying degrees of accuracy, usability, and tool upkeep [34].
Such tools usually follow a similar workflow as described above, that involves the annotation of
genes, prediction of metabolic reactions, and the creation of a stoichiometric matrix that represents the
network of biochemical reactions [35]. However, specific strategies surrounding these generalized steps
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
7
==PAGE:13==
vary between tools. One standard method to automatically reconstruct GEMs is by using a tool called
CarveMe (figure 1.4) [36]. Genome­scale model reconstruction typically follows a bottom­up approach,
that is to say, it begins with the functional annotation of genes and ”builds up” a model through the
extension of this information into a functional metabolic network.
Figure 1.4: Graphical representation of the CarveMe pipeline, adapted from Machado et al. [36]
CarveMe differs from this paradigm by implementing a ”top­down” approach, where a universal draft
model is constructed, and subsequent models are derived from this model through a ”carving process”
[36]. Although the universal model was created by merging existing data which was constructed using
bottom up approaches, the software as a whole functionally works as a ”top­down” tool based on these
building blocks.
This ”universal model” is based on the entire BiGG database and was manually curated to be a
functional prokaryotic model. This model is used as a framework by which strain specific models can be
rapidly produced. It does this by aligning user inputted FASTA files to their associated BiGG gene ID’s.
Gene­protein reaction associations (GPR’s) are then used to identify reactions existing within the system,
with these scores being used to omit or include certain reactions within the universal model through a
mixed integer linear program. Within this reconstruction process, additional reactions can be added in
order to ensure the simulation is functional, in a process called gap­filling. This process can be medium
specific, where specific reactions are selected to make the model run based on the metabolites present
in the medium. If the model does not simulate growth on this user specified medium, additional reactions
will be ”gap­filled” to allow for growth.
Although the CarveMe pipeline has been shown to be an effective tool for rapid genome­scale model
reconstruction, there are certain limitations to the functionality of the tool. One industrially relevant flaw
with this tool concerns its use in generating accurate representations of multiple closely related strains,
primarily due to the use of generic databases and an over­emphasis on network connectivity through
gap­filling. To address this limitation Bras et al. developed a modified in­house CarveMe pipeline [37],
which aimed to refine the Machado et al. (2018) model generation pipeline through curating the existing
workflow and adding additional steps, as seen in Figure 1.5.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
8
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.5: Graphical representation of the in­house CarveMe pipeline, adapted from Bras et al. [37]
First, the CarveMe universal model was curated through the removal of duplicate reactions and
metabolites and the removal of reactions that were found to be charge or mass imbalanced. Then,
the pipeline was developed to include the definition of a strain specific biomass reaction, strain specific
medium, the option of using a curated GEM as a template model for reconstruction, and the prioritization
of GPR associations during reconstruction with a less stringent network connectivity threshold. Such
steps yielded positive results for the reconstruction of hundreds of strains of Lactococcus cremoris and
Lactococcus lactis, as the models were found to accurately reflect the nuances of each of these strains
metabolic activity [37].
As seen, genome­scale metabolic models can be used better understand the dynamics of microbial
metabolism. In fact, there have been many cases where based on predictions made by GEMs, rational
engineering of microorganisms for metabolite secretion has been performed. Examples include the over­
production of triacylglycerol in Yarrowia lipolytica [38], and the overproduction of glycogen in Arthrospira
platensis [39]. Furthermore, numerous examples exist of researchers leveraging genome­scale mod­
els to better understand lactic acid bacteria, and rationally engineer metabolism for industrial purposes
[40] [41], [42], which demonstrates that GEMs are a robust and worthwhile approach to understand and
manipulate LAB metabolism.
1.4
This Thesis
As discussed, Lactobacillus helveticus is a lactic acid bacteria that is important in the flavour formation
of cheeses during the ripening process, namely through its production of flavour associated compounds,
such as succinate and 2­methyl butanoic acid, among others.
Given this metabolic capability, it is an industrially relevant task to overproduce these kinds of com­
pounds in order to enhance the flavours of cheese products. As discussed, due to restrictions on genetic
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
9
==PAGE:15==
engineering, ALE methods must be used to bring about target metabolite overproduction. Designing ALE
experiments for metabolite overproduction is challenging, but despite this difficulty, numerous ways to
overproduce metabolites have been devised, such as co­culture set ups and medium optimization. The
development of the EvolveX software is of particular interest, as it allows for the overproduction of target
compounds without relying on potentially precarious symbiotic co­culture relationships.
Thus, this thesis will aim to develop and experimentally implement an in­house version of the EvolveX
software. However, due to IP issues, the EvolveX software cannot be used (it is patent pending). There­
fore, an original implementation of the conceptual framework of EvolveX will be developed.
However, finding a perfect combination of an evolutionary environment and target compound that
would allow for the ’tacking trait’ to be optimized is remarkably low if we restrict ourselves to analysing
only one strain of L. helveticus. Thus, we wanted to adjust the original EvolveX framework to also work as
a de facto screening tool, such that the metabolic diversity of the entire L. helveticus strain collection can
be analyzed and screened for a ’perfect match’ of strain, evolutionary environment, and target compound,
such that the tacking trait would be optimized (as per figure 1.2) . This would be facilitated by the in house
CarveMe pipeline, which can be used to rapidly reconstruct genome­scale models for all L. helveticus
strains in the collection, allowing us to simulate metabolism across many different strains.
Therefore, the aim of this project is to create a computational pipeline (herein referred to as EvolveY),
which can screen the entire strain collection of L. helveticus to find promising combinations of evolution­
ary environments, target compounds, and strains. These combinations would be cases where, when
grown on the evolutionary environment, the strains ’tacking trait’ will be selected for, meaning that when
switched back to its application environment (fermentation conditions) it will overproduce the target com­
pound. To decrease the complexity and computational demand of our pipeline, we will define the evo­
lutionary environments to consist of alternate carbon consumption. Thus, the different possible evolu­
tionary environments will consist of mediums where the primary carbon source has been changed to
a non­lactose sugar, whereas the application environment is lactose based growth (as experienced in
fermentation). In addition to developing this pipeline, the predictions made for the best ’matches’ will
be experimentally implemented and analyzed to check if target metabolite overproduction is actually
occurring.
In summary, we anticipate that optimizing an EvolveY­identified tracking trait within the evolutionary
environment via an ALE campaign will lead to enhanced production of our target compound when the
strain is returned to the application environment.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
10
==PAGE:16==
2
Methods
2.1
Overview
The aim of this project was to develop a computational pipeline that can identify which carbon sources
can achieve a metabolic phenotype that can be used to improve target compound production in strains
of L. helveticus. Furthermore, we aimed to experimentally implement the predictions that this pipeline
produced, in order to see if target compound overproduction actually occurs. The pipeline serves as a
type of screening method, where the entire strain collection of L. helveticus is assessed in terms of their
ability to have target compound production increased through alternate carbon consumption.
In total, there are 450 annotated genome files of L. helveticus, which were all reconstructed to yield
450 strain specific genome­scale models. In addition to this, seven carbon sources were considered, and
5 main target compounds (table 2.1). Thus, there are ≈15,000 combinations of each of these factors
– the purpose of the EvolveY pipeline (Figure 2.2) is to ascertain which of these strain­carbon source
combinations are relevant for the overproduction of these target compounds.
Figure 2.1: Schematic diagram of the computational and experimental workflow followed in this
thesis
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
11
==PAGE:17==
Model reactions
Common Name
Target Compounds
EX_etoh_e
Ethanol
EX_ac_e
Acetate
EX_btoh_e
1­Butanol
EX_2mba_e
2­methyl butanoic acid
EX_succ_e
Succinate
Carbon Sources
EX_sucr_e
Sucrose
EX_malt_e
Maltose
EX_man_e
Mannose
EX_tre_e
Trehalose
EX_fru_e
Fructose
EX_melib_e
Melibiose
EX_gal_e
Galactose
Table 2.1: BiGG IDs and their corresponding common names for target compounds and carbon
sources used in the EvolveY pipeline
Based on the results of this pipeline, the most promising combinations were chosen for experimental
implementation. This implementation involved an adaptive laboratory evolution campaign of the strain­
carbon source combinations chosen, and a subsequent biochemical analysis to see if the predicted target
compounds are indeed being overproduced in our evolved strains.
2.2
Genome­scale model reconstruction
The models used in this study were reconstructed by the in­house CarveMe Python Wrapper using
annotated FASTA Amino Acid files and a pre­defined standard medium which represents milk­based
growth conditions. This medium was used for gapfilling and medium initialization, meaning the recon­
structed network had metabolic gaps filled in the context of lactose based growth conditions.
2.3
EvolveY Pipeline
The goal of the EvolveY software is to find a suitable match between a given strain and a primary
carbon source, such that the metabolic production pathway of a specified target molecule is optimized.
In the following section we will illustrate the method by which a specific combination of strain and carbon
source is identified.
For each unique combination of carbon source, target compound, and strain, the following procedure
was followed. Firstly, the strain specific genome­scale metabolic model was simulated in four separate
conditions:
1. The standard condition
2. The hypothetical condition
3. The optimized condition
4. The evolved condition
The standard condition is the metabolic model simulating growth on lactose, thus representing
our industrial milk­based growth conditions, as its primary carbon source is lactose (i.e. the application
environment). This condition represents the current state of the strain, as it exists in production. From
this standard condition we used pFBA to generate a flux distribution representing the metabolic activity
of this strain in this lactose based medium, which we can call the standard simulation. In essence, what
a simulation means in this context is simply the list of fluxes of the models reactions in this specified
environment.
The hypothetical condition is a version of the genome scale model used to calculate the maximal
theoretical yield of the target compound. This is done by setting all exchange reaction bounds in the
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
12
==PAGE:18==
medium to zero except for lactose, whose lower bound remains as ­10.0 mmol/gDW/hour (uptake). Then,
the models objective function is set to be the target compounds exchange reaction, with a resultant FBA
being use to determine the strain specific maximal flux value.
A percentage of this maximal theoretical yield was then taken as a minimal secretion threshold to
constrain the standard model condition to produce more of the target compound than it does by default,
when this is achieved we have created the optimized condition, the state of the model where the target
compound is being overproduced. If the model already secretes the target compound, then a percentage
of the maximal theoretical yield was added on to that secretion flux and set as the lower bound of that
exchange reaction (thereby forcing the model to secrete more target compound). If the default secretion
was in fact negative (indicating uptake) then the lower bound was set to zero, with the percentage of the
maximal theoretical flux then being added. This percentage is an arbitrary threshold we have named the
α parameter and have tested at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 20% of the maximal theoretical flux, as seen in the
results.
While this model is our ideal goal, it is a goal that is not ’biologically realistic’, as such harsh con­
straints, and their resultant flux distributions are often not achievable in nature. To be able to generate a
simulation that represents a biologically feasible flux distribution, we employed the principle of minimizing
the difference between the perturbed model state and the wild type, using both ROOM and MOMA (as
described in the introduction) as a method to generate flux distributions that represented our overproduc­
tion of a target compound, while also minimizing the difference from our standard simulation. Thus, our
optimized condition and standard simulation (as a reference) were used as arguments for either ROOM
or MOMA, with the resultant flux distribution representing a biologically realistic state of metabolism for
the overproduction of the target compound. We will call this flux distribution the target simulation, as this
is the phenotype we hope to achieve through the adaptive laboratory evolution campaign.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
13
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.2: Computational workflow to generate similarity scores between standard and evolved
distribution when compared to the target distribution
Lastly, the evolved condition is the same as the standard condition, except its primary carbon
source is not lactose, but rather one of the experimental carbon sources used in this study; either fructose,
sucrose, trehalose, maltose, galactose, or melibiose. To achieve this model condition, lactose was simply
removed from the model medium and was replaced (with the same bounds) with the carbon source of
interest. From this model we generated a flux distribution using pFBA as well, giving us the carbon
source­specific flux distribution for the model, called the evolved simulation.
Average Euclidean Distance Metric
We now have our standard simulation, evolved simulation, and target simulation. At this stage of the
pipeline, we want to gauge how similar the evolved and standard simulations are to the target simulation,
in order to see which carbon source is closer to the target distribution than the standard. Our simulations
are simply lists of metabolic reactions and their associated fluxes, so naturally a Euclidean distance
metric can be used to gauge the distance between these different fluxes.
Given the amount of reactions in these models, we want to specify the reactions used to compute this
distance metric. That is to say, from our set of fluxes, we want to be able to identify the tacking trait, so that
the distance metric calculated is relevant to target compound production. To identify which reactions are
the most relevant, the standard simulation fluxes were subtracted from the target simulation fluxes. The
absolute values of the products of this subtraction were then ranked by their magnitude. Our definition
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
14
==PAGE:20==
of the tacking trait was then the reactions that have the largest absolute difference between the standard
and target simulation, as these are thought to be the reactions that had to change the most to satisfy the
increased target compound secretion constraint. However, the question arose on how many of these
top reaction should be used to represent the tacking trait. As you increase the number of reactions, you
potentially include reactions in your similarity metric that are not relevant to target compound production,
and if you use too few, you risk not finding any cases where the average Euclidean distance is closer in
the evolved­target comparison versus the standard­target. Thus, the pipeline was run using the top 0.5%,
1%, 3%, and 5% of these ranked reactions, with the resultant list being used to compute the distance
between the standard/evolved and target simulation, with a subsequent sensitivity analysis being done
on this parameter, which we have named β. Once these key reactions (tacking trait) were identified, the
average Euclidean distance was computed in the following way:
1. Compute the difference between our target and standard/evolved distributions (filtered by key re­
actions):
D = A −B = {a1 −b1, a2 −b2, . . . , an −bn}
2. Square each element of the difference array:
D2 = {(a1 −b1)2, (a2 −b2)2, . . . , (an −bn)2}
3. Sum all squared differences:
S =
n
∑
i=1
(si −ti)2
4. Compute the square root of the sum:
R =
√
S
5. Divide the square root of the sum by the number of elements in the source fluxes to get the average:
Average Relative Difference = R
n
Essentially this metric is a Euclidean distance that is normalized per reaction. Thus, the resultant
number is the average Euclidean distance between the most relevant reactions. Therefore, we are able
to see not only which evolved distribution is closest to the target, but we can also see if it is closer than
the standard distribution is, so that we know that we are ”moving” the strains metabolic network closer
to the target distribution through an ALE campaign.
The preceding workflow for a specific strain, target molecule, and carbon source can be summarized
here:
1. Generate standard simulation (lactose as primary carbon source)
2. Compute maximal theoretical yield of target compound (hypothetical simulation)
3. Set lower bound of model to have a percentage of this maximal theoretical yield to create optimized
simulation
4. Use either MOMA or ROOM to create the target distribution.
5. Change primary carbon source from lactose to experimental carbon source
6. Create evolved simulation
7. Establish the most relevant reactions for target compound overproduction
8. Calculate similarity between standard/evolved simulations to the target simulation.
9. If evolved distance is less than standard distance, save combination.
10. Repeat for the next combination of strain specific genome­scale model, carbon source, and target
compound
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
15
==PAGE:21==
Each combination saved, as per step 10, gives us the combinations of carbon sources and models
which satisfy the condition of having an evolved distance closer to the target simulation than the standard
simulation. The results of all saved combinations (per strain, carbon source, and target compound)
were saved in a .CSV file, with the experimental candidates being chosen based on the largest percent
differences between the standard and evolved distance scores. This whole pipeline was run once using
MOMA as an optimization algorithm, and once with ROOM, with the final experimental candidate list
being composed of candidates selected by MOMA, ROOM, and both MOMA and ROOM. Furthermore,
the final pipeline was run using an α parameter of 10% and a β parameter of 1%.
While metabolic models can often provide accurate predictions, oftentimes reconstructions can yield
inaccurate metabolic networks. In order to filter out models that are either incorrectly reconstructed, or are
not relevant in the context of this pipeline, several filtering steps were made. One such filtering criterion
is the exclusion of any model with a carbon flux in lactose­based medium that is less than 80% lactose­
derived. This exclusion criteria is to exclude models that are not able to metabolize lactose as a primary
carbon source, meaning that they are not able to represent LAB metabolism correctly. Furthermore, when
simulating on any of the other carbon sources, if the same thing applies (<80% carbon­source derive
carbon flux), then that model­carbon source combination is skipped, as the resultant flux distribution is not
going to be representing true L. helveticus carbon metabolism. Furthermore, if the maximal theoretical
flux is zero, or if the model with the increased production constraint was infeasible, that model was also
skipped in the pipeline.
2.4
Experimental Implementation
2.4.1
Medium preparation
MRS­IM medium was employed in this study due to its lack of a primary carbon source. This medium
was then supplemented with 2% casein hydrolysate to provide essential amino acids. 1g of each carbon
source was dissolved in separate 10 mL of MilliQ water and were then sterile filtered to remove contami­
nants. This stock solution was then added to the MRS­IM medium, such that every MRS­IM medium had
2% casein hydrolysate and 1% of carbon source. Therefore we had separate stocks of each MRS­IM
medium with the carbon sources in 2.1 as their primary carbon sources (also done for lactose). The
preceding media closely resembles the medium used for simulation in the aforementioned pipeline.
2.4.2
Carbon Source Utilization
As a preliminary step in implementing the predictions of the EvolveY pipeline all strains predicted in
this study were grown on all carbon sources, so as to establish which unique combinations predicted
are capable of growing, and which combinations needed to be omitted from downstream testing. These
strains were first isolated from the Novonesis strain collection and inoculated into 10 mL MRS media as
an overnight culture. The next day, these strains were normalized to an OD600 of 1.0 and inoculated
into each of the MRS­IM carbon source mediums prepared earlier. Growth was monitored over 24­72
hours to establish if growth was possible under these carbon sources. A computational analysis was
later performed to assess the predictive efficacy of our models, using the F1 score as a metric. The F1
score is defined as follows:
F1 = 2 × precision × recall
precision + recall
(2.1)
Where precision is defined as the ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to the total pre­
dicted positives, and recall is defined as the ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to all actual
positives. Thus, this metric provides us with a balanced metric by which to assess model predictive
efficacy.
2.4.3
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution Campaign
With the successful combinations predicted by the EvolveY pipeline, an adaptive laboratory evolution
campaign was run using 96 deep­well plates. For each combination 2.5 mL of supplemented MRS­IM
medium was used along with 20 uL of inoculant (all normalized to 1.0 OD600) with each combination
being run in duplicate. Growth in the deep well plate set up was conducted for 2 weeks with daily OD600
measurements being taken. Once a well had doubled from its initial OD reading it was subcultured into
a separate well. Upon the completion of 2 weeks of deep­well plate growth, the surviving combinations
were transferred to daily 10 mL overnight cultures for 2 weeks. In order to assess the degree of ’evolution’
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
16
==PAGE:22==
between the wild­type and the strain that underwent the ALE campaign, a growth assay was performed
in a 96 shallow well­plate set up, with 0.8 mL of culture being added with 10 uL of inoculant normalized
to 1.0 OD600. Growth was monitored for each evolved strain and its wild type counterpart in duplicate,
both on their respective carbon sources and on lactose. OD readings being performed every hour over
a 24 hour period to assess growth.
2.4.4
Biochemical Analysis
After 3.5 weeks of evolution, wild type and evolved strains were cultured in an 10 mL overnight
culture in their respective mediums. Manual OD600 measurements were made to track growth until
exponential phase every hour. When exponential phase had been reached, 1mL of culture broth was
extracted and spun at 5000 rotations per minute in a refrigerated centrifuge. Supernatent was extracted
and added to a 7 mL polystyrene tube, with 200 uL of 2M sulfuric acid being added. Samples were taken
for both exponential phase and late exponential phase for some cases. Samples were frozen overnight
and then delivered to the Nononesis Biochemical Analysis department, where High Performance Liquid
Chromatography measurements were made for carbohydrate and organic acids within each sample.
Subsequent data was received via the LIMS R&D system.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
17
==PAGE:23==
3
Results
3.1
EvolveY Pipeline
The EvolveY pipeline screens hundreds of genome­scale models for specific metabolic features
which can help in evolving strains to overproduce target compounds. Thus, we will begin an exploration
of the specific in silico predictions that this pipeline has made, including which carbon sources, strains,
and target molecules were found to have the combined metabolic profile we are looking for. This specific
metabolic profile consists of having an evolved­target distance that is smaller than the standard­target
distance, which simply means that the model simulates that the strain growing on carbon source X is
closer to the target simulation than the strain growing on lactose. The output of this pipeline yielded 50
such cases (Appendix table A.2), consisting of 15 strains and 5 carbon sources. Interestingly, only two
target compounds were predicted, where succinate was the target in all cases except one case where
acetate is optimized for, as seen in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Breakdown of the percent composition of carbon sources and target compounds from the
output of the EvolveY pipeline run on β parameter of 1% and an α parameter of 10%.
Interestingly, trehalose and sucrose represent more than half of the predicted cases, with maltose
representing roughly a fifth of the cases. Fructose and melibiose were also predicted, each sharing
8.2% of the final output. In addition to carbon sources and target compounds, we can analyze the most
common reactions deemed as ’significant’ for the production of succinate as predicted by our pipeline,
for both ROOM and MOMA approaches (table 3.1). Essentially, what this table represents is which
reactions are most frequently being upregulated, downregulated, or turned on between each standard
and optimized simulation. Interestingly, no turned off reactions were found for this β threshold.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
18
==PAGE:24==
Table 3.1: Top Reactions associated with succinate overproduction in Lactobacillus helveticus via
MOMA and ROOM algorithms implemented in the EvolveY pipeline. Ordering of the reactions is in
descending order of most frequent reaction ID’s found across top 1% of reactions found to be relevant
for succinate production across all strains.
Reaction Category
MOMA
ROOM
Top Upregulated Reactions
Succinate exchange
Fumarate reductase NADH
Succinate transport
Hydrogen exchange
Aspartate exchange
Fumarase
Malate dehydrogenase
ABC Aspartate transport
Glyceraldehyde­3­phosphate dehydrogenase
Ammonia reversible transport
Succinate exchange
Fumarate reductase NADH
Succinate transport
Fumarase
Malate dehydrogenase
Hydrogen exchange
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
Enolase
Phosphoglycerate kinase
Top Downregulated Reactions
Pyruvate kinase
CO2 exchange
CO2 transport
Lactate exchange
Lactate dehydrogenase
Hydrogen exchange
H2O exchange
H2O transport
CO2 exchange
CO2 transport
Pyruvate kinase
Lactate exchange
Lactate dehydrogenase
Glycerol 3­phosphate dehydrogenase
Lactate transport
Hydrogen exchange
Top Turned On Reactions
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
Fumarase
Malate dehydrogenase
Succinate exchange
Fumarate reductase NADH
Succinate transport
Adenylate kinase
Glyceraldehyde­3­phosphate dehydrogenase
Tartrate/succinate antiporter
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
Fumarase
Malate dehydrogenase
Succinate exchange
Fumarate reductase NADH
Acetaldehyde exchange
Glyceraldehyde­3­phosphate dehydrogenase
Acetaldehyde transport
Acetaldehyde dehydrogenase
Methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase NAD
Both ROOM and MOMA approaches highlight similar key reactions, such as the upregulation of succi­
nate transport and proximal production pathways for succinate via malate and fumarate. MOMA is unique
in highlighting the importance of aspartate import as important for succinate production, whereas ROOM
uniquely predicts the importance of early carbon metabolism enzymes such as phosphoglycerate kinase.
The similarity between both MOMA and ROOM continues to down regulation as well, as both predict
the importance of decreasing CO2 transport while also decreasing flux through lactate dehydrogenase,
however ROOM continues to highlight early carbon metabolism reactions such as Glycerol­3­phosphate
dehydrogenase. Both methods also share the top ’turned on’ reactions, most notably phosphoenolpyru­
vate carboxylase, however ROOM specifically highlights the role of activating acetate metabolism related
reactions.
From the output of the simulation, we selected the combinations of strains and carbon sources which
had the highest percent differences between the standard­target and evolved­target distance scores,
which are listed in table 3.2.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
19
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.2: Final carbon source and strain selection from the EvolveY pipeline based on the highest
percent difference between the standard­target and evolved­target distance metric. Highest percent
difference column value is selected from the highest overall percent difference between each strain­
carbon source combination listed.
Strain
Carbon Source
Algorithm
Highest Percent Difference (%)
Target Compound
CHCC4481
Sucrose, Trehalose, Maltose
ROOM
54.53
Succinate
CHCC29501
Sucrose, Trehalose
MOMA, ROOM
25.70
Succinate
CHCC29502
Sucrose, Trehalose
MOMA, ROOM
25.70
Succinate
CHCC54514
Sucrose, Trehalose, Maltose
MOMA, ROOM
19.72
Succinate
CHCC54511
Sucrose, Trehalose, Maltose
MOMA, ROOM
19.71
Succinate
CHCC14979
Sucrose, Trehalose, Maltose
ROOM
16.76
Succinate
CHCC54512
Sucrose, Trehalose, Maltose
MOMA, ROOM
13.94
Succinate
CHCC48945
Sucrose, Trehalose, Fructose
MOMA, ROOM
12.37
Succinate, Acetate
CHCC48851
Melibiose, Fructose
MOMA, ROOM
10.39
Succinate
CHCC49169
Sucrose, Trehalose
MOMA
7.37
Succinate
CHCC49054
Melibiose, Sucrose
MOMA, ROOM
6.45
Succinate
CHCC36708
Maltose, Fructose
MOMA
4.37
Succinate
CHCC49461
Maltose, Fructose
MOMA
4.37
Succinate
Interestingly, each predicted strain has multiple carbon sources that can optimize for succinate, with
one strain being able to optimize for both succinate and acetate. Furthermore, many of the cases were
predicted by both ROOM and MOMA, with only two cases predicted solely by ROOM and three solely
by MOMA. Furthermore, there is a wide distribution of percent differences, as values range from below
5% to a maximum value of 54%. These specific strains and carbon sources were then used as the basis
for the experimental part of this thesis, which will be described in the following section.
3.2
Experimental Results
3.2.1
Growth Tests & Predictive Efficacy
From the output of the EvolveY pipeline, we received a list of strains and carbon sources which were
predicted to optimize the production of either succinate or acetate. As an initial experiment, we decided
to take the predicted strains and grow them on all predicted carbon sources (not limited to specific pairs),
in order to gain some overall data on Lactobacillus helveticus carbon utilization. This overall growth data
can be compared to the models predicted growth rate on these carbon sources, and a predictive score
(F1 score) can be used to gauge how well our models are predicting carbon utilization. This is a relevant
metric to investigate, as having models that are competent at predicting carbon source utilization would
give us more confidence in our pipeline, which primarily focuses on carbon metabolism.
In testing for carbon source utilization experimentally, strains were given multiple days to exhibit
signs of growth. As expected, some strains were able to grow competently on some carbon sources, but
exhibited very low OD600 readings on others. Based on this wide range of OD600 values, we decided to
binarize our growth data in ’growth’ and ’no growth’ categories, to form the basis of our comparison with
our computational predictions. However, the threshold which we decide counts as ’growth’ is relatively
arbitrary, and interestingly affects the F1 scores of our models. An example of this stark difference in
binarization can be seen in figure 3.2.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
20
==PAGE:26==
A
B
C
D
Figure 3.2: Heatmap of both experimental and simulated growth rates of Lactobacillus helveticus strains
on fructose, maltose, melibiose, sucrose and trehalose. A: Binarized experimental growth data with 0.01
OD600 reading being taken as minimal growth value. B: Simulated growth data normalized by highest
predicted growth rate per carbon source, with a minimal growth threshold of 0.01 mmol/gDW/hour. C:
Binarized experimental growth data with 0.05 OD600 reading being taken as minimal growth value. D:
Simulated growth data normalized by highest predicted growth rate per carbon source, with a minimal
growth threshold of 0.05 mmol/gDW/hour.
As can be seen, shifting the minimal growth threshold to 0.05 eliminated many cases that would have
been considered growth at the 0.01 threshold, and this pattern continues as the threshold is raised. To
look more closely at the affect that increasing the growth threshold has on the ability for our models to
predict carbon utilization, we can refer to figure 3.3.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.3: Heat map outlining the predictive efficacy of genome­scale metabolic models of Lactobacil­
lus helveticus in regard to their prediction of strain carbon utilization. F1 scores are used as a metric for
predictive efficacy. This metric is calculated for 50 different growth thresholds between 0 and 0.1 that
were used as a cut­off point for binarization of experimental data into ’growth’ and ’no growth’ categories.
From this plot we can see that there is a great diversity in the ability for our models to accurately
predict carbon utilization, with models like CHCC54512 and CHCC4481 maintaining excellent F1 scores
across all thresholds, while other strains like CHCC48900 and CHCC14979 are able to predict carbon
utilization only when the threshold is near zero. To better understand the predictive efficacy of our models,
we can also look at the average F1 score across models for different carbon sources, as seen in figure
3.4.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
22
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.4: Heat map outlining the carbon source specific average predictive efficacy of genome­scale
metabolic models of Lactobacillus helveticus in regard to their prediction of strain carbon utilization. F1
scores are used as a metric for predictive efficacy. This metric is calculated for 50 different growth
thresholds between 0 and 0.1 that were used as a cutoff point for binarization of experimental data into
’growth’ and ’no growth’ categories.
Interestingly, we can see that there is a clear lack of predictive efficacy for fructose carbon utilization.
However, this deficiency is in contrast with higher efficacy in terms of sucrose utilization. Overall, we can
say that a good proportion of our models are able to predict carbon utilization to an acceptable degree,
whereas others are not able to predict carbon utilization at all past very low thresholds. Furthermore, we
can establish that the models seem to have a predictive deficiency in certain carbon sources, namely
fructose, which should be considered in future studies.
After completing this initial experiment and investigation into predictive efficacy, we proceeded to
implement the adaptive laboratory evolution experiment based on the predictions provided by EvolveY,
as described in the following section.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
23
==PAGE:29==
3.2.2
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution
Following from the EvolveY predictions, there were 35 total cases, with several negative controls
(cases not predicted) being added to the final list of experimental candidates, for a total of 43 total cases.
After the carbon utilization experiment described in the previous section, it was clear that some strain­
carbon source combinations were not going to be successful for an ALE campaign, due to extremely
low growth or no growth at all. Once excluded there were 25 combinations, with 21 positive cases and
4 negative cases (table 3.3). A three week ALE campaign was performed on these combinations. After
three weeks, only a handful of cases survived, which consisted of three positive cases and one negative
case. These cases were then investigated more closely.
Table 3.3: Strains and carbon sources predicted to optimize the succinate tacking trait of each respective
strain. Positive status represents a combination chosen by the method, where a negative status is a
negative control.
Strain
Carbon Source
Status
CHCC4481
Sucrose
Positive
CHCC49054
Melibiose
Positive
CHCC29501
Sucrose
Positive
CHCC29502
Sucrose
Positive
CHCC29502
Trehalose
Positive
CHCC29501
Trehalose
Positive
CHCC4481
Trehalose
Positive
CHCC4481
Maltose
Positive
CHCC54514
Sucrose
Positive
CHCC54512
Sucrose
Positive
CHCC54511
Maltose
Positive
CHCC54511
Trehalose
Positive
CHCC54514
Maltose
Positive
CHCC54514
Trehalose
Positive
CHCC54512
Maltose
Positive
CHCC54512
Trehalose
Positive
CHCC54511
Sucrose
Positive
CHCC48945
Trehalose
Positive
CHCC36708
Fructose
Positive
CHCC49461
Fructose
Positive
CHCC49169
Sucrose
Positive
CHCC48945
Fructose
Negative
CHCC49054
Sucrose
Negative
CHCC49169
Fructose
Negative
CHCC48945
Sucrose
Negative
These ’evolved’ strain­carbon combinations were grown in a 24 hour growth experiment with their
wild­type counterparts, with both strains being grown in the evolutionary carbon source and lactose in
order to gauge the degree of evolution / metabolic shifts that had occurred in each respective strain.
Looking at the result of this experiment, one positive case did not present itself as an ideal choice for
further characterization, as seen in figure A.1 (appendix). This specific case, which consisted of the strain
CHCC54511 with trehalose as a carbon source, did not seem ideal as the wild type and evolved strain
both exhibit near identical growth on trehalose, indicating no noticeable affect of the evolution campaign.
Given that our downstream biochemical analysis was limited in terms of the overall samples we could
submit, and that the interpretation of this strain­carbon source combination was uncertain, this positive
case was excluded from further analysis.
The second positive case was CHCC4481, which was evolved to grow on maltose. As can be seen
in figure 3.5, this case more clearly indicates that some amount of regulation/evolution has occurred.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
24
==PAGE:30==
A
B
Figure 3.5: Graph outlining the growth curves of Lactobacillus helveticus CHCC4481 being grown over
24 hours in both lactose and maltose based mediums. A: CHCC4481 strain evolved for growth on mal­
tose and a wildtype CHCC4481 both grown in 24 hour growth assay on a lactose supplemented MRS­IM
medium. Growth curves were performed in duplicate and were read for OD600 absorbance measure­
ments every 1 hour. B: CHCC4481 strain evolved for growth on maltose and a wild type CHCC4481
both grown in 24 hour growth assay on a maltose supplemented MRS­IM medium. Growth curves were
performed in duplicate and were read for OD600 absorbance measurements every 1 hour.
As can be seen, both the wild­type and evolved strain have near identical growth profiles on lactose,
suggesting that the evolved strain maintains its efficiency in metabolizing lactose. Furthermore, we can
see that the evolved strain has outperformed the wild­type strain in its growth on maltose, suggesting
that the three week evolutionary period has shifted its metabolism to better metabolize maltose. While
identical growth on lactose may also indicate a highly robust metabolism in the evolved strain, the clear
difference in growth in the evolutionary carbon source indicates that this combination is worth investigat­
ing further. Such investigation can be seen in table 3.4, where we can see the key reactions that were
used to calculate the average Euclidean distance from the evolved and standard simulation to the target
simulation.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
25
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.4: Flux (mmol/gDW/hour) of key reactions identified by the EvolveY pipeline to contribute to
succinate overproduction in Lactobacillus helveticus CHCC4481. All fluxes are predicted from a strain
specific genome­scale metabolic model of CHCC4481 simulated for growth on maltose (evolved), lactose
(standard) and a ROOM optimized flux (target).
Reaction ID
Target Flux
Evolved Flux
Standard Flux
Lactate dehydrogenase
­37.20
­35.85
­39.17
Lactate transport
­37.20
­35.85
­39.17
Succinate transport
­1.08
­0.38
­0.08
Fumarate reductase NADH
1.08
0.38
0.08
Fumarase
­1.05
­0.26
­0.05
Malate dehydrogenase
­1.05
­0.26
­0.05
Acetaldehyde transport
­3.21
­3.05
­2.21
Acetate kinase
­3.23
­3.17
­2.23
Phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase
3.23
3.17
2.23
In other words these are the reactions we predict would be optimized after our adaptive laboratory
evolution experiment, and that would lead to succinate overproduction (the tacking trait). To make the
predicted pathway more clear, we can visualize the predicted difference in metabolic phenotype in figure
3.6.
Figure 3.6: Graphical representation of Lactobacillus helveticus CHCC4481 metabolism outlining pre­
dicted flux (mmol/gDW/hour) values for lactose and maltose based growth. Key reactions found via
ROOM optimization for succinate production highlighted in green.
These simulation derived fluxes can be compared against the results of a biochemical analysis of the
evolved and wild type growth medium extracted at exponential phase (figure 3.7), in order to check if the
predicted changes in metabolism did occur. Due to limits on the amount of samples we could submit for
biochemical analysis, measurements were done in duplicates (technical) or singlicates. This unfortunate
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
26
==PAGE:32==
limitation restricts our ability to draw any conclusions on significant differences due to the lack of statistical
power – nevertheless, we will proceed with our analysis noting differences in acid concentrations in a
descriptive manner.
We can begin by noting the predicted observation that acids usually linked with higher growth effi­
ciency, namely lactic acid, looks to be higher in the wild type on lactose and higher in the evolved strain
on maltose. This would provide further indication that the evolved strain is indeed subject to some reg­
ulatory or evolutionary force which has given it a higher efficiency in metabolizing maltose than its wild
type counterpart, and that the evolved strains ability to grow on lactose has been affected by its habitua­
tion to growing on an alternate carbon source. Furthermore, as seen in table 3.4, it is predicted that the
evolved strain would have higher flux through acetate metabolism, namely in the conversion of acetate
to acetaldehyde. This would manifest in a lower extracellular acetic acid concentration, which can be
seen in panel A. However, it could be said that lower acetic acid secretion could be explained due to
a lower overall carbon metabolism, which is suggested by the lower evolved lactic acid concentration
compared to the wild type.
A
B
Figure 3.7: Biochemical analysis of acid concentration present in the culture broth of wild type Lacto­
bacillus helveticus CHCC4481 and a variant evolved to grow on maltose over a four week period. A:
Acid concentrations normalized by the amount of lactose consumed (mg/g consumed carbon) in each
sample for evolved and wild type CHCC4481 on lactose supplemented MRS­IM medium sampled at
exponential phase. B: Acid concentrations normalized by the amount of maltose consumed (mg/g con­
sumed carbon) in each sample for evolved and wild type CHCC4481 on maltose supplemented MRS­IM
medium sampled at exponential phase.
Interestingly, acetic acid concentrations are similar in maltose, despite the difference in lactic acid
production, which could indicate that the acetate metabolism of these strains is in fact subject to some
upregulation on maltose. The most notable result, however, is the lack of succinate, which overall indi­
cates that even if some regulatory shifts did take place in acetate metabolism, this did not have an affect
on succinate production. This is further confirmed by the roughly equal concentrations of malic acid in
both conditions. Given that malic acid is a precursor to succinate, and also predicted to be subject to
evolution (table 3.4), the lack of change between these two conditions indicates that the predicted out­
come did not occur in this strain­carbon combination. When normalized by OD600 instead of consumed
carbon, the same conclusions were reached (Appendix A.2). Another factor that affects the confidence
of our predictions is the fact that the model for this strain predicts no secretion for acetic, malic, and
citric acid, however our biochemical analysis clearly reveals secretion of these metabolites. The second
positive case, CHCC54512 on maltose was also subject to the same 24 hour growth assay on lactose
and maltose with both the wild type and evolved strain, as can be seen in figure 3.8.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
27
==PAGE:33==
A
B
Figure 3.8: Graph outlining the growth curves of Lactobacillus helveticus CHCC54512 being grown
over 24 hours in both lactose and maltose based mediums. A: CHCC54512 strain evolved for growth
on maltose and a wildtype CHCC54512 both grown in 24 hour growth assay on a lactose supplemented
MRS­IM medium. Growth curves were performed in duplicate and were read for OD600 absorbance
measurements every 1 hour. B: CHCC54512 strain evolved for growth on maltose and a wild type
CHCC54512 both grown in 24 hour growth assay on a maltose supplemented MRS­IM medium. Growth
curves were performed in duplicate and were read for OD600 absorbance measurements every 1 hour.
The same trend seen before is present here, as the wild­type and evolved strain exhibit similar growth
on lactose, with the evolved strain exhibiting a clear propensity for growth on maltose when compared to
the wild­type. Based on this evidence of metabolic regulation/evolution this case was investigated further.
Just as in the previous case, we can look at the reactions that were predicted to contribute to succinate
production with this strain and carbon source. However, while the previous case was predicted only by
the ROOM based pipeline, this case was predicted by both the ROOM and MOMA based pipeline, the
details of which can be seen in table 3.5 and visualized in figure 3.9.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
28
==PAGE:34==
Table 3.5: Flux (mmol/gDW/hour) of key reactions identified by the EvolveY pipeline (ROOM and MOMA)
to contribute to succinate overproduction in Lactobacillus helveticus CHCC54512. All fluxes are predicted
from a strain specific genome­scale metabolic model of CHCC54512 simulated for growth on maltose
(evolved), lactose (standard) and a ROOM and MOMA optimized flux (target).
Method
Reaction ID
Target Flux
Evolved Flux
Standard Flux
MOMA
Succinate Transport
­1.08
­0.38
­0.08
Hydrogen exchange
­1.06
­2.31
­2.06
Fumarate reductase NADH
1.07
0.39
0.08
Fumarase
­1.03
­0.26
­0.05
Malate dehydrogenase
­1.03
­0.26
­0.05
CO2 transport
­28.09
­28.38
­28.61
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
0.50
0.00
0.00
Pyruvate kinase
15.83
14.96
16.18
Aspartate exchange
­0.65
­0.79
­0.16
ROOM
Hydrogen exchange
­1.06
­2.31
­2.06
CO2 transport
­28.09
­28.38
­28.61
Succinate Transport
­1.08
­0.38
­0.08
Fumarase
­1.03
­0.26
­0.05
Malate dehydrogenase
­1.03
­0.26
­0.05
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
0.50
0.00
0.00
Fumarate reductase NADH
1.07
0.39
0.08
Glycerol­3­phosphate dehydrogenase NAD
41.51
39.53
41.51
Glycerol­3­phosphate dehydrogenase (NADP)
41.51
39.53
41.51
Figure 3.9: Graphical representation of Lactobacillus helveticus CHCC54512 metabolism outlining pre­
dicted flux (mmol/gDW/hour) value for lactose and maltose based growth. Key reactions found via ROOM
optimization for succinate production highlighted in pink, MOMA optimization in brown, and reactions
found with both methods highlighted in green.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
29
==PAGE:35==
Both the ROOM based and MOMA based predictions are similar in their highlighting of reactions that
are closely associated with succinate production (figure 3.9), however they differ in some ways as well.
While ROOM suggests an importance of maintaining high flux through early carbon metabolism reac­
tions such as glycerol­3­phosphate dehydrogenase, MOMA prioritizes higher flux of aspartate import to
accommodate succinate overproduction. Interestingly, in both cases phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
is highlighted, however both the evolved and wild type conditions show no flux through this reaction.
These predicted fluxes can again be compared to biochemical analysis data, seen in figure 3.10.
A
B
Figure 3.10: Biochemical analysis of acid concentration present in the culture broth of wild type Lacto­
bacillus helveticus CHCC54512 and a variant evolved to grow on maltose over a four week period. A:
Acid concentrations normalized by the amount of lactose consumed (mg/g consumed carbon) in each
sample for evolved and wild type CHCC54512 on lactose supplemented MRS­IM medium sampled at
late exponential phase. B: Acid concentrations normalized by the amount of maltose consumed (mg/g
consumed carbon) in each sample for evolved and wild type CHCC54512 on maltose supplemented
MRS­IM medium sampled at exponential phase.
The same overall pattern occurs in this analysis as in the last, as the wild type strain exhibits higher
overall acid concentrations on lactose. This pattern persists on maltose as lactic acid production is higher
in the evolved strain, however acetic and citric acid is more proportional than on lactose. Perhaps most
interesting is the presence of succinic acid in both strains growing on maltose, whereas both strains
do not exhibit any succinic acid on lactose. This may indicate that, as predicted, growth on maltose
does indeed optimize flux towards succinate, but the degree of evolution in the evolved strain was not
sufficient to carry over this phenotype to lactose. It should be noted, that the OD600 of the lactose
samples submitted to biochemical analysis are higher than the maltose samples (figure 3.10), therefore
it may be the case that succinic acid is consumed in a later growth phase. However, evolved CHCC54512
was also analyzed in early exponential phase (Appendix A.1), where it also did not produce succinate
at an OD600 of ≈0.60, which would support the notion that succinate was never being produced in
lactose conditions. Furthermore, the same data were normalized by OD600 readings instead of carbon
consumption, with the only difference being that the evolved strain is slightly more equal to the wild
type in lactose conditions (Appendix A.3). Although succinate production on maltose may support the
predictions made by our pipeline, one major factor does interfere with the validity of our predictions,
namely that lactic acid is being produced in all conditions. As can be seen in in figure 3.9, it is predicted
by the strain specific genome­scale model that this strain grows exclusively through acetate metabolism,
and does not produce lactic acid. Given that lactic acid is produced in abundance by this strain, the
particular optimization strategy for succinate in this case may be less reliable. This lack of secretion
prediction is continued by the fact that this model also does not predict any secretion of citric, malic, or
acetic acid, which is clearly contradicted by this biochemical analysis.
Lastly, we can consider our negative control case, which consisted of strain CHCC49169 being grown
on fructose. This combination was subject to the same empirical analyses as the previous strains, firstly
with the dual growth assay, as seen in figure 3.11, and a subsequent biochemical analysis, seen in figure
3.12. Unfortunately, a comparative analysis of evolved and wild type strains on fructose was not possible,
as the wild type did not exhibit growth in this experiment ­ however the evolved acid data on fructose is
available in table 3.6b.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
30
==PAGE:36==
A
B
Figure 3.11: Graph outlining the growth curves of Lactobacillus helveticus CHCC49169 being grown
over 24 hours in both lactose and fructose based mediums. A: CHCC41969 strain evolved for growth
on fructose and a wild type CHCC41969 both grown in 24 hour growth assay on a lactose supplemented
MRS­IM medium. Growth curves were performed in duplicate and were read for OD600 absorbance
measurements every 1 hour. B: CHCC49169 strain evolved for growth on fructose and a wild type
CHCC49169 both grown in 24 hour growth assay on a fructose supplemented MRS­IM medium. Growth
curves were performed in duplicate and were read for OD600 absorbance measurements every 1 hour.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
31
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.12: Biochemical analysis of acid concentration present in the culture broth of wild type Lac­
tobacillus helveticus CHCC41969 and a variant evolved to grow on fructose over a four week period.
Acid concentrations normalized by the amount of lactose consumed (mg/g consumed carbon) in each
sample for evolved and wild type CHCC49169 on lactose supplemented MRS­IM medium sampled at
early exponential phase.
This particular case displayed the most stark difference between wild type and evolved strains grow­
ing on the evolutionary carbon source, as the wild type population is not able to support any growth on
fructose. Furthermore, growth on lactose does follow the same trend, however the growth curves are not
as identical as previous cases. Given that this strain­carbon combination was not predicted by this meth­
ods, the optimized reactions are not available, However, we can still check what the predicted excretion
rates of malic, citric, succinic, acetic, and lactic acid are in both conditions (table 3.6a and 3.6b).
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
32
==PAGE:38==
Table 3.6: Central carbon metabolism acid simulation fluxes and experimental concentrations. Simula­
tion fluxes (mmol/gDW/hour) are derived from the strain specific CHCC41969 genome­scale metabolic
model predicted growth on lactose and fructose. Experimental results (b) list acid concentrations for the
wild type growing on lactose, and the strain evolved to grow on fructose in both a fructose and lactose
based growth medium
(a) Simulations
Reaction
Lactose Simulation (mmol/gDW/hour)
Fructose Simulation (mmol/gDW/hour)
Succinate Exchange
0.07
0.06
Malate Exchange
0
0
Lactate Exchange
40.3
20.7
Acetate Exchange
0
0
Citrate Exchange
0
0
(b) Experimental Results
Metabolite
Wild Type (mg/g lactose)
Evolved strain (mg/g lactose)
Evolved strain (mg/g fructose)
Succinate
0.13
0
0
Malate
0.13
0.16
0.047
Lactate
1.04
1.22
0.41
Acetate
4.54
6.01
0
Citrate
2.87
3.80
0.98
As can be seen, the same phenomenon of our models being unable to predict malate, acetate,
and citrate secretion continues. However, in terms of lactate usage, we can see that the roughly 50%
reduction in lactate predicted in silico is reflected in our experimental results between the wild type on
lactose and evolved strain on fructose. Interestingly we can see that the evolved strain on lactose falls
between both fructose and wild type lactate concentrations. Another notable observation is that the
concentration of the other metabolites (save succinate) are all higher in the evolved strain in lactose as
compared to the wild type, indicating that growth on fructose has increased metabolic flux towards lactate,
acetate, and citrate when switched back to lactose ­ a phenomenon not seen in the previous two positive
cases. However, when normalized by OD600 instead of consumed carbon we do see that these acids
are indeed being produced more by the wild type (Appendix A.4), making any interpretation difficult to
make. Another interesting affect the evolutionary condition has had on this strain is that the evolved strain
does not produce any succinate, whereas the wild type strain does (seen in both normalization’s). This
decrease in succinate is marginally reflected in the predicted fluxes in table 3.6a, however the change
in succinate is very small between conditions.
3.3
Sensitivity Analysis
The EvolveY pipeline consists of two primary parameters, α and β. In order to better understand
the variation of our simulations, we wanted to perform a sensitivity analysis on these two parameters.
Beginning with α, we aimed to investigate how increasing the minimal target compound production affects
the predicted growth rate. Our goal was to determine the predicted cost associated with each increment
in the α parameter, as seen in Figure 3.13
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
33
==PAGE:39==
A
B
Figure 3.13: Average trade­off between product formation and fitness cost between MOMA and ROOM
algorithms for the output of the EvolveY pipeline. Average percent cost is based on the percent difference
in growth rate (mmol/gDW/hour) predicted by the model in the optimized and standard simulation. The
same simulations were used to calculate the fractional increase in target product formation based on the
export flux of the target compound exchange reaction.
Predictably, as the threshold increases, a steeper fitness cost (percent loss in growth rate) is seen.
Furthermore, the sensitivity analysis on both MOMA and ROOM revealed a similar trend, but with different
magnitudes in product yield and fitness cost, with ROOM being more conservative with product yield
with lower fitness costs, and MOMA being slightly more productive for product yield with higher average
fitness costs.
The β threshold was also investigated to understand how changes in the parameter affected both
the kinds of reactions that were being used to calculate the average Euclidean distance between flux
distributions, and also the amount of viable cases that each threshold gave us for experimental imple­
mentation.
We chose to implement β values between 0.5% and 5%, ranging from ≈4.2 to ≈55 reactions being
used to calculate the similarity metric. We first aimed to examine how changing the amount of reactions
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
34
==PAGE:40==
compared affected the average difference in fluxes between the standard and optimized simulations, as
seen in figure 3.14.
A
B
Figure 3.14: Histogram outlining the difference in flux (mmol/gDW/hour) between key reactions of the
standard and target simulation across strains and target compounds, under carrying β threshold values
of 0.5%, 1%. 3%, and 5% for both MOMA (A) and ROOM (B) based versions of the EvolveY pipeline.
As specificity increases (i.e. as the β parameter decreases) we also see a decrease in the number
of reactions where the difference in flux value is near zero. Most notably, we can see that the 5% and
3% thresholds exhibit a downward trend as the flux difference increases, whereas the 1% and 0.5%
thresholds exhibit an increasing trend. This could suggest that threshold values below 3% tend to target
more relevant reactions for target compound production, and thus avoid skewing the similarity metric
through the addition of reactions with a much smaller relevance (i.e. flux difference) to target compound
production. To investigate this further we can look not only at the difference in flux value, but the relative
changes in flux across thresholds. This is important as the absolute differences may be small, but could
actually signify relatively large changes in reactions with small fluxes. Thus, we can investigate the
fractional changes in flux across β values, as seen in 3.15.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
35
==PAGE:41==
A
B
Figure 3.15: Histogram outlining the log fractional difference in flux (mmol/gDW/hour) between key
reactions of the standard and target simulation across strains and target compounds, under carrying β
threshold values of 0.5%, 1%. 3%, and 5% for both ROOM (A) and MOMA (B) based versions of the
EvolveY pipeline.
As we can see, the majority of changes across thresholds are very small. with MOMA opting for
a wider distribution of flux changes and ROOM predictably minimizing the amounts of large fractional
changes. In this plot we again see that the β values below 3% tend to target more relevant reactions,
as the amount of the 1% and 0.5% thresholds can be seen to have more specificity for reactions with
large fractional change. Given that the x­axis in figure 3.15 is log­transformed, values with zero as a flux
value were omitted. This category of reaction can be classified as ”On/Off” reactions ­ in other words ­
reactions that were either turned on or off from the standard to the target simulation. The proportion of
these kinds of reactions per β threshold can be seen in figure 3.16
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
36
==PAGE:42==
A
B
Figure 3.16: Percentage of key reactions which were either turned on or off between the standard and
target distribution for varying β thresholds for both MOMA (A) and ROOM (B) based EvolveY simulation
results.
The proportion of reactions turned on is somewhat constant across thresholds and between ROOM
and MOMA. Interestingly, the proportion of turned off reactions is very low compared to turned on, and
occurs only in higher β thresholds. This imbalance is more extreme in ROOM, where only 0.05% of
cases are turned off within only the 5% β category.
In addition to finding a β value that is most relevant for the production of our target molecule, we
also wanted to understand how many viable cases each threshold level provides as an output from the
pipeline. By ’viable case’, we simply mean the amount of evolved simulations that are closer to our
target simulation than the standard simulation is. However, simply being closer to the target simulation
(i.e. having a smaller average Euclidean distance) is not sufficient for a case to be considered viable.
There should be a margin by which the evolved simulation is closer to the target simulation relative to
the standard simulation. Therefore, we decided to plot the amount of viable cases found for each α
and β level, based of varying thresholds of what is considered ’closer’ to the target simulation, with this
being calculated through the percent difference between the evolved and standard simulations, as seen
in figure 3.17.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
37
==PAGE:43==
A
B
Figure 3.17: Line plot outlining the number of cases where the evolved­target distance is a certain
percent difference (x­axis) from its standard­target distance counterpart. This percent difference is a
metric by which one can quantify how much closer the evolved simulation is to the target for a set of key
reactions. The key reactions used to calculate this distance is varied as per the β parameter (A) and α
(B) parameter.
As the β threshold decreases, the amount of viable cases increases. This is somewhat expected,
as decreasing the number of reactions used to calculate the average Euclidean distance increases the
likelihood that an evolved simulation will be closer to the target than the standard simulation. In other
words, the chances of an evolved simulation being closer to the target is higher if 4 reactions are be­
ing considered as opposed to 20. Interestingly the α parameter has similar values across thresholds,
suggesting that the models are relatively robust in dealing with higher minimum secretion constraints.
While figure 3.14 and 3.15 provided us with an estimate of the relevance of each β value, figure
3.17 indicates how many cases we are provided with. Both factors informed our final decision of which
threshold to implement, as we wanted to balance specificity to relevant reactions, while also ensuring
we had enough cases to implement experimentally, as in running an ALE campaign it is uncertain how
many of the combinations will survive to the end of the evolutionary period. In addition to this, figure 3.13
gave us an idea of the predicted trade­off between our target product formation and strain fitness, based
on varying levels of the α parameter.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
38
==PAGE:44==
4
Discussion
4.1
Predicted optimization of succinate
The EvolveY pipeline aims to find a specific strain­carbon source combination that best optimizes a
set of key reactions that are associated with target compound production. Interestingly, when run on the
whole strain collection of Lactobacillus helveticus, with five target compounds defined, the vast majority
of cases were for succinate with one case for acetate. This is not necessarily surprising given the nature
of the pipeline. If the only variable factor between standard and evolved simulations is the primary carbon
source, then major shifts in metabolism will occur proximal to central carbon metabolism. Upon further
analysis, it was found that none of the models had the 1­butanol exchange reaction. However we chose
1­butanol due to the fact that the flavour associated molecule butanone had no BiGG ID, and thus we
chose a chemical which was closest in structure instead of excluding the case altogether, making this
widespread absence less surprising. Thus, the reason for succinate and acetate being the most common
target metabolites is most likely due to their being more proximal to central metabolism than ethanol and
2­methyl­butanoic acid.
In addition to this, more than half of the carbon sources highlighted in this pipeline were sucrose and
trehalose. Although there is no literature describing trehalose as a sugar that can contribute to succinate
production, sucrose and sucrose containing feed­stock like sugarcane have been used for succinate
production in fermentation conditions [43], and have noted higher yields on this substrate when using
E. coli as a fermentation strain [44]. The mechanism behind sucrose based succinate production is
speculated to stem from sucrose metabolism yielding higher amounts of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP),
which increases flux towards succinate via oxaloacetate [45]. This conversion of PEP to oxaloacetate
is facilitated through phosphopyruvate carboxylase, a reaction that is often turned on for succinate over­
production in our pipeline (table 3.1).
Looking to table 3.1, we can look more closely at the specific reaction mechanisms that are high­
lighted within our models to optimize for succinate. Interestingly we can see a motif across both MOMA
and ROOM key reactions, across up and down regulation. This motif is that down regulation is occurring
exclusively downstream to PEP towards lactate and CO2 formation, and that upregulation is occurring
primarily through the reductive TCA cycle. This again places PEP as the keystone metabolite in regard to
succinate production. It also shows that the most likely pathway for succinate overproduction is through
the reductive TCA. This makes sense, as although recent work on metabolic engineering for succinate
production has noted that the oxidative TCA cycle can indeed provide higher yields of succinate [46],
these principles would not hold for Lactobacillus helveticus, as it must use a reductive TCA cycle due to
its anaerobic growth environment. This use of the reductive TCA cycle has been seen in other work, no­
tably in other Lactobacilli, as L. plantarum has been used to overproduce succinate through metabolically
engineering increased usage of the reductive TCA cycle [47], again by leveraging PEP carboxylase, and
also pyruvate carboxylase to produce oxaloacetate, which is then converted to succinate downstream.
If our pipeline is indeed using PEP and pyruvate carboxylation to carry more flux to the reductive TCA
cycle, it would then make sense that CO2 transport is being downregulated, as CO2 would instead be
used for these carboxylation reactions. Another broad trend in the down regulation of reactions is a down
regulation of lactate production, a metabolic shift that would decrease intracellular NAD+ concentrations
(as NAD+ is a by­product of lactate dehydrogenase). This could give the model a ’reason’ to channel
flux towards succinate via fumarate reductase to act as a NAD+ generation mechanism, to supplement
the reduced NAD+ production from lactate. In fact this exact phenomenon has been documented in the
literature, as Yun et al. (2005) have leveraged NADH dehydrogenase deactivation to improve lactate
and succinate production in E. coli [48], with Balzer et al. (2013) and Li et al. (2017) applying similar
NADH/NAD+ manipulation methods to improve succinate formation [49] [50].
In light of these generalized hypotheses, we can investigate one of the specific cases analyzed in this
study, namely CHCC4481 evolved to grow on maltose. Looking at table 3.4 and figure 3.6, we can see
that maltose transport is mediated by the PTS system, using PEP. Given that carbon transport is mediated
by PEP, the overall ATP yield of the cell is reduced, as the conversion of PEP to pyruvate (yielding one
ATP) is downregulated to accommodate the active transport of maltose via the PTS system. When this
occurs in the model, we can see that acetate metabolism is upregulated, presumably as a way to balance
out ATP production due to the reduced flux through pyruvate kinase. Given that pyruvate is now up
regulating acetate metabolism in the model, lactate dehydrogenase is seen to decrease in flux, lowering
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
39
==PAGE:45==
overall NAD+ production. It would then make sense to up regulate succinate through the reductive TCA,
in order to balance out the loss of NAD+. The conversion of PEP through PEP carboxylase to succinate
would yield two NAD+, and would correspond to the aforementioned literature – however the model does
not activate this reaction. Instead flux towards succinate via PEP seems to be mediated by PYK3, an
isoform of pyruvate kinase, which as a byproduct produces guanosine­5’­triphosphate, which is involved
in a succinate production pathway via aspartate. Despite it seeming like an optimal choice to balance
out NAD+, PEP carboxylase would further lower the models ATP yield, as less flux would be used to
generate ATP via pyruvate kinase, and also acetate metabolism downstream, as PEP carboxylase does
not yield pyruvate. Thus, producing succinate via guanosine­5’­triphosphate is the ideal mechanism in
this case, as this PYK3 reaction both contributes to pyruvate production while also increasing flux towards
succinate, generating NAD+. Within the model, we can investigate how intracellular ATP in lactose and
maltose based simulations is produced. In the strain specific model simulating growth on lactose, 41%
of ATP is produced via pyruvate kinase and 3% via acetate metabolism (the rest of which is produced
by phosphoglycerate kinase). On maltose, pyruvate contributes 38% and acetate 5%, meaning that
acetate is somewhat compensating for a reduced pyruvate mediated ATP generation. The same is seen
for intracellular NAD+, where lactate dehydrogenase produces 93% on lactose and 86% on maltose,
where fumarate reductase produces 0.18% on lactose and 1% on maltose.
Looking at the second specific example (table 3.5 and figure 3.9), we are presented with the inter­
esting case that the conversion of pyruvate to lactate simply does not exist within this model, meaning
flux from pyruvate exclusively leads to acetate metabolism. From table 3.5, we can see that in the target
flux distribution phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase is turned on, and that CO2 transport is decreased,
for supplementing this carboxylation reaction. This change would also track with pyruvate kinase down
regulation, as some PEP would be converted to oxaloacetate via carboxylation instead of pyruvate. How­
ever, as we can see, the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase reaction is not turned on in the evolved fluxes,
however the reductive TCA pathways leading to succinate are still up regulated. We can assume that the
PEP carboxylase was not turned on for the reasons previously discussed, as PEP mediated transport
would decrease intracellular ATP, lowering the incentive to synthesize oxaloacetate from PEP. Given
that lactate dehydrogenase is not present in this model, intracellular NAD+ is sourced from other reac­
tions, such as aldose reductase which contributes 24% of NAD+ in lactose, but 12% in maltose, and
is an offshoot of central carbon metabolism. Given that PEP mediated transport reduces ATP, carbon
metabolism would redirect more flux to PEP to keep up energy demands. If this is the case, reactions that
are more convenient for the cell to mediate intracellular NAD+, such as the aforementioned PYK3 path­
way, would be used preferentially for NAD+. This is again the case in this model, as fumarate reductase
percent contribution to NAD+ increases from 0.14% to 0.51% in maltose.
What this section has tried to highlight is the generalized mechanism and motif by which succinate
is being optimized in L. helveticus. We suggest that PEP mediated transport in these models affects
energy and co­factor yields, primarily through reduced pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase flux.
We propose that this is the reason why succinate associated fluxes are being increased in these envi­
ronments, as PYK3 usage provides a parsimonious solution to ATP and NAD+ reduction in a maltose
based environment.
4.2
Experimental results
Moving to the experimental results, we can observe that the main hypothesis of our study, that suc­
cinate would be overproduced in the evolved strain, was not observed. We can attribute this difference
in outcome to many factors.
Firstly, the amount of time that each strain was grown on their respective carbon source was approxi­
mately 3 and a half weeks (when the samples were submitted to biochemical analysis). When compared
to the EvolveX paper, the time of evolution in the model­predicted environment was 150 generations
[29]. Thus, compared to the average of approximately 10­15 generations used for our strains, we can
see that the length of evolution is definitely a limiting factor. We could argue that since the pathways we
are predicting to optimize are so central to carbon metabolism, that optimization might be faster. Carbon
adaptation is indeed reflected in our results as well, as we can see that our evolved strains do produce
more lactic acid (figures 3.10 and 3.7) and have better growth curves (figure 3.5 and 3.8) than their wild
type counterparts. Given the central role of these pathways in carbon metabolism, significant modifica­
tions could occur rapidly, however, this rapid adaptation in core pathways does not necessarily imply
similar lasting changes in closely related, yet distinct, metabolic reactions, such as those involved in
succinate production. Looking to the related literature as well, we can see that for using ALE methods
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
40
==PAGE:46==
for central metabolism modifications, the evolutionary period is generally longer, ranging from 40 days
[51] to thousands of generations [52].
A second possible reason why our predicted outcome was not realized is due to the lack of statistical
power associated with our measurements. Not only are most of our measurements done only in duplicate
or singlicate (due to the fact we were restricted in what we could submit for analysis), but when they were
taken in duplicate, they were technical and not biological replicates. This significantly restricts the kinds
of conclusions we can make, and gives our results an indeterminate status – perhaps succinate was
indeed being overproduced, but we did not have the sample size to see this.
A third reason why the experimental results did not match with our predictions could also stem from
model inaccuracy.
Although all of the models used in our biochemical analysis scored well in their
predictive efficacy for carbon utilization (figure 3.3), many metabolic features were not predicted. For
CHCC4481 and CHCC54512, acetic and malic acid secretion is not present or accounted for, despite
experimental evidence to the contrary. Most strikingly is CHCC54512 predicting no production of lactate,
where we see an abundance of lactate in our biochemical analysis (figure 3.10). Given that these dis­
crepancies are related to central carbon metabolism, it is definitely a sign that our reconstructions and
subsequent optimizations may not have been accurate in their representation of these strains metabolism,
resulting in our predictions being flawed. Interestingly, although some studies have found citric acid to be
secreted by L. helveticus [53], it is not a typical fermentation product in this species. Therefore, it could
be the case that citric acid is being misidentified in our biochemical analysis, however this fact must be
subject to further investigation in future work.
4.3
Approach limitations and Future work
Given that succinate overproduction was not achieved, we may consider what can be improved upon
in future implementations of this pipeline. The theoretical framework of this pipeline is dependent on the
reconstruction process. Target compounds and carbon sources are inputted, and the GEMs produce
flux distributions with the outputs being investigated downstream. That is to say, the knowledge base
of the GEM reconstructions is the primary driver of the engineering strategy, as the completeness and
reliability of the predictions is totally dependent on the quality of the reconstructions used. This means
that oftentimes, model and strain specific predictions may not line up with reality, as was seen in some
cases above. Of course, the most straightforward way to improve this pipeline is to improve the quality
of the models, or cut down the number of models to have the ’top 30’ most reliable ones being used as
the basis for the pipeline, potentially through more in depth empirical validation of model predictions.
Despite this, what this pipeline can provide is a broad overview of species specific optimization strate­
gies. Looking at table 3.1, we can see the most common strategies used across strain specific genome
scale models. This provides us with information about species wide motifs, and can be used for down­
stream enrichment analysis. For instance, the observed prominence of PEP and NAD+ related reactions
across L. helveticus GEM optimizations suggests that these motifs are not merely results of incorrectly
reconstructed metabolic networks, but rather a species specific biologically feasible mechanism for suc­
cinate production that merits further investigation. That is to say, these species wide generalizations
can inform downstream engineering efforts. For example, given these broad L. helveticus insights, one
could investigate them more closely with the in­house curated L. helveticus model, to see if some of the
proposed mechanisms also works for a model which has a higher quality of reconstruction.
Increasing the amount of environmental variables is another way this pipeline can be improved. If
other metabolites, such as amino acids and nutrients are modulated in regard to their presence and
abundance within the evolutionary environment, the overall result may yield more positive cases. Fur­
thermore, this may also bring to light new mechanisms by which target metabolites can be manipulated.
The choice of environmental variable can also be informed by a literature source, to help supplement the
empirical grounding of the pipeline, and increase the probability of finding optimal outcomes.
One important limitation of this study is the applicability of genome­scale models in modeling evolu­
tionary processes. GEMs are inherently static, relying on the metabolic stoichiometry defined through
the reconstruction process. When predicting the flux distribution of a strain that has evolved to grow on
maltose, for example, the solution provided is based on the stoichiometry of metabolism in the wild type.
Theoretically, the solution space that evolution provides to biological organisms is much larger than the
that provided by static stoichiometry. That is to say, evolutionary processes may act to ’mend’ the con­
straints GEMs assume are static through time. For example, the phenomenon of enzyme promiscuity
is prevalent in nature, where enzymes can change in regard to their stoichiometry in ways that GEMs
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
41
==PAGE:47==
cannot predict. That is to say, even if we had the perfect genome­scale metabolic model, the predictions
it makes are not certain through evolution.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
42
==PAGE:48==
5
Conclusion
This thesis has dealt with the construction of an original software called ’EvolveY’, which aimed to
design ALE experiments for metabolite overproduction. The development of this software was supple­
mented by the experimental implementation of these predictions, in order to investigate the hypothesized
overproduction of succinate. The main hypothesis of this study was not achieved, meaning metabolite
overproduction was not realized. Nevertheless, the pipeline still provided interesting insight into L. hel­
veticus metabolism. Notably, this method showed that PEP mediated transport is a possible mechanism
by which succinate can be overproduced, due to the ensuing decrease in intracellular NAD+.
The concept of manipulating environmental conditions to link metabolite secretion with fitness aligns
well with established biological principles. With further refinements, we are optimistic about achieving
improved outcomes with the EvolveY pipeline in future studies. In addition to this, we hope that the
pipeline will be used not only as a way to design ALE experiments, but to also be used as a way to
uncover generalized species wide motifs in metabolic regulation.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
43
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
J Andrew Jones and Xin Wang. “Use of bacterial co­cultures for the efficient production
of chemicals”. In: Current Opinion in Biotechnology 53 (2018). Chemical Biotechnology •
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, pp. 33–38. ISSN: 0958­1669. DOI: 10.1016/j.copbio.2017.
11.012. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0958166917302392.
[2]
Wilfried Rähse. “Production of tailor­made enzymes for detergents”. In: ChemBioEng Re­
views 1.1 (Feb. 2014), pp. 27–39. DOI: 10.1002/cben.201300001.
[3]
Yuan Su et al. “Bacillus subtilis: A universal cell factory for industry, agriculture, Biomate­
rials and Medicine”. In: Microbial Cell Factories 19.1 (Sept. 2020). DOI: 10.1186/s12934-
020-01436-8.
[4]
Marta Irla and Volker F. Wendisch. “Efficient cell factories for the production of n­methylated
amino acids and for methanol­based amino acid production”. In: Microbial Biotechnology
15.8 (Apr. 2022), pp. 2145–2159. DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.14067.
[5]
Damla Huccetogullari, Zi Wei Luo, and Sang Yup Lee. “Metabolic Engineering of microor­
ganisms for production of aromatic compounds”. In: Microbial Cell Factories 18.1 (Feb.
2019). DOI: 10.1186/s12934-019-1090-4.
[6]
Evandro L de Souza, Kataryne ÁR de Oliveira, and Maria EG de Oliveira. “Influence of
lactic acid bacteria metabolites on physical and chemical food properties”. In: Current
Opinion in Food Science 49 (2023), p. 100981. ISSN: 2214­7993. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cofs.2022.100981. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2214799322001837.
[7]
Federica Ronchetti, Laura Springer, and Kai Purnhagen. The regulatory landscape in the
EU for dairy products derived from precision fermentation: An analysis on the example of
cheese. Springer, 2024.
[8]
Luana Tirloni, Daiane Heidrich, and Claucia Fernanda Souza. “Adaptive laboratory evo­
lution to obtain lactic acid bacteria strains of industrial interest ­ A Review”. In: Brazilian
Journal of Food Technology 26 (2023). DOI: 10.1590/1981-6723.05323.
[9]
Patrick F. Fox and Paul L.H. McSweeney. “Chapter 1 ­ Cheese: An Overview”. In: Cheese
(Fourth Edition). Ed. by Paul L.H. McSweeney et al. Fourth Edition. San Diego: Academic
Press, 2017, pp. 5–21. ISBN: 978­0­12­417012­4. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0 - 12 - 417012 - 4 . 00001 - 6. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
B9780124170124000016.
[10]
João Luiz Dagostin, Danielle Carpine, and Maria Lucia Masson. “Influence of acidification
method on composition, texture, Psychrotrophs, and lactic acid bacteria in Minas frescal
cheese”. In: Food and Bioprocess Technology 6.11 (Dec. 2012), pp. 3017–3028. DOI:
10.1007/s11947-012-1029-9.
[11]
K.W. Ruettimann and M.R. Ladisch. “Casein micelles: structure, properties and enzymatic
coagulation”. In: Enzyme and Microbial Technology 9.10 (1987), pp. 578–589. ISSN:
0141­0229. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0141-0229(87)90109-8. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0141022987901098.
[12]
Amira R. Khattab et al. “Cheese ripening: A review on modern technologies towards fla­
vor enhancement, process acceleration and improved quality assessment”. In: Trends
in Food Science
Technology 88 (2019), pp. 343–360. ISSN: 0924­2244. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2019.03.009. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0924224419300597.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
44
==PAGE:50==
[13]
Yaqi Wang et al. “Metabolism characteristics of lactic acid bacteria and the expanding
applications in food industry”. In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 9 (May
2021). DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.612285.
[14]
Chrats Melkonian et al. “Microbial interactions shape cheese flavour formation”. In: Nature
Communications 14.1 (Dec. 2023). DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-41059-2.
[15]
Thomas Bintsis. “Lactic acid bacteria as starter cultures: An update in their metabolism
and Genetics”. In: AIMS Microbiology 4.4 (2018), pp. 665–684. DOI: 10.3934/microbiol.
2018.4.665.
[16]
Gerrit Smit, Bart A. Smit, and Wim J.M. Engels. “Flavour formation by lactic acid bacteria
and biochemical flavour profiling of cheese products”. In: FEMS Microbiology Reviews
29.3 (Aug. 2005), pp. 591–610. ISSN: 0168­6445. DOI: 10.1016/j.fmrre.2005.04.002.
eprint: https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-pdf/29/3/591/18127674/29-3-591.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fmrre.2005.04.002.
[17]
Diana I. Serrazanetti et al. “Acid Stress­Mediated Metabolic Shift in Lactobacillus sanfran­
ciscensis LSCE1”. In: Applied and Environmental Microbiology 77.8 (2011), pp. 2656–
2666. DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01826-10. eprint: https://journals.asm.org/doi/pdf/10.1128/aem.
01826-10. URL: https://journals.asm.org/doi/abs/10.1128/aem.01826-10.
[18]
Gerrit Smit, Bart A. Smit, and Wim J.M. Engels. “Flavour formation by lactic acid bacteria
and biochemical flavour profiling of cheese products”. In: FEMS Microbiology Reviews
29.3 (Aug. 2005), pp. 591–610. ISSN: 0168­6445. DOI: 10.1016/j.fmrre.2005.04.002.
eprint: https://academic.oup.com/femsre/article-pdf/29/3/591/18127674/29-3-591.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fmrre.2005.04.002.
[19]
E.G. Dudley and J.L. Steele. “Succinate production and citrate catabolism by cheddar
cheese nonstarter lactobacilli”. In: Journal of Applied Microbiology 98.1 (Jan. 2005), pp. 14–
23. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2004.02440.x.
[20]
S.L. Drake et al. “Sources of umami taste in Cheddar and Swiss cheeses”. In: Journal of
Food Science 72.6 (June 2007). DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2007.00402.x.
[21]
L. Slattery et al. “Invited review: Lactobacillus helveticus—a thermophilic dairy starter re­
lated to gut bacteria”. In: Journal of Dairy Science 93.10 (Oct. 2010), pp. 4435–4454. DOI:
10.3168/jds.2010-3327.
[22]
M. W. Griffiths and A. M. Tellez. “Lactobacillus helveticus: The proteolytic system”. In:
Frontiers in Microbiology 4 (2013). DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00030.
[23]
Yoshihiko Kido et al. “Niche­specific adaptation of lactobacillus helveticus strains isolated
from malt whisky and dairy fermentations”. In: Microbial Genomics 7.4 (Apr. 2021). DOI:
10.1099/mgen.0.000560.
[24]
M. I. Torino, M. P. Taranto, and G. Font de Valdez. “Citrate catabolism and production of
acetate and succinate by lactobacillus helveticus ATCC 15807”. In: Applied Microbiology
and Biotechnology 69.1 (Mar. 2005), pp. 79–85. DOI: 10.1007/s00253-005-1949-7.
[25]
João G R Cardoso et al. “MARSI: metabolite analogues for rational strain improvement”.
In: Bioinformatics 34.13 (Feb. 2018), pp. 2319–2321. ISSN: 1367­4803. DOI: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/bty108. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/34/
13/2319/50315783/bioinformatics\_34\_13\_2319.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/bty108.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
45
==PAGE:51==
[26]
Robin Dorau et al. “Adaptive Laboratory Evolution as a Means To Generate Lactococcus
lactis Strains with Improved Thermotolerance and Ability To Autolyze”. In: Applied and
Environmental Microbiology 87.21 (2021), e01035–21. DOI: 10 . 1128 / AEM . 01035 - 21.
eprint: https://journals.asm.org/doi/pdf/10.1128/aem.01035-21. URL: https://journals.asm.
org/doi/abs/10.1128/aem.01035-21.
[27]
Belinda Amanda Nyabako et al. “Enhanced acid tolerance in lactobacillus acidophilus
by atmospheric and room temperature plasma (ARTP) coupled with Adaptive Labora­
tory Evolution (ALE)”. In: Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology 191.4 (Mar. 2020),
pp. 1499–1514. DOI: 10.1007/s12010-020-03264-3.
[28]
Dimitrios Konstantinidis et al. “Adaptive Laboratory Evolution of Microbial co￿cultures for
improved metabolite secretion”. In: Molecular Systems Biology 17.8 (Aug. 2021). DOI:
10.15252/msb.202010189.
[29]
Paula Jouhten et al. “Predictive evolution of metabolic phenotypes using model￿designed
environments”. In: Molecular Systems Biology 18.10 (2022), e10980. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.15252/msb.202210980. eprint: https://www.embopress.org/doi/pdf/10.15252/msb.
202210980. URL: https://www.embopress.org/doi/abs/10.15252/msb.202210980.
[30]
Daniel Segrè, Dennis Vitkup, and George M. Church. “Analysis of optimality in natural
and perturbed metabolic networks”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
99.23 (2002), pp. 15112–15117. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.232349399. eprint: https://www.pnas.
org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.232349399. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
232349399.
[31]
Tomer Shlomi, Omer Berkman, and Eytan Ruppin. “Regulatory on/off minimization of
metabolic flux changes after genetic perturbations”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 102.21 (2005), pp. 7695–7700. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0406346102. eprint: https:
//www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.0406346102. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/
10.1073/pnas.0406346102.
[32]
Nathan E Lewis et al. “OMIC data from evolved E. coli are consistent with computed
optimal growth from genome￿scale models”. In: Molecular Systems Biology 6.1 (Jan.
2010). DOI: 10.1038/msb.2010.47.
[33]
Xin Fang, Colton J. Lloyd, and Bernhard O. Palsson. “Reconstructing organisms in silico:
Genome­scale models and their emerging applications”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology
18.12 (Sept. 2020), pp. 731–743. DOI: 10.1038/s41579-020-00440-4.
[34]
Sebastián N. Mendoza et al. “A systematic assessment of current genome­scale metabolic
reconstruction tools”. In: Genome Biology 20.1 (2019). DOI: 10.1186/s13059-019-1769-1.
[35]
José P. Faria et al. “Methods for automated genome­scale metabolic model reconstruc­
tion”. In: Biochemical Society Transactions 46.4 (2018), pp. 931–936. DOI: 10 . 1042 /
bst20170246.
[36]
Daniel Machado et al. “Fast automated reconstruction of genome­scale metabolic mod­
els for microbial species and communities”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 46.15 (2018),
pp. 7542–7553. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky537.
[37]
Jildau Emma Bras et al. “High­throughput generation and comparison of genome­scale
metabolic models reveals strain­specific metabolic diversity in 439 Lactococcus strains”.
Unpublished manuscript. 2023.
[38]
Songsong Wei et al. “Reconstruction of genome­scale metabolic model of Yarrowia lipoly­
tica and its application in overproduction of triacylglycerol”. In: Bioresources and Biopro­
cessing 4.1 (Dec. 2017). DOI: 10.1186/s40643-017-0180-6.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
46
==PAGE:52==
[39]
Amornpan Klanchui et al. “An improved genome­scale metabolic model of Arthrospira
platensis C1 (IAK888) and its application in glycogen overproduction”. In: Metabolites 8.4
(Nov. 2018), p. 84. DOI: 10.3390/metabo8040084.
[40]
Omid Ardalani, Ehsan Motamedian, and Javad Hamedi. “Reconstruction and validation of
genome­scale metabolic model of L. lactis subsp. lactis NCDO 2118 and in silico analysis
for succinate and Gamma­aminobutyric acid overproduction”. In: Biochemical Engineer­
ing Journal 170 (2021), p. 107967. ISSN: 1369­703X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.
2021.107967. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1369703X21000437.
[41]
E.J. Smid et al. “Metabolic models for rational improvement of lactic acid bacteria as cell
factories”. In: Journal of Applied Microbiology 98.6 (June 2005), pp. 1326–1331. ISSN:
1364­5072. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2005.02652.x. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/
jambio/article-pdf/98/6/1326/47304612/jambio1326.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1365-2672.2005.02652.x.
[42]
Ana Paula Oliveira, Jens Nielsen, and Jochen Förster. “Modeling Lactococcus lactis using
a genome­scale flux model”. In: BMC Microbiology 5.1 (June 2005). DOI: 10.1186/1471-
2180-5-39.
[43]
Sitha Chan, Sunthorn Kanchanatawee, and Kaemwich Jantama. “Production of succinic
acid from sucrose and sugarcane molasses by metabolically engineered Escherichia coli”.
In: Bioresource Technology 103.1 (2012), pp. 329–336. ISSN: 0960­8524. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2011.09.096. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0960852411013848.
[44]
Rongming Liu et al. “Succinate production by metabolically engineered Escherichia coli
using sugarcane bagasse hydrolysate as the carbon source”. In: Bioresource Technol­
ogy 135 (2013). Biorefineries, pp. 574–577. ISSN: 0960­8524. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.biortech.2012.08.120. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0960852412013156.
[45]
Anna Lange et al. “Bio­based succinate from sucrose: High­resolution 13C metabolic flux
analysis and metabolic engineering of the rumen bacterium Basfia succiniciproducens”.
In: Metabolic Engineering 44 (2017), pp. 198–212. ISSN: 1096­7176. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ymben.2017.10.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1096717617301751.
[46]
Andreas M. Raab and Christine Lang. “Oxidative versus reductive succinic acid produc­
tion in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Bioengineered Bugs 2.2 (Mar. 2011),
pp. 120–123. DOI: 10.4161/bbug.2.2.14549.
[47]
Akira Tsuji et al. “Metabolic engineering of Lactobacillus plantarum for succinic acid pro­
duction through activation of the reductive branch of the tricarboxylic acid cycle”. In: En­
zyme and Microbial Technology 53.2 (2013), pp. 97–103. ISSN: 0141­0229. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.enzmictec.2013.04.008. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0141022913000987.
[48]
N.￿R. Yun, K.￿Y. San, and G.N. Bennett. “Enhancement of lactate and succinate forma­
tion in adhE or pta￿ackA mutants of NADH dehydrogenase￿deficient Escherichia coli”.
In: Journal of Applied Microbiology 99.6 (Dec. 2005), pp. 1404–1412. ISSN: 1364­5072.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2005.02724.x. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/jambio/article-
pdf / 99 / 6 / 1404 / 47268005 / jambio1404 . pdf. URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 -
2672.2005.02724.x.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
47
==PAGE:53==
[49]
Grant J. Balzer et al. “Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli to minimize byproduct
formate and improving succinate productivity through increasing NADH availability by het­
erologous expression of NAD+­dependent formate dehydrogenase”. In: Metabolic Engi­
neering 20 (2013), pp. 1–8. ISSN: 1096­7176. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2013.
07.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1096717613000694.
[50]
Jiaojiao Li et al. “Enhancement of succinate yield by manipulating NADH/NAD+ ratio
and ATP Generation”. In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 101.8 (Jan. 2017),
pp. 3153–3161. DOI: 10.1007/s00253-017-8127-6.
[51]
Elsayed T. Mohamed et al. “Generation of an E. coli platform strain for improved sucrose
utilization using adaptive laboratory evolution”. In: Microbial Cell Factories 18.1 (June
2019). DOI: 10.1186/s12934-019-1165-2.
[52]
Troy E. Sandberg et al. “Laboratory Evolution to Alternating Substrate Environments Yields
Distinct Phenotypic and Genetic Adaptive Strategies”. In: Applied and Environmental Mi­
crobiology 83.13 (2017), e00410–17. DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00410-17. eprint: https://journals.
asm.org/doi/pdf/10.1128/aem.00410-17. URL: https://journals.asm.org/doi/abs/10.1128/
aem.00410-17.
[53]
Norma Angélica Bolívar­Jacobo et al. “The effects of a high­intensity ultrasound on the
fermentative activity and kinetic growth of lactobacillus acidophilus and lactobacillus hel­
veticus”. In: Fermentation 9.4 (Apr. 2023), p. 356. DOI: 10.3390/fermentation9040356.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
48
==PAGE:54==
A
Appendix
A
B
Figure A.1: Graph outlining the growth curves of Lactobacillus helveticus CHCC54511 being grown over
24 hours in both lactose and trehalose based mediums. A: CHCC54511 strain evolved for growth on
trehalose and a wildtype CHCC54511 both grown in 24 hour growth assay on a lactose supplemented
MRS­IM medium. Growth curves were performed in duplicate and were read for OD600 absorbance
measurements every 1 hour. B: CHCC54511 strain evolved for growth on trehalose and a wild type
CHCC54511 both grown in 24 hour growth assay on a trehalose supplemented MRS­IM medium. Growth
curves were performed in duplicate and were read for OD600 absorbance measurements every 1 hour.
Table A.1: Summary of fermentation product concentrations across different replicates and
strains for strain 54512
Replicate
Strain
Acetic Acid
Citric Acid
Lactic Acid
Malic Acid
Succinic Acid
Initial Carbon
Consumed
OD
1
54512
2.11
1.34
0.91
0.05
0
10
0.41
0.62
2
54512
2.10
1.32
0.93
0.05
0
10
0.95
0.58
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
49
==PAGE:55==
A
B
Figure A.2: Biochemical analysis of acid concentration present in the culture broth of wild type Lacto­
bacillus helveticus CHCC4481 and a variant evolved to grow on maltose over a four week period. A:
Acid concentrations normalized by OD600 reading in each sample for evolved and wild type CHCC4481
on lactose supplemented MRS­IM medium sampled at late exponential phase. B: Acid concentrations
normalized by by OD600 reading in each sample for evolved and wild type CHCC4481 on maltose sup­
plemented MRS­IM medium sampled at exponential phase.
A
B
Figure A.3: Biochemical analysis of acid concentration present in the culture broth of wild type Lacto­
bacillus helveticus CHCC54512 and a variant evolved to grow on maltose over a four week period. A:
Acid concentrations normalized by OD600 reading in each sample for evolved and wild type CHCC54512
on lactose supplemented MRS­IM medium sampled at late exponential phase. B: Acid concentrations
normalized by by OD600 reading in each sample for evolved and wild type CHCC54512 on maltose
supplemented MRS­IM medium sampled at exponential phase.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
50
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.4: Biochemical analysis of acid concentration present in the culture broth of wild type Lacto­
bacillus helveticus CHCC41969 and a variant evolved to grow on fructose over a four week period. Acid
concentrations normalized by OD600 reading in each sample for evolved and wild type CHCC49169 on
lactose supplemented MRS­IM medium sampled at early exponential phase.
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
51
==PAGE:57==
Table A.2: Top cases highlighted by EvolveY pipeline for strain, carbon source, and target compound.
Strain
Target Compound
Carbon Source
Avg. Euclidean Distance (Evolved­target)
Avg. Euclidean Distance (Standard­target)
Percent Difference
Optimization Algorithm
CHCC36708
EX_succ_e
EX_fru_e
0.0683
0.0714
4.37
moma
CHCC49461
EX_succ_e
EX_fru_e
0.0683
0.0714
4.37
moma
CHCC4481
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.1719
0.3780
54.53
room
CHCC54514
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
0.1954
0.2435
19.72
moma
CHCC54514
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.1954
0.2435
19.72
moma
CHCC54511
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.1955
0.2435
19.71
moma
CHCC54511
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
0.1955
0.2435
19.71
moma
CHCC29501
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.1982
0.2547
22.18
moma
CHCC29502
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.1982
0.2547
22.18
moma
CHCC54514
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.2055
0.2435
15.61
moma
CHCC54511
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.2055
0.2435
15.60
moma
CHCC54512
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.2096
0.2436
13.94
moma
CHCC54512
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
0.2104
0.2436
13.62
moma
CHCC49054
EX_succ_e
EX_melib_e
0.2136
0.2281
6.36
room
CHCC29501
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.2154
0.2899
25.70
room
CHCC29502
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.2154
0.2899
25.70
room
CHCC49169
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.2186
0.2360
7.37
moma
CHCC49054
EX_succ_e
EX_melib_e
0.2200
0.2352
6.45
moma
CHCC29502
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.2322
0.2899
19.91
room
CHCC29501
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.2322
0.2899
19.91
room
CHCC29502
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.2325
0.2547
8.72
moma
CHCC29501
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.2325
0.2547
8.72
moma
CHCC4481
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.2390
0.3780
36.78
room
CHCC4481
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
0.2390
0.3780
36.78
room
CHCC48851
EX_succ_e
EX_melib_e
0.2604
0.2905
10.39
moma
CHCC49169
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.2782
0.2360
0.00
moma
CHCC54514
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.3127
0.3530
11.43
room
CHCC54512
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.3127
0.3531
11.43
room
CHCC54511
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
0.3245
0.3532
8.14
room
CHCC54511
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.3245
0.3532
8.14
room
CHCC54514
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
0.3270
0.3530
7.37
room
CHCC54514
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.3270
0.3530
7.37
room
CHCC54512
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
0.3271
0.3531
7.37
room
CHCC54512
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.3271
0.3531
7.37
room
CHCC54511
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.3320
0.3532
6.02
room
CHCC48945
EX_ac_e
EX_tre_e
0.3524
0.3686
4.39
moma
CHCC48851
EX_succ_e
EX_melib_e
0.4634
0.5068
8.55
room
CHCC14979
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.4773
0.5733
16.76
room
CHCC14979
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.4773
0.5733
16.76
room
CHCC14979
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
0.4773
0.5733
16.76
room
CHCC4481
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.5929
0.4753
0.00
room
CHCC48945
EX_succ_e
EX_tre_e
0.6603
0.7535
12.37
room
CHCC48945
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
0.7535
0.7535
0.00
room
CHCC49054
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
2.0640
0.2281
0.00
room
CHCC49054
EX_succ_e
EX_sucr_e
2.0894
0.2352
0.00
moma
CHCC49461
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
3.2294
0.0714
0.00
moma
CHCC36708
EX_succ_e
EX_malt_e
3.2294
0.0714
0.00
moma
CHCC48945
EX_succ_e
EX_fru_e
3.6444
0.5267
0.00
moma
CHCC48851
EX_succ_e
EX_fru_e
4.2726
0.2905
0.00
moma
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
52
==PAGE:58==
Computationally­guided Adaptive Laboratory Evolution for Metabolite Overproduction
53
==PAGE:59==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
