==PAGE:1==
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
Cooperative cultivation tested in digestate and biogas batch conditions
Master Thesis
DTU Sustainable Energy
Department of Biochemical and Chemical Engineering + Energy Conversion and Storage
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
”Se le patate possono diventare vodka,
io posso diventare un’ingegnere”
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
Cooperative cultivation tested in digestate and biogas batch conditions
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Lucrezia Tesei
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biochemical and Chemical Engineering + Energy
Conversion and Storage, Building 228A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over seven months at the BioConversion Reasearch Lab,
Department of Biochemical and Chemical Engineering, at the Technical University of Den­
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Lucrezia Tesei ­ s212983
Signature
Date
ii
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
Lucreatesei
22.08.24
==PAGE:5==
1
Acronyms
AA Amino Acids
AD Anaerobic Digestion
AMS Ammonium Mineral Salts
BG­11 Blue Green 11 medium
CDW Cell Dry Weight
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
DCW Dry Cell Weight
GHG Green House Gas
HOB Hydrogen Oxidizing Bacteria
HPLC High Performance Liquid Chromatography
IVF In Vivo Fluorescence
LC­MS Liquid Chromatography Mass Sprectrometry
LD Liquid Digestate
MA Microalgae
MMO Methane Mono­Oxigenase
MOB Methane Oxidizing Bacteria
MP Microbial Protein
NMS Nitrate Mineral Salts
PBR Photobioreactor
PSB PhotoSynthetic Bacteria
SCP Single Cell Protein
SOB Sulfate Oxidizing Bacteria
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
It is crucial to consider the impact and potential of waste materials on recycling into es­
sential components of new technologies. By repurposing these materials, we promote
environmental sustainability and drive innovation, turning discarded resources into valu­
able assets for future technological advancements. This study investigates new possible
co­cultivation of Microalgae (MA) and Methane­oxidizing Bacteria (MOB) species, their
growth in synthetic media and liquid digestate from anaerobic digestion reactors, adapta­
tion to different biogas compositions, growth dynamics, protein content, and amino acid
profile. The final step of the research is to define how much proteinous biomass can be
extracted from the best results and combinations. The research employed batch culti­
vation in a controlled environment and different methods were applied to determine the
growth and protein content: Liquid chromatography­mass spectrometry (LC­MS), Gas
Chromatographer for Composition analysis (GC), Optical Density (OD), In­Vivo fluores­
cence (IVF), Dry Weight of isolated cell biomass (DCW) and a general Microscopy anal­
ysis. The topic is relevant for industrial applications, such as industrial pigmentation pro­
duction, but it is also expected to be used for feeding in the next few years.
The study showed optimistic results for biomass production with the combination of
Scenedesmus and Methylomonas (50.32 ± 5.84 mg proteins/g wet cell biomass), in par­
ticular considering that the co­cultivation protein biomass gave higher results than the
mono­cultivation of the single microorganisms (27.88 mg protein/g wet cell weight for
Methylomonas and 34.65 mg protein/g wet cell weight on average for Scenedesmus). Us­
ing biogas in co­cultivation instead of synthetic gas mix gave encouraging results (57.67
mg proteins/g wet cell biomass) to continue testing this combination. This can be consid­
ered a good starting point for the development of the experiment.
The study revealed many encouraging results for the characterisation and test conditions;
however, the digestate and biogas adaptation need to be improved and optimised to in­
crease the protein yield of the co­cultivation production.
iv
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Lucrezia Tesei, MSc Sustainable Energy ­ BioEnergy, DTU
Irini Angelidaki, Professor, Supervisor
Sonia Mohamadnia, Postdoc, Co­Supervisor
Dileep Kumar Yeruva, Postdoc, Co­Supervisor
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Acronyms
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
2
Introduction
1
2.1
Background Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Objective and Goals
12
3.1
List of Objectives:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Methodological Scope: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Limitations: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Goals: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Materials and Methods
14
4.1
Microalgae Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
MOB Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Preparation for Co­Cultivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Co­cultivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Protein and Amino Acids (AA) Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.6
Microscopy Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.7
Machines Employed for the Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Results
34
5.1
Co­Cultivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Dry Cell Weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.3
Protein Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.4
Microscopy Results Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Discussion
55
6.1
Mono­cultivation Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6.2
Co­Cultivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
7
Conclusion
69
8
Future perspectives
70
Bibliography
72
A Appendix
76
vi
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:9==
2
Introduction
It is advertised everywhere the urgency of doing something about the present environ­
mental situation and the possibilities and difficulties connected with climate change.
One of the many consistent complications will be food scarcity due to the population num­
bers in the next century [1]. It is estimated that the population will grow even 53.75% more
by 2100 [2], taking with it an imbalance of the food offered at the present moment and
the future exponential demand. Considering the food scarcity that will follow and the con­
siderable need for proteins and amino acids that every human necessitates for protein
synthesis, a solution must be found.
Environmentally speaking, increasing crop and livestock cultivation, following the current
agricultural practices, is not an option anymore, since it creates problems even nowadays
with the current numbers: 7.1 Gt of CO2 equivalent were registered for the food produc­
tion, making the situation already dramatic [3]. For all these reasons, protein sources
need to be found in other supplies. Many new studies pointed the attention to so­called
”Microbial Proteins” (MP) or ”Single cell protein” (SCP) for protein transition [4].
Microorganisms present several inherent advantages in this context. Due to their biologi­
cal nature, they exhibit high levels of sustainability, which aligns with ecological principles
and reduces the environmental footprint compared to traditional industrial processes. Ad­
ditionally, microorganisms demonstrate remarkable efficiency in various biochemical pro­
cesses, often surpassing conventional methods in both speed and yield. Their relatively
simple structure and life cycles make them easier to manipulate genetically and biochem­
ically, facilitating targeted modifications and optimization for specific industrial applica­
tions. These solutions are environmentally viable, cost­effective, and feasible for many
newborn companies and research sites. This biological integration starkly contrasts the
resource­intensive and often ecologically damaging practices associated with large­scale
industrial equipment and construction.
Behind the presented work is the hope, in a not­too­far­away future, that our society will
be closer to becoming the most efficient at the technological level while, at the same
time, getting closer to respecting and giving more space to nature, living in a mutualist
relationship instead of depleting its resources.
2.1
Background Information
2.1.1
Bioenergy and new technologies
In recent decades, an alternative path to synthetic and fossil resources for industrial ap­
plications has been sought in more natural materials, such as biomasses. For example,
in the field of bioenergy, biomass is used as a renewable source of energy through the
transformation of energy stored through the photosynthesis process into electricity, heat,
or fuels. The categorisation in both industrial and energy applications in the biorefinery
sector defines 4 different categories of biomass[5]:
1. First generation, cultivated with the scope of conversion in the final product and used
in its entirety;
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
1
==PAGE:10==
2. Second generation, recycled from other processes and usually considered waste,
but possessing still valuable components for the production of products;
3. Third generation, as the new frontier of resources, wants to implement microalgae
cultivation in the industrial institution after discovering the versatile conditions they
can grow and the wide applications of their products;
4. The Fourth generation sees the genetic manipulation of microalgae and other mi­
croorganisms to optimize process conditions and get the best products with minimal
and sustainable conditions.
What can be found right now in research and implementation studies is mostly first and
second­generation biomasses [5]. Using mainly waste as a substrate for industrial pro­
cesses is the favourite from a sustainable and ecological perspective.
However, the
analytical results of these procedures cannot demonstrate that the second generation
biomass is the most efficient, but can still give good yield results respecting present sus­
tainable goals. Is there any possibility of improvement? What can be the next level of
efficiency for this discipline?
Exploring third and fourth­generation biomasses can lead to new solutions and open new
frontiers for developing bioprocess technologies [6].
2.1.2
Microalgae
Microalgae encompass a remarkable and unique diversity of life forms distributed across
both the prokaryotic and eukaryotic domains of the Tree of Life; this feature, biologically
and genetically, makes this species interesting for research development. These micro­
scopic organisms play a vital role in global biogeochemical cycles, contributing to nearly
half of Earth’s organic carbon fixation [7].
Microalgae species are categorised as autotrophic and carbon­neutral microorganisms
that, like plants, absorb CO2 from the air and generate oxygen [8]. The environment
where they can be found is usually marine, freshwater or soil. Presenting good metabolic
flexibility, making them ideal for adapting to different media and cultivation conditions. An­
other considerable aspect of their growth is the presence of biologically active substances
such as proteins, polysaccharides, lipids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, vitamins, pigments,
phycobiliproteins and enzymes [9].
As an aquatic photosynthetic microorganism that can grow in the outdoor environment and
can be easily maintained, microalgae constitute a very attractive resource for proposing
mitigation to the problem of Green House Gas (GHG) emissions and, at the same time,
fabricating products that do not harm the environment or biodiversity [10]. In recent years,
microalgae have played a role in more sectors and processes as alternatives to classi­
cal resources. For centuries, algae were found and sometimes cultivated in lakes and
shores. In the last century, ca. 1945, scientists started cultivating them in the lab and
suddenly in outdoor cultivation. In the 1960s, the Japanese food industry started culti­
vating them to create valuable food resources [11]. The same research underlines that
once their purpose as food was exploited circa a decade later, their application interest
moved to biomass as an alternative to the conventional ones. From the ’90s, with the
first signals and data that confirmed an actual climate change, until now, the interest in
this new resource has increased, starting a new product generation made of algae and
microalgae [9].
In recent years, macro­ and micro­algae products have expanded their applications to
2
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:11==
several new sectors: food, health and supplement products, pharmaceutical and indus­
trial components. Some examples can be found in drinks and juices with Arthrospira and
Chlorella components, microalgae bio­plastics, microalgal vegetable proteins, Arthrospira
as food powder. In the future, algae will be major contributors to bioenergy production
such as meat alternatives, target robot cells, aquatic vaccines, carbon dioxide fixation,
building structures and even space food [11]. These many applications show how new ap­
proaches are not building on macro orders and extracted from the ground but are instead
paving the way for innovative technologies that are engineered and optimised directly
from the microworld and the microbiome [9].
When approaching this research branch, many species can be studied and it can become
difficult to find the most suitable ones. With the increase in biomass demand, it was nec­
essary to find also new solutions and techniques to improve production yield. Several
techniques have been investigated, and in terms of cell density performance, two species
were found particularly practical for macromolecule production, such as high­quality pro­
tein food source: Chlorella and Scendesmus acuminatus [11]. For this reason, these
microalgae species are recognised as the best option from the perspective of a protein
production process. One of the approaches to increase the cell density of the microalgae
is co­cultivations with other microorganisms, like bacteria or yeast, which will be discussed
in more details in the next section.
2.1.3
Co­Cultivation
At the beginning of the exploration of microalgae application, most of the cultivations were
pure mono­cultivations. However, maintaining a monoculture system of microalgae can
be difficult due to contamination by microorganisms like yeasts, fungi, bacteria, and other
microalgae species. Such contamination can result in reduced productivity, culture col­
lapse, and poor­quality biomass. Co­cultivation was chosen instead of fighting this con­
tamination, as it produces robust organisms’ consortia and communities [10].
The systems involved in these strategies can be open (influenced by environmental fluctu­
ations and susceptible to contamination) and closed (where a photobioreactor (PBRs) can
avoid the grade of contamination and, at the same time, improve productivity). However,
it is also crucial to consider the methods of dewatering and harvesting to get the maximum
amount of biomass at the end of the process without damaging its macromolecule content
[7].
To the best of our knowledge, the best combination of co­cultivation is microalgae­bacteria
consortia. Bacteria’s presence can offer several advantages, like producing growth pro­
moting substances, such as carbon sources, vitamins, and co­factors; at the same time,
microalgae can also be beneficial for the proliferation of bacteria since they can pro­
vide several complex molecules as sources of carbon and/or nitrogen. The biochem­
istry behind it is the pairing of the Calvin­Benson­Bassham cycle, or simply Calvin cycle,
that uses CO2 and energy stored as ATP and NADPH from the light phase to produce
C6H12O6, O2 and other components (dissolved organic matter, dissolved organic carbon,
dissolved organic nitrogen and dissolved organic phosphorus), with the regular bacterial
metabolism that absorbs all this products as its nutrients. At the same time, the bac­
teria can re­mineralize these nutrients into inorganic forms that improve the microalgae
growth [12] [11]. Other molecules that can be produced and beneficial for each other are
siderophores, which supply iron for microalgae growth, and vitamins, particularly B12, B1,
and B7. This cooperation can be seen in the mass balances between these organisms:
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
3
==PAGE:12==
MOB:
CH4 + NADH + H+ + O2
CH3OH + NAD+ + H2O
Its RuMP and serine pathway:
CH4 + O2 + NAH +
4
C4H8O2N + CO2 + H2O + H+
MA essential mass balance:
6CO2 + 6H2O + light energy
C6H12O6 + 6O2
Other than essential nutrients, the single molecules of each conversion path in MOB and
MA are used as inputs from the products of the other microorganism; in order to catalyse
the CH4 molecules, it’s important to have enough O2 molecules produced from the pho­
tosynthesis. At the same time, CO2 produced from MOB’s RuMP pathway is the main
carbon component for the photosynthesis of microalgae.
It’s important to clarify that the interactions between these two organisms are not com­
pletely clear to the research community. The presented equations are an empirical inter­
pretation of how their symbiotic cooperation could work.
2.1.4
Methane Oxidizing Bateria
From the perspective of GHG accumulation in the atmosphere and the climatic catastro­
phes that the world population will face in the next decades, the idea of recycling the two
main GHGs, methane and carbon dioxide, can be appealing in the research field. In fact,
while microalgae consume CO2, MOB, methanotroph organisms that employ methane
monooxygenase enzymes (MMOs) find CH4 the only suitable energy and carbon source.
MOB are part of the methylotrophs group, aerobic bacteria that employ single carbon
molecules that are usually more reduced than formic acid as a source of carbon and
energy. These one­carbon compounds can be methane, methanol, methylated amines,
halomethaned, or methylated compounds with sulfur. Given the mineralization of inter­
mediate and anaerobic compounds, methane is the most stable compound in this specific
environment. Based on their growth and physiological characteristics, methanotrophs can
be classified as types I, II, or X, which help researchers to keep the organisms alive. Each
characteristic can be seen and confronted in the figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Characteristics Type I, II and X Methane Oxidizing Bacteria from Hanson R.
s. et al. 1996 [13].
Specifically to the research, Methylomonas koyamae and Methylococcus Capsulatus are
part of type I and Methylocystis bryophila type II.
4
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Characteristics Type I MOB from Hanson R. s. et al. 1996 [13].
Figure 2.3: Charcateristics Type II MOB from Hanson R. s. et al. 1996 [13].
MOB Medium Requirements
In this situation, methane metabolism is essential to understanding the interaction mech­
anism between the two kinds of organisms and the dynamics of co­cultivation. Main
metabolic differences for this type usually consider the different assimilation paths of one­
carbon molecules, the chemical composition of all the biological actors involved, regula­
tory mechanisms and nutritional responses [13].
First of all, it’s really important to consider the characteristics of the medium and nutrients
of MOB, the most vulnerable organism in this interaction.
From the same manuals, it’s indicated that the growth and nutritional profile of methane­
oxidizing bacteria (MOB) are significantly influenced by the available nitrogen source.
While both nitrate and ammonia can serve as nitrogen sources, type I MOB exhibits a
preference for ammonia, whereas type II MOB is inhibited by it. Nitrate, on the other
hand, supports the growth of both MOB types. Optimal growth conditions also vary by
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
5
==PAGE:14==
MOB type: type II thrives in slightly acidic environments, typically found in soil, while type
I prefers neutral to slightly alkaline conditions.
Trace metals, particularly iron, copper, zinc, and molybdenum, are essential for MOB
growth and methane oxidation. Copper and iron play a crucial role in the initial steps of
this process. In addition to promoting growth and biomass yield, copper can enhance
lipid content in MOB cell membranes, which is particularly important when using nutrient­
deficient substrates like Anaerobic Digestion digestate.
MOB utilize methane as both a carbon and energy source, oxidizing it to carbon dioxide
with the aid of oxygen. The growth rate and cell density of MOB are influenced by the
concentrations of methane and oxygen, with an optimal ratio of 1:1.5. Mass transfer lim­
itations and bacterial affinity for these gases impact the ideal concentrations. Increasing
the concentration of one gas typically reduces the availability of the other, necessitating
a careful balance based on thermodynamic factors and the bacteria’s tolerance to poten­
tially harmful gas levels [14].
2.1.5
Digestate Medium
Approaching topics such as Anaerobic Digestion (AD) processes, it’s usually mentioned
that digestate, semi­solid or liquid material that remains after the anaerobic digestion of
organic matter is usually discarded or recycled as fertiliser. In fact, after the different
phases of AD (hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis), the residual
amounts are then rich in important nutrients for many microorganisms.
Digestate has become more and more popular in the last decades of research because
it presents a number of macronutrients such as N, P, K, S, Mg, Ca, Fe, Na and many
trace elements such as Co, Fe, Se, Mo and Ni. This composition can vary based on
the composition of the original fiction used for the AD. In general, the most important
element is the Nitrogen and Phosphate. These components can favour the growth of
microorganisms, but at the same time, they can be a problem for element cycles in the
land once the digestate is used as fertilizer in land cultivations (fx nitrogen and phosphate
soil cycle) [15].
2.1.6
Biogas Adaptations
Biogas is a renewable energy source produced by microorganisms’ anaerobic digestion of
organic materials like agricultural waste, manure, and food waste. It mainly consists of 50­
70% methane (CH4) and 30­40% carbon dioxide (CO2), with small amounts of other gases
such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and ammonia (NH3). The production process involves
several stages, during which complex organic molecules are broken down into simpler
compounds, which are then converted into methane.
Uses of biogas include:
• Generating electricity and heat;
• Being purified into biomethane for use as a natural gas substitute;
• Serving as a fuel for cooking and heating.
Biogas helps in waste management, reduces greenhouse gas emissions, and supports
sustainable energy development.
For its composition, presenting both CH4 and CO2, it was found, studying similar species
to the ones analysed in this study, that employing biogas instead of synthetic biogas can
6
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:15==
promote the biomass production for the single­cell protein production in this specific co­
cultivation [16].
2.2
Literature Review
Once all the actors involved and their specific roles are clarified, an analysis of the pre­
cious material is needed.
2.2.1
Mono­cultivation and Conditions
In previous studies, the role of microalgae such as Chlorella sp. and Scenedesmus sp.
for protein production was mostly related to techniques of high­cell­density heterotrophic
cultivation that revealed the presence of two main macro­molecule components: proteins
and carbohydrates [17][18]. These studies expanded the possibility of protein harvesting
from microorganisms of this sort, usually employed for biodiesel production due to the
high quantity of lipids, for possible applications related to the food and industrial sectors.
Nowadays, single­cell protein technologies are the new vehicle for producing as much
protein as possible from these mutualist interactions [19]. The SCP technologies consist
of isolating all the cell components of the cultivation and employing the material as a whole
as a source of protein for many applications, in particular, protein food supply; the celled
material is usually yeast, algae, fungi and bacteria cultivated in a water­based medium
[20]. It was researched that Chlorella sp. and Scenedesmus sp. produces an average of
60% and 40% proteins in all the cell components, respectively; on the other hand, MOB
can also provide between 40% and 70% of protein production for each single cell [19].
It’s also important to underline the role of specific agents and conditions involved in the
growth of these organisms, particularly for microalgae growth. Nitrogen source is one of
the main components of the nutrient composition mix. It plays a fundamental role in the
growth of microorganisms. It was observed that the increase of N2 in the medium compo­
sition was proportional to the growth rate and biomass productivity of different MA species,
in particular, inside wastewater mediums [21]. This study (Fadevi 2016) also underlines
the difference in biomass production between Chlorella and Scendesmus species, that
in the context of optimization of nutrient sources, which gives higher results in terms of
biomass for the Chlorella sp. Another critical factor is the ammonium content, which
becomes a valuable parameter in protein production research. The article (González­
Camejo 2019) specifically states that the amount of possible biomass cell production in­
creases with the right amount of ammonium concentration to reach nitrogen­depleted
conditions. This information is really important when trying to improve the cultivation con­
centration in an outdoor system, which is not the case for this specific research. Still, it
should be considered when exploring the possible mix and concentration of media when
considering also lower light conditions.
The BG­11 medium is a widely used growth medium for microalgal research, particu­
larly in the production of biomass and lipids, which are essential for biodiesel production.
Originally developed for freshwater microalgae, BG­11 has become a standard due to its
effectiveness in promoting microalgal growth and lipid accumulation. Researchers have
experimented with modifying the composition of BG­11 to enhance microalgal biomass
production.
Adjustments often involve altering the levels of key nutrients such as ni­
trogen, phosphorus, and carbon or incorporating wastewater as a supplement. These
modifications are tailored to different cultivation methods, aiming to optimize the medium
for specific microalgal species and desired outcomes. Numerous studies have demon­
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
7
==PAGE:16==
strated the positive effects of both modified and unmodified BG­11 on increasing biomass
and lipid yields [22].
On the side of MOB mono­cultivation, the first step of most of research on the topic was
mainly finding the right medium composition. The previous research [14] focused on find­
ing the best medium between Nitrate Mineral Salts (NMS) with Potassium Nitrate and
Ammonium Mineral Salts (AMS) with Ammonium Chloride at 10 nM N concentration. The
results showed that AMS can give higher results for optical density measurements and
growth rate calculations. The only condition that it’s important to take into account is
that AMS’s Ammonia, part of the best medium, can inhibit the main carbon source CH4
assimilation, acting as an alternative substrate [14].
2.2.2
Co­Cultivation ­ What can be found in literature
When it’s introduced, the concept of co­cultivation can be described as interaction that
can be beneficial for both of the microorganisms, called mutualism, or that can promote
the growth of only one of the organisms, while the other is unaffected by it, defined as
commensalism.
The interaction between green microalgae and methane oxidative bacteria is defined
as mutual cooperation. The methods applied for this interaction can be several: direct
mixing, pelletization/flocculation, encapsulation, biofilm formation, cell droplet synthesis,
membrane separation, dialysis tube system, or agar. Based on different factors, such as
the final yield for the operation, the scale of the process, and conditions of the growth of
the microorganisms, the methodology is selected [10].
As mentioned previously in the introduction, the direct biochemical interaction between
green microalgae and MOB is still not completely clear, and the stability of MOB in its
growth is often at risk, requiring rigid conditions; the best option is the most common op­
tion of direct mixing. The pros of this method are surely the direct interaction between
the organisms that promote the direct exchange of nutrients. Still, at the same time, it
presents the eventuality of competition for nutrients in this uncontrolled environment.
Generally speaking, co­cultivating microalgae with bacteria can help them regulate the
fixation of N and P that MA naturally lacks. On the other hand, MA can provide for the
co­cultivation of Fe, Co, and Zn, which can benefit the bacteria growth [10].
In terms of applications, the interaction of microalgae and bacteria, coupled with advanced
harvesting methods, can promote a more sustainable bio­economy for the production of
biofuels, biomolecules, both macro­ and macromolecules and animal feed. In addition to
being sustainable, these new techniques can also be cost­efficient [19].
The first convincing studies on co­cultivation were made using microorganism models
Chlorella sorokiniana and Methylococcus capsulatus, where the growth rate was around
21 g per day, and the CH4 consumption followed the same trend of the oxygen production
inside the photobioreactor system. Comparing the growth of these organisms, in par­
ticular the delicate capsulatus, with the mono­cultivation, the results were higher in the
co­cultivation systems, despite initial competition for the nutrients [23].
Single Cell Protein is the new term coined in 1968 by MIT to indicate ”microbial proteins”
or ”petroproteins”. These sources of protein can be found in microorganisms such as
algae, fungi and bacteria since they all ensure a fast and high growth of the biomass.
Most of the time, the main microorganisms involved in these processes are available in
agricultural and industrial wastes, making these products not only economically valuable
8
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:17==
using cheap resources but also sustainable and in line with the sustainability goals of the
last years [24].
Two of the main species that are environmentally, economically and industrially valuable
in SCP production are found to be Chlorella sp. and Scenedesmus sp. In fact, if consid­
ered from an AA perspective, these organisms’ SCP is full of methionine and lysine, which
are important for the livestock diet. Considering the total amount of protein content in MA,
between 40% and 70%, investments and research around this material are considered
valuable [19].
Bacteria’s protein content generally ranges from 40% to 80%. However, it is essential
to underline the high amounts of nucleic acids that would require the use of nucleic acid
reduction treatments. The main groups of bacteria that can consistently provide a con­
sistent amount of proteins are methane­oxidizing (MOB), hydrogen­oxidizing (HOB), and
photosynthetic ones (PSB) [19].
Table 2.1: Pro and Contra of SCP Microalgae and Bacteria’s Cultivation.
Microalage
Bacteria
Pro
40­70% Protein Content
3­8% Nucleic Acid Content
Extremely Adaptable
Easy to Cultivate
40­80% Protein Content
Rapid Growth
High Digestability
Contra
Light Limitations
Low Digestibility
Heavy Metals Accumulation
12­16% Nucleic Acid Content
Easily Polluted
Difficult to Separate
Low Acceptance
The general idea behind co­cultivation is the possibility of combining these two microor­
ganisms in order to have a higher yield of proteins, summing up the percentage of the MA
and the one from MOB.
Some studies have tested the possibility of an interaction between these two organisms,
but optimisations for higher amounts of proteins, compared to mono­cultivation, are still
in progress. For now, macromolecules such as lipids and carbohydrates have been the
only ones increasing their amount in co­cultivation [23].
2.2.3
Use of digestate as growth medium
As mentioned before, liquid digestate is full of many nutrients important for plant growth.
If this combination works for plants, it will most likely also work for other photosynthetic
organisms without all the problems that this medium can bring to the soil when used as
fertilizer.
Taking this analysis on the singular category of organisms, liquid manure is managed dif­
ferently between MA and MOB.
To address the growing environmental challenges posed by expanding anaerobic diges­
tion (AD) and excessive nutrient discharge, innovative approaches are required to valorize
digestate. One promising solution is to integrate a microalgae cultivation platform into the
AD process. By harnessing the nutrient­rich liquid fraction of digestate, microalgae can
be cultivated to produce valuable products while simultaneously mitigating nutrient pollu­
tion. This circular economy approach transforms organic waste into a resource, reduc­
ing the environmental impact of agriculture and waste management. Robust microalgae
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
9
==PAGE:18==
species, such as Chlorella and Scenedesmus, have shown promise in thriving on diges­
tate, demonstrating the potential of this technology [15].
Methylotrophic organisms (MOB) primarily rely on methane for their carbon and energy
needs, making them unable to heterotrophically process the COD present in liquid diges­
tate. However, they can still absorb vital nutrients like ammonia and phosphorus from LD
to build biomass. When pasteurized and centrifuged LD was used, MOB demonstrated
significant growth (0.87 g DCW/g CH4), with the trace elements in LD promoting amino
acid synthesis. Combining biogas and LD from the same anaerobic bioreactor further
enhanced MOB performance, resulting in over 40% protein content in the biomass and a
yield of 0.95 g­DM/L due to efficient use of ammonia and methane. Although LD provides
a cost­effective nutrient source and soluble methane for MOB, aiding in single­cell protein
production, it does not fully address COD removal requirements [19].
In some studies, also the microalgae and bacteria consortia gave optimistic results in the
LD medium.
It was studied that the area around microalgae cells, known as the phycosphere, is rich
in compounds that support bacterial growth. In turn, microalgae act as biological hosts,
offering bacteria a protective habitat that boosts their survival in challenging environments
like liquid digestate. For example, a system combining Chlorella and MOB can efficiently
transform biogas and LD from food waste into SCP while also displaying improved resis­
tance to sodium sulfide interference [19].
2.2.4
Use of Biogas for co­cultivation
Protein production from waste is legally restricted, but biogas (CH4 and CO2) from anaer­
obic digestion of organic solid waste is considered a safe substrate for cultivation. Certain
bacteria and microalgae are legally approved for producing feed or food protein using this
biogas. To reduce the impact of greenhouse gases, efficient pathways for methane uti­
lization are crucial to avoid additional CO2 emissions. Microorganisms can convert CH4
and CO2 from biogas into high­value SCP with high energy and carbon conversion effi­
ciency, with some systems capable of achieving 100% carbon conversion [19].
When considering the utilisation of biogas as a gas source for microalgae, it’s considered
the carbon dioxide portion (30­45%) is usually removed when the biogas uses separation
to get the pure methane.
However, microalgae could use the CO2 portion for the carbon fixation of photosynthesis.
When talking about genus Chlorella, in particular, the lower amount of nucleic acid, around
2%, can facilitate the downstream process for the protein production from this organism
since it wouldn’t require additional separation steps for the purification. On the other side,
the genus Scenedesmus has good tolerance to high percentages of CO2, making this
organism the best option for the production of carotenoids, biofuels and biomaterials [19].
From the same biogas, MOB is able to interact with the methane portion, using it as a
carbon and energy resource. In fact, as described in the previous sections, MOBs are
the main organisms that can fixate the CH4 from the biogas. In recent studies, methane
(CH4) produced through anaerobic digestion of sewage was used to cultivate these spe­
cific bacteria, resulting in SCP with a protein content exceeding 41%. This SCP is also
rich in essential amino acids like histidine, making it a viable alternative to soybean and
fish meal as a protein source in animal feed. Other than considering their protein yield,
it’s also important to consider that their presence would make the downstream process of
10
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:19==
separation of CO2 from the biogas unnecessary when growing this organism [19]. Con­
sidering co­cultivation, based on the same studies, the focus goes mainly to biofuel and
biorefinery productions but gives a good overview of the role of biogas feeding.
For example, some studies have explored and tested microalgal mixotrophic cultivation
to convert biogas into biodiesel. In these setups, methanotrophs are co­cultivated to
convert methane into organic intermediates and carbon dioxide, which support microal­
gal growth.
One study developed a co­culture of Methylocystis bryophila (MOB) and
Scenedesmus obliquus (MA) with biogas as a feedstock. When comparing the results
of this co­cultivation with the mono­cultivation of MOB (used as a control), the presence
of MA led to higher protein yields despite lower chlorophyll content. The study also ob­
served the upregulation of genes related to MA metabolism, which helped maintain low
oxygen levels, contributing to the success of the system.
The study concluded that MOB acts as a catalyst for MA growth under various light inten­
sities, promoting faster nitrogen absorption, significant accumulation of monounsaturated
fatty acids, and enhanced light adaptation [16].
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Objective and Goals
At the moment, many sources for protein production are being tested to find new, effec­
tive ways to bring biological products to the food industry. Considering the number of
the global population increasing so rapidly and the imbalance of these numbers with the
availability of resources, alternative sources are going to be crucial in the next three quar­
ters of this century. It’s important to explore also the microscopic world and the possible
interactions that can promote new efficient approaches.
The primary aim of this research is to understand if new combinations of microalgae and
MOB can be helpful for the production of single­cell protein, extending the existing re­
sources. In the past, combinations of Chlorella sorokiniana (MA) and Methylococcus
capsulatus (MOB) were successfully tested in synthetic and liquid digestate media.
This study explores these conditions and new variables to have a general understanding
of the quantity and quality of cell biomass and their protein yield.
3.1
List of Objectives:
1. Understand how to ensure the compatibility and maintenance of the two types of or­
ganisms, aiming to make them grow at the same rate;
2. Find another possible combination MA­MOB;
3. Understand the appropriate ratios between these two microorganisms;
4. Adapt these findings to digestate medium solutions in different dilutions;
5. Try to understand if biogas is a possible condition that can be applied to the last find­
ings;
6. Check the protein content of the final biomass obtained from co­cultivation under the
tested conditions.
3.2
Methodological Scope:
All the experiments were performed in duplicates and batch mode cultivations.
All the resources were first analysed and characterised to understand, based on the avail­
ability and presence of instruments, all the components of media, gas, possible contam­
inations, etc.
The study employed gas chromatography, liquid chromatography­mass
spectrometry (LC­MS) spectrophotometry, mass weight, microscopy images, biomass
characterisation kits and protein analysis.
3.3
Limitations:
The main limitation of the study is the time needed for mono­cultivation to find the opti­
mised conditions and grow, maintaining the right amount of cell density for co­cultivation.
It follows keeping the right volume, temperature and pressure conditions to ensure the
growth and good results collection.
12
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:21==
3.4
Goals:
The main goal of the study is to characterise and optimise a new combination of MA­
MOB in batch mode, laying the foundation for new research inputs that will ensure high
amounts of single­cell protein production in industrial production. Considering the time
for the research, the direction was more focused on testing different possible conditions,
employing discarded resources, from anaerobic digestion processes. In some points of
the research, optimisation procedures (as for MOB mono­cultivations) were also applied
to ensure a higher amount of final yield, single­cell proteins.
From these preliminary steps, the hope is that future improved processes with the same
combinations in continuous mode will give optimistic results on a pilot and then industrial
scale. This would assume importance in the industry because it would finally valorise
the role of microorganisms in producing macromolecules, making the process more sus­
tainable and organic. Currently, where resources are depleting daily, the environment is
pressured, and the market struggles to take other directions, biotechnological solutions
can play a crucial role in reaching future global goals.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
13
==PAGE:22==
4
Materials and Methods
4.1
Microalgae Growth
Chlorella sorokiniana, Chlorophyta’s phylum, is presented on the microscope as a single
and oval green organism of 2­10 µm. The shape can be described as similar to an al­
mond when it reaches a mature age. Considering the macromolecules’ composition, they
generally comprise 40% proteins, 30% carbohydrates, of different carbon numbers, and
between 18–22% lipids.
On the other side, Scenedesmus sp. is similar to Sorokiniana. This species is non­motile
and can be found in groups of 4, 6, 16 or 32 cells; this phenomenon is defined as coeno­
bian and follows a specific pairing geometry [25]. Typically, the single cell, based on the
particular species of the genus, presents a cylindrical form that tends to be either more
lunate, ovoid or fusiform, ending with spines or chiton bristles, that can reach even 200
µm.
4.1.1
Medium
BG­11, also known as Blue Green 11 medium, is a derivative of Medium No. 11 and is
the preferable base for cultivating microalgae compounds. This solution is usually chosen
over similar media for freshwater green algae because it presents an optimized composi­
tion in nitrogen, phosphorus, and carbon content and adapts to wastewater supplementa­
tion. In fact, the trace element part of the solution is the source of energy for the microal­
gae since it facilitates the transportation of metabolic activities. From an experimental
perspective, it’s easy to prepare and can be purchased ready­made (Commercial Name:
ATCC Medium 616). Applied to specific green algae cultivation, the specific growth rate
(µ) for Chlorella sorokiniana is 0.119 ≈0.030 per day, and biomass productivity for Scen­
desmus sp. > 0.6 g/L [22].
In this context, the medium was used to start the first microalgae cultivations in order to
produce enough material for the next steps.
BG­11 medium was prepared according to the concentration shown in table 4.1. Once all
the components added to the distilled water, the pH of the final solution was adjusted at
7.5 and then autoclaved for a couple of hours at 121 °C.
14
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:23==
Table 4.1: Composition of BG­11 Medium.
Component
BG­11 (mg L­1)
NaNO3
1500
CaCl2 · 2H2O
36
MgSO4 · 7H2O
75
K2HPO4 · 3H2O
40
Na2CO3
20
Citric acid
6
EDTA­Na2
1
FeC6H5O7 · NH4OH
6
MnCl2 · 4H2O
1.81
ZnSO4
0.222
Co(NO3)2 · 6H2O
0.049
Na2MoO4 · 2H2O
0.36
H3BO3
2.86
CuSO4 · 5H2O
0.049
4.1.2
Inoculation
As the medium reaches room temperature, the inoculation can start.
A 500 mL flask for each microalgae strain was cleaned and a plastic filter foil was applied
to the top with rubber bands to create a sealed environment inside the flask. This was
then autoclaved.
Once the flask was sterilised, different concentrations of medium and samples were in­
oculated under sterile hood conditions, as indicated in the table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Inoculation Concentrations.
Concentration Solutions
Medium Solution
Microalgae Solution
Unit
Test #1
120
10
mL
Test #2
110
20
mL
Test #3
100
10
mL
4.1.3
Sub­Inoculation
Once the cultivations were grown enough and gave good results under OD measure­
ments, the strains were sub­inoculated in smaller containers.
A 250 mL flask for each microalgae strain was cleaned, and plastic filter foil was applied
to the top with rubber bands to create a sealed environment inside. This was then auto­
claved. Once the flask was ready, the insulation was performed as in the previous step,
but in this case (since many particulate aggregates were inside the solution) the solution
strain inoculated was taken from the top of the growth solution.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
15
==PAGE:24==
20 mL of microalgae solution was inoculated in 100 mL of medium and then grown. Two
250 mL flasks were prepared for every microalgae strain, for a total of 4 flasks of sub­
inoculation.
4.1.4
Growth Conditions
The cultivations were grown inside a Bioshaker Incubator that kept the temperature 25°
C at shaking of 200 rpm.
Once stored in an incubator or a shaker, the flasks were monitored to check if the cells
were still alive throughout the study.
The physical appearance was checked almost every day to be sure that the colour of the
sample was progressing to green. If the cultivation was found ”pale” or too dark, the flask
was disposed of.
Another feature to consider in this case is the possible precipitation and particulates
formed during the samples’ growth.
Figure 4.1: Microalgae mono­cultivation flasks for Chlorella and Scenedesmus.
4.1.5
Tests performed
The amount of light absorbed by the samples optical density was measured. To do this,
200 µL of each sample was withdrawn using either a syringe or a micropipette and placed
into a microplate. Synergy H1 Hybrid Multi­Mode Reader (made by BioTek Instruments
in Winooski, Vermont, USA) was used to measure the OD. The machine was set to a
wavelength of light (680 nm) and mixed the samples for 10 seconds before measuring. A
sample with only the growth medium (no cells) was also measured (control) and this value
was subtracted from the OD of each sample to account for any background interference.
OD tests are also taken at a wavelength of 680 nm, since it’s the maximum absorbed
wavelength obtained from the spectrum scanning. This method is usually not very precise
but is usually used to indicate the cultivation’s growth profile.
A more precise analysis is weighting (dry cell weight measurement); after centrifuging and
filtration, the cell weight of specific solutions at different times of the growth [26].
4.2
MOB Growth
Once one became familiar with microalgae cultivation, it became more complicated to
start cultivating MOB. This specific bacteria, even in optimised conditions, presents un­
predictable behaviour and results.
16
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:25==
My colleague Aljosha Rizvic specifically optimised each species variable of MOB [14].
From his research, this study was able to have an orientation about the right amounts of
gases and medium for MOB growth.
4.2.1
Medium
The medium solution was optimised in an Ammonium Salts (AMS) based solution. The
starting medium solution was prepared according to the order in the table 4.3. The com­
ponents were mixed with 700 mL of distilled water. Once the solution is ready, it can be
autoclaved. However, since the final solution will be filtrated anyway and the cultures of
microorganisms in exams are not particularly sensitive to contamination, this autoclaving
step can be avoided.
Table 4.3: AMS Initial Medium Solution.
Chemical
Amount (per L)
Unit
NH4Cl or KNO3
0.5­1
g
MgSO4
1
g
CaCl2
0.2
g
3.8% (w/v) Fe­EDTA solution
0.1
mL
0.1% (w/v) Na2MoO4 solution
0.5
mL
Trace Metal Solution
1
mL
Distilled Water
Add to 1000
mL
The Trace Element solution was ready­made. Solution MBD0056 (Sigma­Aldrich, Mis­
souri, United States) was prepared by diluting 50x with distilled water [27]. The Phosphate
Buffer was prepared following the table 4.4. After mixing, the phosphate buffer stock so­
lution was autoclaved and stored in a fridge at 5 °C. Once ready, 10 mL of it was added
to the main solution.
Table 4.4: Phosphate Buffer Stock Solution.
Chemical
Amount (per L)
Unit
KH2PO4
26
g
Na2HPO4
62
g
Distilled Water
Add to 1000
mL
HCl or NaOH
Adjust to 6.8
pH
The copper stock was prepared by adding copper chloride to the main solution, as indi­
cated in the table 4.5. The following table gives a final concentration of 10 mM copper,
which was added to the medium to achieve a different concentration, probably around 10
µM.
From the final solution, in this case, 1 ml is added to the main solution.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
17
==PAGE:26==
Table 4.5: Copper Stock Solution.
Chemical
Amount (per L)
Unit
CuCl2 x 2H2O
1.4
g
Distilled Water
Add to 1000
mL
After adding phosphate buffer solution, copper chloride solution and 1 ml of vitamin 10x
solution MEM Vitamins 100x solution (Sigma­Aldrich, Cat# M6895, St. Louis, MO, USA,
to the starting medium solution, added also distilled water to a final volume of 1 L, the
final solution pH was adjusted at 6.8. At this point, the medium was filtered in a sterile
environment using a 0.22 µm vacuum filtration system in a 500 mL volume. The reason
for this specific choice (autoclaving, opening again and then filtration) is given by the
precipitation properties of the last two solutions: copper chloride can form precipitation if
autoclaved, and the phosphate one, in some cases, can do the same if autoclaved with
the other components in the medium.
Once the liquid is filtrated, it can be stored in the fridge at 5 °C.
4.2.2
Inoculation
1. SEALING
The bottles were washed and sealed with rubber stoppers and metal sealers to
create a sealed environment inside. Once ready, a vacuum inside the bottle was
created to get space for the gases. Usually, 80­85% of the volume of the bottle is
removed.
2. GASES
Specific amounts of gases were injected inside the bottles based on the MOB strains
to be inoculated inside. See Table 4.6 below.
3. AUTOCLAVE
Once the gases are injected inside the bottle, this is autoclaved.
4. MEDIUM
40 mL medium was injected into the bottle and then 10 mL of inoculum for Methy­
locystis and Methylomonas, and 8.5 mL for Capsulatus, each strain for 300 mL
bottles.
5. GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY TEST
A gas chromatograph measured the amount of gas inside the bottle at the beginning
and throughout the growth process.
Table 4.6: Gas concentration in Mono­cultivation MOB.
Gas Concentration in Mono­cultivations
O2
CH4
CO2
Headspace
Capsulatus
20%
30%
250 mL
Methylocystis
50%
40%
5%
250 mL
Methylomonas
50%
40%
5%
250 mL
18
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:27==
4.2.3
Growth Conditions
Once the bottle was ready, it was fundamental to maintain the solution in a shaker incu­
bator at 37 °C and 120 rpm, in a horizontal position. The cultivation usually reaches its
maximum concentration between 3 and 4 days after the inoculation.
Figure 4.2: MOB mono­cultivation setting for Capsulatus.
4.2.4
Tests performed
The OD, in this case, was measured at 600 nm, based on the literatures study and in
previous researches [14].
In order to monitor the levels of CH4 and CO2 produced during cultivation, gas samples
were extracted from the headspace of each bottle every 2­3 days. A special syringe
designed for gas sampling, equipped with a valve, was used to collect a 0.2 millilitre
(mL) sample. The gas composition was then analyzed using a technique called gas chro­
matography. This analysis was performed using a Trace 1600 machine (made by Thermo
Fisher Scientific in Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). To ensure accurate measurements,
a calibration curve was created by injecting triplicates of three different standard solutions
containing known amounts of gases.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
19
==PAGE:28==
4.2.5
Summary of study around the mono­cultivations MOB
and MA
Table 4.7: Summary of the steps of co­cultivation for both organism categories.
Microalgae Mono­cultivation Steps
MOB Mono­cultivation Steps
Chlorella sorokiniana
Scendesmus obliquus
Methylococcus capsulatus
Methylocystis bryophila
Methylomonas koyamae
Stage 1: Learn how the cultivation
works, what it needs and how is
the BG­11 preparation operated;
Stage 1: Improve the mono­cultivation
preparation procedure (helped by Aljosha Rizvic);
Stage 1.5: Find the right proportions
between medium and inoculum;
Stage 2: Find the best gas combination for each
strain using synthetic mixes of O2, CH4 and CO2;
Stage 2: Confront formulations
between BG­11 and AMS MOB
medium to be sure that they are
compatible;
Stage 3: Find the best formulation to add to the
co­cultivation to maintain an adequate MOB cell
mass production, since it’s more delicate than the
MA portion.
Stage 3: Growth Index using OD and Dry
Cell Density once MA adapted to AMS.
4.3
Preparation for Co­Cultivation
4.3.1
Microalgae components in new medium AMS
The first thing that tested for co­cultivation was the possibility of matching the MOB medium
with the microalgae cultivation.
Based on specific resources and studies that present even different applications for MOB
and microalgae [28] [29] [30], the conditions of microalgae and MOB should be so similar
that the medium used now for MOB would be feasible also for the other culture.
Based on these assumptions, the same procedure described in the microalgae inoculation
section was performed using AMS MOB medium. 2 flasks for each strain were prepared
and 100 mL medium was injected with 10 mL of each strain from the flask prepared for
the initial inoculation.
Once ready, the flasks were stored on a bioshaker at 125 rpm.
4.3.2
Microalgae Growth Index
28 flasks were prepared, 1 for each strain, for 14 days. 28 flasks were prepared to receive
a working volume of 25 mL each.
First, the OD for both flask tests containing the inoculum of Scendesmus sp. was mea­
sured, and the flask with less precipitation and the most consistent OD average was cho­
sen.
The average OD of the sample was around 0.7, so the dilution factor was solved as 1/7 (1
part to be diluted and 7 as dilution agent), which means that the final 2.5 ml of inoculum
was diluted in 22.5 ml of medium in each flask. This ratio also reflects the previous ratios
20
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:29==
of microalgae growth (inoculum is usually 10% the amount of medium).
After checking that the OD was around 0.1 as the starting point for the growth, in case
adjusted again with more distilled water, all the samples were placed on a bioshaker at
20° C and under artificial UV light.
Secondly, each day, 2 of the flasks were first checked for OD growth, and the rest of
the solution was filtrated in as borosilicate glass circle filters (Whatman1825­047) with a
diameter of 47 mm and a pore size of 0.7 µm, previously weighted; one the all the liquid
part was divided by the cells, the filter was positioned in the oven for 24 h at 105 °C. See
picture 4.3 for the final filter result.
If the filter was not available, the pellet left in the shaking tubes could be frozen, dried or
dried in the oven. Freeze drying is usually the most effective method.
Figure 4.3: Filters used for the Growth Index experiment of Scendesmus and Chlorella in
AMS medium.
4.4
Co­cultivation
Several premises were set based on previous experiments:
• Testing 1:1 inoculation;
• Testing the same OD;
• Testing different ratios;
• Testing the batch cultivations in 300 mL bottles, as a reasonable lab scale size and
based on previous similar tests [16];
• Testing synthetic and then digestate medium and biogas composition.
Figure 4.4 gives a visual idea of the premises and conditions for the batch cultivation.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.4: Scheme of the working setting of the batch cultivation with all the conditions
that are going to be tested.
4.4.1
Formulation of Co­cultivations
Co­cultivation formulas were first tested in different gas compositions and inoculation
amounts. The formula that gave the best results was on a combination of Scenedesmus
sp. and Methylococcus capsulatus, and preparation as indicated in the table 4.8. Vol­
umes of each gas were calculated considering a headspace in each bottle around 65%
of the total volume, 300 mL.
Table 4.8: Preliminary formulation for co­cultivation.
Types
Final %
Volume
Initial OD in the co­ultivation system
Gas composition
Oxygen and Methane
20% O2, 50% CH4
39 mL O2, 97.5 mL CH4
Medium
AMS
37%
18.5 mL
MA inoculation
Scendesmus
13%
6.667 mL
0.2 @ 680 nm
MOB inoculation
Capsulatus
50%
25 ml
0.225 @ 600 nm
A pre­dilution was performed on the inoculation portion of MA to take its OD from 0.554
to 0.2. So, only 13% of MA inoculum was used to have the initial OD at 0.2 in the final
medium. In contrast, not much dilution was performed for MOB compared to MA, to
improve the chances of MOB growth since, compared to the resistance of microalgae
species, it was showing more difficulties in producing a consistent yield. During each
experiment, 200­300 mL of flasks of monocultivation/inocula were always available and
mature when possible.
Set Up
All the experiments were performed in 300 mL sealed bottles, and interactions, such as
injections and extractions, were made through syringes. The bottle was kept in an incu­
bator with a shaking of 120 rpm at 37° Celsius. The light exposure registered inside the
incubator was 4.91 ± 0.19 µmol/mˆ2/s.
22
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.5: Injection set up of co­cultivation experiments.
4.4.2
Screening of different species in co­cultivation ­
Experiment 1
Enough fresh inocula and AMS medium need to be prepared. If not fresh, the inoculation
could give lower results.
The combinations were duplicates and tested for the screening were the 2 microalgae
species in exam, Chlorella sorokiniana and Scenedesmus sp., combined with each of the
best strains of the MOB from the previous thesis study [14], Methyloccoccus capsulatus,
Methylocystis and Methylomonas.
• Scenedesmus + Capsulatus;
• Sorokiniana + Capsulatus;
• Scenedesmus + Methylocystis;
• Sorokiniana + Methylocystis;
• Scenedesmus + Methylomonas;
• Sorokiniana + Methylomonas;
To this list, were added
• Control of only Scenedesmus,
• Control of only Sorokiniana,
• Control of only Capsulatus,
• Control of only Methylocystis,
• Control of only Methylomonas,
also analysed alongside the combinations.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
23
==PAGE:32==
Each combination category had specific amounts of inocula and gas composition, as in­
dicated in the table below.
Table 4.9: Characterisation experiment ­ Bottle combinations and compositions.
Gas
Composition
Gas
Volume
(65% headspace)
Medium
Volume
MA inoculum
MOB inoculum
Scenedesmus + Capsulatus
20% O2,
50% CH4
39 mL O2,
97.5 mL CH4
18.75 mL
6.25 mL
25 mL
Sorokiniana + Capsulatus
20% O2,
50% CH4
39 mL O2,
97.5 mL CH4
21 mL
4 mL
25 mL
Scenedesmus + Methylocystis
30% O2,
40% CH4,
5% CO2
58.5 mL O2,
78 mL CH4,
10 mL CO2
18.75 mL
6.25 mL
25 mL
Sorokiniana + Methylocystis
30% O2,
40% CH4,
5% CO2
58.5 mL O2,
78 mL CH4,
10 mL CO2
21 mL
4 mL
25 mL
Scenedesmus + Methylomonas
30% O2,
40% CH4,
5% CO2
58.5 mL O2,
78 mL CH4,
10 mL CO2
18.75 mL
6.25 mL
5 mL
Sorokiniana + Methylomonas
30% O2,
40% CH4,
5% CO2
58.5 mL O2,
78 mL CH4,
10 mL CO2
21 mL
4 mL
5 mL
Scenedesmus (CONTROL)
40% CO2,
60% CH4
78 mL CO2,
117 mL CH4
18.75 mL
6.25 mL
/
Sorokiniana (CONTROL)
40% CO2,
60% CH4
78 mL CO2,
117 mL CH4
21 mL
4 mL
/
Capsulatus (CONTROL)
20% O2,
50% CH4,
5% CO2
39 mL O2,
98 mL CH4,
10 mL CO2
/
/
25 mL
Methylocystis (CONTROL)
50% O2,
40% CH4,
5% CO2
98 mL O2,
78 mL CH4,
5% CO2
/
/
25 mL
Methylomonas (CONTROL)
50% O2,
40% CH4,
5% CO2
98 mL O2,
78 mL CH4,
5% CO2
/
/
5 mL
Like in the formulation stage, the headspace was supposed to be around 65% of the total
volume. The amounts of gases for capsulatus followed exactly previous researches [14],
while the ones for Methylocystis and Methylomonas were deducted based as well from
Rizvic’s study [14] and the example of Capsulatus.
Tests
Tests of OD were performed almost everyday to have a general idea of the growth of both
organisms. To have a general idea of the growth of both organisms, OD measurements
were performed, daily.
Every couple of days, the gas concentration of O2 and CH4 was also monitored to have a
better overview since OD measurement is trustful analytically speaking.
At the end of the experiment, the gas inside the bottle was extracted under safe conditions
and the remaining solution was first shacked as done before for the MA growth index:
3600 rpm for 15 mins in a mechanical shaker. The supernatant was discarded, and the
pellet was transferred to a 2 mL tube that was shaken in a centrifuge at 10000 rpm for 10
minutes. The final pellet was dried in freeze dryer. After subtracting the initial weight of
the empty tube, the amount of dry cells was calculated for each combination.
24
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:33==
4.4.3
MA:MOB inoculum ratio ­ Experiment 2
To optimize the inoculum ratio, an experiment was conducted as shown in the table 4.10.
The values were both in terms of volume and OD to reach the initial OD around 0.2 at 600
nm for MOB and 680 nm for MA.
Table 4.10: MA:MOB Ratio Experiment ­ OD and Dilution based.
MA:MOB Ratio
MA inoculum
MOB inoculum
Volume
Initial OD in
the cultivation
systhem
Medium
Volume
Gas
Composition
Gas
Volume
1:1
1.3 mL
1.4 mL
0.2 : 0.2
47.3 mL
30% O2,
40%CH4,
5% CO2
58.5 mL O2,
78 mL CH4,
10 mL CO2
1:3
1.3 mL
4.2 mL
0.2 : 0.6
54.5 mL
30% O2,
40% CH4,
5% CO2
58.5 mL O2,
78 mL CH4,
10 mL CO2
3:1
3.9 mL
1.4 mL
0.6 : 0.2
54.7 mL
30% O2,
40% CH4,
5% CO2
58.5 mL O2,
78 mL CH4,
10 mL CO2
The final volume for 1:3 and 3:1 ratios was 60 mL, while it was 50 mL for 1:1, as in the
previous experiment.
Figure 4.6: Ratio experiment 2 set­up at day 5 of cultivation.
4.4.4
MA mix co­cultivation ­ Experiment 2.5
A co­cultivation with a mix of the MA species under exam was also tested to give more
indications for future experiments with consortia of this type.
Since the growth was very slow at the beginning of the previous experiment because the
dilution was really high considering the volumes as units of ratios, this time, the proportion
was based on the OD of each inoculation. This, in theory, is the best method to reach the
maximum rate faster.
Gas amounts were the same as in the previous experiment.
Each co­cultivation was prepared with 5 mL of Scenedesmus sp., 5 mL of Chlorella
sorokiniana (based on literature and the previous experiments, higher quantity of MA to
MOB, gave better results over the co­cultivation) and 5 mL of Methylomonas. 40 mL of
medium, as in the previous experiments, was added first in the bottles, followed by the in­
oculation. The experiment was designed as follows. Each combination was in duplicates.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 4.11: Scenedesmus : Sorokiniana ratios tests on co­cultivation with Methylomonas.
Ratio
OD at
680 nm
MA inoculation
volumes
MOB inoculation
volumes
Gas
Concentration
1 : 1
0.2 : 0.2
10 mL (5 mL of each
species)
5 mL
Methylomonas
See Table 3.13
2 : 1
0.4 : 0.2
10 mL (5 mL of each
species)
5 mL
Methylomonas
See Table 3.13
1 : 2
0.2 : 0.4
10 mL (5 mL of each
species)
5 mL
Methylomonas
See Table 3.13
Each inoculum was diluted with AMS medium to take the OD of each species to the
desired amount. Sorkiniana was slightly older than Scendesmus because this last species
gave the best results.
Tests and Growth
The tests performed were the gas amounts each day and the OD monitoring. In vivo
chlorophyll fluorescence (IVF) was used to evaluate photosynthetic activity of microalgae
grown in the co­cultivation (excitation at 440 nm and emission at 690 nm wavelength)
[31].
Since the MA inoculation portion is higher than the MOB for 2/3 of the test, this test is
considered almost necessary; in this situation, the test is particularly important because
gives a better understanding of the biomass cell production, compared to the only OD,
which is a test relatively correct but lacking precision.
The growth conditions were the same as for the first 2 experiments.
4.4.5
Digestate adaptation and ratios ­ Experiment 3
Once the most feasible combination of MA and MOB and their ratio were found, other
dynamics were tested. As anticipated in the introduction and literature, co­cultivations of
this type were tested on discarded materials, such as animal liquid digestate from anaer­
obic digestion plants, which can be called digestate after exiting the system, and how this
material can now be full of nutrients for the proliferation of microorganisms.
Several dilutions were performed with sludge and synthetic AMA medium, maintaining
the same conditions as the previous best results. The inocula were not diluted because
both MA and MOB backups were found at the same OD, around 0.5. Each combination
was in duplicates.
Preparation and tests of digestate
Cattle manure digestate, from another research in the same lab that hosted this study,
was first weighted, then shacked, filtrated and lastly autoclaved. It was then analysed,
both autoclaved and not autoclaved.
The characterisation was about:
• COD
The solutions tested were after­autoclaving without dilution, before­autoclaving and
after­autoclaving with a dilution of 10x and the blank. Each solution was 10 mL and
in duplicates.
26
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:35==
• Phosphate
The solutions tested were before­autoclaving and after­autoclaving with a dilution
of 250x (as indicated in the KIT) and the blank. Each solution was 3 mL and in
duplicates.
• Ammonium
The solutions tested were before­autoclaving and after­autoclaving with a dilution
of 10x and the blank. Each solution was in duplicates.
• Nitrate
The solutions were formulated as presented in the Ammonium test.
• VFA (Volatile Fatty Acids)
The solutions tested were before­autoclaving and after­autoclaving in 10x, 30x, 40x
and 50x, each one in duplicates.
• Sulfate)
This specific analysis was made after the digestate and biogas experiments were
concluded in order to have an idea of the sulfate content of the digestae since many
studies underlined the importance of a low amount of H2S in the medium. The
solutions tested were after­autoclaving in no dilution and 4x dilution since the kit
permitted a wide range of measurements.
The results of characterisation can be found in the next chapter.
The chemical kits were LCK014 for COD, LCK350 for PO4, and LCK339 for NO3, LCK353
for SO4 respectively (Hach Lange ApS, Denmark). For NH4 and NO3 it was used the
Kjeldahl method.
After the analysis, the digestate needed to be treated before dilutions and injection in the
bottles. The steps of the treatments were operated as follows.
1. The autoclaved portion was diluted in different percentages with the synthetic AMS
medium to reach 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% and 100% liquid digestate;
2. Once all the samples were ready, the pH was adjusted for each dilution with drops
of 5 M HCl in 10 mL. The initial pH was, respectively:
100% : 9.71
80% : 9.65
60% : 9.57
40% : 9,21
20% : 9,47
After the adjustment, the pH was taken down between 6.75 and 7.05;
3. The solutions were autoclaved again since the solution presented thick particles,
making any filtration difficult;
4. 10 mL were sampled before the inoculation to run OD and dry cell weight tests as
background;
5. Specific amounts were placed in bottles and inoculated;
6. Once ready, it was grown at the same conditions as the previous experiments.
7. At the first OD measurement, the pH was tested again, resulting in higher numbers,
between 7 and 8.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
27
==PAGE:36==
Once the pure digestate was ready, it was diluted in different percentages with AMS
medium to reach 40 mL that will be added to the bottles. Each combination was made in
duplicates.
Table 4.12: Combinations and volumes Digestate Experiment.
Combinations
Digestate Volume
Synthetic Volume
Inoculation
100% Digestate
40 mL
/
15 mL MA
5 mL MOB
80% Digestate
20% Synthetic
32 mL
8 mL
15 mL MA
5 mL MOB
60% Digestate
40% Synthetic
24 mL
16 mL
15 mL MA
5 mL MOB
40% Digestate
60% Synthetic
16 mL
24 mL
15 mL MA
5 mL MOB
20% Digestate
80% Synthetic
8 mL
32 mL
15 mL MA
5 mL MOB
100% Synthetic
/
40 mL
15 mL MA
5 mL MOB
MA in Digestate
40 mL
/
15 mL MA
MOB in Digestate
40 mL
/
5 mL MOB
Tests
The tests performed were the same as the previous experiment, but since the turbidity
of the medium was higher compared to the synthetic medium, making the OD reading
almost impossible, the IVF test was added to give a more detailed orientation around the
growth. Furthermore, th dry cell weight was tested on days 5 and 8 for all the combina­
tions. Also, the background, only the medium, was weighted because it still presented
some particulate.
4.4.6
Biogas Adaptation ­ Experiment 4
At this stage of the study, the biogas was extracted from a colleague’s anaerobic digestion
set up. 119 mL bottles were shaken for long periods of time with specific formulations, as
indicated in the tables below [32].
Table 4.13: Composition of Trial Batch for Biogas Production [32].
Sample
Substrate
Inoculum
Water
Biochar
Blank
\
30 g
20 g
\
Control
0.10 g
30 g
19.9 g
\
Control­Check
\
30 g
19.75 g
0.25g
Test 500
0.10 g
30 g
19.65 g
0.25 g
28
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:37==
Table 4.14: Composition of Main Batch for Biogas Production [32].
Sample
Substrate
(Avicel)
Substrate
(CM)
Inoculum
Water
Biochar
Blank
\
\
30 g
20 g
\
Control­Avicel
0.10 g
\
30 g
19.90 g
\
Control CM
\
3.98 g
30 g
16.02 g
\
P­Control
\
\
30 g
19.75 g
0.25 g
Test
\
3.98 g
30 g
15.77 g
0.25 g
Inside the bottles, a biogas volume between 20 and 75 mL was removed from each bottle
and collected in a small gas bag.
Once the gas was collected and the different bottles were prepared and autoclaved with
both biogas and synthetic gas combinations, based on the combinations, the digestate
and synthetic mixes were injected inside the bottles, followed by 5 mL of both MA and
MOB. The combinations of digestate and synthetic were the best ones from the previous
experiment, 40% and 20%. The mixed medium was prepared as described in the steps
of the previous experiment. The volume of inoculation was not diluted because the OD
was 0.4 at 600 and 680 nm in both organism types. The volumes were as follows.
Table 4.15: Biogas tests on digestate and synthetic combinations.
Combination
Gas conditions
Gas Volumes
Medium
MOB Inoculum
MA Inoculum
40% Digestate
60% Synthetic
+ Biogas
30% O2
45% Biogas
58,5 mL O2
88 mL Biogas
16 mL Digestate
24 mL Synthetic
5 mL
Methylomonas
15 mL
Scenedesmus
20% Digestate
80% Synthetic
+ Biogas
30% O2
45% Biogas
58,5 mL O2
88 mL Biogas
8 mL Digestate
32 mL Synthetic
5 mL
Methylomonas
15 mL
Scenedesmus
Synthetic
Control
30% O2
40% CH4
5% CO2
58,5 mL O2
78 mL CH4
10 mL CO2
40 mL AMS
medium
5 mL
Methylomonas
15 mL
Scenedesmus
MOB Control
50% O2
40% CH4
5% CO2
125 mL O2
100 mL CH4
12,5 mL CO2
40 mL AMS
medium
5 mL
Methylomonas
MA Control
Air*
Air*
40 mL AMS
medium
15 mL
Scenedesmus
AMS
+ Biogas
30% O2
45% Biogas
58,5 mL O2
88 mL Biogas
40 mL AMS
medium
5 mL
Methylomonas
15 mL
Scenedesmus
The combinations were duplicates.
In the table, for the MA control, the gas composition inside the bottle was atmospheric
air. The bottle was simply sealed and then autoclaved. It was important to recreate in a
bottle the conditions of mono­cultivation performed in flasks with a filter. It’s expected to
not have any CH4 peak when analysed in GC.
Tests and Growth Conditions
The tests performed were the same as the previous experiment. However, the 40% and
20% digestate and MA control were also tested at day 0 to get a full overview of the results
of the previous experiment.
Growth conditions were the same as in the last experiments, with the same incubator.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
29
==PAGE:38==
4.5
Protein and Amino Acids (AA)
Analysis
The authorised technician performed the analysis since he could handle these chemicals
and the expensive equipment.
The analysis is based on the acid hydrolysis principle, usually used in the food industry.
With acid hydrolysis, protein and peptides are hydrolyzed using acid and heat to free AA,
giving the sample the composition of the amino acids under examination.
The AA are analysed in various samples using LC­MS (Liquid Chromatography­Mass
Spectrometry).
4.5.1
Equipment and Materials
Equipment:
­ Precision scale (4 decimal places)
­ Heating oven (110 °C) and Anton Paar 3000 microwave destruction oven
­ Agilent LC­MS with specific columns and cartridges
­ Various vials (4 mL for microwaving and general use), screw caps, syringes, and filters
­ Pipettes (100 μL, 1 mL, 5 mL), syringes, and pH indicator paper
­ HPLC vials (1.5 mL)
Reagents:
­ Various concentrations of HCl and KOH
­ Formic acid, ammonium formate, ion exchange water
­ Buffer (100 mM Ammonium formate, pH 3.1)
­ Acetonitrile (LC­MS grade)
­ Amino acid standards
­ House standards for casein and seaweed
4.5.2
Sample Handling
­ No special requirements for handling solid or liquid samples.
4.5.3
Procedure
Sample Preparation:
­ Weigh and record the sample’s exact weight.
­ Add appropriate HCl concentration, cover with nitrogen, seal, and hydrolyze.
­ Filter the hydrolysate and adjust the pH.
­ Dilute and prepare the sample for LC­MS analysis.
LC­MS Analysis:
­ Each sample takes 18 minutes for analysis.
­ Prepare calibration curves alongside the samples.
­ Run the samples using a specific LC­MS method (Aminoacid sim1).
­ The sequence includes buffer, standards, and samples.
30
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:39==
Calibration and Quantification:
­ Calibration curves are prepared with various volumes.
­ Samples are analyzed on the same day or stored at –18°C if delayed.
4.5.4
Notes
­ The procedure includes detailed steps for acid hydrolysis, filtration, pH adjustment, and
the specifics of the LC­MS method.
­ Safety precautions are noted when handling reagents.
Since it was possible to analyse only 15 samples and the whole process usually takes
3 days to be completed, a selection of the best samples from the previously mentioned
experiments:
• Scenedesmus + Methylomonas (Experiment 1);
• Scenedesmus control (Experiment 1);
• Methylomonas (Experiment 1);
• Combination 3:1 (Experiment 2);
• 40% Digestate + 60% Synthetic medium (Experiment 3);
• 20% Digestate + 80% Synthetic medium (Experiment 3);
• 20% Digestate + 80% Synthetic medium in with biogas in gas phase (Experiment
4);
• Co­Cultivation Synthetic medium + Biogas (Experiment 4.5);
Figure 4.7: Example of wet cell weight before freezer.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
31
==PAGE:40==
4.6
Microscopy Analysis
To examine the most significant cultures, a Nikon Eclipse Ti2 inverted microscope fitted
with a 10x, 20x, 40x, and 60x zoom objective, a polarizer, and a high­sensitivity camera
were employed. Image acquisition and processing were performed using NIS­Elements
software to achieve optimal resolution and contrast.
4.7
Machines Employed for the Analysis
Type
Specifics
Analysis
Multimode Microplate Reader
Synergy H1 Hybrid Multi­Mode Reader
(Biotek Instruments, Winooski VT, Usa)
Optical Density (OD)
at 600 or 680 nm
or IVF;
Gas Chrometographer
Trace 1600 (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA, USA)
Gas concentrations of
CH4, CO2 and O2;
Freezer Dryer
Labogene Scanvac Cool Safe Pro Freeze
Dryer 4L ­110° C
(LaboGene, Allerod, Denmark)
DCW of Co­Cultivations;
Microscopy
Nikon Eclipse Ti2
(Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan)
Microscopy images from
different samples
(10x, 20x, 40x, 60x).
Table 4.16: Machines Involved in the Analysis of the Cultivations.
32
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:41==
Table 4.17: Summary of the conditions for cultivation combinations.
Type
Medium composition
Head Space
Gas Phase Composition
Inocula
Mono­cultivations
Microalgae
BG­11 100 mL
or
AMS 100 mL
/
Air through filter
10 mL
Scenedesmus
or Sorokiniana
Methane Oxidizing
Bacteria
AMS 40 mL
80­85%
Caps: 20% O2, 30% CH4
Cys: 50% O2, 40% CH4, 5% CO2
Monas: 50% O2, 40% CH4, 5% CO2
Caps: 8.5 mL
Cys/Monas: 10 mL
Co­cultivation
Formulation
AMS 18.5 mL (dilution for MA)
65%
20% O2, 30% CH4
Scen: 6.667 mL (OD 0.2 at 680 nm)
Caps: 25 mL (OD 0.225 at 600 nm)
Scen/Sor + Capsulatus
AMS 20 mL *
65%
20% O2, 30% CH4
MA: 5 mL * (OD 0.2 at 680 nm)
Caps: 25 mL (OD 0.225 at 600 nm)
Scen/Sor + Methylocystis
AMS 20 mL *
65%
30% O2, 40% CH4, 5% CO2
MA: 5 mL * (OD 0.2 at 680 nm)
Cystis: 25 mL (OD 0.225 at 600 nm)
Scen/Sor + Methylomonas
AMS 40 mL *
65%
30% O2, 40% CH4, 5% CO2
MA: 5 mL * (OD 0.2 at 680 nm)
Monas: 5 mL (OD 0.225 at 600 nm)
MA in Gas Controls
AMS 20 mL *
65%
40% CO2, 60% CH4
5 mL (OD 0.2 at 680 nm)
(MA : MOB)
1:1
1:3
3:1
AMS 47 ­ 55 mL *
65%
30% O2, 40% CH4, 5% CO2
Scenedesmus: 1.3 ­ 3.9 mL (OD 0.2 in 5 mL)
Methylomonas: 1.4 ­ 4.2 mL (OD 0.2 in 5 mL)
100% Digestate
80% Digestate ­ 20% Synthetic
60% Digestate ­ 40% Synthetic
40% Digestate ­ 60% Synthetic
20% Digestate ­ 80% Synthetic
40 mL Digestate
32 mL Digestate ­ 8 mL AMS
24 mL Digestate ­ 16 mL AMS
16 mL Digestate ­ 24 mL AMS
8 mL Digestate ­ 32 mL AMS
65%
30% O2, 40% CH4, 5% CO2
Scendesmus: 15 mL
Methylomonas: 5 mL
MA + Digestate
40 mL Digestate
65%
30% O2, 40% CH4, 5% CO2
15 mL Scenedesmus
MOB + Digestate
40 mL Digestate
65%
30% O2, 40% CH4, 5% CO2
15 mL Methylomonas
40% Digestate + Biogas
20% Digestate + Biogas
16 mL Digestate ­ 24 mL AMS
8 mL Digestate ­ 32 mL AMS
65%
30% O2, 45% Biogas
Scenedesmus: 15 mL
Methylomonas: 5 mL
MA in bottle with Air
40 mL
/
Air **
4 mL Scenedesmus
(Scenedesmus : Sorokiniana)
1:1
1:2
2:1
AMS 40 mL
65%
30% O2, 40% CH4, 5% CO2
MA: 5 ­ 10 mL
Methylomonas: 5 mL
Co­Cultivation + Biogas
AMS
65%
30% O2, 45% Biogas
Scenedesmus: 15 mL
Methylomonas: 5 mL
* The amount of medium is adjusted based on the dilution of the inoculum if it requires to be diluted for a lower OD value;
** In the bottle is present only air, then it is sealed and medium and inoculum are added to the bottle.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
33
==PAGE:42==
5
Results
5.0.1
Growth Index Measurement
Once the new medium gave encouraging results in the first days, the growth profile and
correlation diagrams were made for Chlorella sorokiniana and Scenedesmus obliquus.
Figure 5.1: Chlorella growth index over
14 days.
Figure 5.2: Chlorella growth rate in AMS
medium.
The experiment was important to understand the correlation between the amount of cell
biomass produced by the cultivation in a canonic lifespan of 2 weeks. With this data,
it’s possible to track and compare the amount of biomass between the mono­ and co­
cultivations as a negative control. In this specific graph, the initial DCW were performed
in 50 ml Eppendorf, but, as it’s possible seeing also in the graph 5.1, the initial weights
were not accurate, so in the last points, and for Scenedsmus, the wells were extracted
through filtration. (See Material and Methods). Another important thing to notice is the
maximum OD reached in this amount of time, which is proportional to the small volume
of the flasks.
Figure 5.3: Scenedesmus growth index
over 14 days.
Figure 5.4: Scenedesmus growth rate in
AMS medium.
34
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:43==
As for the previous experiment, the DCW measurements were performed through filtration
of the solution on specific filters. As it’s possible to notice in the 5.3, the second­last and
last points are distant from each other. This is because the volume of the previous bottle
was higher. For this reason, the experiment was repeated for 11 days. The result was
made in higher volume flasks to obtain higher OD results.
Growth Index Rate
The growth rate of microorganisms in the new medium was also calculated for each genus,
as observed in figure 5.2 and 5.4.
The growth looks more consistent for its specific genus, meaning that the AMS is a better
medium for its development.
5.1
Co­Cultivation
The initial formulations gave different OD results, represented in the graphs 5.5 and 5.6.
Figure 5.5:
Test #1,
where the co­
cultivation was grown in the same bottle
where MOB was grown previously.
Figure 5.6: Test #2, where a new combi­
nation of fresh gasses was injected in a
new bottle, and inocula and medium were
added.
Figure 5.5 shows the OD results of the formulation for the co­cultivation where the MA
portion was injected directly inside the MOB mono­cultivation bottle without injecting new
gas for the gas phase of the environment. Next to it, figure 5.6 shows the OD results for
the second formulation, where the identical amounts of figure 5.5 were injected in a new
bottle with fresh gas amounts.
5.1.1
Synthetic Setting
Once the right formula was found, the initial experiments were performed with synthetic
gas composition and synthetic medium AMS.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.7: Scheme of the gas fermentation bottles for the MA­MOB co­cultivation.
5.1.2
Screening of combinations ­ Experiment 1
The results of the first experiment to find the best combinations were followed firstly by
the OD results over a couple of weeks.
Figure 5.8: Growth profile for the co­cultivation of different MA and MOB genes carried
out in the screening experiment.
As it’s possible to observe in figure 5.8, the combinations with the highest OD were
Scenedesmus with Methylomonas and Chlorella with Methylomonas.
36
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.9: Results of OD measurements at 680 nm for the screening experiment.
Also, at 680 nm, the conclusions are the same: Scenedesmus with Methylomonas is the
combination that works at its best even more diluted compared to the other genus.
Figure 5.10: Results of oxygen concentra­
tion for the screening experiment.
Figure 5.11: Results of methane concen­
tration for the screening experiment.
In relation to the best combinations, the amount of oxygen doesn’t drop drastically (Figure
6.5, meaning that the amount of MA is stable and probably used by the MOB for biochem­
ical paths, while in the second figure is possible to notice that the methane is consistently
consumed after 4­5 days, probably by the MOB for its growth.
The CO2 at this research stage was not measured because of technical problems in the
lab with the GC.
5.1.3
Best Ratio MA:MOB ­ Experiment 2
Once the best combination was found, it was also tested the best ratio between the
amount of MA and the amount of MOB of Scenedesmus with Methylomonas. The first
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
37
==PAGE:46==
indication of the ongoing cultivation was gas consumption.
Figure 5.12: Total O2 concentration at different ratio MA:MOB.
It’s possible to notice a more consistent and higher oxygen availability in cultivation 3:1,
which is coherent with the presence of 3 times higher MA.
Figure 5.13: Total CH4 concentration at different ratio MA:MOB.
In this case, considering also the previous O2 amounts, which dropped at the same time as
CH4, it’s possible that the MOB portion started growing, using both oxygen and methane
as substrate for its reactions.
38
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.14: Total CO2 concentration at different ratio MA:MOB.
The increasing amounts of carbon dioxide match the decrease in oxygen production and
the possible higher biomass concentrations of MOB in the co­cultivation.
Figure 5.15: Results of OD measurements
at 600 nm for the ratio experiment.
Figure 5.16: Results of OD measurements
at 680 nm for the ratio experiment.
Unfortunately, the initial results were not really convincing, since the growth was delayed
compared to the previous experiments. However, keeping in mind that Optical Density
is not the most precise growth analysis method, it would confirm an increase in biomass
production.
In this case, considering that the numbers in OD were similar, it was chosen to follow the
literature, as indicated in the Literature Review, and continuing with the 3:1 MA:MOB ratio.
5.1.4
Ratio experiment MA consortium ­ Side Experiment 2.5
Since the MA were cultivated under the same conditions, it was also interesting to test,
once chosen 3:1 MA:MOB ratio, if there’s also an optimal combination of Scenedesmus:Chlorella
in the co­cultivation system.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.17:
Optical Density Measure­
ments at 600 nm for the side experi­
ment 2.5 about different ratio Scedenes­
mus:Chlorella.
Figure 5.18:
Optical Density Measure­
ments at 680 nm for the side experi­
ment 2.5 about different ratio Scedenes­
mus:Chlorella.
As it’s possible to observe in the OD measurements, the best combination revealed to be
the 1:2 Scedenesmus:Chlorella.
The solutions were also tested at the GC day by day, as in the rest of the experiments;
however, the amount of gases never changed significantly, leaving OD and IVF measure­
ments as the main reliable ones.
5.1.5
Digestate Adaptation ­ Experiment 3
Characterisation
The first step, before starting the inoculation, was to test the presence of different com­
pounds inside the digestate, provided from an AD lab bioreactor system that used cattle
manure as substrate.
Table 5.1: Characterisation based on molecular kits, before and after autoclaving and
specific dilutions.
Before Autoclaving
After Autoclaving
COD
11.5385 ± 0.01 g/L
10.2875 ± 0.075 g/L
11.6685 ± 0.36 g/L
Phosphate
22.172 mg/L
33.672 mg/L
Ammonium
1.7 ± 0.014 g/L
1.566 ± 0.04 g/L
Nitrate
63.5 ± 15 mg/L
63.5 ± 15 mg/L
Sulfate
0.1174 g/L
0.1246 g/L
In this case, there was no consistent difference in compounds concentration before and
after autoclave. The parameters seemed to be in low amounts compared to toxic amounts
for both MA and MOB.
Also, the amounts of traces of gases produced from the digestate seemed to be at normal
level for the AD and not particularly significant in terms of quantities.
40
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:49==
Table 5.2: Summary of VFAs Characterisation Results.
Name
Ethanol
Butanol
Butyric acid
Iso­valeric acid
Hexanoic acid
Total VFAs
1:10 A
65.6418 ± 1.2684 mg/L
7.1856 ± 2.0862 mg/L
15.6725 ± 1.5849 mg/L
4.4724 mg/L
5.9286 ± 1.2704 mg/L
98.90083 mg/L
1:10 NA
30.4426 ± 6.3422 mg/L
10.7985 ± 2.7526 mg/L
17.2573 ± 0.3522 mg/L
9.1481 ± 1.423 mg/L
10.7985 ± 2.7526 mg/L
67.646405 mg/L
1:30 A
41.7 ± 0.4757 mg/L
10.8944 ± 1.159 mg/L
5.1068 ± 0.5283 mg/L
4.2691 ± 0.2033 mg/L
10.375 ± 3.176 mg/L
68.0761 mg/L
1:30 NA
33.9308 ± 2.5369 mg/L
6.5155 ± 0.5283 mg/L
6.5155 ± 0.5283 mg/L
4.2691 ± 0.2033 mg/L
4.8699 ± 0.2117 mg/L
49.58528 mg/L
1:40 A
36.9433 ± 12.2087 mg/L
6.7221 ± 0.2318 mg/L
14.792 mg/L
4.0658 mg/L
18.6327 mg/L
77.09003 mg/L
1:40 NA
35.3578 ± 2.6954 mg/L
4.7898 ± 1.1974 mg/L
4.7898 ± 1.1974 mg/L
4.0658 mg/L
4.4464 ± 0.2117 mg/L
48.659784 mg/L
1:50 A
42.0171 ± 5.2323 mg/L
8.8082 ± 0.9272 mg/L
4.9307 ± 0.3522 mg/L
4.8699 ± 0.2117 mg/L
4.8699 ± 0.2117 mg/L
60.62585 mg/L
1:50 NA
34.565 ± 1.5856 mg/L
4.4024 ± 0.5283 mg/L
4.4024 ± 0.5283 mg/L
5.2855 mg/L
5.0816 ± 0.4235 mg/L
49.334545 mg/L
==PAGE:50==
Dilution Results
(a) OD measurements at 600 nm.
(b) OD measurements at 680 nm.
Figure 5.19: Results of OD measurements for the digestate adaptation. (a) 600 nm and
(b) 680 nm.
As expected, Optical Density measurements cannot reliably measure the increase in
biomass since the liquid is too turbid (dark brow with shades of red). For this reason,
the IVF content was also tested to try to provide more information about cell biomass
growth.
Figure 5.20: IVF analysis of the digestate adaptation experiment.
Unfortunately, the chlorophyll amount was not detected even in digestate higher dilution
solutions. Only the 100% synthetic medium indicated the MA biomass content. The
42
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:51==
only possible indication of the growth of the solutions was the gasses concentrations.
Figure 5.21: Total O2 concentration at different digestate dilutions.
Figure 5.22: Total CH4 concentration at different digestate dilutions
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
43
==PAGE:52==
Despite all these graphs presenting some difficulties in the interpretation, the decision
for the best combination was based on the optical equilibrium of the gases for oxygen
and methane. Maintaining these amounts was important since dropping curves of O2 or
increasing ones of CH4 was going to underline the loss of cell material for MA or MOB.
The most stable amounts are 60%, 40% and 20% digestate dilution.
Figure 5.23: Total CO2 concentration at different digestate dilutions.
The same conclusions were drawn also for the amounts of carbon dioxide, with a CO2
amount that’s too high for the 100% digestate solution and a promising drop at day 6 for
the 20% one.
44
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:53==
5.1.6
Biogas Adaptation
The first check was at the optical density.
(a) OD measurements at 600 nm.
(b) OD measurements at 680 nm.
Figure 5.24: Results of OD measurements for the biogas adaptation. (a) 600 nm and
(b) 680 nm.
As for the previous experiment, the OD measurements didn’t give precise results.
Since the biogas use on synthetic medium for co­cultivation was the only combination
not tested, here are the results of the co­cultivation of Scendesmsu and Methylomonas
in ratio 3:1, respectively, with AMS production and biogas injected in the sealed bottle.
Also, the numbers for the gas concentrations aren’t revealed much. The only consid­
erable detail is the increase of O2 at day 4, right after the increase of the OD at day
3.
The IVF has given, as expected, a visible curve for the negative control where only
Scenedesmus is present in the bottle and the Co­cultivation where only synthetic con­
ditions are present (see Figure 5.25. The only highlight of this figure is the increase
of chlorophyll content on the 6th day at 20% dilution, which can be compared to the
increasing OD in figure 5.24a and 5.24b of in 40% and 20% growth curve.
In figure 5.26, the amount of oxygen didn’t show any particular alteration, while in figure
5.27 the co­cultivation in synthetic medium and synthetic biogas (Cyan blue line).
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.25: Chlorophyll analysis of the biogas adaptation experiment.
Figure 5.26: Total O2 concentration at different biogas dilutions.
46
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.27: Total CH4 concentration at different biogas dilutions.
Figure 5.28: Total CO2 concentration at different biogas dilutions.
As for the methane, after one week, it is possible to notice a decrease in the co­cultivation
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
47
==PAGE:56==
of synthetic medium and gases, probably compatible with this carbon source’s potential
use by Scenedesmus.
5.2
Dry Cell Weight
The results of the wet cell weight (Figures (a)s) are presented in columns graphs before
placing the samples in the freeze dryer and after storing the samples in ­20 °C freezer,
and dry cell weight Figures (b), after the freeze drying process. In the Dry section, some
samples are not analysed because they were used for the protein and AA analysis.
(a) Wet Cell Weight of experiment 1.
(b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 1.
Figure 5.29: (a) Wet and (b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 1.
48
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:57==
(a) Wet Cell Weight of experiment 2.
(b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 2.
Figure 5.30: (a) Wet and (b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 2.
(a) Wet Cell Weight of experiment 2.5.
(b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 2.5.
Figure 5.31: (a) Wet and (b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 2.5.
(a) Wet Cell Weight of experiment 4.
(b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 4.
Figure 5.32: (a) Wet and (b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 4.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) Wet Cell Weight of experiment 3.
(b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 3.
Figure 5.33: (a) Wet and (b) Dry Cell Weight of experiment 3.
50
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Protein Results
The analysis required a long time to process, around 3 days, and the results are listed
in the table 5.3. Since each sample was presented a sufficient amount of cell biomass,
as indicated also in the column tables in the previous section, it was possible to do
duplicates of the duplicates, giving a more extensive idea of the statistical heterogeneity
of the final results.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
51
==PAGE:60==
Table 4.3: Amino Acid analysis results of the selected cultivation samples.
Type
Duplicates
PHE
LEU
ILE
MET
TYR
PRO
VAL
ALA
THR
GLY
SER
HIS
ARG
LYS
GLU
C­C
ASP
Total mg/g
Scenedesmus + Methylomonas
Test #1
1.50 ± 0.14
3.19 ± 0.53
1.81 ± 0.29
0.46 ± 0.46
2.18 ± 0.31
2.16 ± 0.34
3.43 ± 0.41
3.92
2.72 ± 0.14
3.80 ± 0.42
2.64 ± 0.14
1.49 ± 0.05
3.96 ± 0.44
3.92
7.27 ± 0.88
0.00
5.87 ± 0.98
50.32 ± 5.84
Test #2
1.42 ± 0.05
3.10 ± 0.09
1.59 ± 0.13
0.00
1.82 ± 0.02
2.16 ± 0.04
3.34 ± 0.06
3.78
2.67 ± 0.22
3.40 ± 0.02
2.66 ± 0.41
1.24 ± 0.07
3.79 ± 0.25
3.68 ± 0.55
7.27 ± 0.74
0.00
6.46 ± 0.77
48.41 ± 3.66
Methylomonas
Test #1
0.083
1.60
0.89
0.00
0.91
1.20
2.01
2.32
1.54
1.96
1.45
0.75
2.19
2.35
3.90
0.00
3.98
27.88
Scenedesmus
Test #1
1.05
2.34
1.31
0.00
1.48
1.61
2.49
2.84
1.66
2.24
1.67
0.90
2.69
2.48
5.31
0.00
4.45
34.73
Test #2
1.01
2.22
1.19
0.00
1.28
1.47
2.33
2.87
1.85
2.24
1.75
0.93
2.33
2.48
5.27
0.00
4.34
34.60
(MA : MOB) 3:1
Test #1
1.75
3.80
2.21
0.38 ± 0.38
1.92
2.60
4.15
4.69
2.91
4.25
3.18
1.49
3.92
3.92
8.92
0.00
7.33
56.31
Test #2
2.76
5.10
3.11
0.00
2.65
3.91
7.63
7.25
4.83
4.52
3.18
2.49
7.74
7.74
13.9 ± 2.63
0.00
14.65
94.81
40% Digestate
Test #1
2.05 ± 0.01
4.28 ± 0.17
2.68 ± 0.01
0.38 ± 0.38
2.11 ± 0.18
2.50 ± 0.02
4.56 ± 0.05
4.03 ± 0.01
3.18 ± 0.04
4.21 ± 0.13
3.52 ± 0.21
1.22 ± 0.16
3.72 ± 0.14
4.03 ± 0.01
8.81 ± 0.01
0.00
7.12 ± 0.21
59.06 ± 0.54
Test #2
1.84 ± 0.07
3.79 ± 0.15
2.21 ± 0.09
0.00
1.67 ± 0.06
2.26 ± 0.14
4.15 ± 0.12
3.67 ± 0.14
3.15 ± 0.04
3.63 ± 0.03
3.35 ± 0.09
1.24 ± 0.01
3.60 ± 0.04
3.67 ± 0.14
8.03 ± 0.02
0.00
6.16 ± 0.01
53.02 ± 0.91
20% Digestate
Test #1
2.94 ± 0.42
5.50 ± 0.15
3.72 ± 0.55
0.00
3.68 ± 0.58
6.41 ± 1.12
5.94 ± 0.63
7.06 ± 1.14
5.21 ± 0.11
6.17 ± 1.39
5.07 ± 0.81
1.81 ± 0.26
3.53 ± 0.43
7.06 ± 1.14
13.9 ± 2.63
0.00
11.41 ± 1.68
90.28 ± 14.45
Test #2
2.59 ± 0.48
5.53 ± 1.03
3.19 ± 0.50
0.00
2.66 ± 0.56
3.39 ± 0.62
5.85 ± 0.96
6.64 ± 0.32
4.45 ± 0.74
5.69 ± 0.85
5.07 ± 3.19
1.87 ± 0.26
3.56 ± 0.83
6.64 ± 0.32
12.51 ± 1.85
0.00
10.96 ± 1.01
82.95 ± 11.46
20% Digestate + Biogas
Test #1
1.82 ± 0.02
3.83 ± 0.06
2.20
0.00
1.86 ± 0.07
2.38 ± 0.02
4.38 ± 0.05
4.06 ± 0.18
2.99 ± 0.01
4.06 ± 0.03
3.60 ± 0.26
1.45 ± 0.14
4.25 ± 0.01
4.06 ± 0.32
8.59 ± 0.08
0.00
7.49 ± 0.18
57.79 ± 0.67
Test #2
1.84 ± 0.05
3.87 ± 0.11
2.25 ± 0.16
0.00
1.98 ± 0.09
2.44 ± 0.09
4.26 ± 0.43
4.07 ± 0.37
3.15 ± 0.26
4.26 ± 0.10
3.45 ± 0.33
1.28 ± 0.40
4.01 ± 0.17
4.07 ± 0.37
8.56 ± 0.18
0.00
7.21 ± 0.19
57.08 ± 0.52
Co­cultivation in Biogas
Test #1
1.66
3.40
1.78
0.00
1.55
2.43
3.55
4.90
2.98
3.81
3.18
1.42
2.00
4.33
8.44
0.00
6.86
54.51
Test #2
1.79
3.80
2.01
0.00
1.67
2.69
3.76
5.22
2.91
4.11
3.00
0.93
4.04
4.87
9.01
0.00
7.39
57.67
==PAGE:61==
5.4
Microscopy Results Images
Figure 5.34:
Chlorella mono­cultivation
observed at the microscope in 20x.
Figure
5.35:
Scenedesmus
mono­
cultivation observed at the microscope in
40x.
Figure 5.36:
Microscopy
images of Capsulatus at
60x
magnification
from
picture
A.1(a)
in
the
appendix
from
Rizvic’s
thesis
[14],
which
was
the
same
culture
used
for the inoculation of the
experiments.
Figure 5.37:
Microscopy
images of Methylocystis
at 60x magnification from
picture A.2(a) in the ap­
pendix from Rizvic’s the­
sis [14], which was the
same culture used for the
inoculation of the experi­
ments.
Figure 5.38:
Microscopy
images of Methylomonas
at 60x magnification from
picture A.3(a) in the ap­
pendix from Rizvic’s the­
sis [14], which was the
same culture used for the
inoculation of the experi­
ments.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure
5.39:
Co­Cultivation
Scenedesmus
+
Methylomonas
in
synthetic conditions at 40x.
Figure
5.40:
Co­Cultivation
Scenedesmus
+
Methylomonas
in
AMS medium and biogas at 40x.
54
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:63==
6
Discussion
6.1
Mono­cultivation Growth
6.1.1
Different concentrations in microalgae inoculations
Different amounts were tested to find the best to perform good growth without forming
excessive precipitation and particulates in the BG­11 medium.
Initially, finding the right conditions and combination for the MA to grow was challenging,
so it was possible to see the flocculation phenomenon. Lastly, this happens when the
conditions are not optimal, causing the cells to group up and die. It can be observed in
figure 6.1.
As a result, the best performance was with 100 mL of medium and 10 mL of microorgan­
ism inoculation. This inoculation result is reflected in the sub­inoculation results, which
showed similar growth and yield time.
Figure 6.1: Flocculation in the first attempts of growth MA.
It’s important to remember growth details such as:
• Habitat: from freshwater sources, since its biological properties permit the extract­
ing of CH4, but wastewater was the main source of discovering and growth of many
microalgae biomass cells;
• Physical conditions: temperature maintained around 20 and 30 °, in some re­
searches even higher, light exposure that maintained specific light/dark cycles,
like 12:12 or 14:10 h (suggested a lower dark to increase the productivity and
the photosynthesis), neutral pH around 7 and 8, usually adjusted at 7.5, and a
photobioreactor for the best performances [9][10][11][7];
• Nutrients: nitrogen sources are an important indicator and differ based on the
specific research and product, iron presence, since growth complications are con­
nected with the presence or absence of specific metals, in this case fundamen­
tal its presence to maintain the right pigmentation of the solution, and nutrient
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
55
==PAGE:64==
removal rates, in continuous mode is fundamental to remove the NO3 and PO4
components;
• Gases: generally, the microalgae growth in lab scale is stored in specific light and
temperature conditions, but it’s ”breathing” with the outside through a plastic filter.
If grown in the batch bottle, the best percentage of the synthetic gas mix is around
40% CO2 and 60% CH4. This amount is manipulated based on the medium and
requirements.
The growth indications are the same as Sorokiana and Scenedesmus; the two species
were stored in the same incubators with the same conditions.
6.1.2
Tests of MOB
The first test in 119 mL bottles was fast and didn’t show significant growth since, in these
small amounts, the substrate is expected to be consumed and processed so fast that the
growth curve lasts for only 10­12 hours and then stabilises for the next days; the reason
of this is probably connected with the fast metabolisation of all the small amounts of gas
by the MOB organisms. However, some of the difficulties connected with the growth
of these organisms were mainly the preparation of the medium, the attention to the pH
conditions, understanding the life span of each bottle, and maintaining the optimal shak­
ing and temperature during the growth time. All these conditions were illustrated by the
previous research about MOB growth optimisation [14].
The first thing that was found particularly relevant for the progression of the experiments,
other than trying to grow every mono­cultivation as fresh as possible before starting
every experiment, was to prioritise the MOB’s sensibility. Considering the previous re­
search on optimising conditions for MOB cultivations [14], it was imperative to establish
an environment that could ensure a good amount of methane­oxidising organisms.
6.1.3
Microalgae in ASM medium
Surprisingly, the cultivation was performed for one week (7 days) to check whether
growth occurred in this new medium, and the first optimistic results were present even on
the first days of the first tests. Table 6.1 shows similarities between the media composi­
tions BG­11, used for blue­green algae growth, and AMS, an Ammonium Salts medium,
used to improve MOB development; these similarities explain how it was so easy for
MA species to adapt to the new medium.
56
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:65==
Table 6.1: Difference and Similarities in BG­11 and AMS media for microalgae cultiva­
tion.
Common Molecules
Differences
MgSO4 (Magnesium Sulfate)
Nitrogen Source
CaCl2 (CaCl2 ∙2H2O in BG­11) (Calcium Chloride)
Phosphate Sources
Na2MoO4 (Na2MoO4∙2H2O in BG­11) (Sodium Molybdate)
Carbon Source
EDTA (Chelating agent)
Iron Sources
Cu2+ Source ­ CuSO4∙5H2O in BG­11 and
CuCl2∙2H2O in AMS
Vitamines
Some of the Trace Metals
As it’s possible to notice, some more specific common molecules are present in both
media, while there is a slight difference in the types and concentrations of N, P, Fe and
C sources. Despite this, MA was able to adapt to these new molecules.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
57
==PAGE:66==
6.2
Co­Cultivation
6.2.1
Formulation Results
As observed in figure 5.5, the initial results looked promising, showing an increase of
the cell biomass in the first couple of days; however, right after this moment, the growth
first decreased and then increased again, but keeping the general amount at not much
higher maximum, compared to the initial curve’s growth. This means that probably, in the
beginning, the co­cultivation struggled to adapt to the present conditions, and then, once
it understood the resources in the environment, it grew again, finding some equilibrium.
However, compared to the figure 5.6, the amount is too low to be considered acceptable.
The growth and amount of the second figure are considered an improvement compared
to all the failed formulations. The following experiments were based on these initial
conditions.
Figure 6.2: OD Results Test 2, highlighting the maximum number reached.
6.2.2
Structural and decision method
The concentration of MOB inoculum was kept high in this stage because, based on pre­
vious optimisation studies, MOB is a very delicate organism. This way, the co­cultivation
had more chances to grow in a week or 10 days, giving better results. 25 mL of MOB
were directly extracted from the 50 mL cultivation of each backup bottle.
Once the formulation for the co­cultivation was found, all MOB conditions growth incu­
bation was applied to the cooperative cultivation. Since it gave the best results, the
design of the experiment flow was established.
Considering the time, the level of the research, the instruments available, and the main
goals, it was important to create a structure that could count on carrying on the best
58
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:67==
results or what had worked as best. Based on this structure, the formulation and condi­
tions, step by step, were built following the previous best results. The final structure is
shown in the figure 6.3.
Starting from the first experiment, the best combination Scenedesmus with Methylomonas
gave the best results in terms of OD curves progressions and between the best amounts
of DCW (5.1021E­03 g/ml). This combination was then tested at the best ratios, where
the ratio 3:1, best based on different literature sources, was then carried on to the next
test. With this combination and ratio, the medium tested for the cultivation was in var­
ious dilutions of digestate, supposedly ideal for bacteria and microalgae cultivations.
Once the most diluted solutions were found to be the most reliable, these were also
tested with biogas obtained from cattle manure and biochar. Despite the encouraging
results, some details and mistakes need to be discussed with more attention to correct
them once the project is applied to the following research steps through fed­batch and
continuous mode.
Figure 6.3: Structure of the overall main experiments for the characterisation of a new
combination of MA­MOB Co­cultivation.
6.2.3
Combinations
The main assumptions for this first screening experiment, which was to find the most
successful combination of MA­MOB in biomass growth, were satisfied, and the success­
ful combination was expected.
The reason for this success can be read as a parallel to the working combination Chlorella
sorokiniana with Methylococcus capsulatus, which was also analysed previously [23]:
Scenedesmus sp. is a genus very similar in metabolic conditions and requirements to
Chlorella sorokiniana, and Methylomonas and Capsulatus are both part of the type I
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
59
==PAGE:68==
MOB, sharing phylogeny, biochemical pathway for the C assimilation, internal mem­
brane structure, FA composition and general growth conditions. This result was even
more surprising because Methylomonas was the only one diluted, but the growth reached
satisfying amounts despite that.
Second to these two combinations, Sorokiniana with Capsulatus was the best, confirm­
ing the previous research on co­cultivation. [23][13].
Figure 6.4: Figure present also at the beginning of the introduction section, where it’s
possible to read all the general characteristics of Type I MOB. As underlined in this
specific case, both capsulatus and Methylomonas are present in the table.
Another important problem to address was the non­absolute accuracy of the Optical
Density method. As it’s known by anyone who works in a biological lab or performs
experiments, the Optical Density analysis registers the density of the solution based on
its turbidity; if the turbidity increases, the cell biomass amount should increase with it.
However, it doesn’t give an absolute number of cells in the solutions. Making the cell
count wasn’t possible because the MOB cultivation is usually too small and transparent
to give an accurate estimation based on the area [14].
Also, establishing a feasible method to determine the amount of MA and the amount
of MOB was not possible since methods of basic purifications such as cell washing,
density gradient centrifugation, UV irradiation, filtration or antibiotics would compromise
the structure of bacteria portion [7]. The only possible indication of the progress was
matching the gas results with the OD and the DCW at the end of the experiments.
Previous studies observed an accumulation of oxygen, suggesting an imbalance be­
tween oxygen consumption by methane­oxidizing microorganisms (MOB) and oxygen
production through photosynthesis. This implies that MOB consumed oxygen at a slower
rate than it was produced by autotrophic microorganisms (MA). The same research
also found that growth might have ceased when organic carbon was removed from
60
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:69==
the culture medium. Additionally, high biomass levels caused self­shading, hindering
autotrophic algal growth. Under these conditions, MOB may compete with MA for es­
sential micronutrients, such as copper [23]. Comparing these results with the O2 and
CH4 concentrations registered for this experiment. A correlation between the decreas­
ing of oxygen and methane around the 4th­5th day indicates the balance between the
production and consumption of oxygen described in the previous article, particularly for
the levels of the best combination chosen.
Figure 6.5: Oxygen concentration for the
screening experiment.
Figure 6.6: Methane concentration for the
screening experiment.
Figure 6.7: Oxygen, carbon dioxide and methane in the gas phase during algal­bacterial
consortium cultivation from [23]. O2 is indicated in green, CO2 in red and CH4 in blue.
Another recent study examines a combined culture of Scenedesmus obliquus and Methy­
locystis bryophile for biogas production revealed that methane consumed by the methane­
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
61
==PAGE:70==
oxidizing bacteria (MOB) during their symbiotic relationship is not utilized for their growth.
Instead, it acts as a catalyst, stimulating the microalgae to produce organic matter
through heterotrophic synthesis [16]. This could suggest the actual biochemical path­
ways between these two organisms. However, the molecular and biochemical nature
of their co­cultivation interactions needs more investigation.
The interpretation, on the other hand, can even be given by the concentration over time
of the gases: when oxygen levels are high, the final metabolite of methane is typically
carbon dioxide, whereas, in low oxygen conditions, it tends to become extracellular
carbon. These findings suggest that oxygen content in this system could regulate the
balance between heterotrophic and autotrophic growth in microalgae. With sufficient
oxygen, methanotrophs primarily produce carbon dioxide, which may promote the pho­
toautotrophic growth of microalgae. Conversely, if oxygen levels are low or insufficient,
methanotrophs release more organic matter, encouraging the heterotrophic growth of
microalgae [16].
6.2.4
Ratio
A critical consideration must be the ratio of MA compared to MOB. In several studies,
different combinations of inoculum of each microorganism’s category were tested; a
short sum of the conditions of these studies can be found in the following table.
Table 6.2: Research table about best conditions for the choice of the best ratio in Co­
Cultivation.
Roberts, N et al. 2020 [33]
Rasouli, 2018 [23]
Ruiz­Ruiz, P. et al. 2020 [34]
Xin Li, et al. 2022 [16]
Ratio [MA:MOB]
3:1
1:1 **
1:1; 3:1, 1:3: 4:1; 5:1
1:1
Flask Volume
250 mL
600 mL
125 mL
(25 mL solution + 100 mL headspace)
20 mL mixed culture
% Gasses
70% CH4 and 30% CO2*
60% CH4 and 40% CO2
4% ­ 8% headspace CH4
N/A
nm for OD measurement
750 nm
440 MOB, 680 MA
N/A
N/A
Shaking Intensity Growth
200 rpm
N/A
400 rpm
N/A
Notes
Waste water as medium
Continous Illumination
Waste water as medium
Under LED light
AMG, not MOB
Study about the gas and biomass production
Different Variations medium/serum
* Sparged through the medium for 10 min;
** Competition for nutrients;
As indicated in the table, in most studies, 3 times the amount of microalgae inoculum
over 1 of MOB is recognised as the best one. Since the amount of OD was 0.2, the
usual starting point, in particular in algae cultivation, microorganisms took longer than
expected to react. The logic, not considered enough, was that a small amount of in­
oculum was then diluted even more in a 40 ml medium. It’s possible to notice in figures
5.15 and 5.19b, and experiment 2.5 graphs, that the actual biomass increase happened
after more than a week, reaching barely 0.4 OD amounts in both wavelengths. Com­
pared to the previous results of formulation and characterisations, these results cannot
be satisfying, particularly on an industrial scale. In the future, it is advised to use higher
amounts, and the example was also followed for digestate and biogas adaptation, where
62
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:71==
the OD for each inoculum was always around 0.4­0.5.
On a decision level, with these delayed results and a flat growth curve at the beginning,
it was important to establish the priorities for the final result. Considering the litera­
ture results from different sources (Table 6.2) and the possible protein amounts from
the most stable source, in this case, microalgae organisms, it was chosen to carry on
the ratio with the MA higher amount. The MOB, at this stage of the experiments and
also considering the previous research such as [14], where even a small change in
the pH can compromise the success of the growth, is considered on some levels to be
unpredictable and sensible. Despite the results of the OD at day 10 being higher for
the 1:3 MA:MOB, the successful ratio was still 3:1 MA: MOB. In other studies, it was
also noticed that in the cultivation of mixotrophic systems or consortia where both algae
and bacteria are present, it’s important to maintain a higher number of algae because
if the bacteria dominate the solution, this will cause the algal cells to crash. [15] Re­
cent research investigating various combinations of MOB consortia and MA inocula has
shown that these microorganisms’ proportions significantly influence methane produc­
tion rates. Notably, these mixed cultures demonstrated a higher biodegradation capac­
ity than systems solely composed of MOB consortia. This biodegradation capacity was
comprehensive of all the gas analysed also in the current research, CH4, O2 and CO2
[34].
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
63
==PAGE:72==
However, the most relevant results of this experiment were represented by the com­
parability in growth curves between previous studies [16], where it’s assumed that the
ratio was 1:1, and a chosen ratio 3:1. In the graph, the mixed culture is composed by
Scenedesmus obliquus and Methylocystis bryophile for biogas conversion showed sim­
ilar gas pathways to section 6.8b and 6.8c. 6.8d OD growth changed completely at the
end of the cultivation, so it cannot be compared.
(a) Remaining gas in the headspace.
The
one to take into account for the comparison
is the SM graph, which corresponds to the co­
cultivation.
(b) CH4 consumption in Experiment 2.
(c) O2 consumption in Experiment 2.
(d) CO2 consumption in Experiment 2.
Figure 6.8: Comparison between the gases consumption in similar experiment [16] and
experiment 2 of the present research.
64
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:73==
Side Experiment 2.5
The side experiments present the same initial problem of excessive dilution as for the
main experiment 2.
Also, the final result 1:2 in favour of Sorokiniana can be subjective to the highest strengths
of the cultivation itself. More investigations about MA consortia need to be conducted if
these combinations want to be tested on a bigger scale.
6.2.5
Digestate adaptation
Several difficulties were present since the preparation of the medium:
• The turbidity of the digestate was still consistent even after centrifugation, filtration
and autoclaving, so the OD measurements or IVF were not possible, not even at
the higher dilutions;
• Despite adjusting the pH several times with diluted solutions of acids, the solution’s
pH returned to basic amounts. These levels are not compatible with the growth
conditions of these organisms, so this is probably one of the main reasons why
the co­cultivation didn’t grow as much as expected [7][14];
• The considerable quantity of sediment inside the digestate, even after the purifi­
cation process, made further filtration and DCW very difficult since measuring the
pellet of the digestate alone didn’t give evident results compared to co­cultivation.
The only solution for all these difficulties would be to try different filtration techniques
requiring a more distinctive division between the number of cells and the amount of
sediment, which presents a sand­like form and size. In conclusion, further research
on successful pre­treatment for the digestate is needed before testing it again on this
microorganisms system. For example, in recent studies, when digestate is applied as
a medium for MA growth, it’s important to take the pH of the solution to a lower level.
At the same time, there’s a high risk of metals and phosphate being released in soluble
forms. For this reason, microfiltration with acidification or a specific industrial production
process is usually applied to make the conditions favourable for the MA [35].
Another important detail, when analysing digestate, to consider is the ratio nitrogen:
phosphate, which is advised to be 7:1, to avoid amounts of ammonia concentrations
too high for the MA portion [36] [37]. Also, concentrations of heavy metals and their
ions, such as copper and zinc, can trigger the growth of the most robust algal cells [38].
6.2.6
Biogas adaptation
Using biogas discarded from a previous experiment instead of producing it, especially
for microbial cultivation, is the most ecological form of usage and recycling in these pro­
cesses. However, the amount of CH4 inside the gas, which was around 25%, and CO2,
around 7%, was not enough to sustain both MOB and MA. It is also possible that other
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
65
==PAGE:74==
compounds were present inside the biogas and created some inhibition when it came
in contact with the organisms. Some examples of substances should be S2H, found in
amounts 1­8000 ppmv in biogas [39]. It can be problematic for MA and MOB growth
when bound in bog amounts like 5000 ppmv [19].
In any case, the suggestion for the next experiment should be finding a more concen­
trated biogas compound that should satisfy the requests of both MOB and MA.
Compared to other studies as, for example, Xin et al., 2022 [16], where similar organisms
were tested under biogas production, the cell growth and gas concentrations graphs of
experiment 4, see graphs 5.24a, 5.24b, 5.26, 5.27 and 5.28, don’t resemble the same
structure and form.
6.2.7
DCW and Protein content
The first important consideration about wet and dry cell weight is that some important
samples are missing from the dry cell weight. These very samples were used for the
analysis of amino acids.
As it’s possible to notice, comparing 5.29a and 5.29b, the amounts of Scenedesmus
+ Methylomonas decreased drastically from wet to weight. This doesn’t mean that the
dry cell amount was insufficient, but that most of the sample was used for the protein
analysis. In this case, it’s important to consider that high amount Sorokiniana and Methy­
lomonas, especially in the final dry weight amount (0,3177 ± 0,0573 mg/ml).
The co­cultivation protein biomass, confirming the assumptions, is higher than the single
mono­cultivations with 27.88 mg protein/g wet cell weight for Methylomonas and 34.65
mg protein/g wet cell weight on average for Scenedesmus.
The results of experiment 2 in wet weight confirmed the best cultivation in terms of
biomass ratio 3:1 (1,0638 ± 0,3017 mg/ml). Instead, the side experiment of the MA mix
confirmed the result also given from the colour of the bottle during the cultivation, with
a dry weight of 0,02645 ± 0,006 mg/ml). When considering the results for the digestate
experiment, 5.33a and 5.32b, the particles in the background of the solution make ex­
cessive noise in the analysis number to not be completely sure about the actual success
of the cultivation.
Preliminary exams were made to weigh the background amount at different dilutions.
Still, compared with the co­cultivation, which was supposed to be higher because of the
presence of the inocula, the blank/background was actually higher than the inoculated
cultivations. Because of these results, it was impossible to find a suitable number to
subtract from the final solution to define only the cell biomass portion in both wet and
dry. The only comment that can be expressed about these graphs is the growth of the
amount with the progression of the days, as for 40% digestate in 5.33a and 100%, 80%
and 60% digestate in 5.33b. The same comments can be applied to 5.32a and 5.32b.
66
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:75==
Figure 6.9: Cultivation bottles of side experiment 2.5. Cultivation 1:2, where Chlorella
was the majority, shows the brightest colour.
On the protein side, reading 5.3 gives an idea about the amount of protein of each of
the best samples for every stage of the research, also considering mono­cultivation of
Methylomonas and Scendesmus. The initial idea was to analyse all the samples (around
100, counting the duplicates), but it was impossible due to the long time required for the
whole analysis (around 3 days).
The most important highlights from this final experiment are:
1. The amount of protein for Methylomonas mono­cultivation was 27.88 mg protein/g
(27880 mg/L wet weight), which is less compared to the amount of Scendesmus
(34.665 mg protein/g Wet Biomass or 34665 mg protein/L wet weight). This dif­
ference doesn’t seem much, but, as explained for the ratio experiment 2, it looked
logical to prioritise the amount of MA because it is more resistant and gives more
cell biomass, so more proteins.
2. In the AA analysis of experiment 2 (MA:MOB 3:1) 5.3, the standard deviation be­
tween the duplicates is considerable (19.25 mg/g); in this case, the results can
be categorised as uncertain, and it is highly suggested, for future experiments, to
investigate again about this value and the amounts of synthetic conditions in this
ratio.
3. The high amounts of proteins present in the digestate dilution experiments are
actually given not by the cell biomass but most likely from the AD solution. In
fact, it was proven that most proteins contained inside cattle manure, the same
substrate used to produce the digestate of this study, are not entirely broken during
the digestion of the animal and neither during the Anaerobic Digestion [40][41]. the
result is that the liquid portion is still full of amino acids, which in this case makes
the sample examined as the most prolific for Amino Acids growth (59.06 mg/g or
59060 mg/L for 40% digestate and 90.28 mg protein/g or 90280 mg protein/L wet
weight for 20% digestate).
4. The use of biogas for co­cultivation in AMS medium gave better results in the AA
analysis than the gas and OD measurements, making this option promising for the
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
67
==PAGE:76==
next steps.
5. This table can be used in further resources for specific amino acid applications.
6.2.8
Applications of biomass
Protein is used for many industrial and biotechnological applications, but most impor­
tantly, feeding.
However, from an industrial and political point of view, proteins generated from microor­
ganisms and grown in waste materials, such as sludge or digestate from animal manure,
are still not commercialised.
If considering the solution from a sustainable perspective, this would be the best solu­
tion using a green economy system: the feedstock for the Anaerobic Digestion is given
directly from the manure and animal bedding of animal livestock. Once the AD ends, the
product is energy from the conversion of bio­methane, and the byproduct is digestate in
liquid and solid fractions that can be used for the production of feeding material for the
same animal that produced the substrate for the AD [15].
This approach would be helpful not only from the environmental perspective of byprod­
uct recycling but it would also help to reduce the import of crops like soybean (one of the
significant reasons for deforestation in some regions of our planet) for animal feeding
[42].
68
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:77==
7
Conclusion
At this point in history and climate catastrophe, it is not possible anymore to reply to
traditional technologies because they have a tangible contribution to current global is­
sues. One of the big problems and implications will be food scarcity once the popu­
lation is going to grow exponentially, but will live in ecosystems irreversibly damaged
by the present behaviours. Instead of burdening agriculture and increasing livestock,
algae and bacteria can be a possible solution for providing sustainable solutions for the
biological production of essential macromolecules, the most important proteins. This
technology, recognised as Single Cell Protein, has produced promising results in the
last decade’s publications, being the most suitable option once the legislation for this
resource is eventually unlocked for the market.
Based on previous researches, where the different combinations of MA and MOB were
successful, like Chlorella sorokiniana and Methylococcus capsulatus in sludge medium
[23] or Scenedesmus obliquus and Methylocystis bryophila supplied by biogas [16], a
suitable combination of Scendesmus obliquus and Methylomonas koyamae gave opti­
mistic results comparing its growth in optical density measurements, gas contractions
and cell weights. Its growth was then tested applying a proved ratio 3:1 MA:MOB, in
order to provide a more stable amount of biomass thanks to the resistance of microal­
gae, digestate from anaerobic digestion in different dilutions solutions and biogas from
biochar substrate in the gas phase of the batch cultivation. Each new condition was
tested based on the previous best result, and the study was divided into different steps.
Lastly, the amino acid content of these samples was analysed for each of these steps.
In conclusion, the study gave promising results, in terms of optimistic starting point, for
biomass production considering the combination Scenedesmus+Methylomonas (50.32
± 5.84 mg proteins/g wet cell biomass) and the application of biogas to the cultivation
instead of synthetic conditions (57.67 mg proteins/g wet cell biomass).
However, the next step needs some conditions to be optimized when proceeding to the
following levels: fed­batch, continuous mode and finally pilot scale.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
69
==PAGE:78==
8
Future perspectives
What can be done in the next steps of the optimisation of this process:
1. One of the main problems concerning batch mode cultivation was the limited avail­
ability of the gases inside the bottle environment. It took the cultivations to stop cell
biomass production at some point because molecules such as methane, carbon,
and energy resources for MOB were consumed. This problem can be avoided by
changing the cultivation first to the fed­batch mode and finally to the continuous
mode with a proper photobioreactor, as tested in previous studies [16].
2. Connected to the previous solution of taking the cultivation in continuous mode, it’s
also advised to change some of the cultivation conditions to get closer to the ideal
MA optimisation. The conditions proposed in this study were mainly to improve
and promote the delicate equilibrium of MOB: if considering temperature (37 °C),
room light inside a shaking incubator, slightly acid pH and sealed bottles, these
are usually conditions where MA does not give the best yield.
3. In the future, it is advised to employ digestate, which contains a low amount of am­
monium and sulfates and was subjected to pre­treatments before the inoculation
in the cultivation systems. It is highly recommended to find a suitable downstream
process to make the digestate more ideal as a medium for co­cultivation.
4. It is also necessary to use biogas for the gas portion of the co­cultivation, a con­
centrated fluid which ensures high amounts of both ch4 and CO2 for both kinds of
organisms.
5. It was not part of this study, but considering previous successful publications, it
would be interesting, once the optimisation of the co­cultivation of single strains of
organisms is completed, to test the co­cultivation also with consortia of bacteria,
as explained in one fo the sections of [19], were an algae­bacteria mixed culture
was established (MOB, MA, HOB and heterotrophs).
This point is important because some studies, such as Kerckhof F. et al., 2021
explored the benefits of growing Hydrogen Oxidizing Bacteria (HOB) in MOB con­
sortium to produce SCP. The study found that combining these microorganisms
significantly increased protein and essential amino acid production compared to
growing them in mono­cultivation. The best combination of microorganisms pro­
duced protein with a nutritional profile similar to common food sources and re­
quired less quantity than traditional protein sources like chicken, eggs, and tofu to
meet human needs [43].
Another study also suggested another possible combination, MOB and Sulfate
Oxidizing Bacteria (SOB), to avoid inhibiting the cultivation from H2S contained in­
side the biogas. SOB can remove H2S and provide additional nutrients for MOB,
70
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:79==
while MOB can produce organic compounds that benefit SOB. The researchers
created a mixed culture of these microorganisms and tested different conditions
to optimize MP production from sulfide­rich biogas [44]
6. Another exciting idea, which was inspired by the increase of methane in the ini­
tial experiments (see graph 6.5 and in appendix), would be to provide, to the co­
cultivation system MA­MOB, biogas produced by anaerobic digestion of microal­
gae and sludge. As demonstrated in other studies, Wang et al. 2013 reported
that Chlorella sp. in combination with activated sludge gives good results in terms
of biomethane yield [45]; another study proposes to use of septic tank sludge for
biomethane production, employing in this case Spirulina maxima.
This option would be attractive from an LCA study perspective because it would
provide biogas directly to the plant for co­cultivation without the cost of transporta­
tion and would employ the waste materials for the production of both SCPs and
biogas.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
71
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
[1]
FAO; IFAD; UNICEF; WFP; WHO. “The State of Food Security and Nutrition in
the World. Rome Italy: Safeguard against economic slowdowns and downturns.”
In: World Nutrition 2019;10(3):95­97 (2019). DOI: https://doi.org/10.26596/wn.
201910395-97.
[2]
Gerland P. et al. “World population stabilization unlikely this century.” In: Science,
346(6206), 234–237 (2014). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1257469.
[3]
Gerber P.J. et al. “Tackling climate change through livestock – A global assess­
ment of emissions and mitigation opportunities.” In: Food and Agriculture Organi­
zation of the United Nations (FAO), Rome (2013).
[4]
J. Aiking H. et De Boer. “The next protein transition.” In: Trends in Food Science &
Technology, 105, 515–522 (2020). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2018.07.008.
[5]
Asaad S. et al. “Definition of bioenergy.” In: In Elsevier eBooks (pp. 215–243)
(2024). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-323-95211-8.00004-x.
[6]
Alalwan H. A. et al. “Promising evolution of biofuel generations. Subject review.”
In: Renewable Energy Focus, 28, 127–139 (2019). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ref.2018.12.006.
[7]
Several Authors. Handbook of Microalgal Culture: Biotechnology and Applied Phy­
cology. Amos Richmond (Editor) ­ Wiley­Blackwell, 2004. ISBN: 978­0­632­05953­
9.
[8]
Cassini S.T. et al. “Harvesting microalgal biomass grown in anaerobic sewage
treatment effluent by the coagulation­flocculation method: Effect of pH.” In: Braz.
Arch. Biol. Technol. 2017;60:e160174 (2017). DOI: 10.1590/1678-4324-2017160174.
[9]
Dolganuyk V. “Microalgae: A promising Source of Valuable Bioproducts.” In: Biomolecules
10(8):1153 (August 2020). DOI: 10.3390/biom10081153.
[10]
Naseema Rasheed R. et al. “Microalgal co­cultivation ­recent methods, trends in
omic­studies, applications, and future challenges.” In: Frontiers in Bioengineering
and Biotechnology, 11, 1193424 (2023). DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2023.
1193424.
[11]
Qin S. et al. “Biotechnologies for bulk production of microalgal biomass: from mass
cultivation to dried biomass acquisition.” In: Biotechnology for Biofuels and Bio­
products, 16(1) (2023). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13068-023-02382-4.
[12]
Miles P. ”The light and dark reactions of Photosynthesis. 2021.
[13]
Hanson R. S. & Hanson T. E. Methanotrophic Bacteria. Microbial Reviews, 60(2),
439­471, 1996. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1128/mr.60.2.439-471.1996.
[14]
Aljiosha Rizvic. “Cultivation of methane oxidizing bacteria (MOB) fro conversion of
biogas to proteinous biomass ­ Dyrkning af methanoxiderende bakterier for om­
dannelse af biogas til proteiner.” MA thesis. Danish Technical University ­ Dan­
marks Tekniske Universitet, 2024.
72
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:81==
[15]
Stiles et al. “Using microalgae in the circular economy to valorise anaerobic diges­
tate: challenges and opportunities.” In: Bioresource Technology, 267, 732–742
(2018). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2018.07.100.
[16]
Xin Li et al. “Mixotrophic Cultivation of Microalgae Using Biogas as the Substrate.”
In: Environmental Science & Technology 2022 56 (6), 3669­3677 (2022). DOI:
10.1021/acs.est.1c06831.
[17]
Xie Y. et al. “High­cell­density heterotrophic cultivation of microalga Chlorella sorokini­
ana FZU60 for achieving ultra­high lutein production efficiency.” In: Bioresource
Technology, 365, 128130 (2022). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2022.
128130.
[18]
Jin H. et al. “Ultrahigh￿cell￿density heterotrophic cultivation of the unicellular
green microalga Scenedesmus acuminatus and application of the cells to pho­
toautotrophic culture enhance biomass and lipid production. Biotechnology and
Bioengineering.” In: Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 117(1), 96–108 (2019).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.27190.
[19]
Li R. et al. “From anaerobic digestion to single cell protein synthesis: a promising
route beyond biogas utilization.” In: Water Research, 243, 120417 (2023). DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2023.120417.
[20]
Sharif M. et al. “Single cell protein: Sources, mechanism of production, nutritional
value and its uses in aquaculture nutrition.” In: Aquaculture, 531, 735885 (2011).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2020.735885.
[21]
Fadeyi O. et al. “Assessment of Biomass Productivities of Chlorella vulgaris and
Scenedesmus obliquus in Defined Media and Municipal Wastewater at Varying
Concentration of Nitrogen.” In: Journal of Water Resource and Protection, 08(02),
217–225 (2016). DOI: https://doi.org/10.4236/jwarp.2016.82018.
[22]
Pandey S. “A review on the effect of blue green 11 medium and its constituents
on microalgal growth and lipid production.” In: Journal of Environmental Chemical
Engineering, 11(3), 109984 (2023). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2023.
109984.
[23]
Rasouli et al. “Nutrient recovery from industrial wastewater as single cell protein by
a co­culture of green microalgae and methanotrophs.” In: Biochemical Engineer­
ing Journal, 134, 129–135 (2018). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2018.03.010.
[24]
P. Anupama & Ravindra. “Value­added food: Single cell protein.” In: Biotechnology
Advances, 18(6), 459–479 (2000). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0734-9750(00)
00045-8.
[25]
Britannica, T. Editors of Encyclopaedia (2018, November 15). Scenedesmus. En­
cyclopedia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/science/Scenedesmus.
[26]
González­Camejo J. et al. “Comprehensive assessment of the microalgae­nitrifying
bacteria competition in microalgae­based wastewater treatment systems: Rele­
vant factors, evaluation methods and control strategies.” In: Algal Research, 61,
102563 (2022). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.algal.2021.102563.
[27]
See Rizvic A. 2024 ­ http://www.methanotroph.org/wiki/culturing­tips/.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
73
==PAGE:82==
[28]
Woern C. “Microbial gas fermentation technology for sustainable food protein pro­
duction.” In: Biotechnology Advances, 69, 108240 (2023). DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biotechadv.2023.108240.
[29]
Ge X. “Biological conversion of methane to liquid fuels: Status and opportunities.”
In: Biotechnology Advances, 32(8), 1460–1475 (2014). DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.biotechadv.2014.09.004.
[30]
See Rizvic A. 2024 ­ http://www.methanotroph.org/wiki/culturing­tips/.
[31]
Schreiber U. et Klughammer C. “Evidence for variable chlorophyll fluorescence of
photosystem I in vivo.” In: Photosynthesis Research, 149(1–2), 213–231 (2021).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11120-020-00814-y.
[32]
Ioana­Laura Dudu. “Effect of biochar on the biogas process ­ Unveiling how biochar
characteristics are influencing the biogas process.” MA thesis. Danish Technical
University ­ Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, 2024.
[33]
Roberts et al. “A Microalgae­Methanotroph Coculture is a Promising Platform for
Fuels and Chemical Production From Wastewater.” In: Frontiers in Energy Re­
search, 8 (2020). DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2020.563352.
[34]
Ruiz­Ruiz et al. “Methanotroph­microalgae co­culture for greenhouse gas mitiga­
tion: Effect of initial biomass ratio and methane concentration.” In: Chemosphere,
259, 127418 (2020). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.127418.
[35]
Gerardo M. L. et al. “Integration of membrane technology in microalgae biorefiner­
ies.” In: Journal of Membrane Science, 464, 86–99 (2014). DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.memsci.2014.04.010.
[36]
Cho S. et al. “Microalgae cultivation for bioenergy production using wastewaters
from a municipal WWTP as nutritional sources.” In: Bioresource Technology, 131,
515–520 (2013). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.12.176.
[37]
Fenton O. et al. “Agricultural nutrient surpluses as potential input sources to grow
third generation biomass (microalgae): A review”. In: Algal Research, 1(1), 49–56
(2012). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.algal.2012.03.003.
[38]
Hamed S. M. et al. “Sensitivity of two green microalgae to copper stress: Growth,
oxidative and antioxidants analyses.” In: Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety,
144, 19–25 (2017). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2017.05.048.
[39]
Salehi R. and Chaiprapat S. “Conversion of biogas from anaerobic digestion to
single cell protein and bio­methanol: mechanism, microorganisms and key factors
­ A review.” In: Environmental Engineering Research, 27(4), 210109–0 (2021).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.4491/eer.2021.109.
[40]
Shi L. et al. “Nutrient Recovery from Digestate of Anaerobic Digestion of Livestock
Manure: a Review.” In: Current Pollution Reports, 4(2), 74–83 (2018). DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s40726-018-0082-z.
[41]
Tasaki K. “Chemical­free recovery of protein from cow manure digestate solid and
antioxidant activity of recovered protein.” In: Environmental Challenges, 4, 100132
(2021). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envc.2021.100132.
[42]
Gasparri N. et al. “Linkages between soybean and neotropical deforestation: Cou­
pling and transient decoupling dynamics in a multi­decadal analysis.” In: Global
74
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:83==
Environmental Change, 23(6), 1605–1614 (2013). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.gloenvcha.2013.09.007.
[43]
Kerckhof F. et al. “From biogas and hydrogen to microbial protein through Co­
Cultivation of methane and hydrogen oxidizing bacteria.” In: Frontiers in Bioengi­
neering and Biotechnology, 9 (2021). DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2021.
733753.
[44]
Marica Areniello. “Microbial protein production from sulfide­rich biogas through
methane­ and sulfur­oxidizing consortia.” PhD thesis. University of Galway, 2024.
[45]
M. et al. Wang. “Anaerobic co­digestion of microalgae Chlorella sp. and waste
activated sludge.” In: Bioresource Technology, 142, 585–590 (2013). DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.05.096.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
75
==PAGE:84==
A
Appendix
Here are the control results for experiments 1 and 3 and the pictures that did not differ
from those presented in the microscopy results. These pictures can be used to compare
with the ones shown in the results.
Figure A.1: Control MA in bottles with
gas ­ Experiment 1 ­ OD 600 nm.
Figure A.2: Control MOB in bottles with
gas ­ Experiment 1 ­ OD 600 nm.
Figure A.3: Control MA in bottles with
gas ­ Experiment 1 ­ OD 680 nm.
Figure A.4: Control MOB in bottles with
gas ­ Experiment 1 ­ OD 680 nm.
76
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.5: Control MA in bottles with
gas ­ Experiment 1 ­ O2 Concentration.
Figure A.6: Control MOB in bottles for
gas ­ Experiment 1 ­ O2 Concentration.
Figure A.7: Control MA in bottles with
gas ­ Experiment 1 ­ CH4 Concentra­
tion.
Figure A.8: Control MOB in bottles with
gas ­ Experiment 1 ­ CH4 Concentra­
tion.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.9: Controls in Experiment 3 ­
OD 600 nm.
Figure A.10: Controls in Experiment 3 ­
OD 680 nm.
Figure A.11: Controls in Experiment 3 ­
O2 Concentration.
Figure A.12: Controls in Experiment 3 ­
CH4 Concentration.
78
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.13: Controls in Experiment 3 ­
CO2 Concentration.
Figure A.14: Controls in Experiment 3 ­
IVF detection.
Figure A.15: Microscopy picture of 20%
Digestate dilution sample at 40x.
Figure A.16: Microscopy picture of 40%
Digestate dilution sample at 40x.
Microalgae and MOB Co­cultivation for protein production (EN)
Mikroalger og MOB Samdyrkning til proteinproduktion (DK)
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
