==PAGE:1==
Reinforcement learning for path planning
and
obstacle
avoidance
of
autonomous
mowers
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous
mowers
Master Thesis
M.Sc. Electrical Engineering (Automation and Robot Technology)
September, 2024
By
Christian Tranholm Novrup
Supervisors:
Lazaros Nalpantidis
Ole Ravn
Company contact:
Martin Peter Christiansen (AGCO)
Duration:
March 2024 - September 2024
ECTS:
35
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Elektro-
vej, Building 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Christian Tranholm Novrup - s223145
Signature
Date
ii
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Mowing in agriculture is a time-consuming task, which motivates the idea of using au-
tonomous tractors for this. Implementing autonomy in agriculture presents challenges in
avoiding static and dynamic obstacles in the environment. Reinforcement learning (RL)
has shown good potential in navigation and obstacle avoidance in recent works compared
to classical methods. For this reason, this thesis investigates using RL for autonomous
mowers.
The mowing objective was defined as following a given global path around a field, while
avoiding obstacles. The PPO algorithm was chosen to train a policy to perform mower
navigation. The agent observes the global path, tractor state, deviation from the path,
and obstacles as radial distances from the tractor to the obstacle edges. The obstacles are
assumed to be given as boxes or circles by some other perception framework.
A ROS/Gazebo simulation of the tractor and obstacles was developed based on resources
provided by AGCO, but for the bulk of the training, a simplified Python simulator was
designed to accelerate training which was found to be very efficient; however, the final
policy was fine tuned in Gazebo.
The policy was tested in five environments of increasing complexity and compared to the
TEB and DWA planners. The RL planner was found to perform better than TEB and
DWA in path tracking and avoiding obstacles, similar to the performance in avoiding
dynamic obstacles, but it was unable to navigate large obstacles. The control loop time
was constant in all scenarios for the RL planner, whereas the classical planners were slower
to plan as complexity increased.
Further development includes better and more training, tuning the reward function, policy
network and/or hyperparameters, and investigating alternatives to PPO.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to extend my deep gratitude to my DTU supervisors
Lazaros Nalpantidis and Ole Ravn for their guidance, feedback and kindness during this
project. I am also very grateful to AGCO and specifically my supervisors and contact
persons Martin Peter Christiansen and Rudolf Korb, for giving me the opportunity to
write my thesis in collaboration with them, and providing help and guidance throughout
the project, and for their hospitality during my visit to the Randers and Marktoberdorf
departments.
I would also like to thank my parents, my sister Josefine and my girlfriend Martina for
their unconditional moral support, listening to me being frustrated for weeks at a time
when things were not going my way and reminding me to occasionally do other things
than just work, which was an immense help.
iv
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction and background
1
1.1
Research hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Problem Analysis
3
2.1
Mowing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Theory
18
3.1
Ackermann steering dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Robot Operating System (ROS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Classical local planners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Reinforcement learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Deep reinforcement learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Simulation environment
40
4.1
Gazebo simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Python simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3
Model comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5
Reinforcement learning implementation
56
5.1
Stable Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2
RL task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3
Observation space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.4
Action space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.5
Reward function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.6
Policy network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6
Training
64
6.1
Training plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.2
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3
Training level 1: Simple path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.4
Training level 2: Static obstacles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.5
Training level 3: Dynamic obstacles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.6
Training level 4: Gazebo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7
Testing
74
7.1
Python simulator performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.2
Comparison to classical planners
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
8
Discussion
85
8.1
RL planner vs. classical planners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
8.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
8.3
On vs. Off-policy methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
v
==PAGE:8==
8.4
Tractor dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
8.5
Reward function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
8.6
Action and observation space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
8.7
Hyperparameters and policy structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
8.8
Real-world application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
9
Conclusion
92
Bibliography
93
A Hyperparameter tuning plots
102
B Parameter values
105
vi
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction and background
Any field of grass used for recreation, agriculture, decoration, or other purposes needs reg-
ular maintenance in the form of mowing to keep grass down, so that the field is healthy,
usable, and pleasing to the eye [1]. Examples of such areas are grass fields in agriculture,
lawns, park areas, football fields, golf courses, roadside grass areas, and many more. The
aforementioned areas are often large areas, making mowing a time-consuming and tedious
task, which has led to the idea of autonomous mowers, so that workers can spend their
time on other important tasks [2]. Existing and commercially available robotic mowers
may be sufficient for small to medium areas in a structured environment, but they are
impractical for agriculture, unstructured areas with terrain, and cases where quick and
regular mowing is required. In these situations, a large-scale mower, similar to conven-
tional mowers and tractors with a mowing implement as in fig. 1.1, will be more suitable.
However, autonomous mower technology for large-scale mowers and tractors has not pro-
gressed as much as small robotic mowers, which are already widely commercially available
for off-the-shelf purchase [3]. This is largely due to the fact that the domain of small-
scale robotic mowers are areas such as lawns, where the environment is relatively simple.
Furthermore, for large-scale mowers, the machinery is heavy and more dangerous and
thus requires higher safety standards than small mowers. The benefits of developing au-
tonomous solutions for large-scale mowers such as tractors will be that large grass areas
such as in agriculture can be mowed without a worker, the potential of using existing
technology/implements for the actual mowing, and that the research in large-scale au-
tonomous mowing can be used for other agricultural applications, as many of the elements
of mowing with a tractor are similar to other field operations with tractors in agriculture.
Figure 1.1: Large scale mower. Image courtesy of AGCO
One of the main problems in the development of autonomous agricultural equipment is
ensuring safety while operating.
One key element necessary to achieve safe operation
is reliable navigation and obstacle avoidance. Large grass areas are unstructured areas
and contain obstacles such as trees, rocks, fences, etc. In addition, these areas are often
publicly accessible and attractive to wildlife, which means that humans and animals can
also be found in these areas.
The Danish Hunting Association estimates that around
20.000 deer fawns are killed annually by harvesting equipment [4]. Thus, it is of great
importance that the autonomous tractor can detect and avoid these obstacles to improve
safety and decrease material damage.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
1
==PAGE:10==
Obstacle avoidance has always been a main focus area in robotics and autonomous driving,
and combined with advancements in reinforcement learning in recent years, it opens the
possibilities of exploring the use of reinforcement learning for navigation, local planning,
and obstacle avoidance [5] [6]. Thus, this thesis will explore the possibility of using rein-
forcement learning for obstacle avoidance and local planning in the case of autonomous
mowing in agriculture in the presence of several static and dynamic obstacles. This will
be done using the ROS framework and the Gazebo simulator. The project is carried out
in collaboration with AGCO Innovation Center, which, along with DTU, is involved in
the Safety in Autonomous Vehicles in Agriculture (SAVA) project [7].
1.1
Research hypothesis
The research hypothesis for this thesis is that using reinforcement learning for local plan-
ning and obstacle avoidance for mowers can improve performance compared to classical
methods.
This improvement is measured in terms of collision-free operation, distance
traveled by the tractor, time to complete a task, and time to compute a local plan. In this
thesis, the hypothesis will only be investigated in simulation.
2
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:11==
2
Problem Analysis
This section consists of a brief description of mowing in agriculture, with respect to pur-
pose, method, and challenges to get an understanding of what an autonomous mower
requires. Following, the state-of-the-art analysis will be performed, reviewing the state of
the art of autonomous mowing, autonomous driving/obstacle avoidance in the context of
agriculture, reinforcement learning (RL) and RL in the context of local planning. Finally,
the problem formulation for the rest of the project is listed, defining the tasks and the
goal of the project, along with the assumptions and delimitations of the project.
2.1
Mowing
Mowing refers to the process of cutting or harvesting grass in a field, meadow, lawn, or any
other area with grass that needs to be kept [8]. Examples of areas that need mowing range
from private or public lawns, football fields, golf courses [9], roadside vegetation areas [10]
and in agriculture for grass management in orchards [11], for silage harvest [8] or similar.
Common for all mowing tasks is that a worker needs to drive mowing machinery across the
field to be mowed, and cover the entire area with the mower, which is a time-consuming
task for the worker. Depending on the type of grass and where it is located, it needs to be
mowed regularly as well, which takes even more time. The nature of mowing is similar to
that of harvesting other crops, as in both cases a worker needs to drive machinery to cover
the entire field, and the overall purpose is to remove plant material from a field. Thus, it
also makes sense to look into harvesting when investigating mowing.
2.1.1
Challenges
Time and labor
One of the main challenges related to mowing and harvesting is the time required to mow
a large field, as previously stated. This is further increased when the field is large, there
are many fields, and/or these fields need regular mowing. Combined with an increasing
shortage of labor in the agricultural sector [12], the severity of this problem is further
increased. Furthermore, especially when mowing hay, it is important that mowing is done
under the right conditions with respect to weather and hay maturity [13]. In some cases,
the window for mowing hay is quite narrow (e.g.
if rain is imminent at the time the
hay reaches peak maturity), which makes the time-demanding nature of mowing an even
bigger issue.
Obstacles
As mentioned above, areas with crop and grass are attractive to wildlife, which poses a
problem for mowing and harvesting equipment, especially in tall grass and crops, where
visibility is limited and an animal can easily hide. Young deer fawn, who are not yet fast
enough to escape predators, have an instinct to hide in tall grass and plants to hide from
potential dangers. It is especially a prevalent problem with grass mowing, as the grass
harvest season coincides with the season for newly born deer fawn [4]. Even though it
hears loud machinery, it thinks it can avoid it by hiding, which in the worst case results in
death or mutilation of the deer, material damage on the tractor and mowing/harvesting
equipment and emotional damage to the worker driving the machinery. It is estimated
that 500.000 animals are killed annually during grassland operations in Germany [14] and
up to 20.000 deer are killed annually in Denmark. Figure 2.1a shows a scenario with a
fawn hiding in the grass in front of the mower. It is clear to see that if the tractor fails
to detect and/or avoid the deer, the deer will be run over. It is also not unlikely that
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
3
==PAGE:12==
humans are present in or near the environment where the mower is operating. This could
be farm workers, children playing close to the grass field, or hunters going to/from their
posts. An example of this can be seen in fig. 2.1b, where an adult and a child are standing
in the treeline next to a field. The child can be seen moving towards the field, where
the tractor is, which could potentially result in a dangerous situation. This illustrates
the importance of being able to detect and act in the presence of human/live obstacles.
Even if the obstacles are not directly in the danger zone of the tractor, it is still important
that it is aware of potential obstacles, which can interfere, or in the case of a fault on the
tractor which causes it to drive towards a region it is not supposed to be in (e.g., the tree
line where humans are present on fig. 2.1b).
(a) A deer hiding in grass.
(b) A child and adult in standing foliage.
Figure 2.1: Example of a case with live obstacles. Image courtesy of AGCO.
Other obstacles such as trees or rocks that hide in tall grasses are also a problem, as
they can cause damage to the machinery. An example can be seen in fig. 2.2a. Fences
or tree lines are also commonly found in fields. These are obstacles that restrict tractor
movement, as seen in fig. 2.2b. In this case, the mower is driving close to a fence and must
therefore drive relatively accurately to avoid crashing into the fence while still mowing as
much grass as possible. Furthermore, if an obstacle appears in front or next to the tractor,
it cannot drive to one of the sides, as it would crash into the fence, whereas in the case of
fig. 2.2a, the tractor is more free to choose how to navigate around the obstacle.
(a) A tree in the field
(b) A fence next to the field.
Figure 2.2: Example of a case with static obstacles. Image courtesy of AGCO
Naturally, other machinery can be present in the field, such as other mowers or machinery
to collect cut grass. In general, obstacles can be either dynamic (moving) or static (not
moving). Here, it is important to note that an obstacle which has the ability to move is
classified as dynamic despite it not necessarily moving (e.g. a hiding deer). The tractor
should be able to avoid collisions with both types of obstacles, but the way to avoid
collisions need not necessarily be the same. In case of a static obstacle such as a rock,
4
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:13==
it may swerve to avoid it, but for a dynamic obstacle such as a deer or a human which
is also a living creature, it may stop completely as it is a high risk obstacle. In order to
avoid obstacles, they must first be detected, which is also a challenge in itself. Although
this is not within the scope of the project, it is still related to obstacle avoidance. In this
project, it is assumed that the detection is done through another framework which outputs
a bounding box or cylinder of the obstacle, which is what the obstacle avoidance system
must react on.
Path planning
As previously mentioned, to mow an area, the tractor with mower must go through the
entire area. The tractor can take many paths in the area for this to be achieved, but
all paths are not necessarily equally optimal. By minimizing the distance traveled, the
turns taken and the area covered by the mower more than once, an optimal path can
be determined. Thus, an optimal path will maximize efficiency and minimize the time
required for mowing. This problem is known as coverage path planning (CPP) in research
[15] [16]. Furthermore, [14] suggests that mowing in certain patterns can decrease the risk
of driving into a deer by allowing it to escape through other areas than large open areas,
which they tend to avoid. Figure 2.3 shows 4 examples of mowing strategies to encourage
deer to escape the field before the mower gets close to them.
Figure 2.3: Mowing pattern to encourage deer to leave the field. The red arrows indicate
the expected escape direction [17]
In this project, it is assumed that the tractor can complete the mowing task following
a pre-defined path around the field. This assumption may not ensure optimal coverage
of the field in the presence of unknown obstacles, as these cause the tractor to deviate
from the planned path.
This could be solved with regular re-planning once obstacles
have been observed, but this is not considered in this project. The local planner/obstacle
avoidance algorithm should just expect to get a global path to follow to complete the
mowing objective. Since this project is focused on local planning, it is less important
whether the global plan is optimal or not with respect to the mowing task.
2.1.2
Machinery
Conventional mowing machinery ranges from small manually pushed lawn mowers to ride-
on lawn mowers (small tractors with the main purpose of lawn mowing)[18] to actual
full-size tractors with attached mowing implements [19]. Naturally, the larger area and
the taller grass to be mowed require larger machinery.
Specifically in the context of
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
5
==PAGE:14==
autonomous tractors, the nature and shape of the implement are important to the local
planner. For example, if the implement is a trailer, the local planner should know that the
footprint of the machinery changes due to the angle of the trailer and that reverse driving
is not straightforward. Tractors commonly also use Ackermann steering geometry, which
poses additional constraints on the trajectory. A tractor with implement is also heavy
equipment, which in relation to obstacle avoidance is necessary to consider, to make sure
that obstacles can be observed at a great enough distance so the tractor has time to brake
or swerve.
2.1.3
Autonomous mowers
The objective for autonomous mowers is fundamentally the same as manual mowing,
the main difference being that an operator need not be present in the autonomous case.
Small-scale autonomous mowers have become widely available for many kinds of mowing
(residential, parks, football fields, golf courses, etc.) [15] [3] [2]. These small robotic mow-
ers typically operate within the area enclosed by a wire laid out in a perimeter of the area
to be mowed, but the newer systems operate with GPS-RTK systems, without the need
for a wire [20]. The wire-based lawn mower systems typically mow in a random pattern
and thus rely on continuous operation to keep the grass short. Although small robotic
mowers have found great use in lawn mowing operations [3][2], they may not be suitable for
agricultural purposes such as hay mowing. First of all, the environment of a farming field
can be too uneven and muddy for a small robotic mower and it may not be fast enough
to mow the hay if the harvest window is too small. For the reasons mentioned above, it
makes sense to investigate large-scale autonomous mowers for agricultural purposes.
In this context, large-scale autonomous mowers mean autonomous tractors with mowing
implements. The benefit of taking this approach to autonomous mowing is that these
machines have already been used and proven to work well (with a human operator) in
real life. In addition, it might be more viable to retrofit existing tractors with equipment
to make the tractor autonomous and remain driveable by a human operator. This would
mean that in case of failure of the autonomous system, an operator would still be able
to operate the machine and finish the harvest.
It may also be less of an investment
for the farmer to retrofit their existing equipment, rather than buying completely new
equipment with autonomous capabilities.
Most modern tractors use actuated steering
from, e.g., hydraulics [21] and some tractors already have self-steering capabilities [22]
so retrofitting can be done with minor changes to the steering [23]. Furthermore, the
technologies developed for the purpose of autonomous mowing can be transferred and
adapted to other tractor operations in agriculture, instead of developing entirely new
machinery.
The challenges for autonomous mowing are essentially the same as for manual mowing,
although this technology attempts to solve the issue of mowing being a time-demanding
task for a worker, by not requiring a worker to operate the tractor. However, by solving
this problem with autonomy, new problems are created, such as how to steer the tractor,
so that the goal is met and without colliding with obstacles, how to detect obstacles, and
so on. This is overall a big challenge, as an agricultural environment is highly unstructured
and difficult for a computer to perceive and react to, to the same extent as humans can.
Therefore, this project aims to investigate the problem of local planning and obstacle
avoidance for tractors in the case of mowing, with a focus on using RL for this.
2.1.4
Tractor and sensor setup
The tractor to be used for this project is the Fendt 942 tractor, with a mowing implement
attached. AGCO provided a model of this tractor for use in a Gazebo simulation. The
6
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:15==
tractor is controlled by a velocity command and a steering angle command, which is
converted to actuation of the wheels and steering mechanism by controllers internal to the
tractor. The tractor is assumed to be equipped with sensors and state estimator/filtering,
which can determine the state of the tractor (position, velocity, heading, and wheel angle),
with a reasonable accuracy. A big part of the SAVA project mentioned above is perception
of obstacles in the agricultural setting, which AGCO is also involved with. It is assumed
that the tractor is fitted with sensors and perception framework that can classify, locate,
and estimate the size of relevant obstacles (such as trees, rocks, wildlife, humans, etc.) in
the proximity of the tractor. Although tractor state and obstacle information are relatively
straightforward to determine in the simulation, in real life it is not a trivial task, and a
simulation is not worth much if it is not based on the conditions and information available
in real life. Although the focus of this project is simulation, it is still important to consider
the real-world conditions and implications of the tractor.
System overview
On fig. 2.4, the system as a whole is illustrated. The tractor is assumed to have sensors
to measure the state of the tractor and sensors to detect obstacles, along with actuation
(including the control system) to power the tractor forward and turn the front wheels.
The state measurement and obstacle sensor data are received by the main computer in
the tractor, where the state is assumed to go through some filtering/state estimation,
to get as accurate data as possible, where the output is position, orientation, speed and
steering wheel angles. The obstacle sensor data are assumed to go through a perception
framework that identifies and localizes all relevant obstacles in the vicinity of the tractor
and produces a list of obstacles, containing obstacle type, position and bounding box /
cylinder. It is also assumed that there is a human operator to tell the system what to
do (e.g. mow a field in an optimal way, follow a specific path, go to a specific position,
etc.). The user command is then processed by a global planner that outputs a global plan
consisting of a list of waypoints that the tractor must follow to complete the objective.
The global plan, tractor state, and list of obstacles are all inputs to the local planner
whose purpose is to convert the global plan to a local plan that brings the tractor from
waypoint to waypoint, and avoiding obstacles while doing so. The local planner will output
a commanded speed and steering wheel angle, which is given to the tractor drive/steering
control system, to make the tractor drive. As mentioned, the focus of this project is the
local planner; thus, everything outside the blue box in fig. 2.4 is not explicitly considered.
In practice, communication and control of the tractor will be done through ROS, as this
is the standard for autonomous tractors at AGCO. Using ROS also makes it easier not to
focus on the details of the nodes outside the blue area on fig. 2.4, but only on the messages
they output, which are used as input for the local planner node.
2.2
State of the art
This section will provide a review of the state of the art and related work in autonomous
driving/obstacle avoidance (in the context of agriculture), reinforcement learning, and
reinforcement learning for local planning and obstacle avoidance. The purpose of this
section is to get an overview of the current state of the art and to determine which
methods and technologies it will make sense to look further into for the rest of the project.
2.2.1
Autonomous driving and obstacle avoidance
Local planning and obstacle avoidance are central problems in autonomous driving and
have been active areas of research for as long as research in autonomous robots. It covers
how to convert a global path/goal to a feasible trajectory the robot can follow, satisfying
constraints imposed by nearby obstacles, robot kinematics and hardware limitations. A
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
7
==PAGE:16==
Obstacle sensor
stack
Obstacle
detection,
localization and
classification
List of obstacles
obstacle_1
type
position (x,y)
bounding box (4 vertices)
obstacle_2
type
position (x,y)
bounding cylinder (radius)
obstacle_N
type
position
bounding box/cylinder
Local planner
Operator
Global planner
Objective/
path/target
position
State estimation/
filtering
Tractor state
Position (x,y)
Orientation
Forward speed
Steering wheel angles
Localization
sensor stack
Steering angle
sensor
Velocity command
Cmd. forward speed
Cmd. wheel angle
Tractor drive
control system
List of waypoints
(global plan)
x1
y1
x2
y2
xN 
yN
Main tractor computer
Tractor (sensors and actuators)
Figure 2.4: System overview
local planner usually relies on sensor input from LiDARs, cameras, and similar perception
sensors, to get information about the surrounding environment.
A recent survey on local planners for autonomous vehicles in unstructured environments
[24] mentions the Dynamic Window Approach (DWA) planner [25], Timed Elastic Band
(TEB) planner [26] and Artificial Potential Field (APF) planner [27]. These planners are
well-known for local planning in robotics, and despite the time since the methods were
introduced, they have been developed over the years and are still used in research to this
day.
The DWA planner works by discretizing the control space of the robot and, for every
discretized velocity, simulating a trajectory of the robot. Every simulated trajectory gets
evaluated based on certain parameters such as distance to obstacles, distance to goal,
and/or global path etc. and gets assigned a score. If a trajectory collides with an obstacle,
it is discarded. Otherwise, the trajectory with the highest score is selected and executed.
This is repeated at the next sampling instant [28]. In [24] it is stated that the DWA has
high real-time performance but also has high computational complexity and is sensitive
to environment changes and requires that obstacle information is frequently updated. An
improvement to the DWA approach includes a Q-learning-based DWA planner, where the
authors state that the standard DWA planner is prone to fail in unknown environments,
where obstacles are not mapped.
The authors found that the Q-learning approach is
better at avoiding unknown obstacles than the standard DWA [29]. This result also shows
the potential improvements of combining RL with local planning. Further improvements
include a modified DWA that includes predictions of potential future collisions based on
obstacles’ movement [30], a modified DWA planner using MPC [31], and a modified DWA
planner for robots with Ackermann steering [32]. In the context of agriculture, [33] presents
a modified DWA algorithm, which shortens the path and decreases energy consumption,
8
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:17==
implemented in a tractor. [34] presents a vision-based navigation stack for autonomous
tractors in orchards, which used an improved version from [35]. The DWA planner is
by default included in the ROS navigation stack [28], which may also contribute to the
popularity of the planner.
The TEB planner is an extension of the Elastic Band (EB or EBand) planner originally
introduced in [36]. The EB method treats a path between two points as an elastic band,
with internal and external forces. The internal forces ”tighten” the elastic band to keep the
path short, and the external forces bend and repel the elastic band. The obstacles around
the path act as external forces and bend the path so it goes around the obstacles. The EB
method does not consider dynamic motion properties of the robot such as acceleration and
velocity of the robot, but the TEB method does consider this, such that the generated
trajectory can be executed by the robot. The TEB approach has since the first paper
seen improvements by the original authors, such as an extension to car-like robots [37]
and trajectory optimization [38]. Other recent improvements can be found in [39] that
shorten the path and computation time, but still avoid static and dynamic obstacles.
Furthermore, the TEB planner also considers dynamic obstacles explicitly, where other
planners treat dynamic obstacles as momentarily static obstacles [40]. There also exists
a ROS implementation of the planner [41]. According to [24], the TEB planner yields a
smoother path, but is not good for complex scenarios. In [42], TEB was used as a local
planner of a agricultural robot with the purpose of driving along rows of swaths, which
by nature is similar to mowing. The TEB planner proved useful, but the paper did not
focus on obstacle avoidance. An autonomous mower for an orchard was developed in [43]
where it was able to avoid obstacles, but obstacle avoidance was also not the focus of this
article. The TEB planner is mentioned in another review of local planners [44] where it
is stated that it does not work well in high-dimensional space and in complex scenarios.
Furthermore, the paper states that the method can be improved by combining it with
machine learning, which also supports and justifies the research hypothesis of combining
local planning with learning-based method.
Artificial Potential Field (APF) is a method that defines an attractive force at the goal
position, and repulsive forces at obstacles [44]. It was originally introduced in [27]. An
advantage of the APF method, as described in [44], is that it handles unknown environ-
ments well. However, it has a tendency to fall into local minima in some cases. This
issue is addressed in [45], where the Artificial Harmonic Potential Field (AHPF) method
was developed. This method removes local minima of the APF problem by construction.
The AHPF method was further developed in [46] where the method is combined with rein-
forcement learning to adjust the parameters of the AHPF algorithm, to ensure an optimal,
deterministic, continuous, and safe motion plan. [47] further expands on the APF method
by including support for dynamic obstacles, so that the method is suitable for static and
dynamic obstacles. The method was developed for use in autonomous underwater vehi-
cles. In [48], APF was implemented in combination with sliding mode control on a mobile
robot to be used for precision farming, where the planner was able to avoid obstacles well
outside the defined safety distance.
Another popular approach for local planning is Model Predictive Control (MPC) or Non-
linear MPC (NMPC). MPC is more of a wide methodology or concept, compared to the
previous methods, and can be used for many control problems, including local planning.
The main concept of MPC is to solve an optimal control problem, some time steps in
the future such that a cost function is minimized, and then apply the first step of the
calculated control sequence. In the next time step, the process is repeated, given the state
in the next time step. NMPC follows the same principle, although with a nonlinear model
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
9
==PAGE:18==
and/or cost function. This makes the numerical calculation and stability concepts more
complicated than linear MPC. The method was tested in practice and was found to work
well, but the focus of the study was mainly on static obstacles. In [49], NMPC was used
for path tracking and collision avoidance for a tractor and implement. Obstacle avoidance
was implemented by modifying the cost function of the MPC problem to also consider
obstacles. [50] proposes an NMPC method for front-steered tractors, to avoid obstacles
and track the path. The paper includes both simulation and real tractor tests, but did not
account for dynamic obstacles and did not detect obstacles in real time (obstacle position
was known in advance). NMPC was also used in [51] in a tractor-trailer setup as a local
planner. The method supports both forward and reverse driving with a trailer, which
is a challenging control problem, especially due to the nonlinear and unstable nature of
reversing with a trailer. The method can also avoid multiple static and dynamic obstacles.
The method was tested in a Gazebo simulation, where it successfully avoids obstacles and
follows the path. Using MPC for a tractor trailer is widely used in other papers [52][53].
An implementation of MPC in ROS is integrated in the navigation/move_base frame-
work, where the details of the implementation are given in [54]. This implementation also
considers car-like/Ackermann steering robots and dynamic obstacles.
2.2.2
Reinforcement learning
This section will provide a review of the state of art of reinforcement learning (RL) in the
context of robotics. The purpose of this section is to give an overview of methods within
RL, to form a basis of the next section, which will review RL for local planners.
In RL there are generally two approaches; model-free and model-based [55]. Model-free
RL does not rely on a model of the environment and learns the optimal policy solely based
on the reward function/value function and exploring the environment. The advantages of
this approach are that a learning algorithm can be implemented on a system relatively
easily and it is not necessary to build a model beforehand. On the other hand, model-
free RL has the disadvantage of taking long to train, and if training is done on a real
system, it increases wear on the robot, and has the risk of being unsafe due to random
actions taken by the agent during training. Model-based RL relies on a transition model
(model for how states propagate given an action) of the system, and takes less time to
obtain an optimal policy; however, it requires an accurate model (either given or learned)
of the system to converge to the true optimal policy. Both areas of RL are vast; thus
this thesis will mainly focus on model-free methods. The main reasoning of this is that
model-free is simpler to implement and it is not required to build a transitional model of
the environment. Building a model of the environment would be a lot of work, and it is
important that this model can represent the environment accurately. A model-based RL
policy is not any better than the model it is built upon. Thus, it is assessed that this is
out of scope for this thesis.
A historical and contemporary review of the algorithms and methods of RL is presented
in [56]. Some of the fundamental RL algorithms are described here, such as Monte Carlo
(MC) learning, Temporal Difference (TD) learning, Q-learning, SARSA, etc. [57]. All of
these methods are based on discrete state and action space. For an inherently continuous
state and action space, which is the case for most robotics applications, the state and
action space can be discretized to a resolution that also enables the agent to fulfill the
control task. However, this will make the state and action space of very high dimension,
which then makes the RL algorithms slow to converge to the optimal policy and will use
a lot of memory. Value Function Approximation (VFA) can mitigate the effect of the
curse of dimensionality, by approximating the value function of a given algorithm with,
for example, a linear function and/or assigning similar values to states with similar state
10
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:19==
features [56]. However, linear VFA is not effective without the right feature set, which is
not easy to determine [56]. Therefore, the value function can be approximated by a Deep
Neural Network structure, which is a richer function approximation. Deep RL (DRL) has
proven to be effective in board games, complex real-world problems, and robotics [56].
DRL can be divided into two groups of algorithms; value-based or policy-based algorithms,
where value-based methods use the value function to determine the optimal policy, and
policy-based methods estimate the policy directly. In value-based algorithms, Deep Q-
Learning (DQN) is a popular approach. It was introduced in [58], where it was used to
train an algorithm to play Atari games. The main idea of DQN is to approximate the
Q-function with a deep neural network. The network used in [58] only used raw pixels
as input, and the output estimates future rewards. The approach outperformed previous
methods for all but one of the games and won over a human expert in three games. DQN
can in some cases suffer from overestimations, meaning that the estimated reward is higher
than the actual reward. Double DQN was developed with the purpose of improving DQN
by providing more accurate value estimations and reducing the effect of overestimating
[59]. Double DQN was shown in the paper to give better policies on the Atari games,
which were also the test case for DQN in [58]. Other methods of improvement of DQN
include Dueling DQN [60] and Prioritized Experience Replay [61], which all outperform
DQN in Atari games. All the different improvements in DQN led to the development of
Rainbow [62], which studies the combination of several DQN improvements to achieve an
overall improvement. The result did show an improvement compared to the individual
DQN improvements, and the study also shows the contribution of each of the methods to
the overall performance.
Policy-based methods learn the policy without explicitly learning the value function. Com-
pared to value-based methods, policy-based methods tend to have better convergence,
better suited for stochastic policies, better exploration, and better handling of large or
continuous action spaces.
Policy gradient methods are a subset of policy-based meth-
ods that parameterize a policy and aim to find the policy parameters that maximize the
reward [63]. The REINFORCE algorithm [64] is one of the fundamental algorithms in
this category. The Actor-Critic was developed as an improvement to the REINFORCE
algorithm [63]. REINFORCE only updates the policy after each episode, whereas the
Actor-Critic method does not need to wait until the end of an episode. Some notable
actor-critic algorithms include the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) [65], the
Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) [66], the Actor-Critic with Experienced Re-
play (ACER) [67], the Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) [68], the Twin Delayed
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3) [69], and the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [70]. The
Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) method was introduced in [71], which proved
to have robust performance in complex robotic control tasks, as well as in playing Atari
games from raw pixels. TRPO was improved in [72], where the Proximal Policy Optimiza-
tion (PPO) algorithm was introduced. In the paper, PPO was shown to perform better
than all other methods (A2C, ACER, TRPO, CEM, and Vanilla Policy gradient, these
methods were chosen as the comparison was done in a continuous environment and the
authors considered effective for continuous environments). Furthermore, the paper states
that PPO inherit the stability and reliability of trust region methods but follows a simpler
implementation, with better overall performance. In recent studies, PPO has received a
lot of praise for its performance, simplicity, efficiency, and stability [63] [73] [74] [75].
2.2.3
RL for local planning
Based on the advances in RL and the results of applying RL to robotics, control, and video
games, it makes sense to look into RL for local planning and obstacle avoidance for mobile
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
11
==PAGE:20==
robots. Especially in dynamic environments, classical methods cannot always plan a path,
and they require high computational resources [76]. RL is proposed as a new approach
to local planning, as it is able to encode complex scenarios in its training and apply it
with fewer computational resources. This section will explore the current state-of-the-art
in applying RL to the problem of local planning and obstacle avoidance.
[6] proposes a local planning algorithm using RL which is capable of navigating in an
environment with both static and dynamic obstacles in a warehouse setting. The paper
uses raw data and image representation of the environment, which is fed through a neural
network as state representation for the environment. The implementation is done in ROS,
and training is done in simulation in the Flatland simulator. The simulations include
realistic pedestrian motion. For the RL algorithm, PPO is used via the implementation in
stable-baselines [77]. The defined reward function rewards proximity to the next waypoint
on a global path and when the goal position is reached, and penalizes collisions with
objects, driving away from the next waypoint, and for not moving. The approaches was
compared to DWA, showing significant improvements for some of the algorithms, but not
all, and it is stated that the comparison should be considered with caution because of
differences between the planners. It was concluded that the results are promising, but
more work is needed, especially with regards to recovery behavior. [78] also used PPO on
both a discrete and continuous action spaces, and comparing to DQN, where it is found
that PPO on discrete action space outperforms the other methods. A similar result was
obtained in [79], where a RGB image is encoded into a lower dimensional space, and used
by PPO and DQN algorithms, where it was found that PPO performs better and converges
faster.
In [76], the SAC algorithm was implemented on a mobile robot in a dynamic environment.
The state representation was a vector of LiDAR data, goal data, and velocity data. The
LiDAR data contained the distance between the robot and obstacle, and also implicitly
predicted the movement of the obstacle by registering past distances of the obstacle. The
reward function rewards when the robot is at the goal and penalizes collisions and a large
angular velocity. Training was carried out in ROS via the Stage and Gazebo simulators.
During training, PPO and SAC were compared, where it was shown that SAC had better
sample efficiency and faster learning, but only the SAC trained policy was used for testing.
The trained policy was compared with TEB and DWA. For performance measures such as
obstacle avoidance, travel time, computation time, the SAC approach performed better,
but struggled in narrow passages and to keep a straight path. It was also observed that
TEB and DWA avoided dynamic obstacles by stopping, where the RL policy turned to
avoid obstacles. SAC and PPO were also applied to obstacle avoidance in [80], where PPO
was found to perform better than SAC.
[81] presents a global and local path planning framework, using the Seeker Optimization
Algorithm as global planner, and A2C as the local planner. A2C was chosen as the RL
algorithm based on an experiment in the paper, proving that A2C receives greater rewards
in a shorter time span than TD3, SAC and PPO. The reward function rewards the robot
when the position and angle are within some tolerance of the goal pose, drives fast, and is
penalized by collisions with obstacles. The state space is represented as lidar data, linear
velocity, angular velocity, distance to the target point, robot rotation, target rotation,
relative and absolute rotation angle between robot and target. The proposed approach
was tested in simulations against TEB and DWA with Djikstra’s Algorithm as global
planner, where the proposed approach was shown to perform better than TEB and DWA
wrt. path length, execution time and planning time.
12
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:21==
Most of the papers applying RL to navigation have used differential drive robots, which
have significantly simpler dynamics because they can change direction without changing
position. The papers addressing RL navigation for Ackermann steered robots are fewer
in number compared to papers about differential drive robots. [82] is one of the papers
that applies RL in the form of DDPG to a car-like robot. The observation space is an
occupancy grid, where the path to track is encoded as white cells, and forbidden regions
with black cells. The reward function encourages staying close to the path, minimizing
throttle, steering angle, and steering angle velocity. The approach showed that the robot
was able to follow the path with a lower deviation from the path than a lateral controller.
[83] presents a DQN policy for driving a car in a urban environment. It gets observations
from a camera and a LiDAR map and controls the car via. 5 discrete commands. The
reward function rewards driving forward and penalizes collision and turning to either side.
The car was able to drive and choose the correct actions.
A summary of some papers on the use of RL for autonomous driving is shown in table 2.1.
The table shows that many of the existing papers use PPO, DQN and SAC, with a few
also using DDPG and A2C, and a single using the tabular Q-learning without function
approximation. Also interesting is that most of the papers work with differential drive
robots, which are easier to do navigation with, compared to car-like/Ackermann steered
robots, indicating that using RL for car-like robots has not seen a lot of attention in
research. Naturally, there are many other work and papers on this topic, but it is assessed
that the papers in table 2.1 are representative for the current state in RL for navigation.
An important aspect of the research of using RL for local navigation is the safety of the
algorithm implemented, as identified in [90] [91] [92]. This is largely due to the fact that
a learned policy is difficult to interpret and explain, and the answer to the question How
did the algorithm make this decision; is not immediately clear directly from the policy.
For model-free algorithms, the issue is potentially even bigger, as it is an entirely black-
box approach, whereas model-based algorithms are built upon a model which is assumed
to represent the environment accurately.
In classical model-based control, it is more
straightforward to prove mathematically that a control law is guaranteed safe for a model,
given certain disturbances, and so on. The field of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)
aims to solve this problem. This is not part of the thesis, but still important to mention
when doing research in AI - even though the performance of AI and RL algorithms seem
to improve classical methods, safety is still number one priority.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
13
==PAGE:22==
Algorithm
Observation space
Action space
Policy
Performance
Type
[6]
PPO
Costmap, laser scan
Forward velocity, angular velocity
(continuous and discrete)
CNN + MLP
RL planner 65% success, 50% tra-
ditional local planner
Diff drive
[78]
PPO + DQN
RGB image stacked 4 times
discrete:
five different directions,
continuous:forward and angular ve-
locity
CNN + MLP
PPO
discrete
outperforms
PPO
continuous and DQN discrete
Diff drive
[79]
PPO + DQN
RGB image, distance and angle to
target, linear and angular velocity
Linear + angular velocity
VAE + MLP
PPO outperforms DQN
Diff drive
[84]
PPO
Costmap (map, obstacles, robot,
goal)
forward, left and right (discrete)
CNN + MLP
reaches goal 93% of the time, colli-
sion 6% of the time
Diff drive
[85]
PPO
Distance to goal and lidar
target coordinates for next step
Successfully navigates to goal and
avoiding obstacles
[86]
PPO
Lidar map, relative goal and veloc-
ity
Linear + angular velocity
CNN + MLP
Successfully avoids collision
Diff drive
[80]
SAC+PPO
RGB camera, lidar
4 discrete actions
-
PPO
trains
faster
and
obtains
higher rewards
Diff drive
[76]
SAC
Lidar, goal (cart.) linear and angu-
lar velocity (cont)
linear and angular velocity (cont)
CNN + MLP
SAC outperforms DWA and TEB,
better sample efficiency than PPO
Diff drive
[87]
DQN
stacked RGB image
Forward , left and right (discrete)
CNN + MLP
achieves collision free operation
Diff drive
[88]
DQN (Double
DQN + Duel-
ing DQN)
Depth image
Linear + angular velocity
CNN + MLP
Successfully navigates and avoids
obstacles
Diff drive
[83]
DQN
RGB image and costmap
accelerate, brake, left, right and
keep going (discrete)
CNN + MLP
Successfully drives autonomously
Car-like
[82]
DDPG
previous actions and map of target
path
throttle and steering
CNN + MLP
Successfully tracks reference path
with low error
Car-like
[81]
A2C
Lidar, linear+angular velocity, dis-
tance and angle to target, angle of
target
Linear + angular velocity
MLP
Outperforms DWA and TEB, A2C
trains faster than SAC,PPO and
TD3
Omniwheel
[89]
Q-learning
8 states related to obstacle locations
Forward , left and right (discrete)
Q-table
achieves optimal path free of colis-
sion
Diff drive
Table 2.1: Summary of papers about using RL for navigation
14
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:23==
2.3
Problem formulation
In the previous section, an introduction to mowing and autonomous mowing in agriculture
was given, reviewing and analyzing the problem and existing solutions. It was hypothe-
sized that, based on the development in Reinforcement Learning (RL), it can be beneficial
to use it for local planning of autonomous ground robots. A state-of-the-art review was
performed, highlighting the state of the art in classical local planning and obstacle avoid-
ance, RL, and RL for local planning, showing that the existing work shows benefit in
using RL for local planning. Based on the findings in the previous section, in this section
a problem formulation is defined for the remainder of the project.
In order for an autonomous mower in agriculture to perform its task, the tractor must
drive through a field with a mowing implement, covering each part of the field (ideally) not
more than once. Thus, it is assumed that the tractor can complete its task by following a
predefined path through the field, given by a list of (x, y) coordinates. The project does
not cover how this path is made; it is simply assumed that it exists for the tractor to
follow.
The predefined path does not take into account obstacles in the field, which can
Table 2.2: Summary of selected DRL algorithms
Algorithm
Observation
Action
Policy
Features
PPO
Continuous
Discrete
Continuous
Discrete
On
•
Stable and robust
•
Well used and documented
•
Simple implementation
•
Shows good performance in continuous control
•
Keeping change between policies relatively small
•
Outperforming other algorithms in many cases
DQN
Continuous
Discrete
Discrete
Off
•
Useful for large state space and small action space
•
Good performance for discrete tasks
•
Well used and documented
SAC
Continuous
Discrete
Continuous
Off
•
Tradeoff between reward and exploration (entropy)
•
Stable
•
Good performance on complex continuous control
A2C
Continuous
Discrete
Continuous
Discrete
On
•
Utilizes parallel computation
•
Fast training
DDPG
Continuous
Discrete
Continuous
Off
•
Similar to DQN but continuous action
•
Good for high dimensional continuous control
•
Learns deterministic policy
be static or dynamic, which prompts the need of a local planner. This project will consider
rocks, fences, telephone poles, parked vehicles, and trees as static obstacles, and wildlife
and humans as dynamic obstacles, as these are the most likely to be found in a mowing
setting. It is assumed that these objects can be perceived and classified by some other
framework, which is not covered in this project. The obstacles are perceived as either a
bounding box or a bounding cylinder around the obstacle, which will be the input format
of the obstacles to the local planner. The local planner framework that this project aims
to develop will take the predefined path, tractor state, and a list of obstacles as inputs, and
generate a speed and steering angle command, which is sent to the tractor, but how these
values are measured is not considered. This is also outlined in fig. 2.4, where everything
outside the blue box is not explicitly considered, and the format of the input and output
is described.
The overall objective for the local planner is to follow the global predefined path as closely
as possible, but still avoiding collision with the obstacles in the field by either stopping
completely or swerving to avoid collision. The main contribution and theme of the thesis
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
15
==PAGE:24==
is the application of RL to this problem and investigating the benefits and drawbacks
compared to classical methods. Table 2.2 lists some RL algorithms that have been shown to
be promising within the topic of navigation and local planning. Comparing RL algorithms
without experimental data is difficult, as their performance depends on many things,
especially the problem at hand, and it is thus difficult to predict which one is best for
a given application. For this application, it must be an algorithm that works well with
continuous control and complex environments. For this reason, PPO is chosen to be the
algorithm to train the local planner, as it shows to perform well in many continuous control
tasks and in many cases outperforming other algorithms. PPO is an on-policy algorithm,
which means it usually needs many samples to learn, but all training is to be done in
simulation, so sampling the environment is relatively cheap.
The classical local planners that were reviewed previously are summarized in table 2.3.
Pros
Cons
ROS move_base
integration
Dynamic obstacles
considered explicitly
TEB
• Support for Ackermann steering
• High degree of configurability
• Well documented
• Smooth/continuous path
• Soft constraints
• Not good in complex scenarios
yes
yes
DWA
• High performance in real time
• Well documented
• Prone to failure with
unknown obstacles
• High complexity
yes
no
APF
• Avoiding unknown obstacles
• Falling in local minima
no
no
MPC
• High configurability
• Support for Ackermann
• Better than TEB for complex dynamics
• Performance similar to
TEB for simple cases
• ROS implementation not
extensively documented
yes
yes
Table 2.3: Summary of classical local planners
For comparison, TEB and DWA with the Ackermann modification are chosen, as both
support Ackermann steering, and are already implemented in ROS, which means that
they can be relatively straightforwardly implemented and tested. In theory, the MPC
planner would seem to be a better option as it is stated that it is better than TEB
for complex dynamics, directly supports Ackermann, and explicitly considering dynamic
obstacles. However, due to the lack of documentation of the MPC planner, initial testing
was unable to successfully implement the planner in the existing framework, and it was
assessed that too much time would be spent getting it to work, which is why the DWA
was chosen instead. The experimental work will be carried out in ROS and simulations
in Gazebo, as existing tractor models with ROS/Gazebo capabilities are provided for
the project. Planners will be evaluated on the basis of collision-free navigation, time to
complete a given mowing task, deviation to the predefined path, and time to plan a path.
The reason for including collision-free navigation in the evaluation metrics is to quantify
and compare how often collisions occur. Naturally, the number of collisions is desired to be
as small as possible. It is also desired that the tractor complete the task as fast as possible,
because mowing can be a time sensitive task (if bad weather is imminent). Deviation to
the target path is also desired to be minimal, as this is the path that will ensure optimal
mowing and yield, and deviating from this would result in suboptimal behavior. Finally,
the planning time is desired to be as small as possible, because if it takes a long time to
make a plan, the tractor would have driven for that amount of time blindly, which is not
safe.
The problem formulation and tasks for the remainder of this project is summed up in the
below bullets:
16
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:25==
• Set up a simulation environment in ROS/Gazebo for training, testing and compari-
son of methods.
• Define a suitable reward function for the RL algorithm that encourages completion
of the mowing task as quickly as possible, while still following the path and avoiding
collisions with obstacles.
• Implement and train the PPO algorithm for the mowing case to follow a path and
avoid static (trees, rocks, fences, poles, parked vehicles) and dynamic (humans,
wildlife) obstacles, where obstacles are represented as a bounding box/cylinder.
• Perform extensive testing of the trained PPO policy in an environment with static
and dynamic obstacles.
• Test the TEB and DWA algorithms in the same environment as the PPO policy
approach.
• Evaluate and compare approaches with respect to time to complete a task, collision-
free navigation, deviation of the given path, and time to compute a plan.
2.3.1
Delimitation and assumptions
The topic of the thesis is extensive as is; therefore, some delimitations and assumptions
are made to make the project more likely to succeed in the time frame. Refer to fig. 2.4
for a graphical overview of some of the assumptions of inputs and outputs of the system:
• Perfect knowledge about position, velocity, orientation, wheel angle and type of
obstacles as well as the tractor are assumed (it is assumed if an obstacle is within
the field of view of the tractor, the tractor can always perceive it).
• The obstacles are assumed to be perceived as a bounding box or a bounding cylinder
and are classified according to their type.
• It is assumed that a global path that satisfies the mowing objective is given; the
project will not consider global planning.
• The tractor footprint is assumed to be approximated by a rectangle.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
17
==PAGE:26==
3
Theory
This section will outline the theoretical basis for the remainder of the thesis. The section
will describe the Ackermann steering dynamics, which is used by the tractor, the basics of
ROS, a description of the principles of the classical local planners chosen to compare the
RL methods to, and lastly reinforcement learning including deep reinforcement learning.
3.1
Ackermann steering dynamics
The tractor used in this project is a Fendt 942, which uses front wheel Ackermann steering,
similar to what is found in a conventional car. The main benefit of the Ackermann steering
geometry is that it avoids slip when the vehicle is turning because all the rotation axes of
the wheels intersect in a common point. One of the main drawbacks is the quite significant
kinematic constraints due to this steering dynamic. Whereas a differential drive robot can
change its heading by just turning on the spot, for an Ackermann steered vehicle to change
heading, it needs to turn the wheels and drive forward, thus needing to change position
as well. This makes following a pose more tricky, as well as going to a point right next to
the tractor.
In fig. 3.1, an illustration of an Ackermann steered vehicle can be seen. It consists of two
steerable wheels in front, along with a virtual wheel in the middle of the two wheels, and
two wheels in the back. The distance between the steerable wheels is denoted by w and
called the track. The distance l between the front and rear axles is called the wheelbase.
Turning the steering wheel of the vehicle will turn the front wheels with angles δo and δi,
respectively. From the figure, it is also clear that all the axes of rotation of the wheels
intersect in O. The distance a is the distance from the rear track to some point C in the
center of the vehicle. The Ackermann condition states, that the two wheel angles δo and
δi are linked to the ratio between track and wheelbase:
cot δo −cot δi = w
l
(3.1)
The turn radius from O to the center of the rear axle, denoted by R1 on fig. 3.1, is given
by:
R1 = 1
2w +
l
tan δo
= −1
2w +
l
tan δi
(3.2)
The two wheel angles are thus not free variables, and are linked together, which is why
it makes sense to introduce a virtual wheel (the grey wheel between the two front wheels
on fig. 3.1). This reduces the model to a tricycle model with only a single angle δ to be
controlled. The δ angle relates itself to the two other angles by:
cot δ = cot δi + cot δo
2
(3.3)
The turn radius from the turn center O to C is then given by:
R =
p
a2 + l2 cot2 δ
(3.4)
Most often it is more useful to know the turn radius to the rear wheels, as it is often the
reference frame center of the vehicle, in which case a = 0. In other cases, it can be useful
to know the turn radius to some other reference point, such as the center of mass.
18
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:27==
𝛿o
𝛿i
l
w
R1
𝛿
C
a
O
R
x
y
Figure 3.1: Ackermann steering illustration
3.1.1
Tractor model
A vehicle with the Ackermann steering geometry can only follow the perimeter of a circle
with a radius defined by the steering angle δ (to clarify: the steering angle is one of
the control variables of the tractor, hence it is generally not constant).
Suppose that
the middle of the rear axle is defined as the origin of the reference frame of the tractor,
denoted by the vectors x and y on fig. 3.1, the tractor will move along the perimeter of
a circle with origin in O and radius R1. From this it can be observed that the vector x
is tangential to the circle formed by O and R1. This means that the tractor velocity is
always in the direction of the x reference vector, and there is no velocity along the y vector
of the tractor reference frame. This is not of much use in modeling the dynamics of the
tractor, so to get the velocity in the x and y directions with respect to the world reference
frame, the velocities in the tractor reference frame is multiplied with the rotation matrix,
given a rotation θ between the world and tractor reference frames:
 ˙xw
˙yw

=
cos θ
−sin θ
sin θ
cos θ
  ˙x
˙y

(3.5)
˙x is substituted by v indicating the velocity in the x-direction of the tractor frame, and
as previously explained, ˙y = 0, the expression reduces to:
 ˙xw
˙yw

=
v cos θ
v sin θ

(3.6)
The heading of the tractor, θ is a function of the velocity of the tractor, v and the steering
angle δ.
As mentioned above, the Ackermann steering geometry causes the vehicle to
move along the perimeter of a circle, where the radius is given by the steering angle. This
means that the motion of the tractor can be modeled as circular motion. Thus, in order
to get the angular velocity of the heading, the equation for angular velocity given circular
motion is applied:
˙θ = v
R1
(3.7)
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
19
==PAGE:28==
where ˙θ is the angular velocity of the tractor, v is the tangential velocity and R1 is the
turn radius to the center of the tractor reference frame. The equations from the previous
section can be applied, to yield an expression for ˙θ given the wheel angle δ:
˙θ = v
l tan δ
(3.8)
In practice, the tractor cannot change the velocity or the steering angle instantaneously
due to the dynamics of the engine and the steering actuators. A tractor is a relatively big
machine that can produce a lot of torque and force, but at the expense of slow dynamics.
Therefore, these dynamics are so significant that they cannot be neglected when modeling
the tractor.
The Gazebo model provided handles all of the internal dynamics, so the
details of the steering and driving dynamics will not be covered further. However it can
be generally stated, that the velocity, steering angle, acceleration and steering rate are
upper and lower bounded by some values (i.e.
the steering angle cannot exceed some
constant, and the tractor is not able to drive/accelerate/change heading faster than some
constant):
vmin ≤v ≤vmax
(3.9)
δmin ≤δ ≤δmax
(3.10)
˙vmin ≤˙v ≤˙vmax
(3.11)
˙δmin ≤˙δ ≤˙δmax
(3.12)
With these constraints in mind, the (simplified) tractor model can be described as:


˙xw
˙yw
˙θ

=


v cos θ
v sin θ
v
l tan δ


(3.13)
where v, δ are obtained from Gazebo by simulating the internal dynamics of the tractor,
given commanded values vc, δc. The values of the constants can be found in appendix B,
table B.1.
3.2
Robot Operating System (ROS)
Robot Operating System (ROS) is an open source middleware framework for robotics,
developed by Open Robotics [93]. It contains a wide range of tools, libraries, and software
to facilitate robotics development. The core of the ROS framework are nodes, topics,
publishers, messages and subscribers.
ROS nodes are elements of the framework that
perform some form of computation or processing of data. All nodes receive data through
a ROS subscriber, which listens to a ROS topic, which functions like channels of data.
Data appear on the topics via ROS publishers, which take computed data from a node
and publish it to a given topic, for other nodes to listen to via a subscriber. The data
published on the topics are encoded in ROS messages. In a simple closed-loop feedback
controller, the sensor, controller and actuator can be thought of as ROS nodes.
The
sensor node reads a value from a physical sensor, converts it to some physical value (e.g.
velocity), and publishes this on a topic. The controller node listens to the same topic and,
based on the sensor value, computes the control signal and publishes it on another topic.
The actuator node listens to topic and converts this message to a physical value (e.g.
motor voltage), which it applies to the actuator. This way, the ROS framework facilitates
easy development and communication between different elements of the system. ROS is
furthermore integrated in the Gazebo physics simulator, facilitating realistic simulations
of robotic systems.
20
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Classical local planners
This section will contain a theoretical review of the classical local planners, which were
chosen to compare to the RL planner.
3.3.1
Timed Elastic Band (TEB)
The Timed Elastic Band (TEB) planner is an extension of the previously developed elastic
band planner and was introduced in [26]. The original authors have improved it multiple
times, for car-like planning [37], and improvements to the optimization algorithm [38]. It
supports dynamic obstacles, is included in the ROS navigation stack, and is well docu-
mented with tutorials and use cases.
The main intuition about the TEB planner, is extending a elastic band between the robot
and the goal, which gets deformed by obstacles on its way, to get the optimal path for
the robot. The difference between TEB and the classic Elastic Band planner is that TEB
includes temporal aspects of planning, such as limited acceleration and velocity of the
robot. The elastic band is defined to be a series of n poses the robot must follow:
Q = {xi}i=0...n = {(x0, y0, β0)T , (x1, y1, β1)T , ...(xn, yn, βn)T }
(3.14)
where (xi, yi) is the position of the intermediate pose in some reference frame, and βi is
the orientation. The temporal properties of the elastic band is defined by the sequence τ:
τ = {∆Ti}i=0...n−1
(3.15)
where ∆Ti is the time between pose i and i + 1 in Q. The timed elastic band is then
constructed as a tuple of Q and τ:
B = (Q, τ).
(3.16)
The TEB poses are illustrated on fig. 3.2.
Reference
frame
TEB
poses
Figure 3.2: TEB poses
The objective of the TEB planner is to perform real time, weighted multi objective opti-
mization in real time, where the objective function is:
f(B) =
X
k
γkfk(B)
(3.17)
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
21
==PAGE:30==
where fk is some function that captures a given aspect, which is usually in the form of a
constraint approximation. The optimal TEB, denoted as B∗, is thus given by:
B∗= arg min
B f(B)
(3.18)
The functions fk in eq. (3.17) are the functions that constrain the TEB poses. In this
implementation, fk are approximations to constraints, such that they can be thought of
as cost functions to be minimized. For waypoints and obstacles, these functions can be
implemented as:
fpath = eΓ(dmin,j, rpmax, ϵ, S, n)
(3.19)
fobstacle = eΓ(−dmin,j, −romin, ϵ, S, n)
(3.20)
where dmin,j is the minimum distance from the TEB poses to either a waypoint or a
obstacle denoted as zj, rpmax is the max radius to a waypoint (the radius the robot must
be within to pass the waypoint successfully), romin is the footprint radius of the obstacle
(the radius if the robot passes within, a collision occurs). Intuitively, it can be stated that
dmin,j < rpmax and dmin,j > romin for each waypoint and obstacle respectively, to achieve
successful navigation. However, the TEB planner passes these constraints through the
approximation function eΓ, which is defined as:
eΓ(x, xr, ϵ, S, n) =
(
x−(xr−ϵ)
S
n
if x > xr −ϵ
0
otherwise
(3.21)
where x is the function variable, xr is the ideal constraint to upper bound x and S, n
and ϵ tunes the approximation.
The approximation function is zero up until xr −ϵ,
after which the function value starts to increase exponentially. The closer the constraint
is to be violated, or the more the constraint is violated, the more the function value
increases. Thereby, by minimizing these functions for all obstacles and waypoints, one
should get a TEB, consisting of poses that avoid obstacles and follows waypoints. To satisfy
acceleration and velocity constraints, a similar approach as with geometric constraints
(waypoint and obstacles). To satisfy nonholonomic constraints, for robots that can only
execute motion consisting of continuous arc segments of constant curvature, the following
penalty function is implemented:
fk(xi, xi+1) =





cos βi
sin βi
0

+


cos βi+1
sin βi+1
0



× di,i+1

2
(3.22)
where β is the heading at pose i and i + 1 respectively, di,i+1 is the direction vector
between poses xi and xi+1. This function thus penalizes difference in curvature of the
path at the two consecutive poses. Time optimality/fastest path is taken care of by the
following function:
fk =
 n
X
i=1
∆Ti
!2
(3.23)
which penalizes the time ∆Ti between two consecutive poses, and by minimizing this func-
tion, the fastest path will be obtained. All the fk functions are then used in eq. (3.17) and
subsequently optimized to obtain the optimal TEB, denoted as B∗. In the TEB planner
implementation, the optimization is carried out by converting the TEB to a hypergraph,
which is then optimized to obtain the optimal TEB, but further implementation details
22
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:31==
will not be covered here. The extension to car-like robots is described in [37]. It assumes
the same model as described in eq. (3.13), also not taking torque, inertia and friction
etc. into account. The optimization problem for car-like robots is defined as a nonlinear
program:
min
B
n−1
X
k=1
∆T 2
k
(3.24)
subject to:
• that x1 is equal to the current state of the robot
• xn is equal to the final state of the robot
• the path curvature at xk and xk+1 are equal
• the curvature of the path corresponds to a turn radius larger than the minimum
turn radius of the robot
• the obstacles are further away than some minimum distance (potentially also pre-
dicting motion of the obstacles)
• that the linear and angular velocities accelerations are within the limits of the robot
Further details are omitted in this thesis as it is assessed to be less relevant for the topic;
a more detailed description is in [37].
3.3.2
Dynamic Window Approach (DWA)
The dynamic window approach was introduced in [25], and is one of the most common
local planning algorithms for robots. In simple terms, the DWA algorithm samples possible
trajectories of the robot, discards the trajectories that collide with obstacles, and out of
the rest selects the path that scores the highest score based on some metric. This is done
in a loop until the goal is reached.
The DWA assumes that the trajectory of the robot can be approximated by a sequence of
arcs with constant curvature, where the curvature is determined by the linear and angular
velocity of the robot. The DWA algorithm thus needs to determine velocities (vi, ωi) for n
time steps between the current time t0 and the final time tn, under the condition that the
trajectory does not cause a collision. However, the space of all possible velocities over n
steps is a vast space, so the DWA algorithm only considers the first time interval (t0 →t1)
and assumes constant velocity / no acceleration for the remaining n −1 timesteps. This
leaves the search space to be two-dimensional and thus easier to work with, and since the
velocities will be updated at the next time step, performance is not lost by only considering
the velocity at the first time step. Of the set of circular trajectories, the set of admissible
velocities must then be determined such that the corresponding trajectories do not collide
with an obstacle. Given a velocity (v, ω) (linear and angular velocity respectively), the
set of admissible velocities, where the robot can stop before colliding with an obstacle is
given as:
Va =
n
(v, ω) | v ≤
p
2dist(v, ω)˙vb ∧ω ≤
p
2dist(v, ω) ˙ωb
o
(3.25)
˙vb and ˙ωb are the braking accelerations of the robot for linear and angular motion, respec-
tively. dist(v, ω) is the distance to the closest obstacle from the trajectory given (v, ω). In
order to further constrain the trajectories, the dynamic window is calculated, which only
contains the velocities which the robot can actually execute and be reached within the
next time interval. The dynamic window is given as:
Vd = {(v, ω) | v ∈[va −˙vt, va + ˙vt] ∧ω ∈[ωa −˙ωt, ωa + ˙ωt]}
(3.26)
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
23
==PAGE:32==
where (va, ω) is the actual velocity of the robot, t is the time interval where the accelera-
tions can be applied. Now, the resulting search space can be determined:
Vr = Vs ∩Va ∩Vd
(3.27)
where Vs is the space of all possible velocities, Va is the set of admissible velocities and Vd
is the dynamic window. The resulting space is thus the intersection of all these sets. Of
the velocities in Vr, a scoring function is applied:
G(v, ω) = σ (α · heading(v, ω) + β · dist(v, ω) + γ · velocity(v, ω))
(3.28)
The heading function is given as 180 −θ where θ is the angle between the heading of the
robot and the angle to the target point, when the robot is at some predicted position in the
future. The distance function is as described earlier a function that returns the distance
to the closest obstacle that will intersect with the curvature. If no such obstacle exist, the
function is set to a large constant. Finally, the velocity function balances fast movement
and completion of the trajectory, but also avoids too high speeds to avoid losing control
of the robot. DWA seeks to maximize this scoring function and choose the velocity that
maximizes the function. The DWA function described in [25] and implemented in ROS
[28] only supports differential drive robots. However a ROS implementation for car like
robots using DWA is presented in [32]. This modification generates the window based
on linear velocity and steering angle, i.e. the velocities and steering angles that can be
obtained during some time interval t, similar to eq. (3.26). For the trajectory generation,
the feasible subspace of steering angle and speed is sampled, and assessed using a cost
function, determining the total cost based on oscillation, obstacles, path deviation and
goal. The trajectory with the lowest cost function is then selected to be applied on the
robot and the loop continues until it reaches his goal.
3.4
Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) is one of the three machine learning paradigms, that tries
to mimic how humans and animals learn based on experience and rewards. The other
paradigms are supervised learning, which learns by getting exposed to many different sets
of inputs and outputs, and learns to predict the output based on the input (e.g. having a
picture as an input and an output predicting either a dog or a cat), and unsupervised
learning, which learns by finding patterns in data by itself, without being told what
is ”right or wrong”.
Reinforcement learning is somewhere in between, as it learns by
interacting with an environment and tries to maximize the returned reward. In simple
terms, it can be described by, e.g. teaching a dog how to sit. At first the dog has no idea
how to respond when the trainer says ”sit”. It may lay down or bark, but once it sits, the
trainer rewards the dog with a treat. Of course, the dog does not learn the connection
between the voice command and sitting down instantly, but as the trainer keeps repeating
the voice command (and perhaps gets different trainers with other voices to say the same
command), and giving treats when the dog responds to the command, over time the dog
will learn to associate a voice command with an action that gives a treat.
The central concepts in RL are the agent, environment, state st ∈S, action at ∈A and
reward rt, and their relation is illustrated in fig. 3.3. The agent is the decision making
body of the system, similar to a controller in conventional control theory. The input to the
agent is the state (or an observation) of the environment (a vector describing the current
state of the environment) and a reward signal (a measure of how good the previous action
was), and based on the inputs, it returns an action to the environment. This is done by
the policy, which is a mapping from the state space to the action space. Initially, the
24
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:33==
actions of the agent are random (the policy is randomly initialized), so the agent will
explore what actions give the highest returns. When applying a learning algorithm, over
time the agent will learn which action it should apply in a given state, to maximize the
overall reward, that is, it will learn a policy that maximizes rewards. In the example with
the dog, the agent will be the brain of the dog, the policy is the area of the brain that
associates voice commands with actions, the state will be the position the dog is currently
in and the sound signal from its ears. The action will be the position the dog will go to
after the command is given. More or less everything else is the environment; the body of
the dog, the trainer, potential distractions, etc. Obviously, the reward is the treat that is
given when the dog sits when the sit command is issued. The learning algorithm in the
brain of the dog should then ideally learn that ”sit” means to position itself in a sitting
position, and be able to do this under varying circumstances, such as with a command
from a different voice and in the presence of distractions.
Agent
Environment
Action
at
State
Reward
st
rt
st+1
rt+1
Figure 3.3: Agent and environment interaction
This section will describe the fundamentals of reinforcement learning, that being funda-
mental concepts and methods in reinforcement learning, as these serve as a essential basis
for more advanced and powerful methods, which will be described in the next section, and
subsequently used to develop navigation and obstacle avoidance for the tractor.
The following section is based on [57] and [63].
3.4.1
Markov Decision Process
The Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a way of formulating a RL problem mathemat-
ically. It describes the relationship between the agent and the environment in fig. 3.3.
The figure essentially represents a decision-making problem. At time t, the agent receives
a measurement of the state st, and based on this measurement, the agent decides on an
action at. The environment receives the action, then transitions to a new state st+1, and
returns a reward rt+1. These new measurements are then passed on to the actor in the
next time step. There exist both a finite and infinite MDP formulations, but only the in-
finite version will be covered here, as this is a more general formulation and more relevant
for this project. The infinite MDP is defined with 5 elements:
• State space S
• Action space A
• Transition probability model p(st+1|st, at) (the probability that st, at gives the state
st+1 at the next timestep
• Reward rt given st, at
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
25
==PAGE:34==
• Discount factor γ ∈(0, 1) to prevent the cumulative reward to go towards infinity
In an MDP, the environment is completely characterized by the transition probability
function. That also means, that for that the probability of transitioning to st+1, can only
depend on the state and action at time t, and must not depend on previous states. This
property is known as the Markov property, and is essential in RL theory, and is in many
cases a necessary assumption. The discount factor will be covered in more detail in the
following sections.
3.4.2
Reward function
Thus far, the reward function has only been mentioned on a general level as a function,
that returns a value, measuring how well the agent is performing, or how good the actions
it produced was. The higher the reward value, the better the action was, and the lower
the reward value, the worse the action was. Generally, there are two types of rewards:
dense/shaped rewards and sparse rewards. A dense reward is a reward which is given at
every timestep, and a sparse reward is only given once the agent completes the objective.
Either one can be used or a combination of both. An example of this could be that a
robot is rewarded every timestep if it is getting closer to the goal (dense reward) and
receives a big reward once it reaches the goal (sparse reward). There are pros and cons
to both methods. Only using sparse rewards makes the agent more free to interpret the
state and map it to the actions that lead to receiving the best rewards. For e.g. a robot to
reach a goal that only gets rewarded when it reaches the goal, the agent will find (ideally)
learn the most straightforward way to reach the goal. However, since actions are initially
random, the agent will likely receive 0 as reward for some time before the the ”correct”
actions have been applied to the environment. Only here the agent will know if the actions
were good or not. This obviously can lead to slow learning. Dense rewards on the other
hand will give rewards for every timestep, e.g. the rate at which a robot is approaching
its goal. In this way, the agent will always know if the actions were good or bad, and
usually this means faster learning. On the other hand, this will to some extent lead the
agent to be biased towards actions which maximize the dense rewards, which might lead
it to not reach the end objective because it is easier to obtain the dense rewards. As a
rule of thumb, the reward should only represent what is desired for the agent to achieve,
not how it should be achieved [57].
One might initially think, that the purpose of the agent is to take the action, that gives
the biggest reward for each step. This is, however, not the case, as this will most certainly
lead to suboptimal behavior. Assume a grid world, where a robot needs to go from its
position, to a goal position, in the fewest number of steps, as illustrated in fig. 3.4. In
this case, the reward function for each step might be the negative Manhattan distance
rt = −(|xgoal −xrobot| + |ygoal −yrobot|) such that the further away the robot is, the lower
the reward is. If the robot at each step takes the action that maximizes rt, it will follow
the red path, but end up hitting a wall and not reaching the goal. If it follows the green
path, it will reach the goal in the fewest steps possible, but to do this, the reward will
decrease as it goes vertical, but the sum of rewards will be maximized if it follows this
path.
While the example is quite simple, it should still serve to illustrate and motivate that the
objective should be to maximize the expected sum of rewards, and not the immediate
reward as that will most often lead to not completing the objective.
This motivates
introducing the return G at time t:
Gt = rt+1 + rt+2 + . . . + rT
(3.29)
26
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:35==
Robot
Goal
Figure 3.4: Grid world example
This equation is a sum of future rewards, starting from the next time step t + 1 and going
until some time T. Instead of maximizing rt for each timestep, Gt is the value to be
maximized, as this contains the sum of all future rewards, and maximizing this equation,
will naturally lead to the best performance.
This version is for episodic tasks, which
are tasks with a finite horizon, e.g. a game that is settled in a finite number of moves.
However, robotics tasks can rarely be defined on a finite horizon, or a horizon that is small
enough to be considered as finite. These tasks are called continuous, and are characterized
by T = ∞or T →∞. Maximizing Gt when T →∞is not feasible, as Gt will generally be
unbounded and go to infinity, which cannot be maximized. Therefore, the discount factor
γ is introduced, as well as the discounted return:
Gt = rt+1 + γrt+2 + γ2rt+3 + . . . =
∞
X
k=0
γkrt+k+1 = rt+1 + γGt+1
(3.30)
where 0 < γ < 1. This way, the return is converted into an infinite sum, which by the help
of γ will be bounded as long as the rewards are bounded. A γ close to 0 mostly considers
the immediate rewards, whereas a γ closer to 1 takes future rewards into consideration.
Even with this modification, maximizing the discounted sum of rewards should lead to the
best performance. The next question is then: how do we know the future rewards when
they have not been given yet? This will be answered by introducing the value function
and the expected return in the next section.
3.4.3
Policy and value function
The policy and value function in RL are two very central concepts, and are closely linked
together. The policy is a function π(a|s), is a mapping from states to action probabilities.
The way to interpret the policy is that, given a state s, it gives the probability of selecting
action a. The policy is similar to a traditional control law because it decides which action
to take based on the state.
One of the main tasks of RL is to determine the policy
using experience sampled from the environment. A deterministic policy selects the action
with the highest probability, and a stochastic policy returns an action sampled from the
probabilities returned. It is also important to note that an agent is not the same as a
policy, but the agent acts according to a policy.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
27
==PAGE:36==
The policy π tells the agent how to act, based on the state it observes, and this is essential
in computing the expected return based on some state, which is defined by the value
function or state-value function:
vπ(s) = Eπ [Gt|st = s] = Eπ
" ∞
X
k=0
γkrt+k+1
st = s
#
(3.31)
= Eπ [rt+1 + γGt+1|st = s]
(3.32)
=
X
a
π(a|s)
X
s′,r
p(s′, r|s, a)

r + γvπ(s′)

∀s ∈S
(3.33)
Equation (3.33) is known as the Bellman equation and is very central in the field of
RL. This equation provides the total expected sum of discounted rewards, in some state
s, following policy π. Similar to the value function, there is the action-value function
qπ(s, a):
qπ(s, a) = Eπ [Gt|st = s, at = a] = Eπ
" ∞
X
k=0
γkrt+k+1
st = s, at = a
#
(3.34)
qπ(s, a) returns the value of executing action a while in state s. The two functions can be
estimated by experience (using e.g. dynamic programming if the model of the environment
is known, or with Monte Carlo if the model is not known).
In RL, the general objective is to find a policy that maximizes the overall reward in the
long run. The policy π∗is denoted as the optimal policy, which for all states yields the
highest overall return, i.e. the optimal performance. The resulting optimal state value
and action value functions are then:
v∗(s) = max
π
vπ(s)
(3.35)
q∗(s, a) = max
π
qπ(s, a)
(3.36)
for all states and actions. The q∗(s, a) function gives the return of executing action a in
state s, and then following the optimal policy. If the state and action space are finite,
it is relatively straightforward to determine the optimal policy, once v∗or q∗has been
determined. From the value function, there will be at least one action for a given state
that yields the highest value in the Bellman equation. This/these actions will be assigned
a non-zero probability in the policy and will then yield the optimal policy. In other words,
the optimal policy is the greedily induced policy with respect to the optimal value function,
because the immediate best value given a state and action is guaranteed to be the best
value in the long run, when the value function is optimal. For q∗(s, a) it is even easier,
as for a given state, one only needs to iterate over the actions allowed in this state and
choose the action that yields the highest q∗(s, a). Determining the optimal value function
and policy is one of the main objectives of RL and is not a trivial problem. One of the
most basic ways of solving these problems is using dynamic programming (DP). DP is
one of the fundamental approaches in RL, and is theoretically important. DP revolves
around iteratively determining the optimal value function and subsequently the optimal
policy using methods such as value iteration and policy iteration. The main limitations of
DP is that it assumes a perfect model of the system (transition probabilities), and a finite
state, action, and reward space. Although methods exist to handle continuous spaces, DP
is still computationally intense for complex problems, and the requirement of a perfect
model is also infeasible for many problems. For this reason, DP will not receive more
attention in this thesis, and the focus will be on model-free methods, which learn a policy
from experience instead of directly from transition probabilities.
28
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:37==
3.4.4
Monte-Carlo approach
The Monte Carlo (MC) is one of the fundamental model-free learning algorithms that
learn only from experience. This is quite remarkable because it does not require any kind
of prior knowledge of the environment. It still uses some kind of model, but it only uses
the model for sampling the transitions. MC assumes that an RL task is episodic, meaning
that a task is terminated at some point under all circumstances, because only at an episode
termination are the value and policy updated. The basic idea of MC is to compute the
average of the returns of each state, and as the number returns increase, the value function
should converge to the expected value function given some policy. This can be done in
two ways; first-visit or every-visit. Given a trajectory of states, s0, s1, ..., sT then first
visit MC only uses the return at some state st once to compute the average return, even
though st may be visited several times. Every visit MC uses the return at st every time
the state is visited. By the law of large numbers, in each case, the average of returns will
converge to the expected return. The different methods have different properties; first-
visit generally has less bias in the estimate, whereas every-visit generally has less variance.
The incremental update rule for MC using the q function is [63]:
qπ(st, at) = qπ(st, at) +
1
N(st, at) (Gt −qπ(st, at))
(3.37)
where N(st, at) is the number of times the state action pair (st, at) has been visited. Since
MC works with episodes, it only computes the cost and policy after each episode, based
on the state trajectory collected during the episode.
Using MC also introduces the problem of exploration, because it is not guaranteed that
following some policy π, that all state-action pairs are visited. This could be solved by
inducing some randomness in the actions executed, such that new state-action pairs are
explored, and the agent potentially finds a new way to achieve its objective, maybe with
greater reward. Ideally, the agent should exploit the policy it knows gives a high reward,
but once in a while also try new actions, that may lead to an even better policy. This
problem is known as the exploitation/exploration problem, and is one of the most central
problems in RL. One common way to deal with this problem is using ϵ greedy exploration,
which is a way to make the agent select a random action with some probability ϵ. The
definition of an ϵ greedy policy is:
π(a|s) =



1 −ϵ +
ϵ
|A(s)|
if a = arg max
a
qπ(s, a)
ϵ
|A(s)|
if a ̸= arg max
a
qπ(s, a)
(3.38)
where |A(s)| is the number of allowed actions in state s. The expression above describes
the probabilities for selecting action a in state s. ϵ is between 0 and 1, where 0 is deter-
ministically choosing the best action always, and 1 makes it choose randomly. A common
use is that as the timesteps or value increase, ϵ is decreased, such that as the agent learns,
it explores less.
3.4.5
Temporal Difference (TD) learning
One of the main drawbacks of MC learning, is the episodic nature, where the cost and
policy is only updated after each episode. This means that MC is not very suitable for
continuing tasks, where episodes do not exist, and is relatively slow to converge. For this
reason, Temporal Difference (TD) learning is introduced, which is generally regarded as a
more versatile method. TD methods adjust the estimates after each time step, after new
information is available. The most basic TD update rule is given as:
V (st) ←V (st) + α (Rt+1 + γV (st+1) −V (st))
(3.39)
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
29
==PAGE:38==
which is calculated after the transition to st+1 and after receiving the reward Rt+1. V (s)
is the estimate of the true value function v(s). The term Rt+1+γV (st+1) is called the TD-
target, and is a new estimate of the value function in state st, but with new information
about the reward and the estimate at the next state.
Together with the current/old
estimate of the value function, they form the TD error:
δTD = Rt+1 + γ(V (st+1) −V (st))
(3.40)
The TD-error is multiplied with α, which is a step size, and then this term is added to
the old estimate, and replaces the estimate of the value function at state st. This is the
simplest form of TD learning, and this algorithm is known as TD(0) in the literature.
Using TD, it can be observed, that the estimate update is based on another estimate,
namely the TD target, this approach is called bootstrapping in RL terminology. Another
difference between MC and TD is that MC does not bootstrap, but TD does.
3.4.6
SARSA
SARSA (State, Action, Reward, State, Action) is an on-policy TD learning method that
uses the state action function instead of the value function. On-policy meaning that it uses
the same policy it learns to interact with the environment. In basic TD(0) learning, which
was described previously, only the state-to-state transition and the state value function
were considered. In SARSA, the learning is extended to consider the state-action to state-
action transition, and the value of each state-action pair is learned via q(s, a). For TD(0),
to update the value function, information about the current state and action is necessary,
along with the reward and the next state following the action. For SARSA, the current
state and action, along with the following reward, state and action is needed to update
the q-function estimate (hence the name and abbreviation). The update rule for SARSA
is given as:
Q(st, at) ←Q(st, at) + α (Rt+1 + γQ(st+1, at+1) −Q(st, at))
(3.41)
Q(s, a) is the estimate of the true action value function q(s, a). It can be observed that
the SARSA update rule is analogous to the TD(0) update rule. Similarly, the TD target
and error are analogous to that of TD(0). The action taken by the policy π at time t is
usually some sort of ϵ-greedy policy based on Q(s, a). If all state-action pairs are visited
an infinite number of times, SARSA will converge to the optimal action value function.
3.4.7
Q-learning
Q-learning is another TD learning method, but an off-policy variant. Off-policy algorithms
are algorithms that explore the environment with a different policy µ, than the policy it
learns π. The advantage of using off-policy is that it usually explores more than on-policy
and uses this experience to learn the target policy π, instead of using the same policy to
explore each time. The Q-learning update rule is defined as:
Q(st, at) ←Q(st, at) + α

Rt+1 + γ max
a
Q(st+1, a) −Q(st, at)

(3.42)
For each iteration of Q-learning, the agent will select an action based on a ϵ-greedy policy,
and take this action, and observe the reward and new state, after which the update rule
is applied, and this will repeat until Q has converged or at a possible terminal state. The
Q function in the TD target of the Q-learning update rule is the greedy policy, meaning it
will correspond to the largest Q-value over all actions. The TD-target is in some sense the
target of the Q-function, as when the TD error goes to zero, it means that the Q-function
has converged. Q-learning directly estimates the optimal state action function, regardless
of the policy used for exploration. This is what makes it an off-policy method.
30
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:39==
3.5
Deep reinforcement learning
The methods mentioned in the previous section are generally denoted as tabular methods
in the literature, since the value function and the Q function are often thought of as tables
(a 1D table for the value function, with the value as a function of state, and 2D for the
Q function with the value as a function of state and action). It is easy to imagine that
these are practically feasible only for problems with a small and discrete state and action
space. Especially with problems in robotics and control where the state and action space
is inherently continuous, the number of elements in the state and action space is approx-
imately infinite. Even though most control systems nowadays are implemented digitally
and the state and action space seen from the point of view of a digital controller are tech-
nically discrete, the resolution of a discretized signal nowadays is so high that a policy or
value/Q-function would have to take up an astronomical amount of memory. As an exam-
ple, a simple SISO system with a 16 bit state and action signal would require a Q-table
with 232 entries, and just adding a state or action signal will cause the Q-table to increase
exponentially. This problem is also known as the curse of dimensionality in literature.
For this reason, for most RL applications, some approximation of the policy and value/Q-
function is needed to avoid the intangible size of a tabular method with large state/action
space. Some fundamental methods of function approximation include a linear function
approximation or tile coding; however, in recent years deep neural networks (DNN) have
been the state-of-the-art in function approximation for RL. This is largely because theo-
retically DNNs are the universal function approximator, meaning a sufficiently deep and
wide DNN can approximate any function, and practically because DNNs have proven to
perform great in other (similar) applications. This section will describe the theoretical
basis of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), along with some methods, including the
method that will be used to implement autonomous navigation and obstacle avoidance,
the PPO algorithm. The following section is based on [57] and [63].
3.5.1
Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
Similarly to how reinforcement learning attempts to mimic how humans learn, artificial
deep neural networks (DNNs) attempt to mimic the internal structure of the human brain.
DNNs have been of interest in research for a long time, but have become increasingly
popular in recent years due to the increase in computing power, as these methods require
a lot of data to train successfully. DNNs are of interest in RL for policy and value function
approximation, as both of these functions can be quite complex, but DNNs are also known
for being good at learning complex nonlinear relations and features, which makes them
a good match theoretically. The core of DNNs are the neurons, which take in a series of
inputs from another node, compute a weighted sum of the inputs (linear combination),
adds a constant bias, and feed the result into a nonlinear activation function, which outputs
a scalar value, which is then an input to the next neuron. In this way, DNNs leverage the
simplicity and efficiency of linear functions and powerful non-linear functions to finally be
able to learn complex relations between the input and output. The relation between the
input X and output Y is given as:
Y = H(X)
(3.43)
where H is the function describing the DNN.
In fig. 3.5, a 2-layer DNN is illustrated. The inputs to the network is inputted to the
left, through the input neurons, after which they get fed through to the hidden layers,
where the actual features are extracted from the input. One of the main reasons DNN is
powerful, is the layered approach, where the data from the previous layer gets fed into the
next one. Intuitively, this can be explained as the first layers identify simple features in
the data, and the later layers combine features to identify more complex patterns in the
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
31
==PAGE:40==
Input layer
Hidden layers
Output layer
x1
x2
x3
y1
y2
Figure 3.5: Deep neural network illustration
data. These layers are called hidden layers, as they are hidden, as opposed to the inputs
and outputs. After the data has been passed through the hidden layers, it is condensed in
however many output neurons is needed. In a simple classification task, the input could
be image pixels, and the output could be ”dog” or ”cat” (although this would need a
significantly bigger network than illustrated in fig. 3.5.
As mentioned, it is in the hidden layers that the real magic happens, namely in the neurons.
In fig. 3.6, a detailed and zoomed in view of a single neuron in one of the hidden layers is
shown.
Neuron  in layer 
Figure 3.6: Neuron in a neural network
The focus of fig. 3.6 is the neuron j in layer L. As seen in fig. 3.5, a neural network consists
of several layers, with several neurons in each layer, so it is important to distinguish
these.
On the left are all the inputs to the neuron, coming from the neurons in the
32
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:41==
previous layers, denoted by a(L−1)
k
where k refers to the value of the k-th neuron in layer
L −1. Each of these values has a weight associated with it, denoted by w(L)
jk . Inside the
neuron, a weighted sum of the values from the previous layers and the associated weights
is computed. Furthermore, the bias b(L)
j
is added to this weighted sum. This yields the
intermediate value z(L)
j
:
z(L)
j
= b(L)
j
+
nL−1
X
k=0
a(L−1)
k
w(L)
jk
(3.44)
Then z(L)
j
is passed through the activation function σ(z). The purpose of the activation
function is to add non-linearity to the neuron. The activation function can be of many
different kinds, some common ones are ReLU, sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent, and leaky
ReLU. The weights and biases between the neurons are the parameters that are learned
based on examples and/or experience.
If the input data to a neural network consists of e.g.
image data or spatial data, it
is in many cases advantageous to use a convolutional neural network (CNN). In CNNs,
convolutions are applied to the input data, the main purpose of which is feature extraction
and to some extent dimensionality reduction, before passing the data through a fully
connected network, as previously described.
A good reason for using CNNs for, e.g.,
image data is that these are often very high-dimensional data, which can be difficult for
the fully connected network to learn. Furthermore, the input to a fully connected DNN
need be a vector, and image data is at least 2-dimensional, which means that the image
matrix need be flattened into a column vector. In this process, the spatial relation of
pixels gets obscured, making it more difficult for the network to learn the features of the
data.
Input
channels
Output
channels
Figure 3.7: Convolution layer
On fig. 3.7, an illustration of a 2D convolutional layer is shown. To the left, is the input,
denoted by X. In this case, the data is 2D, with 3 channels, so similar to an image, with a
2D image plane, composed of RGB colors. The convolution operation happens by sliding
a convolution kernel or filter, here denoted by W, over the input data, and convolving a
subset of the input data (the colored boxes) with the kernel, to produce a value for the
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
33
==PAGE:42==
feature map Y . Since X has 3 channels, each W consists of three 3 × 3 kernels, where for
each channel, the sum of the elementwise products are computed, and summed across the
channel. To calculate y(1)
111, the sum of the elementwise products of the blue, green and red
section of X and the respective kernel in W (1) is computed, and summed, and a bias is
added. The final value is a scalar, and is equal to y(1)
111. To compute the next value, y(1)
112,
the subset of X (the colored squares) are shifted one stride length (in this case the stride
is 1), so the blue, green and red box are now centered around x123. The same operation
is carried out again, and y(1)
112 is obtained. This is done for the entirety of X. For the
second feature map y(2), the exact same operation is done, but instead with the kernels of
W (2). This finally yields two feature maps, which in theory should be able to distinguish
between two features in the input data. The values in the kernels, along with the biases
are generally not known in advance, and are the values which need to be learned. The
dimension of the output feature maps can further be reduced by e.g. maxpooling, where
the maximum value of the 4 top left values is computed, and put into the first element
of a new matrix. Then the maximum of the 4 top right values are computed, and put
into a matrix, and so on. This way a 3 × 3 feature map is reduced to 2 × 2. When all
the convolutions are done, the feature maps are flattened, and fed into a fully connected
network.
Now two parts of a DNN have been described, but the question still remains how do these
networks learn their weights and biases? One can easily imagine that even for a network
with just a few layers, neurons and convolutions, the number of tuneable parameters
quickly gets out of hand, and impossible to assign any practical meaning to. The training
process will not be covered in detail in this thesis, but a brief overview of the process is
given. It is assumed that a neural network (with or without convolutions is not important)
is given, with the parameters (weights and biases) initialized randomly. The training is
then given as an iterative 4-step process.
1. Forward pass
2. Loss calculation
3. Gradient calculation
4. Parameter update
In the forward pass, some input data X is fed through the network to generate the pre-
dicted output Y :
Y = H(X, θ)
(3.45)
In this case, the DNN is also given as a function of the parameters θ, as they will change
as training progresses. Naturally, since the network is initialized with random parameters,
it is expected that Y is a bad prediction. In cases such as classification, a loss function can
be defined, based on the predicted output Y and the desired output Y ∗(in classification
tasks, the training data always consist of input data and the corresponding output data).
A common loss function is mean squared error:
L(θ) = 1
N
N
X
i=0
(Y ∗
i −Yi)2
(3.46)
But the loss can be defined in many different ways, depending on the use case. What
is important is that the loss function represents something that should be minimized,
such that the predictions are more accurate or desirable. To minimize the loss function,
34
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:43==
the gradient with respect to the weights needs to be determined. This can be done by
backpropagation, which is a technique utilizing the chain rule to determine the gradient
of the loss function with respect to the parameters:
∇L = ∂L
∂θ
(3.47)
The chain rule is used, because the loss is a function of the output, which is a function of
the parameters and values of the previous layer, so by applying the chain rule iteratively,
the gradient with respect to the parameters can be computed. This is best explained by
an example. In fig. 3.8 a 2-layer network is illustrated. The input x is multiplied by the
weight w1 and added to the bias b1, resulting in z1, which is passed through an activation
function σ, resulting in a1.
Figure 3.8: Simple backpropagation example
Starting from the right, it is straightforward to determine ∂L
∂y . Next, it can be observed
that y is a function of w2, a1 and b2, and since y = a1w2 + b2 it is also straightforward to
determine
∂y
∂a1 ,
∂y
∂w2 and ∂y
∂b2 . Now the following relations can be made, where all functions
on the right side are known:
∂L
∂w2
= ∂L
∂y
∂y
∂w2
(3.48)
∂L
∂b2
= ∂L
∂y
∂y
∂b2
(3.49)
∂L
∂a1
= ∂L
∂y
∂y
∂a1
(3.50)
Now, similar relations can be made for the first layer, since the expression for z1 as a
function of x, w1 and b1 is known:
∂L
∂w1
= ∂L
∂a1
∂a1
∂z1
∂z1
∂w1
(3.51)
∂L
∂b1
= ∂L
∂a1
∂a1
∂z1
∂z1
∂b1
(3.52)
(3.53)
The parameter vector is defined as the tuneable parameters θ =

w1
b1
w2
b2
T , thus
all the information needed to determine ∇L(θ) is known. This example is general and
simplified, but still serves to demonstrate the backpropagation of gradients using the chain
rule. The final step is the parameter update, which is usually done via a gradient descent
algorithm:
θ ←θ −α∇L(θ)
(3.54)
∇L(θ) describes the direction of steepest ascent of the loss function, therefore the gradient
descent rule takes a step in the direction of the negative gradient, to decrease the loss as
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
35
==PAGE:44==
much as possible, where the step length is scaled with the learning rate α. This equation
is iterated until convergence. In practice, the parameter update is done via stochastic
gradient descent, which separates the training data and randomizes it, before applying
gradient descent. Furthermore, regularization is also implemented in many learning algo-
rithms, which penalizes e.g. the magnitude of weights to prevent overfitting, but this will
not be covered here.
3.5.2
Value function approximation
Value function approximation aims to approximate the value function and, in the context
of DRL, this is done with a neural network. One of the most popular DRL algorithms that
uses the value function approximation is Deep Q-Learning (DQN) [58]. The algorithm is
very similar to Q-learning, but instead of using a Q-table for state-action pairs, a neural
network is used to approximate the Q-table. However, in order to extract a policy from
the Q-function, the argmax with respect to the actions of the Q-function needs to be taken
to find the action with the highest expected return. This means that the usefulness of
DQN is limited to a discrete action space. For this reason, value function methods/DQN
will not receive more attention, as continuous control is the focus.
3.5.3
Policy gradient methods
Policy gradient methods aim to estimate the policy directly, without estimating the value
function first. These methods rely on a parameterized policy, e.g. via a DNN, and update
the policy via policy gradients, which is a measure of how the expected return changes
as the policy parameters change. Thus, by optimizing the policy gradient, the policy will
learn to take the actions leading to high returns. Policy gradient methods tend to have
good convergence properties, the ability to learn stochastic policies (the policy returns a
probability distribution where the action is sampled), inherent exploration in the policy
(due to the stochastic nature of the policy), and compatibility with large and continuous
action spaces. Furthermore, in some cases, the value function is more complex than the
policy, in which case it is more straightforward to estimate the policy directly.
Policy gradient methods rely on the policy being parametric, with the parameters defined
by θ and the output of the policy being a probability distribution over the actions, e.g.
defined by a mean and standard deviation. The value of a parameterized policy πθ is
defined as the return from some initial state s0 to the final state:
J(θ) = vπθ(s0)
(3.55)
Thus, it is desired to maximize J(θ). A straightforward way to do this is the gradient
ascent step, which is analogous to gradient descent, but aims to find a maximum instead
of minimum:
θ ←θ + α∇θJ(θ)
(3.56)
where α is the learning rate and ∇θJ(θ) is the gradient of the value function. A relevant
question then arises; how can ∇θJ(θ) be determined? The policy gradient theorem [57]
defines the gradient of the value function as:
∇θJ(θ) =
X
s
µ(s)
X
a
∇π(a|s)qπ(s, a)
(3.57)
36
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:45==
where µ(s) is the steady state probability of being in state s. This can be rewritten as :
∇θJ(θ) = E
"X
a
∇π(a|st)qπ(st, a)
#
(3.58)
= E
"X
a
π(a|st)∇π(a|st)
π(a|st) qπ(st, a)
#
(3.59)
= E
∇π(at|st)
π(at|st) qπ(at, st)

(3.60)
= E [qπ(at, st) ∇log π(at|st)]
(3.61)
q(st, at) is the true action-value function, which is generally not available, so an estimate
is used instead. The policy gradient theorem generally exists in a few different variations
[68]. In one of the first and fundamental policy gradient algorithms, REINFORCE [64]
collects a episodic trajectory of length T according to πθ, and for every step t in the
trajectory it computes the discounted return Gt:
Gt =
T−1
X
k=t
γk−trk
(3.62)
where rk is the immediate reward. Then it applies the policy gradient parameter update:
θ ←θ + α∇J(θ)
(3.63)
where:
∇J(θ) = γtGt∇θlogπ(at|st, θ)
(3.64)
After the parameter update, it collects a new trajectory based on the updated policy,
and updates the parameters again, based on the new collected rewards. This way, REIN-
FORCE only uses the policy for exploration, and updates the policy in the direction that
gives the largest increase in performance, and should in theory gradually choose more of
the actions that lead to high rewards, as the iterations increase. Since REINFORCE only
updates after the episode terminates, it is categorized as a Monte Carlo method. This
means that REINFORCE also can suffer from high variance and slow convergence. To
improve this, a baseline function b(st) can be implemented in the parameter update:
θ ←θ + αγt(Gt −b(st))∇θlogπ(at|st, θ)
(3.65)
where the baseline function can be any function that does not depend on actions, however
a common choice for this is the value function Vπ(st), because it is an estimate of the
expected return given st. The baseline function helps to reduce fluctuations in the reward
signal for a more stable update. Even though the baseline can help to reduce variance, it
might introduce bias in return.
3.5.4
Actor-critic methods
Actor-critic methods, both the policy (actor) and value function (critic) is learned. How-
ever, it is still a policy gradient, but it uses the value function for bootstrapping in the
parameter update (as the baseline), which helps reduce variance. In a way, actor-critic
extends REINFORCE with baseline, to be online, and not requiring to wait for an episode
to finish and a complete trajectory to be available. The critic learns the expected return
of each state, which the actor uses to choose the actions with the highest returns. Both
the actor and critic are usually implemented as neural networks (sometimes separately,
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
37
==PAGE:46==
sometimes with shared layers), which are trained based on the experience. A simple actor-
critic algorithm, which uses DNNs for the actor and critic, collects a trajectory (rollout)
of some N tuples (st, at, rt) as training DNN works better with a batch of samples instead
of one. For each tuple, the return is computed from the collected trajectory:
Gi =



PN−2
k=i γk−irk
if sN−1is terminal state
γN−1 ˆV (sN−1, ψ) + PN−2
k=i γk−irk
bootstrapping
(3.66)
where i = 0, 1, ..., N −1, ˆV is the value function estimate and ψ is the value function
parameters. Then the advantage estimate is calculated:
δi = Gi −ˆV (si, ψ)
(3.67)
The gradients for the actor and critic are accumulated for all N tuples:
gv ←gv + β∇ψδ2
i
(3.68)
gπ ←gπ + αδi∇θlogπ(ai|si, θ)
(3.69)
where α and β are step sizes.
After the above equations have been computed for all
N tuples in the trajectory, a gradient ascent is performed on gv and gπ to update the
parameters of the actor and critic.
3.5.5
Trust Region Policy Optimization
In the standard policy gradient methods, usually only a small step is taken in the direction
of the gradient of the loss function, determined by the learning rate/step size α. However,
even though the algorithm only takes a small step in the parameter space, it may result in
a large difference in the policy space, i.e. the new policy may change a lot compared to the
old policy. In general, this may lead to a policy getting progressively worse, because the
policy itself is used to collect new experiences. If a new policy is bad, then the next rollout
will also collect bad data, etc. This makes these algorithms susceptible to falling in local
optima and makes it very difficult for them to recover. Trust Region Policy Optimization
(TRPO) [71] is a method, that keeps the policy update relatively small, to avoid radically
updating the policy and risk divergence. The TRPO update is defined as:
θ = arg max
θ
Lθold(θ)
(3.70)
s.t. DKL(θold, θ) ≤δclip
(3.71)
where θold denotes the parameters before the parameter update, Lθold(θ) is the objec-
tive function based on the old parameters. DKL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL-
divergence), which is a measure of how different two probability distributions are, and is
more formally defined as:
DKL(θold, θ) = DKL(πθold(s,a), πθ(s, a)) =
X
πθold(s, a) log
πθold(s, a)
πθ(s, a)

(3.72)
This approach measure how much the policy actually changes, and not just the parameters,
and adds a constraint that the difference must be equal to or less than δclip. This approach
has shown good results on continuous control, and tends to give monotonic improvement.
The loss function used in TRPO (also denoted as the surrogate loss) is defined as:
L = E
 πθ(st, at)
πθold(st, at)
ˆAt

(3.73)
38
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:47==
where ˆAt is an estimation of the advantage function, e.g. given by GAE [68]. Usually the
advantage is given as:
At(st, at) = Q(st, at) −V (st)
(3.74)
In practice, the objective function and KL constraint are approximations to lighten the
computational load, and the KL divergence is based on a mean divergence, instead of
considering all points in the state space.
3.5.6
Proximal Policy Optimization
While TRPO showed good performance in continuous control and Atari games, it still has
some inherent downsides. First, the core of TRPO is constrained optimization, which is
computationally expensive, especially on this scale. TRPO is also not compatible with
dropout and policies that share value and a policy network. To improve on TRPO, the
same authors propose Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), which is based on the concepts
introduced with TRPO. As previously shown, PPO has proved to be an effective algorithm
with regard to tuning, simplicity, and stability. PPO proposes using a clipped surrogate
objective function:
LCLIP = E
h
min(rt(θ ˆAt, clip(rt(θ), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt
i
(3.75)
where rt(θ) =
πθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st) and ϵ is a hyperparameter which is a measure of how much the
policy is allowed to change between updates ([72] suggests ϵ = 0.2). The first term in
clip is the same objective as in TRPO. The function clip clips the probability ratio, which
should keep rt(θ) within the interval [1 −ϵ, 1 −ϵ] as there is no benefit of changing the
policy more than what ϵ suggests. The clipped surrogate objective can be simplified into
the below expression [94]:
LCLIP = E
h
min(rt(θ) ˆAt, g(ϵ, ˆAt))
i
(3.76)
where
g(ϵ, A) =
(
(1 + ϵ)A
A ≥0
(1 −ϵ)A
otherwise
(3.77)
This simplification makes the intuition behind the clipped objective more clear. If the
advantage ˆAt is positive (the action corresponds to an expected increase in return), the
objective function increases if, by the update, the given action becomes more likely (pos-
itive advantage means that the agent should encourage this action).
However, when
πθ(at|st) > (1 + ϵ)πθold(at|st), the objective function will be clipped at (1 + ϵ) ˆAt and any
incentive to do a large update is removed. In the case of the advantage being negative,
the action probability should be less than the previous policy to avoid actions that lead
to lower returns. In this case, if πθ(at|st) < (1 −ϵ)πθold(at|st), the objective function will
be clipped at (1 −ϵ) ˆAt.
[72] suggests expanding the objective function to include a value loss term and an entropy
term:
LCLIP+V F+S
t
= E

LCLIP
t
+ c1LV F
t
+ c2S[πθ](st)

(3.78)
where c1, c2 are coefficients, S is an entropy bonus and LV F
t
= (Vθ(st) −V targ
t
)2
The PPO algorithm collects a rollout with N actors using πθold for T timesteps and
computes the advantage estimates for all timesteps. After each rollout, it optimizes the
surrogate loss with respect to the parameters θ, using K epochs and a minibatch of size
M ≤NT. This process of collecting rollouts and updating the parameters is what updates
the policy. After the update, the rollouts are collected with the new policy, and the process
repeats.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
39
==PAGE:48==
4
Simulation environment
The implementation of the local planner in this project will be carried out in simulation
only. This is due to time and complexity limitations, as a real life implementation will
require considerably more effort in design, setup, evaluation and safety.
Furthermore,
when training a RL agent on a robotic system, it is often more beneficial to do the bulk
of the training in simulation, and once the agent in the simulation has reached good
performance, the model can be fine tuned by continuing the training on the real system.
The reason for this is first of all safety; the policy network is randomly initialized, which
makes the actions in the beginning of training unpredictable and most likely not in line
what is desirable for the system, which obviously may lead to unsafe behavior. Secondly,
since the policy is randomly initialized, the actions will have high variance and be noisy.
Applying these actions directly to actuators is also not desirable, as this may damage
the actuators themselves. A third good reason to start in simulation is that a model in
simulation is of lower complexity than the real system. This makes the training (in theory)
focus on learning the important dynamics of the system (i.e. the dynamics modeled by
the model in the simulation) first, and then later the more complex dynamics which the
simulator may not model well or model at all.
AGCO has provided a high fidelity model and simulator using the ROS/Gazebo framework,
which includes a highly detailed graphical model of the tractor, implements, obstacles and
environment in general. The desired outcome of this project is to successfully implement
RL based local planning in this ROS/Gazebo simulation, both to make a quantitative
and qualitative assessment of the planner and comparison to the classical planners, but
also to make easy to understand videos for the SAVA project, as well as communicate
the findings of this project. Even though it is possible to train the RL agent directly in
Gazebo, it was found to be rather slow to train due to the highly detailed model and
the extensive ROS stack running as a part of the simulation, even with the graphical
simulator disabled. For this reason, it was decided to make a low-detail simulation using
Pygame in Python, implementing the model from section 3.1.1, in hopes that it would
speed up the simulation. The training needs to do millions of steps before results start to
show, so even a slight improvement each step will pay off in the long run when training.
Furthermore, by creating a custom made simulator, one has more control the environment
wrt.
visualization, showing data, spawning/moving obstacles, etc.
The custom made
simulator also allows for easier multi-agent training, where the training algorithms collect
samples from multiple environments running in parallel, making the training faster and
more robust. Lastly, by using Python and well known libraries, it allows use of the High
Performance Computing (HPC) stack at DTU, which offers fast computing abilities, and
allows training multiple agents at once, to more efficiently find out what parameters and
reward function works the best. Even though developing a custom simulator will take
time, it was assessed to be an investment, to be able to train faster on the HPC with
multiple agents per training, and in the long run spend less time on figuring out how
something should be done in Gazebo, and just implementing it in the python simulator
instead.
Based on these pros and cons in table 4.1, it is assessed that making a custom python
simulator is justified use of time and resources, as it will be beneficial in the long run.
This chapter will firstly describe the Gazebo simulator, then the Python simulator, and
finally a section about how the perception of obstacles in the simulation environment is
40
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:49==
Table 4.1: Summary of pros and cons of simulation frameworks
Gazebo simulation
Python simulator
Pros
Cons
Pros
Cons
• High quality simulation
• Graphical simulator
• Include all dynamics
• Slow training
• Resource demanding
• Not compatible with HPC
• Multi-agent learning is difficult
• Parallel training is difficult
• Highly customizable
• Faster simulation/step time
• Multi agent learning is easier
• Can be trained on the HPC
• Parallel training is easy
• (Theoretically) faster learning
• Takes time to develop
• Low level of detail
• Will most likely require
training in Gazebo anyways
• No 3D graphics
carried out.
4.1
Gazebo simulation
Gazebo [95] is a high-end physics simulator, often used for robotics simulation in connec-
tion with ROS, which is also what AGCO is using for simulating autonomous tractors. For
this project, a simulation environment with a fully functional tractor has been provided
by AGCO. When used with ROS, Gazebo works as a digital twin of the real world, and
attempts to simulate how the environment behaves in real life, given some inputs from a
control system, along with emulating sensor data from the tractor, as it would have been
in real life. The input data to the simulation, and the sensor data from the simulation is
handled by ROS, via the topics and messages. This way, if a robot in real life is configured
with the same topics, sensors, etc. as in the Gazebo simulation, the framework developed
in simulation can be directly implemented on a real robot. This section will explain how
the tractor is controlled in the simulation, how data is extracted from the simulation, and
how how obstacles are handled.
4.1.1
Tractor control
As mentioned, the tractor is controlled via Ackermann steering. Practically, this means
the tractor is given a commanded velocity and steering angle, which both serve as setpoints
for the respective signals. The tractor in Gazebo already has an in-built controller, which
converts the setpoints to control signals to the actuators, and subsequently to torques and
forces, applied by the actuators. The Gazebo model is naturally more complex than the
one described in section 3.1.1, as the Gazebo model e.g. applies a torque to the steering
wheels, which results in a steering angle rate which is not constant. This is due to friction
forces, which makes the wheel turn easier (i.e. faster with a lower applied torque) while
the wheel is moving. This is just one of the examples that illustrates the level of detail in
the Gazebo model.
Controlling the tractor is as simple as sending a ROS message of type AckermannDrive
[96]. Even though this message contains fields for steering angle velocity, acceleration,
and jerk, only the velocity and steering angle are actually used in this implementation.
The steering_angle field of the message correspond to the virtual steering angle δc from
section 3.1.1. The velocity field corresponds to the velocity applied to the front wheels,
so this corresponds to vc cos(δ) compared to section 3.1.1. If a message of this type is
published on the topic /fendt_942_ad/cmd_vel, the tractor executes the given command,
and starts driving.
4.1.2
Handling obstacles
All supported obstacles have their properties defined in a file called sim_params.yaml which
gets loaded when the simulation starts. This file also contains other general parameters,
such as topic names, coefficients etc., which are common for all simulations, for easy recon-
figuration. These parameters gets loaded into the ROS parameter server, where all nodes
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
41
==PAGE:50==
can access them easily. All obstacles must be configured in the variable obstacle_types.
An example for a single obstacle (a rock) could be:
1
obstacle_types:
2
- {identifier: "rock",
3
label: "rock",
4
radius: 2.0,
5
width: 0,
6
length: 0,
7
static: True,
8
model_folder_name: "rock",
9
costmap_include: True,
10
yaw0: 0.0}
In the example, identifier is a unique identifier of the object, which must consist of only
letters. This is used to name objects in the simulation as rock1, rock2, etc. The label is an
arbitrary label, which can be whatever is desired to describe the obstacle. The footprint
of the obstacle can either be defined as a circle with the radius parameter, or a rectangle,
using width and height. Whichever is not used should be left at zero. The static parameter
is a boolean, indicating whether the obstacle is static or dynamic. model_folder_name is the
folder name of the graphic model for the obstacle. costmap_include is a boolean that decides
whether to put the obstacle in the costmap for the classical planners. Finally, the yaw0 is
the yaw angle of the obstacle, if it needs to have a specific heading when spawned. To
actually spawn the obstacles in the simulation, they must be defined in another parameter
file, called obs_params.yaml, which is simulation specific i.e. not general for all simulations.
The obstacles to spawn are given in the parameter obstacle_coordinates:
1
obstacle_coordinates:
2
- {identifier: "rock", type: "fixed", coordinates: [[30,0,0,0.75]]}
3
- {identifier: "tree", type: "random", center: [30,30,0,0], height: 5, width:
5, yaw_range: 3.14, number: 3}
The example shows a rock and some trees which need to be spawned in the simulation.
The rock is at a fixed, determined position given by coordinates: [[x,y,z,yaw], [...]]. To
add more rocks, add more coordinates in the list. The trees are spawned within a height by
width box, centered around center: [x,y,z,yaw]. This will spawn 3 trees randomly within
this box, with a random heading within ±yaw_range.
Dynamic obstacles are implemented via Actors in Gazebo [97], which are human-like
models with walking animations, and can be given a path to follow. To spawn these, they
must be manually included in the world file for the simulation, similar to this example:
1
<actor name="actor1">
2
<pose >10 10 1.2138 0 0 0</pose>
3
<skin>
4
<filename >moonwalk.dae</filename >
5
<scale >1.0</scale>
6
</skin>
7
<animation name="walking">
8
<filename >walk.dae</filename >
9
<scale >1.000000</scale>
10
<interpolate_x >true</interpolate_x >
11
</animation >
12
<plugin name="actor_plugin" filename="libgazebo_ros_actor_command.so">
42
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:51==
13
<follow_mode >path</follow_mode >
14
<path_topic >/actor1/cmd_path </path_topic >
15
<stop_topic >/actor1/stop </stop_topic >
16
<linear_velocity >1</linear_velocity >
17
<angular_velocity >2.5</angular_velocity >
18
</plugin>
19
</actor>
This code must be placed within the <world> tags of the world file.
Most of the code
is boilerplate, but for more actors in a simulation, this code must be repeated, and the
number in actor1 must be incremented, so only one actor has a specific name. The <pose>
tags give the pose of the actor in x y z roll pitch yaw. The <path_topic> is the topic for
which the path of the actor is published to, and the path the actor follows. If the actor
needs to stop, it listens for a command on the <stop_topic>, and stops when it receives this
message. Actors are configured via the actor_data parameter in the obs_params.yaml file:
1
actor_data:
2
- {actor1: {type: "path", coordinates: [[10,10],[20,20]], repeat: True}}
3
- {actor2: {type: "circle", center: [10,10], radius: 5, samples: 10, theta0:
0, repeat: True}}
4
- {actor3: {type: "random", bound: [[20,10],[40,10],[20,-10],[40,-10]], repeat
: True}}
actor1 is configured to follow a path defined by the coordinates [[10,10],[20,20]], and
repeat this path (i.e. when the final coordinate is reached, it goes to the first one again).
actor2 follows a circular path with center in [10,10] with a radius of 5 meters. The circle
is discretized in 10 coordinates, the actor starts at a polar angle of theta0 wrt. the circle
center, and repeats forever. actor3 follows a random waypoint given within the rectangular
boundary defined by bound, and also repeats for the duration of the simulation.
The actual spawning of obstacles is done by the spawner node, which takes all obstacles
in the parameter file, assigns them a unique name, and spawns them via the gazebo/
spawn_sdf_model service, with rospy. The spawner node also spawns the tractor at a coor-
dinate and with a heading given in obs_params.yaml using tractor_start_pose: [x,y,yaw] or
tractor_spawn_box: [height,width] and tractor_spawn_hdg_rng: yaw_range which spawns the
tractor within a rectangle defined by [height,width] centered around the origin, with a
heading given in ±yaw_range.
Once the obstacles have been spawned, the handler node keeps track of all the obstacles.
The details of this node are not relevant to describe in detail, but this node is responsible
for generating perception input to the planners, computing the obstacles position in the
reference frame of the tractor, and generating new waypoints to the actors that are taking a
random path. It does this by subscribing to the topic /gazebo/model_states, which provides
complete information about the state of all obstacles. Combined with the parameters from
obs_params.yaml and sim_parameters.yaml, it makes a list of Obstacle objects, which contain all
obstacles and their individual state and properties. With a fixed rate, it iterates through
this list and computes the transformed coordinates, perception data, and generates new
waypoints. How it generates perception data will be described in the next section.
4.1.3
Sensor data
The tractor will output data regarding its position, orientation, velocity, and wheel angle,
and as previously mentioned, it is assumed that there is some perception stack which can
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
43
==PAGE:52==
Obstacles percieved as bounding boxes and circles
Obstacles percieved as vertices, center and radius
Figure 4.1: Illustration of how obstacles are perceived as shapes (left) and vertices/radius
(right)
classify and localize obstacles, and put a bounding cylinder or box around these.
The position and orientation of the tractor are continuously updated by subscribing to
the /gazebo/model_states topic, which returns the state of all objects in the simulation,
including the tractor and obstacles. The actual velocity and steering angle of the tractor
is updated by subscribing to the /fendt_942_ad/odom topic, which publishes the velocity
data of the tractor (with respect to its own frame) and the /fendt_942_ad/joint_states
topic, which publishes the state of all joints of the tractor, including the angle of the front
wheels. It does not output the virtual angle, so this is calculated using eq. (3.3).
Despite the assumption of a powerful perception framework, which detects, classifies, and
localizes obstacles, bounding boxes and circles is first of all not generally a supported input
to the classical planners, and it might not be a good input for the RL planner as well.
RL algorithms generally expect a state/observation space of known finite dimension. This
poses a problem, as the number of obstacles is generally unknown. A workaround could
be that the RL algorithm can perceive N rectangular and circular obstacles. The list of
observations must be constant regardless of the number of obstacles in the environment,
so how should the observations look if there are more or less than N obstacles? If there is
only one obstacle, how should the remaining N −1 elements in the observation vector be
represented so that the algorithm can learn that it should ignore this data? Suppose that
these problems are solved somehow, one must also consider if this is data the algorithm
can actually learn from. By using RL, the algorithm should be able to learn which actions
in which states lead to collisions and learn to avoid them by sampling experience. If the
algorithm is just given a list of vertices of a rectangular object or a center and radius of a
circular obstacle (or similar representations), it might find it difficult to figure out what
actions in what states lead to collisions since it only perceives the vertices and not the edges
of the obstacles. It might be able to learn this behavior under the right circumstances, but
it might take longer. This is illustrated on fig. 4.1. On the left are the obstacles perceived
as bounding boxes and circles, but in reality, this data is uniquely made out of vertices and
radii, as illustrated on the right. One can imagine that if only given the data shown on
the right, it would be difficult to learn to connect the (right) vertices and how to interpret
the connections, let alone learn a circular boundary just from center and radius.
Since the classical local planners take a planar laser scan as input (which is subsequently
converted to a costmap), a simulated planar laser must be made, to convert the obstacles
44
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:53==
from bounding boxes and circles, to an array of distances from the tractor. It is assessed
that this way of representing obstacles, by a simulated planar laser scanner, will be more
likely to work than feeding the raw bounding boxes and circles to the RL algorithm. This is
because this way of representing the obstacles will be a vector of constant length, where the
elements correspond to radial ranges from the tractor center to the edges of the obstacles,
at fixed angles around the tractor. This provides an observation of a fixed dimension, the
information directly relates distances to obstacles, and there is no ”wasted” information
in the observation vector.
Another option would be to convert the obstacles directly
into a costmap; however, this was decided against, as having a costmap representing
the environment in a reasonable resolution would be more computationally expensive
compared to the simulated laser scan approach, and might not give better results than
the laser scan. Thus, in the following, it will be explained how to create a simulated laser
scanner given circular and rectangular obstacles.
What is desired is an algorithm which provides the radial distance from the center of the
tractor to the edges of the obstacle boxes/circles (shown by red squares on fig. 4.2), at
known, discrete angles, all around the robot. Note: the figure only shows that obstacles
in front are detected, but the following assumes a field of view of 360 degrees; the figure
looks like this to make it easier to understand. Some important quantities are defined here;
Rscan
Figure 4.2: Laser scan for rectangular obstacle
δscan is the angular separation (angular resolution) between scan lines. If Nscan denotes
the total number of scan lines, δscan in radians is given by:
δscan =
2π
Nscan
(4.1)
φi denotes the angle of the i-th scan line from the reference frame. This angle is given by
φi = iδscan, that is, the line number multiplied with the angular resolution. The maximum
radial distance given as Rscan is also defined, so only distances within this are considered.
First, the circular obstacle case is described. Assume an obstacle with a circular footprint
with radius rc and center coordinate (xc, yc) given in the reference frame of the tractor,
as illustrated in fig. 4.3
In fig. 4.3, there are a number of scan lines, where three of them intersect with the circle.
To obtain the distance from the origin (tractor origin) to the circle perimeter di given an
angle ϕi, the following equation can be set up:
(di cos(ϕi) −xc)2 + (di sin(ϕi) −yc)2 = r2
c
(4.2)
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.3: Laser scan for circular obstacle
Solving this equation for di gives two solutions, as theoretically the scan line intersects
with the circle twice, but here only the shortest distance is used. Therefore, the equation
is solved for the minimum value of di:
di = xc cos(ϕi) −
p
x2c cos(ϕi)2 −y2c cos(ϕi)2 + r2c −x2c + xcyc sin(2ϕi) + yc sin(ϕi) (4.3)
Most likely there will be multiple obstacles, and to have a good enough resolution at longer
distances, there will be many scan lines. Performing a scan on all lines for all obstacles
is thus computationally expensive. Therefore, in the implementation, only the scan lines
that are guaranteed to intersect the circle are computed.
This can be determined by
computing φ1 and φ2:
φ1,2 = wrap
 
arctan (yc, xc) ± arcsin
rc
p
x2c + y2c
!
(4.4)
where wrap(·) wraps an angle between −π and π. It is assumed that φ1 < φ2. Then, for
every obstacle, the values of ϕi are between φ1 and φ2 and there exists an integer i such
that ϕi = iδscan:
ϕi = iδscan
(4.5)
s.t. φ1 ≤ϕi ≤φ2
(4.6)
i ∈Z+
(4.7)
For rectangular obstacles, consider the case on fig. 4.4. The setting is the same, however
here a rectangular polygon is considered, with vertices P1, ..., P4. The desired result is
to calculate the range di for a scan line with angle ϕi, from the tractor to the edge of
the rectangle. Similarly to the circle case, only interior angles to φ1 and φ2 should be
considered to save computation. These two angles are calculated by calculating the angles
to all the vertices and determining the two vertices with the largest angle between them,
with respect to the origin. The angle of the scan line is determined in the same way as
in eq. (4.5). Then for every scan line and for all the edges (consisting of two consecutive
46
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.4: Laser scan for rectangular obstacle
vertices), the distance from the origin to the edge should be determined. For this, the
following equality is defined:
di
cos(ϕi)
sin(ϕi)

= (Pj−1 −Pj)t + Pj
(4.8)
where Pj−1, Pj are two consecutive vertices (with a slight abuse of notation; if j = 1, then
Pj−1 refers to P4) and t is a parameter. It can be observed that if t = 0, the right-hand
side reduces to Pj and if t = 1 then it reduces to Pj−1. All points between the two vertices
satisfy 0 ≤t ≤1, and since all other points outside the vertices are not relevant, the
inequality for t is added as a constraint for the solution to eq. (4.8). Solving eq. (4.8) for
di and t yields:
t =
P y
j−1 cos(ϕi) −P x
j−1 sin(ϕi)
(P y
j−1 −P y
j ) cos (ϕi) −(P x
j−1 −P x
j ) sin(ϕi)
(4.9)
di =
−P x
j−1P y
j −P x
j P y
j−1
(P y
j−1 −P y
j ) cos (ϕi) −(P x
j−1 −P x
j ) sin(ϕi)
(4.10)
Since this is computed for every edge, a di will be calculated for every edge, however only
the smallest of these values is kept, as this corresponds to the closest edge (and only if
the corresponding t value satisfies 0 ≤t ≤1). This method is not the most efficient, as
it calculates the distance to all edges, but only maximally 2 edges are visible at the same
time, so if the visible edges could be determined, the algorithm could be improved.
The simulated laser scanner is implemented via the /laser node, and this iterates over all
obstacles in the simulation, calculates the distance to the edge for all angles, and stores
the smallest distance for each angle. Once a list of all the distances is computed, it is put
in a LaserScan message [98] and published on the /scan topic for other nodes to listen to.
The pseudocode for the simulated laser scanner in the /laser node can be seen below.
1
initialize ranges as inf for all ϕi
2
for obstacle in simulation:
3
if obstacle is circular:
4
calculate φ1, φ2
5
for ϕi in [φ1 : φ2] and i ∈Z+
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
47
==PAGE:56==
6
calculate d_i
7
if di < ranges[ϕi] and di < Rscan:
8
ranges[ϕi] = di
9
else if obstacle is rectangular:
10
calculate φ1, φ2
11
for ϕi in [φ1 : φ2] and i ∈Z+
12
for edges in rectangle
13
calculate d_i
14
if di < ranges[ϕi] and di < Rscan:
15
ranges[ϕi] = di
16
return ranges
4.1.4
Collision detection
Both the tractor and all the obstacles are defined with a footprint. Rectangular for the
tractor with dimensions listed in appendix B, and circles or rectangles for the obstacles.
Thus, a collision can be defined as an overlap of the tractor footprint with an obstacle
footprint. The Separating Axes Theorem is a useful algorithm to determine whether two
polygons overlap. This algorithm determines whether two convex polygons are separable
by a hyperplane, and if they are, the polygons do not overlap. An example is illustrated
on fig. 4.5. The first step is to compute the normal vectors of all the edges of two polygons
(axes). Then, for each axis, all vertices of both polygons are projected onto each axis. In
fig. 4.5, a projection of the vertices of both polygons on one axis is shown. To the left,
it can be seen that the line segments spanned by the projected vertices for each polygon
do not overlap, so a separating hyperplane can be found. To the right, an overlap can be
observed, which means a collision has occurred.
Polygon 1
Polygon 2
Seperating
hyperplane
Axis
No overlap of the
green lines
Polygon 1
Polygon 2
Overlap of the
green lines
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the separating axes theorem
In both the Gazebo and python simulators, this algorithm is run continuously to determine
when a collision happens.
4.1.5
Gymnasium integration
Gymnasium [99] is a Python framework to build RL environments on which to train a
model. It is one of the most widely used out-of-the-box frameworks for RL environments
as it works well with other RL libraries that focus on implementing the algorithms. The
details of the Gymnasium environment will not be covered, but a basic explanation of the
core functionalities will be given. For in-depth explanation, see [100].
The Gymnasium framework defines the environment as a Python class. In the __init__
function, the action space and observation need to be defined, wrt.
The number of
48
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:57==
actions/observation, whether they are discrete or not, and the upper and lower bounds
of each action/observation. The framework also requires that the functions step() and
reset() be defined. The reset() function is called at the beginning of a training session
and by the end of each episode, and serves to reset the simulation (e.g., set the collected
reward back to zero, put the tractor to the spawn position, generate new obstacles and
waypoints, etc.). During an episode, the step() function is called over and over again. It
takes an action as an input and outputs the corresponding observation, reward, whether
the system reached a state that causes the episode to end (and thus needs to call reset()).
This means that the step() function is responsible for generating a new state, observation,
and reward, given some action. It is the training algorithm (which will be covered in a
later section) that calls reset() and step() when appropriate, but what happens in them
must be defined.
Normally, Gymnasium environments have the simulator built into the environment itself,
and the state propagation is carried out using step().
However, when using Gazebo,
the simulator is running asynchronously to the Gymnasium environment, so an interface
need be made, to facilitate the communication between Gazebo and Gymnasium. This
interface is another Python class called ControlInterface and when instantiated, it creates
the node /interface and starts subscribing to the relevant ROS topics, which gets the data
from Gazebo. It processes the data it gets from Gazebo in a observation vector, which is
stored in the ControlInterface object. Similarly with inputs, a function in ControlInterface
is defined, which takes an action, and the function publishes this action to ROS, and it
will subsequently be applied in Gazebo. The ControlInterface class also contains functions
to start, pause and reset the simulation, which it does via. ROS services. Doing it this
way, the observation variables in ControlInterface are updated as fast as the subscribers are
called, and the latest observation is always available to the Gymnasium environment. This
is also done to separate the two environments, making the code easier to handle. In the step
() function, firstly the function to start the simulation is run, so the Gazebo simulation can
react to actions and provide output. Then a function is executed, which sends the actions
to the Gazebo simulation. Shortly after, the simulation is paused, because if it continues
to run, in between calls of the step() function, it will be harder to associate actions
with observations and rewards. After this, the observation and reward is extracted from
ControlInterface, and passed as a return variable of step(). It is also determined whether
to terminate the episode, for whatever reason. If the episode is terminated, reset() makes
sure that the tractor is returned to the initial position, the steering commands are set to
zero, and a new path to follow and obstacles are generated (during training). When the
model is deployed/tested, the path is recieved by subscribing to the /path topic, on which
a target path is published by the /path_pub node, or any other node for that matter. In
fig. 4.6, a diagram of the Gazebo simulation integrated with Gymnasium can be seen. This
should be viewed together with the pseudo code in listing 4.1. On the top of fig. 4.6, a
more general overview is given of the simulation and ROS nodes and topics. The spawner
node controls the position of the tractor and the obstacles in Gazebo, and the states of
the tractor and obstacles go to the handler node, which outputs the obstacles to the laser
node, which gives a laser scan to the interface. The interface also gets the tractor state
and the path (except during training), and outputs velocity commands to the tractor, and
reset and play/pause commands to Gazebo. On the bottom of the figure, a zoomed in
view of the interface node, and how it communicates with the Gymnasium environment.
1
Class TractorEnvGazebo:
2
def __init__():
3
define observation space
4
define action space
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
49
==PAGE:58==
/gazebo/model_states
Gazebo
/fendt_942_ad/odom
/fendt_942_ad/joint_states
Tractor
Obstacles
/gazebo/set_model_state
spawner
/obstacles
/handler
/laser
/fendt_942_ad/cmd_vel
/gazebo/reset_simulation
/gazebo/reset_simulation
/gazebo/pause_physics
/gazebo/unpause_physics
/interface
/scan
/interface
step()
observation
get_observation()
observation
interface.observation
action
Policy
/gazebo/pause_physics
/gazebo/unpause_physics
set_action(action)
/cmd_vel
publish(action)
check_terminate()
reward
get_reward()
parameters
Training algorithm
/gazebo/reset_simulation
reset()
subscribers
TractorEnvGazebo()
/fendt_942_ad/odom
/fendt_942_ad/joint_states
/scan
/path
/path_pub
/path
process data
Figure 4.6: Caption
5
instantiate ControlInterface
6
7
def step(action):
8
ControlInterface.play_sim()
9
ControlInterface.set_action(action)
10
wait(sample_time)
11
Controlinterface.pause_sim()
12
observation = ControlInterface.get_observation()
13
terminate_episode = check_terminate(observation)
14
reward = get_reward()
15
return observation , reward , terminate_episode
16
17
def reset():
18
ControlInterface.reset_sim()
19
ControlInterface.set_action(0,0)
20
generate_path()
21
randomize_obstacles()
22
observation = ControlInterface.get_observation()
50
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:59==
23
return observation
Listing 4.1: Environment pseudocode
4.1.6
Classical local planners implementation
The configuration of the classical local planners in ROS is described in detail in [101][102],
so it will not be covered in detail here. To use the classical local planners described in
section 3.3, the move_base node must be launched from the launch file, where the simulation
is also launched from.
When launching the move_base node, one must specify certain
parameters related to planning and navigation, along with paths to configuration files.
These configuration file contain parameters for the planner, costmap, and topic name
where the laser scan data is published. This is also where one specifies whether to use
e.g. the MPC or TEB planner. Once move_base is running, it subscribes to a goal message,
which is treated as the goal for the navigation. A global planner is executed, making a
global plan to the goal, and the navigation starts. The laser scanner is used continually to
build a local and global costmap of obstacles, which the planners use to navigate around
obstacles.
The local planner uses these maps and the global plan to calculate a local
plan, which is converted to a Twist message and published to the /cmd_vel topic, which the
motion controller of the robot should subscribe to, and execute the commanded velocities.
4.2
Python simulator
As with the Gazebo simulator, the Python simulator is built around the Gymnasium
framework. The difference is, that the Gym interface in the Gazebo simulator subscribes
to ROS messages generated by Gazebo, so it only serves as a bridge between Gazebo
and the learning algorithm, whereas all the physics simulation is done within the Gym
environment for the Python simulator, as well as rendering the graphics.
Since the Python simulator is also done using the Gymnasium environment, the structure
of the environment is similar to the one for the Gazebo simulation. The tractor model,
described in section 3.1.1, is implemented in a class called Tractor, and this contains all the
internal states (position, velocity, turn angle, etc.). The state propagation is done with a
discretized version of eq. (3.13):


xw(t + 1)
yw(t + 1)
θ(t + 1)

=


xw(t) + ∆Tv(t) cos θ(t)
yw(t) + ∆Tv(t) sin θ(t)
θ(t) + ∆T v(t)
l
tan δ(t)


(4.11)
where ∆T is the sample time. To calculate v(t) and δ(t), it is assumed that the velocity
of the tractor can be modeled with constant acceleration, bounded by a maximum and
minimum velocity, and the steering rate can be modeled with constant velocity, bounded
by a maximum/minimum steering angle, given a commanded velocity and steering rate
vc, δc:
˙v =





amax
vc > v
−amax
vc < v
0
vc = v
(4.12)
˙δ =





ψmax
δc > δ
−ψmax
δc < δ
0
δ = δc
(4.13)
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
51
==PAGE:60==
Recall from eq. (3.9) that the values of v and δ are constrained by physical limits as well,
but it is assumed that the given commands are within those bounds. The specific values
are given in appendix B, table B.1. Given these constraints, the velocity and steering rate
are calculated as:
v(t + 1) = v(t) + ∆T ˙v
(4.14)
δ(t + 1) = δ(t) + ∆T ˙δ
(4.15)
The obstacles in the Python simulator are modeled as rectangles and circles, just like in
the Gazebo simulation. For every new episode, a new list of obstacles is generated, which
can both consist of static and dynamic obstacles. All obstacles are of class Obstacle, and
the dynamic obstacles are of class DynamicObstacle, which inherits from Obstacle. The only
difference is that DynamicObstacle is also given a velocity when instantiated, and a target
position is randomly generated, within a specified area (given when instantiated). In the
step() function, the dynamic obstacles move linearly towards the waypoint, and when the
waypoint is reached, a new one is generated, and the obstacle keeps moving until the
episode ends. The episode ends in one of three ways, episode length, collision or deviating
too far from the given path. The laser scan data is generated the same way as in the
Gazebo simulation.
1
Class TractorEnv:
2
def __init__():
3
define observation space
4
define action space
5
initialize Tractor
6
initialize obstacles
7
render = True (enable rendering) or False (no graphic output)
8
9
def step(action):
10
Tractor.set_velocity(action.velocity)
11
Tractor.set_steering_angle(action.steering_angle)
12
Tractor.update(Ts)
13
obstacles.update(Ts)
14
observation = Tractor.get_observation()
15
terminate_episode = check_terminate(observation)
16
reward = get_reward()
17
if(render):
18
render()
19
return observation , reward , terminate_episode
20
21
def reset():
22
ControlInterface.reset_sim()
23
ControlInterface.set_action(0,0)
24
generate_path()
25
obstacles = randomize_obstacles()
26
observation = ControlInterface.get_observation()
27
return observation
28
29
def render():
30
draw_tractor()
31
draw_obstacles()
32
draw_path()
33
draw_laser()
On fig. 4.7, a screenshot of the graphical rendition of the python simulator can be seen.
The rectangle in the middle corresponds to the tractor footprint, and all the other red
52
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.7: Python simulator environment
shapes are obstacles. The white dots around them are the perceived edges of the obstacles,
from the laser scanner. The lines connecting the dots is the path to follow and associated
waypoints. To the left in the screenshot, values related to position, velocity, commands,
and rewards are printed directly. Note that the large circular obstacle to the left cannot
be seen, as it is behind a rectangular obstacle.
4.3
Model comparison
This section will document how well the Python simulator represents the Gazebo simula-
tion. Since some dynamics are left out of the Python model on purpose, some deviation is
to be expected, but as long as the important dynamics are captured, it should suffice as a
intermediate step to learning navigation and obstacle avoidance. The test will consist of
manually giving inputs to the Gazebo and Python model at the same time, and recording
position, velocity and steering angle to compare to each other. Firstly, an experiment
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.5
0
0.5
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
0.2
0.4
Figure 4.8: Steering angle comparison experiment with vc = 0 and δc ∈[−0.4, 0.4]
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
53
==PAGE:62==
with just controlling the steering angle is made. The results of this can be seen on fig. 4.8.
Here it can be seen, that while the python and Gazebo models reach the reference signal,
the transients are different. The Gazebo model is slower in the transient phase than the
Python model, which is especially apparent through the error plot, as this shows large
error in the transient period. This is because the Gazebo model applies a torque to the
steering mechanism, which saturates due to actuator limitations. When the tractor is sta-
tionary, it takes more torque to turn the wheels, than if it was driving. When stationary,
the applied torque must overcome the friction caused by tyre material, ground and the
weight of the tractor. When moving, friction forces act on the wheel which helps it turn.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-5
0
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Figure 4.9: Velocity comparison experiment with δc = 0 and vc ∈[−5, 5]
Second experiment is setting the steering angle to zero, and varying the forward velocity,
which can be seen on fig. 4.9. Here it can be seen that the two models follow each other
well. The python model reaches the reference better than the Gazebo model, which can be
due to steady state error in the internal controller of the tractor in the gazebo simulation.
Apart from this, the two responses follow each other well, with a maximum difference of
only 0.25 m
s
The final experiment varies both control inputs simultaneously, and the angle and velocity
plots can be seen on fig. 4.10 and fig. 4.11. On these two plots it can be seen that the
steering angles have lower error between the gazebo and python models, at both high and
low speeds, which confirms the suspicion that the deviation in fig. 4.8 was due to zero
velocity. There is still some deviation in the transient periods, which is suspected to be
due to saturated torque. In the velocity plot, there are also still steady state error of the
Gazebo model. It also seems to be affected by noise towards the end, when the input is
removed/set to zero.
This section demonstrated the difference between the Gazebo and Python simulation.
While there was noticable difference, this was expected, as the python model is heavily
simplified compared to the Gazebo model. Despite this, the Python model captures the
dynamics approximately, which is assessed to be sufficient for initial training. It is ex-
pected, that as long as the model learns the overall/qualitative dynamics first, it can be
adjusted and fine tuned by ultimately training on the Gazebo model. Now, all elements
are ready to set up the RL task, which is the topic of the next chapter.
54
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:63==
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-0.5
0
0.5
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
0.2
0.4
Figure 4.10: Steering angle from experiment with varying velocity and steering angle
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-5
0
5
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Figure 4.11: Steering angle from experiment with varying velocity and steering angle
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
55
==PAGE:64==
5
Reinforcement learning
implementation
This chapter will describe the implementation of the reinforcement learning part of the
project. The RL task will be formalized to create a connection between the mowing task,
and how this should be formulated such that it is suitable for a reinforcement learning
algorithm. This project will not describe the implementation of PPO, as this is assessed
as too big a task in light of the rest of the project, and the fact that it has been done
better and more efficiently by other people. PPO exists in many different frameworks,
but for this project, the Stable Baselines 3 (SB3)[77] library will be used. This choice
is due to that SB3 is widely used and documented, and has been proven to have good
implementations of RL algorithms. The code of the library is also well written and easy
to understand, and it is compatible with the Gymnasium environment, which is what the
simulators are built around. In light of this, the chapter will also shortly describe the SB3
framework, to give an understanding of how it fits with the rest. Following this, it will be
explained how the key elements of RL have been implemented for this task; namely the
observation space, action space, reward function and policy network.
5.1
Stable Baselines
The Stable Baselines 3 (SB3) library is a Python framework built on top of Pytorch, to
facilitate deep reinforcement learning applications. It is compatible with the Gymnasium
framework, as was previously described, and contains several state of the art RL algo-
rithms, including PPO. It also supports extensive logging, monitoring, and in general it
has a good tradeoff between simple use and extensive configurability. The training of the
policy network is done using the Pytorch framework, but collecting samples, calculating
loss function and so on is done in SB3.
The PPO implementation in SB3 is done by collecting rollouts, i.e. running the simulation
for n_envs*n_steps where n_envs is the number of environments to run in parallel, and
n_steps is the number of timesteps to take for each environment in each rollout. It acts
according to the policy π, and collects the applied actions, observations and rewards. It
then computes the advantage, entropy and log probabilities, which it uses to compute
the clipped objective and subsequently the loss function. The algorithm then performs
backpropagation with the loss function, and thus updates the policy parameters.
Training a model using SB3 on a Gymnasium environment is quite straightforward:
1
env = TractorEnv()
2
model = PPO("MlpPolicy", env)
3
model.learn(total_timesteps=25000)
4
model.save("ppo_model")
The example above is in essence all what is needed to train a PPO model using SB3
and Gymnasium. The first line defines the Gymnasium environment, the model should be
trained on. The second line defines a PPO model, and the policy as a multilayer perceptron
(MlpPolicy), i.e. a fully connected neural network for both the actor and critic functions.
It is also in this function where the model hyperparameters and network structure are
specified, but that will be covered later. On the fourth line, is where the aforementioned
56
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:65==
training process takes place, for 25000 timesteps. Once the model is done training, it is
saved as ”ppo_model”, from where it can either be deployed or loaded to continue training.
For further information on how SB3 works and the syntaxes, refer to the documentation
[77].
5.2
RL task
The mowing task was described in chapter 2, and in this section it will be formulated as
a task, which is suitable for RL implementation. In summary, the mowing task is having
a tractor with a mowing implement drive through a field with grass, in such a way that
the mowed area of the field is maximized, while the area mowed more than once, and the
distance traveled is minimized, all while avoiding static and dynamic obstacles. The path
the tractor needs to drive around the field, such that the mowing objective is fulfilled, is
assumed to be given as a sequence of n waypoints:
P = {(x1, y1), (x2, y2), ..., (xn, yn)}
(5.1)
How these waypoints are calculated, and how often it is updated, etc. is not considered;
it is just assumed to be available at all times. It is also assumed that the desired path
is equivalent to the linear interpolation between the waypoints.
The objective for the
agent will then be to follow this path as closely as possible, while avoiding static and
dynamic obstacles. It is assumed that the tractor will always start at the origin, so the
first path segment will span from the global origin to (x1, y1). The tractor will consider
each waypoint in P as an intermediate goal, and once it reaches the waypoint, it will shift
to the next one, until it reaches the final waypoint and thus has completed its task. If the
tractor center is within a distance of ∆wp, the waypoint is assumed to be reached, and
the next waypoint in the sequence is set as the intermediate goal. However, if an obstacle
is near a waypoint, the tractor is unable to reach this waypoint without collision. For
this reason, another method for advancing the waypoints is given. Suppose the function
S = path(Pi, Pi+1) denotes the (linear) path segment between the two waypoints Pi and
Pi+1, and the function dist(S, p) returns the distance between the path segment S and the
tractor center p = (x, y). Then, if the current goal is Pi and the condition:
dist(path(Pi, Pi+1), p) > dist(path(Pi+1, Pi+2), p)
(5.2)
is true, then the distance to the next path segment is less than the current path segment,
and the intermediate goal is advanced, such that the new intermediate goal is Pi+1. This
only advances the goal, but is not equivalent to reaching a waypoint. The way the agent
perceives obstacles is exactly as in section 4.1.3; with the simulated laser. The task for
the RL agent is to generate velocity and steering angle commands to the tractor, given
a path to navigate, a laser scan around the tractor to detect obstacles, and the state of
the tractor, such that the tractor follows the path as closely as possible, avoids static
and dynamic obstacles, and completing the path as fast as possible. The next sections
will work with this task statement, and describe how the observation space, action space,
reward function and policy network can be designed to accommodate this task.
5.3
Observation space
The observation space in terms of RL is generally a subset of the state space, which is
available to the agent. In many cases, with a large state space, the entire state of the
environment is either not available, or unnecessarily large in terms of the task at hand.
Only considering a subset of the state space will in some cases change the MDP to a
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) which can pose challenges to
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.1: Path observation illustration
the RL algorithm, as it in this case attempts to solve a problem in an environment, where
it lacks some information about the state. Therefore, if the observation space is less than
the state space, this must be done carefully, in such a way that the unobserved states are
irrelevant for the task, or they can be estimated by observing other states.
In this project, the observation space is divided into two parts: observations related to
the tractor and path, and the laser scan observations. This is because these two types of
observations are different in nature, and must be handled differently by the policy, and
also initialized differently in the algorithm.
To include the path information in the observation, it is chosen to include the intermediate
goal Pi and the next intermediate goal Pi+1, both with respect to the reference frame of
the tractor. This way, the agent gets information about the current goal, and the next
goal, so it can reach the current goal in a way that makes it easier to get to the next
goal. It is furthermore decided that these waypoints are expressed in polar coordinates,
i.e. distance from the tractor center and angle with respect to the tractor heading:
di =
q
x2
i + y2
i
(5.3)
φi = atan2(yi, xi)
(5.4)
As mentioned, it is desired that the tractor minimizes the deviation from the linear path
between Pi and Pi −1. Therefore, the distance to the path is also included in the obser-
vation vector. This distance is denoted as e, and is calculated by projecting the center
58
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:67==
of the tractor onto the line spanned by Pi and Pi−1. To do this, the vectors ¯Pi and ¯Pi−1
are defined as the vectors from the origin to Pi and Pi−1. Since it is assumed that all the
waypoints are with respect to the tractor frame of reference, the origin coincides with the
tractor center. Using this, the vector ¯s is defined as:
¯s = ¯Pi −¯Pi−1
(5.5)
cp = −
¯P T
i−1¯s
¯sT ¯s
(5.6)
cp is the parameter of the parameterized line spanned between Pi and Pi−1, and the
projected point is given as:
¯P = cp¯s + ¯Pi−1
(5.7)
If cp = 0 then ¯P = ¯Pi−1, and if cp = 1 then ¯P = ¯Pi.
Since it only makes sense to
calculate the distance to the projected point on the path segment between Pi and Pi−1,
the projected point is restricted to be on the segment in between Pi and Pi−1:
¯P =





¯Pi
cp > 1
¯Pi−1
cp < 0
cp¯s + ¯Pi−1
otherwise
(5.8)
The distance e is defined as the norm of ¯P:
e = || ¯P||2
(5.9)
This is assumed to be sufficient information about the path, so the tractor can follow it
satisfactory. Apart from this information, the current velocity v and steering angle δ of
the tractor is also included in the observation vector, so the agent can learn the dynamics
of the tractor as well. The observation vector of the path and tractor data at timestep
t thus includes the two next waypoints in polar coordinates, the distance to the closest
path segment, velocity and steering angle of the tractor. However, to improve training,
these values are normalized to be in the range -1 to 1; i.e. divided by the max value. Most
of the values in the observation have natural bounds, but all the observation that relates
to distance are technically unbounded. It is then chosen to set the maximum range of
the distances equal to the max range of the laser scanner, as it is expected that keeping
all distance measures on the same scale is numerically beneficial. The laser radius thus
becomes the ”horizon” of the tractor with regards to observing the environment. The
observation vector thus becomes:
odata(t) =
h
di
Rscan
φi
π
di+1
Rscan
φi+1
π
e
Rscan
v
vmax
δ
δmax
i
(5.10)
The observation from the simulated laser scanner also normalized, but otherwise just the
ranges calculated from the laser scanner:
olaser(t) =
1
Rscan

d0
d1
. . .
dNscan

(5.11)
The laser scan observations only include the ranges and not the angles, since the angles
will be constant, and thus not provide any meaningful information for the policy network.
The range is chosen to be 30 meters, as this is a range where the obstacle perception
stack is expected to detect obstacles reliably, and leaves enough room for the tractor to
maneuver. The number of scan ranges was chosen to be 512 because this number allows a
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
59
==PAGE:68==
obstacle with a radius of 0.5 m (equivalent to a fawn) at 30 meters out will have at least
two detections. The full observation vector is the concatenation of odata and olaser:
o(t) =

odata(t)
olaser(t)

(5.12)
Since all of the observations are normalized to be in the range of -1 and 1 (and 0 and 1
for the laser), it is important to remember multiply the normalized observations with the
normalization factor, if the real values need be used for something. In order to include
some temporal information in the observation, so the policy network can learn to e.g.
predict motion of obstacle and learn the dynamics of the tractor, the observation vector
is stacked Nstack times:
ostack(t) =


o(t)
o(t −1)
...
o(t −Nstack)


(5.13)
5.3.1
Implementation
In the Gymnasium environment, the observation space need be defined in the __init__()
function of the environment class. It is defined as a dict observation space, which makes
separation of the path/tractor data and the laser scan easy:
1
self.observation_space = spaces.Dict({
2
"laser": spaces.Box(low=0, high=1, shape=(N_scan ,), dtype=np.float32),
3
"data": spaces.Box(low=-1, high=1, shape=(7,), dtype=np.float32)})
One of the elements in the observation dict corresponds to the laser data, and is a column
vector with Nscan elements, in the range of 0 to 1. Similarly, the the rest of the data is
in the data field, and is defined as a 7 dimensional column vector in the range -1 to 1,
because there are 7 normalized observations in eq. (5.10). This does not include the stacked
observations, so a wrapper is implemented, that takes the Gymnasium environment, and
stacks it Nstack times:
1
env = TractorEnv()
2
env = DictFrameStack(env, N_stack)
Nstack is set to 5, so the observation will contain the 5 most recent instances of eq. (5.12).
5.4
Action space
The action space for the setup is straightforward, as there is not much to change. As stated
multiple times, actions are the commanded velocity to the tractor vc, and the commanded
steering angle δc. These are also normalized, to stay in the range of -1 and 1:
a(t) =
h
vc
vmax
δc
δmax
i
(5.14)
In the environment class, the definition of the action space is:
1
self.action_space = spaces.Box(low=-1, high=1, shape=(2,), dtype=np.float32)
60
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:69==
The actions are chosen to be continuous, as this was assessed to be most appropriate for the
application. Similarly to the observations, when the actions are applied it is important to
revert it back to the original values, i.e. multiply with the respective normalization factor.
This must be done in the step() function, before applying the actions to the tractor.
5.5
Reward function
The reward function is at the heart of any RL application, and designing an appropriate
reward function is not a trivial task, and requires some trial and error to figure out what
works for a specific application and RL algorithm. The main intuition behind the reward
function is to reward desired actions or outcomes, and punish the undesirable outcomes.
The main objectives for the RL agent in this project, as stated a few times in this thesis,
can be summed up in these points:
• Avoid collisions with obstacles
• Complete given path as fast as possible
• Minimize distance to the given path
There are many ways of designing a reward function for a task summed up by the points
above. Firstly it should be decided if the reward function should be sparse, dense, or a
mix. Sparse rewards are better for learning a goal-oriented policy, which does not get
influenced by other factors, but is usually slower to learn. Using dense rewards tend to
help the agent to learn, but also has a higher risk of falling into local optima or learning
a suboptimal policy. For this project, a mix of dense and sparse rewards are used in an
attempt to get the best of both worlds. The dense part of the reward function is comprised
of several terms, which will be explained here. Firstly, the velocity reward:
Rv =
(
wvv cos(φi)
v > 0
0
otherwise
(5.15)
where wv is a positive valued weight, v is the tractor velocity and φi is the angle to the
intermediate goal. This function gives a positive rewards for driving towards the waypoint,
and penalizes when driving away from it, however only when driving away with a positive
velocity (i.e. not reversing). If the tractor is reversing, the reward from this term is zero.
This is because in some cases the best action for the tractor is to reverse, and it is not
desired to penalize this; it just does not gain a reward for it. The intention of this function
is that it learns that driving towards the waypoint yields a higher reward. The angular
reward is defined as:
Rφ = −wφ|φi|
(5.16)
where wφ is a positive valued weight and φi is the same as before. This function penalizes
the tractor for having a nonzero angle to the intermediate goal waypoint. This will in
theory help the tractor to align its heading with the direction of the waypoint direction.
This is also intended to avoid cases, where the robot gets stuck if the goal is right next
to it. If this happens, it is the intention that the tractor reverses while turning, so it can
align itself with the goal, and drive forward to reach it. The path error reward is defined
as:
Re = −wee
(5.17)
where we is a positive valued weight and e is the shortest distance from the tractor to the
path. This term penalizes deviation from the path, and should keep the tractor aligned
on the given path. These three reward terms form the dense part of the reward, and their
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
61
==PAGE:70==
main purpose is to help the agent find the rewarding actions quickly, along with completing
the objective. The sparse part of the reward function serves to penalize collisions (Rcoll)
and reward reaching the waypoint (Rwp) and goal (Rgoal). The collision penalty does not
differentiate between static and dynamic obstacles. The goal and waypoint reward are
generally not the same, with the waypoint reward being less than the goal reward, to
prevent the tractor from trying to reach a potentially unreachable waypoint. It should
collect the waypoint reward if possible, but if there is a risk of collision in doing so, it
should not lose a big reward. To improve training, a penalty for reaching the max episode
length Rep and for going to far away Rfar from the path is also implemented (note: Rcoll,
Rwp and Rep are positive valued constants). The full reward function is thus defined as
such:
R =





















−Rcoll
if collision
Rwp
if di < ∆wp
Rgoal
if di < ∆goal
−Rep
if ntimesteps > nmaxtimesteps
−Rfar
if e > Rscan
Rv + Rφ + Re
otherwise
(5.18)
The specific values of rewards, penalty and weights can be found in appendix B, table B.3.
5.6
Policy network
The policy network is another important part of the RL implementation, which requires
some effort in designing. In the observation, there are as mentioned two types of data; the
laser scan and the path/tractor data, which should be handled differently by the policy
network. The laser data consists of spatial data, and for that reason it might be beneficial
to pass through one or more convolutional layers before feeding it to a fully connected
network. The path/tractor observation is quite low dimensional so it is assumed that this
is appropriate to feed directly to a fully connected network. In determining the layers,
layer size, activation functions and properties related to the convolutions, there is no direct
or general approach, or general rule of thumb. Naturally, the size of the policy network
should represent the complexity of the task at hand, considering the input and output
dimensions, but there is no definitive rule of how to convert this to actual specifications.
For this project, the design of the policy network is inspired by [86] and [6]. [86] uses
two 1D convolutional layers, followed by a fully connected layer with 256 neurons for the
input of the laser scan.
The output of the fully connected layer is concatenated with
information about the goal and state of the robot, and fed into a fully connected layer
with 128 neurons, before getting fed to the output layer. [6] takes a similar approach.
Inspired by these papers that treat a similar problem as this project, the policy network
in this project is determined to consist of a two-layer 1D convolutional network followed by
a fully connected network with 512 neurons. This gets concatenated with the path/tractor
data, and fed into a 2-layer 256 neuron network, as shown on fig. 5.2.
The main differences between the networks in [86] and [6] are the more fully connected
layers with more neurons.
This is because both papers use a differential drive robot,
which is evaluated to have simpler dynamics than the tractor in this project. For this
reason, it was decided to extend the network compared to the ones in the papers, due
to the theoretically more complex vehicle dynamics. Another difference is the padding,
which was used in the two papers; the laser scans were padded with zeros, where as in
this implementation, it is padded in a circular way, such that the data in the padding
correspond to the data at the end of the scan vector. This is because the laser scan is
62
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:71==
Stacked
laser scans
Conv1D
Channels: 32
Kernel: 5
Stride: 2
Padding: 1
ReLU
Conv1D
Channels: 32
Kernel: 3
Stride: 2
Padding: 1
ReLU
FC
512 neurons
Tanh
FC
256 neurons
Tanh
Stacked
tractor/path data
Flatten
FC
256 neurons
Tanh
Flatten
Figure 5.2: Policy network illustration
all the way around the tractor, and the idea is that using circular padding, the feature
extraction will be equally as good all the way around the tractor.
In practice, a custom feature extractor is implemented, according to the documentation
in [103], where the feature extractor takes the entire observation dict as input, and with
the observation labeled as "laser", it feeds through the convolutional layers, and the ob-
servation labeled as "data" is just flattened. The output of the convolutional layers and
the flattened data is then concatenated into one vector and fed to the two fully connected
layers. These two layers are handled by SB3/Pytorch, and only the number, size, and
activation function is specified when creating the model.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
63
==PAGE:72==
6
Training
This section will describe the training process of the aforementioned setup, in order to
obtain a policy which can perform navigation of the tractor, while avoiding obstacles.
The section will firstly describe the plan for the training, along with a plan for different
hyperparameters to test. Following this, the actual training will be documented in terms
of reward, episode length, and success/failure rate as a function of training steps, along
with the total time to train.
Most of the training is done on the DTU HPC using GPU (Nvidia Tesla V100), and the
training in Gazebo is done on CPU on a PC with a 4-core Intel® Core™i5-7600K CPU
3.80GHz and 16 GB ram.
6.1
Training plan
There is a reason why reinforcement learning is not a first semester course in universities;
the theory of RL is built upon on calculus, linear algebra, probability and statistics,
machine learning and programming. While it might be possible for a student to learn the
theory and practice of RL without firstly having a solid foundation in the other topics, it
is more likely that the student will get overwhelmed with the amount of theory to learn,
that he/she will either take a long time learning it, learn it the wrong way, or give up
altogether. That is why typically a university course starts with the foundations, and then
moves on to more advanced topics. The exact same can be said about RL. If an agent
is exposed to a complex environment from the very beginning, it might struggle to learn
because it does not know where to start, and it takes random actions initially, which might
carry little information about what is desired. For this reason, it is a common approach,
that training is initially done on simple environments/cases, so the agent can learn some
of the simple, basic behavior, and then gradually make it more difficult for the agent, until
the environment reaches the desired level of difficulty. This approach is formally known as
curriculum learning, and it will also be applied here. This is also another theoretical benefit
of using the Python simulator for initial training; namely that the agent focuses on the
simple dynamics initially, and later learns the more complex dynamics. When designing
curricula, it is important that they are not too hard, so learning fails, but also not too
easy, to prevent that the agent overfits to the simple case, and thus gets stuck. This is
equivalent to having to unlearn a bad (easy) habit or similar, and learn a new (harder) one,
which is in many cases harder than learning the hard one from the beginning. It is difficult
to say from the beginning where to draw the line, it requires some experimentation.
The training is divided in 4 levels of increasing difficulty. The first level aims to teach the
tractor to follow a simple 2-waypoint path, the next level exposes the tractor to a more
complex 2-waypoint path, both in the Python simulator. Level 3 will introduce obstacles
combined with the complex path also in the Python simulator, and finally level 4 will be
the same as level 3 but in Gazebo. The model trained in level 1 will be the initial model
for level 2, and so on. More detail about the different levels will follow in the next sections.
When training a RL model, there are a lot of hyperparameters one can tune to get a
potentially better performance. These include learning rate, batch size, rollout steps, and
many more. However, there is not any guidelines as to how to choose these values well for a
specific application. The best way is to do trial and error with different hyperparameters,
and evaluate the training.
One can easily imagine that an extensive hyperparameter
64
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:73==
tuning requires training and evaluating a lot of models, which is both time and resource
demanding. For this reason, a small range of a few hyperparameters will be tested and
evaluated for the first level, and based on the evaluation, a set of hyperparameters will be
chosen for the rest of the levels.
6.2
Hyperparameters
The hyperparameters which will be included in the hyperparameter search are:
• Learning rate
• Entropy coefficient
• State dependent exploration
• Discount factor
• Rollout steps
• Batch size
Other hyperparameters include PPO clip range, network size, depth and more, but these
were excluded due to time and resource constraints. The included hyperparameters are
furthermore assessed to be of larger significance than the excluded hyperparameters.
Learning rate is a parameter that specifies how big a step the optimization algorithm
takes. A high learning rate usually means faster learning but also a higher risk of diver-
gence. Small learning rate is generally more safe in terms of divergence, but will learn
slower. The default learning rate for PPO is 0.0003, and based on this values of learning
rate to be tested are 10−4, 10−5, and 10−6. It is expected that the environment is quite
complex, so it will not be attempted to have a higher learning rate as this might collapse
learning.
Entropy coefficient is a coefficient that is multiplied with the entropy loss in the PPO
loss function. Entropy loss is the negative entropy of the model, and entropy is a measure
of randomness in the model. In other words, by including the entropy coefficient the loss
function includes the entropy loss and thus encourages that the policy does not become
deterministic, and keeps a level of randomness in the model to explore with. The default
value for PPO is 0, so the values to be tested are 0, 0.01, 0.001 as this is usually the range
this hyperparameter lies in.
State Dependent Exploration is a way of making the exploration consist of smooth
actions, instead of random and rapidly changing actions. It was introduced in [104], and
specifically targeted towards robotic applications, where random and rapidly changing ac-
tions can be damaging to the hardware on the robot. In short, it consists of adding noise as
a function of the state of the robot. This may give smoother exploration, which is desired,
as the tractor has slow dynamics, and rapidly changing actions with zero mean might
not make it explore efficiently. The default value for this is False, so the hyperparameter
testing will test for False (not used) and True (used).
Discount factor is the factor weighting the expected future rewards. A discount factor
close to zero will prioritize immediate rewards, whereas a discount factor close to 1 prior-
itizes future rewards. The default value is 0.99, so the values that will be tested are 0.9,
0.95 and 0.99.
Rollout steps is how many steps to collect rollout data from each parallel environment.
Larger values usually means more stable training, but also slower, as there is more data
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
65
==PAGE:74==
that needs to be processed. The default value for PPO is 2048. The values to be tested
are 512, 1024 and 2048 to see if smaller values will still give stable training but do it faster.
Batch size is the minibatch size for stochastic gradient descent. This is as default set to
64, so the tested values will be 32, 64 and 128. A lower value might give more stable but
slower training.
6.3
Training level 1: Simple path
The simple path consists of two waypoints, the first waypoint being 10 meters from the
origin, and at an angle

−π
2 , π
2

radians relative to the global x-axis (the angle is randomly
generated in this range). The second waypoint is also 10 meters from the first one, at an
angle of

−π
4 , π
4

relative to the first angle (this angle is also randomly generated). A new
path is generated for each episode. The intention of this path is that the agent will simply
learn to follow the waypoints and track the global path. By having the first angle of the
path relatively large, it is intended that the tractor will learn to first reverse and turn,
and then drive straight along the path, instead of only turning and driving forward. If the
path was simpler, it might learn that behavior instead. Generally, the purpose of the first
training level is to get a good foundation in following the path, before moving on.
On this level, the different hyperparameters were tested. Based on the default values and
some intuition of the problem at hand, the baseline hyperparameters were decided as:
• Batch size: 64
• Entropy coefficient: 0
• Gamma: 0.99
• learning rate: 10−5
• Steps: 1024
• SDE: False (not enabled)
These hyperparameters were varied one by one, in the range specified in the previous
section. Three runs per hyperparameter variation was performed for 10 million timesteps
with different random seeds, to check if the trainings behave consistently. The trainings
were done with 16 parallel environments. The trainings and hyperparameters are evaluated
based on total time to train in hours, reward, episode length in timesteps, how many
episodes were terminated due to timeout, reaching the goal, or the tractor driving far
away. The results are summarized in table 6.1. The time was calculated by averaging the
total time to train for all three runs. The reward was calculated by taking the average
reward of the 1000 last episodes in the training, and averaging over the runs, and similarly
with the episode length. The timeout, goal reached and far away are also averaged over the
last 1000 episodes, and the value in these columns are a value between 0-1 and represents
a ratio of how many episodes were ended this way. E.g. a value of 0.36 in the timeout
column means that for this test, 36% of the 1000 last episodes were terminated because
of timeout. In appendix A the plots for the experiments can be found
In the table, for each parameter and measure, the best value is marked with bold. For the
batch size, as expected, the training time increases for low values, but also gives better
results. A batch size of 32 and 64 provide similar results, but the value with the best
values is 128. However, observing fig. A.2 it can be observed that all runs with a batch
size of 128 converge noticeably slower than the others. A batch size of 64 converges faster,
has higher reward and similar episode length, so this value is assessed to be best.
66
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:75==
Table 6.1: Level 1 results
Parameter
Value
Time
Reward
Episode length
Collisions
Timeout
Goal reached
Far away
Batch size
32
4.63
6.04
331.1
0
0
1
0
64
3.03
6.15
279.1
0
0
1
0
128
1.78
4.51
274.13
0
0
1
0
Ent. coef.
0
3.03
6.15
279.1
0
0
1
0
0.001
2.76
2.05
340
0
0.01
0.99
0
0.01
2.82
5.6
274.95
0
0
1
0
Gamma
0.9
2.8
-79.81
1231.34
0
0.28
0.62
0.1
0.95
2.91
-12.85
464.56
0
0.05
0.95
0
0.99
3.03
6.15
279.1
0
0
1
0
Learn. rate
10−4
3.11
6.51
304.23
0
0
1
0
10−5
3.03
6.15
279.1
0
0
1
0
10−6
2.91
-36.92
2509.9
0
0.82
0.16
0.03
Steps
512
2.94
5.9
273.15
0
0
1
0
1024
3.03
6.15
279.1
0
0
1
0
2048
2.93
5
335.19
0
0.01
0.99
0
SDE
True
2.95
-13.81
1964.65
0
0.62
0.37
0
False
3.03
6.15
279.1
0
0
1
0
For the entropy coefficient, a value of 0 seems to produce the best result, but this is
also a simple example. Since it is intended to keep training on increasingly more difficult
problems, it might be beneficial to have some more entropy in the model to explore the
scenarios with increased difficulty. For this reason, a value of 0.01 is chosen, as this has a
low episode length and high reward.
For the discount factor Gamma, there is a clear trend. The time to train is more or less
the same, but the accumulated reward increase as gamma goes towards 1, the episode
length decrease, and the reason for episode termination due to goal reached increase as
well. Therefore, a value of 99 is chosen here.
The learning rate show that a value of 10−6 is the worst of them all. The two others
produce similar results with regards to reward, training time and episode length. The
best learning rate is assessed to be 10−5 since it is the better of the two, and it may be
beneficial with a slightly lower learning rate for more complicated problems.
With the rollout steps, all values show similar results However, since 1024 steps have
highest reward with a short episode length and similar time to train as the others, this is
the value that is decided to move on with.
With the SDE, the results are very clear. The training without SDE performs significantly
better than the one with SDE enabled, which is contrary to the expectation. There might
be underlying issues in the implementation, but for now the next trainings will be without
SDE. The values the rest of the trainings will use are:
• Batch size: 64
• Entropy coefficient: 0.001
• Gamma: 0.99
• learning rate: 10−5
• Steps: 1024
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
67
==PAGE:76==
• SDE: False (not enabled)
The difference from the default values is not big, and in general the different variations of
hyperparameters seem similar (refer to appendix A) which may indicate the environment
is not very sensitive to hyperparameters in this range, or that PPO is robust to changes
in hyperparameters, which is also stated in the paper.
It should be noted, that this
hyperparameter analyis is not extensive, and there is no guarantee that combining the
best values from each experiment give the best response, as everything (environment,
policy, algorithm) is highly nonlinear. Regardless, it is the best that can be done in the
scope of the project. Three trainings are performed for the selected hyperparameter, and
the results are shown in fig. 6.1 and table 6.2. The values in the table are calculated in
the same way as table 6.1 and the plots in fig. 6.1 have been smoothed using a moving
average filter with window size 1000.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
-100
-50
0
Level 1
Reward
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
0
1000
2000
Episode length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Timesteps
#10 6
0
0.5
1
Episode end due to goal reached
Figure 6.1: Final training level 1
Table 6.2: Level 1 results
Time
Reward
Episode length
Timeout
Goal reached
Far away
Run 1
3.00
6.5
317.27
0
1
0
Run 2
3.00
5.16
253.98
0
1
0
Run 3
3.00
5.23
225.25
0
1
0
Run 4
3.00
5.06
252.33
0
1
0
Mean
3.00
5.49
269.71
0
1
0
fig. 6.1 shows that rewards increase and converge around zero, and similarly the episode
length converge to around 300, and the reason for episode termination increase to become
exclusively due to the tractor reaching the goal. Table 6.2 shows similar values as for the
good responses in table 6.1, which proves the hyperparameters work well together. Thus,
68
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:77==
it is these hyperparameters, and the models from run 1, 2 and 3 in fig. 6.1 and table 6.2
that will be used for further training in the next level.
6.4
Training level 2: Static obstacles
In this training level, the path the tractor must follow is of the same nature as in the
first level; two waypoints and with a slight curve. This time however, static obstacles
are implemented. This includes both round and rectangular obstacles which are placed
randomly around the tractor, but not at the goal location nor at where the tractor spawns.
The static obstacles will be circular with a radius ranging from 0.5m to 2m or rectangular
with height and width in the same range as the radius. The agent has learned to follow
a path from the previous level, and by training on that model, the agent will attempt to
follow the path, but it will occasionally collide with obstacles, which give a large negative
reward. The agent should in theory learn that the collisions are bad, and learn to not take
the actions that lead to collision for each state.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
#10 7
-10
-5
0
Level 2
Reward
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
#10 7
400
600
800
Episode length
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
#10 7
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Episode end due to timeout
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
#10 7
0.5
1
Episode end due to goal reached
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Timesteps
#10 7
0
0.2
0.4
Episode end due to collision
Figure 6.2: Level 2 training
In the results for level 2, it can be seen that the rewards are lower, the lengths of the
episodes are longer, and the episode termination due to the timeout increased. This is
to be expected, as the added obstacles cause collisions, which decrease the total reward,
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
69
==PAGE:78==
Table 6.3: Level 2 results
Time
Reward
Ep. length
Collision
Timeout
Goal reached
Far away
Run 1
20
1.94
483.48
0.08
0.02
0.9
0
Run 2
20
1.05
769.15
0.07
0.15
0.78
0
Mean
20
1.5
626.31
0.075
0.085
0.84
0
when avoiding the obstacle, the tractor needs to swerve around the obstacle. In order to
avoid the obstacle, the agent needs to choose to diverge from the path and take a small
penalty, in order to collect the big reward at the goal and avoid the big penalty from
collision. It can also be observed that the episode end due to timeout (most likely when
the tractor is stuck) has increased from the previous level. This is likely due to the way
some obstacles spawn, and they make it too difficult for the tractor to navigate around
them, so it chooses to stay stationary or try different approaches to navigate around them
rather than colliding. However, the timeout and collision rate is less than 10% for the last
1000 episodes, and the collision-free operation is 84%. It can also be seen on fig. 6.2 that
the rate of goal reached is increasing, and the collision rate is decreasing, which is what is
desired.
6.5
Training level 3: Dynamic obstacles
In this level, obstacles will be introduced.
The path the tractor should follow is the
same as in the previous level, but with a mix of obstacles in the simulation as well. The
dynamic obstacles will be circular with a radius from 0.5-2 m and velocity between 1 and
2 m/s. These obstacles are semi-polite, meaning they will not walk into the tractor by
themselves, but they will walk right in front or behind it. This is to avoid penalties due
to unfair collisions, which the tractor cannot avoid. For this level, the learning rate was
decreased to 10−6 as initial training showed that the previous learning rate of 10−5 was
not sufficient.
Table 6.4: Level 3 results
Time
Reward
Ep. length
Collision
Timeout
Goal reached
Far away
Run 1
24
-0.65
348.63
0.17
0.01
0.82
0
Run 2
24
-0.76
386.74
0.15
0.02
0.83
0
Run 3
24
-0.08
382.86
0.16
0.1
0.83
0
Mean
24
-0.44
372.74
0.16
0.01
0.82
0
On the results of this level, which can be seen in fig. 6.3 and table 6.4, it can be seen that
the reward has decreased, the duration of the episode has decreased, the collisions have
increased, the timeouts have decreased, and the goal rate has remained the same. This
is probably to be expected, as the more difficult scenario causes the tractor to not reach
the goal as straightforwardly as before and needs to take more penalties to complete the
objective. The increase in collisions is naturally because the dynamic obstacles are harder
to avoid and need to be predicted to most effectively avoid them, which in some cases is
impossible when they change direction or appear behind larger obstacles. The timeout
has decreased, which can be due to more episodes ending by collision, but also that the
agent now knows what obstacles look like and it must avoid them, and combined with
that the obstacles now move, they can push the tractor in another direction, which may
70
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:79==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
#10 7
-4
-2
0
Level 3
Reward
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
#10 7
300
400
Episode length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
#10 7
0
0.02
0.04
Episode end due to timeout
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
#10 7
0.6
0.8
Episode end due to goal reached
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Timesteps
#10 7
0.2
0.4
Episode end due to collision
Figure 6.3: Level 3 training
lead to successful completion. The success rate is still higher than 80% even with dynamic
obstacles. In fig. 6.3 it can also be seen that the variance of the plots has increased, due
to the greater degree of randomness in the environment due to dynamic obstacles.
6.6
Training level 4: Gazebo
The final training level is in Gazebo. The same conditions as level 3 are implemented, but
this time in Gazebo, so the model can be fine-tuned to the more detailed dynamics of the
tractor. The best model from level 3 is trained here and only that one, because it is more
time demanding to train in Gazebo compared to the Python simulator.
It can be seen in the summary in table 6.5 and the plot in fig. 6.4 that the response has
values in roughly the same range as in level 3, but fluctuating a lot. It is positive that
the performance decrease is not more than what is observed, but negative that it did not
manage to converge to more stable values. The training was given almost 5 million steps,
which took 90 hours, which is several magnitudes slower than the previous levels. This is
largely due to the complexity of the Gazebo simulator, lack of parallelized environments
and limited computing power. The fluctuating values in fig. 6.4 indicate that there is
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
71
==PAGE:80==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
#10 6
-2
-1
0
Level 4
Reward
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
#10 6
300
350
400
450
Episode length
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
#10 6
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
Episode end due to timeout
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
#10 6
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.9
Episode end due to goal reached
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Timesteps
#10 6
0.05
0.1
0.15
Episode end due to collision
Figure 6.4: Level 4 training plot
still uncertainty in the model and that there is more to learn. This is also emphasized
by looking at the explained variance of training in fig. 6.5. The explained variance is a
measure of how good the estimate of the value function is. An explained variance of 1
means a perfect estimate, a value of zero means the estimate might as well be zero, and a
value less than zero means that the estimate is worse than predicting zero. In the figure,
the plot for level 1 shows an ideal graph, where the value is uncertain in the beginning
and converges to 1 towards the end, meaning that the algorithm has learned the value
function, at least for the states it has visited. For level 4, it can be observed that the mean
is lower, it has not yet converged, and the variance is higher. This means that the learned
value function is still somewhat inaccurate, and there is still a lot of learning left for the
model to do. However, as mentioned, time and computational capacity did not allow for
more training.
Table 6.5: Level 4 results
Time
Reward
Ep. length
Collision
Timeout
Goal reached
Far away
Run 1
90
-0.2
381.46
0.1
0.02
0.87
0.01
72
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:81==
0
1
2
3
4
5
Timesteps
#10 6
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Explained variance
Level 4
Level 1
Figure 6.5: Explained variance of level 1 vs level 4
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
73
==PAGE:82==
7
Testing
7.1
Python simulator performance
The Python simulator is run for 1000 episodes in an environment with static and dynamic
obstacles to quantify the performance of the Python simulator, where the bulk of the
training was performed. This test is different from the training results, because the model
is deployed in deterministic mode, which means the selected action is not sampled from
the output distribution, but is simply the mean of the distribution.
Table 7.1: Python simulator test results
Mean path
deviation [m]
Collision rate
Goal reached
rate
Min. distance
to obstacle [m]
Mean time
to plan [s]
RL Python
1.37
0.15
0.8502
1.50
0.0134
The results show a success rate of 85 %, where the tractor reaches the goal within the time
limit without collisions. It does this with a mean path deviation of 1.37 meters, a mean
minimum distance to obstacles of 1.50, and a planning time of 0.0134 seconds (the time
it takes to generate actions given an observation). This is a somewhat simple test, but
since the final test will be carried out in Gazebo and on different scenarios than what has
been trained, different and perhaps worse performance is to be expected, so this serves as
a baseline for the coming tests. The python simulator can be seen in the video 1
7.2
Comparison to classical planners
The comparision to the classical planners will be the final test of the developed algorithm.
It will be done in Gazebo, on scenarios that are a middle ground between realistic and
attempting to push the capabilities of both the RL planner and classical planners. The
agent was trained in somewhat similar environments, but has not seen the test scenarios
before, so the agent has not generalized to these specific scenarios. Thus, some of the
scenarios also test how the agent handles environments that are different from what it
has seen previously. In all scenarios, the target path for the tractor will be a U-shaped
path. The tractor starts in (0,0) and is commanded to drive to (100,0), then (100,30)
and the final goal will be in (0,30). This is assessed to be a path similar to one that
can be found in a real mowing setting. For each test, five different runs are performed to
document the consistency of the algorithm in the environment. The path and all obstacles
are in the same position for each run, and the dynamic obstacles take the same path and
are initialized from the same position in each run, so all tests are given the same initial
conditions, which should give a fair comparison. For each test and each algorithm, all the
runs will be plotted. The target path is shown, along with the tractor paths from the
5 runs. All static obstacles are colored bright red, and dynamic obstacles are shown in
dark red. Dynamic obstacles are only shown upon collision, but their paths are plotted
in a purple color. For each collision, the tractor footprint is shown as well. The plots are
rather small due to space constraints and considerations, so the reader is encouraged to
zoom in on the electronic version of the thesis.
In addition to the position plot, a summary of each scenario is given, which gives a
quantitative comparison of the planners. It shows the completion rate, which shows how
1https://youtu.be/CkNr4I7KwYo
74
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:83==
often the planner reached the goal (1 is always, 0 is none). The time to complete is how
long it took to complete on average, if it completed the path. The distance traveled is the
mean total distance covered by the tractor in all runs. The mean path deviation is the
mean distance to the target path for each run. Collisions pr. run is the mean number of
collisions in all runs. Min. distance from the obstacle is the minimum distance from an
obstacle and should serve to show how well the tractor avoids obstacles and how robust
the planner is to uncertainty in obstacle localization. All the planners run with a rate
of 20 Hz (0.05s). The comparison will also compare how long it takes to plan the path
(control loop time).
It was not possible to get an exact time for the TEB and DWA
planner, only how long each control loop takes. If the time of the control loop is equal to
0.05 it means the planner has calculated a plan within the control loop, but if it exceeds
0.05, the algorithm took longer. Therefore, the listed time to plan will always be at least
0.05, and if the planners exceed the loop time, the time to plan will be greater than 0.05.
In the comparison table, the min and max values are shown in brackets below the mean
All scenarios will also include a plot of the control signals given to the tractor from each
algorithm to evaluate the quality of the control signals. Only the control signals of one of
the five runs are plotted to minimize clutter in the plots, and because the data of one run
is assessed to be representative of the rest.
One run of each algorithm and scenario can be seen in the video 2.
7.2.1
Scenario 1: Path tracking
This scenario is an empty field, where the tractor just has to follow a U-shaped path,
which is intended to mimic a mowing scenario, without objects. This serves as a baseline
test to see how well the different approaches can actually track a path like this.
Target Path
Tractor Path
Static obstacle
Obstacle path
Tractor footprint
Dynamic obstacle
0
50
100
0
10
20
30
Figure 7.1: DWA scenario 1
0
20
40
60
80
100
-20
0
20
Figure 7.2: TEB scenario 1
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
Figure 7.3: RL scenario 1
All planners are able to complete this scenario and do it consistently as shown by fig. 7.1-7.3
and table 7.2. However, it can be seen that the RL planner follows the path better than
the other two planners. This is also shown in table 7.2, where RL completes the path
2https://youtu.be/CkNr4I7KwYo
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
75
==PAGE:84==
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Time [s]
-5
0
5
Velocity [m/s]
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
DWA Cmd.
Actual
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time [s]
-5
0
5
Velocity [m/s]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
TEB Cmd.
Actual
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
0
2
4
Velocity [m/s]
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
RL Cmd.
Actual
Figure 7.4: Scenario 1 velocity and steering angle command
faster, with less deviation and a shorter total distance traveled. The control loop time is
0.05 for the TEB and RL planners, but significantly slower for DWA. In fig. 7.4, it can
be seen that the velocity and steering commands are relatively consistent for DWA and
TEB, but for RL, only the velocity signal is consistent. The steering angle oscillates a lot,
which causes the tractor to also oscillate a lot. This indicates that the agent has trouble
driving straight (keeping the steering angle at zero), which also makes sense, because it
is not considered in the reward function. The TEB planner shows some strange behavior
at the first corner, where it turns away from the next waypoint, then reverses and turns
the other way, instead of just driving directly towards the waypoint, which significantly
contributes to the long distance driven.
76
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:85==
Table 7.2: Scenario 1 summary
Completion
rate
Time to
complete [s]
Distance
traveled [m]
Mean path
deviation [m]
Collisions
pr. run
Min. distance
to obstacle [m]
Control
loop time [s]
DWA
1
212.19
(220.03, 204.88)
248.14
(253.49, 242.12)
3.02
(3.67, 2.24)
0
(0, 0)
Inf
(Inf, Inf)
0.28
(0.3, 0.27)
TEB
1
102.08
(104.02, 98.58)
287.56
(293.8, 282.29)
3.49
(3.81, 3.07)
0
(0, 0)
Inf
(Inf, Inf)
0.05
(0.05, 0.05)
RL
1
62.12
(76.69, 57.93)
223.39
(225.2, 222.3)
0.27
(0.31, 0.21)
0
(0, 0)
Inf
(Inf, Inf)
0.05
(0.05, 0.05)
7.2.2
Scenario 2: Static obstacle avoidance
This scenario has many but simple obstacles (rocks, trees, and telephone poles) with a
relatively small footprint. This scenario aims to test how well the different methods can
follow a path while avoiding obstacles.
Target Path
Tractor Path
Static obstacle
Obstacle path
Tractor footprint
Dynamic obstacle
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
Figure 7.5: DWA scenario 2
0
50
100
-20
0
20
40
Figure 7.6: TEB scenario 2
0
50
100
0
20
40
Figure 7.7: RL scenario 2
In this scenario, DWA fails to complete the path. TEB and RL consistently completes the
path. The position plots can be seen on fig. 7.5-7.7. It can be seen that DWA gets stuck
at around the same place each time. DWA seems to avoid obstacles well, with a narrow
seperation, until it gets stuck. TEB shows a more or less consistent way of completing
the scenario, except for a few outliers. RL shows the most consistent way of completing
the path, and also in a more ”neat” way where it navigates obstacles and the path tightly.
This is also reflected in table 7.3, where RL completes the path the fastest, with smallest
distance traveled, smallest path deviation and smallest distance to obstacles, and fewer
collisions than TEB (DWA is excluded as it did not complete the scenario). TEB and RL
consistently stayed at 0.05s control loop time, where DWA exceeded it. A similar picture
as the previous test is seen in the control signals in fig. 7.8. For DWA the commands are
relatively consistent and the tractor can track the commands relatively well. For TEB,
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
77
==PAGE:86==
0
50
100
150
200
Time [s]
-2
0
2
Velocity [m/s]
0
50
100
150
200
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
DWA Cmd.
Actual
20
40
60
80
100
Time [s]
-5
0
5
Velocity [m/s]
20
40
60
80
100
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
TEB Cmd.
Actual
0
20
40
60
Time [s]
-5
0
5
Velocity [m/s]
0
20
40
60
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
RL Cmd.
Actual
Figure 7.8: Scenario 2 velocity and steering angle command
the commands fluctuate more and only the steering angle is somewhat well tracked by the
tractor. The fluctuations can mean the planners change their plans with a high frequency,
and have difficulty commiting to a plan, which is also illustrated in the video. The RL
planner also generate commands with high frequency which cannot be tracked well by the
tractor.
Table 7.3: Scenario 2 summary
Completion
rate
Time to
complete [s]
Distance
traveled [m]
Mean path
deviation [m]
Collisions
pr. run
Min. distance
to obstacle [m]
Control
loop time [s]
DWA
0
-
183.01
(208.75, 160.59)
3.21
(4, 2.56)
0
(0, 0)
0.74
(0.76, 0.72)
0.25
(0.27, 0.23)
TEB
1
114.09
(122.79, 106.32)
306.31
(312.21, 292.13)
5.1
(5.67, 4.47)
0.4
(2, 0)
1.01
(1.82, 0)
0.05
(0.05, 0.05)
RL
1
82.75
(93.76, 76.14)
227.62
(229.25, 226.79)
0.97
(1.07, 0.88)
0
(0, 0)
0.48
(0.72, 0.18)
0.05
(0.05, 0.05)
78
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:87==
7.2.3
Scenario 3: Dynamic obstacle avoidance
This scenario tests how the planner reacts to dynamic obstacles. It must still follow the
U-shape as before, but this time 10 pedestrians are walking back and forth, intersecting
the path, so the tractor needs to anticipate the behavior of the pedestrians, and handle it
accordingly to avoid collision.
Target Path
Tractor Path
Static obstacle
Obstacle path
Tractor footprint
Dynamic obstacle
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
Figure 7.9: DWA scenario 3
0
50
100
-20
0
20
40
60
Figure 7.10: TEB scenario 3
0
50
100
-20
0
20
40
Figure 7.11: RL scenario 3
In this scenario, all planners except once with DWA complete the path. It can be seen on
fig. 7.9 that collisions happen close to the target path, or where the tractor would have
driven (see the plot from scenario 1) which indicates the planner does not handle moving
obstacles well. This is also expected as it has no way of taking dynamic obstacles into
account; it only considers them as momentarily static. TEB seems to avoid the obstacles
well as seen on fig. 7.10, but has difficulty with the pedestrian in the top right corner, which
it collides with a few times. Otherwise TEB seems to actively avoid obstacles, and the
video also shows it is able to predict the obstacles motion well. RL collides a few times as
well, and seems to have more difficulty effectively predicting and avoiding the pedestrians,
which is also shown in the video. The summary in table 7.4 show that TEB is fastest
to complete, DWA has the shortest distance traveled, likely because of the run where it
barely tracked the target path (which also causes it to have the largest path deviation.
RL has the lowest path deviation, and also a distance driven similar to DWA. TEB has
the fewest collisions and similarly to the previous scenarios, TEB and RL stays within the
control loop time (although TEB has at least one run with a time of 0.06 seconds). The
commands on fig. 7.12 again paint a similar picture as the previous scenarios.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
79
==PAGE:88==
50
100
150
200
250
Time [s]
-2
0
2
Velocity [m/s]
50
100
150
200
250
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
DWA Cmd.
Actual
0
50
100
150
Time [s]
-5
0
5
Velocity [m/s]
0
50
100
150
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
TEB Cmd.
Actual
20
40
60
80
Time [s]
-5
0
5
Velocity [m/s]
20
40
60
80
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
RL Cmd.
Actual
Figure 7.12: Scenario 3 velocity and steering angle command
Table 7.4: Scenario 3 summary
Completion
rate
Time to
complete [s]
Distance
traveled [m]
Mean path
deviation [m]
Collisions
pr. run
Min. distance
to obstacle [m]
Control
loop time [s]
DWA
0.8
385.3
(486.39, 290.7)
236.96
(309.8, 148)
3.79
(4.27, 2.7)
2.4
(5, 1)
0.11
(0.56, 0)
0.24
(0.32, 0.19)
TEB
1
163.09
(213.4, 124.46)
331.4
(375.55, 286.75)
6.32
(7.97, 3.9)
0.6
(3, 0)
0.25
(0.41, 0)
0.05
(0.06, 0.05)
RL
1
186.07
(205.7, 174.61)
245.37
(248.08, 240.62)
1.65
(2.39, 1.02)
1
(2, 0)
0.05
(0.23, 0)
0.05
(0.05, 0.05)
7.2.4
Scenario 4: Complex environment (static obstacles)
This scenario serves to test the planners in environments with large and complex obstacles,
and multiple constraints from obstacles. It consists of two groups of trees, both blocking
the path of the tractor. There also is a fence constraining the movements of the tractor.
Furthermore, there are (static) vehicles it must avoid as well.
In this scenario, DWA drives a strange path, that barely tracks the target path. It drives
forwards to the first cluster of obstacles, then reverses to the lower right corner, then
drives forwards to the upper right corner, and then reverses the rest of the way. This
80
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:89==
Target Path
Tractor Path
Static obstacle
Obstacle path
Tractor footprint
Dynamic obstacle
0
50
100
0
20
40
Figure 7.13: DWA scenario 4
0
50
100
0
20
40
Figure 7.14: TEB scenario 4
0
50
100
0
20
40
Figure 7.15: RL scenario 4
is also shown in the video. This way of driving is not desired, as a tractor should not
spend much time driving reverse. It does avoid the obstacles consistently, but also gets
stuck twice. TEB seems to consistently avoid the obstacles and track the path to the best
of its abilities. RL fails to complete, as it cannot pass the first cluster of obstacles. In
table 7.5, TEB the highest completion rate, fastest time to complete, but also the largest
distance traveled. Here DWA has the lowest, but likely due to the places the tractor got
stuck. Path deviation for DWA and TEB is similar, and TEB has largest seperation to
obstacles. The control loop time is still at 0.05 for RL, and increased for the two others.
The commands on fig. 7.16 again paint a similar picture as the previous scenarios.
Table 7.5: Scenario 4 summary
Completion
rate
Time to
complete [s]
Distance
traveled [m]
Mean path
deviation [m]
Collisions
pr. run
Min. distance
to obstacle [m]
Control
loop time [s]
DWA
0.6
285.76
(296.72, 273.78)
198.06
(270.93, 63.26)
4.9
(5.86, 1.44)
0
(0, 0)
1.05
(1.23, 0.91)
0.29
(0.34, 0.23)
TEB
1
113.88
(132.99, 107.59)
290.25
(296.57, 273.18)
5.02
(5.56, 4.17)
0
(0, 0)
2.35
(2.86, 1.55)
0.08
(0.09, 0.07)
RL
0
-
78.68
(81.82, 76.36)
1.84
(3.73, 0.48)
1.4
(2, 1)
0
(0, 0)
0.05
(0.05, 0.05)
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
81
==PAGE:90==
20
40
60
80
100
Time [s]
-2
0
2
Velocity [m/s]
20
40
60
80
100
Time [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
St. angle [rad]
DWA Cmd.
Actual
20
40
60
80
100
120
Time [s]
-2
0
2
Velocity [m/s]
20
40
60
80
100
120
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
TEB Cmd.
Actual
20
40
60
80
Time [s]
-5
0
5
Velocity [m/s]
20
40
60
80
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
RL Cmd.
Actual
Figure 7.16: Scenario 4 velocity and steering angle command
7.2.5
Scenario 5: Complex environment (static and dynamic)
This scenario is similar to scenario 4, but with dynamic obstacles in the form of deer
(moving and stationary), pedestrians and telephone poles. This serves as the final test,
where all the critical elements are involved, and should ideally be a challenge for the
planners, to test the limits and capabilities in complex environments. This scenario is
based on multiple real life scenarios but condensed into one scenario, so it is unrealistic to
see something like this in a real field.
This scenario proved to be a challenge for all planners, as intended. DWA and TEB have a
completion rate of 0.6 but RL fails to complete again for the same reason as in the previous
scenario. As seen in fig. 7.17 - 7.19, DWA takes roughly the same path and a similar one
to the previous scenario, where TEB takes many different paths, which is also indicated
in table 7.6 by the long distance and high path deviation, and RL does the same as in
the previous scenario. TEB also has the highest collisions per run, and DWA has none.
It is surprising that DWA has no collisions, but it might just happen to choose a route
where the dynamic obstacles are not present at the same time and place as the tractor.
The commands in fig. 7.20 again paint a similar picture to the previous scenarios. It can
especially be seen for RL, that it attempts to move back and forwards, and turning the
steering wheels, before finally ”giving up” and setting zero velocity. It can also be seen
82
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:91==
Target Path
Tractor Path
Static obstacle
Obstacle path
Tractor footprint
Dynamic obstacle
0
50
100
0
20
40
60
Figure 7.17: DWA scenario 5
0
50
100
-20
0
20
40
60
Figure 7.18: TEB scenario 5
0
50
100
0
20
40
60
Figure 7.19: RL scenario 5
that only the RL planner manages to stay within the control loop time.
Table 7.6: Scenario 5 summary
Completion
rate
Time to
complete [s]
Distance
traveled [m]
Mean path
deviation [m]
Collisions
pr. run
Min. distance
to obstacle [m]
Control
loop time [s]
DWA
0.6
409.2
(443.1, 381.69)
191.36
(273.39, 10.18)
5.14
(6.68, 0.01)
0
(0, 0)
2.28
(8.01, 0.69)
0.32
(0.36, 0.3)
TEB
0.6
167.6
(180.47, 148.18)
286.51
(347.55, 232.32)
7.65
(12.55, 3.98)
2.2
(4, 1)
0
(0, 0)
0.07
(0.08, 0.06)
RL
0
-
88.35
(110.47, 77.97)
1.43
(1.93, 0.85)
1.4
(2, 1)
0
(0, 0)
0.05
(0.05, 0.05)
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
83
==PAGE:92==
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-2
0
2
Velocity [m/s]
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
DWA Cmd.
Actual
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Time [s]
-5
0
5
Velocity [m/s]
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
TEB Cmd.
Actual
50
100
150
200
250
Time [s]
-5
0
5
Velocity [m/s]
50
100
150
200
250
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
St. angle [rad]
RL Cmd.
Actual
Figure 7.20: Scenario 5 velocity and steering angle command
84
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:93==
8
Discussion
This section will discuss the process, results and findings of this project, by attempting to
explain the benefits and shortcomings of the developed RL planner, both as a standalone
method, but also in comparison to the classical methods it was compared against. This
section will also include ideas for improvements and further development.
8.1
RL planner vs. classical planners
The test results gave some useful information on the performance of the RL planner,
compared to the classical planners. It was tested in five levels of increasing complexity and
evaluated based on how often it completes the path, how fast it completes, the deviation
to the target path, collisions with obstacles, minimum distance to the obstacles, and the
control loop time. In the first test, where the path-tracking capabilities were tested, the
RL planner performed better on all parameters than the classical planners. In the second
scenario, where the objective was to avoid simple, static, and small obstacles, the RL
planner also performed better than the other planners. It was shown to avoid obstacles
with a smaller separation than the classical planners, and whether this is good or bad, is
not exactly black or white. A large obstacle separation not only means less risk of collision
and more robustness to uncertainties in the system, but also means a larger path deviation
in many cases, which is also undesirable. This metric is included to give a rough indication
of how uncertain the obstacle detection can be, before collision occurs. When dynamic
obstacles are introduced, the RL planner starts to get challenged. It had more collisions
than TEB but fewer than DWA. Despite this, RL still completed all runs and did it with a
similar speed as TEB and similar distance traveled as DWA, and a smaller path deviation
as both of them. The test results in this scenario, combined with the video, indicates that
it still has some trouble estimating and predicting motion of the obstacles, as in many
cases the collisions could easily have been avoided by braking and/or turning the other
way. However, the video and position plot still show that it is capable of avoiding dynamic
obstacles to some extent. It is in the final two scenarios where the RL planner really shows
the limitations. The setups are similar; the final scenario is the same as the previous, but
with dynamic obstacles. In both cases the tractor fails to get past the first large cluster
of obstacles, and has several collisions. It is clear from the video, that the obstacles are
visible to the agent, but it does not act on the information. This indicates that it has
not seen this case during training, which also makes sense. The training was done on
randomized environments, where a tight grouping of obstacles like in scenario 4 and 5
probably only rarely occur. The first step to solve this would thus be to expose the agent
to similar environments during training. In general, more care should be taken to train
the agent on environments it is likely to see. However, this also gives insight into how the
agent reacts in environments it has not previously experienced, which is also important
to document. Agriculture environments can be very diverse, and it is not unlikely an
agent can be exposed to an environment it has not experienced before, and should still be
able to navigate those environments. In the training plots, the decreasing collision rate
as training progresses show that the agent knows to avoid obstacles, but apparently not
well enough to avoid a cluster of obstacles like this. However, the RL planner seemed to
not be influenced with regards to planning time as complexity increases as much as the
classical planners, which is a valuable property.
In the two final test cases, the RL planner could probably benefit of global replanning as
well. As demonstrated in the second test case, it was shown that the RL planner avoided
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
85
==PAGE:94==
the obstacles that were close to the given global path. Thus it would be interesting to
implement global replanning for the RL planner, so a new global plan could be made,
when large obstacles are present.
To compare the two methods to the fullest, the development time and effort should also
be considered. The results produced in this project and documented in this report is the
outcome of 6 months of full time research, development and testing. While some of the
time was dedicated to learning reinforcement learning and making a detailed report, a lot
of the time in this project was spent trying a setup (reward function, hyperparameters,
observation space, obstacle representation, etc.), training a model for a few hours and
evaluating the response. More often than not, the results were not great and it was back
to trying again, until something works. The rules of thumb in designing a RL setup are very
vague, and what works well for some applications, may fail on a similar but different setup.
A lot of it comes down to choosing the right algorithm, the right hyperparameters, the
right action/observation space, the right policy network structure, and the right reward
function, and choosing them right in combination of each other. Even then, since RL
largely relies on randomness for exploration, a specific random seed may cause a good
setup to not converge. All of this makes the process of designing and training a RL agent
potentially a quite lengthy process. Also worth considering; when some properties of the
current model changes, e.g. footprint, dynamics, obstacle shapes, and so on, it will likely
require training again. The old policy can be trained on the new environment, but if
the old model has been trained to convergence, there may not be much exploration (in
the case of on policy methods/PPO) in which case the process is not so straightforward.
Thus when assessing the classical methods vs. RL, it is also important to factor in the
development time, as it can be quite extensive for RL. During the 6 month project, for
approximately 3 months, at least one training has been running at all times, in order to
figure out what works well and what does not. This is quite demanding computationally,
and is also worth considering in a time where questions about energy consumption in AI
are being raised. A lot of the failed attempts can be attributed to the steep learning
curve of RL and the lack of experience early on in the project, but considering how many
different setups were attempted, and how many actually worked, shows that it is not as
straightforward as it might seem.
It should also be noted that the comparison between the RL planner and the classical
planners are not necessarily one-to-one, as the classical planners perceive the path differ-
ently than the RL planner, and most importantly the RL planner was specifically made
for this purpose, whereas the other planners are not. Despite this, it is assessed that as
fair a comparison as possible was carried out.
8.2
Training
The first part of the training involved a test to find the best hyperparameters. This was
done to find the best hyperparameters for the rest of the training, but also in an attempt
to investigate what effect changing a single hyperparameter had on the resulting training.
The results show that even for three identical trainings, the result can vary widely, so the
results here should be taken with a grain of salt. Furthermore, only three trainings per
hyperparameter was done, which may not be enough for a sound statistical analysis. The
most critical hyperparameters, which cause the biggest change in the training result was
batch size, gamma, learning rate and SDE. For this setup it was found that increasing
batch size decreases training time at a small expense of slower convergence. Decreasing
gamma causes the training to not converge and have poor performance; only a value of
0.99 out of the tested values gave satisfactory results. Perhaps increasing gamma further
86
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:95==
can give better results, but this was not attempted. Decreasing the learning rate on the
simple level caused slower convergence, which was also expected. Finally SDE showed a
clear difference. Not using SDE leads to a better performance, than when using it. This
was unexpected as SDE was made for systems similar to this. The reason for this may
be that it was not set up correctly for this environment, or that it just simply is not
compatible.
Based on the hyperparameter test, the best hyperparameters were chosen, and training
proceeded. Better hyperparameters might exist, and can be found with a more extensive
analysis, but this was not prioritized due to time constraints.
The 4 level curriculum
learning approach was found to work quite well, however it took some trial and error to
find the best curricula/increments in difficulty. It was attempted to split the first level
in two, firstly training on a simple path, then on a more complex one. This worked well
for these two levels, but when moving on to obstacles, the agent had difficulty learning
to avoid obstacles and the model might have overfitted. For each increment of difficulty,
it could be observed that the success rate (episode termination due to goal reached) was
lower than the previous level (which is to be expected). Despite this, it relatively quickly
increased and converged to around the same rate as the level before. The success rate from
level 2 and onwards stayed around 80%. In level 2 the episode termination was mainly
due to collision and timeout, but in level 3 where dynamic obstacles were introduced, the
timeout rate dropped dramatically, but the collision rate increased. This may be due to
the dynamic obstacles pushing the tractor, preventing it from getting stuck, which is good
because it forces the tractor to move, but can be bad in the sense that the agent might get
too used to needing an obstacle to push it. Level 4 was probably the largest increment,
which is also seen in the training result. The graphs are fluctuating quite a bit, which
might indicate that it struggles to learn. The model was after all trained for many hours
on a similar but different environment. However the slight loss in performance must also
be seen in the light of the time it took to train. In python, using parallel environments
and the HPC, it could do around 60 million steps in 24 hours, whereas the gazebo model
took 4 days for 5 million steps. So it can be argued that, at least for the purpose of this
project, that the decrease in performance is a fair tradeoff considering how long it would
take to train in Gazebo from scratch. It was attempted to make Gazebo run faster, but
this would ultimately lead to unstable simulations, so the best option for this project was
to let it run real time, even though it was slow. There might be a better way to do it, but
that was not discovered during this project. Parallel environments/tractors would likely
be a massive improvement, but this was not implemented due to time constraints. In
designing the curricula, it was also attempted to simplify the dynamics of the tractor even
further, in hopes it would learn the overall dynamics of the tractor, and then gradually
make the dynamics more slow.
This was not effective however; the agent learned the
simple dynamics well, but seemed to overfit too quickly, and then could not learn the
more complex dynamics.
Maybe this is also what happens in the transition from the
python to gazebo simulation; that the more complex dynamics are too difficult to learn,
when it is more used to simpler dynamics. If this is the case, it might be worth the effort to
implement a more detailed model in the python simulator. While this was not extensively
documented in the report, having multiple parallel environments also helped with training
a lot, as it both increased the speed of the training, and increased exploration. Choosing
a good number of parallel environments is also a tradeoff, as many environments will
increase the rollout data collection and increase exploration, but also increase computation
and memory requirements, and make the model update slow, as there are more rollout
samples to base the update on. For this project, 16 parallel environments were found to
be a good tradeoff.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
87
==PAGE:96==
In light of the testing, the training might not have been sufficient, since collisions with
simple dynamic obstacles occur and it has trouble navigating around large obstacles. The
training plots clearly show that the collisions decrease as training progresses, but not
less than 10 %, so there is still room for improvement. The main problems are avoiding
dynamic obstacles and large obstacles/clusters of obstacles.
This may be solved with
more training, a better policy network/feature extractor, and better training scenarios.
As mentioned, the environments for training were randomized in hopes that it would be
able to create a connection between small distances from the laser scanner, collisions, and
penalties, but this only happened to some extent. Training in more specific environments
may thus be necessary.
The prediction capabilities were also not perfect, which may
call for more stacked observations, and/or a better feature extractor, or entirely different
observation space.
Looking at the training results, both for the Python and Gazebo trainings, it can be seen
that the success rate is at around 80-90%, and the collision rate 10-20 % when the training
is terminated. These results are also somewhat in line with other works where RL was
applied for navigation and obstacle avoidance, and where comparable metrics (success rate,
collision rate, etc.) were presented. [6] presents a final success rate of around 0.6 during
training, 0.7 when navigating in a complex map with pedestrians, 0.8 when navigating a
simple map, and 0.9-1.0 for path tracking. [105] shows a maximum success rate of 82%.
[90] presents a success rate of 0.6-1.0 depending on the environment. [106] presents a
collision rate of 48%, and a success rate of 98% for navigation. Of the more remarkable
results [76] presents a success rate of 90-100% in the specified test cases, and [86] reports
96-100% success rate. Naturally no concise and general conclusions can be drawn from
this, but it may indicate that more research needs to be done in this area to improve on
the results, even if the results in some works outperform the classical methods.
8.3
On vs. Off-policy methods
In this project, the only RL method that was implemented was PPO, which is an on policy
method. While on-policy algorithms are in general faster and more simple, they always
follow the most current policy and rely on that for exploration. As time progresses while
running an on-policy algorithm, the output distributions of the policy tend to become
deterministic, and thus not explore.
When an almost deterministic policy eventually
samples an action that is not close to the mean of the distribution, the action is only
applied for this one sample, and since the environment with the tractor has slow dynamics,
an action for only one timestep has a negligible effect on the system.
It would need
several action samples, which are numerically close to each other for the tractor to react
noticeably, which for an almost deterministic policy is very unlikely. Off-policy can balance
exploration and exploitation better than on policy, and also supports experience replay,
which should serve for more stable training, and imitation learning, which should get the
algorithm a ”head start”. Another downside of on-policy methods is that if the policy
starts being bad, the collected rollouts under that policy will also be bad, and thus the
performance will decrease, and is very difficult to recover from, as the policy can converge
to a bad policy in certain circumstances.
In table 2.1 it was shown that the off-policy algorithm SAC was used with good results in
navigation tasks, and it is also a popular algorithm for continuous control, as it balances
exploration and exploitation to prevent the policy from converging to a bad optimum. Off-
policy methods are generally more sample efficient as well, which may be an advantage
of training in the slow Gazebo environment. However changing to SAC will likely mean
a redesign of the reward function, re-tuning hyperparameters, and potentially redesigning
88
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:97==
the observation space, as there is no guarantee that SAC or any other algorithm will
respond well to this specific reward function and hyperparameters. The reward function
was designed based on what PPO reacts well to, and this may be different for SAC.
8.4
Tractor dynamics
The slow dynamics of the tractor was one of the challenges of the RL algorithm. When the
policy is initialized, the actions it produces are random and change rapidly. The tractor
barely reacts to this, because it works as a slow low-pass filter. This means that the tractor
moves very little given these actions, and struggles to move before actions become more
consistent. When the tractor does not move much, the state does not change much either,
and the same is true for the rewards. This makes it difficult for the algorithm to learn in
the beginning. However, as the training proved, the agent managed to learn despite this,
but it was also observed that the algorithm quickly favors going to the extreme ends of
the action space, that being either full forward or full backward for the velocity command,
or full left or full right for the steering angle command, so what was intended to be a
continuous control policy was reduced to be a discrete control policy. For example, if the
tractor needs to drive straight, it prefers to fluctuate the steering angle between a positive
and negative value, so the mean is approximately zero, instead of just setting the command
to zero. This is problematic if this is to be put on a real tractor, as the actuators may
get damaged if the setpoints fluctuate like they do here. It also causes uncomfortable and
unnecessary driving, along with increased fuel consumption.
In an attempt to solve this, the sample time in the Python simulator was set to 0.05, which
makes the tractor hold the input given for 0.05 seconds, and thus have larger movements
per timestep. This was found to be relatively effective. In theory, by using SDE when
training, the actions given by the agent should be smoother and lead to better exploration,
but in the experiments with SDE enabled, this was not the case; it performed significantly
worse than the training without SDE. An alternative could be to implement a penalty for
rapidly changing actions, so that the agent would learn to gradually increase and decrease
the actions, so the tractor can actually follow the actions. This may lead to problems in the
initial training phase, as the actions will be fluctuating quickly, and will cause the rewards
to be largely negative, and the probability that two consecutive actions have a change less
than some (small) constant might not be very high. Another option could be to implement
some smoothing in the actions given by the agent to give more consistent movements, but
this needs to be implemented in the PPO algorithm, otherwise the training algorithm does
not know the actions are smoothed, and trains the policy on the raw actions.
8.5
Reward function
As mentioned several times, the reward function is an integral part of any RL algorithm.
Here, it was chosen to include both dense and sparse rewards, both to help the agent learn,
but also to make it fulfill the mowing objective. In the future, it would be interesting to
look at mainly using sparse rewards, to avoid the agent finding loopholes to achieve the
largest reward. The weights must be carefully tuned to be numerically suitable for the
algorithm, reflect what is desired to optimize, and ideally not cancel each other out.
An example of this is with the current setup, the tractor may choose to collide with an
obstacle because the detour around the obstacle and going to a waypoint may lead to a
lower reward because of the path deviation and angle deviation terms. A straightforward
fix may be to increase the reward and penalty for reaching waypoints and colliding with
obstacles, respectively, but this may lead to numeric instability if these values are too
far from each other and too numerically different from the dense rewards. Increasing the
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
89
==PAGE:98==
dense rewards may increase the likelihood that the agent finds loopholes, because these
rewards are given constantly. E.g. increasing the penalty of hitting an obstacle may lead
to the agent behaving ultra conservatively, and thinking it gives a better reward to stay
put than to risk driving into an obstacle, which ultimately causes the robot to not move
at all. Increasing the waypoint reward too much will make the agent neglect the smaller,
dense penalties.
One of the issues with the current setup is the tractor getting stuck for unknown reasons,
in situations where it can easily reach the goal. For this reason, it might be an idea to
implement a penalty term which becomes active if the robot is stuck. In the early stages
of the reward function design, the tractor had a tendency to get stuck in driving in circles,
but this was solved by implementing the heading error penalty term, so the tractor would
always try to point itself towards the waypoint.
8.6
Action and observation space
The action space in this project was chosen based on which inputs the Gazebo model
takes, so there was not much design related to this. It was observed, that the actions
were changing rapidly between the maximum and minimum value, which is not desired.
This is however not necessarily something which is solved by changing the action space. It
could however be interesting to change the action space to throttle and steering torque to
control the tractor more directly. This might give better control of the tractor, as throttle
and torque is essentially what makes the tractor move, so it might be easier for the policy
to learn the connection between applied throttle and speed or acceleration, and steering
angle/velocity when steering torque is applied.
With regards to the observation space, there is a bit more freedom to try other things.
Some of the reviewed papers used a costmap for the main part of the observation space
with regards to the path and obstacles, and then a numerical vector for the velocity,
heading, etc. which would also be a good option. The challenges of implementing this
is to discretize all of the observation space, and choosing a resolution that provides good
performance, without being too computationally expensive. In return, it might provide the
agent with more information to plan a better route. The obstacles are given as bounding
boxes and circles, as mentioned multiple times. The current laser scanner approach only
lets the agent see the edge facing the robot, despite that it has information about the
entire shape of the obstacle.
In this implementation, there is not any difference in how static and dynamic obstacles
are passed to the agent. This is another thing that could be improved in future iterations.
This way, the agent should be able to differentiate between the two types (or even more
different types if necessary) and ideally make better decisions. In theory the agent should
be able to learn this behavior by itself from implicitly estimating and predicting the motion
of the obstacle, but it might give better results if this is done before being passed to the
agent. With the laser approach, two seperate scan vectors could be implemented, one for
each type.
8.7
Hyperparameters and policy structure
A small hyperparameter search was done in this project, to get an idea of which hyperpa-
rameters work well for this task. While some hyperparameters were found to work well,
others may work better. The tests done here only varied one hyperparameter at a time,
but an extensive search would test all combinations, as the effects of the hyperparameters
are not easily separable. One might have found two good hyperparameters in two seperate
tests, but when applied together, the give a bad response.
90
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:99==
For the policy network structure, initial tests were done (which were not documented here
due to time and space limitations), but ultimately only one structure was used. There
may also be room for improvement here.
In many cases for RL applications, smaller
networks should not be underestimated, and larger networks are not always better. For
future iterations of this project, it would thus make sense to experiment with different
numbers of layers and neurons in layers, and a different structure of the convolutional
layers. For these, 1D convolutions were used, but since the laser data is stacked, the data
can be represented as 2D, which opens up for using 2D convolutional layers, which might
be capable of estimating movement of obstacles better. The convolutional layers was also
kept constant due to time limitations.
8.8
Real-world application
As the RL algorithm is now, it is not quite ready for real world testing. First of all, the
rapidly changing actions should be improved so the applied actions are more smooth, to
not damage the hardware and improve driving in general.
For this project it was also assumed that the tractor has a rectangular footprint, for
simplicity reasons. However, even though a tractor can always be approximated with a
rectangular footprint, it is not optimal. With a fully equipped mower tractor will have a
footprint similar to a T-shape. A rectangular approximation to a T-shaped footprint will
cover a larger area than the tractor actually needs, and it may be more difficult for it to
navigate around obstacles. On the other hand, a T shaped footprint is non-convex and
more complicated than a rectangle, so the agent may have difficulty learning the boundary
around the tractor.
Another important aspect which definitely needs to be looked more into is recovery strate-
gies. This was not considered in this project but is crucial to consider when testing in
real life. This is based on the question ”what if a collision happens?”. No system will be
100% safe and collision free, so it is necessary to consider not ”if” but ”when”. E.g. if the
tractor just bumps into a tree, and no real damage is done, it could potentially continue
mowing as normal. But if collision with a live creature happens, or another severe case,
special action need to be taken, such as stopping the tractor and alerting the farmer. This
aspect was considered out of scope, despite its importance, for this project.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
91
==PAGE:100==
9
Conclusion
The focus of this thesis was the development of a local planner based on reinforcement
learning (RL) for autonomous mowers in agriculture, which can meet the objective of
mowing and avoid selected dynamic and static obstacles. This planner must be developed
for a ROS/Gazebo simulation framework provided by AGCO and compared to classical
methods. The RL algorithm to base the planner on was chosen to be PPO and compared
to the TEB and DWA planners.
The objective of the autonomous mower was defined to follow a path given by some other
global planning algorithm, which is assumed to follow the mowing objective, avoid static
and dynamic obstacles while following the path, and complete it with as little deviation
and duration as possible. The path is given as line segments between a list of waypoints,
and obstacles are assumed to be represented as either a bounding box or circle. Perfect
knowledge of obstacles is assumed, as well as a rectangular footprint of the mower.
The RL agent took an observation of the two nearest waypoints, tractor velocity and
steering angle, and separation to the path, along with a vector of radial distances to
obstacles at fixed angles around the tractor. A reward function was designed to reward
the agent when the tractor reaches waypoints and drives towards the waypoints, and gets
penalized for collisions, driving too far away, timing out, and for deviating from the path
and heading towards the waypoint.
The RL agent was trained using a simplified Python-based simulator, which significantly
accelerated the learning process compared to training in Gazebo. The final policy tuning
was performed in a ROS/Gazebo environment. The Gazebo environment was made to
support easy configurability wrt.
spawning of obstacles and defining the environment
in general. The training reached a success rate (collision free and reaching the goal) of
85%, where the remaining 15% the tractor collided with obstacles.
The final training
in Gazebo showed a success rate similar to that of the Python simulator. The Gazebo-
trained policy was deployed in five different scenarios; path tracking, simple obstacles,
dynamic obstacles, complex static obstacles, and complex static and dynamic obstacles,
and compared to DWA and TEB in the same environments. The RL planner performed
better than DWA and TEB in terms of path tracking and avoiding small static obstacles.
When exposed to dynamic obstacles, the RL planner performed similarly to TEB and
DWA. In all test scenarios, the RL planner had a constant control loop time and did not
take longer to plan despite the increased complexity, but TEB and DWA took longer to
plan as the scenario complexity increased.
However, the tests showed that there is room for improvement with regard to predicting
dynamic obstacles and avoiding large clusters of obstacles. The proposed improvements to
these issues are suggested to be periodic global replanning, improved policy network/fea-
ture extractor, better and longer training, possibly another reward function, hyperparam-
eters, and/or RL algorithm.
92
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
Łukasz Sobol et al. “Analysis of the Possibility of Energetic Utilization of Biomass
Obtained from Grass Mowing of a Large-Area Golf Course—A Case Study of Tus-
cany”. In: Energies 14.17 (2021). issn: 1996-1073. url: https://www.mdpi.com/
1996-1073/14/17/5520.
[2]
Atle Revheim Hansen. “A new era for golf course maintenance: From conven-
tional to robotic mowers”. In: International Turfgrass Society Research Journal
14.1 (2022), pp. 1057–1060. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/its2.122. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/its2.122. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1002/its2.122.
[3]
Sarah Hubbard, Adam Baxmeyer, and Bryan Hubbard. “Case Study of an Auto-
mated Mower to Support Airport Sustainability”. In: Sustainability 13.16 (2021).
issn: 2071-1050. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/13/16/8867.
[4]
Dansk Jægerforbund. Op til 20.000 rådyrlam dræbes hvert år i Danmark - Danmarks
Jægerforbund. https://www.jaegerforbundet.dk/om-dj/dj-medier/nyhedsarkiv/2017/
op-til-20-000-radyrlam-draebes-hvert-ar-i-danmark/. (Accessed on 02/04/2024). May
2017.
[5]
Daniel Gleason. and Michael Jenkin. “Nonholonomic Robot Navigation of Mazes
using Reinforcement Learning”. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Confer-
ence on Informatics in Control, Automation and Robotics - ICINCO. INSTICC.
SciTePress, 2022, pp. 369–376. isbn: 978-989-758-585-2. doi: 10.5220/0011123600003271.
[6]
Ronja Guldenring et al. “Learning Local Planners for Human-aware Navigation in
Indoor Environments”. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS). 2020, pp. 6053–6060. doi: 10.1109/IROS45743.2020.
9341783.
[7]
Innovationsfonden. Ny sensorteknologi bag fremtidens sikkerhedssystemer til au-
tonome maskiner | Innovationsfonden. https://innovationsfonden.dk/da/press-
release/ny-sensorteknologi-bag-fremtidens. (Accessed on 02/04/2024). May 2023.
[8]
Jean-Yves Humbert, Jaboury Ghazoul, and Thomas Walter. “Meadow harvesting
techniques and their impacts on field fauna”. In: Agriculture, Ecosystems & En-
vironment 130.1 (2009), pp. 1–8. issn: 0167-8809. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j. agee. 2008. 11. 014. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167880908003198.
[9]
Jie Li et al. “Real Time Obstacle Estimation Based on Dense Stereo Vision for
Robotic Lawn Mowers”. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Biomimetics (ROBIO). 2019, pp. 1186–1191. doi: 10.1109/ROBIO49542.2019.
8961557.
[10]
Steven A. Velinsky Ben C. Creed Aaron Arsenault and Ty A. Lasky. “Obstacle
Avoidance for Autonomous Mowing”. In: Mechanics Based Design of Structures and
Machines 40.3 (2012), pp. 334–348. doi: 10.1080/15397734.2012.685441. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/15397734.2012.685441. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/
15397734.2012.685441.
[11]
Hiroki Kurita et al. “Localization Method Using Camera and LiDAR and its Ap-
plication to Autonomous Mowing in Orchards”. In: Journal of Robotics and Mecha-
tronics 34.4 (2022), pp. 877–886. doi: 10.20965/jrm.2022.p0877.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
93
==PAGE:102==
[12]
Justin Ferguson. Labor Shortages Continue to Impact Farmers | Focus on Ag |
American Farm Bureau Federation. https://www.fb.org/focus-on-agriculture/labor-
shortages-continue-to-impact-farmers. (Accessed on 04/03/2024). Nov. 2022.
[13]
Crawfords. Hay Mowing Tips for Beginners in Agriculture. https://www.rwcrawford.
co.uk/hay-mowing-tips-for-beginners-in-agriculture/. (Accessed on 04/03/2024).
[14]
Dionysis D. Bochtis et al. “Design of a Wildlife Avoidance Planning System for
Autonomous Harvesting Operations”. In: International Journal of Advanced Robotic
Systems 11.1 (2014), p. 6. doi: 10.5772/57442. url: https://doi.org/10.5772/57442.
[15]
Kuo-Chun Huang et al. “A novel solution with rapid Voronoi-based coverage path
planning in irregular environment for robotic mowing systems”. In: International
Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications 5.4 (Dec. 2021), pp. 558–575. issn:
2366-598X. doi: 10.1007/s41315-021-00199-8. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s41315-
021-00199-8.
[16]
Timo Oksanen and Arto Visala. “Coverage path planning algorithms for agricul-
tural field machines”. In: Journal of Field Robotics 26.8 (2009), pp. 651–668. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/rob.20300. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
10.1002/rob.20300. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/rob.20300.
[17]
Stefan Thurner and Katharina Mikschl. Mäh-Knigge. 2020. url: https://www.alb-
bayern.de/De/Technik/Beratungsblaetter/wildtierrettung_Maehknigge.html (visited
on 06/25/2024).
[18]
Kuo-Hsien Hsia et al. “Mechanism of Autonomous Mowing Robot for Long Grass”.
In: Proceedings of International Conference on Artificial Life and Robotics 22 (Jan.
2017), pp. 79–82. doi: 10.5954/ICAROB.2017.OS2-5.
[19]
A. Crofts and R.G. Jefferson. The Lowland Grassland Management Handbook. En-
glish Nature, The Wildlife Trusts, 1999. isbn: 1 85716 443 1.
[20]
Husqvarna. Husqvarna EPOS - Virtual boundaries. Endless possibilities. | Husq-
varna US. https://www.husqvarna.com/us/discover/epos/. (Accessed on 04/04/2024).
[21]
Shupeng Hu et al. “Research on Automatic Steering Control System of Full Hy-
draulic Steering Tractor”. In: 11th International Conference on Computer and Com-
puting Technologies in Agriculture (CCTA). Ed. by Daoliang Li and Chunjiang
Zhao. Vol. AICT-545. Computer and Computing Technologies in Agriculture XI
Part I. Jilin, China: Springer International Publishing, Aug. 2017, pp. 517–528.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-06137-1\_48. url: https://inria.hal.science/hal-02124228.
[22]
Fendt. Lane Guidance | Smart Farming. https://www.fendt.com/int/smart-farming/
lane-guidance. (Accessed on 04/04/2024).
[23]
Riikka Soitinaho and Timo Oksanen. “Guidance, Auto-Steering Systems and Con-
trol”. In: Fundamentals of Agricultural and Field Robotics. Ed. by Manoj Karkee
and Qin Zhang. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 239–266. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-70400-1_10. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-70400-
1_10.
[24]
Nan Wang et al. “A Survey on Path Planning for Autonomous Ground Vehicles
in Unstructured Environments”. In: Machines 12.1 (2024). issn: 2075-1702. doi:
10.3390/machines12010031. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-1702/12/1/31.
[25]
D. Fox, W. Burgard, and S. Thrun. “The dynamic window approach to collision
avoidance”. In: IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 4.1 (1997), pp. 23–33. doi:
10.1109/100.580977.
[26]
Christoph Roesmann et al. “Trajectory modification considering dynamic con-
straints of autonomous robots”. In: ROBOTIK 2012; 7th German Conference on
Robotics. 2012, pp. 1–6.
94
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:103==
[27]
O. Khatib. “Real-time obstacle avoidance for manipulators and mobile robots”. In:
Proceedings. 1985 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
Vol. 2. 1985, pp. 500–505. doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.1985.1087247.
[28]
dwa_local_planner - ROS Wiki. http://wiki.ros.org/dwa_local_planner. (Accessed
on 09/04/2024).
[29]
Lu Chang et al. “Reinforcement based mobile robot path planning with improved
dynamic window approach in unknown environment”. In: Autonomous Robots 45
(Jan. 2021). doi: 10.1007/s10514-020-09947-4.
[30]
Marcell Missura and Maren Bennewitz. “Predictive Collision Avoidance for the
Dynamic Window Approach”. In: May 2019, pp. 8620–8626. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.
2019.8794386.
[31]
Domokos Kiss and Gabor Tevesz. “Advanced dynamic window based navigation
approach using model predictive control”. In: Aug. 2012, pp. 148–153. isbn: 978-1-
4673-2121-1. doi: 10.1109/MMAR.2012.6347927.
[32]
Fernando Herrero Cotarelo Sergi Hernandez Juan. Autonomous navigation frame-
work for a car like robot. http://www.iri.upc.edu/files/scidoc/1658-Autonomous-
navigation-framework-for-a-car-like-robot.pdf. (Accessed on 27/05/2023). July 2015.
[33]
Huang TIANYI et al. “OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE METHOD FOR ELECTRIC
TRACTOR BASED ON IMPROVED DYNAMIC WINDOW APPROACH WITH
PRIORITY OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION”. In: INMATEH Agricultural Engi-
neering (Aug. 2023), pp. 309–319. doi: 10.35633/inmateh-70-30.
[34]
Shengli Xu and Rahul Rai. “Vision-based autonomous navigation stack for trac-
tors operating in peach orchards”. In: Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 217
(2024), p. 108558. issn: 0168-1699. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2023.
108558. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168169923009468.
[35]
Fuhai Zhang et al. “An Improved Dynamic Window Approach Integrated Global
Path Planning”. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimet-
ics (ROBIO). 2019, pp. 2873–2878. doi: 10.1109/ROBIO49542.2019.8961684.
[36]
S. Quinlan and O. Khatib. “Elastic bands: connecting path planning and control”.
In: [1993] Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
1993, 802–807 vol.2. doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.1993.291936.
[37]
Christoph Rösmann, Frank Hoffmann, and Torsten Bertram. “Kinodynamic trajec-
tory optimization and control for car-like robots”. In: 2017 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 2017, pp. 5681–5686. doi:
10.1109/IROS.2017.8206458.
[38]
Christoph Rösmann, Frank Hoffmann, and Torsten Bertram. “Planning of multi-
ple robot trajectories in distinctive topologies”. In: 2015 European Conference on
Mobile Robots (ECMR). 2015, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ECMR.2015.7324179.
[39]
Jiafeng Wu et al. “An Improved Timed Elastic Band (TEB) Algorithm of Au-
tonomous Ground Vehicle (AGV) in Complex Environment”. In: Sensors 21.24
(2021). issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s21248312. url: https://www.mdpi.com/
1424-8220/21/24/8312.
[40]
Franz Albers et al. “Online Trajectory Optimization and Navigation in Dynamic
Environments in ROS”. In: Jan. 2019, pp. 241–274. isbn: 978-3-319-91589-0. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-91590-6_8.
[41]
teb_local_planner - ROS Wiki. http://wiki.ros.org/teb_local_planner. (Accessed
on 11/04/2024).
[42]
Ismael Ait, Ernesto Kofman, and Taihú Pire. “A Travelling Salesman Problem
Approach to Efficiently Navigate Crop Row Fields with a Car-Like Robot”. In:
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
95
==PAGE:104==
IEEE Latin America Transactions 21.5 (2023), pp. 643–651. doi: 10.1109/TLA.
2023.10130836.
[43]
Kosuke Inoue et al. “The development of autonomous navigation and obstacle
avoidance for a robotic mower using machine vision technique”. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine
52 (Jan. 2019), pp. 173–177. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.12.517.
[44]
José Ricardo Sánchez-Ibáñez, Carlos J. Pérez-del-Pulgar, and Alfonso García-Cerezo.
“Path Planning for Autonomous Mobile Robots: A Review”. In: Sensors 21.23
(2021). issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s21237898. url: https://www.mdpi.com/
1424-8220/21/23/7898.
[45]
Savvas G. Loizou. “Closed form Navigation Functions based on harmonic poten-
tials”. In: 2011 50th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control and European Con-
trol Conference. 2011, pp. 6361–6366. doi: 10.1109/CDC.2011.6161438.
[46]
Panagiotis Rousseas, Charalampos P. Bechlioulis, and Kostas J. Kyriakopoulos.
“Optimal Robot Motion Planning in Constrained Workspaces Using Reinforcement
Learning”. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). 2020, pp. 6917–6922. doi: 10.1109/IROS45743.2020.9341148.
[47]
Xiaojing Fan et al. “Improved Artificial Potential Field Method Applied for AUV
Path Planning”. In: Mathematical Problems in Engineering 2020 (Apr. 2020), p. 6523158.
issn: 1024-123X. doi: 10.1155/2020/6523158. url: https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/
6523158.
[48]
Mauro Mancini et al. “Adaptive Sliding Mode Control with Artificial Potential
Field for Ground Robots in Precision Agriculture”. In: 2023 IEEE International
Workshop on Metrology for Agriculture and Forestry (MetroAgriFor). 2023, pp. 325–
330. doi: 10.1109/MetroAgriFor58484.2023.10424132.
[49]
J. Backman, T. Oksanen, and A. Visala. “Collision Avoidance Method with Non-
linear Model Predictive Trajectory Control”. In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 46.18
(2013). 4th IFAC Conference on Modelling and Control in Agriculture, Horticul-
ture and Post Harvest Industry, pp. 35–40. issn: 1474-6670. doi: https://doi.org/
10.3182/20130828-2-SF-3019.00004. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1474667015349557.
[50]
Riikka Soitinaho and Timo Oksanen. “Local Navigation and Obstacle Avoidance
for an Agricultural Tractor With Nonlinear Model Predictive Control”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Control Systems Technology 31.5 (2023), pp. 2043–2054. doi: 10.
1109/TCST.2023.3291533.
[51]
Behnam Moradi and Mehran Mehrandezh. A Non-linear MPC Local Planner for
Tractor-Trailer Vehicles in Forward and Backward Maneuvering. 2022. arXiv: 2212.
11427 [cs.RO].
[52]
Manuel Beglini, Leonardo Lanari, and Giuseppe Oriolo. “Anti-Jackknifing Control
of Tractor-Trailer Vehicles via Intrinsically Stable MPC”. In: 2020 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2020, pp. 8806–8812. doi:
10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9197012.
[53]
Manuel Beglini et al. “An Intrinsically Stable MPC Approach for Anti-Jackknifing
Control of Tractor-Trailer Vehicles”. In: IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatron-
ics 27.6 (2022), pp. 4417–4428. doi: 10.1109/TMECH.2022.3154295.
[54]
Christoph Rosmann, Artemi Makarow, and Torsten Bertram. “Online Motion Plan-
ning based on Nonlinear Model Predictive Control with Non-Euclidean Rotation
Groups”. In: 2021 European Control Conference (ECC). IEEE, 2021. doi: 10.23919/
ecc54610.2021.9654872. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/ECC54610.2021.9654872.
[55]
Athanasios S. Polydoros and Lazaros Nalpantidis. “Survey of Model-Based Rein-
forcement Learning: Applications on Robotics”. In: Journal of Intelligent & Robotic
96
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:105==
Systems 86.2 (May 2017), pp. 153–173. issn: 1573-0409. doi: 10.1007/s10846-017-
0468-y. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-017-0468-y.
[56]
Ashish Kumar Shakya, Gopinatha Pillai, and Sohom Chakrabarty. “Reinforce-
ment learning algorithms: A brief survey”. In: Expert Systems with Applications
231 (2023), p. 120495. issn: 0957-4174. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.
120495. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417423009971.
[57]
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning. 2nd ed. Adaptive
Computation and Machine Learning series. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books, Nov.
2018.
[58]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2013.
arXiv: 1312.5602 [cs.LG].
[59]
Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep Reinforcement Learning
with Double Q-learning. 2015. arXiv: 1509.06461 [cs.LG].
[60]
Ziyu Wang et al. Dueling Network Architectures for Deep Reinforcement Learning.
2016. arXiv: 1511.06581 [cs.LG].
[61]
Tom Schaul et al. Prioritized Experience Replay. 2016. arXiv: 1511.05952 [cs.LG].
[62]
Matteo Hessel et al. Rainbow: Combining Improvements in Deep Reinforcement
Learning. 2017. arXiv: 1710.02298 [cs.AI].
[63]
Michael Hu. “Policy Gradient Methods”. In: The Art of Reinforcement Learn-
ing: Fundamentals, Mathematics, and Implementations with Python. Berkeley, CA:
Apress, 2023, pp. 177–196. isbn: 978-1-4842-9606-6. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-9606-
6_9. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-9606-6_9.
[64]
Ronald J. Williams. “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connec-
tionist reinforcement learning”. In: Machine Learning 8.3 (May 1992), pp. 229–
256. issn: 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/BF00992696. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00992696.
[65]
Timothy P. Lillicrap et al. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning.
2019. arXiv: 1509.02971 [cs.LG].
[66]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. Asynchronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning.
2016. arXiv: 1602.01783 [cs.LG].
[67]
Ziyu Wang et al. Sample Efficient Actor-Critic with Experience Replay. 2017. arXiv:
1611.01224 [cs.LG].
[68]
John Schulman et al. High-Dimensional Continuous Control Using Generalized
Advantage Estimation. 2018. arXiv: 1506.02438 [cs.LG].
[69]
Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing Function Approxi-
mation Error in Actor-Critic Methods. 2018. arXiv: 1802.09477 [cs.AI].
[70]
Tuomas Haarnoja et al. Soft Actor-Critic: Off-Policy Maximum Entropy Deep Re-
inforcement Learning with a Stochastic Actor. 2018. arXiv: 1801.01290 [cs.LG].
[71]
John Schulman et al. Trust Region Policy Optimization. 2017. arXiv: 1502.05477
[cs.LG].
[72]
John Schulman et al. Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms. 2017. arXiv: 1707.
06347 [cs.LG].
[73]
Chao Yu et al. “The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent
games”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), pp. 24611–
24624.
[74]
Yuhui Wang, Hao He, and Xiaoyang Tan. “Truly proximal policy optimization”. In:
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. PMLR. 2020, pp. 113–122.
[75]
Han Zhong and Tong Zhang. “A theoretical analysis of optimistic proximal policy
optimization in linear markov decision processes”. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 36 (2024).
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
97
==PAGE:106==
[76]
Jaewan Choi, Geonhee Lee, and Chibum Lee. “Reinforcement learning-based dy-
namic obstacle avoidance and integration of path planning”. en. In: Intell Serv
Robot 14.5 (Oct. 2021), pp. 663–677.
[77]
Ashley Hill et al. stable-baselines. https : / / github . com / hill - a / stable - baselines.
(Accessed on 04/18/2024).
[78]
Patrick Wenzel et al. Vision-Based Mobile Robotics Obstacle Avoidance With Deep
Reinforcement Learning. 2021. arXiv: 2103.04727 [cs.LG].
[79]
Liulong Ma, Yanjie Liu*, and Jiao Chen. Using RGB Image as Visual Input for
Mapless Robot Navigation. 2019. arXiv: 1903.09927 [cs.RO].
[80]
Mahmoud Osama Radwan, Ahmed Ahmed Hesham Sedky, and Khaled Mohammed
Mahar. “Obstacles Avoidance of Self-driving Vehicle using Deep Reinforcement
Learning”. In: 2021 31st International Conference on Computer Theory and Appli-
cations (ICCTA). 2021, pp. 215–222. doi: 10.1109/ICCTA54562.2021.9916640.
[81]
Xiangrui Xing et al. “Robot path planner based on deep reinforcement learning
and the seeker optimization algorithm”. In: Mechatronics 88 (2022), p. 102918.
issn: 0957-4158. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mechatronics.2022.102918. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957415822001362.
[82]
Danial Kamran, Junyi Zhu, and Martin Lauer. “Learning Path Tracking for Real
Car-like Mobile Robots From Simulation”. In: 2019 European Conference on Mobile
Robots (ECMR). 2019, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ECMR.2019.8870947.
[83]
Abdur R. Fayjie et al. “Driverless Car: Autonomous Driving Using Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning in Urban Environment”. In: 2018 15th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Robots (UR). 2018, pp. 896–901. doi: 10.1109/URAI.2018.8441797.
[84]
Martin Gromniak and Jonas Stenzel. “Deep Reinforcement Learning for Mobile
Robot Navigation”. In: 2019 4th Asia-Pacific Conference on Intelligent Robot Sys-
tems (ACIRS). 2019, pp. 68–73. doi: 10.1109/ACIRS.2019.8935944.
[85]
Hao Qin et al. “A Path Planning Algorithm Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning
for Mobile Robots in Unknown Environment”. In: 2022 IEEE 5th Advanced Infor-
mation Management, Communicates, Electronic and Automation Control Confer-
ence (IMCEC). Vol. 5. 2022, pp. 1661–1666. doi: 10.1109/IMCEC55388.2022.
10020025.
[86]
Pinxin Long et al. Towards Optimally Decentralized Multi-Robot Collision Avoid-
ance via Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2018. eprint: 1709.10082.
[87]
Pengyu Yue et al. “Experimental Research on Deep Reinforcement Learning in
Autonomous navigation of Mobile Robot”. In: 2019 14th IEEE Conference on In-
dustrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA). 2019, pp. 1612–1616. doi: 10.1109/
ICIEA.2019.8833968.
[88]
Xiaogang Ruan et al. “Mobile Robot Navigation based on Deep Reinforcement
Learning”. In: 2019 Chinese Control And Decision Conference (CCDC). 2019,
pp. 6174–6178. doi: 10.1109/CCDC.2019.8832393.
[89]
Prases K. Mohanty et al. “A Q-Learning Strategy for Path Planning of Robots
in Unknown Terrains”. In: 2022 1st International Conference on Sustainable Tech-
nology for Power and Energy Systems (STPES). 2022, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/
STPES54845.2022.10006505.
[90]
Weizhi Tao and Hailong Huang. “Fast and Robust Training and Deployment of
Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Navigation Policy”. In: 2023 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Unmanned Systems (ICUS). 2023, pp. 1581–1586. doi:
10.1109/ICUS58632.2023.10318224.
[91]
Lukas Brunke et al. Safe Learning in Robotics: From Learning-Based Control to
Safe Reinforcement Learning. 2021. arXiv: 2108.06266 [cs.RO].
98
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:107==
[92]
Lindsay Wells and Tomasz Bednarz. “Explainable AI and Reinforcement Learn-
ing—A Systematic Review of Current Approaches and Trends”. In: Frontiers in
Artificial Intelligence 4 (2021). issn: 2624-8212. doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.550030.
url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frai.2021.550030.
[93]
Open Robotics. ROS: Home. https://ros.org/. (Accessed on 05/31/2024).
[94]
Joshua Achiam. Simplified PPO Objective. https : / / drive . google . com / file / d /
1PDzn9RPvaXjJFZkGeapMHbHGiWWW20Ey/view. (Accessed on 08/13/2024). July
2018.
[95]
Open Robotics. Gazebo. [Online; accessed 15. Aug. 2024]. Aug. 2024. url: https:
//gazebosim.org/home.
[96]
ackermann_msgs/AckermannDrive Documentation. [Online; accessed 21. Aug. 2024].
Mar. 2022. url: http://docs.ros.org/en/melodic/api/ackermann_msgs/html/msg/
AckermannDrive.html.
[97]
OSRF. Gazebo : Tutorial : Make an animated model (actor). url: http://classic.
gazebosim.org/tutorials?tut=actor&cat=build_robot (visited on 08/15/2024).
[98]
sensor_msgs/LaserScan Documentation. https://docs.ros.org/en/melodic/api/
sensor_msgs/html/msg/LaserScan.html. (Accessed on 08/18/2024).
[99]
Mark Towers et al. “Gymnasium: A Standard Interface for Reinforcement Learning
Environments”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17032 (2024).
[100]
Gymnasium Documentation. https://gymnasium.farama.org/. (Accessed on 08/18/2024).
[101]
navigation - ROS Wiki. url: http://wiki.ros.org/navigation (visited on 08/21/2024).
[102]
move base - ROS Wiki. [Online; accessed 21. Aug. 2024]. Aug. 2024. url: http:
//wiki.ros.org/move_base.
[103]
Policy Networks — Stable Baselines3 2.4.0a8 documentation. [Online; accessed 26.
Aug. 2024]. Aug. 2024. url: https://stable-baselines3.readthedocs.io/en/master/
guide/custom_policy.html.
[104]
Antonin Raffin, Jens Kober, and Freek Stulp. Smooth Exploration for Robotic Re-
inforcement Learning. 2021. arXiv: 2005.05719 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2005.05719.
[105]
Shirel Josef and Amir Degani. “Deep Reinforcement Learning for Safe Local Plan-
ning of a Ground Vehicle in Unknown Rough Terrain”. In: IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters 5.4 (2020), pp. 6748–6755. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2020.3011912.
[106]
Miguel Quinones-Ramirez, Jorge Rios-Martinez, and Victor Uc-Cetina. Robot path
planning using deep reinforcement learning. 2023. arXiv: 2302.09120 [cs.RO]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.09120.
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
99
==PAGE:108==
100
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:109==
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
101
==PAGE:110==
A
Hyperparameter tuning plots
Note: Every parameter was run 3 times, so each line of same color represents different
training runs of the same parameter
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
-100
-50
0
SDE
Reward
False
True
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
0
1000
2000
3000
Episode length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Timesteps
#10 6
0
0.5
1
Episode end due to goal reached
Figure A.1: SDE hyperparameter experiment
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
-100
-50
0
Batch size
Reward
128
32
64
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
0
1000
2000
Episode length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Timesteps
#10 6
0
0.5
1
Episode end due to goal reached
Figure A.2: Batch size hyperparameter experiment
102
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:111==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
-100
-50
0
Steps
Reward
1024
2048
512
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
0
1000
2000
3000
Episode length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Timesteps
#10 6
0
0.5
1
Episode end due to goal reached
Figure A.3: Rollout steps hyperparameter experiment
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
-100
-50
0
Entropy coe/cient
Reward
0.0
0.001
0.01
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
0
1000
2000
Episode length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Timesteps
#10 6
0
0.5
1
Episode end due to goal reached
Figure A.4: Entropy coefficient hyperparameter experiment
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
103
==PAGE:112==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
-200
-100
0
Gamma
Reward
0.9
0.95
0.99
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
0
1000
2000
Episode length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Timesteps
#10 6
0
0.5
1
Episode end due to goal reached
Figure A.5: Discount factor gamma hyperparameter experiment
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
-100
-50
0
Learning rate
Reward
0.0001
1e-05
1e-06
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
#10 6
0
1000
2000
Episode length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Timesteps
#10 6
0
0.5
1
Episode end due to goal reached
Figure A.6: Learning rate hyperparameter experiment
104
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
==PAGE:113==
B
Parameter values
Table B.1: Tractor values
Symbol
Meaning
Value
vmax
Tractor max. velocity
5 m/s
vmin
Tractor min. velocity
-5 m/s
δmax
Max steering angle
0.4 rad
δmin
Min steering angle
-0.4 rad
l
Tractor wheelbase
3.15 m
amax
Max tractor acceleration
0.336 m/s2
ψmax
Max steering angle rate
0.4 rad/s
Tractor width
3 m
Tractor length
5 m
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
105
==PAGE:114==
Table B.2: Laser scanner values
Symbol
Meaning
Value
Nscan
Number of scans
512
Rscan
Max range for laser
30 m
Table B.3: Reward function values
Symbol
Meaning
Value
wv
Velocity reward weight
0.017
wφ
Angle reward weight
0.05
we
Path deviation reward weight
0.001
Rcoll
Collision penalty
10
Rwp
Waypoint reward
1
Rgoal
Goal reward
5
Rep
Timeout penalty
10
Rfar
Too far away penalty
2
106
Reinforcement learning for path planning and obstacle avoidance of autonomous mowers
