==PAGE:1==
Ab Initio Simulation of Spectroscopic Effects
Induced by X-Ray Radiation
Alberte Holm Høholdt
s194230
September 7, 2024
Supervisor: Professor Sonia Coriani, Ph.D.
Co-supervisor: Professor Klaus Braagaard Møller, Ph.D.
Master thesis
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The photo-catalytic reaction of ferrioxalate is a model system for the investigation
of electron transfer mechanisms in iron compounds. The exact description of its
reduction is however still under debate and currently of interest. Ulfrafast X-ray ab-
sorption spectroscopy (XAS) and X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) experiments can
provide information on the reaction mechanism, in collaboration with computational
predictions.
This master’s thesis is a part of the preparatory computational work done for the
interpretation of experiments performed at FXE, European XFEL, in spring 24. Fe
XAS and XES experiments were performed on the reduction of ferrioxalate, in the
hope of providing further insight into the reaction mechanism.
Calculations were performed with Density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent
DFT, on the carbon and iron K-edges of iron(III)oxalate with spin-state s=2.5 (sex-
tet), as well as both singlet and quintet iron(II)oxalate. A TD-DFT protocol was
developed to calculate the carbon transitions, and the carbon K-edge results were
compared to preliminary experimental data. The nature of the underlying transitions
was assessed by visualization of the natural transition orbitals (NTO).
Fe 1s XAS spectra were simulated, and interpreted by NTO visualization. Based
on the computational results, identification of which iron species are present in the
experimental data should be possible. XES calculations of the Kα/Kβ/VtC (Valence-
to-core) regions were performed with DFT, facilitating the distinction of iron species
present during the reaction.
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my advisor Professor Sonia Coriani for her guidance on this
project and her patience with me throughout the work period. I started this project
with little X-ray spectroscopy knowledge, and she has always talked me through any
question I had. It has been an exciting challenge, and I am happy she trusted me
with this project.
Additionally, I would like to thank Frederico Lima and his group for providing us
with this project, as well as the preliminary data it is build upon. He has always been
available for questions and discussions throughout the project.
And Professor Klaus Møller for being available to answer questions when none of us
know what was going on.
A special thank you to those who might have been stuck in an office with me, but
still has offered up helpful discussions and always been available for a chat. Benedikte
Friis, thank you for sharing your solutions to our shared struggles. Benedikte Knorr
Jensen, I thank you for always letting me ask you questions about the protocol and
procedures, as well as helping me when I have been absolutely stuck. Jacob Pedersen,
thank you for taking the time to help me with reading through my project and being
available to answer my stupid questions. Your deeper knowledge of the theory has
been invaluable to me.
Lastly, I would like to thank those who have taken their time to read through this
project and point out my mistakes to me, whether is was typos, forgetfulness, or
absolute blunders. This project would have definitely been a lot messier without you.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Catalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory
7
2.1
Spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Quantum mechanical method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
XAS and XES calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.3
Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methodology
19
4
Results and discussion
22
4.1
Preparatory work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
Cl compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.2
CN compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Fe(III) oxalate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Fe(II) oxalates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.1
Singlet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.2
Quintet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.4
The LMCT complex
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.5
XES calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
4.5.1
[Fe(III)(CN)6]3– . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
4.5.2
[Fe(III)(ox)3]3–
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
4.5.3
[Fe(II)(ox)2]2– multiplicity 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
4.5.4
[Fe(II)(ox)2]2– multiplicity 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5
Conclusion
89
6
Bibliography
92
7
Appendix
96
7.1
Full spectra for the iron cyanide compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
3
==PAGE:5==
7.2
Spectra without the Tamm-Dancoff approximation
. . . . . . . . . .
98
7.3
Spectra from ORCA 5.0.2 calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
7.4
NTO validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
4
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Catalysis
Almost all biological processes involve conversion of energy into some usable form for
the corresponding organism. This includes electronic excitations and transfer of this
excitation energy across the molecule. Most of these processes are quantum-mechanical
in nature,1 and happen though some form of chemical reaction. A catalyst increases
the reaction rate without being consumed. Enzymes represent an example of biological
catalysts.2 The types of catalysts that increase the rate of light-absorption reactions
are referred to as photo-catalysts.3 The energy is usually absorbed and transferred
by means of an excited electron.4 The efficiency of these reactions depends heavily
on the charge transport and therefore charge transfer mechanisms.4,5 Unfortunately,
it is hard to experimentally study electron transfers on the atomic level needed to
interpret the underlying mechanisms.1
The usage of transition metals in catalysts is important, as they can rapidly generate
valuable reagents from simple materials. Transition metal catalysis is therefore invalu-
able for the production of organic molecules.6 Transition metal catalysts are highly
selective, and largely controlled by the ligands coordinated to the metal center.7
While the usage of metals in catalysis has been around for centuries, research is still
focused on ligand design, electronic excitations, as well as influence and manipulation
of oxidation states.6 Computational models provide insight into the electron transfer
processes,1 which is needed in order to facilitate the development of new and improved
catalysts.
1.2
Background
Understanding the light-induced processes of transition metal complexes with dicarbon-
oxalate ligands is of great importance, in order to understand various chemical phe-
nomena in nature and technology.8 Oxalic acid and therefore oxalate is a compound
found in both fog and soil and can often be found chelated to iron.9 Iron complexes
are of particular interest, due to the abundance of the metal.5 Iron oxalate is a photo-
catalyst employed in the treatment of wastewater, and the complex is frequently used
to determine the photon flux of photo-chemical reactions.8,10,11
5
==PAGE:7==
The photo-reduction of iron(III)oxalate takes place as follows8
2[Fe(III)(ox)3]3– + hν →2[Fe(II)(ox)2]2– + 2CO2 + ox2– .
(1)
In Eq. 1 above as well as in the rest of this report, the short-hand notation ox is used
for the oxalate (C2O4) group. At this point, the mechanism for the photo-reduction
of the molecule is still unknown and widely discussed.5,8,10 It is therefore necessary
for experiments to provide structural and dynamical information on the coordination
and fragmentation following the photon absorption.8 Understanding the reaction
mechanism is crucial to understanding and optimizing the reactive paths to control
the outcome.11
So far experimental data indicates that the mechanism proceeds as shown in Fig. 1.
Here photo-excitation (a) leads to the creation of a Fe(II) species and a carbon oxide
radical (b-d), before the further reduction of a second Fe(III) complex (f).5,10
Figure 1: Suggested photo-catalytic reaction for [Fe(III)(ox)3]3–. Taken from Ref. 5.
Whether the metal is reduced due to the ligand dissociation, or a metal-ligand-charge-
transfer (MLCT) state is induced, is still a question under investigation.5,9
The latest experiments indicate the presence of a MLCT state after initial photo-
excitation,5 but the nature of the charge transfer (CT), as well as the effects on the
complex, remains under debate.11 While the CT nature of the reaction has been
confirmed, it is still unknown which electrons participate, and the order of the Fe-O
and C-C bond cleavages.9
1.3
Purpose
This thesis is a part of the computational work done with respect to Proposal No. 5687
at FXE, European XFEL, 11th call, allocation cycle 2024-01. During the beamtime,
X-Ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) exper-
iments were carried out on [Fe(III)(ox)3]3–as well as on products formed during the
6
==PAGE:8==
photo-reaction, that ends with dissociation of CO2. In the experiment, XAS and XES
measurements were performed on the iron K-edges, and from the results, information
about the carbon K-edges can be extracted. During the experiment ionization will
also occur, which makes the setup ideal for X-ray emission measurements.
The purpose of this thesis is to calculate the carbon and iron K-edge X-ray absorption
spectra of the iron(III)oxalate, the possible intermediates, including the metal-ligand
charge-transfer state, and the resulting dissociation products. Additionally, XES
calculations have been performed and spectra predicted. This is done to facilitate
the analysis and interpretation of the experimental XAS and XES results of the
experiment.
The XAS calculations are performed taking a starting point in the computational
protocol previously developed by DeBeer et al.12 The studied complexes for XAS
and XES, are [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– (spin state s = 2.5), [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– (spin state s =
0), [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– (spin state s = 2) and the ligand-metal charge transfer complex
with spin state s = 2.5. The compounds have been structurally optimized before the
calculations. The resulting spectra will be compared to the experiment to provide
information on geometry, oxidation state, and spin state, as well as the nature of the
ligand binding mechanisms.
2
Theory
2.1
Spectroscopy
Spectroscopy is the study of the interaction of light with matter in order to gain
insight on the properties of matter. Today’s spectroscopic methods expand across
most of the electromagnetic spectrum and are applied in almost all scientific fields,
including physics, chemistry, and medicine.13
Electromagnetic waves with wavelengths ranging between 100eV and 100keV are
X-rays.14 Spectroscopic methods employing X-rays to study molecules are collectively
referred to as X-ray spectroscopy.15 The study of electronic excited states has in this
thesis been split into two categories: X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and X-ray
emission spectroscopy (XES). The former focuses on the ground state to excited state
7
==PAGE:9==
transitions, while the latter studies the decay of the excited states.16
In XAS, a core electron is excited to a virtual orbital, and the process therefore
provides information on the unoccupied part of the electronic structure.17 This
is of interest when studying catalytic mechanisms as the reaction takes place.18
Since different elements absorb X-rays in different ranges, the information obtained is
element-specific.10,17 The energy of the X-rays used therefore determines the elements
being probed.16 Moreover, if different types of an element is present, e.g., different
oxidation states, the resulting absorption is a linear combination of the types.17
The involved electron shells are divided into edges, which are characterized by sharp
increases in emission or absorption in the spectra. For XAS, the edge is decided by
which shell the excited electron originates from. If the excitation is from a 1s orbital,
the increase is known as the K-edge. If the electron, however, originates from a 2s or 2p
orbital, it is the L-edge.16 The excitation of 1s electrons of 3d-metals happens in the
range 3-9 keV, while that of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen is in the 300-700 eV range.17
XAS is typically used to identify, e.g., oxidation state and local geometry.18 Excitation
of the ligand 1s electrons into transition metal d-orbitals can provide information
about the metal-ligand bonding. For excitations from the metal 1s orbital, information
about coordination numbers as well as the metal-ligand bonding mechanisms can
be extracted.18 It has been found that the metal XAS spectra can be sensitive to
substitutions on the ligands even beyond the first coordination shell of the metal
center,18 making core excitations very sensitive to the ligands. Prediction of exper-
imental spectra is essential in order to extract additional information beyond the
coordination and oxidation state.18
In XES, one looks at the emission process after core ionization. After a core electron
is ionized, a valence electron descends into its place, and photons are emitted. This
can happen through multiple pathways, with varying amount of energy loss. In
valence-to-core (VtC) XES, an electron from a higher energy (valence) orbital refills
the core hole. Alike in XAS, since the 1s orbital core hole is involved, this is called
the K-edge. If the decaying electron originates in the second shell, this is the Kα-edge,
while for the Kβ-edge the decaying electron originates in the third shell, or from the
ligands. The edges relate to the local structure, spin state, and oxidation state of the
compound. Additionally, XES experiments provide information on the valence band
8
==PAGE:10==
conduction,19 which is vital for the charge movement and therefore the efficiency of a
catalyst.
2.2
Calculations
2.2.1
Quantum mechanical method
Several quantum mechanical methods have been developed to predict and describe
core excitations. Among the most widely used ones are density functional theory
(DFT) and time dependent density-functional theory (TD-DFT).18 In DFT, the
energy expression is a functional of the electron density instead of the wavefunction.
The theory is based on that the interacting electrons are considered to be moving in
an external potential, for which there is a one-to-one correspondence to the electron
density. As the energy is a function of the potential, it can be described as depending
only on the density.
In Hohenberg-Kohn DFT, the electronic energy is expressed as a function of just three
spatial coordinates, rather than the 4N coordinates required in wavefunction-based
methods. Unlike wavefunction methods, which need an additional coordinate to
account for electron spin, the spin information is already included in the electron
density description. This approach simplifies the calculation and provides an efficient
way to describe electronic systems.20
Unfortunately, the kinetic energy is poorly described from the density. Kohn-Sham
DFT includes the wavefunction-based kinetic energy description from HF theory. As
a consequence, this reintroduces orbitals and therefore also the 4N variables in the
kinetic energy description. Assuming that the orbitals have occupations of either 0 or
1, the exact kinetic energy functional can then be calculated as:
TS =
N
X
i=1
⟨φi| – 1
2∇2|φi⟩
(2)
where φi is the orbitals of the Slater determinant describing the system. This is an
approximation, as the natural orbitals φNO
i
will have occupations ni ranging between
9
==PAGE:11==
0 and 1. Therefore the electron density is only approximated.
ρapprox =
N
X
i=1
|φi|2
ρexact =
∞
X
i=1
ni|φNO
i
|2
(3)
As a result there is a discrepancy between the calculated kinetic energy and the exact
kinetic energy. This can be considered the kinetic correlation energy.
The energy expression for Kohn-Sham DFT can be written as
EDFT[ρ] = TS[ρ] + Ene[ρ] + J[ρ] + Exc[ρ] .
(4)
Here Ene is the interaction between the nuclei and the electron, J is the Coulomb
interaction and Exc is the exchange-correlation term. The exchange correlation term
includes the kinetic correlation energy, as well as the electron-electron interaction
energy, not including the Coulomb interaction. New exchange-correlation functionals
are continuously developed, in order to better approximate the exact energy, without
the computational demand exploding.21
For closed-shell compounds, restricting the spin is optimal, as the spin of the electron
do not influence the excitation. However, for open-shell systems, the Pauli exclu-
sion principle results in a restriction on which electron can be excited to specific states.
X-ray excitation happens by absorption of a photon, for which the energy is given by
the frequency. The theory needs to be extended to include time-dependent external
electric potentials, in order to describe the resulting excited states.
This can be done by taking the time-dependent Schrödinger equation,
i δ
δtΨ(r, t) = HΨ(r, t)
(5)
where the time-dependent external potential is treated as a perturbation to the
time-independent Hamiltonian.21
H(r, t) = H0(r) + Vext(r, t)
(6)
In the equations H denominates the time-dependent Hamiltonian, H0 the time-
independent Hamiltonian, Ψ the full wavefunction and Vext(r, t) the full description
of the external potentials as a function of the position vector r and time t. If the
10
==PAGE:12==
wavefunction consists of a single Slater determinant, then this will after manipulation
lead to a set of time-dependent equations to be solved self-consistently.
i δ
δtφi(r, t) = (T + Veff(t))φi(r, t)
(7)
Veff(r, t) = Vne(r, t) + J(r, t) + Vxc(r, t, Ψ0) + Vext(r, t)
(8)
As the density is now time-dependent, the exchange correlation term now not only
depends on time but also on the initial density. This is often neglected by assuming
that the density is a slowly varying function of the position. The solutions hold
memory, and needs to be solved self-consistently also in the time domain.21
If the perturbation is a weak oscillating field, it is possible to determine the density
response (Y,Z)⊤by solving the following equation.
 "
A
B
B∗
A∗
#
– ω
"
1
0
0
–1
#! "
Y
Z
#
= –
"
P
P∗
#
(9)
Here A is a matrix containing the energy difference between an occupied and virtual
orbital as well as the difference in electron-electron interaction as occupation changes,
while B is a matrix containing the difference in electron-electron interaction. P is the
property gradient vector, for which Pa
i = ⟨φi|ˆp|φa⟩given the property operator ˆp.
Aab
ij = ⟨Φa
i |H0|Φb
j ⟩– E0δijδab = δijδab(εa – εi) + ⟨φiφj|φaφb⟩– ⟨φiφa|φjφb⟩
Bab
ij = ⟨Φ0|H0|Φab
ij ⟩= ⟨φiφj|φaφb⟩– ⟨φiφj|φbφa⟩
(10)
In the equations above Φa
i describes a singly excited Slater determinant and Φab
ij
describes a doubly excited Slater determinant, while ε is the orbital energies. The
linear response equation, Eq. 9, reduces to the eigenvalue problem, when the right-
hand-side of the equation equals zero, providing the excitation and de-excitation
energies ωi in pairs.
"
A
B
B∗
A∗
# "
Y
Z
#
= ω
"
1
0
0
–1
# "
Y
Z
#
(11)
Setting the elements of the B matrix to 0 is known as the Tamm-Dancoff approxima-
tion (TDA). This is usually done for computational efficiency, which often proves to
be a good approximation. The theory is then equivalent to Configuration Interaction
Singles (CIS).21
11
==PAGE:13==
Physical laws should be identical in all frames of reference, indicating that time
and space coordinates should be equivalent. For the Schrödinger equation, changing
the frame of reference also changes the solutions and the equation is therefore not
relativistically correct.21 In order for an exact description of the electron position, with
time equal to the space coordinates, time must be added to the position vector. Adding
time to the position vector means that it is now a 4-dimensional description, which
then affects all other vectors in the equation. The wavefunction is therefore also 4-
dimensional, and is called a 4-spinor. Dirac proposed the following (time-independent)
equation, including external potentials.21,22
[cα · p + βmc2 + V]Ψ = EΨ ,
(12)
where α and β are 4 × 4 matrices, defined as the following:
α =
"
0
σ
σ
0
#
(13)
β =
"
I
0
0
–I
#
(14)
In the equations above, σ is the spin matrix, p the momentum operator and I is
the unit matrix. As the wavefunction is 4-dimensional, it is possible to split it into 2
separate 2-spinors, splitting the equation into the two following equations:21
c(σ · p)ΨS + VΨL = EΨL
(15)
c(σ · p)ΨL + (–2mc2 + V)ΨS = EΨS
(16)
The subscripts S and L indicate small and large components of the wavefunction,
respectively. However, solving 4 components requires more computational resources,
and additionally, the small and large components will need to be expanded in two
different basis sets. It is therefore convenient to express the small component in terms
of the large component, to limit the computational requirements.22 The last equation
is therefore rewritten as
ΨS = (E + 2mc2 – V)–1c(σ · p)ΨL .
(17)
The inverse term can be factorized as:
(E + 2mc2 – V)–1 = (2mc2 – V)–1(1 +
E
2mc2 – V)–1
(18)
12
==PAGE:14==
The last term can be expanded in powers of the factor
E
2mc2–V. Keeping only the
zeroth-order term results in the Zeroth-Order Regular Approximation (ZORA) method.
This makes it possible to rewrite Eq. 17 as21
ΨS = c(σ · p)
2mc2 – VΨL .
(19)
Inserting this back into Eq. 15 gives the final equation.

c2p2
2mc2 – V +
2c2
(2mc2 – V)2 + V

ΨL = EΨL
(20)
Here spin-orbit coupling is already included in the equation, and relativistic effects
are therefore included.21 The equation can be translated to TD-DFT, by including
the spin-density explicitly in the equations and have the terms of the energy equation
dependent on the current density. After this transformation, relativistic TD-DFT can
be applied in the study of excited states.
2.2.2
XAS and XES calculations
When in the presence of a time-dependent classical18,19 external field, the rule of
minimal coupling is applied23 to include the vector field A(r,t) in the Hamiltonian18
A(r),t = A0εcos(k · r – ωt) .
(21)
In the equation above, k describes the wave vector, ω is the angular frequency of the
perturbing light and ε is the polarization vector. Treating the field as a perturbation,
the resulting Hamiltonian is given as,18,19
H =
X
i
p2
i
2me
+ V(r1, ..., rN) + Hint(1) + Hint(2)
(22)
Hint(1) =
e
mec
X
i
pi · A(ri, t) +
eg
2mec
X
i
si · ∇× A(ri, t)
(23)
Hint(2) =
e2
2mec2
X
i
A2(ri, t)
(24)
where p is the momentum operator, g is the electron g-factor and s is the spin
operator. The exact structure of the Hamiltonian varies with the reference system as
well as the notation, but the interaction with external fields remains almost identical.
Assuming the field is weak makes it possible to neglect terms of the second order in
13
==PAGE:15==
vector potential Hint(2).18,23 Inserting the vector potential into the interaction term
of the Hamiltonian results in18
Hint(1) = eA0
mec
X
i
[(pi · ε)cos(k · r – ωt) + g
2si · (k × ε)sin(k · r – ωt)] .
(25)
The probability of a transition is given by Fermi’s Golden Rule:19
wfi = 2π
¯h |⟨Φf|T|Φi⟩|2δ(Ef – Ei – ¯hω)
(26)
The delta function ensures the given transition is only at the given frequency, and
the squared matrix element, |⟨Φf|T|Φi⟩|2 gives the transition rate, with T being the
transition operator. Φf and Φi describe the final and initial state, respectively.19
The transition operator, also called the perturbation operator, is related to the
perturbation part of the Hamiltonian Hint by18
Hint(1) = T1e–iωt + T∗
1eiωt .
(27)
This gives that the perturbation operator is given by the equation,18,19
T1 =
X
i
e
2mecA0[(ε · pi)eikr + ig
2 si · (k × ε)eikr] .
(28)
From here, the oscillator strength can be found from the transition probability by
including flux, time and rotational averaging.19
f =
2me
e2(Ef – Ei)|⟨Φf|T|Φi⟩|2δ(Ef – Ei – ¯hω)
(29)
To simplify the transition operator, a Taylor expansion of the exponential function can
be applied. eikr = 1 + ikr - 1
2(k · r)2 +(...). Truncation dictates the approximation.19
The Taylor expansion is done to simplify the computation of the integrals, as well as
because of the dependence of k, which is excitation dependent.18
This results in the following transition operator, when neglecting terms of k of second
order and above.18,19
T1 =
e
2mcA0
X
i
[(ε · p) + i(ε · p)(k · ri) + ig
2 si · (ε × k)]
(30)
The first term of the bracket describes the electric dipole transitions, while the second
term describes the electric quadrupole transitions. The last describe magnetic dipole
transitions. As the squared transition matrix element contains the factor (k · r)2,
the quadrupole transition intensity is usually a factor 10–4 compared to the electric
14
==PAGE:16==
dipole transitions. The magnetic dipole transition matrix element also contains k2,
resulting in a similar size scale. Neglecting the terms and only including the electric
dipole transitions corresponds to the dipole approximation.19
When working within the dipole approximation one assumes that the wavelength of
the perturbing light is much larger than the core orbital.18,23 When probing transition
metal cores with hard X-rays, which are high in energy, this approximation may no
longer be valid. Additionally, the electric field is assumed to be constant over this
distance.18 As a result of this, the quadrupole transitions are usually hundreds of
times weaker than the dipole contributions and are therefore usually neglected.17 For
most cases, the dipole approximation is accurate.17,23
However, the quadrupole/dipole nature of the transition metal 1s edges are debated,
as it considers transitions to the 3d bands. The quadrupole matrix elements are 1%
of that of the dipole, but the 3d character is far larger, resulting in the contributing
intensities being equivalent.17 At high photon energies any finite order truncation
becomes questionable. The addition of first-order terms is usually enough to capture
the dipole-forbidden transitions.18,23
The first-order terms, the magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole intensities, in-
troduce a dependence on the choice of origin for the coordinate system, due to the
dependence on k.18 When working within the dipole approximation, the issue of
origin dependence does not occur,18 as the excited states are orthogonal to the ground
states.23
Usually, the origin dependence problem can be rectified by placing the origin on
the atom at which the excitation takes place. However, for small dipole intensities,
compared to the quadrupole intensities, this can place the origin far away from the
excited core orbital, which is unphysical and can have a large effect on the transition
intensities. This will also fail for excitations on ligands, as well as for transition metal
clusters.18
Therefore, it is important to find a way to rid the calculations of this origin de-
pendence. Achieving an origin-independent formulation is possible by including all
contributions to the oscillator strengths that are in the same order consistently.18
As seen previously, in the truncation of the exponential, terms of k2 were neglected,
instead of truncation at eikr = 1 + ikr. This is done as inserting the term ikr generates
a term of k2. If this term is included, all second-order terms must be included to
15
==PAGE:17==
achieve origin independence, which introduces the electric octupole and magnetic
quadrupole terms. These are negligible for this project and are therefore not included.
Origin independence is therefore achieved by only including all terms up to first order
in k. Further information on the validity of this can be found in Ref. 18.
The symmetry of the initial and final electronic state plays a role in the electronic
transitions.24 Just because a transition has the required energy to happen, it does not
mean that it has a high intensity, as the transition can be forbidden. The transition
rate matrix element |⟨Φf|T|Φi⟩|2, which is an integral, only has non-zero terms for
allowed transitions. For atoms, the symmetry states are described by the total orbital
angular momentum L,24 total spin number S and the total angular momentum J.17,24
A specific state can be described by the term symbol 2S+1LJ, which contains all 3
quantum numbers. Here, the orbital angular momentum is described by a symbol, S
for L=0, P for L=1, D for L=2, etc.24 A 3d1 electron placement is 10-fold degenerate,
and can have more than one term symbol.17 When several electrons are involved, the
degeneracy becomes:24
 
10
n
!
=
10!
(10 – n)!n!
(31)
For each possible transition to a set of degenerate states, which ones have non-zero
terms are dictated by the selection rules. The selection rules appear when separating
the matrix element into an angular and radial element, and dictates which com-
binations give non-zero terms.17 For the dipole transitions, the selection rules are
ΔJ = 0, ±1, excluding the case where J for both terms are 0.24 The quadrupole
selection rules are ΔJ = 0, ±1, ±2 and the sum of the two J-values must be at least
2.25
It is therefore possible for configurations of transitions to be dipole forbidden while
quadrupole allowed, resulting in large quadrupole contributions to the transition
intensity. For iron complexes, the iron transitions are usually treated as isolated, and
the selection rules are those of a multi-electron atom.
When considering transitions to the ligand systems, the theory must be extended to
molecules. Here point group symmetry theory can help identify which integrals have
non-zero terms. The general rule is that the total-symmetric irreducible representation
must be contained within the direct product of the symmetry of the initial state, the
final state and the symmetry operator (Eq. 30).26
16
==PAGE:18==
There is no single given rule for this, since the symmetry operators of the states, as
well as of the transition operator, depend on the molecule’s point group symmetry. The
dipole operator (r) and the quadrupole operator r2 might have the same symmetry in
one point group, but different symmetries in another. Due to the different components
of r, the x-component can be dipole allowed while the y component is forbidden, and
likewise for the quadrupole and magnetic dipole contributions. As such, whether the
dipole and quadrupole transitions are allowed depends on the point group, and it can
be predicted using group symmetry.
XES calculations are performed similarly, with ionized states as both the initial and
final configurations. The initial configuration is a core ionized state, while the final
state is a valence ionized state.
IXES ∝|⟨ΦN–1
core|T|ΦN–1
valence⟩|2δ(Ecore – Evalence – ¯hω)
(32)
Like for the XAS calculations, point group theory and origin independence need to
be considered.
The MLCT state is an excited state, with a valence excitation. The method of
calculating XAS and XES transitions on an already excited state does not differ (in
principle) from the shown ground state calculations, beyond the occupancy of the
orbitals. For XAS the initial state is now a singly excited state, and the final state
is a doubly excited state, and the other way around for XES. Still only one particle
is involved in the transition, and charge transfer effect do not affect the resulting
spectra by much for the 3d bands.17
2.2.3
Interpretation
The lifetime of the core-holes is not included within the framework adopted here, and
the spectrum therefore needs to be broadened heuristically in order to compare with
the experimental spectra.27 Additionally, the photon energy in the experiments is not
a sharp value, but a range depending on the instrument. This means that the reso-
lution of the instrument will also impact the broadening of the experimental features.19
17
==PAGE:19==
A typical broadening function is the Gaussian function. The Gaussian function is
given as:
g(r) =
1
σ
√
2πe
–(r–μ)2
2σ2
(33)
where μ is the center of the peak and σ is the standard deviation.28 Applied to the
XAS spectrum, a Gaussian function will be applied to each transition intensity, with
the transition energy as the peak center. The broadening is the same as two standard
deviations. The final spectra will then be the sum of the broadened functions with an
added pre-factor
I(ω) ∝
N
X
i
fiω
1
σ
√
2πe
–(ω–Ei)2
2σ2
,
(34)
where ω is the photon energy, Ei is the excitation energy and fi is the oscillator
strength of excitation i.
Once the theoretical spectrum is done, the most significant transitions are here an-
alyzed. As a chemist, one’s first instinct would usually be to look at the molecular
orbitals involved in the transition. However, this can be problematic as several orbitals
may be involved in the transitions.29 It is therefore of interest to have a different
way of visualizing the excitation. For this reason, R. Martin suggested to use Natural
Transition Orbitals (NTOs),30 which has since widely been used as a method of
investigating excitations.29 This method produces correlated orbitals which describe
the excited states by single excitations, like in the CIS method.
By application of separate unitary transformations to the occupied and virtual orbitals,
a correspondence can be found between the excited particle and the hole left behind.
This can be done without changing the transition density T, from the creation and
annihilation operators c†
b and cj.30
Tai =
X
σ
⟨Ψex|c†
aσciσ|Ψ0⟩
(35)
New orbitals can be constructed by application of unitary transformations, done
separately for the occupied and virtual orbitals.30
(φ1, φ2, ..., φNo) = (ψ1, ψ2, ..., ψNo)U
(φ
′
1, φ
′
2, ..., φ
′
Nv) = (ψ
′
1, ψ
′
2, ..., ψ
′
Nv)V
(36)
New orbitals φ then emerge from the rotation of the old orbitals ψ. The columns of
U and V can then be found by letting T undergo a singular value decomposition, as
18
==PAGE:20==
it is a rectangular Nv × No matrix. The columns of the two matrices are found by
solving the eigenvalue equations.30
TT†ui = λiui
T†Tvi = λ
′
ivi
(37)
This results in decomposition of T into a singular value matrix, with the compo-
nents of interest in the diagonal. For each hole in the considered excitation, there is
now a single particle in the virtual space. The importance of a hole-particle pair is
reflected in the diagonal value λ,30 and λ2 can be interpreted as the weight of the
pair.31 The NTOs are state specific, so this calculation needs to be done for every
excited state of interest.32 The newly found orbitals can then be visualized in pairs,
to illustrate where the ’particle’ (excited electron) comes from and where it ends up at.
This method is applicable within other methods, like TD-DFT, as well, but in this
case the de-excitation amplitudes emerge due to the de-excitation operators. They
are usually small and are completely ignored within TDA.30
For the case of spin unrestricted calculations, the SVD transformation is applied
separately to each spin index.30 However, for two component methods (such as ZORA)
the orbitals explicitly contain information about spin, and additionally have complex
coefficients.29 For two-component TD-DFT, the equation takes base in Eq. 11, with
the response being related to a transition density matrix T. For a given response
(Yi, Zi)⊤, the transition density matrix has the following form29
Ti =
"
0
–Zi
Yi
0
#
(38)
Both parts of T are diagonalized, to maximize the single particle character of the
transition, by the method mentioned earlier. For two-component NTOs, the dimen-
sions need to be reduced before visualisation.29 One can obtain NTOs by different
methods, allowing comparison between different quantum mechanical methods, such
as wavefunction methods and TD-DFT.31
3
Methodology
The purpose of this project was to simulate Fe and C XAS and XES spectra, following
the TD-DFT XAS protocol developed by DeBeer and co-workers, published in Ref.
19
==PAGE:21==
12, and DFT XES protocol published in Ref. 33. The initial idea was to optimize the
structure of the compounds and then calculate the XAS and XES spectra with those
protocols. All calculations were performed with DFT and TD-DFT. The optimization
of the complexes was done in Gaussian 16 revision A.03,34(because of the simpler
setup and output format). The Gaussian results were almost identical to those of
ORCA. The optimizations were carried out using the BP8635 functional with the
TZVP36 basis set.
For XAS, calculations were performed in ORCA 5.0.0.37 Again, the BP86 functional
was employed with the TZVP basis set for the TD-DFT calculation, with the modifi-
cation that a CP(PPP)38 basis set was used on the iron atom. This basis set was
developed for spectroscopy, and it mixes a double-zeta base with triple-zeta quality
valence description and includes polarizing functions. The calculations were carried
out employing TDA, as the basis set on iron is large. According to DeBeer and
coworkers, using TDA instead of TD-DFT did not influence the results. It was tested
that this was also the case for the systems considered in this project. Additionally,
the calculations adopted the infinite dielectric implicit solvation model CPCM,39
with an infinite optic dielectric constant.
First, it was decided to try to reproduce some of the results obtained by DeBeer
and coworkers. In particular [FeCl4]–, [FeCl4]2– and [FeCl6]3– as well as [Fe(CN)6]4–
and [Fe(CN)6]3– were used as examples. The results are presented and discussed in
section 4.1. The calculations were validated by analysis of the participating orbitals,
which were visualized in Avogadro40 and can be seen in the results section.
For the cyanide complexes, different structures of the [Fe(CN)6]y– (y=3,4) compounds
were tested, as well as other variants of the computational protocol of Ref. 12, in-
cluding relativistic effects by ZORA. I was informed by the author that the reported
intensities was for overall peaks in the spectral shape, calculated by orca-mapspc.
This means that they are not directly related to the reported oscillator strengths and
that the intensity is difficult to compare.
Next, I considered the oxalate compounds, which are those of interest in the previously
mentioned beamtime experiment. The Fe(III) oxalate complex and Fe(II) oxalate
complexes were also optimized at BP86/TZVP level using Gaussian. However, the
singlet Fe(II) complex did not converge using Gaussian, and the optimization had to
be performed in ORCA instead, with the same functional and basis set. Moreover,
20
==PAGE:22==
changing the functional to B3LYP, resulted in a flat compound instead of a twisted
one. For the LMCT complexes I directly used the reported structures from Ref. 11
without re-optimization.
The carbon spectra were simulated first, as preliminary experimental data were
available for comparison and method validation. I started by trying to apply the
same protocol (BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O)) on carbon, knowing that it was
developed for iron transitions. Initially, the spectra were simulated for 40 excited
states, but this was determined not to be enough; 160 excited were then calculated,
using both localized and non-localized orbitals, as several carbon atoms are involved.
Since the functional previously changed the geometry of the singlet Fe(II) oxalate com-
pound in such a drastic way, I tested newer and more accurate functionals (B3LYP41
and CAM-B3LYP42), as the protocol developed in Ref. 12 might not be optimal for
carbon transitions.
Additionally, since the TZVP basis set is not very descriptive of the core orbitals,
it was decided to try the calculations with a larger basis set. For this, a pcSseg-243
basis set was placed on all atoms other than Fe, as iron kept the transition metal
specific CP(PPP) basis set. For [Fe(III)(ox)3]3–, using CP(PPP) on Fe and TZVP
on the other atoms yielded 402 functions, versus 708 when TZVP was replaced by
pcSseg-2, which increased the computational cost. While the basis is larger, it is more
descriptive and is developed specifically for X-ray spectroscopy.21,44
For the calculations on the closed shell Fe(II) s=0 complex, the choice of restricted
calculations could also be taken. A set of calculations were done, and can be seen
in the results and discussion section. The same sets of functional, basis sets and
restricted calculations were performed on the iron transitions for comparison and to
ensure improvement of the protocol.
By comparison with the experimental data, it was decided to continue with the CAM-
B3LYP functional and the pcSseg-2 basis set on all ligand atoms. The CAM-B3LYP
functional is optimal for describing long-range interactions23, and the basis set was
chosen due to the core description and improved results. Calculations were continued
with non-localized orbitals, after I tested that this made little difference in the carbon
spectra. For the closed shell complex, restricted calculations were performed, as this
sped up the calculations, and results after broadening were nearly identical in the
energy range of interest.
21
==PAGE:23==
The character of the transitions (below the ionization threshold) was investigated and
analyzed, by booking at the natural transition orbitals. Python45 was utilized for vi-
sualizing the NTOs, making use of the py3dplot module. A smaller, well-investigated
test compound (acrolein) was used to confirm that I correctly visualized NTOs (results
can be found in appendix). During the analysis of the generated NTOs it became
clear that an error was present in ORCA. Further esearch revealed that employing
version 5.0.4 of ORCA instead resolved the issue, and NTOs could be analyzed in full.
XES calculations were performed using ORCA 5.0.4, still employing the CAM-B3LYP
functional, with a CP(PPP) basis set on iron and a pcSseg-2 basis set on the rest of
the atoms. The calculations were done unrestricted, with spin-orbit coupling and a
CPCM implicit solvent model. The Kα and Kβ edges (valence to core) were analysed,
specifically 2s, 2p, 3p and valence electron transitions to the empty 1s orbital of iron.
The XES stick spectra were then broadened for the future comparison to experimental
spectra by our collaborators (not yet available).
For the LMCT structures, ORCA 5.0.4 was employed for calculation of XAS ground
state spectra, and ORCA 6.0.0 for the excited state XAS calculations. Unfortunately,
the valence excited state calculations never reached convergence. The reason for this is
unexplored and unfortunately beyond the time limit for this project to solve. Results
for the ground-state XAS calculations at the LMCT geometry have been included, as
ground state calculations were performed for comparison.
4
Results and discussion
4.1
Preparatory work
To ensure that the protocol employed was the same as the one developed by DeBeer
and coworkers, the first step was to try to reproduce the results of Ref. 12. In
their paper,12 DeBeer et al. simulated the pre-edge of the XAS spectra of different
iron complexes. These were compared to experimental spectra, and the quadrupole
contributions were examined. Results from DeBeer and coworkers can be seen in
Fig. 2.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2: Experimental (upper panels) and calculated (lower panels) XAS spectra at the
iron K-edge for various iron complexes from Ref. 12, originally reported in Ref. 46.
As seen in Fig. 2, only a small portion of the spectra was investigated, and mainly
quadrupole dominated transition were of interest when considering the pre-edge. The
calculated spectra in Ref. 12 were shifted by 171.3 eV to align with experimental
values.
For this masters thesis, I applied DeBeer’s protocol to several iron compounds in
an attempt to reproduce some of the results from Ref. 12. Information about the
complexes, as well as the 3D geometry, can be found in Fig. 3.
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3: Table with information about the iron chloride and iron cyanide complexes used
for comparison with the results of DeBeer et al.12
4.1.1
Cl compounds
Initial tests were done on a variety of iron chloride complexes, to take advantage of
the simple structure of the compounds. Specifically, [Fe(III)Cl4]–, [Fe(II)Cl4]2– and
[Fe(III)Cl6]3– were chosen. The structural guesses for the geometry optimizations
were built in Avogadro. For the tetrahedral compounds, the Fe-Cl bond distance
was found in Ref. 47, and the octahedral guess was around the same value. The
XAS calculations were performed on the optimized structures. The full spectra for 30
excited states can be seen in Fig. 4.
24
==PAGE:26==
7100
7102
7104
7106
7108
7110
7112
7114
7116
Photon energy (eV)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
[Fe(II)Cl4]2
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
[Fe(III)Cl6]3
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
[Fe(III)Cl4]  BP86/TZVP DMQ
Figure 4: Calculated spectra at the Fe K-edge of [FeCl4]–, [FeCl4]2– and [FeCl6]3– for 30
excited states. The calculations were performed at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(Cl) level.
The results were shifted by 171.3 eV as done in Ref. 12.
By shifting my results by 171.3 eV as done by DeBeer and coworkers, the first peaks
are around 7102 eV, meaning 10 eV lower than the first peak in Ref. 12. Due to the
nature of the [FeCl4]2– peak, the range considered by DeBeer and coworkers must
correspond to the range 7098-7105 eV of my results in Fig. 4. This approximately
matches a shift of 181.5 eV. The calculated results by DeBeer et al. are compared
with my results in Fig. 5.
25
==PAGE:27==
7108
7109
7110
7111
7112
7113
7114
7115
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
[Fe(II)Cl4]2
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
Ref. [Fe(II)Cl4]2
[Fe(III)Cl6]3
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
Ref. [Fe(III)Cl6]3
[Fe(III)Cl4]  BP86/TZVP DMQ
Ref. [Fe(III)Cl4]
Figure 5: Calculated spectra at the Fe K-edge of [FeCl4]–, [FeCl4]2– and [FeCl6]3– compared
with calculated results from Ref. 12 (introduced in the lower left panel of Fig. 2). The
calculations were performed at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(Cl) level. My results were
shifted by 181.5 eV, to align with the shifted results of Ref. 12.
Looking at the relative intensity, my results for [FeCl4]– and [FeCl4]2– follow the
trend reported by DeBeer and coworkers in Ref. 12. However, the intensity of the
octahedral compound is lower than my results indicate. This can be due to a scaling
of the results in Ref. 12. Note that my results were further shifted by 10 eV, and a
total shift of 181.5 eV was applied, vs 171.3 eV in Ref. 12.
I was unable to identify the origin of the discrepancies between my results and those in
Ref. 12, and can only attribute them to differences in the computational methodology
between the versions of ORCA I used and the version used in Ref. 12. Instead, the
focus is shifted to the given experimental data. Comparison with experimental data
can be seen below.
26
==PAGE:28==
7108
7109
7110
7111
7112
7113
7114
7115
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
[Fe(II)Cl4]2
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
Exp. [Fe(II)Cl4]2
[Fe(III)Cl6]3
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
Exp. [Fe(III)Cl6]3
[Fe(III)Cl4]  BP86/TZVP DMQ
Exp. [Fe(III)Cl4]
Figure 6: Calculated spectra at the Fe K-edge of [FeCl4]–, [FeCl4]2– and [FeCl6]3– in the
range depicted of the experimental data reported in Ref. 12 from Ref. 46. The results were
shifted by 181.3 eV to align with experimental data.
The results of my calculations match the experimental data reasonably well, given
that the shift might vary a little for the different compounds. The transitions are for
this reason not exactly beneath the experimental peaks.
Since only the shape of the calculated spectra can be seen in the results of DeBeer
and coworkers, exact comparisons with ref. 12 are difficult. The difference in shift
could be due to updates in the ORCA code, and the difference in relative intensity
might originate from an unmentioned scaling in ref. 12. In general, the results of
my calculations are qualitatively in agreement, and the match with experiment is
satisfactory.
4.1.2
CN compounds
Another set of compounds studied by DeBeer and coworkers are the iron complexes
[Fe(II)(CN)6]4– and [Fe(III)(CN)6]3–. For these compounds, DeBeer and coworkers
reported the individual transitions (sticks), and therefore these systems were a logical
next step to verify my use of the protocol. The detailed results of the cyanide complexes
from DeBeer et al. can be seen in Fig. 7.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 7: Spectra for the [Fe(III)(CN)6]3– and [Fe(II)(CN)6]4– calculation from Ref. 12.
Here the excitation sticks and their relative intensities are included, which facilitates
the comparison with my data.
The geometries of the cyanide complexes were built on the Fe-C distance from Ref. 48,
and optimized in both instances. XAS calculations were run on both complexes, and
the results of all the transitions can be seen in appendix. The comparable transitions
from my calculations can be seen in Fig. 8, which are all quadrupole-dominated.
28
==PAGE:30==
7106
7108
7110
7112
7114
7116
7118
7120
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
[Fe(III)(CN)6]3
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
[Fe(II)(CN)6]4
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
Figure 8: Calculated transitions at the Fe K-edge for [Fe(CN)6]3– and [Fe(CN)6]4– for 14
excited states, shifted 181.3 eV to align with results in Ref. 12.
The results from my calculations are now shifted to align with the spectra by DeBeer
et al, and the range of the x-axis is also set to match. The spectral shapes are in
agreement with the results from Ref. 12 shown in Fig. 2, for both experiment (upper
right) and calculations (lower right). However, it can be seen that the spectral shape
for [Fe(CN)6]3– is not in agreement with the calculated spectrum shown in Fig. 7.
Therefore, in Fig. 9, I specifically compare the results of Fig. 7 with my results for
the relevant transitions.
29
==PAGE:31==
7106
7108
7110
7112
7114
7116
7118
7120
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
[Fe(III)(CN)6]3
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
DeBeer. [Fe(II)(CN)l6]3
Figure 9: Calculated transitions at the Fe K-edge of [Fe(CN)6]3– for 11 excited states
shifted 181.5 eV to align with results by DeBeer et al.12
The transitions visualized only have quadrupole intensities (they are dipole forbidden).
The peak which has the highest intensity is different, as well as the relative intensities
between the 3 peaks. The intensity of the first peak should be half of the third peak,
and a third of the second. However, in my results the first and second peak have
almost the same intensity. Looking at Fig. 7, the second peak consists of 4 transitions,
which is the same number as for my calculations. The intensity of these transitions
are therefore inconsistent.
For [Fe(CN)6]4–, which of the two transitions has the higher intensity is switched,
which means that the results of these calculations are also not in agreement with Ref.
12.
I considered the possibility that these differences might be due to the structure of the
compound, or that the plots are made with a different type of broadening function.
The discrepancy could also be because an older version of ORCA was used for the
calculations by DeBeer et al. The results for the Fe(III) complex should give the most
profound differences in results, and was therefore used in the tests.
An older version of ORCA (4.0.0) was tested, but this made no difference. I considered
that the symmetric structure optimized is too different from the crystal structure
30
==PAGE:32==
used by DeBeer and coworkers. A less symmetrical crystal structure was reported in
Ref. 49, and calculations were done on this geometry. Results can be seen in Fig. 10,
with the full spectrum in appendix.
7106
7108
7110
7112
7114
7116
7118
7120
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Cryst. [Fe(III)(CN)6]3
 BP86/TZVP DMQ
Figure 10: Calculated transitions at the Fe K-edge on [Fe(CN)6]3– crystal structure for 30
excited states shifted 181.3 eV.
The difference the structure makes is minimal, and the last peak is still the largest.
There might be a major difference between the protocols, but unfortunately I was
unable to confirm this.
Lastly, I considered the possibility that the results reported in the plots by DeBeer et
al. in the plot were from ZORA calculations. My ZORA results can be seen below in
Fig. 11, and the full spectrum is in the appendix.
31
==PAGE:33==
7050
7052
7054
7056
7058
7060
7062
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
[Fe(III)(CN)6]3
 ZORA BP86/TZVP DMQ
Figure 11: Calculated transitions at the Fe K-edge on [Fe(CN)6]3– for 11 excited states
and ZORA, unshifted.
The spectrum shows that including ZORA changes the shift in the spectrum, but has
no influence on the shape of the spectrum. DeBeer et al. report a shift of -33.5 eV for
the ZORA calculations, while the shift is around 57 eV for my calculations. This is a
large difference, whose origin remain unexplained.
The next step was to investigate the character of the transitions in terms of molecular
orbitals, to ensure that the correct transitions had been computed and visualized
in the spectrum. In the spectra by DeBeer et al, it is indicated which molecular
orbitals were involved in the core transition, which should be in accordance with my
calculations. I investigated this by taking a closer look at the ligand field, which can
be seen in Fig. 12.
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 12: Ligand field splitting of octahedral iron compounds. Figure reproduced from
Ref. 50.
From Fig. 12, we see that the last t2g orbital of [Fe(III)(CN)6]3– is only partially
occupied, meaning that 1s transitions to a d-orbital could occur. However, for
[Fe(II)(CN)6]4– this orbital would be fully occupied, as Fe(II) contains an extra
electron. Both complexes could then have transitions to the eg and π∗orbitals next,
which is in agreement with the transitions displayed in Fig. 7. The molecular orbitals
to which the 1s transitions occur, are displayed below in Fig. 13 and 14.
(a) t2g orbital.
(b) eg orbital.
33
==PAGE:35==
(c) eg orbital.
(d) π∗orbital.
Figure 13: Orbitals for [Fe(III)(CN)6]3–.
(a) eg orbital.
(b) eg orbital.
(c) π∗orbital.
Figure 14: Orbitals for [Fe(II)(CN)6]4–.
The orbitals show that the transitions I computed are the same as those reported in
Ref. 12. The differences in the results must then be due to unreported methodology
or differences in the older version of ORCA, which was employed in Ref. 12. For
instance, the difference in energy shifts could be due to an updated density functional.
The nature of the transitions (in terms of orbital composition), are identical, even
though the intensities differ.
In other words, my calculations arrive at the same peaks as in Ref. 12, and it was
therefore concluded that the calculations are qualitatively in agreement, and I could
proceed with calculations on the oxalates.
4.2
Fe(III) oxalate
[Fe(III)(ox)3]3– has been studied extensively in the literature, and the structure has
previously been optimized by Tran et al.11 The geometry used for the calculation
34
==PAGE:36==
takes base in the crystal structure of K3[Fe(ox)3] where one [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– ion has
been isolated and optimized. To ensure the validity of this process, the resulting
structure was compared to the results of Tran et al., and the structures were virtually
identical. The geometry of [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– can be seen below in Fig. 15.
Figure 15: Molecular structure of [Fe(III)(ox)3]3–.
The symmetry is close to octahedral, specifically D3 due to the distortions.5 The spin
state of the complex is s=2.5, and the multiplicity is, therefore, a sextet. This means
that 5 orbitals are singly occupied and that whether the excitation electron has α or β
spin will influence the calculation result. Calculations should therefore be unrestricted,
as it is an open shell complex. Unfortunately, no reference spectra are available for
comparison for the iron transitions. However, there are detailed experimental spectra
for the carbon transitions,51 obtained by our collaborators. The spectra have not,
to my knowledge, been published previously. The carbon spectra make comparison
possible, which is why my calculations were initially on the carbon transitions.
Carbon transitions
XAS spectra of the carbon K-edge were calculated following the protocol described
in the methodology section. To start with, only 40 excited states were included in
the transitions, as less than this was used for the previously tested spectra. However,
there are now 6 carbon atoms from which the transitions can occur, so more might
35
==PAGE:37==
be necessary. Additionally, there is no longer symmetry around the atoms, meaning
that the transitions are no longer quadrupole-dominated at the start of the spectra.
Initial results can be seen in Fig. 16.
264
266
268
270
272
274
276
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Figure 16: XAS spectrum of [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– at the carbon K-edge, calculated for 40 excited
states at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
The absorption only spans across 4 eV, as opposed to the around 7 eV seen for earlier
calculations, indicating that a lot more excited states might be needed to accurately
depict the experimental spectra. Comparing with the experimentally recorded spectra,
this turns out to be the case. The result of the experimental measurements can be
seen in Fig. 17. As the simulations are performed with an implicit solvent model, the
simulated spectra should be the most similar to experimental results for the liquid.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 17: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– experimental carbon K-edge XAS spectra measured by Ref. 51.
The figure shows absorption across around 7 eV as suspected. However, the spectral
shapes are only similar in the sense that there are 2 peaks. More excited states need
to be calculated to properly compare the calculations with the experimental results.
Additionally, the protocol might need to be changed, as it was developed for iron
transitions.
For energies above the ionization threshold, some of the transitions become unphysical,
as they correspond to a discretized representation of the electronic continuum. There-
fore a guess of the ionization threshold should be done, in order to limit calculations
of transitions after the threshold. This was done according to Koopmans’ theorem.
Results from the calculation for 160 excited states, including the ionization threshold
according to Koopmans’ can be seen in Fig. 18.
If a molecule contains more than one atom of the XAS element, and the 1s orbitals
are symmetry equivalent, it may be necessary to localize them first. In the systems
here considered, there are 6 carbon atoms from which 1s transitions occur. Therefore
the XAS calculation is repeated with localized 1s orbitals for carbon, and the results
can be seen in Fig. 18.
37
==PAGE:39==
264
266
268
270
272
274
276
278
280
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Intensity (arb. units)
1e6
Localized orbitals
Non-localized orbitals
Ionization according to Koopmans
Figure 18: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– carbon spectra at the K-edge calculated with both localized
and non-localized orbitals for carbon atoms and 160 excited states. The calculations were
performed at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level. Ionization threshold according to
Koopmans’ theorem can be seen with green.
Increasing the excited states to 160 drastically changes the spectral shape. The
previously small second peak now increases to a point where the first can barely be
seen, and a third even bigger peak appears. It is unclear whether localized orbitals
change anything but the overall intensity.
Removing some transitions from the spectra, resulting in the absorption terminating
at 274 eV, could result in the spectra closely resembling that of the powder in Fig. 17.
However, the spectral shape, being the same as for the experiment, does not neces-
sarily mean that it is correct. As the calculations are done in the infinite dielectric
solvation model, the results should be closer to those of the liquid.
From both figures, it is clear that Koopmans’ theorem is far off when it comes to the
ionization threshold, as it suggests ionization after less than 5 eV of absorption. It
was therefore decided that it should not be used for further analysis at this point.
Since DeBeer’s protocol was developed for iron transitions and not for carbon, it
is important at this point to test the influence of the functional and the basis set
applied. Localized 1s orbitals are still applied to the carbon atoms. In Ref. 12, method
2 changes the functional to B3LYP. The authors state that changing the functional
38
==PAGE:40==
does not influence the spectra. This might be true for the iron transitions but it
should be investigated for the carbon transitions. The results of the calculation done
with the B3LYP functional can be found in Fig. 19.
The basis set on iron is a CP(PPP), developed for core investigations on transition
metals. Now the carbon atom cores are under investigation and they should be
described extensively in the basis set applied. A TZVP basis set is not very descriptive,
and a larger basis set should be used on the carbon atoms. A pcSseg-2 basis set is now
applied instead of TZVP, and the results of the calculations can be seen in Fig. 20.
270
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Intensity (arb. units)
1e6
Figure 19: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– XAS at the
carbon K-edge, calculated with localized C
orbitals and 160 excited states at the
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
264
266
268
270
272
274
276
278
280
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Intensity (arb. units)
1e6
Figure 20: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– XAS at carbon
K-edge, calculated with localized orbitals
for carbon atoms, 160 excited states at the
BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level
From the figures, it can be seen that changing the functional influence the transition
energies and intensities, drastically changing the spectral shape. Moreover, applying a
different basis set results in a different shift. Since changing the functional significantly
change the spectra for the carbon transitions, another functional was tested as well,
namely the CAM-B3LYP functional. This was tested on both localized and non-
localized orbitals to better compare the influence of both. Results can be seen below.
39
==PAGE:41==
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Intensity (arb. units)
1e6
Figure 21: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– XAS at the
carbon K-edge, computed for 160 excited
states at the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/
TZVP(C,O) level.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Intensity (arb. units)
1e6
Figure 22: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– carbon spectra
calculated with localized orbitals for the car-
bon atoms, 160 excited states at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
The CAM-B3LYP functional accentuates the last peak and decreases the intensity of
the second peak, compared to the B3LYP functional. Once again, it does not appear
that localizing the orbitals has a significant impact on the spectral profiles (even
though it redistributes the individual intensities).
One last comparison was done using both the updated functional and basis set on
carbon. The resulting spectra with both localized and non-localized orbitals can be
seen in Fig. 23.
Fig. 23 shows that localized orbitals do not change the spectra but only the intensity.
Additionally, localized orbitals should only be used when necessary, as the procedure
otherwise can give artifacts. The two first peaks now resemble those of the experi-
mental spectra for the liquid, seen in Fig. 17. The absorbance is across around 7 eV,
with 4 eV separation between the peaks. The third peak might be obscured or can be
beyond the ionization threshold.
40
==PAGE:42==
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Intensity (arb. units)
1e6
(a) Without localized orbitals
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Intensity (arb. units)
1e6
(b) With localized orbitals.
Figure 23: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– carbon spectra calculated with and without localized orbitals
for carbon atoms and 160 excited states at the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O)
level.
The next step was to analyze the key transitions, by illustrating the transfer of
electron density. This was done by determining and visualizing the NTOs. During this
process, it was discovered that an error was present in the way ORCA 5.0.0 computed
these. It was discussed whether using TD-DFT instead of TDA would solve the issues,
but they did not and the spectra barely changed. The spectra can be found in the
appendix. The calculations were continued with ORCA 5.0.2. The resulting spectra
were identical and can be seen in the appendix, but the NTO calculations all resulted
in an error. Therefore ORCA 5.0.4 was downloaded and employed for the final results.
The calculations performed with ORCA 5.0.4 completed faster and without error,
yielding spectra identical to those computed previously. The spectrum for 160 excited
states can be seen in Fig. 24, where it is compared with the experimental data.
41
==PAGE:43==
282.5
285.0
287.5
290.0
292.5
295.0
297.5
300.0
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Intensity (arb. units)
1e6
CAM/seg2
Experiment, liquid
Figure 24: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– XAS at the carbon K-edge calculated for 160 excited states at
the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level, compared with experimental data.
The simulated spectrum was shifted by 11.3 eV to align with the experimental one.
The peaks of the the simulated data have been shifted to align with experimental
data, and the spectral shapes are generally in good agreement. The experimental
data presents an ionization background causing the baseline to increase steadily.
This might obscure the third peak or it might be beyond the ionization threshold.
Koopmans’ theorem was applied and indicated that ionization occurs at around
293.6 eV. Results from a calculation with a bath orbital were in agreement. This
matches the experimental data as well.
This time it was possible to compute the NTOs and selected high-intensity states
were visualized. For this, the NTOs for the first major peak are presented, state 11
(287.9 eV). The NTOs can be seen below, in Fig. 25.
42
==PAGE:44==
(a) Hole NTO 22a from state 11.
Isovalue 0.005, 27% contribution to
the state.
(b) Particle NTO 83a from state 11.
Isovalue 0.015, 27% contribution to
the state.
(c) Hole NTO 22b from state 11.
Isovalue 0.005, 26% contribution to
the state.
(d) Particle NTO 78b from state 11.
Isovalue 0.01, 26% contribution to the
state.
(e) Hole NTO 21a from state 11.
Isovalue 0.005, 24% contribution to
the state.
(f) Particle NTO 84a from state 11.
Isovalue 0.01, 24% contribution to the
state.
43
==PAGE:45==
(g) Hole NTO 21b from state 11.
Isovalue 0.005, 15% contribution to
the state.
(h) Particle NTO 79b from state 11.
Isovalue 0.015, 15% contribution to
the state.
Figure 25: NTOs for state 11 of the [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– carbon transitions.
The transitions are from the carbon 1s orbitals to the π∗systems, which fits with
the molecular orbitals receiving the electron. The NTOs 78b and 79b have some
d-orbital character, which fits with the spin state allowing singly occupied d-orbitals
to accept the electron. The spectrum for [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– has as such been recorded
and validated by comparison with experimental data as well as transition analysis.
Iron transitions
For the iron transitions, the protocol developed by DeBeer et al. should be relatively
accurate. Nonetheless, the influence of the basis set and functional is explored as
well. This is done by changing the basis set of the non-iron atoms from TZVP to
pcSseg-2 and applying the CAM-B3LYP functional instead of BP86. The results with
80 excited states can be seen in Fig. 26.
44
==PAGE:46==
6930
6932
6934
6936
6938
6940
6942
6944
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/
TZVP(C,O) level.
6930
6932
6934
6936
6938
6940
6942
6944
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(c) BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O)
level.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(d) CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-
2(C,O) level.
Figure 26: Iron K-edge XAS spectra for [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– at different levels of theory.
The figure illustrates how the functional is responsible for shifting the excitations,
as well changing the spectral shape. Employing CAM-B3LYP, the high-intensity
transitions get grouped, and the low-intensity transitions are placed almost on top
of each other in the latter part of the spectrum. However, due to the spread of the
absorbance, which is across more than 10 eV at this point, the transitions are likely
beyond the ionization threshold. The basis set also influences the transitions, with the
same tendency for pcSseg-2 but in the opposite direction. Combining the new basis
set and functional, the transitions at the end of the spectra are more spread out.
For the pre-edge, the quadrupole contributions to the transitions are of interest, as
they have high quadrupole character. Spectra only including quadrupole contributions
can be seen in Fig. 27.
45
==PAGE:47==
6928
6930
6932
6934
6936
6938
6940
6942
6944
Photon energy (eV)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
(a) BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
(b) CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/
TZVP(C,O) level.
6928
6930
6932
6934
6936
6938
6940
6942
6944
Photon energy (eV)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
(c) BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O)
level.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
(d) CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-
2(C,O) level.
Figure 27: Iron K-edge spectra for [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– containing only the quadrupole contri-
butions, at different levels of theory.
It was decided to move forward with the CAM-B3LYP functional and the pcSseg-
2 basis set on carbon and oxygen. The functional includes long-ranging effects of
interest, the basis set is marked as a benchmark in X-ray spectroscopy, and the
combination was found approximate in calculating the ionization threshold for the
carbon transitions. The full TD-DFT spectra (without TDA) can be found in the
appendix. The spectra employing the 5.0.4 version of ORCA can be seen in Fig. 28.
46
==PAGE:48==
6960.0 6962.5 6965.0 6967.5 6970.0 6972.5 6975.0 6977.5 6980.0
Photon energy (eV)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Figure 28: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– iron K-edge spectrum calculated for 80 excited at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
As seen previously, the intensity dampens significantly after 6975 eV when only
quadrupole contributions are considered. For the carbon transitions, results were
compared with experimental spectra to approximate the ionization threshold. This is
not possible for the iron transitions, as a detailed reference has not been found. Due
to the nature of the quadrupole contributions, as well as the sudden spike in intensity,
it is likely that the ionization threshold is around 6975 eV.
To better estimate the ionization threshold, a calculation was performed with the
addition of a bath orbital. The results indicated that transitions with energies above
6973.9 eV were beyond the ionization threshold. It is of note that this is an approxi-
mation, and the estimated ionization energy may be inaccurate. The spectra only
including transitions below the ionization threshold can be seen in Fig. 29.
47
==PAGE:49==
6958
6960
6962
6964
6966
6968
6970
6972
6974
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Figure 29: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– iron K-edge spectra calculated for 19 excited states at the
CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
The symmetry of the Fe(III) oxalate is less than that of the cyanide complexes
explored by DeBeer et al., due to the multiplicity of 6. For this reason, the quadrupole
contributions to the intensity will be less but still significant. This can be seen in
Fig. 30.
6958
6960
6962
6964
6966
6968
6970
6972
6974
6976
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Figure 30: [Fe(III)(ox)3]3–. Quadrupole contribution to the iron K-edge spectra, calculated
for 19 excited states at the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
48
==PAGE:50==
For validation of the spectra, the NTOs of several of the states were analyzed. The
results for states 2 and 14 can be seen in Figs. 31 and 32.
(a) Hole NTO 0b from state 2. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 78b from state 2.
Isovalue 0.005.
Figure 31: NTOs for state 2 of the [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– iron transitions, calculated with ORCA
5.0.4
(a) Hole NTO 0a from state 14. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 83a from state 14.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 32: NTOs for state 14 of the [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– iron transitions, calculated with ORCA
5.0.4
State 2 is dominated by a single transition, from the iron core to a partially occupied
3d-orbital. The particle NTO for this transition has, accordingly, d-orbital character.
The NTO for state 14 is larger and more diffuse. One of the noted problems with
earlier versions of ORCA was that the MO was printed instead of the NTO, and
there was no similarity between the MO accepting the transition and the NTOs. The
states are dominated by single transitions, and the NTOs should therefore resemble
49
==PAGE:51==
the MOs receiving the excited electron. For state 2 this is orbital 80b, while for state
14 it is orbital 87a. Both are pictured in Fig. 33.
(a) Molecular orbital 80b. Isovalue 0.01.
(b) Molecular orbital 87a. Isovalue
0.015.
Figure 33: Molecular orbitals for [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– iron transitions.
There is now a match between the MOs and the NTOs, which is what was expected.
The particle NTO for state 2 resembles a partial d-orbital, matching the lowest
partially occupied orbitals. The orbitals for state 14 are a little more diffuse but are
also higher in the virtual orbitals.
4.3
Fe(II) oxalates
After the photocatalytic reaction has run its course, the dissociation product [Fe(II)(ox)2]2–
remains. This product can be found either as a singlet (s=0) or as a quintet (s=2),
and the two will be discussed separately, as the transitions will be different.
4.3.1
Singlet
The geometry optimization of the singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– molecule was attempted in
Gaussian, but it did not reach a minimum structure. Instead, the optimization was
done in ORCA, still employing the BP86 functional and a TZVP basis set. Changing
the functional to B3LYP, which was done during a test, changed the geometry enough
to make the previously twisted structure flat. The results of both optimizations can
be seen below in Fig. 34.
50
==PAGE:52==
(a) Structure of the BP86 geometry
optimization.
(b) Structure of the B3LYP geometry
optimization.
Figure 34: Resulting structures from the singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– optimizations.
The singlet complex is a closed shell compound, which means that restricted cal-
culations are relevant to run. Restricted and unrestricted calculations should be
compared. The results should not differ by much, but both cases have been simulated
and compared to each other, as well as to experimental data.
Carbon transitions
To start with, XAS calculations were done following the protocol for iron transitions
developed by DeBeer and coworkers,12 for 40 excited states. This first calculation was
only run on the twisted structure, as it was a preliminary unrestricted test. Results
can be seen in Fig. 35.
266
268
270
272
274
276
278
Photon energy (eV)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Figure 35: Singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon spectra calculated for 40 excited states at the
BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
51
==PAGE:53==
The broadened spectrum spreads across just a little more than 5 eV, indicating that
too few excited states are included in the calculation. The unpublished experimental
results from our collaborators can be seen in Fig. 36.
Figure 36: [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– experimental carbon K-edge spectra measured by Ref. 51.
In the experimental spectra, there are two clear peaks, as well as a smaller third
peak. This indicates that more excited states are needed for the calculations, as the
absorption spans across almost 7 eV. At this point, the number of excited states was
set to 160, and Koopmans’ theorem was used to estimate the ionization threshold.
The calculations were done on both the twisted and the flat structure, and the results
can be seen in Fig. 37.
52
==PAGE:54==
265.0
267.5
270.0
272.5
275.0
277.5
280.0
282.5
285.0
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Intensity (arb. units)
1e6
Twisted
Flat
Ionization according to Koopmans
Figure 37: Spectrum for the singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon K-edge calculations for 160
excited states at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level. Ionization according to Koop-
mans’ theorem can be seen with green.
From the spectra, we see that the first to peaks are almost identical, between the
twisted and flat structure. Differences occur at higher energies.
As seen for the [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– carbon transition spectra, Koopmans’ theorem under-
estimates the ionization threshold of the compounds with the BP86 functional.
The separation between the two peaks is around 4 eV, while the experimental data
suggests this should be less than 3 eV. However, this is the data for powder, and the
implicit solvent model results in a liquid-like behavior. Additionally, the second peak
is much larger than the first, which is the opposite of the experimental, but the trend
does follow the powder-liquid difference. This was also the case for the initial results
for the [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– carbon transitions.
As the singlet complex is a closed shell, calculations can also be done restricted. The
influence of restricted calculations is therefore also tested. The results of the restricted
calculation for the flat structure can be seen in Fig. 38.
53
==PAGE:55==
265
270
275
280
285
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
Figure
38:
Spin restricted flat singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2–
carbon spectrum at the
BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
The spin-restricted spectrum looks like that of the non-restricted calculation in the
beginning and then continues on at higher energies afterwards. This indicates that
restricting the spin makes the alpha excitation and the beta excitation count as one,
resulting in more transitions than before. However, this should be further investigated.
The protocol was developed for iron transitions, and functional and basis sets are
for this reason changed, for a better and more accurate description of the carbon cores.
The spectrum for the unrestricted calculations for 160 excited states, spans more
than the 7 eV observed in the experimental data, and it is likely that too many
excited states are included. This is even more clear in the restricted calculations. This
means that most of the relevant spectra of the twisted and flat structure are close
to identical, and the tests of the influence of basis set and functional can be done
on only one of the two. This was chosen to be the flat structure due to a decreased
calculation time. Changing the functional to B3LYP is tested with both restricted
and unrestricted calculations, and the results can be seen in Fig. 39.
54
==PAGE:56==
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Unrestricted calculation.
275.0
277.5
280.0
282.5
285.0
287.5
290.0
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Restricted calculation.
Figure 39: Spectra for the flat singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon K-edge calculations at the
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
Changing the functional once again definitely has an impact, making the initial peaks
sharper and more intense. The functional CAM-B3LYP and a pcSseg-2 basis set on
non-iron atoms is again tested, with the results shown in Fig. 40 and 41.
275.0
277.5
280.0
282.5
285.0
287.5
290.0
292.5
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Unrestricted calculation.
275.0
277.5
280.0
282.5
285.0
287.5
290.0
292.5
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Restricted structure.
Figure 40: Spectra for the flat singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon K-edge calculations at the
CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
It can be seen for the CAM-B3LYP calculation that some transitions are shifted
slightly, but that the spectra are still very similar. A restricted calculation was done
on the twisted structure with CAM-B3LYP as well for comparison.
55
==PAGE:57==
275.0
277.5
280.0
282.5
285.0
287.5
290.0
292.5
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
Figure 41: Spectra for the restricted carbon calculation on twisted singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2–
at the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
Comparing the two restricted calculations, for the twisted and flat structure respec-
tively, the spectral shapes start out being near identical. Then there is a large peak at
around 285 eV, from which the two starts to differ. This peak is theorized to signify
the ionization threshold, and future calculations for this compound will only include
excited states until this point.
Next the basis set on carbon and oxygen is changed from TZVP to pcSseg-2. The
result for this can be seen in Fig. 42.
266
268
270
272
274
276
278
280
282
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Unrestricted calculation.
266
268
270
272
274
276
278
280
282
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Restricted calculation.
Figure 42: Spectra for the flat singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon calculations at the
BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
56
==PAGE:58==
For the pcSseg-2 calculation it can be seen that there are slight shifts between the
restricted and non-restricted calculations, but that the major difference is the intensity.
It is theorised that the ionization threshold lies just beyond the small third bump,
marking the point where the spectra, for the two different geometries, stops being
similar. The calculations should be restricted, as it is a closed shell complex.
The new basis set and functional are combined, and the question of the usage of
localized orbitals is considered. That resulted in the spectra seen in Fig. 43.
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Calculations without localized orbitals.
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Calculation with localized orbitals.
Figure 43: Spectra for the flat singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon restricted calculations at the
CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
It can be seen that the major difference, when it comes to using localized orbitals, is
that it splits transitions into several with less intensity, while the broadening stays
the same. The same calculations are then done on the twisted structure, and can be
seen in Fig. 44.
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Restricted calculation.
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Restricted calculation with localized
orbitals.
Figure 44: Spectra for the twisted singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
57
==PAGE:59==
Once again the localized orbitals split the transitions up. It is determined that the
calculations done with non-localized orbitals, the CAM-B3LYP functional and a
pcSseg-2 basis set, are those that that will be developed on further. They have
a 4 eV separation between the two major peaks, and the second is smaller than
the first, which matches the experimental. However the broadening and intensity
of the third peak does not match, which might be because the experimental spec-
tra is done for a powder, while the calculations are done with an implicit solvent model.
Spectra for ORCA 5.0.2 can be found in the appendix. The spectra from version
5.0.4 are once again identical to those found previously, and are visualized different
numbers of excited states, in figures 45 and 46, and are compared with experimental
data.
275.0
277.5
280.0
282.5
285.0
287.5
290.0
292.5
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Spectrum for 160 excited states
284
286
288
290
292
294
296
298
300
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
CAM/seg2
Experiment, powder
(b) Spectrum for 60 excited states shifted
11.5 eV, compared with experimental
results for powder.
Figure 45: Spectra for the twisted singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– restricted carbon K-edge calcula-
tions at the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
58
==PAGE:60==
275.0
277.5
280.0
282.5
285.0
287.5
290.0
292.5
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Spectrum for 160 excited states
284
286
288
290
292
294
296
298
300
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
CAM/seg2
Experiment, powder
(b) Spectrum for 60 excited states shifted
11.5 eV, compared with experimental
results for powder.
Figure 46: Spectra for the flat singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– restricted carbon K-edge calculations
at the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
For comparison with experimental data, the first peaks have been aligned. This time
the second peak does not line up, but it must be kept in mind that the experimental
data is for powder. The simulations are done with the CPCM implicit solvation
model, and should therefore more closely resemble liquid results. Liquid results were
not obtained for [Fe(II)(ox)2]2–, but if we compare powder and liquid results for
[Fe(III)(ox)3]3–, the peaks are further apart for the liquid state. The simulated data
is therefore in good agreement with the experimental data. Koopmans’ theorem and a
calculation with a bath orbital place the ionization threshold just beyond the second
peak.
For both geometries, the most important excitations have been analyzed and the
NTOs visualized. Of relevance for both the twisted and flat structure, are states 4
and 22. First for the twisted structure:
59
==PAGE:61==
(a) Hole NTO 16a from state 4. Isovalue
0.005.
(b) Particle NTO 58a from state 4.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 47: NTOs for state 4 of twisted singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon K-edge transitions.
(a) Hole NTO 16a from state 22.
Isovalue 0.005.
(b) Particle NTO 58a from state 22.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 48: NTOs for state 22 of the twisted singlet [Fe(ox)2]2– carbon transitions.
It is shown that the particle NTOs resemble π∗systems. The NTO from state 4 is
very defined, while for state 22 the particle NTO becomes more delocalized.
Next, the NTOs for the flat structure were investigated, with the results shown in
Fig. 49 and 50.
60
==PAGE:62==
(a) Hole NTO 16a from state 4. Isovalue
0.005, 48% contribution to the state.
(b) Particle NTO 58a from state 4.
Isovalue 0.015, 48% contribution to the
state.
(c) Hole NTO 15a from state 4. Isovalue
0.005, 45% contribution to the state.
(d) Particle NTO 59a from state 4.
Isovalue 0.015, 45% contribution to the
state.
Figure 49: NTOs for state 4 of the flat singlet [Fe(ox)2]2– carbon transitions.
61
==PAGE:63==
(a) Hole NTO 16a from state 22.
Isovalue 0.005, 56% contribution to the
state.
(b) Particle NTO 58a from state 22.
Isovalue 0.015, 56% contribution to the
state.
(c) Hole NTO 15a from state 22.
Isovalue 0.005, 44% contribution to the
state.
(d) Particle NTO 59a from state 22.
Isovalue 0.015, 44% contribution to the
state.
Figure 50: NTOs for state 22 of the flat singlet [Fe(ox)2]2– carbon transitions.
Like for the twisted structure, the NTOs for state 4 looks like a π∗system as expected.
It is however of note that the states are no longer as defined by 1 single transition,
given by the combination of NTO pairs. The particle NTOs of state 22 is still given
by a π system, likely de-localized over the entire molecule.
As such the spectra for the two [Fe(ox)2]2– geometries have been simulated. Due
to the difference in orbital overlaps, the transitions and their intensities differ. This
could additionally been seen in the NTO analysis, where the character of the particle
NTOs are influenced by the geometry. The spectral shapes are similar and the two
geometries will experimentally be indistinguishable.
62
==PAGE:64==
Iron transitions
For the 5.0.2 version of ORCA, the spectra were identical to those of 5.0.4, and can
be seen in the appendix. The full spectra from version 5.0.4 can be seen in Fig. 51.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
6985
6990
6995
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Twisted structure/80 excited states.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
6985
6990
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Twisted structure/65 excited states.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
6985
6990
6995
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(c) Flat structure/80 excited states.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
6985
6990
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(d) Flat structure/65 excited states.
Figure 51: Spectra for the singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– iron calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
In order to estimate the ionization threshold, calculations were again performed with
a bath orbital. The results of the calculations indicate that the ionization threshold is
around 6968.9 eV for the twisted structure and 6969.5 eV for the flat structure. Both
happen to be after 8 excitations. The cropped spectra can be seen in Fig. 52.
63
==PAGE:65==
6958
6960
6962
6964
6966
6968
6970
6972
Photon energy (eV)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Twisted structure/8 excited states.
6958
6960
6962
6964
6966
6968
6970
6972
Photon energy (eV)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Flat structure/8 excited states.
Figure 52: Spectra for the singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– iron calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
The spectra indicate that the early transitions are more intense for the twisted struc-
ture, while a higher energy transition has very high intensity for the flat structure.
The spectra show that the intensities are very different, despite oxidation and spin
states being identical, indicating that the different mixing of the orbitals change the
symmetry.
The NTO analysis for the twisted complex was completed, and has been included for
states 2 and 3. Results can be seen below.
(a) Hole NTO 0a from state 2. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 58a from state 2.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 53: NTOs for state 2 of the twisted singlet [Fe(ox)2]2– iron transitions.
64
==PAGE:66==
(a) Hole NTO 0a from state 3. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 58a from state 3.
Isovalue 0.02.
Figure 54: NTOs for state 3 of the twisted singlet [Fe(ox)2]2– iron transitions.
The particle orbital of state 2 is a textbook eg orbital, likely involving the unoccupied
3d-orbital. For state 3, the resemblance is close to the π∗-system, likely with interfier-
ence from a different transition.
For the flat structure NTOs from states 2 and 3 has been visualized below.
(a) Hole NTO 0a from state 2. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 58a from state 2.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 55: NTOs for state 2 of the flat singlet [Fe(ox)2]2– iron transitions.
65
==PAGE:67==
(a) Hole NTO 0a from state 3. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 58a from state 3.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 56: NTOs for state 3 of the flat singlet [Fe(ox)2]2– iron transitions.
The particle NTO for state 2 has the same eg character as the one from the twisted
structure. The one for state 3 is again a π∗system, likely with de-localized orbitals
around iron.
4.3.2
Quintet
For the s=2 spin state of [Fe(II)(ox)2]2–, the optimization with Gaussian did reach a
minimum. This was a twisted structure, similar to that of the s=0 state. However, as
the s=0 state was found in both a flat and a twisted geometry, it is not unreasonable
to hypothesize that the s=2 spin state does too. A flat s=2 [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– geometry
was indeed reported by Straub et al,8 found using DFT for the geometry optimization
at the B3LYP/def2-TZVP level. The geometries can be seen below.
(a) Structure from the geometry
optimization.
(b) Structure reported by Straub.
Figure 57: Possible geometries of the quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– complex.
66
==PAGE:68==
The structures are close to identical to those of the s=0 spin state, but as the spin
is now s=2, the calculated spectra might be completely different. The quintet state
is open shell, with 4 orbitals only singly occupied. All calculations are therefore
performed unrestricted.
Carbon transitions
Initially, calculations were only performed on the twisted quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2–
structure, as testing on the Fe(III) oxalate and the singlet structure was prioritized.
As with the other two complexes, an initial calculation on the carbon transitions was
run for 40 excited states.
266
268
270
272
274
276
278
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
Figure 58: Quintet twisted [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon spectra calculated for 40 excited states
at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
Like with the other calculations, too few excited states are included. The experimental
results have not the spin state specified, but it is assumed to s=0. The results of the
s=2 compound should therefore not be identical, but it can still be used as a rough
guideline, to the extend that more excited states are needed. The calculation for 160
excited states can be seen below in Fig. 59.
67
==PAGE:69==
266
268
270
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
Figure 59: Quintet twisted [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon spectra calculated for 160 excited states
at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level..
The spectra now span almost 10 eV which, based on results from previous compounds,
is too many excited states.
It was then decided to look at the flat structure by Straub et al, employing the revised
protocol. The calculation was done with localized orbitals, the CAM-B3LYP functional
and the pcSseg-2 basis set on carbon and oxygen, while keeping a CP(PPP) basis
set on iron. This calculation was also done for the twisted structure for comparison.
Results can be seen in Fig. 60.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Twisted structure.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Flat structure.
Figure 60: Spectra for the quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon K-edge. Calculations for 160
excited states and localized orbitals at the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
It can be seen that the second peak of the flat structure spectrum starts a bit earlier
than that of the twisted structure, but the spectra are otherwise similar. The in-
68
==PAGE:70==
tensity of the third peak is a bit smaller, but it is likely beyond the ionization threshold.
The two spectra without localized orbitals were calculated using ORCA 5.0.2 (see
appendix), and the spectra from 5.0.4 can be seen in figures 61 and 62.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 160 excited states.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 120 excited states.
Figure 61: Spectra for the twisted quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon K-edge calculations at
the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 160 excited states.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
290
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 120 excited states.
Figure 62: Spectra for the flat quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
The spectra look similar to that of the singlet calculations, which makes sense as
both complexes have Fe(II) as the metal center. However, doubly occupied orbitals
for the singlet complex are now only singly occupied, resulting in available transitions
to these states. This results in differences in the spectra. Koopmans’ theorem and
bath orbital calculations again agree that the ionization threshold can be estimated
as around 282 eV.
69
==PAGE:71==
The dominating peaks of the spectra were analyzed. For the twisted structure, these
are states 8 and 44.
(a) Hole NTO 16a from state 8. Isovalue
0.005, 46% contribution to the state.
(b) Particle NTO 60a from state 8.
Isovalue 0.015, 46% contribution to the
state.
(c) Hole NTO 16b from state 8. Isovalue
0.005, 42% contribution to the state.
(d) Particle NTO 56b from state 8.
Isovalue 0.015, 42% contribution to the
state.
Figure 63: NTOs for state 8 of the twisted quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon transitions.
70
==PAGE:72==
(a) Hole NTO 16b from state 44.
Isovalue 0.005, 61% contribution to the
state.
(b) Particle NTO 56b from state 44.
Isovalue 0.015, 61% contribution to the
state.
(c) Hole NTO 16a from state 44.
Isovalue 0.005, 31% contribution to the
state.
(d) Particle NTO 60a from state 44.
Isovalue 0.015, 31% contribution to the
state.
Figure 64: NTOs for state 44 of the twisted quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon transitions.
All particle NTOs have π-system resemblance, which is expected as the lower un-
occupied part of the system. Particle NTO 56b from state 44 has a little d-orbital
character as well.
For the flat structure, the second peak consists of several states. The NTOs for states
8 and 52 can be seen below.
71
==PAGE:73==
(a) Hole NTO 16a from state 8. Isovalue
0.005, 25% contribution to the state.
(b) Particle NTO 60a from state 8.
Isovalue 0.015, 25% contribution to the
state.
(c) Hole NTO 15a from state 8. Isovalue
0.005, 23% contribution to the state.
(d) Particle NTO 61a from state 8.
Isovalue 0.015, 23% contribution to the
state.
(e) Hole NTO 16b from state 8. Isovalue
0.005, 23% contribution to the state.
(f) Particle NTO 56b from state 8.
Isovalue 0.015, 23% contribution to the
state.
(g) Hole NTO 15b from state 8. Isovalue
0.005, 22% contribution to the state.
(h) Particle NTO 57b from state 8.
Isovalue 0.015, 22% contribution to the
state.
Figure 65: NTOs for state 8 of the flat quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– carbon transitions.
72
==PAGE:74==
(a) Hole NTO 16a from state 52.
Isovalue 0.005, 19% contribution to the
state.
(b) Particle NTO 60a from state 52.
Isovalue 0.015, 19% contribution to the
state.
(c) Hole NTO 16b from state 52.
Isovalue 0.005, 16% contribution to the
state.
(d) Particle NTO 56b from state 52.
Isovalue 0.015, 16% contribution to the
state.
(e) Hole NTO 15a from state 52.
Isovalue 0.005, 14% contribution to the
state.
(f) Particle NTO 61a from state 52.
Isovalue 0.015, 14% contribution to the
state.
(g) Hole NTO 15b from state 52.
Isovalue 0.005, 14% contribution to the
state.
(h) Particle NTO 57b from state 52.
Isovalue 0.015, 14% contribution to the
state.
73
==PAGE:75==
(i) Hole NTO 14a from state 52.
Isovalue 0.005, 13% contribution to the
state.
(j) Particle NTO 62a from state 52.
Isovalue 0.015, 13% contribution to the
state.
Figure 66: NTOs for state 52 of the flat quintet [Fe(ox)2]2– carbon transitions.
For state 8 all of the particle NTOs are π∗-systems. for state 52 some of the particle
NTOs are π-systems as well, but one is a much larger ’split blob’. This is likely from
delocalization of multiple orbitals.
In conclusion, the geometries influence the mixing of the orbitals and as such the
resulting symmetries. For the flat structure more transitions are allowed but with less
intensity. The receiving orbitals vary, based on the NTO analysis, but the resulting
broadened spectra are in agreement. The resulting experimental will likely be identical.
Iron transitions
With ORCA 5.0.4 the spectra was calculated for both the flat and twisted geometry,
see appendix for the 5.0.2 spectra. The results can be seen in Fig. 67.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Twisted structure/80 excited states.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Flat structure/80 excited states.
Figure 67: Spectra for the quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– iron calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
74
==PAGE:76==
To approximate the ionization threshold, a bath orbital was included in a calculation.
This gave the indication of ionization threshold of 6970.1 eV for the twisted structure
and 6970.6 for the flat structure. Like for the singlet complex, the amount of excited
states included before the threshold is unrelated to the 3D structure. For the singlet
this was 8, while for the quintet below it is 16. The difference is due to the singly
occupied orbitals available for low energy excitations. The results can be seen in
Fig. 68.
6958
6960
6962
6964
6966
6968
6970
6972
6974
Photon energy (eV)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) Twisted structure/18 excited states.
6958
6960
6962
6964
6966
6968
6970
6972
6974
Photon energy (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Flat structure/18 excited states.
Figure 68: Spectra for the quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– iron calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
While the spectra for the two geometries look different, the transitions are generally
in the same positions, even if the intensities differ. Transitions in the beginning of the
spectra are more intense for the twisted structure, while the latter are more intense
for the flat.
The NTOs for dominating transitions were analyzed and visualized. Selected states
for the twisted structure, state 6 and 12, can be seen in figures 69 and 70.
75
==PAGE:77==
(a) Hole NTO 0a from state 6. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 60a from state 6.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 69: NTOs for state 6 of the twisted quintet [Fe(ox)2]2– iron transitions.
(a) Hole NTO 0b from state 12. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 56b from state 12.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 70: NTOs for state 12 of the twisted quintet [Fe(ox)2]2– iron transitions.
The particle NTO for state 6 is a π∗-system. For state 12 however, a more de-localized
orbital is shown. This NTO was also found in the carbon transitions, showing consis-
tency in the treatment of the transitions and the system orbitals.
The NTOs of states 7 and 12 can be seen below in figures 71 and 72.
76
==PAGE:78==
(a) Hole NTO 0a from state 7. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 60a from state 7.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 71: NTOs for state 7 of the flat quintet [Fe(ox)2]2– iron transitions.
(a) Hole NTO 0b from state 12. Isovalue
0.00005.
(b) Particle NTO 56b from state 12.
Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 72: NTOs for state 12 of the flat quintet [Fe(ox)2]2– iron transitions.
Like for the twisted structure, the particle NTOs respectively resemble a π∗-system
and the more de-localized orbital.
4.4
The LMCT complex
The ligand-to-metal charge transfer state is an excited state, where the electron
transfer of the reaction has already been initiated. However, the exact structure of the
state is discussed. Ogi et al.10 concluded that an electron from the oxalate σ-bond
is excited to a singly occupied 3d-orbital. Tran et al.11 has optimized the LMCT
state, using either TD-DFT/B3LYP or SS-CASSCF(7e,6o), arriving at two different
77
==PAGE:79==
structures. This eliminates the need for a valence excited state geometry optimization,
and calculations can be done directly on the given geometries. The structures can be
seen in Fig. 73.
(a) The LMCT structure when optimized
using TD-DFT/B3LYP.
(b) The LMCT structure when
optimized using SS-CASSCF(7e,6o).
Figure 73: Possible structures of the LMCT State.
As it can be seen, the major difference between the two is the connectivity of one
oxalate with an elongated bond to the iron atom. In the DFT structure both oxygens
are connected with longer bonds for one of the oxalates, such that whether the bond
is there or not depends on the visualization program settings. Meanwhile in the
CAS structure, only one oxygen is connected, while other Fe-O bond length remains
relatively unchanged.
One major point about the complex is its spin state. The spin state for iron is s=2,
but the spin state for the entire complex is s=2.5. However, in ORCA it is not possible
to specify the spin state of individual atoms and only for the entire molecule. The
orbitals involved in the valence excitation were coded manually to specify this.
First, the spectra for the ground state electronic configurations were found with
ORCA, for comparison with the excited state spectra. This is also done in order to
ensure the converged state is actually the excited state, and not the ground state.
Afterwards calculations were attempted on the LMCT electronic state.
78
==PAGE:80==
Carbon transitions
XAS calculations were initially done on the TD-DFT structure. First comparative
calculations on the ground state was performed. As the work on the complex began,
localized orbitals were still being used. Results can be seen below in Fig. 74.
266
268
270
272
274
276
278
280
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
Figure 74: DFT-optimized, LMCT complex carbon K-edge spectra calculated for 160
excited states with localized orbitals at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
Since the CAS structure is different, it was decided to do the same calculations for
this geometry. It is unknown if any of them resemble the ’real’ structure. The resulting
spectra can be seen below.
266
268
270
272
274
276
278
280
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
Figure 75: CAS-optimized, LMCT complex carbon K-edge spectra calculated for 160
excited states with localized orbitals at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
79
==PAGE:81==
The two spectra are clearly different, which was expected as the two structures are
different as well. As it was decided to switch to the CAM-B3LYP functional and a
pcSseg-2 basis set, the spectra was updated, still with the use of localized orbitals.
Results can be seen in Fig. 76.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) DFT-optimized structure.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) CAS-optimized structure.
Figure 76: Spectra for the updated LMCT complex carbon calculations, with localized
orbitals at the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
The two spectra are still drastically different. It was discovered that localized orbitals
should not be used, as the calculations are not symmetry specified. The calculations
without localized orbitals were performed with ORCA 5.0.4, and the spectra can be
seen below.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) DFT-optimized structure.
272
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) CAS-optimized structure.
Figure 77: Spectra for the LMCT complex carbon K-edge calculations for 160 excited
states at the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
The spectrum for the DFT optimized structure closely resemble that of the [Fe(III)(ox)3]3–
complex, which is expected as the structures are close to identical. The last peak is
less distinguished, and the peaks are now a combination of several transitions. The
80
==PAGE:82==
CAS optimized structure has a broken bond, and the resulting spectra therefore differ.
The transitions making up the second peak are now more spread out, resulting in a
wider peak with less intensity.
The excited state calculations were performed in ORCA 6.0.0, employing the ΔSCF
module. Unfortunately none of the attempted calculations converged. The geome-
tries have previously been optimized by Tran et al, but as the wave functions do
not converge, the real geometries might be different. The time limit of this thesis
prevented me from exploring the reason further. Based on the preliminary findings,
experimental data could reflect the exact structure.
Iron transitions
For the iron transitions, ground state spectra were once again completed for compari-
son, for 80 excited states for both the DFT- and CAS-optimized structures. They
can be seen in Fig. 78.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) DFT-optimized structure/80 excited
states.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) CAS-optimized structure/80 excited
states.
Figure 78: Spectra for the LMCT complex iron K-edge calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
The symmetry of the electronic structure of the complex is now less than that of
the [Fe(ox)3]3– complex. For the DFT optimized structure the only difference is the
bond elongation, while the symmetry is completely broken for the CAS optimized
structure. The calculations on the excited state did not converge, and is something
that should be further explored.
81
==PAGE:83==
4.5
XES calculations
XES calculations were performed on the same structures as the XAS calculations, with
the same settings with DFT instead of TD-DFT, apart from the explicit inclusion of
spin-orbit coupling. For each compound, the transitions corresponding to the Kα/Kβ-
edges were determined and isolated for analysis, which was done with a broadening
of 1 eV. Test calculations were performed on the [Fe(III)(CN)6]3– (Oh) complex
mentioned previously, in an attempt to reproduce previous results. This was done in
order to gain experience with the method and to investigate the orbitals involved in
valence to core XES. Spectra for the LMCT complexes were not simulated due to the
convergence issues.
4.5.1
[Fe(III)(CN)6]3–
For the calculations on the cyanide complex, results from Lee et al.33 and Zhang et
al.52 were considered for comparison. Lee et al. published experimental Kβ-edges for
a range of iron complexes.
The XES spectra consist of two parts: The “main line” 3p-orbital transitions at
lower energy, and the so-called valence-to-core (VtC) region at higher energy. The
valence-to-core region consists of 3d-orbital and ligand binding orbital transitions.
Experimental spectra for the two regions, as well as results from calculations can be
seen in Fig. 79.
Figure 79: A+B: Experimental XES data for several iron complexes. C: Calculated valence-
to-core region at BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,N) level. Figure modified from Ref. 33.
In the figure, the main line builds before the peak, while the valence-to-core region
has two peaks with a spacing of around 5 eV. The calculations of Lee et al.33 are
82
==PAGE:84==
similar, and have a shift of 182.5 eV. In my attempt to reproduce data, the protocol
developed by Lee et al. was employed.33 The transitions were applied a gaussian
broadening of 1.5 eV. Results for the main line and the valence-to-core region can be
seen in Fig. 80.
6870
6872
6874
6876
6878
6880
6882
6884
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Intensity x10
6 (arb. units)
(a) Main line spectra.
6915.0 6917.5 6920.0 6922.5 6925.0 6927.5 6930.0 6932.5 6935.0
Photon energy (eV)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) Valence-to-core spectrum.
Figure
80:
Kβ-edge
of
the
[Fe(III)(CN)6]3–
XES
calculations
at
BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,N) level.
The difference between the two regions in the experimental spectra is around 50 eV,
which matches with my calculations. The peak separation of around 5 eV in the VtC
band has also been reproduced, and the difference in the spectral shape is likely
because it is experimental data and not broadening by an applied function. The shift
of 182.5 eV by Lee et al. has also been replicated.
The main peak has not been reproduced with this protocol, as it has a tail instead. A
different protocol might have given more accurate results.
Zhang et al.52 simulated XES spectra for several iron complexes, and compared them
with experimental data. Their results for [Fe(III)(CN)6]3– can be seen in Fig. 81.
83
==PAGE:85==
Figure 81: Simulated and experimental data for [Fe(III)(CN)6]3–. Figure taken from Ref.
52.
Their simulations only include the VtC region, with around 4 eV between the two
peaks. The TD-DFT calculations were done applying the B3LYP functional, and a
mix of basis sets. The DFT protocol I applied included the B3LYP functional and a
pcSseg-2 basis set. A Lorentzian broadening of 1.5 eV was applied. Results can be
seen in Fig. 82.
6945
6950
6955
6960
6965
6970
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
Figure
82:
Simulated
data
for
the
[Fe(III)(CN)6]3–
Kβ-edge
at
the
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,N) level.
84
==PAGE:86==
The two peaks of the valence-to-core region are reproduced, with the transitions of
the spectrum being in agreement.
As previous results as well as experimental data, are in agreement with my simulations,
the DFT method in ORCA can be applied at different levels of theory.
4.5.2
[Fe(III)(ox)3]3–
The Kα-edge of [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– emits the least amount of energy for the compound,
as the 2s and 2p orbitals of iron are the closest in energy to the 1s orbital. The
resulting spectra can be seen in Fig. 83.
6250
6255
6260
6265
6270
6275
6280
Photon energy (eV)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Intensity x10
6 (arb. units)
Figure
83:
Kα-edge
of
the
[Fe(III)(ox)3]3–
XES
calculations
at
the
CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
For the 2s transitions no peaks can be seen, as the transitions have no intensity. The
2p transitions result in 2 distinct peaks, separated by 20 eV. The intensity mostly
stems from the dipole transitions, and the intensity is accordingly high.
The Fe(III) oxalate has a multiplicity of 6, which influences the 3d-orbitals in particular,
with two being doubly occupied and three singly occupied. Symmetry of the initial
state should therefore be highly reflected in the Kβ-edge. The spectra can be seen in
Fig. 84.
85
==PAGE:87==
6890
6895
6900
6905
6910
6915
6920
6925
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Intensity x10
6 (arb. units)
(a) 3p contributions to the Kβ-edge.
6940
6945
6950
6955
6960
6965
6970
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
(b) Valence-to-core section of the
Kβ-edge.
Figure
84:
Kβ-edge
of
the
[Fe(III)(ox)3]3–
XES
calculations
at
the
CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
Like for the Kα-edge, the 3p orbitals gives two peaks, here separated by around
5 eV. The intensity is high, as the dipole transitions dominate. For the ligand and
3d contributions, the intensity of the transitions are more varied. As mentioned, the
symmetry of the states differ, and which electron is involved highly influences whether
dipole and quadrupole transitions are allowed.
4.5.3
[Fe(II)(ox)2]2– multiplicity 1
The K-edge has been calculated for both the twisted and flat version of [Fe(II)(ox)2]2–
in spin-state s=0. The Kα-edges can be seen in Fig. 85.
6250
6255
6260
6265
6270
6275
6280
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Intensity x10
7 (arb. units)
(a) Kα-edge of the twisted structure.
6250
6255
6260
6265
6270
6275
6280
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Intensity x10
7 (arb. units)
(b) Kα-edge of the flat structure.
Figure 85: Kα-edges of the singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– XES calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
The 2s transitions are again without intensity. The 2p transitions are split by 20 eV,
indicating that the 2p orbitals are not degenerate due to spin-orbit effects. We see
86
==PAGE:88==
more transitions with intensity for the flat compound, indicating that the 3D geometry
influences the mixing of the orbitals.
The compound is a closed shell complex, which means that the 3d-transitions of the
Kβ-edge should be more structured and similar to each other. The results can be seen
below.
6900
6902
6904
6906
6908
6910
6912
6914
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Intensity x10
6 (arb. units)
(a) 3p contributions to the Kβ-edge.
6930
6935
6940
6945
6950
6955
6960
6965
6970
Photon energy (eV)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
(b) Valence-to-core contributions to the
Kβ-edge.
Figure 86: Kβ-edge of the twisted singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– XES calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
6900
6902
6904
6906
6908
6910
6912
6914
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Intensity x10
6 (arb. units)
(a) 3p contributions to the Kβ-edge.
6930
6935
6940
6945
6950
6955
6960
6965
6970
Photon energy (eV)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
(b) Valence-to-Core contributions to the
Kβ-edge.
Figure 87: Kβ-edge of the flat singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– XES calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
The 3p transitions are intense, but specific transitions vary between the two geometries,
again showing that the 3D structure influences the increased orbital mixing included
by the spin-orbit effect. The ligand and 3d-transitions vary in intensity depending on
the electron origin, but are in agreement between the two complexes.
87
==PAGE:89==
4.5.4
[Fe(II)(ox)2]2– multiplicity 5
For the Fe(II) compound with spin state s=2, the calculations have also been performed
on both the twisted and flat geometry. The Kα-edges can be seen below.
6250
6255
6260
6265
6270
6275
6280
6285
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Intensity x10
7 (arb. units)
(a) Kα-edge of the twisted structure.
6250
6255
6260
6265
6270
6275
6280
6285
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Intensity x10
7 (arb. units)
(b) Kα-edge of the flat structure.
Figure 88: Kα-edges of the quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– XES calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
The 2s transitions are again without intensities. The 2p transitions are however
intense, and once again separated by 20 eV, showing that mixing of the orbitals occur.
For the Kβ-edge, the singly occupied 3d-orbitals should influence the spectra, as the
symmetry greatly impacts the transition intensities. The Kβ-edges can be seen in
figures 89 and 90.
6895
6900
6905
6910
6915
6920
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Intensity x10
6 (arb. units)
(a) 3p contributions to the Kβ-edge.
6935
6940
6945
6950
6955
6960
6965
6970
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
(b) Valence-to-Core contributions to the
Kβ-edge.
Figure 89: Kβ-edge of the twisted quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– XES calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
88
==PAGE:90==
6895
6900
6905
6910
6915
6920
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Intensity x10
6 (arb. units)
(a) 3p contributions to the Kβ-edge.
6935
6940
6945
6950
6955
6960
6965
6970
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
(b) Valence-to-Core contributions to the
Kβ-edge.
Figure 90: Kβ-edge of the flat quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2– XES calculations at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
For the 3p contributions, they are separated like the 2p, however only 5 eV. The
intensity of the ligand and 3d-transitions varies, but are in agreement.
5
Conclusion
Ferrioxalate is an important model system for the photophysics of electron transfer in
iron compounds and a promising photocatalyst applied in wastewater treatment. A
complete description of its photocycle, in particular in the early times, is still debated.
In particular, the iron spin state in the initial photoreduced species and the subsequent
intermediates is unknown. The degree of the C-C bond weakening and its dynamics
with respect to the Fe-O bond elongation and finally CO2 release are also still to be
experimentally determined. These will be addressed via simultaneous ultrafast Fe XAS,
Kα/Kβ/VtC XES, and X-ray Raman experiment (XRS) carried out in the spring 2024.
To support the interpretation of the experimental measurements, this master thesis
focused on the definition and verification of reliable simulation protocols of the rele-
vant X-ray spectroscopic signatures, including XAS spectra at the Carbon K-edge.
First, a computational protocol for XAS of iron complexed proposed by DeBeer
et al.12 was applied on a series of already investigated systems, in an attempt to
reproduce the results of DeBeer et al.12
These attempts were unsuccessful, despite every effort to do so. I was unable to
reproduce the shift, as well as the relative intensities. Crystal structures were investi-
89
==PAGE:91==
gated and a relativistic method was applied in order to determine the cause of the
differences. In the end, the differences are theorized to be due to an update of the
functional in ORCA, as well as unreported scaling. Nonetheless, reasonable agreement
with experimental data obtained, to the extend of the experimental resolution.
Next, XAS spectra for reactant and products of the photo-catalytic reaction were
simulated. The protocol was developed upon, in order to better replicate experimental
data. The experimental data for carbon transitions of [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– was replicated,
and spectra for [Fe(III)(ox)2]2– were simulated with the same protocol. These spec-
tra were also in agreement with experimental results. For the iron transitions no
experimental data were available for comparison, but the protocol was developed
and the iron spectra simulated, including a guess for the ionization threshold. The
characteristics of both carbon and iron transitions were visualized as a part of the
analysis.
The experimental spectra were recorded as the photo-catalytic reaction took place.
This means that the data from the different complexes are recorded on top of each other.
Based on my findings, the carbon spectrum from the starting reactant [Fe(III)(ox)3]3–
is hard to distinguish from the end product, [Fe(III)(ox)2]2–. Both consist of two
peaks, with the second peak being lower in intensity. The only difference is the spacing
between the two peaks. For [Fe(III)(ox)3]3– the peaks are around 4.5 eV apart, while
they are respectively 4 eV and 4.5 eV apart for the singlet and quintet [Fe(III)(ox)2]2–
complexes. Whether or not the complexes will be distinguishable might be dependent
on the resolution of the instrument and experimental setup.
The iron transition spectra are completely different. The oxidation state, spin state
and symmetry point group is clearly visible from the spectra. However, the protocol
is not validated as no detailed experimental spectra was available for comparison.
Based on my findings, which of the species have been measured upon should be clear,
and information about the carbon excitations can therefore be extracted.
The same course of action was undertaken for the XES calculations. First, the DFT
results of Lee and coworkers33 were reproduced on a test system, within the resolution
of the apparent difference in broadening functions. Additionally, their experimental
data was partially matched. The TD-DFT results of Zhang et al.52 were also repro-
duced with DFT, despite the application of different basis sets. XES spectra of the
iron oxalate species were simulated, including spin-orbit effects. For the XES spectra,
90
==PAGE:92==
the results are more easily differentiated, by the intensity and widths of the peaks.
[Fe(III)(ox)3]3– has a broader, intense valence-to-core absorption range, and can be
isolated based on this. The [Fe(III)(ox)2]2– complexes are harder to distinguish from
each other, but the intensity could indicate the difference between the singlet and
quintet.
XAS calculations on the MLCT states were initiated, and the possible structures and
electronic configurations were studied. Ground state spectra (at the MLCT excited
state geometry) were simulated to compare with the excited state spectra, to ensure
the SCF procedure did not converge at the ground state. Unfortunately, I was unable
to complete calculations on the MLCT state as the calculations did not converge. As
the symmetry of the electronic state change with the valence excitation, it is hard
to come to any conclusions as to how the spectra would look like. As such, I am
unable to provide further insight into how the reaction progresses. The MLCT state
should be investigated further in a separate project, in order to achieve insight into
the progression of the reaction.
91
==PAGE:93==
6
Bibliography
[1] Sjulstok, E.; Olsen, J. M. H.; Solov’yov, I. A. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 18446.
[2] Catalyst. https://www.britannica.com/science/catalyst, Visited 7/8-24.
[3] Selvi, K. T.; Sagadevan, S. In Metal Oxides for Optoelectronics and Optics-Based
Medical Applications; Sagadevan, S., Podder, J., Mohammad, F., Eds.; Metal
Oxides; Elsevier, 2022; pp 33–57.
[4] Brédas, J.-L.; Sargent, E. H.; Scholes, G. D. Nat. Mat. 2017, 16, 35–44.
[5] Longetti, L.; Barillot, T.; Puppin, M.; Ojeda, J.; Poletto, L.; van Mourik, F.;
Arrell, C.; Chergui, M. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2021, 23, 25308–25316.
[6] Twilton, J.; Le, C.; Zhang, P.; Shaw, M. H.; Evans, R. W.; MacMillan, D. W.
Nat. Rev. Chem. 2017, 1, 0052.
[7] Reek, J. N. H.; de Bruin, B.; Pullen, S.; Mooibroek, T. J.; Kluwer, A. M.;
Caumes, X. Chem. Rev. 2022, 122, 12308–12369.
[8] Straub, S.; Brünker, P.; Lindner, J.; Vöhringer, P. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2018, 20, 21390–21403.
[9] Li, X.; Hou, M.; Fu, Y.; Wang, L.; Wang, Y.; Lin, D.; Li, Q.; Hu, D.; Wang, Z.
Chi. Chem. Lett. 2023, 34, 107752.
[10] Ogi, Y.; Obara, Y.; Katayama, T.; Suzuki, Y.-I.; Liu, S.; Bartlett, N.-M.; Kura-
hashi, N.; Karashima, S.; Togashi, T.; Inubushi, Y., et al. Struct. Dyn. 2015,
2.
[11] Tran, L. N.; Neuscamman, E. J Phys. Chem. Lett. 2023, 14, 7454–7460.
[12] DeBeer George, S.; Petrenko, T.; Neese, F. J Phys. Chem. A 2008, 112, 12936–
12943.
[13] Chu, S.; Hurst, G. S.; Graybeal, J. D.; Stoner, J. O. Spectroscopy. https:
//www.britannica.com/science/spectroscopy, Accessed 23 July 2024.
[14] Electromagnetic Spectrum 101: X-Rays. https://gamma-sci.com/2021/10/13/
electromagnetic-spectrum-101-x-rays/, Visited 8/8-24.
92
==PAGE:94==
[15] Nag, N.; Sasidharan, S.; Saudagar, P.; Tripathi, T. In Advanced Spectroscopic
Methods to Study Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics; Saudagar, P., Tri-
pathi, T., Eds.; Academic Press, 2023; pp 1–35.
[16] Yano, J.; Yachandra, V. K. Photosynth. Res. 2009, 102, 241–254.
[17] de Groot, F. Chem. Rev. 2001, 101, 1779–1808.
[18] Bernadotte, S.; Atkins, A. J.; Jacob, C. R. J Chem. Phy. 2012, 137, 204106.
[19] de Groot, F.; Kotani, A. Core Level Spectroscopy of Solids; CRC Press, 2008.
[20] Pedersen, J. Electron Transfer in Solution Including Dissipation. M.Sc. thesis,
University of Copenhagen, 2022.
[21] Jensen, F. Introduction to Computational Chemistry; Wiley, 2017.
[22] Reiher, M. Lecture notes for Advanced quantum chemistry, course at ETH
Zürich. Lecture notes are based on the book Relativistic Quantum Chemistry:
The Fundamental Theory of Molecular Science by the same Author.
[23] List, N. H.; Kauczor, J.; Saue, T.; Jensen, H. J. A.; Norman, P. J Chem. Phy.
2015, 142, 244111.
[24] Nyrow, A. Iron containing compounds of the inner Earth: X-ray Raman scattering
from ambient to extreme conditions. Ph.D. thesis, Technischen Universität
Dortmund, 2014.
[25] Tatum, J. Selection rules. Visited 4/8-24.
[26] Atkins, P. Molecular Quantum Mechanics; Oxford university press, 1983.
[27] Šipr, O.; Vackár, J.; Minár, J. J Synchrotron Radiat. 2018, 25, 523–528.
[28] Mathworld,
Gaussian
function.
https://mathworld.wolfram.com/
GaussianFunction.html, Accessed 23/7-24.
[29] Kasper, J. M.; Li, X. J Comp. Chem. 2020, 41, 1557–1563.
[30] Martin, R. L. J Chem. Phy. 2003, 118, 4775–4777.
[31] Krylov, A. I. J Chem. Phy. 2020, 153.
93
==PAGE:95==
[32] Herbert, J. M. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2024, 26, 3755–3794.
[33] Lee, N.; Petrenko, T.; Bergmann, U.; Neese, F.; DeBeer, S. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 2010, 132, 9715–9727.
[34] Frisch, M. J. et al. Gaussian˜16 Revision C.01. 2016; Gaussian Inc. Wallingford
CT.
[35] Perdew, J. P. Phys. Rev. B 1986, 33, 8822–8824.
[36] Schäfer, A.; Huber, C.; Ahlrichs, R. J Chem. Phy. 1994, 100, 5829–5835.
[37] Neese, F.; Wennmohs, F.; Becker, U.; Riplinger, C. J Chem. Phy. 2020, 152.
[38] Neese, F. Inorganica Chim. Acta. 2002, 337, 181–192.
[39] Stahn, M.; Ehlert, S.; Grimme, S. J. Phys. Chem. A 2023, 127, 7036–7043,
PMID: 37567769.
[40] D Hanwell, M.; E Curtis, D.; C Lonie, D.; Vandermeersch, T.; Zurek, E.; R Hutchi-
son, G. J. Cheminform. 2012, 4.
[41] Becke, A. D. Phys. Rev. A 1988, 38, 3098–3100.
[42] Yanai, T.; Tew, D. P.; Handy, N. C. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 393, 51–57.
[43] Jensen, F. J Chem. Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 132–138.
[44] Fouda, A. E.; Besley, N. A. Theor. Chem. Acc. 2018, 137, 6.
[45] Van Rossum, G.; Drake, F. L. Python 3 Reference Manual; CreateSpace: Scotts
Valley, CA, 2009.
[46] Westre, T. E.; Kennepohl, P.; DeWitt, J. G.; Hedman, B.; Hodgson, K. O.;
Solomon, E. I. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1997, 119, 6297–6314.
[47] Bagus, P. S.; Nelin, C. J.; Brundle, C. R.; Crist, B. V.; Lahiri, N.; Rosso, K. M.
J Chem. Phy. 2021, 154.
[48] Smith, D. A.; Heeg, M. J.; Heineman, W. R.; Elder, R. C. J Am. Chem. Soc.
1984, 106, 3053–3054.
94
==PAGE:96==
[49] Overgaard, J.; Svendsen, H.; Chevalier, M. A.; Iversen, B. B. Acta. Crystallogr.
E 2005, 61, m268–m270.
[50] https://uu.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:898659/FULLTEXT01.pdf,
14/3-24.
[51] Lima, F. Unpublished experimental data obtained at XFEL.
[52] Zhang, Y.; Mukamel, S.; Khalil, M.; Govind, N. J Chem. Theory Comput. 2015,
11, 5804–5809.
[53] Olsen, J. M. H. et al. J. Chem. Phy. 2020, 152.
95
==PAGE:97==
7
Appendix
7.1
Full spectra for the iron cyanide compounds
6928
6930
6932
6934
6936
6938
Photon energy (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Figure 91: All calculated transitions at the Fe K-edge of [Fe(III)(CN)6]3– for 30 excited
states at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
6928
6930
6932
6934
6936
6938
Photon energy (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Figure 92: All calculated transitions at the Fe K-edge of [Fe(II)(CN)6]4– for 30 excited
states at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
96
==PAGE:98==
7052
7054
7056
7058
7060
7062
Photon energy (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Figure 93: All calculated transitions at the Fe K-edge of [Fe(III)(CN)6]3– for 30 excited
states with ZORA at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
6928
6930
6932
6934
6936
Photon energy (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Intensity x10
3 (arb. units)
Figure 94: All calculated transitions at the Fe K-edge of the crystal structure of
[Fe(III)(CN)6]3– for 20 excited states at the BP86/CP(PPP)(Fe)/TZVP(C,O) level.
97
==PAGE:99==
7.2
Spectra without the Tamm-Dancoff approximation
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
Figure 95: Spectra from calculation of the C K-edge on [Fe(III)(Ox)3]3– at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level without TDA.
6960.0 6962.5 6965.0 6967.5 6970.0 6972.5 6975.0 6977.5 6980.0
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
Figure 96: Spectra from calculation of the Fe K-edge on [Fe(III)(Ox)3]3– at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level without TDA.
98
==PAGE:100==
7.3
Spectra from ORCA 5.0.2 calculations
[Fe(III)(ox)3]3–
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 160 excited states.
274
276
278
280
282
284
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 100 excited states.
99
==PAGE:101==
274
276
278
280
282
284
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(c) 80 excited states.
Figure 97: Spectra from calculation of the C K-edge on [Fe(III)(Ox)3]3– at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
100
==PAGE:102==
6960.0 6962.5 6965.0 6967.5 6970.0 6972.5 6975.0 6977.5 6980.0
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 80 excited states.
6960.0 6962.5 6965.0 6967.5 6970.0 6972.5 6975.0 6977.5 6980.0
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 50 excited states.
Figure 98: Spectra from calculation of the Fe K-edge on [Fe(III)(Ox)3]3– at the CAM-
B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
101
==PAGE:103==
Singlet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2–
275.0
277.5
280.0
282.5
285.0
287.5
290.0
292.5
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 160 excited states.
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 80 excited states.
102
==PAGE:104==
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(c) 55 excited states.
Figure 99: Spectra from calculation of the C K-edge on twisted singlet [Fe(Ox)2]2– at the
CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
103
==PAGE:105==
275.0
277.5
280.0
282.5
285.0
287.5
290.0
292.5
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 160 excited states.
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 80 excited states.
104
==PAGE:106==
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(c) 55 excited states.
Figure 100: Spectra from calculation of the C K-edge on flat singlet [Fe(Ox)2]2– at the
CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
105
==PAGE:107==
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
6985
6990
6995
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 80 excited states.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 50 excited states.
Figure 101: Spectra from calculation of the Fe K-edge on twisted singlet [Fe(Ox)2]2– at
the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
106
==PAGE:108==
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
6985
6990
6995
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 80 excited states.
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 50 excited states.
Figure 102: Spectra from calculation of the Fe K-edge on flat singlet [Fe(Ox)2]2– at the
CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
107
==PAGE:109==
Quintet [Fe(II)(ox)2]2–
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 160 excited states.
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 100 excited states.
Figure 103: Spectra from calculation of the C K-edge on twisted quintet [Fe(Ox)2]2– at
the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
108
==PAGE:110==
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
288
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 160 excited states.
274
276
278
280
282
284
286
Photon energy (eV)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 100 excited states.
Figure 104: Spectra from calculation of the C K-edge on flat quintet [Fe(Ox)2]2– at the
CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
109
==PAGE:111==
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 80 excited states.
6958
6960
6962
6964
6966
6968
6970
6972
6974
6976
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 50 excited states.
Figure 105: Spectra from calculation of the Fe K-edge on twisted quintet [Fe(Ox)2]2– at
the CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
110
==PAGE:112==
6960
6965
6970
6975
6980
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(a) 80 excited states.
6958
6960
6962
6964
6966
6968
6970
6972
6974
6976
Photon energy (eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Intensity x10
4 (arb. units)
(b) 50 excited states.
Figure 106: Spectra from calculation of the Fe K-edge on flat quintet [Fe(Ox)2]2– at the
CAM-B3LYP/CP(PPP)(Fe)/pcSseg-2(C,O) level.
7.4
NTO validation
Acrolein is a well-researched compound, and the natural transition orbitals for the
key transitions are well pictured. They are investigated in article Ref. 53 with CC
theory and visualized below.
111
==PAGE:113==
(a) Particle and hole NTO
from first transition.
(b) Particle and hole NTO
from second transition.
(c) Particle and hole NTO
from third transition.
Figure 107: NTOs for acrolein.
These can be compared to the results of our calculations, which are done with DFT,
with the CAM-B3LYP functional and a 6-311++G** basis set. The calculations were
done with ORCA 5.0.4.
(a) Hole NTO 3a from state 1.
Isovalue 0.01.
(b) Particle NTO 15a from state
1. Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 108: NTOs for state 1 for acrolein.
112
==PAGE:114==
(a) Hole NTO 3a from state 2.
Isovalue 0.015.
(b) Particle NTO 15a from state
2. Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 109: NTOs for state 2 for acrolein.
(a) Hole NTO 3a from state 3.
Isovalue 0.015.
(b) Particle NTO 15a from state
3. Isovalue 0.015.
Figure 110: NTOs for state 3 for acrolein.
The numbering of the NTOs are the same, but the hole NTOs are different, likely due
to the chosen isovalue for the plot. The illustrations show that the particle NTOs do
not match exactly, but this can be due to the different methods, with the article being
calculated with CAS. A Q-chem calculation was run to see results from a TD-DFT
calculation, and the results agreed with my ORCA calculations.
113
