==PAGE:1==
Master of Science
Master Thesis
Accelerating computational catalysis with
GenAI and foundational models
Arnar Snæland
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors:
Arghya Bhowmik
Jaysree Pan
Juan Maria García Lastra
DTU Energy
Department of Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Englunds vej
Building 301
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis, we introduce and investigate a system that combines the generative
capabilities of large language models (LLMs) with the material property prediction
power of equivariant graph neural networks (EGNNs). Recent advancements in EG-
NNs have significantly reduced the computational cost of material property predic-
tions, accelerating the search for new catalysts. However, the vastness of the chemical
search space makes unguided exploration ineﬀicient. This is where LLMs play a cru-
cial role, guiding the search by generating stable materials.
Using the Crystal-text-LLM method, we fine-tune a pre-trained LLM to generate
stable materials.
These materials are then converted into distinct slabs following
the Open Catalyst Project workflow, and their catalytic performance for specific
adsorbates is predicted using the state-of-the-art EGNN, EquiformerV2.
We instructed our system to generate catalysts based on a chemical formula pro-
vided as a prompt to the LLM. The system then produced thousands of distinct
catalyst slabs and predicted their performance for specified adsorbates. We analyze
the outcomes and identify several noteworthy catalysts.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
ii
Introduction
1
1
Literature review
3
1.1
Density functional theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Equivariant Graph neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Large language models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Method
7
2.1
Material generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Large language model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1.1
Fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1.2
Prompting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Data processing workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Property prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Graph neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
EquiformerV2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Experiments
13
3.1
Hydrogen adsorption on platinum surface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Hydrogen adsorption on FeCoNiCu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Hydrogen adsorption on PtFeCoNiCu
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Conclusion
19
Conclusion
19
4.1
Improvements / Future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:5==
Contents
iii
Appendices
21
.1
Generated CIF file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Bibliography
25
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Introduction
Catalysis plays a crucial role in various chemical processes, enabling the transfor-
mation of reactants into desired products with enhanced eﬀiciency and selectivity.
Traditional catalyst development relies heavily on empirical experimentation, which
is often time-consuming, labor-intensive, and costly. In recent years, the intersection
of computational techniques with catalysis has offered unprecedented opportunities
for accelerated catalyst design and discovery.
However, these techniques, such as
density functional theory (DFT), incur significant computational costs, making the
unguided exploration of novel catalysts challenging.
Graph neural networks (GNN) have proven to be quite effective in predicting the
quantum mechanical properties of molecules, while being much less compute intensive
than DFT. Bringing the computational costs from hours or days to seconds, or even
fractions of seconds. This makes testing a large number of potential catalysts quite
feasible.
However, given the enormity of the chemical search space, a guided approach is
still needed for catalyst exploration. That is where recent advances in generative AI,
specifically large language models (LLM), can assist us. LLMs have shown great poten-
tial in various chemistry tasks, generation of stable materials being one of them. These
models, despite their potential, occasionally produce ’hallucinations’—responses that
are incorrect or fabricated. Although these hallucinations can negatively affect the
performance of the models by giving wrong results, they can also have a beneficial
side. Sometimes, these incorrect responses can inspire new ideas and perhaps lead
researchers to explore novel areas that they might otherwise have ignored.
In this thesis, we will introduce and explore a system that combines an LLMs
capability to generate valid catalyst structures with the computational eﬀiciency of
GNNs, enabling the automated testing of a large number of potential catalysts.
We will begin with a literature review that offers a concise overview of traditional
approaches in computational catalysis, followed by an analysis of the latest machine
learning (ML) models employed in this area. This review will examine recent devel-
opments in both GNNs and LLMs within the chemical field, focusing particularly on
their applications in catalysis.
After the literature review, we will explore the technologies and methods utilized
in this project. We will begin with an overview of the LLM employed, followed by a
discussion on the OC20 dataset project and how its methods were applied to set up
catalyst systems for simulations. Finally we will examine GNNs and the importance
==PAGE:8==
2
Introduction
of equivariance, ending with a short examination of the EquiformerV2 model, which
was used in our system.
The subsequent section will present the experiments conducted in this project,
along with an analysis of the results.
Finally, the conclusion will summarize the key findings of this work. This sec-
tion will also address potential areas for improvement, offering insights into how the
current system could be enhanced in future work.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Literature review
Computational catalysis has long been a critical field in chemical research, providing
insight into the underlying mechanisms of catalytic reactions and aiding in the design
of more eﬀicient catalysts. Traditional approaches in computational catalysis predom-
inantly rely on quantum mechanical methods. These methods are highly regarded for
their ability to provide accurate electronic structure calculations, which are crucial
for understanding the reactivity and energetics of catalytic systems.
1.1
Density functional theory
Density functional theory (DFT) stands out as the most widely used tool for study-
ing catalysis at the atomic level. DFT enables the calculation of electronic properties,
which are essential for predicting reaction pathways, activation energies, and reaction
intermediates. In heterogeneous catalysis, for instance, DFT is extensively used to
model the interactions between reactant molecules and catalyst surfaces. These sim-
ulations allow researchers to understand how different catalyst surfaces influence the
rate and selectivity of reactions.
Despite its strengths, DFT is not without limitations. The most notable drawback
is its computational cost, particularly for large systems or complex reactions involving
many atoms. The time required for DFT calculations increases exponentially with the
number of atoms in the system, making it impractical for high-throughput screening
of catalysts.
1.2
Machine learning
In recent years, ML models have emerged as a promising alternative for performing
faster-than-DFT calculations. Unlike traditional physics-based methods, which rely
on complex quantum mechanical simulations, these ML models are trained on exten-
sive datasets of calculations done using DFT or other traditional methods. By learn-
ing patterns and relationships from this data, ML models are capable of near-DFT
accuracy, but at a fraction of the computational cost [1]. Where DFT calculations
may take hours or even days for complex systems, ML models can provide results in
seconds or less. This accelerated approach opens the door for high-throughput screen-
==PAGE:10==
4
1 Literature review
ing, where vast libraries of potential catalysts can be explored in a much shorter time
frame.
Furthermore, machine learning models have shown remarkable flexibility and scal-
ability. They can be trained to predict a wide range of properties, including energy
levels, reaction barriers, and inter molecular forces, across diverse chemical systems.
1.2.1
Equivariant Graph neural networks
Equivariant graph neural networks (EGNNs) model 3D atomic systems by encoding
both the features of atoms (like type or charge) and their geometric arrangement in
3D space. They ensure that the learned representations and predictions are equivari-
ant to rotations and translations, which is critical for accurately modeling properties
of molecular or atomic systems like forces, dynamics and energy. This makes EG-
NNs especially useful for applications in materials science, chemistry, and molecular
dynamics, where the symmetries of space play a fundamental role [2].
Some notable examples of these EGNNs are GemNet [3], eSCN [4] and EquiformerV2
[5].
1.3
Large language models
LLMs are increasingly becoming powerful tools across various research domains. Their
capacity to analyze, extract, and comprehend critical information from complex scien-
tific literature positions them as valuable assets in advancing knowledge and innova-
tion. In fields such as chemistry, materials science, and catalysis, where vast amounts
of intricate and highly technical data are produced, LLMs offer the potential to accel-
erate discovery by sifting through and synthesizing existing research more eﬀiciently
than traditional methods.
Despite the broad applicability of LLMs, efforts to fine-tune them specifically for
catalysis research have been relatively limited so far but evaluation of current state
of the art models has shown great potential [6]. Catalysis, being a highly specialized
and multifaceted field, requires models to understand both the fundamental chemistry
and the nuanced mechanisms behind catalytic reactions, including reaction kinetics,
thermodynamics, and material properties. Fine-tuning LLMs for this domain could
significantly enhance their performance, enabling them to provide deeper insights,
predict reaction outcomes, and suggest novel catalytic materials or reaction pathways.
The use of LLMs in catalyst discovery has been actively explored, with various
approaches demonstrating their potential to enhance the research process. For ex-
ample, in [7], an innovative approach incorporating Monte Carlo Tree Search was
applied alongside LLMs, resulting in a significant improvement over traditional chain-
of-thought prompting methods.
Recently, a system called ChemReasoner [8] was introduced, which integrates
LLMs and EGNNs for catalyst discovery. In this approach, the LLM agent generates
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Large language models
5
a hypothesis for a potential catalyst, which is then converted into a 3D atomic graph.
The EGNN subsequently predicts the properties of the proposed catalyst, and the
results are fed back to the LLM, enabling it to refine its next catalyst suggestion
based on the predicted outcomes. This iterative process enhances the LLM’s ability
to propose increasingly effective catalyst candidates.
A recent paper [6] used an LLM for material generation by utilizing the Crystal-
lographic Information File (CIF) format. The authors fine-tuned an LLM on a large
dataset of CIF files, each containing a string representation of a crystal, enabling it to
generate valid structures in the CIF format with a high degree of reliability, despite
the simplicity of the approach. Moreover, since this method leverages a pre-trained
language model, users can prompt the system using straightforward natural language
commands.
==PAGE:12==
6
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Method
Our system is composed of three key components: material generation with a large
language model, a data processing workflow, and the EGNN for property prediction.
The LLM is tasked with generating candidate catalysts for testing, outputting them
as strings which are then converted to the Crystallographic Information File (CIF)
format. The workflow then reads these files, converts the data into a 3D atomic struc-
ture, and incorporates an adsorbate into an adsorbate-system. Finally, the EGNN
evaluates the catalysts’ properties based on this structure. An overview of the system
can be seen in figure 2.1. In this chapter, we will detail each component and explain
the complete workflow, from material generation to property prediction.
Figure 2.1. System overview: The LLM generates a string representation of a bulk material,
which is converted into a 3D atomic structure along with an adsorbate. This model is then
processed by an EGNN for property prediction, and the results are stored in a database.
2.1
Material generation
A crystal structure can be represented by a periodic arrangement of atoms, that can
be extended in all directions to make up the structure. This arrangement is called a
unit cell. A unit cell of a material is defined as a tuple with it’s three side lengths
and angles, along with the atom types and their position within the cell.
==PAGE:14==
8
2 Method
Predicting material properties requires constructing the unit cell, but generating
plausible unit cells that form stable materials is a complex challenge. This is because
the number of atom arrangements that result in stable materials is much smaller than
the number of possible configurations.
2.1.1
Large language model
In the Crystal-text-llm paper [6], they demonstrated that pre-trained large language
models (LLMs) fine-tuned on crystal structures encoded as text can generate stable
material structures with impressive accuracy. They achieved around 90% success in
producing structures that adhered to physical constraints like atomic interactions and
charge balance. By using a pre-trained model, in this case (Llama-2) [9], they were
able to use the model’s flexibility to handle a range of tasks, including conditional
generation, infilling atoms in a partial structure, and unconditional generation. Figure
2.2 shows example output of the LLM along with a visualization of the generated unit
cell. Appendix .1 shows the corresponding generated CIF file.
4.8 4.8 4.8
59 59 59
Ru
0.82 0.80 0.88
Ru
0.32 0.30 0.38
Ti
0.57 0.55 0.63
Ti
0.07 0.05 0.13
CIF file
Figure 2.2. LLM generation: On the left is an example generated string, which is parsed
into a CIF file. On the right is a visualization of the corresponding unit cell
2.1.1.1
Fine-tuning
In this project, we adopted this approach to fine-tune a 7-billion-parameter version
of Llama-2. We fine-tuned the model on the MP-20 dataset, the same dataset used
by [6], which contains over 45,000 materials. Instead of fine-tuning all parameters of
the model we used LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) [10]. LoRA is a method used to fine-
tune pre-trained models eﬀiciently. Instead of updating all the model’s parameters
during fine-tuning (which can be computationally expensive), LoRA introduces small,
low-rank update matrices into the existing architecture. This reduces the number of
trainable parameters significantly, making the fine-tuning process faster and requiring
less memory.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Data processing workflow
9
2.1.1.2
Prompting
Prompting follows the method provided by the Crystal-text-llm authors. Figure 2.1
shows the prompt format. For unconditional generation the instruction prompt can
be left empty.
Below is a description of a bulk material.
<Instruction prompt>
Generate a description of the lengths and angles of the lattice vectors
and then the element type and coordinates for each atom within the lattice:
Table 2.1. Prompt used for LLM. <Instruction prompt>can be set for conditional genera-
tion.
2.2
Data processing workflow
Now that we are able to generate structures in CIF format, the next steps are to
process this data, construct material slabs, and place adsorbates at their respective
adsorption sites. These adsorbate-slab systems can then be relaxed using our EGNN.
To facilitate this process, we use Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) [11], along
with a workflow designed for the Open Catalyst Project [12]. There this workflow was
used to generate low-Miller index slabs of stable materials sourced from the Materials
Project [13].
We start by taking the catalyst prediction from the LLM and generating all sym-
metrically distinct slabs with a Miller index of 2 or lower. All slabs are at least 7 Å
high, 8 Å wide and have a vacuum layer of at least 20 Å in the z-direction. Each
atom in a slab is classified as either a surface atom or a bulk atom. Surface atoms
are defined as those within 2 Ångstroms of the highest atom (along the third unit
cell vector) or atoms that are under-coordinated compared to bulk atoms. For sim-
ulations, all atoms identified as bulk atoms are considered fixed. For each slab, we
choose multiple different adsorption sites and create an adsorbate-slab system by plac-
ing the adsorbate at each selected site. Figure 2.3 shows a high level diagram of the
flow from CIF to adsorbate-slab and figure 2.4 shows a visualization of an example
adsorbate-slab system.
There are three methods for selecting adsorption sites. The first method involves
using Delaunay triangulation of the surface atoms to form a mesh of triangles. A
triangle is randomly selected, and a site is chosen randomly within it, where the
adsorbate’s center of mass is placed. The second method follows the same process,
but the adsorbate is positioned with its binding atom placed on the selected site. The
third method uses Pymatgen’s AdsorbateSiteFinder to identify the most energetically
favorable sites, where the adsorbate is placed with its binding atom on the site.
==PAGE:16==
10
2 Method
CIF file
Bulk object
Slab
Adsorbate
Adsorbate-slab
Slab
Slab
Slab
Slab
Slab
Adsorbate-slab
Figure 2.3. Diagram of data processing: starting with a CIF file, which is read and turned
into a bulk object. Slabs are then created from the bulk and finally an adsorbate is placed on
the slabs to create the adsorbat-slabs that will be sent for relaxation and adsorption energy
prediction
2.3
Property prediction
As mentioned in 1.2, machine learning models can be trained to predict various ma-
terial properties. For the proposed catalysts, our primary focus is on predicting the
adsorption energy and per-atom forces. The force calculations are used during system
relaxation, which is performed using the BFGS (Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno)
optimization implementation in ASE. The adsorption energy of the relaxed structures
is then used to evaluate the expected effectiveness of the proposed catalysts.
2.3.1
Graph neural networks
Graphs are an essential tool for modeling crystal structures, particularly in the context
of graph neural networks (GNNs). In modeling crystal structures, each atom in the
crystal structure is represented as a node, while the bonds or interactions between
these atoms are represented as edges. As mentioned before in 2.1, crystal structures
are periodic, with atoms arranged in a repeating pattern called a unit cell, making
graphs an effective way to capture both the arrangement of atoms within the unit
cell as well as in the whole material.
Graph neural networks take advantage of these graph representations by learning
both local and global features from the atomic structure. For example, in a GNN,
information from each atom (node) and its surrounding neighbors (connected nodes)
is propagated through the network. The spatial relationships between atoms, encoded
in the graph’s edges, allow the GNN to learn how the arrangement of atoms influences
the material’s properties.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Property prediction
11
However, these GNNs typically do not account for the effects of spatial transfor-
mations on the graph. In other words, if you rotate or translate the entire graph in
3D space, a standard GNN would treat this as a completely new input rather than
recognizing it as the same graph in a different orientation.
GNNs are inherently invariant to the node ordering in the graph (i.e., they treat
the graph the same regardless of how the nodes are indexed). However, they are not
inherently sensitive to the geometric orientation of the nodes in 3D space. This can
be a limitation when dealing with systems where the geometry directly influences
properties, such as the energy of a molecule or the structural stability of a crystal
lattice.
Equivariant GNNs, on the other hand, are designed to respect the physical symme-
tries of the problem, such as translations and rotations. A GNN is called equivariant
if applying a transformation to the input (e.g., rotating the 3D coordinates of atoms
in a molecule) results in a corresponding transformation to the output, rather than
changing the output arbitrarily. For example, if you rotate the input structure, the
forces and positions should also rotate in the same way. Additionally, the predicted
energy of the structure should be the same regardless of how the system is rotated or
translated.
2.3.2
EquiformerV2
EquiformerV2 [5] is currently the state-of-the-art machine learning model for predict-
ing material energies and forces on the OC20 dataset. It builds upon the original
Equiformer model [14], which combines an equivariant Transformer architecture with
a novel attention mechanism called equivariant graph attention.
EquiformerV2 improves on this architecture by incorporating a recent technique
for reducing the computational complexity of maintaining equivariance under 3D
rotations [15]. This innovation allows the model to utilize higher-order tensors, sig-
nificantly enhancing its accuracy.
==PAGE:18==
12
2 Method
Adsorbate-slab system
before relaxation
Adsorbate-slab system after
relaxation
Figure 2.4. Example of adsorbate-slab system: Depicts a system containing 36 Platinum
atoms and a single hydrogen atom. On the left the initial state of the system. On the right
is the relaxed system.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Experiments
In this chapter we discuss the experiments we did using our system as well as their
results.
All experiments were conducted using the previously mentioned fine-tuned Llama-
7b model, with a temperature and top-p set to 0.9. Adsorption sites were selected
using Delaunay triangulation by randomly choosing a triangle and a site within it,
where the binding atom of the adsorbate was placed. For each slab, 100 different
adsorption sites were found and an adsorbate-slab created for each one. The BFGS
optimization algorithm from ASE was used to relax the structures, continuing for up
to 100 steps or until the force on all individual atoms was reduced below 0.05 eV/Å
(fmax). Force and energy predictions were made using EquiformerV2 (153M), trained
on the S2EF-All+MD split of the OC20 dataset.
3.1
Hydrogen adsorption on platinum surface
This experiment tests the systems ability to find a good Platinum surface for hydrogen
adsorption.
The instruction prompt used was ”The material is Pt”. The system ran for 7 days,
relaxing just over 44000 adsorbate-slabs. Figure 3.1 shows all adsorbate-slab systems,
sorted by bulk id and adsorption energy. According to the Sabatier principle [16] a
good catalyst should be neither too strong nor too weak. Following that, the slabs
that fall close to 0 in adsorption energy could be good candidates.
The predicted adsorption energy for some bulk materials seems to vary quite a bit.
For example the bulk with ID 12 has energies from -2 eV to over 20 eV. If we take
a closer look at a couple adsorbate-slabs from bulk 12 and compare them in figure
3.2. We can see in the lower energy system that the adsorbate has adsorbed to a Pt
atom and the surface has relaxed. On the other hand the high energy system has the
surface atoms splitting off, explaining the higher energy. Also note that the LLM has
hallucinated and added nitrogen to the bulk material, although it was told that the
material should be platinum.
==PAGE:20==
14
3 Experiments
Figure 3.1. Pt slab with H adsorbate: All adsorbate-slabs sorted by bulk id on the x-axis
and adsorption energy on the y-axis. Note that a few outliers (large positive energy values)
are not shown for clarity.
3.2
Hydrogen adsorption on FeCoNiCu
To test the systems ability to handle more complex structures, we decided to look at
hydrogen adsorption on FeCoNiCu. The instruction prompt used was ”The material
is PtFeCoCuNi”.
With the increase in amount of atoms in the unit cell compared to earlier exper-
iments, the number of different possible slabs goes up drastically. This means our
system takes quite a bit longer to predict properties of all the slabs from a single bulk
material. After running for 7 days the system had relaxed 32292 adsorbate-slabs.
The increased complexity of the slabs also likely results in slower prediction speed.
Figure 3.3 shows the adsorption energy of all adsorbate-slabs, sorted by bulk. The
first three bulks have remarkably similar adsorption energy on all of their adsorbate-
slabs while bulks 4 and 5 have much greater variance. Figure 3.4 shows an example
relaxed adsorbate-slab from bulk 1, its chemical formula is HCo24Cu24Fe24Ni24.
3.3
Hydrogen adsorption on PtFeCoNiCu
Making the chemical formula slightly more complex, we add platinum to the previ-
ously requested formula FeCoNiCu. The instruction prompt used was ”The material
is PtFeCoNiCu”. Again the system ran for 7 days and produced a total of 33799
relaxed adsorbate-slabs. Quite similar to the previous experiment.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Hydrogen adsorption on PtFeCoNiCu
15
0.140 eV
21.484 eV
Figure 3.2.
PtN slabs with H adsorbate: Here the LLM has hallucinated nitrogen into
the generated material. Pictures are of two different relaxed adsorbate-slabs, made from the
same bulk material. They are labeled with their respective adsorption energies.
Figure 3.5 shows all adsorbate-slabs from this experiment, with similar results as
section 3.2. One thing to note is bulk 6 has some adsorbate-slabs with very negative
adsorption energies. Looking at figure 3.6 we can see the lowest energy adsorbate-
slab had an adsorption energy of about -13 eV. Taking a closer look at this specific
adsorbate-slab we see an interesting structure (figure 3.7), called a step surface [17].
==PAGE:22==
16
3 Experiments
Figure 3.3. FeCoNiCu slab with H adsorbate: All slabs sorted by bulk id on the x-axis and
adsorption energy on the y-axis. Quite a bit of variance can be seen on the adsorbate-slabs
of bulks 4 and 5, while all slabs of bulks 1, 2 and 3 are very close in adsorption energy.
-0.394 eV
Figure 3.4. Example relaxed adsorbate-slab system for FeCoNiCu and H. Shown from two
angles. Adsorption energy of -0.394 eV.
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Hydrogen adsorption on PtFeCoNiCu
17
Figure 3.5. FeCoNiCuPt slab with H adsorbate: All adsorbate-slabs sorted by bulk id on
the x-axis and adsorption energy on the y-axis.
Figure 3.6. FeCoNiCuPt slab with H adsorbate: Lowest adsorption energy calculated for
each bulk.
==PAGE:24==
18
3 Experiments
Figure 3.7. Step surface, with an adsorption energy of -12.961 eV. On the left is the original
adsorbate-slab system and on the right is the relaxed system.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
In this thesis, we demonstrated the potential of our system for identifying catalyst
candidates. The system was able to generate and predict the properties of thousands
of potential catalyst surfaces, yielding some intriguing outcomes. The use of an LLM
for material generation introduced occasional hallucinations, which at times led to
the exploration of unconventional ideas. The data processing workflow successfully
transformed simple unit cells into, in some cases, hundreds of different slab configura-
tions. This extensive exploration was made possible by the low computational cost of
the EquiformerV2 model. However, material generation could be further refined to
produce more stable predictions, reducing the time spent computing trajectories for
unstable materials. Training a larger model would likely lead to significant improve-
ments. Another useful enhancement to the current system would be the automatic
selection of the most promising materials, followed by DFT validation of the EGNN
predictions.
4.1
Improvements / Future work
The current workflow sometimes wastes time on unstable materials. Introducing con-
vex hull calculations to assess the stability of generated materials before proceeding
with property predictions could significantly enhance the system’s eﬀiciency. Addi-
tionally, as mentioned earlier, training a larger model would yield substantial improve-
ments to the system, similar to the benefits of convex hull calculations, by reducing
computational resources spent on unstable materials. Finally, exploring alternative
prompting methods could offer valuable insights and further optimize the workflow.
Adding support for testing multiple adsorbates on the same materials would allow
for some interesting comparisons.
Implementing multiprocessing for property predictions could significantly enhance
performance on multi-node, multi-GPU setups, enabling more comprehensive explo-
ration.
==PAGE:26==
20
==PAGE:27==
Appendices
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
Appendix .1 Generated CIF file
23
.1
Generated CIF file
Below is an example of a generated CIF file, this one was created from the generated
text shown in 2.2.
# generated using pymatgen
data_TiRu
_symmetry_space_group_name_H-M
'P 1'
_cell_length_a
4.00000000
_cell_length_b
4.00000000
_cell_length_c
5.20000000
_cell_angle_alpha
90.00000000
_cell_angle_beta
90.00000000
_cell_angle_gamma
119.00000000
_symmetry_Int_Tables_number
1
_chemical_formula_structural
TiRu
_chemical_formula_sum
'Ti2 Ru2'
_cell_volume
72.76835963
_cell_formula_units_Z
2
loop_
_symmetry_equiv_pos_site_id
_symmetry_equiv_pos_as_xyz
1
'x, y, z'
loop_
_atom_site_type_symbol
_atom_site_label
_atom_site_symmetry_multiplicity
_atom_site_fract_x
_atom_site_fract_y
_atom_site_fract_z
_atom_site_occupancy
Ru
Ru0
1
0.76000000
0.71000000
0.72000000
1
Ru
Ru1
1
0.09000000
0.38000000
0.22000000
1
Ti
Ti2
1
0.42000000
0.05000000
0.47000000
1
Ti
Ti3
1
0.42000000
0.05000000
0.97000000
1
==PAGE:30==
24
==PAGE:31==
Bibliography
[1]
B. W. J. Chen, L. Xu, and M. Mavrikakis, “Computational methods in hetero-
geneous catalysis,” Chemical Reviews, vol. 121, 12 2020.
[2]
A. Duval, S. V. Mathis, C. K. Joshi, V. Schmidt, S. Miret, F. D. Malliaros, T. Co-
hen, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and M. Bronstein, “A hitchhiker’s guide to geometric
gnns for 3d atomic systems,” 2024.
[3]
J. Gasteiger, F. Becker, and S. Günnemann, “Gemnet: Universal directional
graph neural networks for molecules,” 2024.
[4]
S. Passaro and C. L. Zitnick, “Reducing so(3) convolutions to so(2) for eﬀicient
equivariant gnns,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, ICML’23, JMLR.org, 2023.
[5]
Y.-L. Liao, B. Wood, A. Das, and T. Smidt, “Equiformerv2: Improved equivari-
ant transformer for scaling to higher-degree representations,” 2024.
[6]
N. Gruver, A. Sriram, A. Madotto, A. G. Wilson, C. L. Zitnick, and Z. Ulissi,
“Fine-tuned language models generate stable inorganic materials as text,” 2024.
[7]
H. W. Sprueill, C. Edwards, M. V. Olarte, U. Sanyal, H. Ji, and S. Choud-
hury, “Monte carlo thought search: Large language model querying for complex
scientific reasoning in catalyst design,” 2023.
[8]
H. W. Sprueill, C. Edwards, K. Agarwal, M. V. Olarte, U. Sanyal, C. Johnston,
H. Liu, H. Ji, and S. Choudhury, “Chemreasoner: Heuristic search over a large
language model’s knowledge space using quantum-chemical feedback,” 2024.
[9]
H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bash-
lykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, D. Bikel, L. Blecher, C. C. Ferrer,
M. Chen, G. Cucurull, D. Esiobu, J. Fernandes, J. Fu, W. Fu, B. Fuller, C. Gao,
V. Goswami, N. Goyal, A. Hartshorn, S. Hosseini, R. Hou, H. Inan, M. Kardas,
V. Kerkez, M. Khabsa, I. Kloumann, A. Korenev, P. S. Koura, M.-A. Lachaux,
T. Lavril, J. Lee, D. Liskovich, Y. Lu, Y. Mao, X. Martinet, T. Mihaylov,
P. Mishra, I. Molybog, Y. Nie, A. Poulton, J. Reizenstein, R. Rungta, K. Sal-
adi, A. Schelten, R. Silva, E. M. Smith, R. Subramanian, X. E. Tan, B. Tang,
R. Taylor, A. Williams, J. X. Kuan, P. Xu, Z. Yan, I. Zarov, Y. Zhang, A. Fan,
==PAGE:32==
26
Bibliography
M. Kambadur, S. Narang, A. Rodriguez, R. Stojnic, S. Edunov, and T. Scialom,
“Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” 2023.
[10] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, and
W. Chen, “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,” 2021.
[11] A. Larsen, J. Mortensen, J. Blomqvist, I. Castelli, R. Christensen, M. Dulak,
J. Friis, M. Groves, B. Hammer, C. Hargus, E. Hermes, P. C. Jennings, P. Jensen,
J. Kermode, J. Kitchin, E. Kolsbjerg, J. Kubal, K. Kaasbjerg, S. Lysgaard,
J. Maronsson, T. Maxson, T. Olsen, L. Pastewka, A. Peterson, C. Rostgaard,
J. Schiøtz, O. Schütt, M. Strange, K. Thygesen, T. Vegge, L. Vilhelmsen, M. Wal-
ter, Z. Zeng, and K. Jacobsen, “The atomic simulation environment - a python
library for working with atoms,” Journal of Physics Condensed Matter, vol. 29,
2017.
[12] L. Chanussot, A. Das, S. Goyal, T. Lavril, M. Shuaibi, M. Riviere, K. Tran,
J. Heras-Domingo, C. Ho, W. Hu, A. Palizhati, A. Sriram, B. Wood, J. Yoon,
D. Parikh, C. L. Zitnick, and Z. Ulissi, “Open catalyst 2020 (oc20) dataset and
community challenges,” ACS Catalysis, vol. 11, p. 6059–6072, May 2021.
[13] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia,
D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, and K. A. Persson, “Commentary: The Materi-
als Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation,”
APL Materials, vol. 1, p. 011002, 07 2013.
[14] Y.-L. Liao and T. Smidt, “Equiformer: Equivariant graph attention transformer
for 3d atomistic graphs,” in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
[15] S. Passaro and C. L. Zitnick, “Reducing so(3) convolutions to so(2) for eﬀicient
equivariant gnns,” 2023.
[16] H. Ooka, J. Huang, and K. S. Exner, “The sabatier principle in electrocatalysis:
Basics, limitations, and extensions,” in Frontiers in Energy Research, 2021.
[17] B. L. M. Hendriksen, M. D. Ackermann, R. van Rijn, D. Stoltz, I. Popa,
O. Balmes, A. Resta, D. Wermeille, R. Felici, S. Ferrer, and J. W. M. Frenken,
“The role of steps in surface catalysis and reaction oscillations,” Nature Chem-
istry, vol. 2, pp. 730–734, Sep 2010.
