==PAGE:1==
Circular economy implications on environmental impact
categories of absolute targets.
Technical University of Denmark
September 15, 2024
Author
Anastasia Katzou, s222567
Supervisors
Professor Tim C. McAloone
Michele Marini
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Author
Anastasia Katzou (S222567)
Project
Master Thesis
Title
Circular economy implications on environmental impact categories of absolute targets.
Supervisors
Professor Tim C. McAloone
Michele Marini
MSc programme
Design and Innovation
ECTS points
30
Submission date
September 15, 2024
==PAGE:4==
Preface
The exponential development of Circular Economy (CE) as an approach to reverse environmental com-
plications caused by linear economy functions toward sustainability goals and structuring the industrial
activity in a way respectful to the planetary capacity. Despite the benefits of CE, there are also impli-
cations affecting negatively several environmental, social, and economic. This project investigates the
environmental trade-offs of CE strategies implemented in the manufacturing sector and highlights the
impact on the environmental categories of land, water, ocean, biodiversity, and climate. The research
confirms the significance of environmental impact due to CE strategies and the necessity to systematize
the facilitation of the early prediction of them. The data collected during research synthesized the input
for the formulation of a tool designed to assist manufacturing companies in the early decision-making
stage of product development to predict potential environmental trade-offs of CE strategies. The pur-
pose is to prevent CE strategies’ environmental consequences and avoid late realizations of unintended
impacts. The designed framework allows the selection of CE strategies according to relevant Life Cycle
(LC) phases for products or the business models for services covering all the development journey from
sourcing to end-of-life (EoL) and cross-phase strategies. Modifications and iterations on the selection
upon the review of the results are encouraged to ensure the evaluation of various options and optimize
the finalized outcome.
Keywords: Circular Economy, CE, Circular Economy Strategies, Environmental Trade-offs, Manufactur-
ing Sector, Environmental Categories
Anastasia Katzou
September 15, 2024
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Tim C, McAlone, and Michele Marini for the
remarkable support and guidance they provided me during the conduction of my Master’s Thesis. Their
valuable experience and expertise constituted a fundamental factor in assisting the flow and development of
this part of my academic journey. Furthermore, I would like especially thank the industry representatives
who contributed to the data collection of my research and shared critical insights for the development of
this study. My heartfelt appreciation goes to my family, friends, and partner for their encouragement,
support, and understanding during the completion of this significant part of my studies.
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
CE
Circular Economy
LC
Life-cycle
DfD
Design for Disassembly
EE
Embodied Energy
EC
Embodied Carbon
SBTN
Science Based Targets Network
GHG
Greenhouse Gass
CLSC
Closed-Loop Supply Chains
CRMs
Critical Materials
V RP
Value Retention Processes
LCA
Life-cycle Assessment
EV
Electric Vehicle
LIB
Lithium-ion Battery
DRM
Design Research Methodology
RC
Research Clarification
DSI
Descriptive Study I
PS
prescriptive Study
DSII
Descriptive Study II
EWI
External Wall Insulation
PSS
Product-service system
RE
Renewable Energy
ETA
Environmental Trade-off Assistant
SMCE
Socio Multi-Criteria Evaluation
MFA
Material Flow Analysis
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Contemporary approach of CE implementation and current environmental needs
. . . . .
1
1.2
Research aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Meanings and Definitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
The global initiative of Science Based Target Network (SBTN) and its requirements.
4
2.1.2
Manufacturing sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Sustainability concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Circular Economy (CE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.5
Understanding the notion of trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
The connection between CE strategies and Environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methodology
12
3.1
Design Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.1
Research clarification(RC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
Descriptive Study I (DS I) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Presrcriptive Study (PS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.4
Descriptive Study II (DS II) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results
21
4.1
Reinvent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Rethink and reconfigure, and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Restore, reduce and avoid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.1
Renewables and environmental trade-offs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.2
Recyclable materials and environmental trade-offs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.3
Secondary sources and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.4
Restorative sourcing and environmental trade-offs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.5
Non-toxic and benign materials and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.6
Lowest suitable grade and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.7
Lean manufacturing and cleaner production and environmental trade-offs . . . . .
29
4.3.8
Product longevity and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.9
Low consumables and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Energy and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Logistics and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Recirculate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6.1
Upgrade and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6.2
Reuse and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:8==
4.6.3
Repair and Maintenance and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.6.4
Refurbish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6.5
Remanufacture and environmental trade-offs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6.6
Repurpose and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6.7
Recycle and environmental trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6.8
Cascade and environmental trade-offs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Environmental trade-off assistant( Proposed decision-making tool)
38
5.1
Purpose and function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Contents and user flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Tools and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion and Research implications
46
6.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Future Perspectives
49
7.1
Proposed plan for the evaluation of Environmental trade-offs assistant . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Proposals for development of the Environmental trade-offs assistant
. . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Conclusions
51
References
53
A Appendix A
59
B Appendix B
63
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Contemporary approach of CE implementation and current environmental needs
The rapid growth of industrial development to meet human needs is one of the main contributors to
the overexploitation of planetary carrying capacities. [1] The traditional linear economy model, ”take,
make, use, dispose”, is jeopardizing the ability of our planet to sustain human activity. [2] Indeed, the
unsustainable cycle of resource extraction and waste generation is already depleting the natural bioca-
pacity and overloading the waste disposal systems. At the same time, high energy consumption has been
normalized. The depletion of environmental resources led to the development of the concept of Circular
Economy(CE) which emerged as a critical need for solving the environmental crisis. The original pur-
pose of CE was to recycle waste and reduce production costs by transforming it into valuable resources,
addressing a significant drawback of the linear economy. [3] Circular Economy (CE) constituted a strong
response to this global issue since it replaced the linear scheme with a circular approach in which ma-
terials and energy are recirculated within a loop of reuse aiming at extending the utilization time of all
resources.(See Figure 1) The concept has been holistically adopted with governmental strategic actions
to support it, and the industrial and academic community to work towards applying it and studying it.
“Science-based targets are critically important for businesses. First and foremost, they take
the guesswork out of what we need to do, by when, by whom, how much, and where.”
M. Sanjayan CEO, Conservation International
However, while the industrial world is embracing circularity and adopting CE strategies more and
more, positive or negative environmental impacts can be also linked to their implementation. [1, 4, 5]
An example of a well-known CE strategies is product longevity during the use phase of a product.
Product longevity aims at ensuring a maximized functional period of products by achieving durability for
example. This CE strategy is employed for the prevention of waste generation because of the products’
shorter lifespan. [6] Another case of a CE strategy is the use of non-toxic and benign materials, such as
vegan leather instead of animal leather. This CE strategy attempts to reduce the toxicity of the material,
which in this phase is linked to the toxic additives the animal hides require to turn into leather. [7] Such
techniques are supposed to contribute to decreasing the impact of production on the environment.
While they fulfill their initial purpose, they might also cause additional unintended impacts on another
environmental category. A problematic aspect of vegan leather, for instance, is that despite it relieves the
processing from toxic additives and safely biodegrades at the EoL, there has been evidence to question
its durability. [8] Lacking durability relates to waste generation since the product made of vegan leather
will not last as long as the conventional one.
These effects pertain to the concept of environmental trade-offs, that is the shifting of the loads from
one environmental category to another while a CE strategy is utilized to minimize the environmental
weights. [9] It is, therefore, essential to investigate how to implement CE in a way that avoids unintended
consequences on the environment. [1,9]
Page 1 of 67
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1: The difference between Linear Economy and Circular Economy
1.2
Research aim
To ensure the sustainable implementation of CE strategies in the manufacturing sector, it is essential
to identify, predict, and address the unintended environmental consequences, or circular trade-offs. This
thesis aims to identify and understand these negative impacts, develop a framework for predicting potential
trade-offs, and create a decision-support tool to help manufacturers make more informed choices about
potential environmental trade-offs.
In particular, the research goals are the following:
1. To categorize and characterize CE strategies in manufacturing companies and understand how and
to what extent the latter influences the environmental impact categories of absolute targets. There-
fore, the first step was to understand why the implementation of CE strategies results in harmful
consequences for the environment. The second step was to analyze which specific aspects and pro-
cedures of the current CE strategies in the sector of production are burdening the environmental
dimension of sustainability. The last step was to document and categorize the current CE practices
within the manufacturing sector.
2. To create a catalogue of existing trade-offs and predictive outcomes for companies’ decision-making.
For this purpose, the first step is to understand the stakeholders’ interests and goals in companies
where CE strategies are implemented. In addition, it is necessary to understand the connection
between the stakeholders’ goals and the occurring CE environmental trade-offs for the maximum
possible alignment of the requirements of both sides – the optimal fulfillment of the companies’ goals
Page 2 of 67
==PAGE:11==
and sustainability goals. The final step is the categorization and understanding of CE environmental
trade-offs that occurred in the manufacturing companies’ sector.
3. The creation of a catalog of potential trade-offs occurring after the implementation of CE strategies,
that would enable companies to visualize in advance and anticipate the trade-offs in their decision-
making.
In order to address the above objectives, I developed the following research questions:
1. What are the reasons behind the negative environmental impact of CE solutions in the manufac-
turing companies’ sector?
2. Can the factors that drive the occurrence of CE environmental trade-offs be managed during the
early decision-making stage?
3. How is it possible for manufacturing companies to align their strategic goals with mitigating CE
environmental trade-offs?
4. How can manufacturing companies mitigate their negative environmental trade-offs?
5. How to design a holistic solution that can be utilized by generic manufacturing companies?
The proposed decision-support tool will assist manufacturers in identifying potential environmental
trade-offs associated with CE strategies.
The tool can be used by manufacturing companies at the early stage of their product design. More
specifically it aims to support their decision to take advantage of CE Strategies to achieve the SBTN tar-
gets. The estimation of these potential trade-offs is critical to avoid unexpected impacts on environmental
categories indicated by SBTN.
The tool consists of several stages, each of which helps the users identify their business needs regarding
sustainability deficiencies, select the appropriate combination of CE strategies, and finally provide an
assessment of possible future environmental impacts their plan might demonstrate. Hence, they will have
an initial overview assessment of possibilities they have to further investigate to avoid damaging solutions
for the environment.
The subsequent sections of this report are arranged as follows. Section 2, consists of the theoretical
background covering fundamental meanings and definitions for a better understanding of the project.
In Section 3, the methodology aims to provide an overview of the structural steps and parts from the
research planning to the solution design. In Section 4, the obtained results of the research are analyzed,
while Section 5 describes the synthesis of the solution, that is the tool. Section 6 contains the discussion
and research implications, and section 7 suggests areas for future improvements upon a proposal for the
evaluation of the tool. Lastly, in section 8 the conclusions and outcomes of the study are presented.
.
Page 3 of 67
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
To provide a solid foundation for this thesis, this section will define and explain the key terms and
concepts that will be used throughout the work.
2.1
Meanings and Definitions
2.1.1
The global initiative of Science Based Target Network (SBTN) and its requirements.
The initiative of the Science-Base Target network stems from the Science-based targets for nature
(SBTs) in cooperation with the Science-based targets initiative (SBTi). STBi is a public and private
initiative that guides companies to decrease their GHG emissions via implementing climate mitigation
practices. Currently, more than 5.000 companies are aligned and have contributed to this endeavor since
2015, focusing on mitigating climate change. [10]. Although the STBi focuses on reducing GHG emissions,
the Science-based Targets Network (SBTN) was developed to cover a holistic approach towards a more
sustainable direction through industrial activity, formulating targets for the protection of the land, ocean,
freshwater, and biodiversity. [11] Companies part of SBTN are provided with a framework that assesses
and guides them to evaluate their impacts and establish targets towards the reduction of the most crucial
environmental dimension. [11] Similarly to the SBTi, STBs aim to set and accomplish targets for nature
protection and conservation within a specific time frame and employ scientific and technological capacity
to align human activity with planetary boundaries, by respecting absolute sustainability principles and
societal goals. [11]
Drawing on the best available scientific knowledge and in line with global societal goals, the SBTN
targets provide companies with the necessary guidance on taking effective environmental actions across
their value chains. A larger aim of the SBTN is to soon include guidance for cities to also fulfill their
need to stay within an environmentally safe and socially just operating space. [12,13]
2.1.2
Manufacturing sector
The companies belonging to the manufacturing industry are defined by their key activity of mechanical,
physical, or chemical transformation of materials, substances, or components into finalized products, ready
for use, while assembling of parts of manufactured products is also included. [14,15] The spectrum of the
manufacturing sector includes a massive segment of industries such as electronics, computers, electrical
equipment, batteries, automotive, furniture, textiles, pharmaceuticals, plastics, paper and wood, food,
chemicals, petroleum, and coal. [14]
As a highly influencing sector for the global development, it is also responsible for its impact on several
domains including the ecological footprint that increases in correspondence to the technological growth.
[16] The common envisioning of reorganizing human activity concerning the environmental capacity for
long-lasting sustainability onboards companies sharing the same aspirations for change. [11,16] Therefore
CE is widely adopted within the sector affecting the benefits of industrial activity towards the environment,
the relationship of which will be further analyzed in the next sections.
Page 4 of 67
==PAGE:13==
2.1.3
Sustainability concept
The idea of sustainability, as we know it today, can be considered relatively new and was popularized
in 1987 by the World Commission on Environment and Development. [1] Although the relatively new
understanding of sustainability, its global relevance has sparked significant interest among academic and
industry representatives.
Sustainability is perceived and developed through different philosophies, which aim to represent inter-
pretation narratives, purposes, and set requirements, the fulfillment of which ensures the alignment with
each philosophy’s goals. [17] Some of the existing ones are the Absolute Sustainability (AS), the Circular
Economy, the Doughnut Economics(DE), the Planetary Boundaries (PBs), the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), and the Triple Bottom Line (TBL). [1] (See Figure 2)
Figure 2: Introduction of the sustainability philosophies and the time context. [17]
The concept of Absolute Sustainability (AS) is formulated according to the approach that allows
activities within the limits of the environment restricting the operations in such a way that zero negative
environmental impact is emerged. [18] The principles regulating AS are the demarcation of the entire
human activity within the earth’s Safe Operating Space (SOS), the responsibility of allocating the impact
so that its total never exceeds the limits is shared between companies and sectors, and lastly the carrying
capacity should be rational incorporating all the categories related to sustainability. [19] The SBTN, which
was described previously was founded to support companies and governments to allocate their tactics in
line with AS principles and goals. [11,20]
Doughnut Economics (DE) presents a combination of the planetary boundaries and the societal needs,
that should be satisfied.
The principle of DE, in addition to operating within SOS similarly to AS,
focuses on the elimination of inequalities, the collective management of prosperity and securing of equal
Page 5 of 67
==PAGE:14==
distribution, and regenerative by design. [21,22]
The Planetary Boundaries (PBs) states also the importance of limiting all kinds of human activities
within specific environmental boundaries, while the responsibility in this is assigned more to the individual
companies aiming that solely alterations will result in a global decrease of negative environmental impact.
[23] This philosophy concentrates on the prevention of exceedance of the boundary limits, while it does
not consider social aspects. [24]
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) constitute part of a plan introduced by the United Na-
tions(UN), according to which the world should develop within a timeline between 2015 and 2030 adopting
and achieving inclusion and sustainability. [17,25] They are organized on the principle of the TBL and aim
at a holistic solution considering all aspects of environmental, economic, and social dimensions, suggesting
17 specific goals. [17,25] More specifically, the goals leaning more towards the environmental dimension
are established to support sustainable agriculture, accessible clean water and energy, responsible con-
sumption and production, and maintain life on aquatic and terrestrial life. [26] The social and economic
goals are described by poverty extinction, sufficient food supply, securing health and well-being, accessible
education, gender equality, decent work, and economic growth, and inclusive communities and cities. [26]
Overall, the goals are designed to intersect across environmental, social, and economic categories.
Another way to interpret sustainability is through three aspects of economy, society, and environment,
known as the Triple Bottom Line (TBL) or “sustainability trilemma”. [1] The challenging part is the
simultaneous societal achievement and coexistence of the aforementioned elements. More specifically, the
problem is that global societies are struggling to coordinate these elements, in a way that the values
of high prosperity, low inequality, and low environmental impact are acquired and maintained. [9] The
economic factor is closely related to the prosperity within a society, which requires the fulfillment of high
living standards and well-being. A simultaneous necessity is the equal distribution of prosperity to the
whole society, and this describes the social aspect of sustainability. For the concept of sustainability to
be optimally developed, the enduring presence of both economic prosperity and environmental well-being
is essential. To achieve this, it’s imperative to conserve resources, ensure equitable access to prosperity,
and maintain a healthy environment capable of supporting future generations. This is highlighted as the
environmental part of sustainability, which is the main focus of this research thesis. [9]
Due to the complexity of sustainability implementation, the current implementation approaches
present weaknesses affecting efficiency. The alignment of all the requirements of all three pillars needs
review and refinement of the current methods, designing them to resolve unwanted situations where one
area of sustainability conflicts with another. These are called trade-offs. [1]
Except for the conflicts between the fundamental components of sustainability, each of them can
involve internal conflicts or crucial aspects that prevent achieving them singularly. This research project
aims to investigate trade-off conflicts, within the environmental element of the domain of sustainability.
Among the diverse approaches of sustainability, there is also CE, which highlights the conservation
of natural resources and the extended use phase of products and materials aiming at an organically
regenerative and restorative economy. [17] CE constitutes a fundamental part of this project and will be
further analyzed in the following section.
Page 6 of 67
==PAGE:15==
2.1.4
Circular Economy (CE)
While sustainability focuses broadly on meeting the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs, integrating economic, environmental, and social
dimensions, the Circular Economy is a more specific approach. It emphasizes resource efficiency, waste
reduction, and the closing of material loops to achieve sustainable development. [3] Unlike the linear
economy, which follows a ”take-make-dispose” model, CE aims to maximize the value of resources by
extending their life cycles, increasing energy efficiency, and decreasing resource consumption and waste. [2]
To achieve this, CE focuses on taking advantage of the resources after their first cycle of life, via facilitating
products, components, and materials design in a way that allows their service in multiple lives. [2] The
application of CE is also related to the EoL (End of Life) with the provision of products and material
recirculation to take the maximum advantage of the resources and energy used during the pre-use phase. [2]
Besides, a comprehensive framework for the CE application involves holistic systemic thinking, en-
compassing not only the EoL after the first life of the products but also sourcing, manufacturing, and
use.
Additionally, exploring alternative ownership models can help extend the life-cycle of products and
materials. [2] The latter refers to the incorporation of service as a product and it is often expressed
through leasing business models for instance.
This shifts the traditional ownership concept and the
customers purchase for the services, not the product itself. [2, 27] Leasing cars instead of buying cars is
one of the cases of service as a product. Users have complete ownership of the car for the period that
they need it, while the company takes care of its functionality through strategies like maintenance and
upgrades. At the end of the usage period of a specific customer, the cars are returned to their long-term
owner that is the company. The product can be reused by another customer repeating the same process,
and in between and during the LC the company is responsible for fixings, upgrades, and refurbishments to
optimize functionality. This area of business models demonstrates various environmental benefits, while
it is appealing to social and economic aspects. [3,27]
The CE is an economic system that seeks to eliminate waste and make the most out of material and
energy resources. It is based on three key principles:
• Designing out waste and pollution: Products are designed to minimize waste, using materials that
can either biodegrade naturally or be fully reused.
• Keeping products and materials in use: This involves creating closed-loop systems where products,
components, and materials are kept in use for as long as possible through upgrading, repairing
and maintenance, refurbishing, reusing, remanufacturing, repurposing, recycling, cascading, and
recovering.
• Regenerating natural systems: CE aims to restore and regenerate natural systems, promoting the
use of renewable resources and returning biological materials to the environment in a way that
enhances natural systems. [28]
The Circular Economy concept has been gaining momentum during the 20th century. [29] It has
Page 7 of 67
==PAGE:16==
influenced a range of policies at both national and international levels.
For instance, countries like
Germany, Japan, and China have enacted laws to promote circular practices, such as recycling and
resource efficiency. [29, 30] The European Union has also been at the forefront, introducing a Circular
Economy Action Plan aimed at transitioning towards a sustainable and competitive economy. [29]
The Circular Economy has become an important area of academic research, with numerous studies
exploring its potential to transform traditional economic systems. [31]Additionally, organizations like the
Ellen MacArthur Foundation have been instrumental in promoting the CE through research, collaboration,
and policy advocacy. [29] The business world is also increasingly embracing circular practices, recognizing
the potential for cost savings, innovation, and competitive advantage. [29]
2.1.5
Understanding the notion of trade-offs
Once this CE adoption and implementation has been achieved, sustainability trade-off resolution might
also be successful.
Trade-offs in life-history evolution, as discussed, refer to the compromises organisms must make when
allocating limited resources to different aspects of survival and reproduction. [32] In evolutionary biology,
a trade-off is a situation where an improvement in one trait, such as reproductive output, comes at the
expense of another, such as survival or future reproductive success. [32] The most significant life-history
trade-off involves the cost of reproduction. This cost can manifest as reduced survival or diminished
future reproductive potential. For instance, if an organism invests heavily in producing offspring in one
season, it may have less energy or resources available for survival or future reproduction.
Trade-offs can be analyzed at different levels, including the genetic and phenotypic levels. Genetic
trade-offs are linked to genetic correlations between traits, meaning that a genetic predisposition to excel
in one trait (e.g., fast growth) may inherently limit another (e.g., longevity). Phenotypic trade-offs are
observed at the organism level, where observable traits directly impact fitness, such as the trade-off
between size at maturity and age at maturity. [32,33]
The expression of trade-offs is highly dependent on environmental conditions. The same genetic traits
may lead to different outcomes depending on the environment, which can cause trade-offs to shift. For
example, in a rich environment with abundant resources, an organism might grow quickly and reproduce
early, while in a poor environment, the same organism might grow slowly and reproduce later. [33]
The trade-offs can be procedural or substantive. The former is related to the early decision-making
stage and the amount of energy and effort that is decided to be invested to address possible upcoming
trade-offs. On the other hand, the latter constitute the actual decisions taken and the procedural ones
directly influence the arising results of them, and therefore the substantive trade-offs. [1]
Within the CE research field, many companies, including the manufacturing sector, are currently
implementing CE strategies as solutions to achieve their sustainability goals, such as minimizing toxic
materials, or emissions from inbound and outbound transportation.
Nevertheless, implementing CE
strategies has also led, in many cases unexpectedly, to negative effects alongside beneficial effects for
the environment. These are called CE trade-offs. For instance, while recycling is implemented for the
minimization of waste generation at the EoL of a product, it is highly possible that the impact is not
Page 8 of 67
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3: The relationship between the three dimensions of sustainability -social, environmental, and
economic growth, their synergies and conflicts.
All conflicts among the three dimensions need to be
balanced for the holistic accomplishment of sustainability.
reduced but transferred to a different category, that is from burdening the land to affecting the climate. It
can even be higher due to energy and transportation requirements, which finally increase the overall impact
of the product. This consequence eventuates because the impact of the energy consumption for processing
and the transportation emissions for delivery of the waste to the recycling infrastructures overcome the
total impact of conventional waste disposal. [34] This project aims to investigate the underlying drivers
Page 9 of 67
==PAGE:18==
of CE trade-offs, as implementing CE solutions can cause different positive or negative environmental
impacts on specific aspects of the sustainability goals while burdening others.
According to the current scientific research on CE trade-offs, among the main reasons behind these
unexpected consequences of CE strategies implementation is the absence of a systemic understanding
of CE models to both theoretical and practical knowledge on the application of CE. [35] Therefore, the
provision of new holistic approaches that better understand CE trade-offs on environmental categories
might be considered the optimal method to reduce the negative consequences on the environment from
CE implementation. [31,36]
One of the challenging requirements for the successful conduction of addressing CE trade-offs, within
the manufacturing sector, is the explicit understanding and elucidation of the sustainability indicators
which follow in the next paragraph. [37]
2.2
The connection between CE strategies and Environmental trade-offs
Despite the potential of CE to secure environmental sustainability and its broad embracing within
the manufacturing sector it is crucial to estimate the actual benefits and costs of circularity to secure its
results in a meaningful outcome. [37] Therefore it is important to explore and understand the connection
between the CE and the environmental trade-offs. (Figure 4)
The occurrence of environmental trade-offs because of CE implementation can affect several environ-
mental categories. The application of CE in the first place aims to reduce the impact on the environmental
categories. However, the impact decreases in a specific category such as biodiversity due to natural re-
source depletion might imply the transfer of the avoided impact to another category such as fresh water.
For example, the reuse of products, while preventing the manufacturing of new ones and hence sourcing,
requires high water consumption between the uses of the product. [38]
The environmental categories that will be studied in this project are established by SBTN and they are
biodiversity, freshwater, land, ocean, and climate. [11] The category of biodiversity refers to the distruc-
tion of the natural environment including flora and fauna elements. For instance, the over-consumption
of plants for the production of natural materials indicates an impact on biodiversity. [39] Accordingly,
washing demands that might be a consequence of a strategy to avoid another type of impact burdens the
category freshwater due to high consumption. [40] The categories of land and ocean include the habitat
of flora and fauna, while their burden happens due to hazardous materials contaminating the natural
environment and affecting the health of plants and animals. The improper disposal methods and haz-
ardous processes are mainly responsible for environmental loads in both these categories. [41,42] Finally,
the climate is the category affected by all types of emissions, such as energy, GHG, or transportation
emissions. [11,42]
The employment of CE in the manufacturing sector constitutes a more and more common phenomenon
as an attempt to support the sustainability goals aiming to reduce the industrial activity’s environmental
footprint. Thereupon, the efficiency of this initiative will be optimized by predicting, understanding, and
mitigating environmental trade-offs of CE within the manufacturing industry.
Page 10 of 67
==PAGE:19==
Figure 4: The function of environmental trade-offs in connection with CE.
Page 11 of 67
==PAGE:20==
3
Methodology
3.1
Design Research Methodology
The design Research Methodology (DRM) was employed for the structure of this Master’s thesis.
[43] The DRM approach provides a framework for the research, development, and evaluation by setting
valuable guidelines, and time-frames and suggesting tools and methods to be applied to ensure the optimal
execution of the research and design process. [43] This methodology supports the transition from the
current design state to a desired future state, namely from the ”is” to the ”ought”, allowing iterations on
the design solution and future optimization. [43] The DRM approach proved invaluable in organizing and
supporting all stages of my Master’s thesis, from the research on the topic conducted through literature
reviews to the analysis of the findings and the formulation of design solutions. By providing a structured
framework, the DRM ensured a strong correlation among the different parts of my work, leading to a
well-ordered, comprehensive presentation and completion of this Master’s thesis. (Figure 5) The following
stages of the DRM were utilized as the core of this research: Research Clarification (RC), Descriptive
Study I (DS I), and Prescriptive Study (PS). [43]
3.1.1
Research clarification(RC)
The research outcome of this phase was integrated within the previous chapters and its role was to
support and facilitate the definition of the problem, the research goals, and the research questions of this
research thesis. More specifically, the aim of RC for this dissertation was to design and plan the entire
research structure and fulfill the requirements for the preparation of DS I. Overall, this is the stage at
which the holistic approach of conducting the project is taken into consideration to guide the rest of my
thesis process.
3.1.2
Descriptive Study I (DS I)
The next phase of the DRM approach is the DS I which in my thesis involved research for the in-
depth understanding of the SBTN, the notion of environmental trade-offs, and the collection of identified
environmental trade-offs through theoretical and empirical data. For this purpose, a systematic literature
approach was used, aiming to collect a sufficient amount of articles explaining the negative environmental
impact linked with CE strategies. [44,45]
Page 12 of 67
==PAGE:21==
Figure 5: DRM framework: stages, basic means and main outcomes. [43]
Criteria
Decision
The predefined keywords exist as a whole or in the title, keywords, or abstract of the paper.
Inclusion
The paper published in a scientific peer-reviewed journal.
Inclusion
The paper should be written in the English language.
inclusion
When the articles address at least one CE strategy.
Inclusion
When the articles address at least one CE trade-off.
Inclusion
Papers that are duplicated within the search documents.
Exclusion
Papers that are not accessible, review papers and meta-data.
Exclusion
Table 1: Established criteria for the selection of the articles.
To conduct the systematic literature review, the following steps were designed:
• Formulation of search strings according to the highlighted meanings from the general background
research conducted for scoping of the project.
• The establishment of certain inclusion and exclusion criteria for guiding the proper inclusion and
exclusion of scientific articles. (Table 1)
• A first scanning of the results based on the Titles, the keywords, and the abstract to exclude the
non-relevant articles.
Page 13 of 67
==PAGE:22==
• An examination of the introduction and conclusions for further narrowing down the articles’ specifics.
• Analyzing the full body of the text for the final selection of the articles to be investigated.
• Refining the final selection through ”snowballing”.
For the search of publications, the Scopus database and Science Direct database were used. [46, 47]
The search strings used in the Scopus database are:
• Scopus database:
– (“CE” OR “Circular Economy” OR “CE strategies” OR “CE solution*”) AND “CE implica-
tions” AND (“CE tradeoffs” OR “Tradeoffs” OR “Environmental tradeoffs”) AND (“Manu-
facturing companies” OR “Manufacturing sector”) AND (“Decision making” OR “Early-stage
decision-making”)
– ( ”circular economy” AND strateg* ) AND ( ”environmental implications” OR ”environmental
trade-off*” OR ”environmental tradeoff*” ) AND ( manufacturing )
• Science Direct database:
– (circular economy AND ”design for disassembly”) AND (environmental impact OR sustain-
ability) AND (trade-off OR ”environmental burden”) AND (manufacturing)
– (circular economy AND ”design for disassembly”) AND (environmental impact ) AND ( ”en-
vironmental trade-off” OR ”environmental burden”) AND (manufacturing)
Overall, about 300 articles were identified. Among them, 30 articles were selected and analyzed in
this study. The identification phase of the systematic literature review was conducted according to the
criteria established, to include articles and publications with the scope of the project. (Figure 6)
All the potential CE strategies included in this thesis were divided into five main categories:
• For services
– Rethink and Reconfigure
• For products
– Restore, Reduce and Avoid
– Recirculate in relation to products and products
– Recirculate in relation to materials
• For services and products
– Energy
– Logistics
Page 14 of 67
==PAGE:23==
The logic of organizing the CE strategies in categories is in agreement with the so-called CE Scanner.
[27] The CE Scanner classifies each strategy according to its purpose and the LC phase for which can
be employed. That is, some of the strategies might appear more than once due to their applicability in
more than one phase of LC. [27] All the CE strategies are grouped into categories that correspond to LC
phases. The areas of Restore, Reduce, and Avoid cover the sourcing of raw materials the manufacturing
and use phase, and the recirculate area including the EoL phase. Accordingly, each of these categories
includes the CE strategies that can facilitate environmental impact decrease based on each LC phase.
For instance, recycling as a CE strategy is part of Recirculate, which corresponds to the EoL. However,
recycling also belongs to the manufacturing phase under the umbrella of restore, reduce, and avoid. [3]
Moreover, the area of ”rethink and reconfigure” is relevant to the services, containing three main
concepts for business models, which are the value generators, each of which activates a specific set of the
aforementioned CE strategies to be framed. [3] For example, the model of long-life products is dedicated
to maximizing the lifespan of the products and that is its value proposition. [37] To achieve this scope,
a combination of CE strategies across all the LC phases needs to be employed. Therefore in the service-
related cases, the CE strategies remain the same but they are selected according to the business model
and not the LC phases. [36]
Lastly, there are the CE strategies that apply to both products and services and refer to energy and
logistics. [43]
The correlation between the formulation of the search strings and the identification of CE strategies
is iterative. At first, a review of the CE Scanner was conducted, which inspired the formulation of the
search strings, and following the literature review results were validated and organized according to the
CE Scanner.
Accordingly, the basis of the environmental categories and the impact that will be investigated are
defined by the SBTN. [11] These are:
• Land
• Ocean
• Freshwater
• Biodiversity
• Climate
For services
Business Models
CE Strategies
Rethink & Reconfigure
Result and Performance
Upgrade
Repair and maintenance
Refurbish
Rethink & Reconfigure
Access and availability
Upgrade
Page 15 of 67
==PAGE:24==
Repair and maintenance
Reuse
Refurbish
Remanufacture
Rethink & Reconfigure
Long life products
Product Longevity
Upgrade
Repair and maintenance
Reuse
Refurbish
Remanufacture
For products
LC Phases
CE Strategies
Restore, Reduce and Avoid
Sourcing
Renewables
Recyclable materials
Secondary sources
Restorative sourcing
Non-toxic and benign materials
Lowest suitable grade
Restore, Reduce and Avoid
Manufacturing
Lean manufacturing and cleaner
production
Rework
Recycle
Cascade
Recover
Restore, Reduce and Avoid
Use
Product longevity
Low consumables
Use of idle product capacity
Recirculate for parts and products
EoL
Upgrade
Repair and maintenance
Reuse
Refurbish
Remanufacture
Repurpose
Recirculate for materials
Recycle
Cascade
Recover
Page 16 of 67
==PAGE:25==
For services & products
Cross-phase strategies
CE Strategies
Energy
Renewable energy
Reduction of energy needs
Logistics
Reduction in volume and weight
Table 2: CE strategies according to the Business Models for services, LC phases for products, and the
cross-phase strategies that are applicable for services and products.
To validate and expand the theoretical data collection, semi-structured interviews were organized to-
gether with a few industry CE specialists. The goal of the communication with the CE experts where
to explore their experience with CE implications and collect additional data on trade-off functioning and
understanding for the completion of the trade-offs catalogue.
To collect empirical data, seven industry experts were contacted, five of whom responded, and they
were invited to a 60-minute interview. The interview with the industry representatives followed a semi-
structured questionnaire that included general but also specific questions. This supported the collection
of specific required data but also left some space for the interviewees to highlight any remarkable aspects,
commensurate with their experience with CE strategies and the related implications for the environment.
(Table 3)
The first part of the interview included a short introduction of the project topic together with a few
simple environmental trade-off examples linked to circularity. This initial part was needed to assess the
interviewees’ familiarity with the concept of trade-offs and ensure a smooth and fruitful interview process
and follow-up to the next step concerning qualitative data collection. Thereafter, the following questions
were asked:
• Are you familiar with the meaning of trade-offs?
• In your experience, what are some of the biggest challenges companies face when implementing
circular economy strategies, and how do they typically approach mitigating environmental trade-
offs?
• Have you participated in the implementation of any Circular economy strategies?
– If yes, which ones?
• Did you need to tackle environmental trade-offs happening because of the CE you have tried to
implement?
– If yes, which ones?
Page 17 of 67
==PAGE:26==
Figure 6: Systematic literature review flow
• Have you been in the position to resolve environmental implications/ trade-offs, while you were not
involved in the implementation of this/these CE strategy/strategies?
– If yes, which strategies and which trade-offs did you notice?
– What was the impact in this case compared to the conventional alternative?
– What was the solution?
– Did you completely change the CE strategy by replacing it with an alternative CE or did you
try to improve it?
– Were there any thoughts of going back to a conventional strategy (not circular)?
• Can you think of any additional information or insights regarding environmental trade-offs because
of CE strategies’ implementation, which is useful according to your opinion?
The final question would introduce the unstructured part of the meeting during which industry rep-
resentatives could refer to their experiences and observations working with circularity and implications
they had noticed throughout their career.
Page 18 of 67
==PAGE:27==
A final part was dedicated to the interviewees’ career path and their involvement with CE imple-
mentation. It consisted of several questions on specific projects they participated in or their companies
conducted, and it was designated after having researched their published works. These are analytically
described in Appendix A.
Participant
Expertise/ Role
Company type
Country
Interviewee 1
Senior
Sustainability
Transformation Archi-
tect
Pharmaceutical
Denmark
Interviewee 2
Circular economy
Manufacturing
Denmark
Interviewee 3
Textile engineer
Innovation hub
Sweden
Interviewee 4
Consultant
PLastics manufacturing
Denmark
Interviewee 5
Continuous
Improve-
ment Manager
Logistics
UK
Table 3: List of participants in the semi-structured interviews.
3.1.3
Presrcriptive Study (PS)
PS constituted the stage at which the trade-off catalogue was created as well as the early-stage decision-
making supportive tool within the manufacturing sector. Systematic design principles were applied to
design the tool to fulfill the required features to effectively support companies with their development pro-
cedures and strategic decisions concerning CE implementation. This systematic approach was employed
to gather, present, and analyze data, as well as compare different scenarios.
More specifically this phase consisted of two steps. First, the analysis of the findings and the catalogue
creation of the possible environmental trade-off. Second, the conversion of the catalogue to a trade-off
decision-making supportive tool for companies. The former analysis is elaborated in the Results section
and its structure includes a short description of each CE strategy, the ecological problem that the CE
strategy tries to address, and the analysis of the environmental implications, which each single strategy
can cause. The data analyzed within this chapter consists of the findings of the systematic literature
review combined with the empirical data collected from the semi-structured interviews.
The second part of the PS is dedicated to the utilization of these data for the designation of a tool
that can be used by manufacturers at the early stages of product design and development to support their
decision-making regarding the CE selection and trade-off visualization for their business case. Certain
criteria were established to ensure the usefulness of the tool for growth. The latter criteria refers to the
properties of the tool to guide the users to valid results based on their interested products as well as the
tool’s usability for both experts and non-expert users.
Page 19 of 67
==PAGE:28==
3.1.4
Descriptive Study II (DS II)
Specifically within the scope of this Master’s thesis the Descriptive Study II (DS II), which refers to
the practical evaluation of the work, is not included. However, a plan for future evaluation scenarios for
the tool and its functionalities is proposed in the future perspectives section. [43] (See Subsection 7.1)
Page 20 of 67
==PAGE:29==
4
Results
In this chapter, the findings of the literature review and the semi-structured interviews on environ-
mental trade-offs of circular strategies are presented and analyzed.
More specifically it presents the
environmental impact that each CE strategy attempts to resolve and the environmental trade-offs that
might occur due to each CE strategy implementation. (See Table 2 and Table 4)
CE strategies
Environmental
trade-offs
Sources
PSS,
Recy-
clable
materials,
Restorative sourc-
ing,
Lowest
suitable
grade,
Cascade, Product
longevity,
Reuse,
Remanufacture,
Repurpose, Recy-
cle
Material intensity
Franco, M. A. (2019)., Tang, X., & Chen,
E. Y. X. (2019)., Mostert, C., et al. (2021).,
Campbell-Johnston, K., et al.
(2020).,
Boulay, A.-M., et al. (n.d.)., Picatoste, A.,
Justel, D., & Mendoza, J. M. F. (2022)., Pic-
cardo, C., & Hughes, M. (2022)., Rivera,
J. L., & Lallmahomed, A. (2016)., P´erez-
S´anchez, L., Velasco-Fern´andez, R., & Gi-
ampietro,
M. (2022).,
Yang,
Y.,
et al.
(2024)., Hauschild, M. Z., et al. (2020). ,
Scott, S., et al. (2023). , Yang, Y., et al.
(2024)., Stahel, 2016
Interviewee 1,
Interviewee 3,
Interviewee 4
Recyclable mate-
rials,
Restorative
sourcing
GHG emissions
Mostert, C., et al.
(2021)., Campbell-
Johnston, K., et al. (2020)., Boulay, A.-M.,
et al. (n.d.).
Interviewee 1,
Interviewee 3
Recyclable mate-
rials, Reuse, Re-
cycle
Water
consump-
tion
Mostert, C., et al.
(2021)., Campbell-
Johnston, K., et al. (2020)., Boulay, A.-M.,
et al.
(n.d.)., Ghisellini, P., Ripa, M., &
Ulgiati, S. (2018).
Interviewee 1,
Interviewee 3,
Interviewee 4
Page 21 of 67
==PAGE:30==
Continuation of Table 2
CE strategies
Environmental
trade-offs
Sources
Renewables,
Recylable
mate-
rials,
Secondary
sources,
Restora-
tive
sourcing,
Lowest
suitable
grade,
Cas-
cade,
Product
longevity,
Lo-
gistics,
Repair
and maintenance,
Reuse, Refurbish,
Recycle
Energy consump-
tion
Tang, X., & Chen, E. Y. X. (2019)., Mostert,
C., et al. (2021)., Campbell-Johnston, K., et
al. (2020)., Ryen, E. G., et al. (2018)., Pi-
catoste, A., Justel, D., & Mendoza, J. M. F.
(2022)., Piccardo, C., & Hughes, M. (2022).,
Rivera, J. L., & Lallmahomed, A. (2016).,
P´erez-S´anchez, L., Velasco-Fern´andez, R., &
Giampietro, M. (2022)., Hauschild, M. Z., et
al. (2020)., Lindstrom, T., & Hicks, A. L.
(2022)., Daly, P. (2023)., Kirchherr, J., et
al. (2017)., Walker et al., 2014
Interviewee 1,
Interviewee 3,
Interviewee 4,
Interviewee 5
Recyclable mate-
rials,
Non-toxic
and
Benign
ma-
terials,
Product
longevity,
Low
consumables,
Energy, Recycle
Waste generation
Tang, X., & Chen, E. Y. X. (2019)., Mostert,
C., et al. (2021)., Campbell-Johnston, K.,
et al. (2020)., Boulay, A.-M., et al. (n.d.).,
Tardy, B. L., et al. (2023)., Rivera, J. L., &
Lallmahomed, A. (2016)., Mugurusi, G., &
Ahishakiye, E. (2022), Milousi, M., & Souli-
otis, M. (2023)., Campbell-Johnston, K., et
al. (2020).
Interviewee 1,
Interviewee 2,
Interviewee 3,
Interviewee 4
Secondary
sources,
Non-
toxic and Benign
materials,
Low
consumables,
Energy
Critical
material
depletion
Ryen, E. G., et al. (2018)., Tardy, B. L., et
al. (2023)., Mugurusi, G., & Ahishakiye, E.
(2022), Lapko, Y., et al. (2019)., Milousi,
M., & Souliotis, M. (2023).
Interviewee 2
Non-toxic and Be-
nign materials
Contamination
Tardy, B. L., et al. (2023).
Interviewee 1,
Interviewee 2,
Interviewee 3
Page 22 of 67
==PAGE:31==
Continuation of Table 2
CE strategies
Environmental
trade-offs
Sources
Restorative sourc-
ing, Nontoxic and
Benign materials,
Reuse
Transportation
emissions
Tardy, B. L., et al. (2023)., Hauschild, M.
Z., et al. (2020)., Lindstrom, T., & Hicks,
A. L. (2022)., Milousi, M., & Souliotis, M.
(2023)., Geyer et al., 2017
Interviewee 1,
Interviewee 2
Lean manufactur-
ing
and
cleaner
production, Recy-
cle
Ozone depletion
Ghasemi, S., et al. (2020)., Lindstrom, T.,
& Hicks, A. L. (2022)., Daly, P. (2023).
Interviewee 1
Lean manufactur-
ing
and
cleaner
production
Eutrophication
Ghasemi, S., et al. (2020)
Restorative sourc-
ing, Low consum-
ables
Hazardous
pro-
cessing
Mugurusi,
G.,&
Ahishakiye,
E.
(2022),
Milousi, M., & Souliotis, M. (2023)., Der-
raik, n.d.
Low consumables,
Remanufacture
Embodied Energy
Ghisellini,
P.,
Ripa,
M.,
& Ulgiati,
S.
(2018)., Daly, P. (2023).
Interviewee 4
Remanufacture
Embodied Carbon
Daly, P. (2023).
Interviewee 4
Cascade
Contamination of
aquatic life
Campbell-Johnston, K., et al. (2020).
Table 4: Environmental trade-offs collected and sources.
4.1
Reinvent
Reinvent refers to a transition from physical products to complete digitization and servitization.
Because of the large complexities and variabilities associated with this type of strategy it was considered
out of scope for this project. [27]
Page 23 of 67
==PAGE:32==
4.2
Rethink and reconfigure, and environmental trade-offs
Contemporary society is linked with materialistic qualities, which have taken over people’s consuming
habits and led them to a perpetual cycle of acquiring as many purchasable items as possible [48] Some of
the products people own are necessary to fulfill the basic needs of today’s life, while others are realistically
needed on a weekly or monthly basis. There is also the category of conspicuous goods, referring to the
purchasing of items primarily as status symbols regardless of their prices. The latter category is out of the
scope of this research. However, the second category will be examined within this section. Consumers’
mentality is traditionally connected with having total ownership of each product they use even when they
use it very few times during the entire period they own it. [48]
As a result, consumption tends to far exceed the needs and affect the ecology due to the demand for the
manufacturing of massive amounts of products. [48,49] This is translated into the need to source a huge
variety of natural materials, processes vulnerable to biodiversity, excessive water and energy consumption
for production, and transportation emissions to facilitate delivery all over the world. [49]
As a method for controlling and thus reducing over-consumption, the introduction of circular business
models has gained strong attention recently. These solutions include leasing business models and Product
Service System (PSS) that are focused on the products’ performance and promote a shared way of using
them without necessarily aligning with the conventional full ownership of the user. [50] The benefits
of this scenario relate to securing the functionality and prolonging the lifespan of the product through
maintenance. The business purpose shifts from selling large quantities to selling services to guarantee the
maintained functionality properties throughout the entire life of the products. [50] Companies can keep
full the ownership of the products and be responsible for each type of maintenance or repair needed. There
are several approaches to be followed regarding the value offered to the customer. Securing the results
and performance of the product might be the service that a company sells while keeping the ownership
of a product regardless of the period of customer use. Access or availability is another option, at which
the products are available to users for the period for which they need them and it is often expressed via
shared use. [51] There is also the case of long-life products in which the company aims to prolong the
lifespan of the products. This encourages the optimal use of products and discourages misuse, resulting in
a downgrade of performance of early disposal burdening energy consumption or the already high existing
waste volume. [51]
Despite the benefits of the circular business models, concerns have been expressed regarding the
realistic environmental credits of the solution. [50] Even though they could potentially help reduce the en-
vironmental impacts, it is crucial to ensure their careful and right implementation to avoid environmental
loads. [50]
To achieve these PSS concepts more CE strategies are employed, relevant to the product development
that will be analyzed in the next sections. For providing long-life products the possible strategies utilized
are product longevity, upgrade, reuse, repair and maintenance, refurbish, and remanufacture. Regarding
access and availability, the relevant CE strategies are upgrade, reuse, repair and maintenance, refurbish,
and remanufacture, while results and performance strategy includes upgrade, repair and maintenance,
and refurbish. [27]
Page 24 of 67
==PAGE:33==
4.3
Restore, reduce and avoid
4.3.1
Renewables and environmental trade-offs
The conventional style of product development, based on the linear approach leading to infinite re-
sourced demand and waste generation constitutes one of the main arguments in favor of the CE since
the planetary boundaries are threatened. The constant sourcing required for the continued production
provoked worries regarding the future of the natural reserve and highlighted the emergence of a more
sustainable approach to sources used for manufacturing.
The introduction of renewable materials is considered an efficient solution to address this issue since
they can be recycled and reused after their first LC within a closed-loop system while preventing waste
generation as well. However, the latter benefit will be further analyzed in the next sections. Regarding
the natural sources, this approach provides a clear option for avoiding the extraction of raw materials for
each production cycle ensuring higher environmental benefits. [52] A concrete application of this concept
is presented in the case of infinitely recyclable plastics composed of cyclic esters. [52] Their contribution
to circularity is based on their properties to be recycled repeatedly offering constant opportunities for
sources. [52]
While their case presents an ideal scenario to tackle the environmental issues related to plastics,
their processing during recycling is rather energy-intensive. [53] At the same time the performance of
the bio-renewable plastics could be potentially affected. [52] Such performance is linked with a lack of
durability, and possibly shorter lifespan, causing waste generation and material loss, affecting biodiversity,
and climate change.
4.3.2
Recyclable materials and environmental trade-offs
There is a global tendency in the industry world to support the use of recyclable materials to participate
in the environmental impact reduction initiative. [54] The main argument here is the waste generation of
the disposal of the products at the EoL. Replacing conventional packaging with recyclable is suggested
and in some cases implemented, relying on the fact the existing packaging composition can be a mixture
of different materials, which makes it impossible to recycle afterward, according to Interviewee 1.
Nevertheless, there might be a few potential negative consequences for the environment. As an ex-
ample, food packaging has to be able to sustain and conserve food products throughout a specific period
and through diverse production steps such as transportation and storage. Interviewees 1 and 3 agreed
that achieving similar material performance while using recyclable material for packaging might imply an
increased amount of food waste since renewable packaging material might be less resistant. The case of
cookie packaging reflects this exact aspect. The traditional packaging of cookies includes a very thin cover
consisting of two even thinner layers, a layer of plastic and a layer of metal. This material has no other
option but to be disposed of at the EoL, according to Interviewee 1. However, the amount of resources
used for its manufacturing as well as the final amount of waste is significantly less than the resources
needed for its replacement with a recyclable packaging option, which would lead to an increased volume
of material arriving at the EoL. In addition, in case the properties of the packaging option do not comply
Page 25 of 67
==PAGE:34==
with the performance requirement for food preservation, food waste might be generated. This could affect
the environment within two areas since food waste is generated and the need for more food production will
likely increase the overall environmental impact. [55] These consequences burden biodiversity, freshwater,
and climate.
4.3.3
Secondary sources and environmental trade-offs
The increased production to meet the market needs is responsible for the increased sourcing of materi-
als. This challenges the planet’s boundaries regarding its limit to continuously providing resources. This
issue can create a large concern since there is no long-term plan for the preservation of natural resources
to sustain the current levels of production. [56]
Secondary sources might help reduce the environmental footprint of economic activities. The idea is
that using resources already extracted as well as materials or even components for the manufacturing
needs might reduce the environmental load. [57]
Although this solution seems to fully tackle the problem of natural resource exhaustion, the concerns
regarding the potential unexplored environmental impacts of this circularity direction should not be
ignored. These are related to the quality of second-hand sources and also to the fact that despite the effort
to take advantage of already existing supplies, additional virgin material inputs will still be needed. [57]
The former case is linked to the use phase of the produced items and affects their life length and their
performance, because of the preliminary termination of the functional properties. [57] This formulates the
need for either repair due to downgraded qualities or early disposal, affecting the energy requirements
for the product or the waste generation. [58] In the latter case, in addition to the resources invested
in secondary sourcing the extraction of raw materials is not avoided to reach the appropriate levels of
properties for the manufacturing. [58] According to the data collected from interviews, this increases
the overall energy spent on the fabrication of products utilizing second-hand materials since both this
procedure and conventional sourcing are involved. [58] These implications burden environmental categories
of biodiversity, land, and climate due to material intensity, waste generation, and energy emissions.
4.3.4
Restorative sourcing and environmental trade-offs
Among various problematic environmental situations, there is the case of plastic pollution, which is
strongly connected to marine litter. The consequences of the domination of plastic, a preferred type of
material within the industry sector and everyday use are the focal point of global attention requiring
immediate resolution due to crucial environmental risks. [56] The conspicuous result of marine pollution
triggers relevant concerns. Moreover, the fossil fuel consumption for the actual material transformation
into plastic, and the total high GHG emissions are leading to climate change. [56]
Restorative sourcing is employed to contribute to tackling this issue since constitutes a strategy that
aims to limit waste generation and enhance ecosystem regeneration. [29] Including the collection of ocean,
Page 26 of 67
==PAGE:35==
such as plastics, and returning them to life as sources for new products, is seemingly an ideal strategy to
support sustainability goals. [29]
Despite the benefits of restorative sourcing, there are several implications such as energy-intensive
processes for collecting the wasted materials. [59] For example, a part of the plastics in the oceans can
deteriorate or contain contaminants, which leads to a complex process for retaining the desired qualities,
before returning to the production phase. Thus, the overall impact can outweigh the impact of sourcing
raw materials. [59]
Moreover, the carbon emissions, due to transportation of the material collected increase the impli-
cations levels, when sourcing is not localized. It therefore burdens the environment and affects climate
change. [60] According to the properties of the collected materials, it is highly possible downcycling to
be included. This restricts its potential since reduces durability or possibilities for recycling, resulting in
either a short lifespan or additional material for retention of the initial features. [61]
Another implication of this strategy is the intervention in the ecosystem at the site of the collection,
which may jeopardize the marine life or coastal fauna, and disturb biodiversity. [62]
Lastly, there is a potential risk related to the long-term supply chain of products the manufacturing
of which relies upon restorative sourcing materials. [63] In case the sources are insufficient, they might
replaced with environmentally questionable alternatives. [63] For example, the collection of wasted plastic
from mixed waste streams, such as landfills instead of oceans, could imply more contaminants or lower
quality leading to more processing and leading to higher energy emissions. [64] In conclusion, biodiversity
and climate change can be potentially affected due to restorative sourcing.
4.3.5
Non-toxic and benign materials and environmental trade-offs
The production of certain products might require the use of materials considered damaging and toxic,
affecting the balance of biodiversity. These are responsible for polluting the atmosphere, landfills, and
aquatic life, which have consequences for the flora and fauna’s healthy existence and evolution.
As a response to this issue, using natural and biobased materials for production has been encouraged.
The purpose here is the elimination of pollution after the disposal phase, but also the minimization
of toxic emissions during the manifold production processes. An example of biobased materials is the
lignin-based biocomposites, considered an alternative to non-biodegradable and fossil-based components,
able to introduce new functionalities, while also being a potential energy source. [65] Introduced lining-
based material could include gels, foams, adhesives, polymer blends, and composites, as well as carbon
materials. [65] Another example is the reusable grocery bags as a replacement of plastic single-use ones,
which are designed to be durable over time. To secure this property, the energy and resource intensity for
their manufacturing present a remarkable impact on the environment. These are often made of organic
cotton. [65] There is also the case of the replacement of concrete with wood, as a natural choice. [57] Lastly,
in the discussion with the industry representatives paper cups and paper straws were mentioned. These
are designed to be used instead of plastic ones, and, supposedly, provide the possibility for conventional
disposal, similar to organic waste.
Aiming for an efficient solution requires a holistic approach to this issue, and thus the estimation
Page 27 of 67
==PAGE:36==
of the overall impact of the option of plastic and its alternatives as well.
Exploring this perspective
indicates evidence of the harmful aspects of the substitutes, which might overcome the overall impact
of the conventional choice. For instance, despite the benefits of lignin-based substitutes, there is also
a strong indication of potential ecological trade-offs related to water depletion and land use as well as
acidification and eutrophication. [65] These possible drawbacks are based on considerations regarding the
lining’s long-term consistency in its supply chain - the tree crops, but also the transportation costs.
To balance out the single-use bags’ impact a minimum number of uses is mandatory. [56] In the case of
cotton bags fully manufactured of organic cotton, which might have an impact in the categories of carbon
footprint and water use since they can overcome the benefits unless they are used 20.000 times. [65] In
addition to these, biodiversity loss is a remarkable consideration when the growing of cotton requires
extended field areas dedicated to this purpose. This example is also relevant to the reuse as CE strategy
and it will be also analyzed in the relevant section. [56,65]
[56] On the contrary, single-use plastic bags due to their thin composition might result in less effect
on the environment. In addition to that, reusable objects are also washed after a specific amount of uses,
according to their function, which might result in affecting local water resources. [56]
Additionally, possible environmental trade-offs in these cases are the performance of biobased mate-
rials, the biodiversity damage, and the endangered carbon sequestration in the case of wood replacing
concrete. [57] The insulation performance is decreased causing higher energy needs during the use phase,
and if wood extraction expands up to the point that forestry land decreases the GWP increases. [57]
A concern regarding plastic substitutes is the biodegradability of paper-based replacements. Notwith-
standing, for the production of these single-use paper items, a higher amount of material is required
even though they are designed for one use. This is because the structure and the properties of these
items require a lot more paper to be achieved compared to the thin layer of plastic the conventional
products would use to ensure their functionality. This results again in material intensity. Even after the
additional material usage, for the achievement of the desired quality, additives might still be necessary.
Within the additives options, there are chemical and toxic substances as well as pollution sources during
biodegradation, according to the interviewed industry representatives.
In conclusion, the avoidance of plastic and the establishment of alternatives are accompanied by
several trade-offs regarding the over-consumption of materials and energy for their manufacturing, but
also additional waste which is harder to dispose of compared to light-weight single-use items. This burdens
several environmental categories, such as biodiversity, land, and climate.
4.3.6
Lowest suitable grade and environmental trade-offs
The contemporary way of manufacturing products promising optimal quality and performance in-
creases the demand for resources and materials that fulfill certain properties to achieve the preferable
deliverable. For instance, the case of Electric Vehicles (EVs) offers an alternative to conventional vehicles
which is considered more sustainable. However, the use of critical materials for the battery manufacturing
used in EVs has created concerns regarding the depletion of natural resources. [66]
An approach to address the problematic aspect of overconsumption of Critical Materials CRMs could
Page 28 of 67
==PAGE:37==
be their replacement with other materials similar in properties and less toxic. The CRM’s attributes
are considered the optimal choice for the manufacturing of EV batteries, while some alternatives could
provide equal performance to the final product, with lower environmental loads. [66]
Even though this direction supposedly presents clear ecological benefits, there are also drawbacks
linked to it. These are focused on increased needs for materials and thus product size and weight. [66]
According to this alternative solution, except for the additional resource requirements that affect the
beginning of the LC of the batteries, their performance, as well as the energy requirements, are also under
question. [66] This implies possible environmental burdens within the use phase, as well as lower durability
of the product. Since this option, is under study additional research and investigation are required to
confirm the actual benefits and burdens of CRM alternatives. [66] Generally biodiversity and climate can
be possibly impacted by this strategy.
4.3.7
Lean manufacturing and cleaner production and environmental trade-offs
Within the textile manufacturing sector, the production of cotton suggests a clear example of cleaner
production. Lean manufacturing is considered a more sustainable way of producing fabrics for example in
terms of energy consumption and CO2 emissions. However, that might not be true regarding the excessive
amount of water needed for growing cotton. [38] In addition, depending on the geographical area, the
process of growing and harvesting cotton can have an impact on the local biodiversity by interfering with
it repetitively until the finalization of cotton production. [38] On top of that, the CO2 emissions due to
cotton transportation might also be taken into account.
Depending on the location of the manufacturer and the distance from which the resources have to
be traveled the transportation emissions change, therefore the environmental impact might overcome the
benefits. Biodiversity, fresh water, and climate can be potentially affected by this circular strategy.
”It takes so many liters of water just to grow cotton and it takes a lot of biodiversity from
where it’s grown.”, Interviewee 3
4.3.8
Product longevity and environmental trade-offs
The design for longevity has been considered an effective way to prevent the frequent replacement
of products with new ones. [6] The concept behind this scenario supports the idea that achieving long-
lasting and durable products will decrease the need to purchase new similar products, and therefore the
requirement for raw materials as well as the waste generation would decelerate. [67] This can positively
affect the environment, by preserving the natural resources and preventing pollution due to disposal. [6]
Beyond technical product longevity, subjective longevity is influenced by timeless design aesthetics and
consumer loyalty or emotional connection. [27]
There are however several environmental implications accompanying the benefits of achieving product
longevity. Obsolescence constitutes one of the fundamental because older long-lasting products lack in
many cases of properties provided by the newest releases rendering them outdated and replaced. This
results in resource waste and inefficient exploitation of the energy invested in the product’s durability. [67]
Page 29 of 67
==PAGE:38==
Besides, the repair and maintenance of products with long life spans might be often complicated, and
time-consuming and therefore lead to early disposal, despite their design with the opposite ambitions, thus
resulting in waste generation. [67] In addition to this, relying on the everlasting of a product can hinder
the adoption of new technologies, promising the potential development of more sustainable solutions and
therefore maintaining higher energy consumption solutions related to outdated commodities. [67] The
aforementioned environmental trade-offs are applicable in the case of subjective product longevity as
well. Therefore, the environmental categories affected in this case are biodiversity, and climate.
4.3.9
Low consumables and environmental trade-offs
Products considered efficient regarding their energy needs and consumption during the use phase are
currently attracting more and more attention as they offer an optimal environmental solution. [68] EVs
and other devices, featuring low consumption of energy while in use, constitute a preferable option at the
moment. [68,69] Several examples of everyday life belong to this category, such as EVs, laptops, mobile
phones, or power tools. The demand for these types of products seems to grow rapidly and constantly. [68]
At the same time, some of the critical metals that are necessary for serving the resources of this industry
are rare earth, indium, tantalum, nickel, manganese, cobalt, and aluminium. [68]
Despite the potential energy-saving benefits of these options, the strong requirements in terms of
rare earth materials for their production demonstrate a strong correlation with concerns related to the
extraction and supply of materials for the manufacturing sector. [68] More specifically, the manufacturing
of batteries to fulfill the demand for vehicles’ and devices’ low consumption requires the sourcing and use of
cobalt. [68] In the case of cobalt the risk is high, due to its suitability for the manufacturing of lithium-ion
batteries (LIBs), but also its questionable sourcing practices to ensure its long-term availability. [68]
Regardless of the increased need for rare materials, not enough attention is given to the preservation
of their sources over the long term ensuring the material supply for this industry. An immediate conse-
quence of continuous extraction of critical materials for LIBs alongside the absence of planning on how
to recirculate them as well as their components might lead to additional waste generation. [69]
In addition to that, the manufacturing processing of LIBs includes connective methods, such as ad-
hesive, physical joints, or binders which might increase the complexities associated with a recirculating
scenario when mainly relying on disassembly. Recycling constitutes a case for which disassembly is needed
for the materials to be recycled. Even though it suggests a solution to the environmental impact of the
EoL for LIBs, the recycling process itself ends up providing a poorly performed outcome, because of the
energy consumption at the stage of disassembly and also the possible cross-contamination of the mate-
rials to be recycled. [69] More specifically, the importance of reducing the power needs for disassembly
correlates with the need to avoid Global Warming Potential (GWP). [69] On the contrary, ensuring the
strength of connectors is crucial for the performance of the LIBs at the use phase. It should, therefore, be
necessary to avoid compromising the batteries’ durability and functionality in favor of efficient recycling,
since that would discard the initial goal for the existence of low consumables. [69]
Another example is self-sufficient buildings, which are equipped with materials and electronic devices to
control and minimize their need for energy during the use phase. This value comes together with complex
Page 30 of 67
==PAGE:39==
and energy-intensive technicalities procedures during the construction phase. Despite the achievement
of a high reduction of energy needs while usage, the embodied energy at the beginning of the LC could
easily overcome the overall energy usage of a conventional building. [70] In conclusion, biodiversity and
climate are potentially affected by low consumables.
4.4
Energy and environmental trade-offs
The development of green technologies such as wind and solar energy has gained significant attention
in recent decades. These renewable energy sources offer a sustainable alternative to traditional fossil fuels,
which contribute to pollution and climate change, and a transition to them can reduce the dependency
on harmful energy sources. [71]
However, the manufacturing of wind turbines or solar panels, which are relevant energy sources for
sustainable electricity production, requires the use of critical materials. Hence, there might be a risk
associated with securing these material supplies in a long-term scenario. [72]
Moreover, the over-consumption of natural resources currently providing the variety of critical ma-
terials required for the development of RE technologies constitutes a concern about the future of this
perspective on energy production. [72]
Besides, the procedures for extracting materials for the manufacturing of low consumables are linked
to harmful processing that affects natural biodiversity. [71,72]
At the same time, little effort has been put into recycling or reusing these critical materials. [71,72]
While considering recycling critical materials as an option, the negative environmental impacts might
exceed the benefits, due to transportation emissions. [72] This consequence refers to the cases, where
recycling cannot take place at the same production site. [72] However, this reflects most cases since
recycling in place is not feasible in most scenarios. [53,72,73]
Several underlying factors are responsible for the absence of research on implementing Closed-Loop
Supply Chains (CLSC) in CRMs, including the complexity of CRM recycling. At the same time, various
opinions on the topic have been observed among manufacturers of relevant products. [71] The decision-
making regarding the design of solar and Wind Turbines does not often consider the EoL options and
manufacturers mainly rely on the long-term functionality and durability these solutions promise. However,
the life span of solar panels for example is normally shorter than the served building. [71,72] This prevents
the possibility of proposals concerning recycling the CRMs used in RE technologies since durability testing
can be considered ambiguous.
In this CE case, several trade-offs are presented as well. These are relevant to waste generation due to
the lack of recirculation plans, and the potential exhaustion of the natural resources, affecting biodiversity,
and climate change.
4.5
Logistics and environmental trade-offs
One of the sectors affecting the environmental impact of manufacturing refers to logistics.
This
process is responsible for the management of the goods and their allocation from the production site to
Page 31 of 67
==PAGE:40==
the customers. Since it includes transportation and packaging among other procedures it can result in
environmental impacts due to high consumption of materials and transportation emissions. [74]
To address these issues, effort is put into organizing these activities, so that their contribution to
impacting the environment is reduced. An example of such attempts is the use of machinery that stretches
the plastic wrap more than the conventional devices serving this purpose. This option offers the possibility
of using less material for wrapping and therefore plastics reduction, less material intense packaging as
well as weight and volume reduction. Despite the seemingly efficiency of this solution, there have been
environmental implications since the device also consumes higher amounts of energy due to increased
power needs. A similar case is detected in a different type of device which can fold the paper used in
packaging fragile items for protection. This folding allows air gaps in the paper offering the opportunity
for less material usage. However, this option demands as well increased power needs, leading to increased
energy consumption. (Interviewee 5) Thus in favor of reduction of material use, energy consumption can
burden the climate.
4.6
Recirculate
4.6.1
Upgrade and environmental trade-offs
The constant economic development constitutes an underlying reason behind overconsumption. Every
day, new products are released on the market creating the sense that the majority of the existing ones are
outdated, and limit people’s lives since they do not provide the maximum functional benefits compared to
recently developed goods. Besides the need for technology to be updated, there are many rational causes
leading to the demand for the acquisition of the newest product features or properties. [57]
However, since it is not considered sustainable to discard items following the rhythm of industrial
development, the strategy of upgrade enters the framework of providing updated properties to older
products.
Upgrading exists to extend the LC of products and increase their values by incorporating
additional features or properties. This covers a wide range of products referring to electronic devices
but also non-electronic hardware. The former corresponds to software updates and it applies to laptops
or smartphones, facilitating their compatibility with the newest software advancements.
The second
scenario is related to physical products to which an improvement, meaning the addition of a feature
would increase their performance. For instance, adding insulation to a building aiming at improving its
thermal characteristics constitutes upgrading. [57] This technique increases the energy performance of the
building improving the energy loss regarding temperature, such as unnecessary heating system use during
the winter. However, at the same time, it might intensify the material needs. [57]
There is also the scenario, that combines the two aforementioned solutions, that is when housing
is transformed into a smart home. Despite the overall control of energy use, the minimum electricity
needs are increased to sustain the smart-home concept. [57] In addition, CRMs are included in the
electronic parts, the recycling of which is controversial and complicated, which restricts the EoL options
for recirculating them. [71] Biodiversity and climate can be damaged due to such consequences.
Page 32 of 67
==PAGE:41==
4.6.2
Reuse and environmental trade-offs
A significant amount of the total waste consists of completely functional products, that have not
reached the EoL. There are several reasons behind this conclusion, including social aspects as well. It
is crucial to contribute to the reduction of these numbers and facilitate the extension of these products’
lives. For this purpose, reuse can be utilized and working items can continue to exist in favor of the
avoidance of the environmental cost of additional production of new ones. Reuse can be applied at the
retail level, while is also possible for business-level scenarios. The latter is translated as components that
can be used at the assembly phase of the production, when for instance a manufacturing company selects
to produce some parts from the beginning but to reuse some other parts, which are taken from other
not used items. Another example refers to companies, that are responsible for reselling used products or
producing reusable ones.
Reuse aims to provide more than one life for goods and items. The concept is to use them again and
again without going through retention or refurbishment procedures for the elimination of their overall
impact. It is defined by the use of a material or an element again for the same function or for a different
function and it excludes Value Retention Processes (VRPs). [70] Reuse is complemented directly through
Design for Disassembly (DfD) since the components of a product or a building can be separated safely
and directly reused. [75]
Reuse is linked to a low risk of burdening the environment since the products can be handed to the
next user without the interference of any processing phase. However, it is realistic to consider some simple
VRPs including washing and cleaning, which can impact water consumption. [75] It is thus noticeable, that
the higher the complexity of VRPs is, it might be translated into higher the environmental consequences.
Moreover, the negative ecological influence is increased, when the rate of reusability overcomes the rate
of the actual reuse since the energy and resources spent on the accomplishment of this feature allowing
to the components be functional for more than on LCs are not outweighed if the product is handled and
disposed of as a conventional one. [75]
Despite the low expected impact of this CE strategy, there is still a questionable aspect, which is
the environmental cost associated with transportation. Transportation emissions depend mostly on the
traveling distance required for each product to reach new users. As a result, considering transportation
when selecting reuse as an approach is critical for the estimation of its benefits in comparison to its
drawbacks. [18,75] Overall, the implementation of reuse might affect the categories of climate, biodiversity,
and freshwater.
4.6.3
Repair and Maintenance and environmental trade-offs
Since contemporary society needs to handle massive volumes of waste, any efforts for the reduction of
material waste are fundamental. Among other ways of preventing waste generation, there is the extension
of the life of products through repair and maintenance. The concept behind the appropriate treatment of
various items supports that maximizing the LC of an item while belonging to its first user will outweigh to
the highest possible degree the environmental cost for the production. Consequently, the waste generation
Page 33 of 67
==PAGE:42==
might be delayed while overconsumption of new-released products of the same kind might be avoided.
At the same time, while taking advantage of maximizing the product’s lifetime, which provides signif-
icant environmental benefits, by preventing waste generation, there are also consequences. Maintaining,
outdated devices implies the preservation of highly energy-consuming products compared to new low-
consuming ones, which also require energy-intensive fixings. [57]
In other cases maintenance or repair might contain VRP, requiring material consumption when addi-
tives or additional material are used, while also water consumption for washing. [18, 75] The aforemen-
tioned trade-offs indicate possible impact in climate change, biodiversity and freshwater.
4.6.4
Refurbish
Refurbishment constitutes an approach to support prolonged LC of products and thus reduce the
sourcing procedures and waste generation. Through fixing components and even whole products, the
lifetime of the product can be extended, serving long-term needs and eliminating the demand for additional
production. This approach demonstrates several ecological benefits because it excludes the phases of
sourcing, manufacturing, and disposal compared to the linear process of conventional products.
Despite the benefits of this approach, when reuse is not direct and refurbishment is required the energy
spent on VRPs results in a higher environmental impact. That is, in the cases where conventional man-
ufacturing is less impactful, the refurbishment of components indicates increased environmental damage
compared to benefits. [75] Especially, when replacements of sub-components for instance are required the
environmental consequences might be even higher, affecting the climate and biodiversity. [75]
4.6.5
Remanufacture and environmental trade-offs
Remanufacturing describes the process of returning a part or a product to its original form, transfusing
its initial or optimized properties. [76] It includes disassembly and reassembly, cleaning, and fixings to
ensure the reclaim of at least qualities equal to a newly manufactured corresponding item. [76]
When remanufacturing includes the reuse of modular components, the ensuring of their functional
properties is at high risk. [75]
The concept of this approach is concentrated on the employment of reversible attaching methods,
such as screwing, nailing, or bolted joints for the assembly of a product. [75] The possibilities of saving all
the elements and preserving their functionality are maximized compared to the cases where conventional
attaching methods, such as adhesive materials or welding, have been applied. [75] Therefore, it allows the
extension of the life of the component, excluding the need for the production of new ones for the creation
of a new product. Even in a scenario, where not all the elements are functional after disassembly, only
the non-functional ones will be needed to be produced again. Among the beneficial aspects of DfD are
waste reduction, the eliminated consumption of resources, and the extension of LC. [77]
Despite the positive features of DfD, the latter seems responsible for burdening the environment in
different ways, such as higher energy consumption and embodied GHG emissions. More specifically, an
assessment was conducted to compare conventional External Wall Insulation (EWI) systems to circular
modular wall panels and indicated higher Embodied Energy (EE), as well as Embodied Carbon(GHG). [77]
Page 34 of 67
==PAGE:43==
The underlying cause behind these consequences is the requirement for additional materials or fixings to
serve the nature of DfD, which justifies the higher need for material energy and carbon emissions. [77]
Components that are meant to be reused after disassembly, for example, should retain their initial
properties, in order to be able to work exactly as during the beginning of their LC. Since this is not always
possible at the second LC of the used element, VRP is introduced to support the restoration and thus
its initial value. [75] VRP might include cleaning in the form of washing or the employment of additional
materials to perform fixings. As a result, this might affect the environment in the categories of natural
resources and water consumption. In addition to these trade-offs energy required for the completion of
the repair activities intensifies the environmental impact through its consumption and emissions. [75]
Especially in cases where there are disposals or no reuse of any part, DfD is a more impactful method
for the environment. The additional energy and resources consumed to achieve the disassembly aspect
will be wasted since new parts will need to be manufactured while the ones that were supposed to be
reused will be disposed of. It is, therefore, necessary to secure the optimal effort for direct reuse when
DfD is implemented.
In addition to the accomplishment of disassembly features the embodied energy and carbon emission
included in this method impacts remarkably the ”first life” energy requirements of the product. [77] This
indicated the correlation to the overall impact on the number of LCs assigned to it. An appropriate
approach leading to an actual estimation of the total impact is to include all the possible LCs within a
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). [77]
It is remarkable to mention that disassembly can be achieved more safely when DfD is followed during
the development. Indeed, if disassembly is applied to a product, that has been manufactured traditionally,
there is a high risk of damage and exclusion of the option for reuse. [75]
Accordingly, when remanufacturing is selected it is fundamental to weigh its harmful aspects based
on the components and material in each product case, since biodiversity and climate can be affected.
4.6.6
Repurpose and environmental trade-offs
Repurpose as a CE strategy refers to the use of products without any intervention to them at their
EoL. Examples of this method are the use of Nutella containers for storing or the Mærsk containers
for housing. [43] According to these cases there are limited VRPs and fixings required such as cleaning
and processes to support the desirable properties when repurposing is employed. [27] As a result, it is
considered one of the most beneficial for the environment circular strategies, while the environmental
loads are limited due to the reduced processing.
Even though new life is given to products that are considered waste, there are still a few environmental
implications in this CE strategy. For instance, the cleaning that is a required stage before the new life of
the products can be energy-intensive. [78] In addition, based on the notion of the acquired life, additional
resources might be necessary to support the required functional properties of the former. [78] Besides the
performance of the products that were not specifically developed for the new purpose might be weaker and
therefore lead to shorter life-span compared to conventional solutions. [63] In such cases, regular repairs
are performed, resulting in more resources and energy consumption. [63] Consequently, the aforementioned
Page 35 of 67
==PAGE:44==
environmental trade-offs impact biodiversity, and climate, due to material and energy needs for repairs
and cleaning.
4.6.7
Recycle and environmental trade-offs
Recycling is a process that diverts waste from landfills and transforms it into valuable resources.
Instead of extracting raw materials, recycling processes reuse and repurpose used materials and parts.
This can occur at various stages of the lifecycle including before production, during pre-use, or after
end-of-life. Recycling offers an alternative to traditional disposal methods and helps conserve natural
resources. [27]
Due to the popularity of recycling among the CE strategies preferred within the manufacturing sector,-
aiming to reduce the environmental burden of industrial activity- there has been increased interest in
understanding both its benefits and limitations. While recycling can be effective, research has shown that
it may not always be as environmentally beneficial as initially thought, and in some cases, can even have
negative consequences.
In general, selecting recycling as the optimal CE depends on the material to be recycled. For some
types of materials such as concrete, the environmental impact of recycling might outweigh the beneficial
side of the method, because of the excessive amount of energy consumption and emissions that result
in negative consequences for the environment. [53, 75] As a result, the extraction of virgin materials for
the production of concrete would be less impactful. In addition, according to the recycling technique
followed, high water use or additional cement might be required, leading to increased water consumption
and GHG emissions compared to the linear production of concrete. [55] Moreover, transportation emissions
according to the distance also burden the environment. [70]
Wood recycling also faces challenges related to energy consumption. Despite reducing carbon emissions
compared to incineration or landfilling, wood recycling requires significantly more energy than recycling
materials such as aluminum, plastic, or steel. Wood recycling can consume up to 3 times more energy
than traditional wood sourcing. This energy-intensive process limits the environmental benefit of wood
recycling which is only prevalent when the recycling process occurs close to the location of demolition -
such as construction sites. [70,75] [70]
In cases such as EPS recycling indicates an impact to ozone-depleting substances in the upper at-
mosphere due to the energy requirements for the recycling. [53] In conclusion, climate, land, ocean, and
freshwater can be negatively affected by recycling.
4.6.8
Cascade and environmental trade-offs
Despite advancements in recycling technology, there are instances where recycled materials do not
meet the original quality standards. To avoid wasting resources, these materials can often be repurposed
for different applications. Examples of this scenario are the utilization of textile waste for insulation
material. [27] While this cascading strategy helps manage waste, it’s important to note that it can also
have environmental implications.
Page 36 of 67
==PAGE:45==
Cascading recyclable materials is a valuable strategy when closed-loop recycling is not feasible. While
it might effectively reduce waste, it is important to consider potential environmental risks. For example,
repurposing old car tires as sport fields’ fillers for their floors has raised concerns in the Netherlands.
Although this approach avoids waste, it has been linked to potential health and environmental impacts,
particularly on aquatic life. [50]
This specific concept occurred, after the realization that the material of the tyres at the EoL did
demonstrate low quality, thus only a limited amount of granulated rubber could be used to produce new
tyres. [50] Except for the ocean affected in this case, the energy used for the necessary processes results
in emissions and influences climate. [79]
The results of the theoretical and data collection presented in this chapter describe the potential
environmental trade-offs of CE and their extended overview can be found in the Table 4. There are also
in Appendix B, in the form that they are displayed in the decision making tool described in the Section
5. This is the entire catalogue that connects the CE strategies with the environmental trade-offs, which
is accompanied by explanatory comments and suggestions for further management of each case.
Page 37 of 67
==PAGE:46==
5
Environmental trade-off assistant( Proposed decision-making tool)
5.1
Purpose and function
The Environmental Trade-off Assistant(ETA) is a tool designed within the scope of this Master thesis
to provide initial guidance on integrating CE strategies in product design and development while avoid-
ing environmental trade-offs. Identifying potential environmental trade-offs early in the product’s LC,
helps decision-makers and company practitioners to make more informed choices and minimize negative
environmental impacts. [1]
Without a comprehensive understanding of CE strategies, decision-makers may inadvertently make
biased choices based on limited knowledge, overlooking the full range of circularity options. Additionally,
research has shown that identifying and addressing environmental problems early in the products’ LC is
often neglected.
The ETA guides the user through all the fundamental key steps of selecting and understanding CE
applications and implications. At first, the LC phases, which are environmentally heavy throughout the
lifetime of a product have to be acknowledged. This step is crucial for the efficient final selection of the CE
strategies. According to the LC phase, the tool suggests relevant CE strategies to minimize environmental
impact. After the selection of one or more CE strategies for each selected LC phase, the results include
potential trade-offs per CE strategy, as well as which environmental category is impacted. The results also
include comments explaining possible reasons for the underlying causes of the trade-offs - extracted from
the research conducted and suggestions for further estimations of the impacts. The results are designed
to provide the user an overview of the implications, an opportunity to reselect and compare them with
other CE strategies’ impacts, and a learning experience of familiarizing themselves with the concept of
environmental trade-offs.
For business cases involving Product-Service Systems (PSS), the trade-off assistant incorporates a user
interface that allows decision-makers to select the primary purpose of the PSS. Options include result and
performance, access or availability, and long-life products. [3] Based on this selection, the tool suggests the
relevant CE strategies tailored to the specific PSS scenario (See Figure 7 ). The CE strategies related to
service development are a part of the ones that are utilized for product development. Thus the trade-offs
are in some cases similar for both options of service and product. However, it is important to facilitate
the selections through different paths, since the combinations and the overview might bear different user
implications. Furthermore, the ETA is designed to take into account the user journey attempting to
simplify the experience in predicting these trade-offs. Thus, it is fundamental for the overall functionality
of the tool to include and illustrate separate options for pure products and product services. [80,81]
5.2
Contents and user flow
The final deliverable consists of three key elements, that fundamentally define its notion as a tool.
These are the model, that in this case is an Excel configurator, the data that are included in the cata-
logue with the environmental trade-offs of CE, and the method, that describes the structural procedures
Page 38 of 67
==PAGE:47==
Figure 7: Life cycle phases of products, Business models for services, and strategies for products and
services
synthesized the outcome. [82] (See Figure 9 )
More specifically the tool to be efficient will need the Excel model, accompanied by an instruction
Page 39 of 67
==PAGE:48==
guide for users explaining practicalities and the resonates of the structure. For the holistic understanding
of the concept of CE a full table combining all the CE strategies with environmental trade-offs for which
the former can be responsible. Comments of examples referring to each case are also included. More
specifically the contents are:
• A user guide, explaining all the necessary steps to navigate, properly use the tool, and get valid
results.
• A complete catalogue of all the environmental trade-offs collected from the research of this project.
They are in accordance with the CE strategies that are responsible for them, the environmental
categories that are burdened, and explanatory comments. (See Appendix B)
• The tool, where the user interacts, makes selections, and receives results.
• A guide for updates and future optimizations of the tools. This is only useful for administrators.
The user has to follow a few steps to receive the results, that is the possible implications the CE
strategies might evoke.(Figure 8) These are the following:
• Select the LC phase or LC phases, which are environmentally heavy in the case of their product
development, according to the existing knowledge of the current manufacturing methods.
(See
Figure 10
• Thereafter select one or more CE strategies, that could provide a solution for minimizing the iden-
tified impacts. Users have to select CE strategies for each chosen LC phase.
• Get the results, that is tables for each CE strategy’s environmental impacts including:
– The environmental trade-offs.
– The affected environmental categories
– Comments explaining via examples the implications.
– Suggestions for how to further assess and calculate the impact of the trade-offs, specifically for
their manufacturing procedures. This last category of results exists since the tool is designed
to provide a holistic, but not detailed or personalized overview of CE environmental trade-offs.
That means each manufacturing case requires further detailed LCA to ensure their pragmatic
impacts.(See Figure 11
• Review the results and iterate if needed to eliminate trade-offs
5.3
Tools and methods
For the design of the tool, the main purpose was the creation of a clear and easy-to-understand guide
for manufacturers, which prevents misuse to the maximum possible degree and thus guarantees optimal
results. These aspects are critical for its usefulness and the efficiency of it. To achieve this goal several
Page 40 of 67
==PAGE:49==
criteria to be fulfilled were established, and following an ideation phase took place. For the ideation phase,
six options for the possible formulation of it were drafted and evaluated based on the criteria. (Table 5)
Besides, each of the options was given a score for each criterion, concluding in a total score, according
to which the final selection was made. The option that collected the higher score was Option 6. Despite
the highest score of Option 6, there was a criterion for which the score was lower compared to the other
options.
Since this option was focused on ensuring the optimal use of the model, preventing misleading, and
a user-friendly experience even for individuals with no experience in circularity, it constitutes a funnel
imitating the diversity of the possible selections in parallel to the user flow. This functions serves the
efficiency of the use, and secures the avoidance of confusion from the user’s perspective. [80,81] However,
it also excludes the free choice to mix and match even seemingly less relevant CE strategies.
This
functionality could be preferred by CE experienced decision makers, who could make biased selections,
which could actually be reasonable relying on their in-depth knowledge.
This observation highlighted the opportunity to refine the solution and provide this feature to strengthen
the model. The enablement of this aspect is accomplished with the provision of a holistic overview of all
the LC phases, CE strategies, environmental trade-offs, explanatory comments, and further suggestions in
the form of a table indicating their interconnections. Consequently, the final model combines the funnel
function for the clarified user flow with the quality of offering the total overview of all the available data.
Page 41 of 67
==PAGE:50==
Criteria
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3
Option 4
Option 5
Option 6
Guide users to understand
their
products’
impactful
phases of LC.
+
+
++
+
+
+++
Guide users to select the
most suitable CE strategies
to reduce the environmen-
tal impact based on the hot
spots of the previous phases
+
+
+
++
+++
+++
Lead users to the possible en-
vironmental impacts because
of the CE strategies they se-
lected during the previous
step.
+
+++
+
+
++
+++
Provide an efficient overview
of the possible CE strategies.
More experienced users on
CE.
+++
+
+
+++
++
+
Provide an efficient overview
of the possible CE trade-offs.
More experienced users on
CE.
+++
+++
+
+++
++
+
Guide users to evaluate their
decision and modify accord-
ingly (change the strategies,
or combine them with one
more or find a solution for
the trade-offs)
+
+
+
+++
+
+
Understandable
user
flow
without the need for instruc-
tions. Clear steps.
+
++
++
++
++
+++
Efficient time-wise
+
+
+
+
++
+++
Probability to edit the reg-
ular way of working for the
tool.
+
+
++
+
+
+
Score
13
14
12
17
16
19
Table 5: Established criteria for the formulation of the tool. + Lower score, ++ Medium score,+++
Highest score
Page 42 of 67
==PAGE:51==
Figure 8: Environmental trade-off assistant structure and user flow
Page 43 of 67
==PAGE:52==
Figure 9: Environmental trade-off assistant frontpage.
Figure 10: The environment of the tool, where the users make selections
Page 44 of 67
==PAGE:53==
Figure 11: Example of Environmental trade-off assistant’s results
Page 45 of 67
==PAGE:54==
6
Discussion and Research implications
6.1
Discussion
This research dissertation covers the environmental trade-offs, which are one of the three dimensions,
and the social and economic trade-offs. The latter is not in the scope of this work, due to the environmental
orientation of the Master’s thesis. However, it is suggested to be considered a holistic approach when
attempting to tackle the trade-offs of circularity.
It is significant to declare the fact that no research has been conducted for economic and social trade-
offs, and the aforementioned references constitute high-level personal observations that occurred during
the data collection for environmental trade-offs.
Other attempts by researchers have suggested decision-making frameworks as well. One case is the
concept of Socio Multi-Criteria Evaluation(SMCE), which concentrates on providing a tool supporting
decisions on CE strategies by weighting and comparing the impact of them. [83] The weighting is decided
by the stakeholders, according to the most important of the three dimensions, namely economic, environ-
mental, and social, for their case. That is, they decide for instance that the social dimension is crucial and
compare the potential CE strategies based on the social trade-offs it might cause. In this example, since
social impact is the main concern they do not consider the environmental and economic implications. [83]
Despite the inclusion of all aspects of sustainability, the fact the decision on the prioritization of them
is taken by the users implies a high risk of biases for the final selection. The reasons behind this risk are
detected in the possible occurrence of increased overall impact across all three aspects if the two of them
are ignored during the evaluation. In conclusion, this challenged the objectives of the decision-making
procedure. A potential improvement for this issue could be the comparison of the CE strategies according
to calculated impact in sustainability pillars and upon this total result, the finalizing of the decision could
ensure the minimization of trade-offs.
Another attempt to prevent trade-offs is presented in the Material Flow Analysis (MFA) framework,
which is responsible for mapping the journey of materials from the sourcing to the EoL phase. [84] It aims
at identifying deficiencies or opportunities for CE involvement and impact reduction.
MFA covers potential environmental impacts related to resource depletion and waste generation.
However, it does not consider other processes within manufacturing, such as energy needs and emissions.
Ignoring the latter increases the risk of unidentified greater impacts originating from other parts of the
production and following possible further environmental implications. A secondary limitation of MFA is
the necessity of accurate data at an early stage of product development, increasing the effort required
for utilizing it and demonstrating the risk of questionable results in case of inaccurate input. MFA could
be strengthened if it considers the assessment of more environmental impacts deriving from all phases
of production. In general, it might also be more useful at a later stage of product development, when
specific data are available for a detailed assessment.
The ETA designed within this Master’s thesis aims to initiate an attempt the predict the environmental
trade-offs covering all different scenarios and combinations of CE strategies. Even though it is focused
only on environmental trade-offs and does not currently cover social and economic, like SMCE, it ensures
Page 46 of 67
==PAGE:55==
efficient inclusion supporting all parameters established within its design. It facilitates an objective user
journey and time-efficient iterations providing an initial overview of potential implications at a realistic
and sufficient accuracy level for the early development stages.
Moreover, the ETA framework unlike MFA considers all types of environmental impacts and all strate-
gies corresponding to different LC phases and production procedures. This feature empowers its ability
to be applicable for predicting trade-offs for the entire manufacturing journey and decision-makers can
rely on it for the high-level analysis to set a direction for further investigation.
Lastly, ETA is structured to cover a wide spectrum of cases in the manufacturing sector including
products and services as well, and provides a separate decision journey for each one. It considers all iden-
tified LC phases for products, all identified business models for services as well as cross-phases strategies
that are relatable to both types of products and services.
6.2
Limitations
The concept of CE is widely embraced and a lot of academic and industrial work is dedicated to
it.
However, the existing research presents limitations regarding the implications of circularity.
The
majority of the publications give prominence to the beneficial features of CE, while the consideration
of the consequences even the unintended ones is often insufficient and restricted to proposals for future
research.
When CE trade-offs are investigated the focus is mainly on the economic aspect against the social and
the environmental. [85] During the theoretical and empirical data collection of this project the financial
drawbacks were highlighted as an obstacle to a broader adoption of circularity.
CE is currently solution-oriented towards addressing the problematic aspects of linear economy, that
postpones the prediction of future issues and weaknesses of its own.
During the collection of the theoretical data, there were several descriptions of CE environmental trade-
offs that were non-relevant. This can be interpreted through the high levels of interest in the financial
aspect of the industrial activity from the business perspective, even though the CE presents economic
advantages as well. [85] The fact that investments are necessary in many cases for the integration of CE
resonates with the struggles of smaller companies to follow this path according to comments from the
industry representatives during the semi-structured interviews. They clearly stated that even in cases
in which companies invest in consultancy on the transition from the linear to the circular way, the final
decision, often discarded, depends on the size of the company and the financial resources. Therefore, the
financial trade-offs are certainly a crucial factor to be considered.
On the contrary, the social trade-offs of CE were minimally observed within this highly interesting
journey. It is of high interest that the only mention of the social consequences was the case of health risk
due to a circular strategy, which was an insight from the industry experts as well.
It is significant to declare the fact that no research has been conducted for economic and social trade-
offs, and the aforementioned references constitute high-level personal observations that occurred during
the data collection for environmental trade-offs.
These research constraints restricted the literature review results highlighting the implications of the
Page 47 of 67
==PAGE:56==
project. As a consequence, there are no findings or inputs for two of the CE strategies identified, namely
for rework and recover. [27]
Reflecting on the research conducted, an interesting observation refers to the terminology diversity
used among the authors for the description of the same CE strategies. This restriction might have affected
the identification phase of the SLR, which was based on elements such as the title, the abstract, and the
keywords. During the later phase of SLR it was ascertained that there has been a lot of differentiation in
the interpretation of strategies. For instance, under the umbrella of the word reuse, there were often cases
referring to remanufacture or refurbish. The framework on which this study was structured distinguishes
them, while in several publications they were overlapping.
It is intriguing to understand the various
perceptions of circularity, even though it might have constituted an obstacle to the optimal data collection
for this project. Therefore it is significant to acknowledge the limitations of the research material and
propose further research taking into account these unexpected abnormalities
Page 48 of 67
==PAGE:57==
7
Future Perspectives
The current work suggests an efficient framework for predicting the potential environmental trade-offs
of CE. To further strengthen the mechanism of the tool there are a few proposed steps for evaluation and
future improvements.
7.1
Proposed plan for the evaluation of Environmental trade-offs assistant
As explained in the methodology describing the structure of the research project, following the stage
of DS I, the PS II is responsible for the validation of the solution. This phase is proposed to be conducted
in the future for the enhancement of the dynamic of the designed tool.
Firstly, a testing phase would be able to provide valuable results on the effectiveness of the solu-
tion. According to the theoretical and empirical data collection, the first step is to include the industry
representatives who provided their insights to use the ETA and express their opinion on its strengths,
weaknesses, and share their ideas for modifications. To implement this testing process it is necessary to
organize workshop sessions with the individuals during which they will have the opportunity to review
the tool in detail, that is in-depth reading of the environmental trade-offs catalogue and arguing on the
validity of the data. They should also be given the task to use the interactive tool either on their own or
including their colleagues from their professional environment to test its utilization and dynamics within
a group. For this purpose, they have to follow the decision-making procedure at the early stage of the
development of a product or a service and use the tool to understand the impact of their case. They
should select the relevant CE strategies, review the results for the potential trade-offs, and iterate on their
initial decisions if necessary. The case of the development on which they will work can be a real case from
the portfolio of their companies or a proposed one for the requirements of the workshop.
Upon this exercise, they would be able to evaluate the main features of the tool, such as user flow
and usability, results, and time efficiency.
A reserved period allowing open dialogue and additional
questions is necessary to capture insights that might expand the horizons of the scope and the plan
offering opportunities for adding additional value to the project and the product. After the incorporation
of the feedback, a second round of testing could be scheduled for further iterations and polishing.
7.2
Proposals for development of the Environmental trade-offs assistant
The need to use a holistic approach to efficiently address a problem has been investigated, particularly
when referring to the spectrum of CE trade-offs. While this work is concentrated on the environmental
trade-offs of the CE strategies, it has explained the equally crucial role of financial and social trade-offs.
Their consideration is critical for a successful journey towards achieving sustainability for the planet, the
society, and the economy.
Therefore, expanding the framework to include possible social and economic implications of circularity
offers features to completely cover the prediction of trade-offs in all three dimensions of sustainability and
their categories.
Page 49 of 67
==PAGE:58==
To apply these modifications, two research procedures are proposed, parallel to the current one. More
explicitly to sufficiently cover the majority of the potential trade-offs in the economic and the social
pillar of sustainability when implementing CE, the collection of theoretical combined with empirical is
recommended. Upon the analysis of the results, the data collected can be added to the Excel configurator
alongside the environmental trade-offs.
A useful feature to add would be offering the user the possibility to invert the journey and start
from identified trade-offs resulting in responsible CE strategies. This multidirectional upgrade of the tool
presents a widening of the scope for this tool since it changes the scenery and allows manufacturers who
have already progressed in their development procedures to utilize it. For instance, if in a later stage, a
type of unintended impact is detected the decision-makers will be able to initiate an identification journey
for the underlying causes of these consequences. The user flow should be the opposite, that is from the
selection of the trade-offs and the impacts should guide the users to spot the responsible CE strategies,
the LC phase to which the strategy belongs, and refine the circularity approach.
Regardless of the aforementioned suggestions for evaluation and further development, the tool must
be maintained and updated with additional or modified data according to contemporary academic and
industrial knowledge throughout time.
Page 50 of 67
==PAGE:59==
8
Conclusions
This thesis aims to investigate the environmental trade-offs of CE strategies and provide the manu-
facturers with a tool to support decision-making towards prediction and avoidance of these trade-offs at
the early stage of product development.
The study highlighted the significance of CE and the potential benefits for the environment if holis-
tically adopted from the manufacturing industry. It also explained the concept of trade-offs in design
for sustainability, validated their criticality, and analyzed the necessity of their consideration to prevent
negative consequences. The dynamics between environmental trade-offs and CE strategy and the factors
influencing this correlation were also described.
The tool developed during this dissertation constitutes a novel contributor covering the gaps of the ex-
isting prediction tools on environmental trade-offs, since it considers a broader spectrum of manufacturing
processes for products and services as products, and explores various environmental impacts.
It is revealed that companies tend to follow circularity and support the zero impact initiative, while
their decisions often lack the fundamental structure and are made according to trends or considering
mainly financial interests.
It is fundamental for companies leaning towards employing CE to secure
the effectiveness of their strategic decisions alongside facilitating their financial interests.
This work
indicated a proposed structure for the identification of valid CE strategies for each case and accordingly
the prediction of potential trade-offs for the selected CE strategy. It is therefore crucial to detect the
type of impact that is aimed to be solved through circularity employment. One of the causes behind
this initial step is the prevention of an abstract selection of CE strategies ignoring the problem definition
and misleading the process. This risk certainly affects the optimal prediction of potential environmental
trade-offs. The framework designed within this project ensures the inclusion of all necessary steps to
guide companies to the optimal prediction of possible circularity implications. The results provided in the
framework include the environmental categories that are affected due to the trade-offs, and an explanation
of examples to resonate on the reasons behind the implications of CE strategies.
It is vital to invest in optimal CE strategies and predict the possible trade-offs to secure long-term
sustainability advantages for the environment. ETA allows manufacturers short and flexible iterations,
offering a great variety of results on different combinations of CE strategies and encouraging comparisons
in a time-efficient and user-friendly way.
Due to the high-level assessment, the ETA framework is currently designed to function up until the
end of this early stage of decision-making and following hand in the detailed assessment of the future
steps to specialized tools such as life-cycle assessment (LCA). It is significant to clarify the limitations of
the designed tool and its dynamics to be focused on the coverage of versatile cases and suitable to support
the early stages of decision-making rather than specifying calculations. The latter duty is aimed to be
transferred to a different specialized method.
Regarding the range of cases that are covered within this work, it relies on the existing knowledge
captured through the research conducted within a specific timeline, and future data updates are required
to maintain the long-term effectiveness of the tool.
Page 51 of 67
==PAGE:60==
Upon the constant updates required on the data, there are opportunities for further development and
improvements. The inclusion of economic and social trade-offs for instance would create a version of the
tool that offers simultaneous results and comparison changes across impacts in all three categories of en-
vironment, economy, and society. These additions would embrace the holistic addressing of sustainability
issues due to CE, securing balanced decisions and eliminating consequences. Lastly, the establishment of
persistent testing of the usability could structure a dynamic system and guarantee long-term alignment
with the manufacturers’ needs and the validity of the data.
Page 52 of 67
==PAGE:61==
References
[1] R. B. Gibson, “Avoiding sustainability trade-offs in environmental assessment,” Impact Assessment
and Project Appraisal, vol. 31, pp. 2–12, 3 2013.
[2] M. Kravchenko, CIRCit Norden (projekt), Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Sven Read, Nick Jio, and
Mimi Thian, Circular economy sustainability screening. Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[3] M. Kravchenko, CIRCit Norden (projekt), Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Sven Read, Nick Jio, and
Mimi Thian, Circular economy sustainability screening. Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[4] R. Greer, T. von Wirth, and D. Loorbach, “The Circular Decision-Making Tree: an Operational
Framework,” Circular Economy and Sustainability, vol. 3, pp. 693–718, 6 2023.
[5] V. Vines, M. Pasquali, S. Ganguli, and D. E. Meyer, “Understanding the trade-offs of national mu-
nicipal solid waste estimation methods for circular economy policy,” Journal of Cleaner Production,
vol. 412, 8 2023.
[6] L. Løvbak Berg and M. Hebrok, “Holding on or letting go:
Conflicting narratives of product
longevity,” Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol. 210, 11 2024.
[7] A. Amobonye, J. Lalung, M. K. Awasthi, and S. Pillai, “Fungal mycelium as leather alternative:
A sustainable biogenic material for the fashion industry,” Sustainable Materials and Technologies,
vol. 38, p. e00724, 12 2023.
[8] H. Wang, “Advantages of animal leather over alternatives and its medical applications,” European
Polymer Journal, vol. 214, p. 113153, 6 2024.
[9] T. Wu, J. C. Rocha, K. Berry, T. Chaigneau, M. Hamann, E. Lindkvist, J. Qiu, C. Schill, A. Shepon,
A. S. Cr´epin, and C. Folke, “Triple Bottom Line or Trilemma? Global Tradeoffs Between Prosperity,
Inequality, and the Environment,” World Development, vol. 178, 6 2024.
[10] “Ambitious corporate climate action - Science Based Targets Initiative.”
[11] “What are Science Based Targets? – Science Based Targets Network.”
[12] H. C. Oosterhoff, L. Golsteijn, A. Laurent, and M. W. Ryberg, “A new consistent framework for
assignment of safe operating space to B2C and B2B industries for use in absolute environmental
sustainability assessments,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 399, 5 2023.
[13] M. S. Hossain, J. A. Dearing, F. Eigenbrod, and F. A. Johnson, “Operationalizing safe operating
space for regional social-ecological systems,” Science of the Total Environment, vol. 584-585, pp. 673–
682, 4 2017.
[14] “NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM United States, 2022 EXECU-
TIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET,” tech. rep.
Page 53 of 67
==PAGE:62==
[15] M. Levinson, “What Is Manufacturing? Why Does the Definition Matter?,” tech. rep., 2017.
[16] S. Vilochani, Y. Borgianni, T. C. McAloone, and D. C. Pigosso, “An investigation into the extent
to which sustainable product development practices are implemented in manufacturing companies,”
Sustainable Production and Consumption, vol. 50, pp. 155–167, 10 2024.
[17] L. I. Acevedo, D. C. Pigosso, and T. C. McAloone, “Exploring the Landscape of Contemporary
Sustainability Philosophies: Origins, Synergies and Corporate Applications,” 2024.
[18] M. Z. Hauschild, S. Kara, and I. Røpke, “Absolute sustainability: Challenges to life cycle engineer-
ing,” CIRP Annals, vol. 69, pp. 533–553, 1 2020.
[19] M. Li, T. Wiedmann, K. Fang, and M. Hadjikakou, “The role of planetary boundaries in assessing
absolute environmental sustainability across scales,” 7 2021.
[20] “Catalyzing Value Chain Decarbonization Corporate Survey Results,” tech. rep.
[21] M. Wahlund and T. Hansen, “Exploring alternative economic pathways: a comparison of foundational
economy and Doughnut economics,” Sustainability: Science, Practice, and Policy, vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 171–186, 2022.
[22] M. Hausdorf and J. M. Timm, “Business research for sustainable development: How does sustain-
able business model research reflect doughnut economics?,” Business Strategy and the Environment,
vol. 32, pp. 3398–3416, 9 2023.
[23] M. Z. Hauschild, “Better - but is it good enough? On the need to consider both eco-efficiency and
eco-effectiveness to gauge industrial sustainability,” in Procedia CIRP, vol. 29, pp. 1–7, Elsevier B.V.,
2015.
[24] H. Desing, D. Brunner, F. Takacs, S. Nahrath, K. Frankenberger, and R. Hischier, “A circular
economy within the planetary boundaries: Towards a resource-based, systemic approach,” Resources,
Conservation and Recycling, vol. 155, 4 2020.
[25] A. P. Singh and Z. Rahman, “Integrating corporate sustainability and sustainable development goals:
towards a multi-stakeholder framework,” Cogent Business and Management, vol. 8, no. 1, 2021.
[26] “THE 17 GOALS — Sustainable Development.”
[27] F. Blomsma, M. Pieroni, M. Kravchenko, D. C. Pigosso, J. Hildenbrand, A. R. Kristinsdottir,
E. Kristoffersen, S. Shabazi, K. D. Nielsen, A. K. J¨onbrink, J. Li, C. Wiik, and T. C. McAloone, “De-
veloping a circular strategies framework for manufacturing companies to support circular economy-
oriented innovation,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 241, 12 2019.
[28] P. Ekins, T. Domenech, P. Drummond, R. Bleischwitz, N. Hughes, and L. Lotti, “Managing en-
vironmental and energy transitions for regions and cities How and Where Background information
Page 54 of 67
==PAGE:63==
Managing environmental and energy transitions for regions and cities The OECD Centre for En-
trepreneurship, SMEs, Regions and Cities on Twitter: @OECD local Citation,” tech. rep., 2019.
[29] M. Geissdoerfer, P. Savaget, N. M. Bocken, and E. J. Hultink, “The Circular Economy – A new
sustainability paradigm?,” 2 2017.
[30] C. Ciliberto, K. Szopik-Depczy´nska, M. Tarczy´nska- Luniewska, A. Ruggieri, and G. Ioppolo, “En-
abling the Circular Economy transition: a sustainable lean manufacturing recipe for Industry 4.0,”
Business Strategy and the Environment, vol. 30, pp. 3255–3272, 11 2021.
[31] P. Mhatre, R. Panchal, A. Singh, and S. Bibyan, “A systematic literature review on the circu-
lar economy initiatives in the European Union,” Sustainable Production and Consumption, vol. 26,
pp. 187–202, 4 2021.
[32] S. C. Stearns, “Trade-Offs in Life-History Evolution,” Tech. Rep. 3, 1989.
[33] D. A. Roff and D. J. Fairbairn, “The evolution of trade-offs: Where are we?,” 3 2007.
[34] M. Anshassi and T. G. Townsend, “Residential Recycling in Florida: A Case Study on Costs, Envi-
ronmental Impacts, and Improvement Strategies,” Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol. 206,
7 2024.
[35] J. Nickel, P. R. Duimering, and A. Hurst, “Manipulating the design space to resolve trade-offs:
Theory and evidence,” Design Studies, vol. 79, 3 2022.
[36] M. Kravchenko, CIRCit Norden (projekt), Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Sven Read, Nick Jio, and
Mimi Thian, Circular economy sustainability screening. Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[37] M. Kravchenko, D. C. Pigosso, and T. C. McAloone, “A trade-off navigation framework as a deci-
sion support for conflicting sustainability indicators within circular economy implementation in the
manufacturing industry,” Sustainability (Switzerland), vol. 13, pp. 1–26, 1 2021.
[38] Z. Li, A. S. Hamidi, Z. Yan, A. Sattar, S. Hazra, J. Soulard, C. Guest, S. H. Ahmed, and F. Tailor,
“A circular economy approach for recycling Electric Motors in the end-of-life Vehicles: A literature
review,” Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol. 205, p. 107582, 6 2024.
[39] V. Vainio, S. El Geneidy, P. Halme, M. Peura, and J. S. Kotiaho, “Biodiversity impact of the
consumption of peat and wood-fired district heating,” Environmental Impact Assessment Review,
vol. 108, 9 2024.
[40] D. Bansal, G. Gupta, G. V. Ramana, and M. Datta, “Optimizing MSW incineration bottom ash
reuse: A study on treated wastewater washing and leaching control,” Waste Management, vol. 182,
pp. 164–174, 6 2024.
Page 55 of 67
==PAGE:64==
[41] L. Yang, F. Zhao, H. Yen, Q. Feng, M. Li, X. Wang, J. Tang, Q. Bu, and L. Chen, “Urbanization
and land use regulate soil vulnerability to antibiotic contamination in urban green spaces,” Journal
of Hazardous Materials, vol. 465, p. 133363, 3 2024.
[42] J. A. Raven, C. J. Gobler, and P. J. Hansen, “Dynamic CO2 and pH levels in coastal, estuarine, and
inland waters: Theoretical and observed effects on harmful algal blooms,” Harmful Algae, vol. 91, 1
2020.
[43] L. T. Blessing and A. Chakrabarti, DRM, a design research methodology. Springer London, 2009.
[44] J. Biolchini, P. Gomes Mian, A. Candida Cruz Natali, and G. Horta Travassos, “Systematic Review
in Software Engineering,” tech. rep., 2005.
[45] W. Mengist, T. Soromessa, and G. Legese, “Ecosystem services research in mountainous regions: A
systematic literature review on current knowledge and research gaps,” 2 2020.
[46] “Scopus preview - Scopus - Welcome to Scopus.”
[47] “ScienceDirect.com — Science, health and medical journals, full text articles and books..”
[48] R. Ianole and V. Cornescu, “Overconsumption Society through the Looking-glass of Behavioral
Economics,” Procedia Economics and Finance, vol. 6, pp. 66–72, 2013.
[49] I. Mar´ın-Beltr´an, F. Demaria, C. Ofelio, L. M. Serra, A. Turiel, W. J. Ripple, S. A. Mukul, and
M. C. Costa, “Scientists’ warning against the society of waste,” 3 2022.
[50] K. Campbell-Johnston, M. Calisto Friant, K. Thapa, D. Lakerveld, and W. J. Vermeulen, “How
circular is your tyre: Experiences with extended producer responsibility from a circular economy
perspective,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 270, 10 2020.
[51] A. Tukker, “Eight types of product-service system: Eight ways to sustainability? Experiences from
suspronet,” Business Strategy and the Environment, vol. 13, pp. 246–260, 7 2004.
[52] X. Tang and E. Y. Chen, “Toward Infinitely Recyclable Plastics Derived from Renewable Cyclic
Esters,” 2 2019.
[53] T. Lindstrom and A. L. Hicks, “Life cycle assessment of expanded polystyrene shipping boxes at a
public research institution: insights for infrastructure at the end of life,” Environmental Research:
Infrastructure and Sustainability, vol. 2, 9 2022.
[54] M. R. Gorman, D. A. Dzombak, and C. Frischmann, “Potential global GHG emissions reduction
from increased adoption of metals recycling,” Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol. 184, 9
2022.
[55] C. Mostert, H. Sameer, D. Glanz, and S. Bringezu, “Climate and resource footprint assessment
and visualization of recycled concrete for circular economy,” Resources, Conservation and Recycling,
vol. 174, 11 2021.
Page 56 of 67
==PAGE:65==
[56] A.-M. Boulay, P. Montr´eal, C. David, S. Z. Quintana, I. V´azquez-Rowe, and S. A. Miller, “The
capabilities and deficiencies of life cycle assessment to address the plastic problem,” tech. rep.
[57] L. P´erez-S´anchez, R. Velasco-Fern´andez, and M. Giampietro, “Factors and actions for the sustain-
ability of the residential sector. The nexus of energy, materials, space, and time use,” 6 2022.
[58] E. G. Ryen, G. Gaustad, C. W. Babbitt, and G. Babbitt, “Ecological foraging models as inspiration
for optimized recycling systems in the circular economy,” Resources, Conservation and Recycling,
vol. 135, pp. 48–57, 8 2018.
[59] P. H. Walker, P. S. Seuring, P. J. Sarkis, and P. R. Klassen, “Sustainable operations management:
recent trends and future directions,” International Journal of Operations & Production Management,
vol. 34, 4 2014.
[60] R. Geyer, J. R. Jambeck, and K. L. Law, “Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made,” tech.
rep., 2017.
[61] W. R. Stahel, “The circular economy,” 3 2016.
[62] B. Derraik, “The pollution of the marine environment by plastic debris: a review Jos e e G,” tech.
rep.
[63] J. Kirchherr, D. Reike, and M. Hekkert, “Conceptualizing the circular economy: An analysis of 114
definitions,” 2017.
[64] “The New Plastics Economy Rethinking the future of plastics,”
[65] B. L. Tardy, E. Lizundia, C. Guizani, M. Hakkarainen, and M. H. Sipponen, “Prospects for the
integration of lignin materials into the circular economy,” Materials Today, vol. 65, pp. 122–132, 5
2023.
[66] A. Picatoste, D. Justel, and J. M. F. Mendoza, “Exploring the applicability of circular design criteria
for electric vehicle batteries,” in Procedia CIRP, vol. 109, pp. 107–112, Elsevier B.V., 2022.
[67] J. L. Rivera and A. Lallmahomed, “Environmental implications of planned obsolescence and product
lifetime: a literature review,” 3 2016.
[68] G. Mugurusi and E. Ahishakiye, “Blockchain technology needs for sustainable mineral supply chains:
A framework for responsible sourcing of Cobalt.,” in Procedia Computer Science, vol. 200, pp. 638–
647, Elsevier B.V., 2022.
[69] S. Scott, Z. Islam, J. Allen, T. Yingnakorn, A. Alflakian, J. Hathaway, A. Rastegarpanah, G. D.
Harper, E. Kendrick, P. A. Anderson, J. Edge, L. Lander, and A. P. Abbott, “Designing lithium-ion
batteries for recycle: The role of adhesives,” Next Energy, vol. 1, p. 100023, 6 2023.
Page 57 of 67
==PAGE:66==
[70] P. Ghisellini, M. Ripa, and S. Ulgiati, “Exploring environmental and economic costs and benefits of
a circular economy approach to the construction and demolition sector. A literature review,” Journal
of Cleaner Production, vol. 178, pp. 618–643, 3 2018.
[71] Y. Lapko, A. Trianni, C. Nuur, and D. Masi, “In Pursuit of Closed-Loop Supply Chains for Critical
Materials: An Exploratory Study in the Green Energy Sector,” Journal of Industrial Ecology, vol. 23,
pp. 182–196, 2 2019.
[72] M. Milousi and M. Souliotis, “A circular economy approach to residential solar thermal systems,”
Renewable Energy, vol. 207, pp. 242–252, 5 2023.
[73] Z. Mousania, A. V. Angulo, J. P. Poon, and J. D. Atkinson, “Quantifying the environmental impact
of transportation for plastic film packaging end-of-life: Landfill, incineration, physical recycling, or
chemical recycling,” Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol. 207, 8 2024.
[74] G. Gatenholm,
Halld´orsson, and J. B¨ackstrand, “Enhanced circularity in aftermarkets: logistics
tradeoffs,” International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, vol. 51, pp. 999–
1021, 10 2021.
[75] Y. Yang, B. Zheng, C. Luk, K. f. Yuen, and A. Chan, “Towards a sustainable circular economy:
Understanding the environmental credits and loads of reusing modular building components from a
multi-use cycle perspective,” Sustainable Production and Consumption, vol. 46, pp. 543–558, 5 2024.
[76] R. T. Lund and W. M. Hauser, “Remanufacturing-An American Perspective,” tech. rep.
[77] P. Daly, “A critical review of circularity - ‘design for disassembly’ assessment methods applied in the
development of modular construction panels - an Irish case study,” e-Prime - Advances in Electrical
Engineering, Electronics and Energy, vol. 5, 9 2023.
[78] A. Pires, G. Martinho, and N. B. Chang, “Solid waste management in European countries: A review
of systems analysis techniques,” 2011.
[79] C. Piccardo and M. Hughes, “Design strategies to increase the reuse of wood materials in buildings:
Lessons from architectural practice,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 368, 9 2022.
[80] “13 important usability principles - ZEISS Digital Innovation Blog.”
[81] “Usability Metrics Explained: What to Track and How.”
[82] T. C. . Mcaloone and N. Bey, General rights Environmental improvement through product develop-
ment A guide. 2024.
[83] G. Munda, “Social multi-criteria evaluation: Methodological foundations and operational conse-
quences,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 158, pp. 662–677, 11 2004.
[84] P. HBrunner and H. Rechberger, “Practical Handbook of Material Flow Analysis,” tech. rep.
[85] F. C. Schultz, “The circular economy and economic growth – An irreconcilable tradeoff?,” 8 2022.
Page 58 of 67
==PAGE:67==
A
Appendix A
Questions on the work of Interviewee 1
1. It is mentioned in your company’s web-page that all energy used in the production sites is 100%
renewable.
(a) Are you aware of any environmental trade-offs that occurred because of the employment of
renewable energy compared to the conventional options for energy supply? Examples of im-
plications could be water consumption or emissions related to wind energy turbines and solar
panels.
(b) Are there any implications regarding the EoL of these renewable energy infrastructures due to
the rare materials required for their manufacturing?
2. There is a project on transforming a type of product made of plastic into a partially reusable product
so that plastic waste to be reduced.
(a) Have you identified any environmental trade-offs on this project?
(b) Could it result in more environmental loads compared to benefits because reusable plastic
products require higher material intensity for their production?
(c) Can it also affect the overall impact of the final product the fact that separate processing is
required for the manufacturing of a product that is partially reusable and partially single-use?
3. According to your company’s environmental assessment data, despite the attempt to reduce the
overall impact of your activities there is an increase in categories such as emissions and energy
consumption for the production. It is stated that the reason behind this increase is the company’s
growth.
(a) Could there be any relation between the increased impact and the CE implementation?
4. In an attempt to decrease waste your company facilitates waste processing to achieve energy recovery.
Despite the decrease in waste incineration, it is stated that during a year 20% of the waste was
categorized as hazardous and it could not be treated equally to the rest 80%.
(a) What are the main causes of this 20% of waste which is characterized as hazardous waste?
(b) Is it an improvement compared to the previous years’ numbers?
(c) Is there any conflict between the application of circularity in waste treatment and the levels of
hazardous materials included in the waste?
Questions on the work of Interviewee 2
1. Your product is an alternative to single-use plastic bags and is designed to be compostable.
Page 59 of 67
==PAGE:68==
(a) Have you encountered any trade-offs, such as higher energy consumption during composting
or bio-digestion compared to conventional waste treatment?
2. When single-use bags are used for the collection of food waste, the food waste is used for the
production of biogas, and the remaining nutrient-rich pulp is used as fertilizer on agricultural land.
The remains of the compostable bags break down in the soil and thus do not pose a risk of plastic
contamination of agricultural land.
(a) Have you experienced any environmental implications because of the manufacturing of com-
postable bags or their disposal (incineration) to produce fertilizer? Such ss high energy con-
sumption?
3. You facilitate waste sorting and the desire to waste sorting products are of high quality and with
good functionality. They must last for many years and therefore the materials are, for example,
steel, aluminum, concrete, certified wood, reusable plastic, and recycled plastic.
(a) Does this mean that you collect this high-quality material from waste and recycle/reuse it?
(b) For what type of waste do you implement this procedure (waste of other companies)?
4. Your suppliers within urban space furniture are carefully selected. The products must be of high
quality and must be able to withstand the wear and tear of public urban spaces. Your suppliers
must have the necessary certifications, to ensure that products and materials are produced under
proper conditions. Furniture is made of materials such as steel, aluminum, concrete, recycled plastic,
recyclable plastic, and certified wood.
(a) What do you mean by “produced under proper conditions”
(b) Have you noticed any environmental implications regarding the reuse or recycling of these
materials, such as high energy consumption because of recycling or VRP (value retention
procedures) in the case of reuse?
(c) What about transportation emissions?
(d) Where do you get the materials from?
(e) What about the durability of your products?
(f) Have you studied their EoL?
Questions on the work of Interviewee 3
1. There is a project in your company’s portfolio on which unwashed wool would be disposed of that
is used as an alternative to ”pod-lid”. Traditionally, it is made of coconut fibers, manufactured in
Malaysia and imported in Sweden. The purpose of this product is to maintain moisture in the plant
pots and reduce weeds.
(a) Why was the unwashed wool selected?
Page 60 of 67
==PAGE:69==
(b) Did you observe environmental trade-offs while developing this idea?
2. There is this project on which you manufactured sound-absorbing tiles to replace ceiling tiles, which
are conventionally made of fiberglass-based materials. In this case, you used hemp, recycled textiles,
and binders.
(a) Can you describe the procedure and which CE strategies you employ for this project?
(b) Were there any environmental trade-offs observed related to the CE strategies, such as high
resources or energy needs?
3. You produce material prototypes that illustrate different properties such as tactility, shaping possi-
bilities, strength, softness, and detail richness and you combine their presentation with a workshop,
to spark creativity by giving new perspectives on the material.
(a) Which CE strategies did you employ for this project?
(b) Did you observe environmental trade-offs while developing this idea?
4. It is mentioned in the work of your company that you experiment with alternative material and
tech concepts, and explore possibilities in cellulose formable packaging alternatives (Wet/dry/formed
paper).
(a) Which CE strategies did you employ while designing and developing these concepts?
(b) Did you observe environmental trade-offs within this experiment?
Questions on the work of Interviewee 4
1. In the portfolio of your work, there are projects related to waste collection and recycling. These
include plastic, paper, glass, batteries, hazardous substances, and ferrous materials.
(a) The variety of materials for which you provide recycling options is remarkable.
Are there
different approaches you follow to properly recycle the different types of material?
(b) While conducting these projects, have you observed environmental implications, that is trade-
offs, related to energy consumption transportation emissions, or water needs?
(c) According to your assessment is there any evidence implying that in some cases conventional
disposal overall presents higher environmental benefits than recycling?
2. Reuse is also part of your portfolio. You facilitate the collection of products, such as electronics,
and provide a second life to them. You cover many aspects since you recycle non-reusable ones and
safely dispose of hazardous materials.
(a) Have you noticed any environmental trade-offs during the execution of all these different pro-
cesses?
Page 61 of 67
==PAGE:70==
(b) Would in any of these cases more advantageous for the environment to dispose of the products
and manufacture new ones including extraction of raw materials instead of reusing parts or
recycled materials?
Questions on the work of Interviewee 5
1. Your company is part of SBTi and one of your goals stated in your portfolio for accomplishment
refers to decelerating climate change, practices like GHG emissions reduction across your or decar-
bonisation of electricity.
(a) If you know, can you describe strategies you follow towards this goal?
(b) Did you observe environmental implications due to the CE strategies applied to support the
reduction of GHG emissions?
2. There is also the goal of having a positive impact on biodiversity.
(a) Are you aware of what CE strategies are employed to achieve this goal?
(b) Are there any observations regarding any environmental implications that occurred because of
these strategies?
Page 62 of 67
==PAGE:71==
B
Appendix B
Appendix B continues on the next pages. It contains the entire catalogue of Environmental trade-
offs, the environmental categories which are affected, the explanatory comments, and the suggestions for
further assessment.
Figure 12: Appendix B
Page 63 of 67
==PAGE:72==
Figure 13: Appendix B
Page 64 of 67
==PAGE:73==
Figure 14: Appendix B
Page 65 of 67
==PAGE:74==
Figure 15: Appendix B
Page 66 of 67
==PAGE:75==
Figure 16: Appendix B
Page 67 of 67
