==PAGE:1==
Odyssey
A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization
Software Module
Master’s Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy
Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Odyssey
A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
Master’s Thesis
August, 2024
By
Kshitij Gambhir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Anker Engelunds
Vej 301, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over a semester of 30 ECTS points at the Department of
Energy Conversion and Storage, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Kshitij Gambhir - s193903
Signature
Date
ii
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
19/08/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The search for novel materials with advanced properties is accelerating, driven by the de-
mands of industries such as energy storage and healthcare. Traditional materials discov-
ery processes are time-consuming and expensive, as they are dependent on extensive
trial-and-error. Odyssey, a modular and customizable framework, is introduced in this
thesis to address these challenges. It is designed to simplify the application of Bayesian
Optimization (BO) in Self-Driving Labs (SDLs) for materials discovery. Odyssey aims to
streamline the implementation of BO, a critical component for efficiently navigating the
vast experimental spaces of SDLs.
Odyssey is based on the BoTorch library and supports a variety of single- and multi-
objective BO algorithms, enabling the flexible and efficient optimization of complex ex-
perimental problems. The modular structure of the framework facilitates the integration of
new optimization algorithms as they are developed, thereby ensuring it remains a valuable
tool for future research.
This thesis provides a detailed assessment of Odyssey’s ability to handle intricate opti-
mization tasks by utilizing synthetic and semi-synthetic benchmarks such as the DTLZ
suite and ScattBO. Odyssey is also implemented in an educational environment at DTU,
employed in conjunction with the PumpBot liquid handling robot to offer students a hands-
on experience in autonomous materials discovery.
While Odyssey represents significant progress, this work also highlight the potential for
future development, such as the expansion of its hardware interfaces, the development
of a user-friendly graphical interface, and the potential for decentralized optimization in
materials research. Odyssey is a promising candidate for broad adoption in the scientific
community due to its adaptability and open-source nature, which will ultimately aid in
accelerating the pace of materials discovery.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my gratitude to all my supervisors for their support throughout this
project. Their guidance has been invaluable and the insightful discussion we had greatly
contributed to this thesis.
I owe a special thanks to my main supervisor, Associate Professor Jin Hyun Chang, whose
expertise in the aspects of software development self-driving labs was crucial in steering
this project to completion. I couldn’t have asked for a more supportive and uplifting su-
pervisor. Even during the toughest moments, Jin had a remarkable ability to lighten the
mood and keep me motivated.
I am also grateful to PhD student Nis Fisker-Bødker for his alternative ideas, which pro-
vided me with a fresh perspective on challenging issues. His willingness to always be
available, just a knock on the door away, was a tremendous support throughout this
project.
A sincere thanks to Postdocs Smobin Vincent and Victor Gregorio for their guidance on
the practical aspects of self-driving labs. Their insights ensured that my work remained
grounded in real-world applications, even when I found myself deep in theoretical explo-
ration.
A special thank you to Professor Tejs Vegge for his guidance throughout the course of the
project, and especially for the opportunity to attend the Accelerate Conference 2024 in
Vancouver, providing me with an unforgettable experience and further fuelling my passing
for this field.
I would also like to express my appreciation to my fellow master’s students and colleagues
Louie Lucas Bisgaard Nyeland and Rógvi Ziskason for their critical feedback and unwa-
vering support, both during work hours and beyond.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family and friends for their constant encouragement and
support, which kept me motivated throughout this journey.
iv
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Motivation
3
3
Theory
6
3.1
Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Bayesian Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Method
18
4.1
Isolated Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Creating Odyssey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Synthetic Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
ScattBO Benchmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.5
DTU Course 47332 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Results
32
5.1
Results from Initial Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Pseudocode of Selected Odyssey Classes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
Synthetic Benchmark Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.4
ScattBO Benchmarking Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.5
DTU Course 47332 and PumpBot Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Conclusion
45
7
Discussion
47
8
Further Work
49
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
53
A.1 Odyssey Gitlab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.2 47332 AI-orchestrated self-driving labs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
3.1
An Example of a Local Optimization Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Gradient Descent on a Local Optimization Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Local Optimization vs Global Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Bayesian Optimization Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Example of a GP Fitting Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Comparison of Acquisition Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.7
Single-Objective Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.8
MOBO Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.9
Pareto Front
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.10 Hypervolume Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.1
SISO and SIMO Optimization Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Branin and Dejong Multi-Input Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
PumpBot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.1
SISO Optimization Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
SIMO Optimization Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Pareto of SIMO Optimization Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.4
MISO Optimization Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.5
MIMO Optimization Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.6
Pareto of MIMO Optimization Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.7
Workflow of Odyssey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.8
Pareto of DTLZ2 using ParEGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.9
Pareto of DTLZ2 using EHVI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.10 ScattBO Gr SOBO with EI, PI and UCB
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.11 ScattBO Sq SOBO with EI, PI and UCB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.12 Pareto of ScattBO Gr and Sq MOBO using ParEGO and EHVI
. . . . . . . 42
5.13 Color and pH MOBO using EHVI on PumpBot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.14 Pareto of Color and pH on PumpBot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
List of Tables
4.1
BO Problem Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Optimization Log for DTLZ2 Using ParEGO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
List of Algorithms
1
Overview of the Mission Class
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
2
Overview of the Objective Class
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3
Overview of the Base Navigator Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4
Overview of the SingleGP_Navigator Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
vi
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The demand for new materials with enhanced properties is growing rapidly across various
industries, from energy storage to healthcare. Traditional materials discovery processes
are often time-consuming and costly, requiring extensive trial-and-error experimentation.
To address these challenges, there has been a shift towards accelerated materials discov-
ery methods, which aim to significantly reduce the time and resources needed to identify
new materials.
One promising approach in this domain is the concept of self-driving laboratories (SDLs).
These autonomous systems combine robotics and artificial intelligence to perform exper-
iments in an automated manner, significantly reducing the need for human intervention,
which can often slow down the discovery process. By autonomously conducting and
analyzing experiments, SDLs can continuously refine their approach, making real-time
adjustments based on prior outcomes, offering a potential increase in the speed and ef-
fectiveness of materials discovery. However, while the robotics enable SDLs to carry out
experiments autonomously, the other side of the coin is the necessity for advanced opti-
mization techniques to effectively search and navigate these vast experimental spaces,
which is where Bayesian Optimization (BO) comes into play.
BO has proven to be a powerful method for optimizing expensive and noisy functions,
which are often encountered in materials discovery. By using probabilistic models like
Gaussian Processes (GPs), BO can estimate unknown objective functions and decide
where to sample next. This approach allows BO to find optimal solutions with fewer ex-
periments compared to traditional optimization methods.
However, implementing BO can be challenging, especially for those who are not experts
in optimization theory. The process of choosing the right models, selecting acquisition
functions, and handling multi-objective problems can be complex. These challenges can
slow down the adoption of advanced optimization techniques in self-driving laboratories,
which may, in turn, hinder the materials discovery process.
To overcome these barriers and accelerate progress, it is crucial to develop well-documented
open-source tools that integrate both software and hardware. These tools enable re-
searchers to easily replicate experiments, share methodologies, and build upon each
other’s work, thus enhancing the efficiency and collaboration of self-driving labs in mate-
rials discovery.
Reproducibility is key to advancing scientific research, and in self-driving labs, this extends
to both the software algorithms and the hardware used in experiments. Open-source
solutions ensure that setups can be consistently replicated across different laboratories.
However, without comprehensive documentation, even the most powerful tools can be
challenging to implement effectively.
To address the challenges associated with BO and SDLs in materials discovery, this the-
sis introduces Odyssey, a modular and customizable framework designed to streamline
the implementation of BO in self-driving laboratories. Odyssey allows users to define
a ”mission,” which represents the problem to be solved, input parameters, objectives,
and constraints. The framework then provides a selection of ”navigators” — wrappers
around various advanced single- and multi-objective Bayesian Optimization algorithms.
This modular approach not only simplifies the process of applying BO to complex tasks
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
1
==PAGE:10==
but also allows for the seamless integration of new optimization algorithms as they are
developed.
One of the key features of Odyssey is its flexibility in handling different types of optimiza-
tion problems, from single-objective to multi-objective scenarios. By leveraging the pow-
erful BoTorch [1] library for Gaussian Process models and acquisition functions, Odyssey
can effectively navigate complex experimental spaces. Additionally, as Bayesian Op-
timization continues to evolve, new and more advanced algorithms can be seamlessly
integrated into Odyssey as new navigators, ensuring it remains an invaluable tool for ac-
celerating materials discovery.
Overview of the Report
This thesis is structured as follows.
The Motivation section provides a review of existing tools and frameworks related to
Bayesian Optimization and materials discovery, highlighting the gaps that Odyssey aims
to fill.
The Theory section offers a detailed explanation of the underlying concepts in optimiza-
tion and Bayesian Optimization, providing the necessary background for understanding
Odyssey.
The Methodology section describes the development and implementation of Odyssey, in-
cluding initial testing, the creation of different navigator modules, and the benchmarking
of the framework and implemented algorithms. A case study involving hardware integra-
tion is also presented to demonstrate the practical application of Odyssey in a real-world
scenario.
In the Results section, the outcomes of the experiments and benchmarks are presented,
followed by a Conclusion section, summarizing the contributions of Odyssey.
The thesis concludes with a Discussion section that analyzes the obtained results in the
context of the objectives set out at the beginning of the thesis, and a Future Work section,
proposing potential directions for further research and development.
2
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:11==
2
Motivation
While the concept of self-driving laboratories (SDLs) and the application of Bayesian Op-
timization (BO) represent significant strides in materials discovery, the effectiveness of
these approaches depends heavily on the tools and frameworks available to researchers.
Although SDLs show great promise, the existing methods for implementing BO in materi-
als discovery have notable limitations. These limitations often result in inefficiencies and
hinder the broader adoption of SDLs in the scientific community.
Several tools have been developed to address these challenges, each with its strengths
and weaknesses, and are described in the following.
Atinary
Atinary offers SDLabs, a robust platform that enables users to optimize trial planning and
analyze outcomes without the need for coding. The platform combines advanced AI, ma-
chine learning and automation capabilities, allowing customers to shift from manual ex-
perimentation to completely automated operations. Falcon, Atinary’s class of proprietary
algorithms, offers powerful capabilities for handling various types of variables, including
continuous, discrete and categorical, and they support multi-objective optimization. These
features make Atinary a powerful tool in fields such as chemistry, materials science and
pharmaceuticals.
However, Atinary’s platform is closed-source, which limits transparency and customiza-
tion for researchers who require control over the optimization process. The reliance on
proprietary algorithms also means that users are unable to easily modify or extend the
platform to meet specific research needs. Additionally, while its no-code interface is user-
friendly, it may not provide the flexibility that advanced users require, and the premium
features are behind a paywall, which could be a barrier for certain researchers. [2]
Honegumi
Honegumi is a graphical user interface (GUI)-based framework that simplifies the process
of generating code for BO. Its purpose is to reduce the difficulty for consumers who may
lack expertise in optimization techniques. The platform currently relies on template-based
code generation, which allows users to set up optimization quickly without needing to write
extensive code manually. Honegumi plans to enhance its capabilities by incorporating
large language models (LLMs) in the future, potentially allowing for more dynamic and
context-specific code generation.
Despite its strengths, Honegumi currently only supports code generation for standard, or
”vanilla”, implementations of BO algorithms. This limits its applicability to more complex or
customized optimization tasks. The platform is built on the Ax backend, which, while pow-
erful, restricts some of the customizability that may be necessary for specific optimization
scenarios. [3]
Atlas
Atlas is a sophisticated, open-source BO framework specifically designed for experimental
sciences. It excels in handling complex parameter spaces, including categorical, discrete
and mixed parameters. This makes it well-suited for applications in the fields of chemistry
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
3
==PAGE:12==
and materials sciences. Atlas utilizes the GPyTorch and BoTorch Python libraries to effec-
tively address a range of optimization problems, such as noisy optimization, constrained
optimization and multi-fidelity optimization.
Nevertheless, Atlas has some notable limitations. While it excels in its intended purpose,
it does not currently support mulit-objective BO, which is a significant drawback for re-
searchers dealing with research problems that involve balancing multiple objectives. This
limitation restricts Atlas’s applicability to more complex, real-world scenarios where multi-
objective trade-offs are essential. Additionally, while Atlas is easier to use compared to
some other advanced frameworks, its lack of multi-objective support may require to look
for alternative tools if their optimization problems involve more than one objective. [4]
Olympus
Olympus is an open-source framework designed for rapidly benchmarking new optimiza-
tion algorithms. It provides a platform for evaluating algorithms across various parame-
ter spaces, and also offers access to a wide range of planning algorithms and synthetic
benchmarks, making it a valuable tool for algorithm designers.
Despite its strengths, Olympus is primarily focused on single-objective optimization, which
limits its applicability to real-world problems. While it is a powerful benchmarking tool,
giving easy access to a range of synthetic functions, Olympus is more suited for test-
ing algorithms rather than for solving complex, multi-objective optimization problems or
integrating with experimental hardware for real-time application. [5]
The Need for Odyssey
The analysis of these current tools reveals clear gaps that Odyssey is designed to fill.
While Atinary, Honegumi, Atlas and Olympus each offer valuable capabilities, they also
present notable limitations, especially in terms of flexibility, transparency, and support for
multi-objective optimization. Odyssey aims to overcome these limitations by providing
an open-source, modular and highly customizable framework that is both powerful and
accessible.
Taking into account the gaps and limitations identified in existing BO tools, in designing
Odyssey, the following key features should be prioritized:
Open-Source and Transparent
Odyssey aims to be fully open-source, allowing researchers full access to the underlying
code. The transparency of the framework is essential for promoting collaboration, ensur-
ing reproducibility and allowing researchers to adapt or expand the framework according
to their individual requirements. Unlike proprietary platforms such as Atinary, Odyssey
should ensure that all algorithms and methods are openly available and may be tailored
to the user’s specific needs.
User-Friendly Interface
Odyssey aims to provide a user-friendly, intuitive and accessible interface that caters
to both beginners and advanced users. It must combine the simplicity of Honegumi’s
template-based code generation, along with the flexibility of more advanced frameworks-
This would allow users to easily set up and execute optimization tasks without requiring
extensive expertise in optimization theory.
Multi-Objective Optimization Support
A critical feature of Odyssey should be robust support for multi-objective BO. This would
address the significant gap in tools like Atlas and Olympus, which currently lack multi-
4
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:13==
objective capabilities. Odyssey aims to enable users to effortlessly specify and optimize
multiple conflicting objectives. Thus making it suitable for complex real-world problems
that require balancing trade-offs between different material properties.
Interoperability with Experimental Hardware
In order to facilitate integration with SDLs, Odyssey should be designed with hardware
interoperability in mind. This feature should enable seamless connections with lab equip-
ment, allowing for real-time optimization and autonomous experimentation. Unlike tools
like Olympus, which focus primarily on synthetic benchmarking, Odyssey should be equipped
to handle real-world experimental setups.
Comprehensive Documentation and Support
Recognizing that even the most powerful tools can be challenging to implement without
proper guidance, Odyssey should provide extensive documentation. This documenta-
tion should be clear, structured and accessible to ensure it caters to both beginners and
advanced users, reducing the learning curve and enabling broader adoption.
Following these design features, Odyssey can have the potential to be a comprehensive
solution that addresses the current limitations in the Bayesian Optimization landscape,
making it a valuable tool for accelerating materials discovery.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
5
==PAGE:14==
3
Theory
3.1
Optimization
Optimization is an essential idea in mathematics and engineering that refers to the process
of determining the optimal solution to a problem, given a specific set of restrictions. In its
broadest sense, optimization aims to maximize or minimize an objective function — a
mathematical expression (known or unknown) that symbolizes the issue that has to be
resolved. Typically, the objective function depends on a number of variables. The aim of
optimization is to determine the values of these variables so as to identify the objective
function’s predetermined optimum outcome.
Optimization problems are widely prevalent across various disciplines, ranging from the
minimization of costs in industrial processes to the maximization of efficiency in energy
systems. The problems can vary in complexity, ranging from simple ones that involve a
single variable to more intricate ones that involve multiple variables and constraints. The
method employed to solve an optimization problem is often dependent upon its level of
complexity.
To illustrate, consider a simple optimization problem where the aim is to minimize a single-
input-single-output function. Let the objective function y = f (x) be defined as:
y = sin (x) −sin
10
3 · x

(3.1)
Here, x is the input parameter, and y is the objective that is to be minimized. The goal of
the optimization problem is to find the value of x that results in the smallest possible value
of y.
3.1.1
Local Optimization
Local optimization is a term used to describe the procedure of finding the best solution
within a limited region of the search space. Put differently, a local optimization algorithm
seeks to identify a solution that is the best within a neighborhood of solutions, but not
necessarily the best overall. Local optimization techniques are especially beneficial when
the objective function is relatively smooth and when the global optimum is expected to lie
within a well-defined region.
Revisiting the objective function from (3.1), Figure 3.1 illustrates this objective function
within the input parameter bounds x ∈[2, 3].
6
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.1: An Example of a Local Optimization Problem
Figure 3.2: Gradient Descent on a Local Optimization Problem
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
7
==PAGE:16==
Gradient descent is a frequently used technique for local optimization, in which the algo-
rithm iteratively approaches the minimum of a function by taking steps that are proportional
to the negative gradient (or slope). Altough gradient-based methods are generally suc-
cessful in locating local optima, they may encounter difficulties in escaping local minima,
particularly in intricate terrains characterized by multiple peaks and valleys. Figure 3.2
shows how the objective function in (3.1) can be solved using a gradient-based method.
3.1.2
Global Optimization
In contrast to local optimization, global optimization is concerned with identifying the op-
timal solution across the entire search space, rather than being limited to a specific local
region. The presence of multiple local optima in the objective function of complex, high-
dimensional problems poses a significant challenge to global optimization. The goal of
global optimization is therefore to navigate the entire search space effectively, avoiding
the pitfalls of local optima to identify the true global optimum.
For example, upon reconsidering the problem presented in (3.1), a local solution was
obtained as depicted in Figure 3.2. Consider the scenario where the limits of the input
parameter are changed to x ∈[0, 10]. This is illustrated in Figure 3.3, where it can be
observed that the problem becomes multimodal, making the previous solution suboptimal.
Figure 3.3: Local Optimization vs Global Optimization
Global optimization techniques are specifically designed to systematically explore the
search space in a more comprehensive manner. These methods often involve a com-
bination of exploration (searching new areas of the space) and exploitation (refining the
search in promising areas). Genetic algorithms, simulated annealing and particle swarm
optimization are all examples of global optimization methods. Although these methods
are effective, they often require a large number of evaluations of the objective function,
making them data-hungry and sometimes impractical for problems where each evaluation
is expensive or time-consuming.
3.2
Bayesian Optimization
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a sequential design strategy utilized for the optimization
of expensive, black-box functions. In contrast to conventional optimization techniques
that typically require a substantial number of function evaluations, Bayesian optimization
8
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:17==
is particularly effective when the objective function is expensive to evaluate, such as in
real-world experiments or time-consuming simulations.
The core principle of Bayesian Optimization is to utilize a probabilistic surrogate model for
estimating and modeling the unknown objective function. The Gaussian Process (GP) is
the most frequently used surrogate model in BO. It offers a non-parametric approach to
modeling complex functions, meaning that the model can adapt its complexity to the un-
derlying data. The GP provides a probabilistic estimate of the objective function, including
both the predicted mean (the best guess of the value of the objective function at a given
point) and the variance (or uncertainty) associated with that prediction.
BO and the Bayesian framework effectively achieve a balance between exploration and
exploitation. Exploration involves sampling regions of the search space where the un-
certainty in the model is high, whereas exploitation focuses on sampling regions where
the model predicts that the objective function will be optimal. The balance is crucial, as it
allows BO to systematically and efficiently explore the search space, reducing the number
of required evaluations.
The specific balance between exploration and exploitation is defined by the selected ac-
quisition function, a key component of BO, used to determine the next point to sample
based on the current model. The acquisition function incorporates both the predicted
mean and uncertainty from the GP model, guiding the optimization process to areas where
improvements are most likely. Various acquisition functions exist, each with their own
strategy for balancing exploration and exploitation, such as Expected Improvement (EI),
Probability of Improvement (PI) and Upper Confidence Bound (UCB).
Figure 3.4: Bayesian Optimization Workflow
Figure 3.4 shows the workflow of a Bayesian Optimization model, how it samples and
incorporates new data to improve the surrogate model. The subsequent sections will
provide a more detailed analysis of some of the individual components of the BO workflow,
including the surrogate model and acquisition functions.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
9
==PAGE:18==
3.2.1
Gaussian Processes
Gaussian Processes (GPs) are a powerful tool used in BO to model complex, unknown
objective functions. Essentially, GPs offer a probabilistic framework for making predictions
about the value of the objective function at new points in the search space, based on the
data observed so far.
In the context of optimization, a set of training data is often given, where the objective func-
tion has been observed at certain input values. The challenge then is to make predictions
for new inputs that have not yet been seen. This challenge is of an inductive nature, i.e.
a finite set of training data is used to model a function f (x) that can accurately predict
outputs for all possible input values.
To solve a problem like this, two general approaches can be taken. The first approach
involves restricting the class of functions considered, for example limiting the resulting
model to linear functions. While this simplifies the problem, a significant limitation is also
introduced: if the true objective function is not well-modelled by the chosen class (i.e. if
the objective function is non-linear but the applied model is restricted to linear functions),
the predictions will be poor. Increasing the flexibility of the chosen class of functions can
improve the predictions, but also makes the model highly prone to overfitting. This is
where the model fits the training data well but fails to generalize to new data.
The second approach is more flexible, where a prior probability is assigned to every pos-
sible function. Functions that are considered more likely, such as smoother functions,
are given higher probabilities. The prior probability distribution, defined over all possible
functions, is characterized by two things. A mean function, which represents the aver-
age prediction at any given point, and a covariance matrix (or kernel), which defines the
relationship between the values of the function at different points in the input space.
With the concept of having a distribution over all possible functions, the result is that for
any set of input points x = (x1, x2, . . . , xn), the GP can generate a corresponding set of
function values that follow a multivariate normal distribution:
f (x1) , f (x2) , . . . , f (xn) ∼N (µ, K)
(3.2)
where µ is the mean vector and K is the covariance matrix defined by the kernel function.
In practice, the mean function µ (x) is often assumed to be zero (i.e. µ (x) = 0), simplifying
the GP to:
f (x) ∼GP

0, k
 x, x′
(3.3)
Here, k
 x, x′
is the kernel function that defines the covariance between any two points
x and x′. The choice of kernel function is crucial, as it encodes assumptions about the
smoothness, periodicity or other properties of the function being modelled.
Kernel Functions
A commonly used kernel is the Radial Basis Function (RBF) or Gaussian Kernel, which
is defined as:
kRBF
 x, x′
= σ2
f exp

−
 x −x′2
2ℓ2


(3.4)
10
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:19==
where σ2
f is the variance parameter that controls the amplitude of the function. ℓis the
length scale parameter that determines how quickly the correlation between points de-
creases with distance. The RBF kernel assumes that points closer together in the input
space are more strongly correlated than points further apart.
Another popular choice is the Matérn kernel, especially in situations where the assumption
of smoothness may not be appropriate. This kernel introduces a parameter ν, which
controls the smoothness of the resulting functions. The Matérn kernel is defined as:
kMatérn
 x, x′
= σ2
f
21−ν
Γ (ν)
 √
2ν
x −x′
ℓ
!ν
Kν
 √
2ν
x −x′
ℓ
!
(3.5)
where σ2
f is the variance parameter, ℓis the length scale parameter, ν controls the smooth-
ness of the function, Kν is the modified Bessel function of the second kind and Γ (ν) is
the gamma function.
The smoothness parameter ν can take various values, but most importantly, when ν in-
creases, i.e. ν →∞, the Matérn kernel approaches the RBF kernel. This flexibility of
the Matérn kernel makes it particularly useful in cases where the characteristics of the
underlying function are not fully known.
Figure 3.5: Example of a GP Fitting Data
Figure 3.5 illustrates a GP posterior fit on a few data samples, along with the true function,
the confidence interval (or uncertainty) and a few samples of the functions modeling the
objective from the posterior.
While Gaussian Processes provide a probabilistic estimate of the objective function, the
true strength of BO lies in how these estimates are used to guide the search for the opti-
mum. This is where Acquisition functions come into play. Acquisition functions determine
the next point to evaluate by striking a balance between the exploration of uncertain areas
of the search space and the exploitation of regions that are likely to produce high rewards.
[6]
3.2.2
Acquisition Functions
Acquisition functions are specifically designed to be computationally efficient in their eval-
uation, enabling them to be maximized quickly, even in high-dimensional spaces. The
selection of the acquisition function can have a substantial impact on the success of the
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
11
==PAGE:20==
BO process, and different acquisition functions are suitable for different types of prob-
lems. In the following, the three most frequently employed acquisition functions in BO
are described: Expected Improvement (EI), Probability of Improvement (PI) and Upper
Confidence Bound (UCB).
Expected Improvement (EI)
Expected Improvement (EI) is one of the most widely used acquisition functions in BO.
The concept of EI is to quantify the expected amount of improvement over the current
best observation. Mathematically, EI at a point x is defined as:
EI (x) = E
h
max
 0, f (x) −f (xbest )
i
(3.6)
where f (x) is the predicted mean of the GP at point x and f (xbest) is the best observed
value of the objective function so far.
EI balances exploration and exploitation by favoring points that either have a high pre-
dicted mean or a high uncertainty.
Probability of Improvement (PI)
The Probability of Improvement (PI) is another frequently used acquisition function that
specifically considers the likelihood that a given point will surpass the current best obser-
vation. Mathematically, PI is defined as:
PI (x) = Φ
f (x) −f (xbest )
σ (x)

(3.7)
Here, f (x) is again the predicted mean, σ (x) is the standard deviation of the GP at point x
and Φ (·) is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the standard normal distribution,
given as:
Φ (x) =
1
√
2π
Z x
−∞
exp
 
−t2
2
!
dt
(3.8)
PI primarily focuses on exploitation, as it selects points with a high probability of improve-
ment. However, it can be adjusted to balance exploration and exploitation by introducing
a trade-off parameter ξ:
PI (x) = Φ
f (x) −f (xbest ) −ξ
σ (x)

(3.9)
A higher value of ξ encourages exploration by reducing the emphasis on improvement.
Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)
The Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) acquisition function has a very clear balance of ex-
ploration and exploitation, given that it has a single parameter controlling the uncertainty
tradeoff. Mathematically, UCB is defined as:
UCB (x) = f (x) + βσ (x)
(3.10)
where f (x) is the predicted mean of the GP at point x, σ (x) is the standard deviation of
the GP at point x and β is a hyperparameter that controls the balance between exploration
and exploitation.
12
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:21==
A larger value of β emphasizes exploration by increasing the influence of uncertainty,
while a smaller value diminishes this influence, focusing on the exploitation. [7]
Figure 3.6: Comparison of Acquisition Functions
Figure 3.6 shows the EI, PI, UCB (β = 0.3) and UCB (β = 0.7) acquisition functions applied
on the function from (3.1), with three data points already sampled. Here, all functions
obtaining their maximum value (i.e. suggesting a candidate point) close to the optimum
of the function. This shows how even a few data points in just the right places can result
in convergence.
3.2.3
Single-Objective vs. Multi-Objective Optimization
Optimization problems can be broadly categorized into two types: single-objective opti-
mization and multi-objective optimization. Although both types aim to identify the optimal
solution within a set of limitations, the complexity and approach can vary greatly depend-
ing on whether a single objective or multiple conflicting objectives are to be optimized.
Single-Objective Optimization
Single-objective optimization involves the goal of either maximizing or minimizing a single
objective function. This is the most basic kind of optimization, where the goal is straight-
forward: to identify the optimal value of the objective function. Mathematically, a single-
objective optimization problem can be represented as:
max
x∈X f (x)
(3.11)
where x represents the input variables, X is the feasible region and f (x) is the objective
function to be minimized or maximized. It is important to note that a minimization problem
can always be formulated as a maximization problem by simply maximizing the negative
of the original objective function, and vice versa. Single-objective optimization problems
are well-suited for cases where there is a clear measure of success or performance, such
as minimizing cost, maximizing efficiency, or optimizing a specific metric.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.7: Single-Objective Optimization
Figure 3.7 illustrates what the optimization process of a single objective optimization can
look like.
Challenges in Multi-Objective Optimization
Multi-objective optimization, in contrast, involves the simultaneous optimization of two or
more objectives that are in competition with one another. This adds a layer of complexity,
as improving one objective often results in the deterioration of another. Multi-objective
problems are common in real-world scenarios where trade-offs are inevitable - for example
when finding a balance between the cost of production and the performance of a product.
A multi-objective optimization problem can be expressed mathematically as:
max
x∈X f (x) =
 f1 (x) , f2 (x) , . . . , fm (x)

(3.12)
where f (x) is a vector of objective functions f1 (x) , f2 (x) , . . . , fm (x) that need to be min-
imized or maximized simultaneously. Here, m is the number of objectives.
Techniques for Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization (MOBO)
Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization (MOBO) extends the principles of BO to handle
multiple objectives. Several techniques are used in MOBO to manage the trade-offs be-
tween conflicting objectives and to navigate the multi-dimensional search space effec-
tively. These techniques are seen in Figure 3.8 and introduced in the following, along
with the concept of Pareto optimality.
14
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.8: MOBO Techniques
Pareto Optimality
Pareto optimality is a central concept in multi-objective optimization,
where a solution is considered Pareto optimal, if there is no other solution that can improve
one objective without worsening at least one other objective. The set of all Pareto optimal
solutions forms what is known as the Pareto front. An example of a Pareto front for a
two-objective optimization problem is shown in Figure 3.9. Here, objective 1 is to be
minimized, whereas objective 2 is to be maximized.
Figure 3.9: Pareto Front
The Pareto front illustrates the trade-offs between the objectives, and each point on this
front is a potentially optimal solution, depending on the decision-maker’s preferences. In
practice, finding the Pareto front requires exploring the objective space to identify these
trade-offs. Subsequently, the decision-maker can select a solution from the Pareto front
that best aligns with their priorities.
Relative Weight-Based Approach
A common approach in MOBO involves assigning
relative weights to each objective, which can be adjusted throughout each iteration. For
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
15
==PAGE:24==
example, the Chebyshev scalarization method [8] applies random weights to the objec-
tives in each iteration, creating a single objective from the weighted sum of all the ob-
jectives, that is then optimized. This approach enables the algorithm to systematically
investigate various regions of the search space over multiple iterations, helping to identify
a wide range of objective trade-offs.
fweighted (x) =
m
X
i=1
wifi (x)
(3.13)
where wi are the weights applied to each objective. The key advantage of this approach
is its simplicity and the ability to explore various trade-offs by adjusting the weights dy-
namically.
Preference Order-Based Methods
In preference order-based methods, the decision-
maker defines a ranking or priority order for the objectives, indicating which objectives
are more critical and should be optimized first. The optimization process is then directed
toward satisfying the higher-priority objectives, while the lower-priority objectives are opti-
mized conditionally. The Chimera [9] scalarization method is an example of this approach.
It enables users to define a hierarchical preference among objectives, which directs the
optimization process to prioritize the most critical objectives and only address secondary
objectives after the primary ones have been adequately optimized.
Mathematically, preference order-based methods can be expressed as a lexicographic
optimization problem, where the objective functions f1 (x) , f2 (x) , . . . , fm (x) are optimized
in sequence according to their priority, shown here in a minimization setup:
min
x∈X f1 (x) , subject to f1 (x) ≤ϵ1
min
x∈X f2 (x) , subject to f1 (x) ≤ϵ1, f2 (x) ≤ϵ2
...
min
x∈X fm (x) , subject to f1 (x) ≤ϵ1, f2 (x) ≤ϵ2, . . . , fm (x) ≤ϵm
(3.14)
where ϵi are the thresholds defined for each objective based on the priority order. This
approach is especially valuable in situations where specific objectives are inflexible or
crucial, and it offers a systematic method to explore the solution space while respecting
the decision-maker’s preferences.
Hypervolume-Based Approaches
Where the previous two techniques scalarize the
multiple objectives into a single objective, Hypervolume-based approaches focus on max-
imizing the hypervolume of the Pareto front. In MOBO, hypervolume-based acquisition
functions are used to determine the next sampling point that will have the most impact on
increasing the hypervolume, thereby improving the overall Pareto front.
A prominent example of this approach is the Expected Hypervolume Improvement (EHVI)
acquisition function [10].
EHVI calculates the expected increase in hypervolume that
would result from sampling a particular point in the objective space. By selecting points
that maximize EHVI, the algorithm systematically improves the Pareto front, focusing on
areas that provide the greatest potential for advancement. Mathematically, the EHVI for
a candidate point x can be expressed as:
16
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:25==
EHVI (x) = E

max

0, HV
 A ∪{x}

−HV (A)

(3.15)
where HV (A) is the hypervolume of the current Pareto front A, HV
 A ∪{x}

is the hy-
pervolume of the Pareto front if x.
Figure 3.10: Hypervolume Improvement
Goal-Oriented Approaches
Goal-oriented optimization techniques allow the decision-
maker to establish specific goals for each objective, and the optimization process con-
centrates on identifying solutions that most effectively meet these goals. This strategy is
especially useful when the decision-maker has clear target values for each objective, and
the optimization seeks to achieve or roughly approximate these targets. Integrating goal-
oriented methods with other techniques such as hypervolume improvement can ensure
that the identified solutions are both diverse, but also aligned with the desired goals.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
17
==PAGE:26==
4
Method
4.1
Isolated Testing
Before the development of Odyssey, it was essential to evaluate different Bayesian opti-
mization backends in order to identify which one would offer the most robust and adaptable
foundation for the framework. Several options were considered, including Ax, GPytorch,
BayesOpt, but in the end, BoTorch was chosen due to its advanced capabilities in multi-
objective BO and native support for PyTorch, allowing GPU-acceleration throughout the
framework.
In order to determine the capabilities of BoTorch in various problem domains, a set of
preliminary tests were carried out on various optimization tasks. The entire field of BO
problems was split into four broad categories, as seen on Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: BO Problem Categories
Single-Output
Multi-Output
Single-Input
SISO
SIMO
Multi-Input
MISO
MIMO
SISO
For the SISO case, (4.1), which is simply the negative of (3.1), was maximized.
f (x) = −
 
sin (x) + sin
10
3 · x
!
, x ∈[0, 10]
(4.1)
In order to simulate a more realistic scenario, measurement noise was incorporated into
the objective function, introducing uncertainty into the observations. This allowed for an
assessment of how well BO could perform under noisy conditions.
The process began by taking a few random observations of the noisy function. These ob-
servations were then used to calculate the exact marginal log likelihood using the Exact-
MarginalLogLikelihood function from the GPyTorch library, which comes with BoTorch.
This step was crucial in fitting a GP model to the data, which was done using the Single-
TaskGP function in BoTorch.
Next, an EI acquisition function was created using the ExpectedImprovement function.
The optimization process is guided by the current best observed data point, which was
configured in the EI acquisition function.
The optimize_acqf was finally employed to generate the next candidate point to evalu-
ate by maximizing the current acquisition function. This whole process was repeated in
a loop, where each iteration involved updating the GP model with new observations and
optimizing the acquisition function to select the next candidate. The loop continued until
the optimization results were deemed satisfactory, allowing for a comprehensive evalu-
ation of the BoTorch infrastructure and capabilities in managing noisy, single-objective
optimization problems. The results are seen in Figure 5.1.
18
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:27==
SIMO
For the SIMO case, both (4.1), (4.2) were used to create a multi-output problem,
where a single input variable x was mapped to both outputs. As observed in Figure 4.1,
the two objectives are in conflict. The optimum of (4.1) is located at x∗≈5 while the
optimum of (4.2) is located at x∗≈8. Additionally, both functions demonstrate minimal
values at the optimum of the other function, which complicates simultaneous optimization.
f (x) = x · sin (x)
(4.2)
Figure 4.1: SISO and SIMO Optimization Functions
Similar to the SISO instance, measurement noise was introduced to both objective func-
tions being optimized, and from these, several random observations were collected. A
separate GP was fitted for each of the objective functions using the SingleTaskGP func-
tion, but were subsequently merged using the ModelListGP function to address the multi-
output issue. The combined marginal log likelihood was then computed using the Sum-
MarginalLogLikelihood function from GPyTorch.
The ParEGO [8] algorithm, which utilizes Chebyshev scalarization, was employed to op-
timize this multi-objective problem. This scalarization was implemented by sampling from
the unit simplex, i.e. assigning weights to each of the objectives, all weights summing up
to 1, and creating a single objective function from the weights and the objectives. EI was
once again used as the acquisition function, and the optimize_acqf function was also
used for generating the next candidate point for evaluation. The whole process was per-
formed iteratively, with the scalarization weights being modified in each iteration in order
to explore different regions of the parameter space. With the accumulation of sufficient
data points, it was possible to create a Pareto front, illustrating the trade-offs between
the two objectives and providing a visual representation of the optimal balance between
them. The results are seen in Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3.
MISO
For the MISO case, the well-known Branin function [11], a 2-input 1-output func-
tion, seen in (4.3) was selected as the objective:
f (x1, x2) = a

x2 −bx2
1 + cx1 −r
2
+ s (1 −t) cos (x1) + s, x1 ∈[−5, 10] , x2 ∈[0, 15]
(4.3)
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
19
==PAGE:28==
where a = 1, b =
5.1
4π2 , c =
5
π, r = 6, s = 10 and t =
1
8π. With the input parameter
space normalized to x1, x2 ∈[0, 1], this objective has three minima with the value y∗=
0.397887 at
 x∗
1, x∗
2

= (0.124, 0.818), (0.543, 0.152) and (0.962, 0.165), and is illustrated on
Figure 4.2a.
The SingleTaskGP module from BoTorch, which is capable of handling multiple inputs,
was also employed in the MISO instance, just as it was in the SISO instance. The exact
marginal log likelihood was calculated, the GP model was fitted and the optimize_acqf
function was used to generate the next candidate - but in this case, a set of (x1, x2) values.
The results are seen in Figure 5.4.
(a) Branin Function
(b) Dejong Function
Figure 4.2: Branin and Dejong Multi-Input Functions
MIMO
The MIMO scenario involved optimizing two different 2-input 1-output functions
simultaneously - the Branin function from (4.3) and the altered Dejong function [12], where
the original Dejong function is a sum of squares, the altered function used here and seen
in (4.4) is the sum of square roots.
f (x1, x2) =
p
|x1| +
p
|x2|, x1, x2 ∈[0, 1]
(4.4)
The input parameter space of the Dejong function is also normalized, and the objective
has one minima with the value y∗= 0.0 at (x1, x2) = (0.5, 0.5). The objective is illustrated
in Figure 4.2b.
For this multi-objective optimization problem, the EHVI (Expected Hypervolume Improve-
ment) [10] algorithm was used. The fitting process of the GP was the same as that of
the ParEGO approach, but instead of scalarizing the objective functions, EHVI focuses
on maximizing hypervolume improvement.
In order to calculate the hypervolume, a reference point (worse than the most optimal
solution) had to be specified. After collecting random observations of the Branin and De-
jong functions, a Pareto front was generated using the FastNonDominatedPartitioning
20
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:29==
function. This Pareto front, along with the reference point was then used to calculate the
hypervolume.
The algorithm utilized the Expected Hypervolume Improvement (EHVI) acquisition func-
tion, implemented using the qExpectedHypervolumeImprovement function in BoTorch and
the optimize_acqf was again employed to identify the next candidate that is expected to
contribute most to increasing the hypervolume. This process was repeated until a suffi-
cient amount of data was gather, and an illustration of the Pareto front was made. The
results are seen in Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.6.
4.2
Creating Odyssey
The initial testing phase provided valuable insights into the different optimization sce-
narios, emphasizing both the similarities and the unique challenges associated with the
implementation of the different types of problems. It became clear that, despite the va-
riety of optimization tasks, there were many fundamental concepts and processes that
were consistently used in all circumstances. For example, the process of defining the
parameter space, the definition of the type of problem (maximization or minimization), the
fitting of GPs and other aspects remained mostly unchanged, independent of the specific
problem type or algorithm used.
These observations highlighted the possibility of uniformity, which could not only stream-
line the optimization process, but also make it more accessible for others to implement
and extend. Recognizing this, the primary goal of developing Odyssey was to construct
a modular and flexible framework that could accommodate a wide range of optimization
tasks while providing a standardized interface for defining problems and executing opti-
mization algorithms.
The goal was to design Odyssey in a way that allowed users to define a ”mission” - a
clear, structured representation of the optimization problem, including input parameters,
objective bounds and constraints. The mission would then be guided by a series of adapt-
able and interchangeable ”navigators”, each aligned with distinct optimization algorithms
or techniques. By standardizing these components, Odyssey would streamline the im-
plementation and solving of intricate optimization tasks, while enabling the seamless in-
tegration of novel algorithms and approaches as they are created. This would assure the
framework’s adaptability to future work in the field.
The following subsections provide a detailed explanation of how Odyssey’s core com-
ponents are put into action. This includes the creation and programming of the mission
module, followed by the development of the base navigator, and the specific navigators
for both single-objective and multi-objective optimization.
4.2.1
Mission Class
The ”mission” in Odyssey represents the core element of the optimization process. It
encapsulates all the fundamental components needed to define the problem, including
the input parameters, objectives, bounds and constraints. The Mission class was created
to be flexible, allowing users to define custom optimization problems while maintaining a
standardized interface for easy integration with the rest of the Odyssey framework.
The key attributes of this class are introduced in the following.
funcs
A list of functions to be optimized. These functions represent the objectives of
the optimization problem.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
21
==PAGE:30==
maneuvers
A list of goals corresponding to each function, indicating whether each func-
tion should ascend (maximization) or descend (minimization).
envelope
The parameter space for the optimization problem, defining the bounds within
which the optimization will occur.
param_dims
The number of input parameters, automatically determined based on the
envelope dimensions
output_dims
The number of output parameters, automatically determined based on the
number of maneuvers specified.
Additionally, the Mission class manages a logfile that tracks the progress of the optimiza-
tion process, including the input parameters and objective values at each iteration.
While the Mission class provides a foundation for defining the optimization problem, the
next step in building Odyssey involves creating a structure that can manage the optimiza-
tion process itself.
4.2.2
Base Navigator Class
The Base Navigator in Odyssey functions as the fundamental class that all specific nav-
igators inherit from. The Base Navigator does not serve as a real navigator. Its main
purpose is to establish a standardized framework that outlines the fundamental structure
and shared functionalities necessary for all navigators. This architecture enables the im-
plementation of different optimization methods with flexibility, while ensuring consistent
management of fundamental capabilities.
Upon initialization, the Base Navigator establishes a connection with a Mission, which
contains the encapsulated optimization problem. The navigator requires several key pa-
rameters during initialization, including the mission object, the number of initial points to
sample from the objective functions, the method used for initialization and optional flags
for activating or deactivating input scaling and data standardization.
The Base Navigator is responsible for generating the initial set of data points that are
utilized to train the model. This process is carried out through the generate_init_data
method, which leverages the specified initialized method to create the initial input data.
Once the initial input data is created, the values of the objective function at these input
points is gathered using the probe method. The main optimization loop can now com-
mence.
One of the key features of the Base Navigator is the inclusion of the abstract methods
_trajectory and _upgrade. These methods are designed to be overridden by specific
navigator implementation:
_trajectory
This method is responsible for suggesting the next candidate point to be
probed- This is done either by maximizing an acquisition function, or another similar tech-
nique for generating candidates. This is an abstract method, that must be defined specif-
ically by the inheriting navigator, ensuring that the output is compatible with the format
expected by Odyssey.
_upgrade
This method is designed to handle the model update process specific to the
optimization algorithm being implemented. Each Navigator that inherits from the Base
Navigator will provide its own version of _upgrade, tailored to its optimization strategy.
22
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:31==
Crucially important for engaging with the mission objectives and updating the optimization
process, the Base Navigator also specifies the probe and relay methods:
_probe
This method takes the input data and probes the objective functions and these
points. It ensures that input scaling and data standardization are handled, if necessary.
_relay
This method is responsible for updating the training data and display data with
the latest trajectory and probed observation. It ensures that the new data points are
integrated into the existing data and that the logs are updated accordingly. This method
is crucial for maintaining an accurate record of the optimization process and for ensuring
that the model is updated with the most recent information.
The Base Navigator is designed to balance standardization with flexibility. By providing
a skeletal structure with key processes defined, it allows for consistency across different
navigators while still enabling the development of custom optimization strategies. The use
of abstract methods further enhances this flexibility, allowing each navigator to implement
the specifics of its algorithm without deviating from the overall structure.
This approach ensures that Odyssey can easily integrate new optimization algorithms,
along with sampling techniques while maintaining a consistent and reliable framework for
users. A number of optimization algorithms have been implemented, which inherit the
Base Navigator, including the single objective SingleGP_Navigator, the multi-objective
navigators qNParEGO_Navigator, qEHVI_Navigator and Gryffin_Navigator and the ini-
tial sampling methods Grid_Navigator and Sobol_Navigator.
4.2.3
Objective Class
The Objective class in Odyssey plays a vital role in managing the functions that need to
be optimized within the framework. It acts as a wrapper around these functions, ensur-
ing that they are properly formatted and compatible with the PyTorch-based optimization
process employed by Odyssey. The input variables, and any additional arguments are
handled by this class, maintaining the integrity of the optimization process.
This class was created to meet the requirement for adaptibility in managing different sorts
of objective functions. Optimization problems often involve functions that can be influ-
enced by extra parameters or configurations, especially when controlling hardware, and
the Objective class enables the integration of these functionalities into Odyssey without
the need for significant modifications, streamlining the integration process.
When the class instance is called, i.e. the__call__ method is invoked, the positional and
keyword arguments provided during the initialization of the Objective class are merged
with any additional arguments passed during the function call. This allows for dynamic
adjustment of the function’s behaviour without altering its core structure.
Finally, if the output is not already a PyTorch tensor, it is converted into one, with the
correct amount of dimensions required for further compatibility with the rest of the Odyssey
framework. Additionally, any input parameters coming from the Odyssey navigators are
converted to match the input type of the original function.
4.3
Synthetic Benchmarking
During the initial testing phase, described in Section 4.1, the EHVI and ParEGO MOBO
algorithms were evaluated for their performance, without using the Odyssey framework,
using the synthetic benchmarking functions Branin and Dejong. Although these tests
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
23
==PAGE:32==
provided helpful insights, they required a substantial amount of repetitive code, especially
when trying to solve the same problem using different algorithms.
To demonstrate the full power of Odyssey, this section describes how the EHVI and
ParEGO algorithms were benchmarked on a class of synthetic MIMO benchmark prob-
lems known as DTLZ. Specificially, this was done using the DTLZ2 problem with 2 inputs
and 2 outputs. Each algorithm was initialized with 2 data points and iterated through 20
optimization steps. The benchmarking was implemented fully using Odyssey, using the
Mission and Objective classes, along with the qNParEGO_Navigator and qEHVI_Navi-
gator classes, which both inherit from the Base Navigator class.
The Python modules necessary for optimization were imported first. These include the
pymoo.problems.get_problems module [13], containing all the pymoo test problems, in-
cluding the DTZL2 problem. Additionally, the Odyssey modules were imported, along with
other packages for handling data types and warnings.
1
# Problem
2
from pymoo.problems import get_problem
3
4
# Odyssey modules
5
from odyssey.mission import Mission
# Mission
6
from odyssey.objective import Objective
# Objective
7
from odyssey.navigators.moo import qNParEGO_Navigator , qEHVI_Navigator
#
Multi Objective Navigators
8
from odyssey.navigators.sampler_navigators import Grid_Navigator
# Sampler
Navigator
9
10
# Other Packages
11
import torch
12
import numpy as np
13
import pandas as pd
14
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
15
from IPython import display
16
from warnings import catch_warnings , simplefilter
The first step in the benchmarking process was to set the problem up. The DTLZ2 problem
was configured to have 2 input variables and 2 output objectives. The Objective class
in Odyssey was used to set the problem up to work within the Odyssey framework.
1
from pymoo.problems import get_problem
2
3
problem = get_problem("dtlz2", n_var=2, n_obj=2)
4
5
def evaluate_problem(params, i):
6
value = problem.evaluate(params.flatten().numpy())
7
return value[i]
8
9
obj1 = Objective(evaluate_problem , i=0)
10
obj2 = Objective(evaluate_problem , i=1)
Subsequently, the Mission class was used to setup a mission that describes the optimiza-
tion problem, including the objective functions and the parameter space.
1
mission = Mission(name="DTLZ2_2in_2out_MOBO",
2
funcs=[obj1, obj2],
3
maneuvers=['descend', 'descend'],
24
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:33==
4
envelope=[(0.0, 1.0), (0.0, 1.0)])
The qNParEGO_Navigator was then initialized, specifying the number of initial data points
to be sampled using the Grid_Navigator method, and other parameters regarding the
optimization process.
1
num_init_design = 2
2
navigator = qNParEGO_Navigator(mission=mission ,
3
num_init_design=num_init_design ,
4
init_method=Grid_Navigator(mission=mission ,
subdivisions=num_init_design),
5
input_scaling=False,
6
data_standardization=False,
7
display_always_max=True,
8
acq_function_params={'prune_baseline': True}
9
)
In the case of EHVI, the qEHVI_Navigator was initialized in a similar manner.
1
navigator = qEHVI_Navigator(mission=mission ,
2
num_init_design=num_init_design ,
3
init_method=Grid_Navigator(mission=mission ,
subdivisions=num_init_design),
4
input_scaling=False,
5
data_standardization=False,
6
display_always_max=True,
7
acq_function_params={'ref_point': torch.tensor
([-0.8, -0.8])}
8
)
At the end of the navigator initialization, the initial points were sampled, and the naviga-
tors were now ready for optimization. The optimization was run as a loop for 20 iterations,
calling for a candidate point (using the trajectory method). An observation at the candi-
date point was made (using the probe) method and the logs and the model were updated
(using the relay and upgrade methods).
1
num_iter = 20
2
while len(mission.train_X) - num_init_design < num_iter:
3
trajectory = navigator.trajectory()
4
observation = navigator.probe(trajectory , init=False)
5
navigator.relay(trajectory , observation)
6
navigator.upgrade()
One of the critical features in Odyssey is its ability to automatically log the optimization
results. The Mission class handles the logging process, ensuring that all input parame-
ters, objective values and timestamps of the optimization process are recorded. These
results are saved in a csv-file named after the mission and timestamped, stored in the
missionlogs folder within the working directory. An example of the first 10 data entries
(2 initial samples and 8 optimizations) from the ParEgo optimization of DTLZ2 is shown
in Table 4.2
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 4.2: Optimization Log for DTLZ2 Using ParEGO
param_1
param_2
objective_1
objective_2
creation_timestamp
0.0
0.0
1.25
0.0
04-08-24 20:20:57
1.0
1.0
7.65e-17
1.25
04-08-24 20:20:57
0.0
0.893
1.15
0.0
04-08-24 20:22:31
1.0
0.0
7.65e-17
1.25
04-08-24 20:23:33
0.587
0.576
0.608
0.801
04-08-24 20:24:24
0.461
0.0
0.936
0.828
04-08-24 20:24:28
0.684
1.0
0.595
1.099
04-08-24 20:24:43
0.426
0.638
0.799
0.632
04-08-24 20:25:52
0.535
0.567
0.670
0.748
04-08-24 20:32:02
0.0
0.470
1.00
0.0
04-08-24 20:32:34
By using Odyssey for the benchmarking, the code was significantly streamlined, reduc-
ing redundancy and making it easier to benchmark different algorithms on a variety of
problems. This was a simple demonstration of two algorithms used to optimize a simple
problem, but the same code structure could be used for optimizing various problems us-
ing a multitude of optimization algorithms, showcasing the flexibility and extensibility of the
Odyssey framework. The optimization results can be seen in Figure 5.8 and Figure 5.9.
4.4
ScattBO Benchmarking
As a bridge between purely synthetic benchmarking and real-world applications in labo-
ratory settings, the ScattBO benchmark [14] represents an important intermediate step in
the development and application of Odyssey for materials research. ScattBO differs from
synthetic functions that have well-defined Pareto fronts as it relies on data obtained from
real material synthesis experiments. These studies involve synthesizing materials with
specific input parameters and their structural characteristics are evaluated to determine if
the desired material structure has been achieved.
The objective of ScattBO is to benchmark optimization of the synthesis parameters in
order to achieve a material with a structure that closely matches a target structure. This
is done by measuring the scattering data of the synthesized material and comparing it
to the scattering pattern of the target material. The scattering data is evaluated in two
key domains: The Q-space (Sq), relating to the analysis of atomic arrangements, and
R-Space (Gr), assessing density variations of radial distances. While the detailed theory
behind scattering measurements is not the primary focus for Bayesian optimization, these
objectives offer a meaningful way to assess the success of the material synthesis process.
For the purposes of optimization, three input synthesis parameters were varied:
• pH: Ranging from 0 to 14
• Pressure: Ranging from 0 to 100
• Solvent: A categorical variable with four possible values (0: Ethanol, 1: Methanol,
2: Water, 3: Others)
The outputs of the scattering domains Gr and Sq, measured as objective values in the
ScattBO Benchmark, serve as the criteria for optimization. These values reflect how much
the synthesized material differs from the target material in the respective domains, and
therefore poses as a minimization problem.
26
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:35==
In order to demonstrate Odyssey on the ScattBO problem, two sets of experiments were
conducted, a single-objective optimization of Gr and Sq individually, and a multi-objective
optimization of both domains simultaneously.
4.4.1
Single-Objective Optimization
To begin, a wrapper was made for accessing the benchmark functions of ScattBO. Addi-
tionally, the wrapper was used for converting the float input of Odyssey to integer values
to accommodate the categorical solvent variable:
1
def benchmark_wrapper(input_data , simulated_or_experimental ,
scatteringfunction):
2
solvent = int(np.round(solvent))
3
solvent_name = {0: 'Methanol', 1: 'Ethanol', 2: 'Water', 3: 'Others'}
4
5
params = LargeBenchmarkParameters(pH = pH, pressure = pressure , solvent =
solvent_name[solvent])
6
return ScatterBO_large_benchmark(params , plot=False,
simulated_or_experimental=simulated_or_experimental ,
scatteringfunction=scatteringfunction)
Doing this, the objectives could be setup using the Objective class in Odyssey
1
gr_objective = Objective(func=benchmark_wrapper , simulated_or_experimental = '
experimental', scatteringfunction='Gr')
2
sq_objective = Objective(func=benchmark_wrapper , simulated_or_experimental = '
experimental', scatteringfunction='Sq')
The optimization problem was loaded into Odyssey as a Mission. In the case of Gr, the
gr_objective was loaded into the mission, and the sq_objective in the case of Sq. The
appropriate ranges for the synthesis parameters were also stated here.
1
mission = Mission(name="Gr_SOBO",
2
funcs=[gr_objective],
3
maneuvers=['descend'],
4
envelope=[(0.0, 14.0), (0.0, 100.0), (0.0, 3.0)])
The navigator used was the SingleGP_Navigator, shown in the following using EI as the
acquisition function. In reality, both EI, PI and UCB (β = 0.3) were used for optimization
of both Gr and Sq. The optimization was initialized with 10 initial samples.
1
num_init_design = 10
2
navigator = SingleGP_Navigator(mission = mission ,
3
num_init_design = num_init_design ,
4
init_method = Grid_Navigator(mission = mission ,
subdivisions = num_init_design),
5
input_scaling = False,
6
data_standardization = False,
7
display_always_max = True,
8
acq_function_type = ExpectedImprovement ,
9
acq_function_params = {'best_f': 0.0}
10
)
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
27
==PAGE:36==
The optimization was set to run until the objective value of the respective problem fell
under the pre-defined success criteria, being < 0.80 for Gr and < 0.84 for Sq.
1
while observation[0][0].item() < criteria[0] or observation[0][1].item() <
criteria[1]:
2
3
with catch_warnings() as w:
4
simplefilter('ignore')
5
6
trajectory = navigator.trajectory()
7
observation = navigator.probe(trajectory , init = False)
8
9
print(len(mission.train_X)-num_init_design , trajectory , observation)
10
11
navigator.relay(trajectory , observation)
12
navigator.upgrade()
The single-objective optimization results are illustrated in Figure 5.10 and Figure 5.11.
4.4.2
Multi-Objective Optimization
In the multi-objective case, for optimizing in the Gr and Sq domains simultaneously, the
same gr_objective and sq_objective were used as before. The mission was then
setup, adding both objective functions to funcs, and updating the maneuvers accordingly.
1
mission = Mission(name="Gr_Sq_MOBO",
2
funcs=[gr_objective , sq_objective],
3
maneuvers=['descend', 'descend'],
4
envelope=[(0.0, 14.0), (0.0, 100.0), (0.0, 3.0)])
The navigators used for the multi-objective optimization were again qNParEGO_Navigator
and qEHVI_Navigator, initialized just as in Section 4.3. For EHVI, knowing the success
criteria (and thereby the most optimal point), a reference point slightly worse than the
optimal point could be set for hypervolume calculation, namely (y1, y2) = (0.81, 0.84).
The optimization loop was again set to run, but until both success criteria had been sur-
passed:
1
while observation[0][0].item() < criteria[0] or observation[0][1].item() <
criteria[1]:
2
3
with catch_warnings() as w:
4
simplefilter('ignore')
5
6
trajectory = navigator.trajectory()
7
observation = navigator.probe(trajectory , init = False)
8
9
print(len(mission.train_X)-num_init_design , trajectory , observation)
10
11
navigator.relay(trajectory , observation)
12
navigator.upgrade()
As a simultaneous optimization of both Gr and Sq domains had not been conducted be-
fore, reaching both criteria was merely a hypothetical. After a sufficient number of it-
erations, this target was abandoned. The results of the optimizations can be seen in
Figure 5.12.
28
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:37==
By applying Odyssey to optimize synthesis parameters based on real experimental data
from ScattBO, this work demonstrated Odyssey’s potential to accelerate materials re-
search, highlighting its flexibility and robustness in the multitude of problems it can handle.
4.5
DTU Course 47332
In an effort to introduce new students to the rapidly advancing field of Autonomous Ma-
terials Discovery, a new course titled 47332 AI-orchestrated self-driving labs was devel-
oped at DTU. The course aimed to teach students about the fundamental principles of
self-driving labs (SDLs) and their applications in materials science. The course specif-
ically emphasized the automation of synthesis, testing and experiment design through
Bayesian Machine Learning, where Odyssey played a central role. Additional details re-
garding the course can be accessed on the official homepage dedicated to the course
[15].
4.5.1
Development of PumpBot
A liquid handling robot, named PumpBot was conceived and constructed to offer a prac-
tical experience with SDLs. The PumpBot functioned as a physical platform for students
to engage with, and understand the complexities of, SDLs. The robot utilized an Arduino
microprocessor and incorporated several peristaltic pumps linked to bottles filled with wa-
ter combined with red, blue, green and yellow food coloring. Additional pumps were used
for flushing the test cell with water and draining it.
The core functionality of PumpBot was to mix these colored liquids (ingredients / precur-
sors) in specified ratios and measure the resulting color using an RGB sensor placed on
the test cell. An LED light stick provided consistent lighting conditions for accurate color
measurement. The task for students was to match a target color - provided as a mys-
tery mixture - by optimizing the ratios of the four colored liquids. This exercise served as
an analogy to material synthesis in SDLs, where the goal is to achieve desired material
properties by optimizing, among other aspects, precursor ratios. Figure 4.3 shows the
PumpBot, where each component is annotated.
(a) PumpBot Liquid-Side
(b) PumpBot Electronics-Side
Figure 4.3: PumpBot
4.5.2
Software Integration and PumpController
Apart from the hardware development of PumpBot, including designing the 3D-printed
parts for the test cell and pump holders, a significant amount of effort was invested in
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
29
==PAGE:38==
the software development for PumpBot. This included writing firmware for the Arduino in
C++, and developing a communication library to enable Python-based interaction with the
PumpBot. The result was a comprehensive Python library named PumpController, which
included essential functions for communication, synthesis and measurements, with the
essential methods here being the mix and measure methods.
The mix method accepts a list of four values corresponding to the ratios of red, green, blue
and yellow liquids. The PumpBot would mix these colors in the specified proportions, nor-
malized to the volume of the test cell. Subsequently, the measure method would measure
the RGB value of the mixed color using the sensor. Finally, the cell would be drained of
the colored liquid, flushed with water and drained again, ready for another synthesis and
measurement.
To evaluate the accuracy of the color being synthesized, a score function based on the
sum of root mean squared differences was used:
score =
X r
mean

( mixed_color −target_color )2
(4.5)
This score was then used as the objective function to be minimized, with the precursor
ratios as input variables. The optimization task was thus to minimize the score, using
Bayesian optimization through the Odyssey framework.
4.5.3
SilicoBot and Educational Notebooks
A virtual counterpart named SilicoBot was created to accompany the actual PumpBot.
SilicoBot provided students with the opportunity to become acquainted with optimization
methods in a simulated setting prior to implementing their understanding on real hardware.
This approach helped bridge the gap between theory and practice, providing a safe space
for experimentation.
Additionally, a set of Jupyter Notebooks was created in collaboration with the course re-
sponsible and instructors. The notebooks provided a step-by-step guidance to students
on the process of using the PumpController Python module and Odyssey for Bayesian
optimization. The curriculum included a wide range of topics, starting with basic local
optimization techniques and progressing to more sophisticated topics including Bayesian
optimization and the use of digital twins for generating data and training neural networks.
4.5.4
Documentation and the Diataxis Framework
To ensure that Odyssey was accessible to students with varying levels of experience
in Bayesian optimization, comprehensivve documentation was created following the Di-
ataxis framework [16]. Tutorials in the documentation gave learning-oriented experiences
that walked users through key concepts and practical examples, How-to-Guides were
goal-oriented instructions, such as setting up the framework, API references were given
as detailed descriptions of the Odyssey functions and classes, Explanations were given
as discussions to help users understand the underlying principles of the framework. A
dedicated website was created to host this documentation, giving convenient access to
navigate the resources to students and other users.
4.5.5
Evolution and Future of PumpBot and Odyssey
The incorporation of Odyssey into the 47332 course marked the first time the framework
was used in a hardware setting, moving beyond synthetic benchmarks and simulations.
This represented a significant step toward Odyssey’s intended application in real-world
SDLs for materials research. Moreover, this was the first usage of Odyssey by a broader
30
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:39==
audience - the students of course 47332 - providing valuable feedback for further improve-
ments to the framework.
Over time, the PumpBot system was upgraded with the addition of a pH sensor, enabling
the simultaneous optimization of both color and pH levels. This enhancement allowed for
multi-objective Bayesian optimization, bringing the experiment even closer to the com-
plexities of real-world SDLs.
More information about the course can be found in A.2.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
31
==PAGE:40==
5
Results
This chapter presents the results of the various experiments described in the previous
chapter. These results are organized into several sections, starting with the initial testing
phase, applying BO to various functions. The learnings from these initial tests is used to
create Odyssey, and its structure is presented in the following section. Subsequently, fol-
lowed by the creation of Odyssey, it is applied to synthetic benchmark problems, and later
more complex materials science benchmarks like ScattBO. Finally, some of the results
from the experiments conducted in the DTU 47332 course using PumpBot and Odyssey in
a real-world setting are presented. Each section provides visualizations and an analysis
of the outcomes.
5.1
Results from Initial Testing
In the initial testing phase, a SISO optimization problem was set up to test BO’s ability
to fit a surrogate model to a noisy function. Figure 5.1 illustrates the true function (from
(4.1)), a noise band indicating where the noisy observations may lie, the observations
themselves, the surrogate model and the associated uncertainty.
Figure 5.1: SISO Optimization Result
After 5 initial samples and 10 optimization iterations, the surrogate model begins to closely
fit the true function, despite the presence of noise in the measurements. The uncertainty of
the model naturally remains high in regions with fewer data points, which also corresponds
to areas where the surrogate model does not fit the function well.
The next step involved optimizing two conflicting objectives simultaneously in a SIMO
case. Figure 5.2 shows the true functions for both objectives, (4.1) and (4.2), along with
noise bands, observations, surrogate models and uncertainties.
Again, 5 initial samples are taken, and the ParEGO optimization is run for 10 iterations.
The individual optima are investigated, but as the objectives are conflicting, a balance be-
tween the two is found by the optimization algorithm. This balance seems to be achieved
at x ≈7, at the second-highest peak of Objective 1 and close to the optimum of Objective
2.
32
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:41==
(a) Objective 1
(b) Objective 2
Figure 5.2: SIMO Optimization Result
To visualize the trade-off between the two conflicting objectives, a Pareto front was gen-
erated. Figure 5.3 illustrates this front, which takes the shape of an elbow due to the
opposing optima of the two objectives.
Figure 5.3: Pareto of SIMO Optimization Problem
Most of the points on the Pareto front in Figure 5.3 are from later iterations, indicating
that the optimization algorithm effectively honed in on the balance between the objectives.
The decision-maker can then use this information to prioritize one objective over the other,
depending on the specific goals of the problem.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
33
==PAGE:42==
In the MISO scenario, the Branin function from (4.3) was optimized, and Figure 5.4 illus-
trates the function as a contour plot, along with the minima, the initial samples and the
optimization steps.
Figure 5.4: MISO Optimization Result
Also in this scenario, 5 initial samples were taken, and 10 additional optimization iterations
were run. It is evident that the optimization process converges to one of the minima. Since
all minima are equal, the algorithm could potentially find the other minima using different
initial samples or additional optimization steps.
Finally, in the MIMO scenario, both the Branin ((4.3)) and Dejong ((4.4)) functions were
optimized simultaneously. Figure 5.5 illustrates the contour plots of both objective func-
tions individually, with the optima, initial samples and optimization iterations marked on
the plots.
Also here, 5 initial samples are taken from the objective functions, and the ParEGO opti-
mization is run for 10 iterations. Since the minima of the Branin and Dejong functions are
conflicting, the optimization process has had a larger focus on exploration, looking for a
balance between the two objectives, rather than converging to a specific optimum.
A Pareto front was generated to visualize the trade-offs between optimizing the Branin
and Dejong functions simultaneously. Figure 5.6 shows the theoretical optimum of this
optimization, along with the the sets of observations made during the optimization pro-
cess.
The optimization minimizes the Branin function well, but still achieves relatively high val-
ues for the Dejong function, illustrating the complex trade-offs between these objectives.
34
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:43==
(a) Branin Function
(b) Dejong Function
Figure 5.5: MIMO Optimization Result
Figure 5.6: Pareto of MIMO Optimization Problem
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
35
==PAGE:44==
5.2
Pseudocode of Selected Odyssey Classes
The Mission class in Odyssey represents the optimization problem at hand, and the pseu-
docode in Algorithm 1 represents the structure of the class, including the initialization and
the read_logfile and write_to_logfile methods.
Algorithm 1 Overview of the Mission Class
1: Class Mission():
2:
Attributes:
3:
funcs,
maneuvers,
envelope,
param_dims,
output_dims,
name,
logfile,
columns
4:
Initialization:
5:
Initialize attributes with input parameters (name, funcs, maneuvers, envelope)
6:
Validate maneuvers (ensure they are either ’ascend’ or ’descend’)
7:
Set up logfile directory and path
8:
Define logfile columns (parameters and objectives)
9:
Write initial columns to logfile
10:
Method read_logfile:
11:
Read and return the logfile as a pandas DataFrame
12:
Method write_to_logfile(data):
13:
Add a timestamp to the data
14:
Validate data keys against logfile columns
15:
Read the current logfile
16:
Append new data to the logfile
17:
Save the updated logfile
The Objective class in Odyssey is responsible for wrapping the function to be optimized,
ensuring that it is compatible with the framework. The pseudocode in Algorithm 2 shows
how this class is initialized, how it handles function calls and merges positional and key-
word arguments to proecss the output to ensure compatibility with Odyssey.
Algorithm 2 Overview of the Objective Class
1: Class Objective():
2:
Attributes:
3:
func: The function to be wrapped
4:
args: Positional arguments for the function
5:
kwargs: Keyword arguments for the function
6:
Constructor:
7:
Initialize the Objective with a function, positional arguments, and keyword ar-
guments
8:
Method __call__:
9:
Merge the stored arguments with the new arguments
10:
Call the stored function with the merged arguments
11:
Convert the output to a tensor if it isn’t already
12:
Ensure the output tensor has the right number of dimensions
13:
return the processed output tensor
36
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:45==
The Base Navigator class provides the foundational structure for all navigators in Odyssey.
The pseudocode in Algorithm 3 outlines the initialization of the class, methods for gener-
ating intiial samples, and abstract methods that must be implemented by subclasses.
Algorithm 3 Overview of the Base Navigator Class
1: Class Navigator():
2:
Attributes:
3:
mission, num_init_design, init_method, input_scaling, data_standardization,
display_always_max
4:
Initialization:
5:
Initialize attributes
6:
Set trajectory bounds
7:
Method generate_init_data:
8:
Generate initial input data using init_method
9:
Normalize if input_scaling is True
10:
Probe functions with initial input data
11:
Method generate_display_data:
12:
Convert training data to display data
13:
Method generate_log_data:
14:
Prepare data for logging
15:
Abstract Method _upgrade:
16:
Update the model (to be implemented by subclasses)
17:
Method upgrade:
18:
Call the abstract _upgrade method (accessed by user)
19:
Abstract Method _trajectory:
20:
Get next candidate point (to be implemented by subclasses)
21:
Method trajectory:
22:
Call the abstract _trajectory method (accessed by user)
23:
Method relay:
24:
Update training and display data
25:
Log the updated data
26:
Method probe:
27:
Probe functions with input data
28:
Handle data standardization if required
The pseudocode also shows how users interact with the navigator through methods like
upgrade and trajectory, which in turn call the abstract methods defined in its subclasses.
The probe and relay methods are additionally also accessible by users and are used for
making observations of the objective function and updating the logs, respectively.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
37
==PAGE:46==
The SingleGP_Navigator class is a specific implementation of the Base Navigator, tai-
lored for single-objective optimization using Gaussian Processes. The pseudocode in
Algorithm 4 illustrates how the abstract methods _upgrade and _trajectory are imple-
mented.
Algorithm 4 Overview of the SingleGP_Navigator Class
1: Class SingleGP_Navigator(Navigator):
2:
Attributes:
3:
acq_function_type, acq_function_params, acq_function, model, mll
4:
Initialization:
5:
Inherit attributes from the Navigator class
6:
Ensure the mission has a single output
7:
Initialize acquisition function type and parameters
8:
Create the GP model and acquisition function by calling upgrade() (which in
turn calls _upgrade())
9:
Method _upgrade:
10:
Create the GP model using training data
11:
Compute the marginal log likelihood (mll) and fit the model
12:
Create the acquisition function by calling create_acq_func()
13:
Method create_acq_func:
14:
Update acquisition function parameters (e.g., best_f - best observed value so
far)
15:
Instantiate the acquisition function with the model and parameters
16:
Method _trajectory:
17:
Optimize the acquisition function to find the next best candidate
18:
return the next best candidate
The implementation of the SingleGP_Navigator showcases how a specific navigator can
be implemented, be it the ParEGO, EHVI or any other optimization algorithm, by inheriting
from the Base Navigator and simply updating the two abstract methods _trajectory and
_upgrade.
With all the classes implemented, the general workflow of an optimization sequence is as
illustrated in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Workflow of Odyssey
Additionally, the Odyssey codebase and documentation can be found in A.1.
38
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:47==
5.3
Synthetic Benchmark Results
The ParEGO algorithm was used to solve the DTLZ2 problem, and after 2 initial sam-
ples and 20 optimization iterations, a Pareto front was generated and is illustrated on
Figure 5.8.
Similarly, the EHVI algorithm was also used to solve the DTLZ2 problem, also with 2 initial
samples and 20 optimization iterations, and the Pareto front generated is illustrated on
Figure 5.9.
Both ParEGO and EHVI exhibit robust performance in mapping the Pareto front for the
DTLZ2 problem, but their strategies lead to different outcomes in terms of observation
distribution and focus. ParEGO’s approach allows for broader exploration, making it suit-
able for problems that require a wide range of solutions with trade-offs. On the other hand,
EHVI’s hypervolume improvement strategy tends to focus the optimization process on the
most critical areas of the Pareto front, potentially leading to faster convergence in those
regions.
These results emphasize the significance of selecting the appropriate optimization strat-
egy according to the specific requirements of the task. Although both algorithms are ca-
pable of addressing multi-objective problems, the choice between them should be based
on whether the emphasis is on extensive exploration or concentrated enhancement of the
Pareto front. Nonetheless, Odyssey makes comparison between optimization algorithms
such as these an easy task with its structured interface.
Figure 5.8: Pareto of DTLZ2 using ParEGP
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.9: Pareto of DTLZ2 using EHVI
5.4
ScattBO Benchmarking Results
By leveraging experimental data derived from actual material synthesis processes, Scat-
tBO provides a realistic benchmark to test optimization algorithms for materials science
tasks. The benchmark involves optimizing synthesis parameters to achieve a material
structure that closely matches a target, with the structure being evaluated through scat-
tering data in both Q-space (Sq) and r-space (Gr).
The first set of experiments focused on optimizing the Gr objective individually, using
the SingleGP_Navigator with three different acquisition functions: EI, PI and UCB with
β = 0.3. The goal was to create a horse-race situation to determine which acquisition
function would most effectively guide the optimization process towards achieving the de-
sired structure. The success criteria for Gr was achieving an objective value < 0.80.
Figure 5.10 illustrates this optimization process.
Each optimization sequence was initialized with 10 samples, followed by the optimization
loop itself. As seen in Figure 5.10, the optimization using the EI acquisition function con-
verges to the success criteria after approximately 40 iterations. On the other hand, the
two other optimization sequences struggled to achieve significant improvements after the
first 15 iterations.
The next set of experiments focused on following the same approach as before, but on
the Sq objective. The SingleGP_Navigator was again used with the three acquisition
functions to explore how effectively each could optimize the Sq scattering data, with a
success criteria of < 0.84. This set of experiments is illustrated on Figure 5.11.
40
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.10: ScattBO Gr SOBO with EI, PI and UCB
Figure 5.11: ScattBO Sq SOBO with EI, PI and UCB
Again in this situation, EI converged to the success criteria first, after around 110 iterations.
Interestingly, UCB showed better performance in this scenario compared to its results with
Gr, converging after around 130 iterations. On the other hand, PI continued to show limited
effectiveness after around 20 iterations, suggesting that PI may require additional tuning
or a different approach to competetive in ScattBO’s complex optimization landscape.
In the final set of experiments, Odyssey was tasked with optimizing both Gr and Sq simul-
taneously, a more challenging problem that involves balancing the two conflicting objec-
tives. This was achieved using both the ParEGO and EHVI algorithms, with the resulting
Pareto fronts shown in Figure 5.12.
The Pareto plot illustrates the trade-offs between optimizing Gr and Sq, with individual
success criteria indicated by red dashed lines and the theoretical combined success point
marked by a red cross. It is evident that ParEGO and EHVI produce similar Pareto fronts
after about 250 iterations, demonstrating their ability to balance the two objectives. Ob-
servations are made achieving the success criteria for the individual objectives, but the
theoretical combined optimum is not attained.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.12: Pareto of ScattBO Gr and Sq MOBO using ParEGO and EHVI
42
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:51==
5.5
DTU Course 47332 and PumpBot Results
The 47332 course at DTU marked a significant milestone for Odyssey in applying the
optimization techniques used for synthetic benchmarking to a real-world educational set-
ting. The course provided students with hands-on experience in autonomous materials
discovery, using both physical and virtual tools.
One of the primary experiments conducted using PumpBot involved multi-objective opti-
mization of matching a target color and pH value. This experiment was designed to mimic
the challenges of real world materials synthesis, where multiple objectives must often be
balanced to achieve the desired materials properties.
The EHVI algorithm was used to perform the optimization, aiming to minimize the color
score (the difference between synthesized and target colors) and the difference in pH
value from the target. Figure 5.13 illustrates this optimization process.
Figure 5.13: Color and pH MOBO using EHVI on PumpBot
Figure 5.13 shows a series of colored circles for each iteration on the x-axis, where the
position of the circle on the y-axis denotes the color score. The innermost color in the
circles represents the target color, while the colored ring just outside of the center rep-
resents the synthesized color. Finally, the outermost ring represents the ratios of the
precursors that were used to synthesize the color. On the other hand, the red line plot
represents the difference in pH value from the target for each iteration. This visualiza-
tion provides an intuitive understanding of how the optimization process progresses over
time, experimenting in various precursor ratios in order to match both the color and the
pH targets.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
43
==PAGE:52==
To further analyze the trade-offs between color and pH optimization, a Pareto plot of the
optimization was generated and is illustrated in Figure 5.14.
Figure 5.14: Pareto of Color and pH on PumpBot
The Pareto plot reveals that several combinations of precursors were found that relatively
well match either the color or pH targets, but only a select few combinations match both.
As a result, an observation that minimizes both the color and pH targets well is found
around the 10th iteration, and can be replicated by the decision-maker for further analysis.
44
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:53==
6
Conclusion
The purpose of developing Odyssey was to tackle the difficulties of incorporating Bayesian
Optimization into Self-Driving Laboratories for materials discovery.
The conventional
methods of discovering materials, which mainly depend on extensive trial-and-error ex-
perimentations, are both time consuming and costly. SDLs, which integrate robotics and
artificial intelligence, offer a promising alternative by automating experiments and making
real-time adjustments based on prior outcomes. However, successfully exploring the vast
experimental spaces in SDLs require the application of advanced optimization techniques
such as BO. Despite its potential, BO poses a number of challenges, particularly for those
less familiar with optimization theory and its implementation in laboratories.
To address these challenges, Odyssey was developed as a modular and customizable
framework designed to streamline the application of BO in SDLs. The primary objec-
tive was to create a tool that not only simplifies the process of applying BO to complex
tasks, but also remains flexible enough to accommodate new and evolving optimization
algorithms. The design of Odyssey was guided by the gaps identified in existing tools -
such as Atinary, Honegumi, Atlas and Olympus. This highlighted the need for an open-
source, user-friendly framework that supports multi-objective optimization and integrates
seamlessly with experimental hardware.
The development process of Odyssey involved the construction of several key compo-
nents, including the Mission, Objective and Base Navigator classes, which together
form the fundamental structure of the framework. The Mission class encapsulates the
problem, while the Navigator classes provide a structured approach to applying various
optimization algorithms. Odyssey’s modular design allows for easy integration of new
optimization algorithms, making it a future-proof tool for materials discovery.
The effectiveness of Odyssey was demonstrated through synthetic benchmarking using
the DTLZ2 problem, where the performance of the ParEGO and EHVi algorithms was
compared. A comparison of the Pareto front of the problem was generated by each algo-
rithm, and the results showed that ParEGO offered broader exploration of the parameter
space, while EHVI focused on critical areas of the Pareto front. This experiment high-
lighted the flexibility of Odyssey in implementing different optimization strategies easily,
depending on the specific needs of the task.
Further, Odyssey was applied to the ScattBO benchmark, which serves as a bridge be-
tween synthetic benchmarks and real-world applications. By optimizing synthesis param-
eters based on experimental data, Odyssey’s potential in materials research was demon-
strated, showing its ability to handle both single-objective and multi-objective optimization
tasks effectively. The results from the ScattBO benchmark, particularly the simultane-
ous optimization of Gr and Sq scatter objectives, underscored Odyssey’s robustness and
adaptability in complex optimization scenarios.
Finally, the application of Odyssey in the DTU course 47332 provided a real-world educa-
tional context for the framework. The course introduced students to SDLs and Bayesian
Optimization, using both physical tools like PumpBot and virtual tools like SilicoBot. The
successful integration of Odyssey into the hardware used for the course, coupled with
the the feedback from students, marked a significant milestone in the development of the
framework, demonstrating its utility in the physical realm, in both educational and research
settings.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
45
==PAGE:54==
In conclusion, Odyssey represents a real advancement in the field of optimization for
materials discovery, offering a powerful, flexible and user-friendly tool for implementing
BO in SDLs. By addressing the limitations of existing tools and providing a framework
that supports a wide range of optimization tasks, Odyssey has the potential to contribute
to the development of new materials with enhanced properties.
46
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:55==
7
Discussion
The development and implementation of Odyssey within the scope of this thesis has show-
cased its capabilities as a BO framework, particularly in the context of SDLs. However,
the work presented here has certain limitations that highlight areas for improvement and
further exploration.
Limited Range of Implemented Navigators and Test Problems
One of the primary limitations of this thesis is the relatively small number of navigators
implemented within Odyssey. The current focus has been on a select few navigators,
including SingleGP_Navigator, qNParEGO_Navigator, qEHVI_Navigator and Gryffin_-
Navigator. While these navigators represent a good starting point, they do not encom-
pass the full range of cutting-edge optimization algorithms that could be beneficial for
various applications. The inclusion of additional algorithms from the range of optimization
techniques as seen on Figure 3.8 such as Falcon from Atinary [2], Dragonfly [17] and
Phoenics [18] with Chimera [9] scalarization, was planned but not fully realized within
the timeframe of this thesis. As a result, the versatility of Odyssey in handling different
optimization tasks has been considerably limited.
Similarly, the test problems used to certify the optimization algorithms implemented in
Odyssey have had narrow focus. The DTLZ2 problem, used as a demonstration, offered
valuable insights into the capabilities of the applied algorithms, ParEGO and EHVI. How-
ever, it does not test the algorithms to the full extent that potential applications require. To
get a more thorough assessment, and to harness the Odyssey framework better, it would
be beneficial to include a wider variety of benchmark problems, including more intricate
scenarios with higher dimensions in both input parameters and objectives.
Furthermore, this thesis has primarily focused on problems that result in 2D Pareto fronts,
which are easier to visualize and interpret. However, real-world problems often involve
higher-dimensional analysis of the Pareto fronts, and the methods for visualizing these
were not explored in this work. This limitation presents a challenge for decision-makers
who need to understand the trade-offs between multiple-objectives in a large number of
dimensions and in complex optimization scenarios.
Limited Fine-Tuning of Optimization Approaches
Another limitation of this work is the level of fine-tuning available within Odyssey’s op-
timization approaches. One of the design criteria was to allow fine-tuning of the opti-
mization at a deeper level. Although the framework allows this at the acquisition function
level, more flexibility is required. The ability to adjust parameters within the acquisition
functions, such as those that influence the exploration-exploitation balance, was not fully
explored in this thesis.
Moreover, Odyssey currently uses a default Matérn kernel as the covariance module for
Gaussian Processes. Although this kernel is useful in several scenarios, it may not be
the most suitable option for all problem types. The investigation of different kernel func-
tions and their influence on optimization results was not within the scope of this study.
This resulted in a limitation in the framework’s capacity to adapt to specific optimization
challenges.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
47
==PAGE:56==
Limited Application to Real Materials Research
One of the objectives of this thesis was to utilize Odyssey in real materials research set-
tings, particularly within SDLs. However, due to the time-consuming nature of developing
Odyssey and the readiness of SDL tools at DTU, this goal was only partially achieved
through Course 47332 and PumpBot. While Odyssey was successfully applied to syn-
thetic and semi-synthetic benchmarks, its application in live laboratory settings remains
limited. The integration of Odyssey with real-world lab hardware and the demonstration
of a fully autonomous workflow for materials research was not fully realized, highlighting
a significant area for future development.
While this thesis has successfully introduced and demonstrated Odyssey as a modular
and flexible BO framework, several limitations have been identified that suggest areas for
improvement. These limitations provide a clear direction for further work in the already
existing framework for Odyssey, that, given more time, could have been explored in this
thesis.
48
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:57==
8
Further Work
The development of Odyssey as a BO framework has laid the groundwork for its applica-
tion in accelerating materials discovery within SDLs. However, the potential for Odyssey
to grow in a comprehensive and indispensible tool in this field extends well beyond the
scope of this thesis. There are several important areas of future work that could signifi-
cantly enhance the capabilities of Odyssey and broaden its impact on materials research.
Development of a Graphical User Interface (GUI)
An area with great promise for future work is the design of a user-friendly graphical user
interface (GUI) for Odyssey. This could be achieved by utilizing open-source tools such as
Streamlit [19] or Dash [20]. Implementing a GUI for Odyssey would significantly enhance
the accessibility, enabling users with limited programming knowledge to engage with the
framework when their interest is to simply utilize BO approaches for their work.
A well-designed GUI could offer a dual-mode interface: a no-code environment for be-
ginners and a more advanced mode for experienced users who prefer to interact with
Odyssey through code. The versatility of Odyssey’s application would be enhanced by
this approach, which would accommodate a wide range of users. The user experience
could be further improved by simplifying the process of setting up optimization problems
by incorporating template-based or LLM-powered code generation, similar to Honegumi.
This would make Odyssey not only a powerful tool for advanced users but also an acces-
sible entry point for those new to the field of BO and SDLs.
Decentralization in Materials Research
As the field of materials research continues to develop, there is an increasing trend to-
wards decentralization. This involves distributing research efforts across multiple labora-
tories and institutions, allowing for a more collaborative and efficient discovery process.
Integrating Odyssey as a decentralized optimization platform would align it with this future
direction.
In a decentralized research environment, Odyssey could function as a central optimization
engine that coordinates experiments across multiple locations. Through the use of cloud-
based services or distributed computing frameworks, Odyssey could have the potential
to facilitate real-time sharing of data, optimization strategies and results by researchers.
This would not only expedite the discovery process but also guarantee that knowledge
and innovations are transmitted widely and rapidly within the scientific community.
Expansion of Hardware Interfaces
The expansion of Odyssey’s hardware interfaces, which builds upon the work done with
PumpBot, is another significant area for future development. Currently, Odyssey’s inter-
action with hardware is somewhat restricted. However, its potential to become a central
hub for the control and optimization of a diverse array of laboratory equipment could be
achieved by enhancing this capability.
Future work could involve developing communication protocols within Odyssey to inter-
face with widely-used open-source hardware components, such as various actuators and
sensors. By providing native support for common inputs and outputs - such as time-based
relay control, sensor data acquisition and motor control - Odyssey could seamlessly in-
tegrate with various experimental setups. This would allow researchers to automate and
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
49
==PAGE:58==
optimize complex laboratory processes in real-time, bringing the concept of SDLs closer
to reality.
Looking further into the future, Odyssey could serve as a unified platform for SDLs, bridg-
ing the gap between experimental setups and advanced optimization algorithms. This
could be achieved by continuing to expand its capabilities - both in terms of software and
hardware. It could also enable the optimization of experiments using data from both sim-
ulations and real-world experiments in a multi-fidelity setting. Thus making Odyssey more
than just a tool for optimizing experiments, but a comprehensive platform for conducting
and optimizing entire research workflows, and a promising candidate for broader adoption
in the scientific community.
50
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Maximilian Balandat et al. BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian
Optimization. 2020. arXiv: 1910.06403 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.
06403.
[2]
Atinary – Enables Self-Driving Labs® technology. URL: https://atinary.com/.
[3]
Sterling G. Baird. Honegumi. URL: https://github.com/sgbaird/honegumi.
[4]
The Matter Lab. Atlas: A brain for self-driving laboratories. URL: https://github.
com/aspuru-guzik-group/atlas.
[5]
The Matter Lab. Olympus: a benchmarking framework for noisy optimization and
experiment planning. URL: https://github.com/aspuru-guzik-group/olympus.
[6]
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for
Machine Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006. ISBN: 9780262256834.
[7]
Xilu Wang et al. Recent Advances in Bayesian Optimization. 2022. arXiv: 2206.03301
[cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.03301.
[8]
Joshua Knowles. “ParEGO: a hybrid algorithm with on-line landscape approxima-
tion for expensive multiobjective optimization problems”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation 10.1 (2006), pp. 50–66. DOI: 10.1109/TEVC.2005.851274.
[9]
Florian Häse, Loic Roch, and Alan Aspuru-Guzik. “Chimera: Enabling Hierarchy
Based Multi-Objective Optimization for Self-Driving Laboratories”. In: ChemRxiv
(2018). DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv.6195176.v1.
[10]
Michael T. M. Emmerich, André H. Deutz, and Jan Willem Klinkenberg. “Hypervolume-
based expected improvement: Monotonicity properties and exact computation”. In:
2011 IEEE Congress of Evolutionary Computation (CEC). 2011, pp. 2147–2154.
DOI: 10.1109/CEC.2011.5949880.
[11]
Branin — Olympus. URL: https://aspuru-guzik-group.github.io/olympus/classes/
surfaces/branin.html.
[12]
Dejong — Olympus. URL: https://aspuru-guzik-group.github.io/olympus/classes/
surfaces/dejong.html.
[13]
pymoo: Multi-objective Optimization in Python. URL: https://pymoo.org/.
[14]
Andy Sode Anker. ScattBO Benchmark - Bayesian optimisation for materials dis-
covery. URL: https://github.com/AndySAnker/ScattBO/.
[15]
47332 AI-orchestrated self-driving labs. May 2024. URL: https://kurser.dtu.dk/
course/47332.
[16]
Daniele Procida. Diátaxis: A systematic approach to technical documentation au-
thoring. URL: https://diataxis.fr/.
[17]
Dragonfly. Dragonfly: An open source python library for scalable Bayesian optimi-
sation. URL: https://github.com/dragonfly/dragonfly.
[18]
The Matter Lab. Phoenics: Bayesian optimization for efficient experiment planning.
URL: https://github.com/aspuru-guzik-group/phoenics.
[19]
Streamlit: A faster way to build and share data apps. URL: https://streamlit.io/.
[20]
Dash: The original low-code framework for rapidly building data apps for Python.
URL: https://dash.plotly.com/.
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
==PAGE:61==
A
Appendix
A.1
Odyssey Gitlab
Access the Odyssey codebase: https://gitlab.com/auto_lab/odyssey
Access the Odyssey Documentation: https://odyssey-auto-lab-de98adb48801ec6a9ad6d1
738d8ce68e811b24234385b9.gitlab.io/
A.2
47332 AI-orchestrated self-driving labs
Course Website: https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/47332
PumpController Code: https://gitlab.com/auto_lab/47332-student-excercises/
PumpController Documentation: https://47332-student-excercises-auto-lab-a9486c744362
dd41066bcfeabead9.gitlab.io/
Student Notebooks: https://gitlab.com/auto_lab/47332-student-excercises/-/tree/studen
t_excercises/
Odyssey: A Modular, Customizable Bayesian Optimization Software Module
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 301
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.energy.dtu.dk
