==PAGE:1==
Freestanding Perovskite Oxide
Membranes: Synthesis, Release and
Transfer Techniques
Master Thesis
Author
Nikolas Vitaliti
Supervisor
Professor Nini Pryds
Co-Supervisors
Assistant Professor Shinhee Yun
Ph.D. Student Christina Høgfeldt Christoffersen
Dr. Katja Isabelle Wurster
Examiners
Prof. Morten Madsen
Dr. Martin Jens
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the Functional Oxides Group (FOX),
whose help and support throughout this work has been absolutely invaluable. Special
thanks go to my supervisor and mentor, Professor Nini Pryds, who not only provided
me with exciting projects, trips to other institutes and meaningful conversations, but
also opened the doors for me to join the other FOX-es as a student assistant. Your
mentorship has made this journey much smoother and more enjoyable than I had
anticipated. I am also deeply grateful to Assistant Professor Shinhee Yun for all our
enriching conversations, both work-related and otherwise, her tremendous help, and
her kindness. Lastly, a heartfelt thank you to my Boss for the past months, Ph.D.
student Christina Høghfeldt Christoffersen. Our countless talks, were always some-
thing to look forward to. I cannot express enough my gratitude for your unwavering
willingness to help, regardless of the problem, og tusind tak for at hjælpe mig med
dansk også!! Of course, I would like to extend my appreciation to everyone who has
directly or indirectly assisted me with my work and thesis in the FOX section. Many
thanks to Dr. Martin Jens for showing Christina and me around Berlin, helping us
with substrate treatment, and, most importantly, for taking the time to be my ex-
ternal examiner and traveling here for my defense right after his vacations. I am also
grateful to Dr. Neu Volker for dedicating five intense days to MFM measurements
with Shinhee and me. Your expertise in the field was truly astonishing, and it was a
pleasure to learn from you.
Un sentito grazie alla mia famiglia e a quella che ho acquisito dieci anni fa. Un
grazie al mio Bro, per essere l’unica persona con cui la giornata prende una piega
positiva solo dopo una chiamata o un messaggio e per essermi sempre stato vicino nel
bene e nel male. Ti aspetto in Danimarca! Un grazie speciale alla mia Alice e alla
mia Narsil per avermi accompagnato in questa mia avventura lontano dall’Italia da
un giorno all’altro e per avermi supportato e sopportato in questi dieci anni. Siete e
sarete sempre le cose che tengo più strette al cuore. Grazie. Grazie anche a te xior.
In conclusione, questa tesi la desidero dedicare a mia sorella Giorgia: possa il mio
percorso essere l’esempio che puoi fare qualsiasi cosa tu ti metta in testa di fare,
nonostante il tuo passato, i problemi che incontri e le tue difficoltà. Io credo in te e
non smetterò mai di farlo. Ti voglio bene, Sister!
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis investigated freestanding perovskite oxide membranes from various
perspectives, focusing on strontium titanate (SrTiO3), barium titanate (BaTiO3),
and lanthanum strontium manganite (LaSrMnO3).
The primary goal was to un-
derstand the methods for depositing, releasing, and transferring freestanding oxide
membranes. This procedure was applied to SrTiO3, by adjusting the thickness of
SrTiO3 membranes and then stacking and twisting these membranes onto Trans-
mission Electron Microscopy (TEM) grids to examine Moirè patterns and explore
potential emergent material properties. The membranes were grown using Pulsed
Laser Deposition (PLD) and their thickness was monitored using Reflection High-
Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED). The surface of the membranes was examined
using Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), and their structure was analyzed with X-ray
diffraction (XRD). The piezoelectric properties of the freestanding BaTiO3 mem-
branes were investigated. These membranes were placed on a silicon substrate fea-
turing various cavity designs. The relationship between the strain in the membranes
and the electric field applied across the cavities was studied using Piezoresponse
Force Microscopy (PFM). Finally, the magnetic response of LaSrMnO3 under induced
strain was explored by transferring SrTiO3/ LaSrMnO3 membranes onto triangular
nanowire shapes and exploring the behaviour of the membrane using Magnetic Force
Microscopy (MFM). This was done both at DTU and at the Leibniz Institute for Solid
State and Materials Research in Dresden. This comprehensive study not only helped
me become familiar with this area of research but also enhanced our understanding of
the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of freestanding perovskite mem-
branes. It provided insights into their potential applications and behaviour under
varying conditions.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Epitaxial Thin Films and Membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Transition Metal Oxides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Perovskites Oxides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3.1
SrTiO3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3.2
Ferromagnetic LaSrMnO3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.3
Ferroelectric BaTiO3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.4
Water Soluble Sr3Al2O6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Epitaxial Strain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Experimental Methods
9
3.1
Membrane Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
TiO2 terminated SrTiO3 substrate preparation . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.2
Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Reflection High-Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED)
. . . .
14
3.1.4
Membrane Twisting and Stacking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Sample Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
X-Ray Diffraction (XRD)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.2
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.3
Piezoresponse Force Microscopy (PFM) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.4
Magnetic Force Microscopy (MFM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Results and Discussion
34
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer 34
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
4.1.1
SrTiO3 Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
Sample Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.3
Membrane Liftoff, Transfer and Stacking . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Freestanding BaTiO3 Piezoresponse and Buckling Modes . . . . . . .
51
4.2.1
Sample Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.2
Switching Spectroscopy Piezoresponse Force . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain . . . . . . . .
57
4.3.1
Sample Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3.2
LaSrMnO3 MFM Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Conclusions and Outlook
70
6
Appendix
71
6.1
DRIE etched Silicium Substrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Square and Circle Geometries Buckling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
References
74
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Nanotechnology is often marked by significant milestones in both academic and
popular culture. One pivotal moment in this area is often traced back to Nobel laure-
ate Richard Feynman’s renowned 1959 lecture titled "There is plenty of room at the
bottom" [1]. In this lecture at Caltech, Feynman drew attention to the vast dispar-
ity between the length scales perceivable by human senses, such as meters, and the
minuscule length scales at the atomic level, on the order of hundreds of picometers
(10−12 meters). This ultimately sparked an interest in understanding and initiating
the exploration of the potential for manipulating matter at the nanoscale [2]. At the
same time, the rapid advancements in technology, driven by the ever-growing demand
for faster computing speeds, miniaturized devices, and energy-efficient electronics,
have pushed traditional silicon-based devices to their scale limits. The semiconduc-
tor industry is currently facing challenges in keeping up with the escalating demands
of the digital era and ongoing miniaturization [3].
As electronic devices continue
to decrease in size, the presence of impurities and defects in silicon-based materials
becomes increasingly problematic.
These imperfections result in higher resistance
and compromised device performances. Furthermore, the reduction in dimensions
worsens the power consumption, leading to increased device heat dissipation. These
limitations challenge silicon-based transistors to meet the strict requirements of high-
performance devices, which demand low power consumption, insensitivity to temper-
ature changes, and a broad band gap for efficient control of electronic properties and
electrical flow [4–9].
In the quest for advanced materials with tailored properties for diverse applications,
freestanding oxide membranes emerged recently as a captivating area of study. These
membranes are typically composed of thin oxide films made from materials such
as transition metal oxides (TMOs) that are self-supporting [10], which means that
they can exist independently without the need for a substrate or support structure.
However, the fabrication and properties of these membranes are still under intense
investigation. This thesis is motivated by the need to understand how to fabricate,
release and transfer these membranes. Being able to fabricate these membranes on
demand opens up a remarkable potential to revolutionize various fields, ranging from
energy storage and conversion to magnetic memories, and non-volatile ferroelectric
random access memories, just to name a few [11–13]. Recent reports also suggest that
manipulating strain and employing membranes with twisted interfaces can control
their electromechanical properties, magnetization states, and electronic conductivity,
thereby providing a basis for advanced device applications [2,4,14].
Page 1 of 74
==PAGE:7==
2
Background
In this chapter, the materials employed are discussed. The discussion begins with
an introduction to thin films and membranes in general, followed by an overview of
the broader family of materials used as freestanding membranes. The materials focus
is narrowed to the specific compositions utilized in the experiments conducted for this
study.
2.1
Epitaxial Thin Films and Membranes
The term "thin film" describes a very thin layer of material that is wide in two
directions but has limited thickness, ranging from a fraction of a nanometer to a few
micrometers. A thin film is created when a material is deposited on a solid surface
through controlled methods like physical deposition or chemical reactions. These films
often display unique properties when attached to a substrate, due to a process known
as epitaxy, where one crystal grows on another crystal in the same orientation. The
challenge is to be able to have materials with their intrinsic properties, i.e., without
the influence of the substrate. This was recently possible with the development of
freestanding membranes [2]. Releasing these films from their substrates, and obtain-
ing freestanding membranes is a crucial step in materials science and engineering as
such fabrication technique allows, for example, to have materials without the need for
substrate, materials which are flexible and materials which can be strained to values
beyond what their bulk can tolerate. This process is achieved through a sacrificial
layer, which enables the transformation of thin oxide films into quasi-2D freestanding
membranes by acting as a temporary support during fabrication, facilitating precise
etching without damaging the membrane structure in the process. This capability
to fabricate tailored ultrathin oxide membranes opens avenues for enhancing device
performance, exploring novel phenomena, and advancing fundamental understand-
ing across various disciplines [15]. Indeed, oxide membranes are integral to numerous
technological applications due to their unique properties such as ferroelectricity, piezo-
electricity, and ferromagnetic properties [11,16,17]. However, the current methods of
freestanding fabrication often encounter challenges in achieving uniform thicknesses,
controlling defects, and integrating with other materials [17]. The development of
oxide membrane transfer techniques addresses these limitations by offering a versatile
and precise approach to engineer oxide films on desired substrates.
Page 2 of 74
==PAGE:8==
2.2
Transition Metal Oxides
2.2
Transition Metal Oxides
Transition metal oxides (TMOs) have emerged as a promising alternative to tradi-
tional silicon-based materials, offering a diverse range of exceptional properties that
could potentially extend the range of Si properties. TMOs are compounds consisting
of transition metals, such as Fe, Ni, Ti, Zr and Cu, combined with oxygen, which
stand out due to their unique characteristics, propelling them into various practical
applications, ranging from energy storage to nonvolatile memory devices and sen-
sors [18]. The capability to modify both the physical and chemical properties e.g.,
atomic structure, bonding, and electronic configurations, of TMOs enables the design
of novel devices with adjustable features, thus amplifying their relevance in indus-
trial contexts [19]. Perovskites, with the general formula ABO3, are a sub-family of
TMOs and display such properties due to their distinctive crystal structure and the
ability to accommodate diverse cations, leading to versatile and tunable properties.
In this thesis, perovskite oxides like SrTiO3, known for its interesting electronic prop-
erties, along with complex oxides like LaSrMnO3 and BaTiO3, which exhibit Colossal
Magneto Resistance (CMR) and piezoelectricity respectively, were studied [19,20].
2.3
Perovskites Oxides
The word Perovskite itself refers to the oxide mineral calcium titante (CaTiO3),
but soon the name was used interchangeably to include all of those solid-state mate-
rials with similar structures to it [20]. Perovskite-type oxides have been intensively
explored for their unique properties, such as superconductivity, metal insulator tran-
sitions, ionic conduction, dielectric properties, optoelectronic capabilities, and ferro-
electricity [21]. This structure became popular in solid-state chemistry due to its
ability to tolerate most metal ions and a variety of anions. The general formula of
perovskite is ABO3 [20, 22]. In many perovskites, the ’A’ site is divalent and the
’B’ site is tetravalent. This allows for elements like Ca to be partially or completely
replaced by Na, Mn, Ce, Sr, or Pb, and Ti to be replaced by Fe, Nb, Zr, or Mg. The
BO3 framework in the perovskite consists of corner-shared BX6 octahedra. Figure 1
shows the possible materials that can occupy the cationic position of site A or B [23].
Page 3 of 74
==PAGE:9==
2.3
Perovskites Oxides
Figure 1: Periodic table showing possible perovskite element combinations and loca-
tions in the ABO3 structure [24].
2.3.1
SrTiO3
Strontium titanate (SrTiO3) is a perovskite-type oxide semiconductor with an in-
direct band gap of 3.2 eV [25]. Figure 2 displays its crystal structure, showing the
titanium (Ti) cation surrounded by 6 oxygen atoms at the center of the unit cell
and the strontium (Sr) atoms positioned at the corners of the cubic crystal structure.
The TiO6-octahedral in the centre of the cell makes it a Face Centered Cubic cell
(FCC) [26]. With its lattice constant of 3.905 Å [27], SrTiO3 presents a remarkable
lattice match with most perovskite-structured materials, a quality that positions it as
an ideal substrate for epitaxial growth of thin films of various oxide compounds. Be-
cause of this, SrTiO3 properties have been extensively studied, making this material
a well-known starting point as a single crystalline substrate material.
Page 4 of 74
==PAGE:10==
2.3
Perovskites Oxides
Figure 2: FCC SrTiO3 crystal structure. Titanium atom in the middle, four strontium
atoms on the corners and six oxygen atoms bonded in octahedral shape with the
titanium [28].
2.3.2
Ferromagnetic LaSrMnO3
In recent years, significant attention has been drawn to doped perovskite man-
ganites, denoted as "La1−xAxMnO3", where A represents a divalent alkaline-earth
ion. This interest originates from the observation of the colossal magnetoresistance
(CMR) effect i.e, the property which dramatically decreases the electrical resistances
of the compound, in presence of a magnetic field in optimally doped samples (with
x around 0.3) [29]. This effect is attributed to the interplay between magnetic and
electronic properties and it arises from the alignment of manganese ion spins under an
applied magnetic field, which enhances electron mobility and reduces electrical resis-
tivity. This phenomenon is primarily facilitated by the coexistence of Mn+3 and Mn+4
states that allow for dynamic charge interactions [30]. In this thesis, strontium (Sr)
was used in place of the A-site with an optimal doping in the following composition:
La0.66Sr0.33MnO3. However, although in bulk materials the CMR effect is primarily
influenced by the doping concentration, in epitaxial thin films, factors such as lattice
strain induced by lattice mismatch, film thickness, and oxygen content play crucial
roles in determining both magnetic and transport properties, even at fixed doping
levels [31]. The fundamental crystal structure of the La1−xSrxMnO3 perovskite can
be described as an FCC lattice, therefore identical with that of Figure 2 for SrTiO3,
with a manganese ion of mixed valence states transitioning from Mn3+ to Mn4+ in
the middle, six oxygen atoms bonded in octahedral shape with the central manganese,
and four strontium atoms at the corners of the cubic crystal lattice.
Page 5 of 74
==PAGE:11==
2.3
Perovskites Oxides
2.3.3
Ferroelectric BaTiO3
Figure 3:
A centrosymmetric unit cell
(left)
and
a
non-centrosymmetric
one
(right).
Barium titanate, BaTiO3 is also a
member of this large perovskite fam-
ily and it has been of particular in-
terest for several years, amongst other
things, due to its ferroelectric properties
at and above room temperature. In or-
der for a material to be ferroelectric, it
is a strict requirement for it to be non-
centrosymmetric : meaning there is no
center of inversion in the unit cell as
shown in Figure 3. Generally speaking,
a material is considered ferroelectric if it
exhibits a pyroelectric behaviour, characterised by spontaneous polarization below
its Curie temperature (Tc) and if this polarization can be reoriented by an applied
electric field. Figure 4 depicts the structural phases of the BaTiO3 cell. Of particular
interest are the cubic phase, stable above Curie temperature (Tc = 120◦C), and the
tetragonal phase, stable between 120◦C and 0◦C. The structure exhibits ferroelectric
behaviour below 120 ◦C with a non-centrosymmetric unit cell, whereas above 120 ◦C,
the structure is cubic, and the ferroelectricity vanishes [32–34].
Figure 4: From left to right: cubic BaTiO3 structure above 120 ◦C with Ti ion fixed
at the center of the structure, tetragonal structure between 120 ◦C and 0 ◦C where
the Ti ion can move along the [001] directions and thus create polarity, orthorhombic
structure between 0 ◦C and -80 ◦C where the Ti has freedom of movement along the
[110] directions and finally below -80 ◦C with a rhombohedral structure where the Ti
ion can move along the [111] directions.
Page 6 of 74
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Perovskites Oxides
2.3.4
Water Soluble Sr3Al2O6
As lightly touched upon already, in order to release a thin film, a dissoluble sacri-
ficial layer poses as a good solution. An effective sacrificial layer is a material which
is generally dissolved with a liquid etchant such as water due to its volatility and
etching characteristics, and which facilitates the epitaxial growth of perovskite oxides
over various crystal orientations [35]. The use of the family of materials (Ca, Sr,
Ba)3Al2O6 as a sacrificial layer, has gained widespread use in the field [36]. That is
because the lattice parameters of the sacrificial layer fits well with the lattice param-
eter of most perovskites, e.g., SrTiO3, as well as the fact that this material can be
doped to match with most substrates and perovskite oxide growth simply by addi-
tion of calcium (Ca), strontium (Sr), and barium (Ba) and control of their ratio. For
example, Sr3Al2O6 has a lattice constant of 15.844 Å matching 4 unit-cells of SrTiO3
for each unit cell of Sr3Al2O6:
aSAO = 15.844 ˚
A
aSTO = 3.905 ˚
A
aSAO
4
= 3.961 ˚
A
Sr3Al2O6 and SrTiO3 are, therefore, estimated to have a lattice mismatch of just
1.4 % . The similarities in these two crystals are also illustrated in Figure 5. This is
why Sr3Al2O6 proved to be a suitable match as sacrificial layer for SrTiO3 growth.
Figure 5: Crystal structure schematic of SrTiO3 and Sr3Al2O6. Figure re-adapted [37].
Page 7 of 74
==PAGE:13==
2.4
Epitaxial Strain
2.4
Epitaxial Strain
Strain in materials arises as a consequence of epitaxial growth, a process where
a thin film is deposited on a crystalline substrate, adopting the substrate’s crystal-
lographic orientation. This procedure introduces strain due to the lattice mismatch
between the film and the substrate. There are two types of strain: elastic and plastic.
Elastic strain is reversible and does not introduce defects into the material, occurring
when the lattice mismatch is accommodated within the elastic limits of the material.
Plastic strain, on the other hand, is irreversible and introduces defects such as mis-
fit dislocations at the interface between the film and the substrate. [38]. When the
film exceeds a critical thickness, it becomes energetically favorable for the material to
relax by forming these defects. These defects destroy the coherency of the interface
and, therefore, increase its energy. Lattice mismatch between the film and substrate
can result in either compressive or tensile strain. Compressive strain occurs when
the film’s lattice constant is larger than that of the substrate, while tensile strain
occurs when the film’s lattice constant is smaller than that of the substrate as Figure
6 shows.
Structurally, strain can change the lattice parameters and also cause lattice distor-
tions, affecting the overall crystallographic alignment of the film. These changes can
be observed directly using X-ray Diffraction (XRD) techniques. Electronically, strain
alters the electronic band structure, shifting the energy levels of electronic bands [21].
This can control the band gap energy, carrier mobility, and charge carrier density
as for instance in thin LaSrMnO3 films [39]. A final consideration is thermal strain,
which can occur due to thermal mismatch between the film and substrate during cool-
ing from the growth temperature to room temperature. This mismatch in thermal
expansion coefficients can induce additional strain, which is relevant for PLD growth.
In the latter, materials are typically deposited at elevated temperatures. As the film
and substrate cool down, any difference in their rates of thermal expansion can cause
strain. For instance, if the film contracts more than the substrate upon cooling, it will
experience tensile strain, whereas if it contracts less, it will experience compressive
strain.
Page 8 of 74
==PAGE:14==
Figure 6: Strain effects depending on lattice mismatch between thin film grown and
substrate it has been grow onto.
3
Experimental Methods
In this chapter, methods and techniques employed for the growth and characteri-
zation of the materials used in this thesis are presented. The fabrication procedures
to grow SrTiO3 membranes, along with the characterization methods used, such as
RHEED, XRD, and AFM, are also discussed. In addition, Scanning Probe Microscopy
(SPM) techniques will be further extended to examine BaTiO3 and LaSrMnO3 ma-
terials through PFM and MFM respectively.
Page 9 of 74
==PAGE:15==
3.1
Membrane Fabrication
3.1
Membrane Fabrication
In this section, the growth techniques used to fabricate the membranes and the
subsequent membrane transfer will be presented. This discussion will describe the
various equipment used and explain the rationale behind their selection and their
working principles.
3.1.1
TiO2 terminated SrTiO3 substrate preparation
The very first important step in the fabrication and release of membrane is ensur-
ing good substrate surface quality. A good substrate surface should be well-defined
and atomically smooth. For SrTiO3, the ideal surface should have clear terraces (ter-
mination of TiO2), characterized by linear features with straight step edges and no
double terminations (TiO2 and SrO). The term termination here refers to the specific
crystal plane and specific arrangement of atoms or ions which constitute the crystal’s
surface. The surface of a crystal can, in fact, expose different crystallographic planes
depending on how they are cut and prepared [40]. Figure 7 shows the difference be-
tween a single terminated substrate, and two double terminated ones. In addition,
there can be different type of double terminations caused by sub-optimal annealing
times or under/over-etching of the substrate as seen from Figure 7c and e.
This
study on double terminations was carried out by Ph.D. Student Christina Høgfeldt
Christoffersen.
Following a systematic protocol, the SrTiO3 substrates were treated to guarantee
optimum quality and single TiO2 terminated surfaces. These 5x5mm high-quality
SrTiO3 (001) substrates with pre-terminated flat surfaces, were supplied by the
Japanese company Shinkosha Co., Ltd. Upon examination of the substrates, as previ-
ously studied and established by other Ph.D. candidates and postdoctoral researchers,
the samples exhibited partial miscuts and a non-linear array of terraces. This obser-
vation suggested the presence of a double-terminated surface. A chemical surface
treatment and subsequent annealing processes were conducted in an oxygen environ-
ment, as explained below.
Page 10 of 74
==PAGE:16==
3.1
Membrane Fabrication
Figure 7: AFM images of differently treated substrates. Figure (a) shows a single
terminated substrate treated at IKZ and its respective termination illustration in
Figure (b).
Figure (c) shows a different SrTiO3 substrate annealed for a shorter
amount of time and its respective termination illustration in Figure (d). Figure (e)
shows a different SrTiO3 substrate subjected to longer annealing times compared to
the optimal ones and its respective termination illustration in Figure (f). The two
yellow dashed circles highlight the double terminations in the scans.
Surface termination of the substrate involved a controlled treatment with Buffered
Hydrofluoric Acid (BHF), which selectively breaks SrO bonds revealing a predomi-
nantly TiO2-rich preferred surface. Prior to this treatment, the substrates underwent
a thorough cleaning process. The SrTiO3 wafers were firstly immersed in a glass
beaker with acetone and ultrasonicated for 8 minutes to eliminate any organic residue.
Then, they were moved in another glass beaker filled with Isopropyl Alcohol (IPA)
and ultrasonicated for another 8 minutes to eliminate any remaining acetone residues.
To conclude the cleaning process, the wafers were rinsed and ultrasonicated in DI wa-
ter for 20 minutes to promote the reaction between SrO and hydroxyl. Following this
cleaning procedure, the wafers were submerged in BHF for 50 seconds with the use of
a dipper, dried and prepared for annealing. The wafers were finally annealed at 950
◦C, for 6 h with a ramping temperature of 2.6 ◦C/ h in an Oxygen environment and
cooled down at the same speed. This step is fundamental to reorganize the desired
structure. The breaking grooves on the backside of these substrates, also shown in
Page 11 of 74
==PAGE:17==
3.1
Membrane Fabrication
Figure 8, were then used to break the wafer into several pieces, with a total of nine
square pieces per wafer.
Figure 8: Breaking of the 3x3 substrate matrix into 9 SrTiO3 5x5 mm samples [41].
3.1.2
Pulsed laser deposition (PLD)
Upon substrate preparation, thin films of SrTiO3 of various thicknesses were grown.
The growth was carried out by PLD, a laser ablation technique that stands out for its
adaptability and very fine growth parameter tunability, specifically for oxides. The
technique enables growth of a broad range of thin film oxides with different material
compositions [42].
The process employs a KrF excimer laser with a wavelength of 248 nm, which de-
livers high-energy pulses through a beamline into a vacuum chamber. Within this
chamber, the target material and substrate are positioned. The laser pulses vaporise
and ablate the chosen material, generating a dense plasma of the selected target. The
plasma interacts with the laser pulses and surrounding gas, leading to the formation
of a highly energised material plasma known as the target plume. The latter con-
sists of a mixture of atoms, molecules and ions generating from the target caused by
the high laser energy [43]. The composition and physics of the plume are crucial in
the deposition process, as it transports the target material to the substrate, where
thin films are formed [44]. The distance between the target and substrate affects
the expansion and shape of the plasma plume. A larger target-to-substrate distance
can lead to a more diffuse plasma plume, reducing the energy density and kinetic
energy of the ablated species that reach the substrate. Conversely, a shorter distance
can concentrate the plasma plume, enhancing the kinetic energy and directional de-
position of the particles. Additionally, this distance influences the uniformity and
thickness of the deposited film; shorter distances generally result in more uniform
deposition but can also lead to higher deposition rates and potential quality issues if
excessively reduced. Optimal distance selection, therefore, depends on the material
Page 12 of 74
==PAGE:18==
3.1
Membrane Fabrication
composition and the required energy for effective 1:1 target - substrate deposition [45].
More generally, quality and characteristics of the deposited thin film are influenced
by several parameters such as: laser fluence, chamber gas pressure, target-to-substrate
distance, substrate temperature, and target quality. Each of these factors play an im-
portant role in determining the final film properties and the plasma plume dynamics.
For instance, laser fluence is defined as the ratio of laser energy to the area of the
laser spot, expressed as:
Fluence =
ELaser
AreaSpot size
[J/cm2]
In this context, ELaser denotes the measured laser energy, while the spot size is
determined by factors such as mask size, its positioning, and lens alignment. Higher
laser fluence is crucial as it ensures that the energy delivered surpasses the material’s
ablation threshold, providing the ablated species with sufficient kinetic energy. This
increased energy is essential for enhancing film crystallinity.
Within the deposition chamber, the gaseous environment plays a key role in mod-
ulating the expansion and geometry of the plasma plume, which in turn influences
material growth. The substrate temperature during deposition significantly affects
film growth by impacting the surface diffusion of the deposited species. Elevated
temperatures can result in smoother films with fewer surface defects, as the increased
mobility of ablated atoms allows them to migrate to energetically favorable sites and
improve film morphology [46].
Lastly, the quality of the target material directly influences the composition and
quality of the deposited film. An ideal target should be free from impurities, ho-
mogeneous, and devoid of cracks or tears.
Regular polishing and high-frequency
pre-ablation cleaning are necessary to maintain the target’s cleanliness and ensure
consistent film quality. This precision allows for the fine adjustment of deposition
parameters, granting a high degree of control over material properties [47]. Figure 9
shows a schematic of the experimental setup used.
Page 13 of 74
==PAGE:19==
3.1
Membrane Fabrication
Figure 9: Side cut view of a PLD chamber. The system consists of: a gas inlet from
which Oxygen partial pressure can be controlled, a rotating target fixed to a movable
target holder, an adjustable heater to get the sample to the desired temperature and
distance from the target, the KrF excimer laser which, through a series of fixable
focusing lenses, is focused at the desired target and, finally, a system composed by
an electron beam cannon and a detector used for film growth analysis [48].
3.1.3
Reflection High-Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED)
To monitor the growth rate of a selected material, RHEED was systematically em-
ployed during the depositions. This technique has gained increasing interest because
of its compatibility within vapor deposition methods used for the epitaxial growth of
thin films [2]. The technique involves a high-energy electron gun emitting a focused
beam of electrons, narrowly angled toward the sample’s surface. Upon impact, these
electrons scatter, and a small fraction experiences constructive interference at specific
angles, producing distinct patterns on the detector that reveal surface structure, as
illustrated in Figure 10 [49].
The electrons interfere based on the atomic arrangement on the sample surface, mean-
ing the diffraction pattern at the detector directly reflects the surface characteristics.
As depicted in Figure 11, the growth of monolayers and the intensity of the RHEED
signal are closely linked to the scattering level of the electrons post-impact [50] [51].
Page 14 of 74
==PAGE:20==
3.1
Membrane Fabrication
By analyzing the arrangement, intensity, and profile of the diffraction spots in RHEED
patterns, one can derive critical information such as surface flatness, the epitaxial re-
lationship between the grown material and the substrate, and most importantly, the
number of atomic layers grown.
More specifically, as also shown in Figure 12 thin film growth manifests through
three distinct modes, given the alignment was performed correctly [48]:
• Layer-by-layer growth: wherein each layer forms entirely before the subse-
quent one initiates [52].
• Island growth: wherein the material aggregates into discrete clusters or islands
rather than spreading uniformly across the substrate. This mode often indicates
discontinuous film formation [53].
• Mixed growth: combining aspects of both layer-by-layer and island growth,
this mode exhibits a transitional behavior. Initially, layers form in a continuous
manner such as in layer-by-layer mode. However, beyond a critical thickness,
island growth begins atop the continuous layers, leading to a hybrid growth
pattern [54].
Figure 10: Simplified RHEED setup.
Page 15 of 74
==PAGE:21==
3.1
Membrane Fabrication
Figure 11: RHEED signal and monolayer film growth dependence on electron beam
scattering (θ). θ = 0 and θ = 1 refer to start and finish of a full unit cell , e.g., the
moments of highest intensity and lowest scattering.
Figure 12: RHEED patterns configuration depending on surface quality. From top to
bottom: (a) flat and crystalline surface, this is how the SrTiO3 substrate would look
like, (b) flat surface with small domains - points gradually become streaks: sign of
epitaxial growth and (c) 3D islands growth is characterized by the presence of several
spots on the screen.
Page 16 of 74
==PAGE:22==
3.1
Membrane Fabrication
3.1.4
Membrane Twisting and Stacking
Membrane transfer is a process in which a thin film is detached from its initial
substrate and subsequently repositioned onto a different substrate. This technique
not only allows for the fabrication of freestanding membrane materials or hetero
structures but also for the study of their properties in different contexts. It often
involves precise control of adhesion, mechanical stress, and alignment to maintain
the integrity and functionality of the transferred membrane. Among the different
techniques, membrane scooping is a delicate process employed to transfer thin films
from one substrate to another or to specific structures like Transmission Electron
Microscopy (TEM) grids. Initially, the target membrane, grown on a sacrificial layer,
is carefully prepared to ensure its structural integrity and proper adherence manage-
ment for subsequent detachment. The sacrificial layer is then selectively dissolved to
release the membrane from its initial substrate. This step requires precision to avoid
damaging the fragile membrane. Once detached, the membrane is carefully scooped
onto a new substrate or grid. This transfer must be executed with great precision to
maintain the membrane’s structural and functional properties. Figure 13 shows the
process visually.
Figure 13: General transfer method by sacrificial layer etching and target layer mem-
brane scooping on a different substrate [37].
The reason why it is so interesting to investigate a bilayer membrane SrTiO3 struc-
ture is due to the potential to reveal novel physical phenomena or access known ones
that were previously inaccessible in the material. These structures arise when two
layers with slightly different lattice constants or orientations are overlaid, creating a
superlattice of periodic pattern of interference fringes known as a Moirè pattern [55].
This unique structural feature can lead to significant modifications in the electronic,
optical, and mechanical properties of the material.
In bilayer freestanding mem-
branes, Moirè structures can induce strain which alter electronic band structures and
modify the local symmetry of the crystal lattice [56]. Such effects are particularly
Page 17 of 74
==PAGE:23==
3.2
Sample Characterization
intriguing in the context of functional oxides.
For instance, in materials such as bilayer graphene, Moirè patterns have been shown
to create flat bands that enhance electron correlations, leading to phenomena such
as superconductivity and magnetism [57].
Similarly, in bilayer oxide membranes,
Moirè patterns could potentially lead to the discovery of new correlated electronic
states and phase transitions driven by strong electron-electron interactions. This in-
teresting phenomena is represented in Figure 14, where a set of images show how
two honeycomb layers create different and intricate Moirè patterns when rotated one
with respect to the other. The two layers stand to represent singular planes of a crys-
tal which in this thesis case, would represent the interface between the two twisted
SrTiO3 membranes.
Figure 14: Wolfram Alpha simulation representing the appearance of Moirè patterns
in hexagonal lattice systems as a honeycomb layer is rotated on top of another iden-
tical layer by a certain angle [58]. From left to right: (a) the two honeycomb layers
laying one on top of the other without any angle, (b) with a 55.16 degrees angle and
(c) with a 32.30 degrees angle between the stacked layers.
3.2
Sample Characterization
In this section, the techniques used to study the surface quality, morphology and
sample composition of the SrTiO3 samples, along with the tools and techniques used
to investigate the magnetic and piezoelectric properties of LaSrMnO3 and BaTiO3,
respectively, will be presented.
Page 18 of 74
==PAGE:24==
3.2
Sample Characterization
3.2.1
X-Ray Diffraction (XRD)
After successful growth, the SrTiO3 films were characterized to ensure the correct
phase. Generally in materials, atoms are arranged into crystal structures [59, 60].
In such structures, atoms are systematically organized in a consistent and repeating
pattern. The smallest repeating unit within this structure is known as the unit cell.
In a three-dimensional context, the unit cell’s dimensions are characterized by the
lengths of three axes and the angles between these axes [61].
In XRD, the sample is placed in the center of an instrument and illuminated with a
beam of X-Rays. When X-rays interact with the atoms of a solid, they are scattered
by the electrons within these atoms. This scattering leads to interference of the waves
in various directions, resulting in a diffraction pattern.
Such interference can be either constructive (i.e. superposition of waves) or destruc-
tive in accordance with Bragg‘s law:
nλ = 2dhklsinθ
(1)
Since this formula helps with the explanation of the XRD technique and will be
used extensively in the result section, a short derivation is herein given, accompanied
by some intuitive figures collected in Figure 15.
Given two lattice planes of a crystal (illustrated by lines of blue atoms in the pictures)
an X-Ray of wavelength λ starting from a source, scatters on the crystal planes at a
constant angle. This electromagnetic radiation is based on CuK α 1 x-ray energy of
about 8.94 keV which corresponds to a wavelength of 0.1541 nm and forms an angle
with the surface which is generally noted as θ and known as the Bragg angle.
Considering now the same scenario on a new plane at distance d with the first one,
it is clear from Figure 15a that this new wave travels an extra distance x compared
to the first one. This extra distance x is equal to the wavelength λ, or a multiple of
it depending on the order of diffraction. This can be written as: nλ.
As shown in Figure 15b by making a right triangle from the scattering point of the
first plane and the incident X-ray line on the second plane, a γ equal to 90 deg. is
obtained.
Page 19 of 74
==PAGE:25==
3.2
Sample Characterization
From here it is apparent that the sum between the Bragg’s angle and β would be
also equal to 90 deg., which implies:
β = 90 −θ
(2)
It follows, that since the sum of all angles in a triangle must be equal to 180 deg.:
180 = β + γ + α
(3)
By substituting γ with 90 and β with equation 2 it can be realized that:
180 = 90 −θ + 90 + α
(4)
Which simplified and rearranged gives the equality:
α = θ
(5)
With this information, it is easy to find the distance x as shown by Figure 15c.
However, it must be noted that the extra distance traveled by the wave is symmetrical
from both sides of the scattering plane, which implies that this distance has to be
doubled:
x = 2dsinθ
(6)
Finally, by changing x with the initial assumption that said x was equal to a mul-
tiple of the the wavelength noted as nλ, Bragg’s law in equation 1 can be found. The
subscript hkl indicates the miller indices i.e., the crystal orientation of the material
investigated.
Page 20 of 74
==PAGE:26==
3.2
Sample Characterization
Figure 15: Step by step illustration of the XRD principle based on Bragg’s law. In
order: (a) illustrates the crystallographic planes with incident and diffracted x-ray
bouncing off of it, (b) serves as an illustration of the different angles created by the
construction of a right triangle and (c) finds the solution of the distance x based on
trigonometry.
For the scope of this thesis, θ-2θ scans were carried out for all 5 samples. This
measurement, also known as a Bragg-Brentano scan, is a common technique in XRD
used to analyze the crystallographic structure of materials. In this configuration, the
incident X-ray beam and the detector move in a coupled manner to maintain the
angle of incidence and the angle of detection equal to each other. This ensures that
the diffraction condition (Bragg’s Law) is satisfied as shown by Figure 17 [62]. By
performing such scans and comparing the obtained diffraction patterns with standard
reference patterns, the phases of the samples can be identified. For instance, the
theoretical diffraction peaks for SrTiO3 are illustrated in Figure 16. The (200) peak is
particularly relevant for this work, as the main measured peak of the SrTiO3 substrate
Page 21 of 74
==PAGE:27==
3.2
Sample Characterization
will be identified here.
It is important to note that for the cubic crystal lattices
investigated in this thesis, where a = b = c, a (200) peak is equivalent to a (020) or
(002) peak.
Figure 16: Figure re-adaption from a study from C. R. Garcia et.al. showing SrTiO3
peaks of different crystal lattice orientations [63].
Figure 17: Illustration of Bragg-Bentano (θ-2θ) scan. To keep the incident and scat-
tering angle equal to each other, X-rays source and detector move along an arc in the
same directions i.e., if one angle increases, the other will be increased too, and vice
versa.
Page 22 of 74
==PAGE:28==
3.2
Sample Characterization
Of particular importance is also the general approach to resolve the (00l) lattice
paramater calculations of a cubic crystal system. The calculation is shown below and
it will be used to compute the lattice parameters of the grown Sr3Al2O6 and SrTiO3
in the result section. Starting from a rearrangement of Bragg’s law:
d =
nλ
2sinθ
(7)
Where λ is 1.541 Å or 0.15 nm, n is assumed to be 1, θ is extracted from the XRD
results and d was the lattice parameter in nm to be found. Then, for a cubic crystal
system the following equality holds:
d =
a
√
h2 + k2 + l2
(8)
Considering that for the materials used in this work h and k are equal to 0,
√
l2
can be simplified as l. By substituting d into the cubic system equation, removing n
as it was assumed to be 1, and solving for a we therefore have the following equality:
a =
λl
2sinθ
(9)
Finally, dividing the 2θ angle extracted from the XRD measurement of both mate-
rials by 2 in order to obtain Bragg’s angle, the lattice paramater for a cubic crystal
system can be calculated as follows:
a =
λl
2sin( θ
2)
(10)
3.2.2
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) represents an advancement in the field of mi-
croscopy and surface topography, enabling scientists to explore and manipulate mate-
rials at the nanoscale. The development of SPM techniques marked a departure from
traditional optical microscopy, which was limited by the diffraction of light and the
resolution constraints it imposed. Indeed, this novel technique was able to map solid
surfaces with atomic resolution and not only reveal the structure of perfect crystalline
surfaces, but also the distribution of point defects, adsorbates, and structural defects
such as steps [64]. SPM techniques share a common principle: they utilize a sharp
probe to scan the surface of a sample, mapping its morphologies with unprecedented
Page 23 of 74
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Sample Characterization
resolution [64]. This capability provided crucial insights into the arrangement and
behavior of atoms and, beyond imaging: for instance in AFM, SPM allowed for atom
manipulations in techniques such as PFM [65].
The functioning of AFM involves the systematic scanning across the surface of a
pointed probe on a specimen in parallel scanning lines. The probe’s movement is mon-
itored, enabling the construction of a three-dimensional representation of the surface.
The accompanying schematic diagram in Figure 18 provides a visual representation of
the essential components and operational principles of an AFM system [66]. In par-
ticular, the reflected laser beam from the cantilever is registered onto a four-sectional
photodiode, also known as the detector. The signal acquired from the detector is
then transmitted to the computer, which facilitates precise control of the AFM. This
control is executed through a feedback signal, which, with the assistance of the piezo-
electric scanner, ensures a consistent tip-sample interaction, as observed in Contact
Mode [67]. The importance of a feedback loop are shown in Figures 19 (a) and (b)
below.
Figure 18: AFM schematic depicting the piezoelectric scanner with a generic sample
on top of it. A tip, attached to the cantilever, probes the sample as the reflected laser
is detected by a four sectional photodiode [68].
Page 24 of 74
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Sample Characterization
Figure 19: Representation of (a) cantilever deflection as a function of its movement
along the sample surface when the Feedback signal is used: the cantilever height is
adjusted to avoid bending, versus (b) when the Feedback is OFF and the cantilever
is subjected to strong bending [66].
When the AFM tip gets close to the sample, different forces come into play. The
main ones affecting the movement of the AFM cantilever are the Coulombic and
Van der Waals interactions [69]. The former is a strong, short-range force that comes
from the electron clouds of the tip and sample pushing each other away: the force gets
stronger as the tip gets closer to the sample. Van der Waals Interactions, instead, are
longer-range forces that attract the tip and sample to each other and can be felt even
when they are up to 10 nm or more apart [65]. They happen because of temporary
fluctuations in electric charge. The combination of these interactions creates a curve
showing how force changes with distance, as shown in Figure 20.
Page 25 of 74
==PAGE:31==
3.2
Sample Characterization
Figure 20: As the AFM tip comes near the sample, Van der Waals forces (green)
start pulling them together. This attraction strengthens as the tip gets closer. Yet,
at very close distances, stronger repulsive Coulombic forces (blue) take over. The
sum of these two curves gives the force response curve (red). This push-back force
leads to the bending of the cantilever as the tip approaches the surface [66].
3.2.3
Piezoresponse Force Microscopy (PFM)
PFM is a variant of AFM that is used to detect local piezoelectricity in a sample
induced by an applied electric field via the tip. This technique is based on the direct
and inverse piezoelectric effect. The former is a phenomenon where certain materials
generate an electric potential in response to mechanical stresses, whereas the latter
generate mechanical deformations when an electric field is applied to the material, as
shown Figure 21 [70].
Page 26 of 74
==PAGE:32==
3.2
Sample Characterization
Figure 21: (a) Direct piezoelectric effect (mechanical stress generates electric poten-
tial). (b) inverse piezoelectric effect (electric potential generates mechanical deforma-
tions).
To measure a piezoresponse in a material, an conductive PFM tip tip is operated
in contact mode, ensuring that the tip remains in constant contact with the sample
surface. The sample is subjected to an AC electric field, which induces expansions
and contractions in the material.
Normally, the measurements are performed by
scanning in contact mode with a conducting tip over the piezoelectric surface, and
a voltage is applied between the tip and the bottom electrode. These deformations
are tracked by the vertical deflection of the cantilever and measured by the four-
quadrant photodiode detector. The vertical deflection, when converted to physical
units, is typically in the picometer range. Given the minute scale of these deflections, a
lock-in amplifier becomes essential for detecting these weak signals among noise [69].
The lock-in amplifier enhances signal detection by modulation of the applied AC
electric field. The latter, used as the reference signal, possesses a specific frequency,
amplitude and phase. The oscillations detected by the PFM’s cantilever result also
in small AC signals possessing a specific frequency, amplitude and phase. The lock-in
amplifier multiplies these detected signals by the reference signal in a process known
as mixing [71].
The operation of a lock-in amplifier exploits the orthogonality of sinusoidal func-
tions. Orthogonality, in the context of sinusoidal functions, means that two sinusoidal
waves of similar or different frequency are independent from each other. In particular,
when a sinusoidal function of frequency f1 is multiplied by another sinusoidal function
of frequency f2 (where f2 ̸= f1) the result is zero. Conversely, in this case, if f1 equals
f2 and the two functions are in phase, the average integrated value becomes half the
product of their amplitudes. The lock-in amplifier then employs a low-pass filter to
isolate these lower frequency component, effectively filtering out high-frequency noise.
This process significantly enhances the signal-to-noise ratio: by comparing the phase
and amplitude of the filtered signal with the reference signal, the lock-in amplifier can
Page 27 of 74
==PAGE:33==
3.2
Sample Characterization
precisely measure the phase shift and amplitude of the sample’s response [72]. Fun-
damentally, the contribution of every signal not originating from the applied electric
field at the reference frequency, is significantly attenuated and effectively reduced to
zero. This allows the lock-in amplifier to isolate and measure weak signals embedded
in noise with high precision. A schematic of the PFM mode is shown in Figure 22.
Figure 22: PFM experimental schematic. ∆V illustrates the sample’s volume change
caused by its piezoelectric natureÂ˝.
3.2.4
Magnetic Force Microscopy (MFM)
MFM relies on the detection of magnetic forces between a specially designed probe
tip and the sample surface. The probe tip is typically coated with a magnetic material
or a magnetic thin film, enabling it to sense variations in magnetic field strength as it
scans over the sample. These variations induce attractive or repulsive forces between
the tip and the sample surface, which are measured to generate high-resolution images
revealing the magnetic properties and structures of the sample. A sketch representing
these interaction forces can be seen in Figure 23.
A typical MFM system comprises the standard AFM setup with the primary distinc-
tion lying in the choice of probe. As in AFM the interaction force is mainly attributed
to Van Der Waals forces between tip and surface studied, in MFM the force measured
is mainly from magnetic origins, although noise is present and sometimes even pre-
dominant, as will be discussed in the result section [73].
Page 28 of 74
==PAGE:34==
3.2
Sample Characterization
Figure 23: On the top left: probe with stray field lines induced by tip magnetization
below it a test sample such as an hard disk with clear magnetic domains and stray
field lines coming from the alternations of them. On the top right, representation
of the attractive forces between oppositely polarized tip and domain wall, and below
repulsive forces caused by equally polarized tip and domain wall.
To perform the measurement, the two-pass technique is employed, as depicted in
Figure 24, where each line of the surface undergoes four scans: two for topography and
two for magnetic properties. Given that van der Waals forces are short-range while
magnetic forces act over longer distances, the approach involves initially scanning the
topography in tapping mode using a trace-retrace method to visualize the surface.
Subsequently, the tip is lifted to a predetermined height, and another trace-retrace
scan is performed to map the magnetic forces of the sample, thereby minimizing in-
terference from unwanted forces [74–77].
MFM measures stray fields that arise due to magnetic moments within the material,
which generate magnetic flux lines that extend into the surrounding space [78]. This
implies the fact that if one were to measure a fully magnetic sample fashioned as
one big domain, signal could only be seen at the very edges of said sample because
MFM only measures changes in magnetization. To be more precise, only the bound-
aries and/or edges between the magnetic sample and the nonmagnetic substrate (for
example) would be measurable, as shown in Figure 25.
Page 29 of 74
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Sample Characterization
Figure 24: Graphic representation of the two-pass technique where: number (1) sys-
tem during what can be considered as an AFM height scan performing the first
trace-retrace scan, and number (2) system after the probe is lifted, performing the
second trace-retrace scan.
Figure 25: Graphical depiction of the relationship between tip and sample positions
where magnetic responses are measured. In particular (a) represents a multi-domain
sample, in which a magnetic response would only be measured in between domain
walls (at the boundaries) or at the edges, whereas (b) corresponds to a mono-domain
sample in which magnetic response could only be measured at the edges.
Page 30 of 74
==PAGE:36==
3.2
Sample Characterization
However, the measured signal alone does not provide insight into the sample’s
polarization. Despite the possibility of the sample’s magnetization being either In or
Out of plane, the overall signal remains unchanged. This is attributed to the presence
of multiple magnetized domains, each with distinct orientations. Consequently, the
measured signal represents only an average of these various orientations [78,79].
It is also worth noting that the anisotropic morphology of the tip exerts an influ-
ence on its magnetization orientation, specifically dictating a preferred magnetization
direction. This means that variances in tip geometry correspond to distinct coating
configurations, thereby determining the resultant orientation of the easy axis.
The easy axis refers to the direction along which a material has the lowest energy
when magnetized, which is typically aligned with the longest dimension. In simpler
terms, the easy axis is the path of least resistance for the alignment of magnetic do-
mains within the material [80,81].
This phenomenon arises from the nanopolycrystalline nature of the magnetic coat-
ing enveloping the tip, characterized by numerous grains possessing diverse magnetic
alignments. Consequently, the collective magnetization of the tip represents an aver-
age of the orientations exhibited by each individual grain, as also illustrated in Figure
26.
Figure 26: Graphical representation of (1) The often used cobalt chromium (CoCr)
coating surrounding the tip, (2) the nanopolycrystallinic nature of the coating and
(3) The usual average magnetization direction of the tip - or its easy axis.
Page 31 of 74
==PAGE:37==
3.2
Sample Characterization
All of this shows the importance of the choice of tip. In fact, according to the
literature and more precisely to a study by L. Folks
et al. [82], the choice of tip
and its use play an important role in the measurement and resolution of the image.
Several key factors may be taken into account:
• Distance Between Tip and Sample: The tip-sample separation must be
as small as possible for optimal magnetic imaging. However as the distance
decreases, noise from electrostatic forces will be picked up and prevail over
weakly magnetized samples.
Therefore an optima should be found through
multiple scans [83].
• Resolution: The resolution is critically dependent on the sample characteris-
tics, the type of tip employed, and the specific measurement conditions: with a
particular emphasis on the average tip-sample distance. Generally, the resolu-
tion cannot be higher than the tip-sample distance. For example, to achieve a
resolution of 20 nm, such distance - which is the sum of the lift height and the
amplitude setpoint - must be maintained at or below 20 nm. Additionally, the
minimum achievable resolution is constrained by the thickness of the magnetic
coating on the tip, as this thickness determines the volume of integration that
defines the magnetostatic interaction. Consequently, with a magnetic coating
thickness of 40 nm, achieving a resolution of 20 nm is improbable, even if the
tip-sample distance is minimized [78] [84].
• Tip manufacturer properties: Manufacturer properties such as spring con-
stant, magnetic moment and coercivity also play a big role in the tip decision.
For instance, a smaller spring constant translates into larger phase signal during
the experiment and therefore higher resolution. Lower magnetic moment tips
instead, result in a lower signal but have the advantage of minimizing distur-
bances to the sample‘s domain structure - particularly important for samples
with low coercivity sensitive to stray fields.
Since MFM can only measure stray fields from a sample, it is important to un-
derstand the relationship between the width of the sample domain walls and its
relationship with the sample’s thickness. As the sample gets progressively thinner,
minimization of energy is achieved by forming less domain walls, therefore showing
less boundaries in the sample, which in return means the signal gets progressively
hard to see.
Page 32 of 74
==PAGE:38==
3.2
Sample Characterization
The magnetic sample can be conceptualized in a manner akin to Faraday’s source
of charges, where up-magnetized domains can be seen as positive charges and down-
magnetized domains can be seen as negative charges. As the sample thickness di-
minishes, the need to establish domain walls between distinct magnetic polarizations
diminishes as well. This is because the charges located at the top and bottom of the
sample balance each other out directly, rather than seeking out the nearest opposite
charge in their vicinity [85–87]. This relationship between the width of the domain
walls and the thickness of the sample is also shown in Figure 27.
Important for the scope of MFM analysis was also tip inversion: a technique em-
ployed for ensuring the reliability and accuracy of magnetic measurements.
This
technique provides a way to double-check the data and to enhance the resolution and
contrast of magnetic domain images through differential image analysis and differ-
ential signal analysis. This is mainly done to alleviate the impact of electrostatic
artifacts on measurements. Differential image analysis typically involves comparing
two images captured using opposite tip magnetizations at precisely the same loca-
tion on the sample. By examining the differences between pixels in these images,
non-magnetic artifacts can be discerned and removed, resulting in a clearer depiction
of the magnetic domain structure. Specifically, the process consists in conducting
an initial scan with a positive tip magnetization (M = +α) at a designated sample
point, recorded by Cartesian coordinates. Subsequently, a second scan is conducted
with a negative tip magnetization (M = -α) at an identical location. The second
image undergoes pixel inversion to align more closely with the first image and the
differential image is then generated by subtracting one image from the other as shown
by equation 11.
[M = +α] −[M = −α] = [M = +2α]
(11)
Note that, one could also use M = +1 and M = 0 where 0 stands for a de-magnetized
tip, but in this way magnetic features would not be enhanced, which might make them
harder to spot. As a general practice, the samples should also be consistently scanned
in the same slow scan direction during tip inversion analysis. This approach ensures
that if the sample starts drifting and the image becomes slanted, the second image will
also exhibit the same slanted angle. Consequently, aligning and conforming the two
images becomes more straightforward, facilitating accurate comparison and analysis
The same concepts hold for differential signal analysis which directly processes the
MFM signal itself. This indeed has been the practice of choice for this thesis, as more
reliable.
Page 33 of 74
==PAGE:39==
Figure 27: Plot showing the relationship between domain width (w) and thickness (d).
For thick samples, the relationship is proportional to the square root of the thickness.
On the bottom left, a thicker sample is represented, showing smaller domain width,
whereas on the right a thinner sample show much larger domain width in comparison.
4
Results and Discussion
In this part of the thesis, the results from the freestanding perovskite oxide mem-
branes (SrTiO3, BaTiO3, and LaSrMnO3) will be presented and discussed in detail.
Each material outcome, along with the challenges faced, expectations, and potential
optimization strategies, will be explored.
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Mem-
brane Transfer
Here, the experimental results of the five different thicknesses of SrTiO3 (1, 5, 10, 15
and 25 nm) will be discussed. First, the RHEED data will be analyzed and compared
to literature to assess the surface crystallinity and growth modes. AFM data will be
then presented to illustrate the surface topography of the grown samples. XRD θ-2θ
measurements will provide information on the lattice parameters, crystal structure,
and epitaxial relationship with the substrate. Finally, the results of the membrane
transfer will be shown and thoroughly discussed, including the effectiveness of the
transfer process and the structural integrity of the transferred membranes throughout
the steps taken.
Page 34 of 74
==PAGE:40==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
4.1.1
SrTiO3 Fabrication
The optimized growth conditions used for the 5 grown SrTiO3/ Sr3Al2O6/ SrTiO3
samples shown in Figure 28 are shown in Table 1. The SrTiO3 thicknesses grown were
of: 1, 5, 10, 15 and 25 nm, whereas the Sr3Al2O6 was kept constant at a thickness of
7 nm.
Figure 28: SrTiO3/ Sr3Al2O6/ SrTiO3 hetero structure schematic.
Material
Temperature (◦C)
Pressure (mbar)
Fluence (mJ/cm2)
Freq. (Hz)
Sr3Al2O6
750
9 E-6
1.885
2
SrTiO3
700
5 E-4
1.684
2
Table 1: Optimized SrTiO3/ Sr3Al2O6/ SrTiO3 growth parameters.
The foundation for epitaxial growth began with the preparation of the TiO2 ter-
minated STO substrate. Following BHF treatment, the substrates were examined
through AFM to ensure proper surface termination and morphology. A represen-
tative image, among several taken, is shown in Figure 29. The 5 µm scan clearly
illustrates the well-defined terraces, which ensure a suitable substrate for subsequent
epitaxial growth. The terraces height were measured by a step profile tool to be
around 0.4 nm.
Page 35 of 74
==PAGE:41==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
Figure 29: (a) BHF treated SrTiO3 substrate: 5 µm AFM image of the height sensor
channel, taken at a resolution of 512 samples per line with a scan rate of 0.7 Hz and
(b) Step profile showing terraces height.
After inspecting the surface with AFM imaging and ensuring single termination
(TiO2) of the SrTiO3 (001) substrate, the samples were placed inside the PLD cham-
ber, and RHEED was used to monitor each sample during the growth of the films.
The RHEED was firstly aligned on the SrTiO3 substrate to locate its surface and
obtain a clear diffraction pattern on the detector (see Figure 30a).
Then, the alignment was performed once again on the substrate at Sr3Al2O6 depo-
sition temperature (750 ◦C), as the surface tends to slightly change due to the high
temperatures, after which the Sr3Al2O6 was deposited, and its growth monitored us-
ing the RHEED signal. The deposition was interrupted after reaching 18 unit cells
of the deposited material which multiplied by one-fourth of the lattice parameter of
Sr3Al2O6 (0.396 nm), results in the aforementioned thickness of 7 nm. At this point,
a new image of the RHEED pattern of the grown material was taken (see Figure 30b),
and the procedure was repeated similarly for the different grown SrTiO3 thicknesses
by adjusting the number of unit cells reached (see Figure 30c).
This proved to be straightforward, as the primary challenge in PLD typically arises
from parameter optimization, which was not required in this instance. In addition,
the process was carried out as systematically as possible to decrease any window of
error and maximize reproducibility: from substrate cleaning, to deposition and to
finally sample storage.
Page 36 of 74
==PAGE:42==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
Figures 30 and 31 present sets of three RHEED patterns and two RHEED signals
for the five SrTiO3 samples. Each set of images begins with a RHEED pattern of the
SrTiO3 substrate’s surface alignment, followed by patterns of the deposited Sr3Al2O6
layers and the grown SrTiO3 thin films.
Figure 30: RHEED data of 1-nm-thick sample. On the top, RHEED patterns im-
ages of the (a) SrTiO3 substrate at 690 ◦C, (b) Sr3Al2O6 after deposition on SrTiO3
substrate and (c) SrTiO3 after deposition on Sr3Al2O6. On the bottom, RHEED
intensity signals of the (d) Sr3Al2O6 growth and (e) SrTiO3 growth.
Page 37 of 74
==PAGE:43==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
Figure 31: Each quadrant represents RHEED images and patterns for a different
SrTiO3 thickness. (a) and (b) show Sr3Al2O6 and SrTiO3 oscillations respectively for
the 5 nm sample and, in the same fashion, (c) and (d) for the 10 nm sample, (e) and
(h) for the 15 nm sample and finally (g) and (h) for the 25 nm sample.
Page 38 of 74
==PAGE:44==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
As anticipated, before deposition the RHEED beam was aligned with the SrTiO3
substrate’s surface. Intensity was maximized by tuning the heater position and ro-
tation and Sr3Al2O6 was deposited following the same procedure and with the same
growth parameters for every SrTiO3 thickness. The SrTiO3 substrate pattern seen
are typical and consistent with literature [88, 89]. The Sr3Al2O6 patterns also look
consistent with other studies [90].
This is clear from the three strong streaks in
the RHEED pattern along the three initial spots coming from the substrate and the
several more lower intensity streaks in between them, typical of Sr3Al2O6 epitaxial
growth.
With the sacrificial layer grown, the intensity was maximized again by slightly ad-
justing the heater position and the desired SrTiO3 thicknesses were deposited. This
clearly implied different number unit cells for the 1, 5, 10, 15, 25 nm thin films
which were respectively calculated to be 3, 13, 27, 39 and 64 unit cells approximately.
In general, throughout the depositions, a high-quality RHEED pattern was observed,
characterized by sharp and well-defined streaks, indicating a smooth and well-ordered
surface. Additionally, clear and regular RHEED intensity oscillations were observed
during the growth process, confirming a layer-by-layer growth mode. The symmetry
and spacing of the streaks matched the expected crystal structure, and the growth
speed showed to be consistent, too, with 13 s per unit cell for SrTiO3 and 16 s for
Sr3Al2O6.
4.1.2
Sample Characterization
Post depositions, the samples were placed and kept in a desiccator to preserve
the moisture/air-sensitive Sr3Al2O6 layer in a low-humidity environment.
Surface
morphology was checked for all thin film thicknesses through AFM scans. These scans
were taken using ScanAsyst tips from "Bruker Corporation" and the experiments were
performed in air. All samples were scanned and the results can be seen in Figure 32.
Page 39 of 74
==PAGE:45==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
Figure 32: AFM images showing 5 µm scans of a) 1 nm thick SrTiO3, b) 5 nm thick
SrTiO3, c) 10 nm thick SrTiO3, d) 15 nm thick SrTiO3 and e) 25 nm thick SrTiO3.
The scan area investigated for the samples was kept at 5 µm to have a well defined
picture of the terraces, which were evident in all samples confirming layer by layer
growth. Surface roughness measurements were also performed on the samples reveal-
ing an Rmax ranging between 1.12 nm to 1.98 nm in topographic variation and an Ra
ranging from 0.2 nm to 0.3 nm. Where Ra is the average roughness of the surface
height and Rmax is the maximum roughness calculated from the peak-to-valley height
over a given image length. According to literature, these are considered to be good
values for a smooth SrTiO3 surface [91,92]. The variations in step-terrace widths ob-
served across different AFM images, despite keeping the scanned area size constant,
have been attributed to the initial miscuts angles of the substrates.
The XRD data for the samples exhibited sharp and intense peaks, indicating a well-
ordered crystalline structure. The peak positions matched closely with the standard
reference pattern for the expected phase, confirming the phase purity and correct
crystal structure. Figure 33 shows the different scans stacked one on top of the other.
Page 40 of 74
==PAGE:46==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
Figure 33: θ-2θ XRD scan from 41 to 51 degrees around the known SrTiO3 (002)
peak. Downward-up, the different thicknesses are plotted from 5 to 25 nm in different
colours.
It can be observed that the 1 nm thick SrTiO3 sample was not included in the
XRD scans. To understand the reason behind this, some background explanation
is necessary. Laue fringes: the oscillations present before the peaks, visible in the
XRD data, become more sparse as the film thickness decreases. This occurs because
the intensity of the diffracted X-ray photons diminishes with decreasing film thick-
ness. Specifically, as the number of crystal planes decreases, the diffracted intensity
also decreases due to less constructive interference between waves, resulting in fewer
photons being scattered from the crystal. Therefore, the 1 nm thick SrTiO3 sample,
consisting of approximately three unit cells, would not have produced a sufficiently
high intensity to be detected by the XRD detector. This is because the XRD source’s
intensity at DTU is not capable of generating intensities high enough from such a
thin sample to be picked up by the detector.
Speaking of the data more generally instead, the functions had to be changed in
order to be able to move the signal up and down on intensity in the plot: this was
done to represent the consistency of the SrTiO3 substrate peaks of the scans across the
different samples. Indeed, it can be seen how the SrTiO3 (002) peak coming from the
substrate is always apparent at 46.5 degrees which complies with literature value of
46.48 degrees [93]. On the other hand, as the Sr3Al2O6 peak is not apparent as much
Page 41 of 74
==PAGE:47==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
as the SrTiO3 (002) is, the reference peak value was found from literature to be 45,53
degrees for Sr3Al2O6 (008), which is exactly 4 times the SrTiO3 (002) unit cell and
complies with the carried out calculations. Using equation 10 and substituting lSTO
with 2 and lSAO with 8; coming from the two crystal orientations of (002) and (008)
respectively, the lattice constants were calculated for both SrTiO3 and Sr3Al2O6.
The calculation are herein shown for the two materials respectively:
aSTO =
0.15 · 2
2sin(46.5
2 ) = 0.38 nm
(12)
aSAO =
0.15 · 8
2sin(45.53
2 ) = 1.55 nm
(13)
These results proved to be once again consistent with literature and with what
discussed so far, as aSAO is exactly 4 times aSTO: indicating minimal strain and
compositional uniformity. Finally, no additional peaks were observed, confirming the
absence of secondary phases or impurities.
4.1.3
Membrane Liftoff, Transfer and Stacking
After sample growth and characterization, the water-sacrificial layer of Sr3Al2O6
was ready to be etched for membrane transfer. Schematically, the process can be seen
in Figure 35. In order to prevent undesirable crinkling and folding of the freestanding
membranes during the etching release process, a common approach involves covering
the oxide membrane with a support layer [94]. For this, a ’sticky’ polymer is often
used and, in this work, polymeric cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB) was chosen. A
solution of 5 mg of CAB in 100 ml of ethyl acetate was spin coated at 3000 RPM
for 60 s on the surfaces to support and aid the membrane transfer [95]. The samples
were then heated on a hotplate at 150 ◦C for 5 m: a temperature higher than the
glass transition point of the polymer (120 ◦C) was chosen, in order to soften it before
partially cutting through it with a scalpel. CAB is a thermoplastic polymer, and its
glass transition temperature is the temperature range at which it transitions from
a hard, glassy material to a softer, more pliable state. The thickness of the CAB
was estimated to be < 1 µm. This was determined to be optimal by development
engineer Edwin Dollekamp and assistant professor Shinhee Yun, primarily due to the
lower elastic constant of CAB at reduced thicknesses. Specifically, its elastic constant
tends to decrease as its thickness decreases, making the polymer more accommodat-
ing for the rearrangement of the SrTiO3 membrane. SrTiO3 is strained (although
very little as previously discussed) as a consequence of being grown on Sr3Al2O6 and
Page 42 of 74
==PAGE:48==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
it therefore undergoes a rearrangement upon the sacrificial layer etching to return to
its original, energetically favorable state. A thinner CAB layer, therefore, facilitates
this rearrangement process, resulting in fewer wrinkles and cracks in the membrane.
To successfully release the membranes in sizes compatible with the grids the sample
was indeed sectioned under a microscope using a scalpel, yielding four square SrTiO3
membranes as Figure 34 illustrates. This sectioning is a crucial step aimed at scratch-
ing through the SrTiO3 film and partially into the Sr3Al2O6 layer in order to create
a pathway for water to flow beneath the membrane, allowing for the selective etching
of the Sr3Al2O6 layer and consequently making the SrTiO3 float as a freestanding
membrane.
Figure 34: Cut sample process. As the sample is optically almost transparent, the
spot in the middle is given by the silver paste on the back of the substrate which was
used previous deposition to fix the target to the heater.
The samples were then submerged under water to promote the etching (release)
process of Sr3Al2O6 to take place. The process was monitored under a microscope
to check the time needed for the water to penetrate through the layers and dissolve
Sr3Al2O6. The process was filmed through a time-lapse feature in the microscope,
and some clips are reported in Figure 36. Full water penetration below the SrTiO3
film could be seen after 20 minutes with homogeneous water propagation throughout
the sample. Once the membranes were ready to be detached, the samples were gently
pulled out of the water and vertically pushed down again to use the water impact to
finalize the liftoff: at which point the 4 membranes and some of the edges could be
seen floating on the water surface. The floating membranes were scooped on TEM
grids, followed by annealing on a hot plate at 150 ◦C for 5 minutes in order for water to
evaporate, but also to ensure conformability between membranes and grids. Finally,
the samples were submerged in acetone or ethyl acetate to completely remove the
polymer and have the first final version of a transferred membrane on a TEM grid.
Page 43 of 74
==PAGE:49==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
Figure 35: Sketch of the transfer strategy used to release oxide membranes via wet
etching. From top left to bottom right depictions can be seen of: (a) hetero structure
schematic, (b) sample schematic after polymer spin coating, (c) water immersion for
sacrificial layer etching, (d) membrane liftoff, (e) TEM grid transfer followed by drying
process and polymer removal by solvent and (f) final SrTiO3 freestanding membrane
on TEM grid.
Figure 36: Pictures from a time-lapse video taken from the microscope. The sample
in question was submerged in water throughout the time-lapse time. (a) Beginning
of the observation, water has not reached Sr3Al2O6 yet. (b) 2 minutes after, water
is starting to infiltrate through the edges and the cuts. (c) 7 minutes after, water is
quickly propagating towards the center of the 4 quadrants and edges. (d) 10 minutes
after. (e) 14 minutes after, water has almost completely propagated below the SrTiO3
layer. (f) 20 minutes after, Sr3Al2O6 layer fully, or close to fully, dissolved.
Page 44 of 74
==PAGE:50==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
The results of the first scooped membranes on the grids are shown at 2.5x and 10x
magnifications, along with the results of the same membranes after complete disso-
lution of CAB, in Figure 37 and Figure 38. The different colour contrast of the grids
is mainly caused by slight bending.
Figure 37: Microscope pictures representing for each row a different SrTiO3 mem-
brane thickness. From left to right, every row presents 3 images, respectively: 2.5x
magnification of scooped membrane with CAB on top, 10x magnification in the same
conditions and membrane status after CAB dissolution. In particular: (a), (b) and
(c) show images of the 1 nm membrane whereas (d), (e) and (f) show images of the
5 nm membrane.
Page 45 of 74
==PAGE:51==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
Figure 38: Microscope pictures representing each row a different SrTiO3 membrane
thickness. From left to right, every row presents 3 images, respectively: 2.5x mag-
nification of scooped membrane with CAB on top, 10x magnification in the same
conditions and membrane status after CAB dissolution. In particular (a), (b) and
(c) show images of the 10 nm membrane, (d), (e) and (f) show images of the 15 nm
membrane.(g), (h) and (i) show images of the 25 nm membrane.
Page 46 of 74
==PAGE:52==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
It was observed how membranes with thicknesses below 10 nm, although they
adhered to the TEM grid during scooping, either detached due to grid’s roughness or
were too transparent to be seen in both bright field and dark field modes under the
microscope. The procedure itself was difficult because the grids are very small, light,
and fragile, making them prone to bending, flipping, or even falling off the microscope
slides with the slightest air-flow. Consequently, it is possible that the 1 nm and 5
nm membranes were damaged during the process.
The procedure was, therefore,
optimized to minimize interactions between tweezers and grids. Instead of dropping
the TEM grid into a beaker filled with acetone or ethyl acetate to dissolve CAB, a
petri dish was used. Lens paper was placed inside the glass to serve as a contingency
plan in case the grid fell off the microscope slide. However, this rarely occurred, and
it was usually possible to submerge the slide with the TEM grid as a single compact
system in the solvents, allowing the solvent to evaporate, and then safely remove the
entire system without touching the grids, as represented by Figure 39.
Figure 39: Petri dish with lens paper cov-
ering the inner surface and a microscope
slide with a TEM grid on top submerged
in acetone.
Of particular interest was the initial
attempt with the 1 nm membrane, which
formed a triple-fold "envelope" struc-
ture.
This unique configuration would
have been valuable for standalone stud-
ies but was unfortunately lost during the
CAB dissolution process. On the other
hand, the 10, 15 and 25 nm membranes
presented several flat areas without wrin-
kles or cracks which which could be the
object of study once the second mem-
brane had been successfully scooped on
top of them at an angle.
The second
scooping process was performed similarly
to the first but with added complexity.
Only an empty portion of the grid sur-
face was accessible for the tweezers, in-
creasing the difficulty of the task. Addi-
tionally, extra care was required to sub-
merge the TEM grid as vertically and
slowly as possible to minimize disruptions from surface tension and preserve mem-
brane integrity. In Figure 40, the second scooping for the three aforementioned suc-
cessfully transferred membranes onto TEM grids is shown.
Page 47 of 74
==PAGE:53==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
Figure 40: Microscope pictures representing for each row a different SrTiO3 membrane
thickness.
Highlighted by a light blue dash line and labelled as number (1) are
the first membranes, whereas in yellow and labelled as number (2) are the second
scooped membranes. In particular: (a) and (b) show images of the twisted 10 nm
membranes before CAB dissolution on the second membrane, and (c) shows the same
two membranes after dissolution. (d) Shows the twisted 15 nm membrane before CAB
dissolution, whereas (e) and (f) show the two membranes after polymer dissolution.
(g) Shows the twisted 25 nm membrane before CAB dissolution, whereas (h) after.
Finally, (i) represents a 50x magnification in which the two 25 nm membranes appear
one on top of the other.
Page 48 of 74
==PAGE:54==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
The stacking was performed at different, random angles. Approximately, the 10
nm membranes were found to be oriented at an angle of 55 degrees with respect to
each other, whereas the 15 nm membranes at 10 degrees and the 25 nm membranes
at 50 degrees. Although the second 10 nm and 15 nm membranes could be precisely
discerned from the first membranes below them, the 25 was not. The reason why a
50x magnification was used to probe the sample from closer, and only at this point
a slight difference could be seen visually. As discussed, most of the challenges were
caused by membrane transfer, membrane stacking at precise angles and membrane
integrity after CAB removal.
The first of these two challenges will hopefully be overcome by applying a new tool
with possible optimization solutions. The instrument consists of a perforated loop
attached to a handle.
This so-called "perfect loop" utilizes water surface tension
to create a small bubble where the membrane sits and can be transferred.
By a
similar principle, since the perfect loop section and the TEM grids used have identical
diameters, they will tend to attract each other when submerged in water, allowing
them to adhere once again through surface tension. Figure 41 shows this procedure.
This would not only increase the precision and integrity of the transfer but also
ensure fine-tuning of the second stacked membrane angle. As for what concerns CAB
removal, it is thought that possibly less rougher TEM grids and different material
matches between grid and membrane would help.
To conclude the experiments, a silicium nitrate (SiN) TEM grid provided by assis-
tant professor Daesung Park was used to check the difference for the 5 nm SrTiO3
membrane transfer. Figure 42 shows in a similar fashion the results obtained.
Figure 41: Perfect Loop transfer procedure taken from the Perfect Loop website [96].
Page 49 of 74
==PAGE:55==
4.1
SrTiO3 Thin film Fabrication, Characterization and Membrane Transfer
Figure 42: Microscope pictures taken of the 5 nm twisted membrane stacking. In blue
and labelled as number (1) is the first membrane, whereas in yellow and labelled as
number (2) is the second scooped membrane. In particular: (a) and (b) show images
of the twisted 5 nm membranes before CAB dissolution withe different magnifications,
(c) shows the latter after CAB dissolution. For the second membrane, (d) and (e)
show the twisted 5 nm membrane before CAB dissolution and (f) shows the second
membrane after CAB dissolution.
This grid was much more robust and easier to manipulate and, after CAB removal,
there was a higher surface area of membrane still intact. However, the regions of
interest in the cavities were completely damaged. Nonetheless, a small fraction in
the middle cavity of the grid presented a good membrane area. A second transfer
was, therefore, tried on that area. From the images, particularly from Figure 42e,
it can be seen from the difference in colour that the middle spot still presents the
presence of the two membranes. CAB removal, however, once again destroyed the
stack completely, only leaving half the middle square semi-intact. It is not easy to
say from the optical microscope if both membranes are still on the grid or just one
of them. In conclusion, even though SiN grids proved to be less rough than Cu ones,
they presented much lower chance of membrane integrity on top of the cavities.
Page 50 of 74
==PAGE:56==
4.2
Freestanding BaTiO3 Piezoresponse and Buckling Modes
4.2
Freestanding BaTiO3 Piezoresponse and Buckling Modes
In this part of the thesis, the piezoelectric response of ferroelectric BaTiO3 mem-
brane transferred on silicon (Si) substrate with different cavities will be discussed.
First, an explanation of the sample and its properties will be given, and then PFM
results will be shown and discussed.
4.2.1
Sample Characterization
The substrate used for this part of the work consisted in a 5x5 mm Si crystal con-
taining 4 sets of 21x21 holes matrices on it. The holes were split into three geometries,
circle (diameter = 11 µm), square (11x11 µm) and triangle (sidelength = 8.5 µm).
They were etched by Deep Reactive Ion Etching (DRIE) which is a highly precise fab-
rication process used to etch deep and high-aspect-ratio structures through the use
of chemically reactive plasma. The fabrication of the Si was done by my colleague
in the group, Thomas Emil le Cozannet. An example of how the cavities (triangle)
look like in high magnification is shown in Figure 43. An image representing one of
the 4 sets of holes on the substrate and a magnification on the triangle geometries
is given in Figure 44. A more detailed substrate fabrication procedure is discussed
in Appendix 6.1, as it was not the objective of this work. Most of the other results
obtained from now on the circle and square geometries will be omitted for clarity and
can be seen in Appendix 6.2 .
Figure 43: Closer look at some of the triangles showing buckling due to the wrinkling
and stresses. The cavities are evident from the triangular shapes, whereas the wrinkles
have been highlighted by a yellow arrow.
Page 51 of 74
==PAGE:57==
4.2
Freestanding BaTiO3 Piezoresponse and Buckling Modes
Figure 44: Microscope images of the BaTiO3 membrane on top of the holes. From left
to right, a 10x magnification of one of the four sets of 21x21 holes featuring triangles
on the left, squares in the middle, and circles on the right. This is followed, on the
right, by a 100x magnification of the red-highlighted area containing the triangles.
The blue color is attributed to the BaTiO3 membrane and is highlighted by pointing
red arrows whereas the white stripes running through the membranes are cracks and
wrinkles and are highlighted by yellow pointing arrows.
These images clearly show the membrane buckling within the cavities due to the
release of stress acting on these areas. Buckling occurs when a structure experiences
instability under compressive stress, leading to a sudden deformation perpendicular
to the direction of the applied load. In the context of the BaTiO3 membrane, buck-
ling can be induced by several factors. For example, compressive stresses caused by
the membrane transfer and the thickness of the membrane itself would make it more
susceptible to buckling as it lacks the structural rigidity to resist external forces. This
instability results in the membrane deforming out of its plane, creating wrinkles or
waves as it seeks to relieve the applied stresses as illustrated in Figure 43.
Professor Rasmus Bjørk assisted in setting up a 2D model to compute the buckling
modes for the different sets of holes. The model demonstrated the different modes
of relaxation of the membranes on the triangle geometry. A good way to explain
this phenomenon is by conceptualizing the buckling as a wave, where the harmonic
complexity of the wave increases as the critical load increases, as also shown in Figure
45.
Page 52 of 74
==PAGE:58==
4.2
Freestanding BaTiO3 Piezoresponse and Buckling Modes
Figure 45: Professor Rasmus Bjørk’s model images showing the buckling behaviour
of the membrane under critical load when transferred on a triangle.
4.2.2
Switching Spectroscopy Piezoresponse Force
A particular instance of the PFM software called Switching Spectroscopy Piezore-
sponse Force (SS-PFM) was used to carry out the following experiments. SS-PFM
mode allowed for higher accuracy, electrostatic artifact elimination and signal tuning.
The settings and parameters used for the experiments had already been optimised by
previous measurements made by Thomas Cozannet and Shinhee Yun on the BaTiO3
sample used. The one parameter amongst them worth explaining in more detail in
this case is the setpoint deflection point: a measure of the force exerted by the tip on
the sample. Such force can be calculated by multiplying the cantilever deflection by
the force constant of the cantilever.
F = k · ∆z
(14)
Where F is the force, k is the spring constant (5.4 N/m for the HQ:NSC35/Pt
conductive probes used), and ∆z ranged from 0 to 350 nm. Consequently, the maxi-
mum force applied was approximately 2 µN. This force is critical because, given the
BaTiO3 membrane’s placement over a distinct array of perforations, excessive force
could puncture and damage the membrane, while insufficient force would fail to in-
duce any vibrations. MIROview, a dashboard facilitating rapid surface mapping and
multiple measurements available in SS-PFM was employed to perform ramp over-
lays on specific points of the sample. This technique involves superimposing various
Page 53 of 74
==PAGE:59==
4.2
Freestanding BaTiO3 Piezoresponse and Buckling Modes
datasets onto a single image to analyze the sample’s properties. The integration of
electrical data and piezoresponse measurements through ramp overlays allowed for
precise characterization, providing insights unattainable with isolated measurements.
In particular, a script generator was used to create a switching waveform, as rep-
resented in Figure 46. This waveform featured an AC on top of a DC switching bias,
although not shown by the script generator waveform preview. The bias was changed
from 0 V to 3 V in 7 steps, effectively reading the output every 0.5 V change. The
signal is divided into two steps: write steps and read steps. The write steps actively
apply the voltage to the system, while the read steps measure the response and store
it for the selected channels. The floating membrane was expected to respond to a
varying electric field by maintaining a fixed resonant frequency and displaying a pos-
itive increment in amplitude corresponding to an increase in the electric field. This
behaviour would indicate a ferroelectric response of the membrane under different
biases. To test this, the amplitude (mV) as a function of frequency (kHz) was plotted
for every bias, as shown in Figure 47. The results confirmed that an increment in
amplitude is driven by stronger vibrations and indicative of a piezoelectric response.
Figure 46: Low to high increasing AC on top of DC waveform used for the ramp
overlays carried out.
Page 54 of 74
==PAGE:60==
4.2
Freestanding BaTiO3 Piezoresponse and Buckling Modes
Figure 47: Amplitude vs. frequency response to different voltages i.e., varying electric
fields applied.
To further analyse the findings, the strain versus varying electric field was com-
puted. The resonant frequency of the membrane was estimated to be at a frequency
of about 340 kHz. In order to confirm whether the response observed is due to the
piezoelectric effect, a linear relation between the strain and the electric field should
be observed where:
ϵ = QE
(15)
In which, ϵ is the strain, Q is the piezoelectric coefficient of the material and E is
the electric field. These calculations were carried out at 3 different frequencies: < 270
kHz, at 337 kHz and >380 kHz and were based on a similar study from E. Mishuk
et. al. in which changes in membrane shape under bias were also investigated [97].
In this study, the deformation of the membrane is assumed to be dome-shaped and
homogeneous, i.e., with a first harmonic buckling. Based on the assumption that the
dome is perfectly spherical, the radius of curvature of the buckling can be estimated
to be:
R = L2
2δ
(16)
Page 55 of 74
==PAGE:61==
4.2
Freestanding BaTiO3 Piezoresponse and Buckling Modes
Where R refers to the radius of curvature, L is related to the hole dimensions and
δ is the change in height of the film or, in other words, the change in amplitude at
certain frequencies and for certain biases. The values of the extracted dδ and the
calculated R for every bias and for every frequency are given in Table 2.
Following the same study, from the radius of curvature the strain was estimated
using the following formula:
ϵ = tf
2R
(17)
Where ϵ refers to the strain and tf refers to the film thickness that was calculated
to be 30 nm, or 0.03 µm. The results of these strain points at every frequency and
bias were finally calculated and plotted against the electric field and are shown in
Figure 48. The electric field was instead calculated in
V
µm as:
E =
V oltage
Film Thickness
(18)
Page 56 of 74
==PAGE:62==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Figure 48: Strain Vs. Voltage relations for: (1) 270 kHz, (2) 337 kHz and (3) 380
kHz
The linearity of these results proved the hypothesis made and confirms the mem-
brane’s mechanical response to electric fields applied. This along with the behaviour
seen in Figure 47 proves the ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties of the buckled
BaTiO3 membrane. More calculations however need to be carried out to further in-
vestigate and confirm if these results come from the membrane itself or the system
as a whole.
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Hetero-structured SrTiO3/ LaSrMnO3 membrane transferred on top of a series of
gold coated NWs will be discussed in this section. In particular, the study will focus
Page 57 of 74
==PAGE:63==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
on the magnetic properties of LaSrMnO3 when subjected to induced compressive and
tensile strain caused by the nanowires (NWs).
4.3.1
Sample Characterization
The NWs substrate, shown in Figure 49, used in this project consisted in a gallium
arsenite (GaAs) substrate with triangular gold (Au) coated NWs grown on its surface
by Focused Ion Beam (FIB): a nanofabrication technology. The freestanding hetero
structured membrane on the NWs instead consisted in a 4.7 nm SrTiO3 capping layer
followed by a 3.8 nm LaSrMnO3 layer (10 unit cells).
Figure 49: 3D NW AFM scan. In blue the
surface covered by the membrane,in gold
the bare substrate.
Before MFM, the sample was mag-
netically characterized to ensure room-
temperature ferromagnetism. Vibrating
Sample Magnetometry (VSM) was per-
formed by postdoctoral Varun Harbola
at the Max Planck Institute in Stuttgart.
VSM operates by placing a sample in
a uniform magnetic field and mechan-
ically vibrating it.
The vibration in-
duces an electromotive force (EMF) in
nearby pickup coils proportional to the
sample’s magnetic moment which is an-
alyzed to acquire information about the
Curie temperature, Tc, of the sample and
its magnetic moment [98].
Two differ-
ent measurements were carried out dur-
ing VSM: Field cooling (FC) and zero field cooling (ZFC). In FC experiments, a
sample is cooled in the presence of an external magnetic field. The magnetic field is
applied above the sample’s theoretical transition temperature and maintained as the
sample is cooled down. This process helps to align the magnetic domains or moments
along the direction of the applied field, allowing the study of how the material’s mag-
netization evolves under these conditions. In ZFC experiments, the sample is first
cooled in the absence of any external magnetic field. After reaching the desired low
temperature, an external magnetic field is applied, and the sample’s response is mea-
sured as it is gradually warmed up. This helps to determine the magnetic properties
of the material without the influence of an externally aligned magnetic field during
the cooling process such as in the FC technique [99]. The results of these different
cooling cycles taken with a magnetic field in-plane with respect to the sample are
shown in Figure 50.
Page 58 of 74
==PAGE:64==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Figure 50: VSM results of the FC and ZFC measurements on the LaSrMnO3 mem-
brane.
The VSM M-T curves for the epitaxial film revealed Curie temperature (Tc) values
near room temperature for this specific film thickness, indicating the ferromagnetic
properties of LaSrMnO3 at ambient conditions.
4.3.2
LaSrMnO3 MFM Measurements
As discussed in Section 2.3.2, the ferromagnetism of LaSrMnO3 is driven by the
double exchange interaction between Mn3+ and Mn4+ ions. This interaction involves
the transfer of electrons between the manganese ions, facilitated by their overlapping
orbitals and through the oxygen atoms positioned between them which function as
intermediate bridges for the hopping of the electrons [30]. The experimental expecta-
tions were that the tensile strain would increase the distance between Mn ions. This
increase would reduce the orbital overlap between the latter and the oxygen atoms,
thereby weakening the double exchange interaction. Consequently, this weakening
could lead to a reduction in the overall magnetic ordering, potentially diminishing
the material’s ferromagnetic properties on the NW peaks. A significant portion of
Page 59 of 74
==PAGE:65==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
the insights presented here has been acquired during my short stay at the Leib-
niz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research in Dresden (Leibniz-Institut für
Festkörper- und Werkstoffforschung), under the guidance of Dr. Volker Neu. Prior
to each measurement and following any tip change, a reference sample was used for
training and to validate the concept of tip inversion for subsequent experiments. Fig-
ure 51 presents two images in close proximity of a standard Hard Drive Disk (HDD)
MFM phase channel, highlighting the opposite magnetic polarities of the domains
when probed with inversely magnetized tips. A detailed analysis about tip inversion
can be found in the experimental method section about MFM.
Figure 51: Tip inversion MFM on HDD. Highlighted by a red circle is a small area
clearly showing the difference in domain polarization of: (a) up-magnetized tip and
(b) down-magnetized tip.
The measurements on the LaSrMnO3 membrane were conducted on distinct areas
of the sample, namely: on the strained LaSrMnO3 membrane covering the NWs
and on the bare NWs to have a non magnetic reference. For these areas, both tip
inversion and Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) were conducted. The latter
was taken into consideration as it gives a very good idea of the work function and
surface potential variations in the sample, ultimately showing the electrostatic forces
and noise that might be measured on top of the magnetic signal. An image of the
membrane and the different scanned areas was also taken by microscope and can be
seen in Figure 52. The image shows a section of high-quality, continuous membrane
positioned over some NWs. The NWs appear as rows of small, alternating vertical
grey lines. The setup, together with a 3D AFM image of the area, is intuitively given
in Figure 53.
Page 60 of 74
==PAGE:66==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Figure 52: 100x microscope magnification of membrane and NWs. Highlighted by
red circles are the two investigated regions. Region 1 where the membrane covers the
NWs and region 2 where the second measurement on bare NWs was performed.
Figure 53: Three dimensional AFM scan of the SrTiO3/ LaSrMnO3 membrane on the
NWs. The red feature indicates a part of the GaAs substrate which was not covered
by the membrane. The tip was lifted 50nm above the surface for MFM and KPFM
measurements.
Page 61 of 74
==PAGE:67==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Results from the MFM measurements with an up-magnetized and down-magnetized
tip are reported in Figure 54. The images were rotated and aligned relative to the
NWs to ensure strong comparability before differential signal processing. In addition,
KPFM results for the same area are reported in Figure 55, for which the same type
of rotation and alignment were carried out.
Figure 54: MFM measurements of the LaSrMnO3 membrane on the NWs at a lift
height of 50 nm and a scan size of 8 µm. In order from top left to bottom right: (a)
topography of the scanned area with an up magnetization and (b) topography of the
same area with a down magnetization, (c) up magnetized tip scanned phase and (d)
down magnetized tip scanned phase.
Page 62 of 74
==PAGE:68==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Figure 55: KPFM measurement of the same area seen in Figure 54, with a scan area
of 8 µm and a lift height of 50 nm. The sample was contacted to the stage using
silver paint. Image (a) shows the topography channel and (b) the potential channel.
Highlighted by a pointing yellow arrow is the high potential intensity measured at
the NWs.
The MFM images exhibited excellent alignment across the scanned area within
the height sensor channel for tips with different magnetizations. However, the phase
images displayed negligible variation, as evidenced by the lack of color inversion typi-
cally observed in cases involving magnetic domains, such as in Hard Disk Drive (HDD)
samples. This absence of contrasting colors suggests a lack of magnetic domains in
the scanned region or the presence of a noise level higher than that of the magnetic
signal. Conversely, the potential images provided great insights into the possible is-
sues. The pronounced intensity in Figure 55(b) suggests the presence of significant
electrostatic artifacts: likely resulting from the potential difference between the Au
coating and the GaAs surface. These artifacts can obscure true magnetic signals,
complicating the interpretation of MFM data. To address this, advanced signal pro-
cessing techniques were employed to isolate and analyze the signals, aiming to detect
any magnetic responses induced by strain in the nanowires (NWs). Figure 56 shows
the signal processing applied to the various signal channels. This processing was cru-
cial to differentiate between electrostatic and magnetic contributions, enhancing the
accuracy of the magnetic characterization.
Page 63 of 74
==PAGE:69==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Figure 56: From top to bottom, the plotted signals include: the topography signal,
the up-magnetized (red) and down-magnetized (blue) phase signals, the resulting
difference between the up-magnetized and down-magnetized signals, the amplitude
signal, and finally the KPFM signal. The vertical red line indicates the gold-coated
area where the membrane was not transferred in accordance with Figure 53.
The results were aligned and shifted in order to have a peak-to-peak symmetry. It
is clear that ∆ϕ, i.e., the difference between the up-magnetized and down-magnetized
Page 64 of 74
==PAGE:70==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
phase signals, still presents some small signal even after the subtraction, which sug-
gests the presence or magnetic response of the film when subjected to the NWs strain.
To validate this observation, the same measurements were performed on bare NWs
to establish a reference zero signal for comparison. The expectation was that of ob-
serving a zero signal in ∆ϕ which would have confirmed that the signal detected in
Figure 56 actually originated from a genuine magnetic response of the strained film.
This comparison was crucial to ensure that the observed effects were indeed due to
the magnetic properties of the membrane and not due to any extraneous factors.
In a similar fashion, results from the MFM measurements with up-magnetized
and down-magnetized tips on the NWs are therefore reported in Figure 58. KPFM
results for the same area are instead shown in Figure 59: the same type of rotation an
alignment was done for these images. In the same way as for region 1, a 3D schematic
for this region can be seen in Figure 57.
Figure 57: Surface analysis and three dimensional characterization of the bare NWs
denoted by the yellow and green features.
Note that this time the yellow region
denotes the substrate and not the membrane.
Page 65 of 74
==PAGE:71==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Figure 58: MFM measurements of the bare NWs at a lift height of 50 nm and a scan
size of 8 µm. In order from top left to bottom right: (a) topography of the scanned
area with an up magnetization and (b) topography of the same area with a down
magnetization, (c) up magnetized tip scanned phase and (d) down magnetized tip
scanned phase.
Page 66 of 74
==PAGE:72==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Figure 59: KPFM measurement of the same area seen in Figure 58, with a scan area
of 8 µm and a lift height of 50nm. The sample was contacted to the stage using silver
paint. Image (a) shows the topography channel and (b) the potential channel.
As expected, the height sensor channel again shows a strong correspondence be-
tween up magnetization and down magnetization, while the phase images reveal mini-
mal differences. However, the potential images display a pronounced contrast, leading
to significant insights. Indeed, this confirms the hypothesis of a strong electrostatic
interaction arising from the difference in work functions of the substrate. More in-
triguingly, by comparing the potential images from the two different regions, it can be
assumed that the variation in potential intensity is due to the partial screening of the
LaSrMnO3 membrane. The screening of the KPFM potential signal observed on the
membrane can be attributed to differences in work functions, charge redistribution at
the interface or, similarly, to the conductive nature of LaSrMnO3. This perovskite,
indeed, presents many free charges which might interact with the electric field injected
by KPFM and redistribute at the interface, therefore giving off an intense signal on
the NWs. Results of the signal processing on the bare NWs region are reported in
Figure 60.
Page 67 of 74
==PAGE:73==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
Figure 60: From top to bottom, the plotted signals include: the topography signal,
the up-magnetized (red) and down-magnetized (blue) phase signal, the difference
between the up-magnetized and down-magnetized phase signals and the amplitude
signal.
After thoroughly analyzing every step taken multiple times, it is apparent that the
subtracted phase signal from the bare NWs is very similar if not identical to that of
Page 68 of 74
==PAGE:74==
4.3
LaSrMnO3 Magnetic Response vs. NWs Induced Strain
the LaSrMnO3 covered NWs. This implies that the signal does not have magnetic
origins, and what can be seen is mostly, if not only, caused by contributions of external
factors such as mechanical noise, electrostatic interactions and even height difference
artifacts. This suggests that the membrane, although shown to be magnetic at room
temperature by VSM measurements, had a very low and soft magnetization. This,
plus the intrinsic in-plane magnetization of LaSrMnO3 proved to be enough to show
little to no magnetic response in MFM scans.
According to a modeling paper by a study of I. A. Malik, et al. [100], the vortex
phase of LaSrMnO3 can appear due to biaxial strain with a certain range along
the x1 and x2 axes applied simultaneously as shown by Figure 61. This so-called
"magnetic vortex" would in turn induce out-of-plane components of the magnetic
fields on the membrane and make it easier for the magnetic signal to be detectable
by MFM. In addition, according to another paper from Y. Feng et.al. [101], the
LaSrMnO3 critical thickness might have played a role in the experimental design.
Such a thin LaSrMnO3 membrane, although still magnetic, might have such low
magnetization that it would be hard, if not impossible, to detect amongst the other
external noise factors. Thickness has a direct relation with the magnetic properties of
the material, indeed the study shows that with a 10 unit cell thickness, similarly to this
work, the magnetization although present is very and usually not entirely above room
temperature. In conclusion, to detect some contrast in MFM, bi-axial strain might
be applied to create a vortex structure on thin LaSrMnO3 membranes, or a thicker
LaSrMnO3 might be used to show stronger signal and out-of-plane magnetization.
Figure 61: Phase diagram of LaSrMnO3 in terms of strain in different direction [100].
Page 69 of 74
==PAGE:75==
5
Conclusions and Outlook
The investigation into freestanding perovskite oxide membranes produced several
important findings and insights as shown in this thesis.
• For SrTiO3 membranes thicker than 10 nm, the results were promising, while
thinner membranes faced challenges with fragility and surface roughness. Suc-
cessful transfers and stacking were achieved, but issues like surface tension of
the polymer solvent have been identified as factors affecting membrane integrity.
Future efforts will focus on optimizing methods such as critical point drying and
using a perfect loop for more precise transfers. Additionally, the Moirè struc-
tures formed by these membranes will be thoroughly examined using TEM.
• The BaTiO3 membranes demonstrated a distinct piezoelectric response when
transferred onto substrates with different cavity shapes. This successful outcome
indicate the potential of BaTiO3 membranes for applications that involve strain-
induced electrical properties.
Future experiments will involve establishing a
reference by measuring the substrate alone, investigating the response of the
BaTiO3 membrane on the substrate, and exploring this behavior over various
shaped cavities.
• The LaSrMnO3 membranes, when subjected to induced strain, provided valu-
able insights, even though the MFM results were less successful than anticipated.
The findings suggest that increasing the thickness of the LaSrMnO3 membranes
may enhance their performance and provide more consistent results in future
studies.
Overall, this project has provided me with experience in a wide range of advanced
techniques and a new perspective on how to conduct scientific research, from designing
experiments to conducting and interpreting results. Most importantly, it has taught
me to critically analyze the results and distinguish between genuine physical outcomes
and artifacts.
Page 70 of 74
==PAGE:76==
6
Appendix
6.1
DRIE etched Silicium Substrate
The following substrate fabrication procedure was offered by Thomas Cozannet,
whom fabricated the sample.
The substrate employed for the BaTiO3 membrane
investigation consisted in a a 350 µm thick, 100 mm Si wafer.
The backside of
the wafer is etched using a polymer mask, which is deposited via spin coating and
then patterned with a maskless UV-aligner, providing design flexibility for iterative
processes. In the first etching step, approximately 300 µm of Si is etched. However,
due to the challenge of achieving uniformity at such depths, the target is set at over
300 µm to avoid etching completely through the wafer, which could lead to various
processing issues. After this etch, the mask is removed by plasma ashing, and the
entire wafer is coated with aluminum oxide (Al2O3) using Atomic Layer Deposition
(ALD). Subsequently, UV-lithography is used to define the hole geometries on the
topside of the wafer, which are then etched into the Al2O3 mask using hydrofluoric acid
(HF) etching. The backside of the wafer is protected with a plastic film to maintain
a hard mask that acts as an etch stop. Another DRIE step is then performed to etch
through the final 50 µm of the wafer, creating the narrow holes. Finally, the Al2O3
on the backside is removed with HF. For the deep etching of 300 µm, and particularly
the 50 µm narrow holes, it is essential to maintain the integrity of the geometries.
Parameters such as gas flow, chamber pressure, temperature, etching cycle times, RF
power/frequency, and DC bias must be carefully controlled to achieve the desired
etching results.
6.2
Square and Circle Geometries Buckling
Figure 62 shows a 50x magnification of squares and circular cavities by highlighting
the membrane’s buckling onto them. The buckling model on the other hand, was not
complete.
Only the square geometry was analyzed with increasing critical loads.
Figure 63 shows the buckling results coming from the modelling of the square cavity.
Page 71 of 74
==PAGE:77==
6.2
Square and Circle Geometries Buckling
Figure 62: Closer look at some of the square and circle holes showing membrane
buckling due to wrinkling or stress. The cavities are distinguished by their shape
( square cavities Figure (a), (b), (c) and square cavities Figure (d), (e), (f). The
wrinkles instead, are highlighted by yellow pointing arrows.
Page 72 of 74
==PAGE:78==
6.2
Square and Circle Geometries Buckling
Figure 63: Professor Rasmus Bjørk’ s images showing the buckling behaviour of the
membrane under critical load when transferred on a square cavity
Page 73 of 74
==PAGE:79==
References
References
[1] W. H. Fissell, “What is nanotechnology?,” Advances in Chronic Kidney Disease,
vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 452–453, 2013.
[2] D. Lu, D. J. Baek, S. S. Hong, L. F. Kourkoutis, Y. Hikita, and H. Y. Hwang,
“Synthesis of freestanding single-crystal perovskite films and heterostructures
by etching of sacrificial water-soluble layers,” Nature materials, vol. 15, no. 12,
pp. 1255–1260, 2016.
[3] “Global energy efficiency progress is accelerating, signalling a potential turning
point after years of slow improvement - News.”
[4] P. Dong, Y.-K. Chen, G.-H. Duan, and D. T. Neilson, “Silicon photonic de-
vices and integrated circuits,” Nanophotonics, vol. 3, pp. 215–228, Aug. 2014.
Publisher: De Gruyter.
[5] H. Bennett, R. Brederlow, J. Costa, P. Cottrell, W. Huang, A. Immorlica, J.-
E. Mueller, M. Racanelli, H. Shichijo, C. Weitzel, and B. Zhao, “Device and
technology evolution for Si-based RF integrated circuits,” IEEE Transactions
on Electron Devices, vol. 52, pp. 1235–1258, July 2005. Conference Name: IEEE
Transactions on Electron Devices.
[6] “Integrated circuit | Types, Uses, & Function | Britannica.”
[7] K. Zhu, C. Wen, A. A. Aljarb, F. Xue, X. Xu, V. Tung, X. Zhang, H. N.
Alshareef, and M. Lanza, “The development of integrated circuits based on
two-dimensional materials,” Nature Electronics, vol. 4, pp. 775–785, Nov. 2021.
Number: 11 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[8] Humaira and M. Asghar, Limitation of Silicon Based Computation and Future
Prospects. Mar. 2010. Pages: 561.
[9] H. Riel, “Quantum Computing Technology and Roadmap,” in ESSDERC 2022
- IEEE 52nd European Solid-State Device Research Conference (ESSDERC),
pp. 25–30, Sept. 2022.
[10] N. Pryds, D.-S. Park, T. Jespersen, and S. Yun, “Twisted oxide membranes: A
perspective,” APL Materials, vol. 12, no. 1, 2024.
[11] L. Han, G. Dong, M. Liu, and Y. Nie, “Freestanding perovskite oxide mem-
branes: A new playground for novel ferroic properties and applications,” Ad-
vanced Functional Materials, vol. 34, no. 4, p. 2309543, 2024.
Page 74 of 74
==PAGE:80==
References
[12] K. Kerman and S. Ramanathan, “Complex oxide nanomembranes for energy
conversion and storage: A review,” Journal of Materials Research, vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 320–337, 2014.
[13] R. Gao, A. C. Jain, S. Pandya, Y. Dong, Y. Yuan, H. Zhou, L. R. Dedon,
V. Thoréton, S. Saremi, R. Xu, et al., “Designing optimal perovskite structure
for high ionic conduction,” Advanced materials, vol. 32, no. 1, p. 1905178, 2020.
[14] S. Yun, T. E. le Cozannet, C. H. Christoffersen, E. Brand, T. S. Jespersen,
and N. Pryds, “Strain engineering: Perfecting freestanding perovskite oxide
fabrication,” Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany), p. e2310782.
[15] F. M. Chiabrera, S. Yun, Y. Li, R. T. Dahm, H. Zhang, C. K. Kirchert, D. V.
Christensen, F. Trier, T. S. Jespersen, and N. Pryds, “Freestanding perovskite
oxide films: Synthesis, challenges, and properties,” Annalen der Physik, vol. 534,
no. 9, p. 2200084, 2022.
[16] W. Gao, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, G. Yuan, and J.-M. Liu, “A review of flexible per-
ovskite oxide ferroelectric films and their application,” Journal of Materiomics,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2020.
[17] J. Ji, S. Park, H. Do, and H. S. Kum, “A review on recent advances in fabricating
freestanding single-crystalline complex-oxide membranes and its applications,”
Physica Scripta, vol. 98, no. 5, p. 052002, 2023.
[18] C. N. R. Rao, “Transition metal oxides,” Annual Review of Physical Chemistry,
vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 291–326, 1989.
[19] A. Tyagi, S. Banerjee, J. Cherusseri, and K. K. Kar, “Characteristics of tran-
sition metal oxides,” Handbook of Nanocomposite Supercapacitor Materials I:
Characteristics, pp. 91–123, 2020.
[20] R. M. Hazen, “Perovskites,” Scientific American, vol. 258, no. 6, pp. 74–81,
1988.
[21] J. Hwang, Z. Feng, N. Charles, X. R. Wang, D. Lee, K. A. Stoerzinger, S. Muy,
R. R. Rao, D. Lee, R. Jacobs, et al., “Tuning perovskite oxides by strain: Elec-
tronic structure, properties, and functions in (electro) catalysis and ferroelec-
tricity,” Materials Today, vol. 31, pp. 100–118, 2019.
[22] B. Viswanathan, V. Suryakumar, B. Venugopal, S. Roshna, and N. Hariprasad,
“Perovskite materials an introduction,” 2019.
Page 75 of 74
==PAGE:81==
References
[23] J. P. Attfield, P. Lightfoot, and R. E. Morris, “Perovskites,” Dalton Transac-
tions, vol. 44, no. 23, pp. 10541–10542, 2015.
[24] Y. Xiong, W. Chen, W. Guo, H. Wei, and I. Dabo, “Data-driven analysis of the
electronic-structure factors controlling the work functions of perovskite oxides,”
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 6880–6887, 2021.
[25] S. Somiya, “Preface to the second edition,” in Handbook of Advanced Ceramics
(Second Edition) (S. Somiya, ed.), p. xiii, Oxford: Academic Press, second
edition ed., 2013.
[26] https://msestudent.com/face-centered-cubic-fcc-unit-cell/.
[27] M. J. Akhtar, Z.-U.-N. Akhtar, R. A. Jackson, and C. R. A. Catlow, “Computer
simulation studies of strontium titanate,” Journal of the American Ceramic
Society, vol. 78, no. 2, pp. 421–428, 1995.
[28] https://funsizephysics.com/let-light-little-bit-magnetism/.
[29] J. Dho, N. Hur, I. Kim, and Y. Park, “Oxygen pressure and thickness dependent
lattice strain in la 0.7 sr 0.3 mno 3 films,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 94,
no. 12, pp. 7670–7674, 2003.
[30] M. Cesaria, A. P. Caricato, G. Maruccio, and M. Martino, “Lsmo–growing op-
portunities by pld and applications in spintronics,” in Journal of Physics: Con-
ference Series, vol. 292, p. 012003, IOP Publishing, 2011.
[31] G. J. Snyder, R. Hiskes, S. DiCarolis, M. Beasley, and T. Geballe, “Intrinsic
electrical transport and magnetic properties of la 0.67 ca 0.33 mn o 3 and la
0.67 sr 0.33 mn o 3 mocvd thin films and bulk material,” Physical Review B,
vol. 53, no. 21, p. 14434, 1996.
[32] F. Jona and G. Shirane, “Ferroelectric crystals,” (No Title), 1962.
[33] Cambridge, “X-ray diffraction,” Ingegneria dei materiali, 2022.
[34] M. Vijatović, J. Bobić, and B. D. Stojanović, “History and challenges of barium
titanate: Part i,” Science of Sintering, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 155–165, 2008.
[35] https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.14584.
[36] P. Salles, R. Guzman, A. Barrera, M. Ramis, J. M. Caicedo, A. Palau, W. Zhou,
and M. Coll, “On the role of the sr3- xcaxal2o6 sacrificial layer composition in
epitaxial la0. 7sr0. 3mno3 membranes,” Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 33,
no. 41, p. 2304059, 2023.
Page 76 of 74
==PAGE:82==
References
[37] F. M. Chiabrera, S. Yun, Y. Li, R. T. Dahm, H. Zhang, C. K. R. Kirchert, D. V.
Christensen, F. Trier, T. S. Jespersen, and N. Pryds, “Freestanding perovskite
oxide films: Synthesis, challenges, and properties,” Annalen der Physik, vol. 534,
no. 9, p. 2200084, 2022.
[38] T. Lin, “Analysis of elastic and plastic strains of a face-centred cubic crystal,”
Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 143–149, 1957.
[39] A. G. Cieri, The Effect of Strain on Electronic Transport Properties in Per-
ovskite Manganite and Ferrite Films. PhD thesis, Drexel University, 2016.
[40] A. Biswas, P. Rossen, C.-H. Yang, W. Siemons, M.-H. Jung, I. Yang, R. Ramesh,
and Y. Jeong, “Universal ti-rich termination of atomically flat srtio3 (001),(110),
and (111) surfaces,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 98, no. 5, 2011.
[41] C. Christoffersen, “A high mobility oxide heterointerface structural and
magneto-electrical characterization of Îł-al2o3/srtio3 grown by pulsed laser de-
position,” 2023. unpublished thesis.
[42] R. Dietsch, T. Holz, H. Mai, M. Panzner, and S. Völlmar, “Pulsed laser deposi-
tion (pld)âan advanced state for technical applications,” Optical and quantum
electronics, vol. 27, pp. 1385–1396, 1995.
[43] A. Ojeda-G-P, M. Döbeli, and T. Lippert, “Influence of plume properties on
thin film composition in pulsed laser deposition,” Advanced Materials Interfaces,
vol. 5, no. 18, p. 1701062, 2018.
[44] I. N. Mihailescu and E. György, “Pulsed laser deposition: an overview,” Inter-
national Trends in Optics and Photonics: ICO IV, pp. 201–214, 1999.
[45] A. De Bonis and R. Teghil, “Ultra-short pulsed laser deposition of oxides, borides
and carbides of transition elements,” Coatings, vol. 10, no. 5, p. 501, 2020.
[46] E. Hasabeldaim, O. Ntwaeaborwa, R. Kroon, E. Coetsee, and H. Swart, “Effect
of substrate temperature and post annealing temperature on zno: Zn pld thin
film properties,” Optical Materials, vol. 74, pp. 139–149, 2017.
[47] H.-U. Krebs, M. Weisheit, J. Faupel, E. Süske, T. Scharf, C. Fuhse, M. Störmer,
K. Sturm, M. Seibt, H. Kijewski, et al., “Pulsed laser deposition (pld)–a versatile
thin film technique,” Advances in solid state physics, pp. 505–518, 2003.
[48] R. T. Dahm, “Srtio3-based oxides: A versatile platform for emerging magnetic
and electronic properties,” 2023.
Page 77 of 74
==PAGE:83==
References
[49] A. Zintler, Investigating the influence of microstructure and grain boundaries
on electric properties in thin film oxide RRAM devices â A component specific
approach. PhD thesis, 07 2022.
[50] W. Braun, Applied RHEED: reflection high-energy electron diffraction during
crystal growth, vol. 154. Springer Science & Business Media, 1999.
[51] A. Ichimiya, P. I. Cohen, and P. I. Cohen, Reflection high-energy electron diffrac-
tion. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[52] F. C. Frank and J. H. van der Merwe, “One-dimensional dislocations. i. static
theory,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical
and Physical Sciences, vol. 198, no. 1053, pp. 205–216, 1949.
[53] M. Volmer, “Nucleus formation in supersaturated systems,” Z. Phys. Chem.,
vol. 119, pp. 277–301, 1926.
[54] I. Stranski and L. Krastanov, “Theory of orientation separation of ionic crys-
tals,” Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 146, p. 797, 1938.
[55] F. He, Y. Zhou, Z. Ye, S.-H. Cho, J. Jeong, X. Meng, and Y. Wang, “Moiré
patterns in 2d materials: a review,” ACS nano, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 5944–5958,
2021.
[56] K. Tang and W. Qi, “Moiré-pattern-tuned electronic structures of van der waals
heterostructures,” Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 30, no. 32, p. 2002672,
2020.
[57] G. Chen, A. L. Sharpe, P. Gallagher, I. T. Rosen, E. J. Fox, L. Jiang, B. Lyu,
H. Li, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, et al., “Signatures of tunable superconduc-
tivity in a trilayer graphene moiré superlattice,” Nature, vol. 572, no. 7768,
pp. 215–219, 2019.
[58] “https://demonstrations.wolfram.com/,”
[59] B. Fultz and J. M. Howe, Transmission electron microscopy and diffractometry
of materials. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[60] N. Pappas, “Calculating retained austenite in steel post magnetic processing
using x-ray diffraction,” BS Undergr. Maths Exch, vol. 4, pp. 8–14, 2006.
[61] C. D. Putnam, M. Hammel, G. L. Hura, and J. A. Tainer, “X-ray solution
scattering (saxs) combined with crystallography and computation: defining ac-
curate macromolecular structures, conformations and assemblies in solution,”
Quarterly reviews of biophysics, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 191–285, 2007.
Page 78 of 74
==PAGE:84==
References
[62] G. F. Harrington and J. Santiso, “Back-to-basics tutorial: X-ray diffraction of
thin films,” Journal of Electroceramics, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 141–163, 2021.
[63] C. GarcĂa, J. Oliva, M. Romero, R. Ochoa-Valiente, and L. Trujillo, “Effect of
eu 3+ concentration on the luminescent properties of srtio 3 phosphors prepared
by pressure-assisted combustion synthesis,” Advances in Materials Science and
Engineering, vol. 2015, pp. 1–7, 08 2015.
[64] E. Meyer, H. J. Hug, R. Bennewitz, et al., Scanning probe microscopy, vol. 4.
Springer, 2003.
[65] R. Nix, “7.6: Scanning probe microscopy - stm and afm,” University of London.
[66] R. Oliver, “https://www.doitpoms.ac.uk/tlplib/afm/printall.php: :text=in
[67] G. Haugstad, Atomic force microscopy: understanding basic modes and ad-
vanced applications. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[68] “<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0>, via wikimedia commons,”
[69] H. Zhang, J. Huang, Y. Wang, R. Liu, X. Huai, J. Jiang, and C. Anfuso,
“Atomic force microscopy for two-dimensional materials: A tutorial review,”
Optics Communications, vol. 406, pp. 3–17, 2018.
[70] R. Steenwelle, Characterization of piezo-and ferroelectric thin films by Scanning
Probe Techniques. PhD thesis, Master thesis, Univ. Twente, 2007.
[71] C. Enriquez-Flores, J. Gervacio-Arciniega, E. Cruz-Valeriano, P. de Urquijo-
Ventura, B. Gutierrez-Salazar, and F. Espinoza-Beltran, “Fast frequency sweep-
ing in resonance-tracking spm for high-resolution afam and pfm imaging,” Nan-
otechnology, vol. 23, no. 49, p. 495705, 2012.
[72] Wikipedia contributors, “Lock-in amplifier — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia,”
2024. [Online; accessed 26-July-2024].
[73] H. Uršič and U. Prah, “Investigations of ferroelectric polycrystalline bulks and
thick films using piezoresponse force microscopy,” Proceedings of the Royal So-
ciety A, vol. 475, no. 2223, p. 20180782, 2019.
[74] H. Uršič, M. Šadl, U. Prah, and V. Fišinger, “Magnetic force microscopy of
multiferroic bulk ceramic oxides,” Crystals, vol. 13, no. 5, p. 838, 2023.
[75] P. Grütter, H. Mamin, and D. Rugar, “Magnetic force microscopy (mfm),” in
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy II: Further applications and related scanning
techniques, pp. 151–207, Springer, 1992.
Page 79 of 74
==PAGE:85==
References
[76] D. Rugar, H. Mamin, P. Guethner, S. Lambert, J. Stern, I. McFadyen, and
T. Yogi, “Magnetic force microscopy: General principles and application to lon-
gitudinal recording media,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1169–
1183, 1990.
[77] M. Lind, “Control functions in mfm: basic principles,” Nuclear safety and sim-
ulation, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 132–140, 2011.
[78] O. Kazakova, R. Puttock, C. Barton, H. Corte-León, M. Jaafar, V. Neu, and
A. Asenjo, “Frontiers of magnetic force microscopy,” Journal of applied Physics,
vol. 125, no. 6, 2019.
[79] M. R. Koblischka and U. Hartmann, “Recent advances in magnetic force mi-
croscopy,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 97, no. 1-4, pp. 103–112, 2003.
[80] E. R. Callen and H. Callen, “Anisotropic magnetization,” Journal of Physics
and Chemistry of Solids, vol. 16, no. 3-4, pp. 310–328, 1960.
[81] A. Ramesh, D. Jiles, and J. Roderick, “A model of anisotropic anhysteretic
magnetization,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 4234–
4236, 1996.
[82] L. Folks and R. Woodward, “The use of mfm for investigating domain structures
in modern permanent magnet materials,” Journal of magnetism and magnetic
materials, vol. 190, no. 1-2, pp. 28–41, 1998.
[83] X. Wu, W. Zhang, W. Wang, and Y. Chen, “Accurate determination of mfm
tipâs magnetic parameters on nanoparticles by decoupling the influence of elec-
trostatic force,” Nanotechnology, vol. 33, no. 47, p. 475703, 2022.
[84] F. M. Candocia, E. B. Svedberg, D. Litvinov, and S. Khizroev, “Deconvolution
processing for increasing the resolution of magnetic force microscopy measure-
ments,” Nanotechnology, vol. 15, no. 10, p. S575, 2004.
[85] J. Miltat, “Domains and domain walls in soft magnetic materials, mostly,” in
Applied magnetism, pp. 221–308, Springer, 1994.
[86] A. Thiaville, S. Rohart, É. Jué, V. Cros, and A. Fert, “Dynamics of dzyaloshin-
skii domain walls in ultrathin magnetic films,” Europhysics Letters, vol. 100,
no. 5, p. 57002, 2012.
[87] J. Slonczewski, “Theory of domain-wall motion in magnetic films and platelets,”
Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 1759–1770, 1973.
Page 80 of 74
==PAGE:86==
References
[88] M. Bousquet, L. Batista, J.-L. Dellis, A. Boulle, U. Rabe, O. Durand-Drouhin,
Y. Gagou, L. Dupont, V. Viallet, A. Zeinert, S. Hirsekorn, and N. LemĂŠe,
“Structural and electrical properties of bi0.5na0.5tio3 based superlattices grown
by pulsed laser deposition,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 116, pp. –, 11 2014.
[89] M. A. Hafez, M. K. Zayed, and H. E. Elsayed-Ali, “Review: Geometric in-
terpretation of reflection and transmission rheed patterns,” Micron, vol. 159,
p. 103286, 2022.
[90] M. Lee, M. Robin, R. Guis, U. Filippozzi, D. Shin, T. Thiel, S. Paardekooper,
J. Renshof, H. Zant, A. Caviglia, G. Verbiest, and P. Steeneken, “Self-sealing
complex oxide resonators,” Nano Letters, vol. 22, 02 2022.
[91] J. Contour, D. Ravelosona, C. Sant, C. FrĂŠtigny, C. Dolin, J. Rioux, P. Au-
vray, and J. Caulet, “Homoepitaxial growth of low roughness srtio3 by pulsed
laser deposition: application to yba2cu3o7-x -based thin films and superlat-
tices,” Journal of Crystal Growth, vol. 141, no. 1, pp. 141–149, 1994.
[92] T. Nakamura, H. Tokuda, S. Tanaka, and M. I. M. Iiyama, “Dielectric properties
of srtio3 thin films grown by ozone-assisted molecular beam epitaxy,” Japanese
journal of applied physics, vol. 34, no. 4R, p. 1906, 1995.
[93] S. Chaluvadi, F. Ajejas, P. Orgiani, O. Rousseau, G. Vinai, A. Petrov, P. Torelli,
A. Pautrat, J. Camarero, P. Perna, and L. Mechin, “Room temperature biaxial
magnetic anisotropy in la 0.67 sr 0.33 mno 3 thin films on srtio 3 buffered mgo
(001) substrates for spintronic applications,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 113,
p. 052403, 07 2018.
[94] Q. Wang, H. Fang, D. Wang, J. Wang, N. Zhang, B. He, and W. Lü, “Towards a
large-area freestanding single-crystal ferroelectric batio3 membrane,” Crystals,
vol. 10, no. 9, p. 733, 2020.
[95] B. Zhang, C. Yun, and J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, “High yield transfer of clean
large-area epitaxial oxide thin films,” Nano-Micro Letters, vol. 13, pp. 1–14,
2021.
[96] “https://www.emsdiasum.com/perfect-loop,”
[97] E. Mishuk, A. Ushakov, E. Makagon, S. R. Cohen, E. Wachtel, T. Paul, Y. Tsur,
V. Y. Shur, A. Kholkin, and I. Lubomirsky, “Electro-chemomechanical contribu-
tion to mechanical actuation in gd-doped ceria membranes,” Advanced Materials
Interfaces, vol. 6, no. 6, p. 1801592, 2019.
Page 81 of 74
==PAGE:87==
References
[98] B. Dodrill and J. R. Lindemuth, “Vibrating sample magnetometry,” Magnetic
measurement techniques for materials characterization, pp. 15–37, 2021.
[99] V. Shukla, Introduction of Vibrating Sample Magnetometer for Magnetic Char-
acterization, pp. 1–24. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020.
[100] I. Malik, H. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Wang, C. Xiao, Y. Sun, R. Ullah, Y. Zhang,
J. Wang, M. Malik, I. Ahmed, C.-M. Xiong, S. Finizio, M. KlĂ¤ui, P. Gao,
J. Wang, and J. Zhang, “Inhomogeneous-strain-induced magnetic vortex cluster
in one-dimensional manganite wire,” Science Bulletin, vol. 65, p. 201, 11 2019.
[101] Y. Feng, K.-J. Jin, L. Gu, X. He, C. Ge, Q.-h. Zhang, M. He, Q.-l. Guo, Q. Wan,
M. he, H.-b. Lu, and G. Yang, “Insulating phase at low temperature in ultrathin
la0.8sr0.2mno3 films,” Scientific Reports, vol. 6, p. 22382, 03 2016.
Page 82 of 74
