==PAGE:1==
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewa­
ter Pump Station Control: A Neural Network
Verification Framework for Smart Controller
Implementation
Enhancing Neural Network Robustness
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural
Network Verification Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
Enhancing Neural Network Robustness
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Ask Stene Ramberg
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Ask Stene Ramberg ­ s222619
Signature
Date
ii
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
August 22, 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis examines the creation and application of a neural network verification frame­
work with the goal of improving the robustness and general performence of such net­
works in controlling wastewater pump station controllers. Doing so is crucial for minimizing
the energy consumption related to water delivery. Although conventional teqhniques like
Model Predictive Control (MPC) gives an efficient way of solving the problem they need
a lot of computational resources, and can be difficult to implement in real­time systems.
This thesis showcases the implementation of a surrogate model to mimic the behavior of
Model Predictive Control (MPC) through the use of a Digital Twin framework.
The primary objective is to make the neural network models mimicing the behavior robust
and recilient against perturbations in the input set, and making them generalize well on
unseen data. The thesis focuses on two main approaches to do so: implementing the
Certified Robustness by Optimized Neural Networks (CROWN) algorithm, and constrain­
ing the outputs of neural networks through the use of Lipschitz continuity constraints. The
CROWN method computes bounds for the output of the network, with a mean of penaliz­
ing larger bounds through a regularization term in the loss function.
The results suggests implementing these strategies into the training improves the robust­
ness and recilience of the neural networks, while also maintaining a high level of accu­
racy on nominal inputs. The results have practical consequences for the use of intelligent
controllers in essential infrastructure, providing a route towards more robust and energy­
efficient systems for managing wastewater.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ask Stene Ramberg, MSc Electrical Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Ramadhani Kurniawan Subroto, Postdoc, Department of Wind and Energy Systems,
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800, Denmark
Alessandro Quattrociocchi, PhD, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, Technical
University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800, Denmark
Tomislav Dragicevic, Professor, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, Technical
University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800, Denmark
iv
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Neural Network Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Introduction to Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
CROWN Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Lipschitz Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4
Integration into Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Implementation
21
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
System Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Dataset Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5
Training Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.6
MPC­Based Expert Policy for Neural Network Training . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Results
29
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
The importance of choosing the right lambda value for LRR . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Hyperparameter Tuning for Lipschitz λ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Training Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5
Behavior under standard operating conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.6
Handling of noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.7
Limit Testing the Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.8
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6
Discussion
45
6.1
Interpretation of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
Comparison with Existing Literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.3
Impact of Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.4
Limitations of the Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
7
Conclusion
47
7.1
Summary of Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7.2
Interpretation of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7.3
Final thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Bibliography
49
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This thesis endeavors to pioneer a streamlined approach to designing a smart controller
for wastewater pump stations. The primary focus is on enhancing efficiency and mitigating
the risk of overflow during abrupt changes in inflow rates. Given that approximately 80% of
water distribution and treatment electricity costs are attributed to pumping, optimizing the
control system becomes pivotal. In 2016, the International Energy Agency (IEA) estimated
that the total energy consumption of electrical motors (e.g., pumps, fans, compressors,
transport, and industrial facilities) accounts for 53% of the global consumption [1]. This
necessity is even more prominent given that 4% of the global electricity consumption
comes from water systems, with 70% used for pumping [2]. Energy consumption by
wastewater stations is, therefore, very substantial. In such stations, motors drive pumps
to convey wastewater into treatment facilities. However, they are often designed without
considering internal operating conditions such as wear and tear, energy efficiency, and
incoming flow, or external factors like grid conditions, electricity prices, or CO2 emissions.
Given these challenges, the capacity of Digital Twins (DTs) to replicate high­fidelity virtual
reproductions of physical systems or processes has led to their emergence in various ap­
plications [3]. A Digital Twin is a dynamic digital model that enables real­time control and
monitoring of a physical system. DTs can identify system faults in advance and increase
operational efficiency by utilizing big data and predictive analytics. The first conceptual­
ization of DTs was provided by Grieves in 2003 [4]. These layers include the physical
assets, their virtual representation, and the bi­directional data flow between them. This
capability makes more precise forecasts and energy­efficient operations possible.
Traditionally, most pump stations have employed a conventional control strategy based
on a simple level controller, where the speed reference of the pump is directly proportional
to the water level. While straightforward, this strategy is limited in its ability to optimize
the overall operation of pump stations. It cannot regulate operations to the most efficient
operating points and makes decisions based only on the current conditions, without con­
sidering future scenarios. This instantaneous decision­making can lead to suboptimal
performance, particularly in dynamic and complex environments.
To address these limitations, more advanced control techniques like Model Predictive
Control (MPC) have been explored. While effective, MPCs are often computationally ex­
pensive and may not be suitable for real­time applications such as the control of wastewa­
ter pumps. These disadvantages can be addressed by developing a surrogate model that
mimics MPCs behavior but allows for instant computation. By employing a neural network
as this surrogate model within a Digital Twin framework, control strategies can be opti­
mized, energy consumption reduced, and overflow risk mitigated. Neural networks are
particularly valuable for this purpose due to their ability to accurately represent intricate,
non­linear relationships within data.
However, as showcased by [5], conventional neural networks often exhibit a gap between
their performance on training data and unseen data, known as the generalization gap.
This indicates that even though the neural network model performs extremely well on
training data, it might fail to uphold this performance when introduced to new, unseen
data. Neural networks are also highly susceptible to adversarial attacks, where small
changes in the input data can lead to unwanted behavior and incorrect predictions [6], [7].
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
1
==PAGE:10==
Robust training methods are a means to cope with these vulnerabilities by generalizing
and maintaining good performance even on unseen or obscure data. In this thesis, I aim
to provide insights into training techniques for neural network robustness. I will explore
the history of different training strategies and examine new methods for enhancing the
robustness of neural networks. By doing so, I aim to contribute to this growing field of
research and ensure that the models for controlling these wastewater pump stations are
secure for deployment and demonstrate robustness against varying operating conditions.
1.0.1
Thesis Structure
The remainder of this thesis is organized as follows:
• Chapter 2: Literature Review
• Chapter 3: Methodology
• Chapter 4: Implementation
• Chapter 5: Results
• Chapter 6: Discussion
• Chapter 7: Conclusion
2
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Neural Network Robustness
The early days of neural network research focused primarily on the accuracy and effi­
ciency of these models. However, as described in Chapter One, it became evident that de­
spite their excellent performance, neural networks were vulnerable to adversarial attacks
and unseen data. In 2013, Christian Szegedy and colleagues discovered that neural net­
works could be fooled by small, often unnoticeable changes in pixel values in input images
[8]. Building on this, adversarial examples were introduced by Goodfellow et al. (2014)
[6]. They proposed the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) as a way to generate these
adversarial attacks, laying the groundwork for adversarial training, which involves training
neural networks directly on adversarially perturbed inputs. Various strategies to enhance
the robustness of neural networks were explored, and in 2017, Aleksander Madry and
his team developed the Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) method [9]. This method of­
fered a more effective approach than previous ones. In their work, they demonstrated
that robust training techniques could significantly improve neural network behavior when
subjected to adversarial attacks.
As these training methods developed, the concept of certifying the robustness of neural
networks against adversarial attacks emerged. Huan Zhang et al. (2018) [10] developed
the CROWN (Certified Robustness by Optimized Neural Network) algorithm, a method
for calculating the upper and lower bounds of the output of neural networks based on
input perturbations. Around the same time, training neural networks based on Lipschitz
continuity was introduced, enforcing Lipschitz constraints as a means to control the out­
put of neural networks. Notably, studies by Tsuzuku et al. (2018) [11] and Scaman &
Virmaux (2018) [12] were instrumental in using spectral norms as a way to constrain neu­
ral networks, showing that maintaining a low Lipschitz constant could vastly improve the
robustness and stability of neural networks.
These achievements demonstrate the existence of several solutions to address the prob­
lem of resilience in neural networks. Subsequently, we shall explore the aforementioned
techniques in greater detail, analyzing each approach thoroughly, scrutinizing the pro­
cess, and identifying any potential shortcomings. The chapter concludes by addressing
the thesis’s positioning and how it connects with and attempts to fill the gaps that have
been highlighted.
2.1.1
Adversarial training
Adversarial training involves training neural networks on adversarial examples to improve
their robustness. Goodfellow et al. (2014) introduced the concept of adversarial exam­
ples and proposed a method to train networks using these perturbed inputs to enhance
their robustness [6]. Similarly, Madry et al. (2017) developed a robust optimization­based
approach to adversarial training, demonstrating its effectiveness in defending against sig­
nificant adversarial attacks [9].
Gap analysis: While training networks based on adversarial examples has shown promise,
it also tends to vastly increase the training time of the networks. This is because gen­
erating and incorporating adversarial examples into the training set is computationally
intensive. Additionally, it often does not generalize well to unseen data. This lack of
generalization means that although the network may perform well on the adversarial ex­
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
3
==PAGE:12==
amples included in the training set, it can be vulnerable to novel attacks or scenarios not
covered during training.
Furthermore, training a model based on adversarial examples can sometimes degrade
the network’s performance on standard, nominal cases. In this way, you might have a
more robust network, but it may be less accurate against non­adversarial, clean inputs.
This trade­off between robustness and accuracy limits the practical implementation of this
training method.
2.1.2
Certified robustness
Certified robustness aims to provide formal guarantees regarding the robustness of neu­
ral networks under specific input perturbations. A significant contributor to certifying and
demonstrating the robustness of various models is Zhang et al. (2018), who introduced
the CROWN (Certified Robustness by Optimised Neural Network) algorithm. This algo­
rithm calculates bounds for networks based on input perturbations of varying magnitudes
[13].
Gap analysis: Although CROWN provides formal guarantees about the robustness of
neural networks, it is computationally intensive. Moreover, it serves only as a verification
method for a model’s robustness, with no existing method to train neural networks for
robustness using this approach.
2.1.3
Lipschitz continuity
Lipschitz continuity is based on the Lipschitz property and the Lipschitz constant, which
constrains the output of neural network layers. By limiting the Lipschitz constant for these
layers, the method restricts the extent to which the network’s output can change in re­
sponse to input variations. Formally, a function f is said to be Lipschitz continuous if
there exists a constant L (Lipschitz constant) such that for all x, y ∈Rn,
∥f(x) −f(y)∥≤L∥x −y∥
This relationship ensures that small changes in the input x result in proportionally small
changes in the output f(x), which is crucial for enhancing the robustness of neural net­
works.
State­of­the­Art Approaches
Lipschitz continuity is applied to constrain the output of
different layers in a neural network, thereby limiting how much the output can change in
response to changes in the input. Tsuzuku et al. (2018) suggested using spectral norms
to enforce the Lipschitz constant on neural networks, demonstrating its effectiveness in
improving robustness [11]. Scaman and Virmaux (2018) introduced AutoLip for upper
bounding the Lipschitz constant using automatic differentiation, and SeqLip for sequen­
tial neural networks [12]. Anil et al. (2019) discussed the application of Lipschitz continuity
in recurrent neural networks, highlighting its benefits for robustness [14]. Arjovsky et al.
(2017) applied Lipschitz continuity to stabilize GAN training by constraining the Lipschitz
constant of the critic [15]. Weng et al. (2018) employed extreme value theory to evalu­
ate the robustness of neural networks, emphasizing the role of Lipschitz constants [16].
Shen et al. (2021) discussed the importance of Lipschitz constants in maintaining robust
attention distributions in self­attention mechanisms [17].
Additionally, Gouk et al. (2018) explored the use of Lipschitz continuity to improve the
generalization bounds of neural networks. By maintaining a low Lipschitz constant, they
demonstrated that neural networks could achieve better generalization performance, which
is essential for real­world scenarios where data can be noisy and unpredictable [18].
4
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:13==
These studies underscore the significance of Lipschitz continuity in enhancing the robust­
ness and stability of neural networks across various applications.
Gap analysis: Although the spectral norm is effective, it is crucial to explore precisely
how this can be implemented and showcase the methods for doing so. Additionally, there
is a need to examine the trade­off between accuracy and robustness when applying this
method.
2.2
Introduction to Neural Networks
Neural networks have become a fundamental component of machine learning and artificial
intelligence. This section provides an overview of the basic concepts and architectures of
neural networks.
2.2.1
Basic Architecture
A neural network consists of neurons, layers, and activation functions. Neurons are the
fundamental units of computation, organized in layers. Each layer contains a set of neu­
rons, and each neuron has an activation function. The neurons in different layers are
connected by weights and biases. The basic structure of a neural network is illustrated in
Figure 2.1.
Input Layer
Hidden Layer
Output Layer
Figure 2.1: Neural network illustration with one input layer, one hidden layer, and one
output layer. There are 3 input neurons, 4 neurons in the hidden layer, and 2 neurons in
the output layer. The arrows indicate the weights
Neural networks consist of three primary types of layers: the input layer, the hidden layers,
and the output layer. These layers can be thought of as parts of a function. The input layer
receives the raw data fed into the network, where each neuron corresponds to a feature
of this input data. These neurons are connected to neurons in the hidden layers, which
may consist of multiple layers or just one. The hidden layers perform computations on
the data received from the input layer. Following the hidden layers is the output layer,
which represents the ”result” of the neural network — this is what users will use for further
analysis if needed.
The layers are connected by weights and biases. The weights for a layer are stored in a
matrix that multiplies the neurons from the previous layer, combining them with the weights
from this matrix before feeding the results into the neurons of the next layer. The bias for a
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
5
==PAGE:14==
layer is a vector that represents values added to the result, with one value corresponding
to each neuron in the resulting layer. The result is then fed into an activation function.
Several activation functions exist, but their primary role is to enable the neural network
to learn non­linear relationships. The output of a hidden layer, denoted as z1 can be
expressed as:
z1 = σ(W1x + b1),
where σ is the activation function, W1 is the weighting matrix, x is the input from the
previous layer, and b1 is the bias vector.
For example, a neural network can be fed an image, where each neuron in the input layer
represents a pixel value. Depending on what the network has been trained for, this input
will propagate through the network, resulting in some output values. If the network is
trained to distinguish between cats and dogs, the output layer might have two neurons,
each representing the probability of the image being a cat or a dog. This scenario is
known as a classification problem
However, in this thesis, we are dealing with a regression problem. Instead of images
and pixel values as input, we use two distinct values — representing the water level in
a tank and the inflow of water into the tank — that are fed to the input neurons. The
output neurons, instead of representing probabilities like in the classification example, will
produce two values corresponding to the speeds of two pumps, which control the outflow
of water from the tank. This setup allows the neural network to learn which pump speeds
to output based on different input combinations.
2.2.2
Types of Neural Networks
What has been described so far is the simplest model of neural networks, known as fully
connected neural networks. However, there are many other types of neural networks,
including feedforward neural networks, convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and recur­
rent neural networks (RNNs), among others. In this thesis, we will focus on fully connected
neural networks, as the aim is not to investigate and improve the network structure itself
but rather the training process.
2.3
Backpropagation
Backpropagation is a key algorithm used to train neural networks. It facilitates the adjust­
ment of weights through gradient descent to improve the model’s accuracy. In the earlier
section on neural networks, we explained how inputs pass through different layers of the
network, eventually reaching the output layer. This entire process, from the input to the
output layer, is called a forward pass.
After obtaining the output from the neural network, it is compared with the ground truth
value. The goal is for the neural network’s output to be as close to the actual value as
possible. Since this thesis deals with a regression problem, we will use it as our example.
To ensure the output matches or closely approximates the ground truth, we need a mea­
sure of how well the model predicts the output values based on the inputs. This is where
loss functions come into play. Loss functions calculate the error between the predicted
output and the true output. There are many different loss functions, and we will later
explore how some of them are incorporated into our training process.
Once the loss has been computed, a backward pass typically follows. This is where
the weights are updated to minimize the loss. During the backward pass, the algorithm
6
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:15==
computes the gradient of the loss function by applying the chain rule. These gradients
are then used to update the weights in the direction that minimizes the loss function.
This is usually done using an optimization algorithm like gradient descent. This algorithm
updates the weights by ”stepping” in the opposite direction of the gradient of the loss
function during each iteration of training. The size of this step is determined by what is
known as the learning rate.
2.3.1
Positioning of this thesis
Despite significant advancements in the field, there remains a need for comparative stud­
ies evaluating different robustness methods. This thesis addresses this gap by comparing
CROWN­based bounds and Lipschitz continuity. Moreover, it will employ the widely re­
spected CROWN algorithm not just to verify pre­trained networks but also to train new
networks. By implementing these methods in a controlled setting, this research aims to
provide insights into their effectiveness and the trade­offs associated with each method.
This deeper understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of these approaches will
guide future work and practical applications in developing robust neural networks.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:17==
3
Methodology
3.1
Introduction
As outlined in Chapter 1 when we explained that there is a need for a robustness guar­
antee for neural networks, and in Chapter 2 we mentioned two possible training methods
(CROWN and Lipschitz continuity regularization). In Chapter 3 we are going to go through
the methodology and how one could implement said strategies for training neural networks
based on robustness and stability.
Two primary methods are explored: CROWN­based bounds and Lipschitz continuity.
The CROWN­based implements the algorithm described in section 2.1.2 to compute the
bounds of the network during training and uses these bounds in a custom loss function to
penalize larger bounds. The Lipschitz continuity training method uses weight projection
to project weights, violating the Lipschitz continuity constant, into the feasible set.
3.2
CROWN Algorithm
The CROWN (Certified Robustness by Optimized Neural Network) algorithm is used to
compute robustness bounds for neural networks. This algorithm linearizes the network
and optimizes these linear bounds to provide robustness guarantees. Based on this lin­
earization it computes the upper and lower bound, based on a perturbation, for the output
of the neural network.
Figure 3.1: The figure shows an illustration on worst case computed upper and lower
bound of a given f(x) where in this case the f(x) is the output of a neural network over a
perturbation set which is defined as a region of x.
1 The CROWN algorithm involves the following steps:
1. Linearize the neural network by relaxing non­linear activation functions.
2. Formulate the linear bounds as an optimization problem.
3. Solve the optimization problem to find the upper and lower bounds of the network’s
output.
4. Integrate these bounds into the training process to enhance robustness.
1Figure from Auto­LIRPA documentation: https://auto-lirpa.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
9
==PAGE:18==
3.2.1
Algorithm Description
This work builds upon the CROWN (alpha­CROWN, beta­CROWN) algorithm, originally
developed for classification tasks, but I have adapted it for use in a regression context. The
explanation provided here will describe the key concepts and equations, closely following
the approach of Zhang et al (2023) [13]. First, let us consider the perturbation set. The
following definition is paraphrased from the report by Zhang et al. (2023) [13]:
Definition 1 Let x0 ∈S be a given data point, and let the perturbed input vector x be
within an ϵ­bounded ℓp­ball centered at x0, i.e., x ∈S(x0, ϵ), where
S(x0, ϵ) := {x | ∥x −x0∥p ≤ϵ}
For a norm of type 2 this can be pictured below
Figure 3.2: The perturbation set S, data point x0, and the perturbation ϵ
Now, consider a simple three­layer fully connected neural network.
A simple three­layer neural network with ReLU as the activation function. h(i):
pre­activation of layer i and g(i): post­activation of layer i.
The objective is to demonstrate that for any perturbation, as described above, the output
of the neural network is bounded by both a lower and an upper limit.
yu > f(x) > yl, ∀x ∈S
(3.1)
(In this thesis, we focus on a regression problem. Therefore, we aim to establish that the
output remains within specified bounds for all inputs in the perturbation set. However, if
we were addressing a classification problem, the goal would shift to proving that f(x) > 0
for all x within the perturbation set.)
10
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:19==
To compute the upper and lower bounds of the neural network’s output under perturba­
tions, we define the following formulas:
f∗
L = min
x∈S f(x)
(3.2)
f∗
U = max
x∈S f(x)
(3.3)
where f∗
L represents the lower bound and f∗
U represents the upper bound of the neural
network’s output over the perturbation set S. First, let’s define the
f∗
L < f(x) < f∗
U
(3.4)
Using the simple three­layer neural network illustrated earlier as an example, we can see
that
h(3)
L <= f(x) <= h(3)
U
Where h(3)
L
and h(3)
U
represent the lower and upper limits of the last post­activation layer
respectively. Propagating further backward through the network
g(2)
L · W (3) <= f(x) <= g(2)
U · W (3)
In this equation g is the pre­activation function, g(2)
L the lower limit, and g(2)
U the upper limit
of the pre­activation function. For now, the entire equation is linear. It is however when we
reach the activation functions (in this case a ReLu) the problem becomes non linear. Since
solving optimization problems with non linear functions can be computationally expensive,
the CROWN algorithm simplifies (relaxes) the ReLU function into linear bounds.
Relaxation of activation functions for Bounding
CROWN’s approach is based on bounding activation functions using linear and quadratic
functions. This bounding enables the algorithm to generalize to various activation func­
tions and improve the robustness certification.
1. Bounding Activation Functions
• For a given activation function σ(y) over an interval [l, u], CROWN defines two
linear functions, hL(y) and hU(y), such that hL(y) ≤σ(y) ≤hU(y).
• This bounding is adaptive, meaning it selects appropriate bounds for each neu­
ron based on the local properties of the activation function.
2. Certified Lower Bound Calculation
• The algorithm iteratively propagates the bounds from the input layer to the out­
put layer of the neural network.
• For each layer, the pre­activation bounds are calculated, and then the post­
activation bounds are updated using the linear or quadratic bounds of the ac­
tivation function.
• The final output bounds are used to determine the robustness of the network.
3. Output Bound Calculation
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
11
==PAGE:20==
• For an m­layer neural network, the output of the k­th layer is given by
Φk(x) = σ(W (k)Φk−1(x) + b(k)).
Here, Φk(x) represents the output of the k­th layer for input x, σ is the activation
function, W (k) is the weight matrix for the k­th layer, Φk−1(x) is the output from
the previous layer (k −1), and b(k) is the bias vector for the k­th layer.
• The pre­activation bounds for the neural neurons in the k−th layer are l(k) and
u(k)
• The post­activation bounds are calculated using the defined linear functions hL
and hU
Relaxation of the ReLU activation function
To facilitate the computation of bounds, the ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) activation func­
tion is relaxed into a linear form. The ReLU function is defined as:
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
This piecewise linear function has two distinct regions: one where the output is zero and
x
ReLU(x)
y = x
y = 0
Figure 3.3: The ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) activation function.
one where the output is equal to the input. For bounding purposes, the CROWN algorithm
linearizes the ReLU function using the following linear bounds:
1. Lower Bound:
g(i)
L = α(i)
L h(i) + β(i)
L
2. Upper Bound:
g(i)
U = α(i)
U h(i) + β(i)
U
where h(i) is the pre­activation value in layer i, and α and β are coefficients calculated
based on the interval bounds of h(i).
Coefficient calculation The coefficients α and β are determined by the bounds of h(i),
denoted as h(i)
L and h(i)
U :
• For h(i) ≤0:
α(i)
L = 0,
β(i)
L = 0
α(i)
U = 0,
β(i)
U = 0
12
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:21==
• For h(i) > 0:
α(i)
L = 1,
β(i)
L = 0
α(i)
U = 1,
β(i)
U = 0
• For the interval h(i)
L ≤h(i) ≤h(i)
U :
α(i)
L =
h(i)
U
h(i)
U −h(i)
L
,
β(i)
L = −h(i)
L h(i)
U
h(i)
U −h(i)
L
α(i)
U = 1,
β(i)
U = 0
Linear approximations enable the formulation of the optimization problem as a linear pro­
gram, which can be efficiently solved to provide certified bounds on the network’s output
for given input perturbations.
Alpha­CROWN and Alpha­Beta­CROWN are expansions of the CROWN method. The
version used in this thesis, known as Alpha­CROWN, is a simplified variant that ad­
heres closely to the fundamental principles of the CROWN method while implementing
additional measures to enhance robustness. The more advanced version, Alpha­Beta­
CROWN, includes further improvements aimed at increasing the precision and tightness
of the computed bounds. By incorporating more sophisticated bounding and optimization
techniques, these enhanced versions build upon the basic CROWN methodology and are
suitable for a wider range of neural network architectures and applications.
This thesis focuses on Alpha­CROWN because it strikes a balance between robustness
and computational efficiency. Although Alpha­Beta­CROWN offers significant improve­
ments, providing stronger robustness guarantees and tighter bounds, its higher compu­
tational complexity makes it less practical for the scope of this master’s thesis.
CROWN Algorithm Example for ReLU Activation
Example Calculation for a Single Layer
Consider a single­layer neural network with ReLU activation and weights W (1), biases
b(1), and input x.
• Let W (1)
r
= [0.5, −0.3]
• Let x = [1.0, 2.0]
• Let b(1)
r
= 0.1
The pre­activation value for neuron r in the first layer is:
y(1)
r
= W (1)
r
· x + b(1)
r
= 0.5 · 1.0 + (−0.3) · 2.0 + 0.1 = 0.5 −0.6 + 0.1 = 0.0
Assuming perturbation ϵ = 0.2, the input x can vary within [0.8, 1.2] for the first component
and [1.8, 2.2] for the second component.
Calculate the range for y(1)
r :
Minimum: y(1)
r,min = 0.5 · 0.8 + (−0.3) · 2.2 + 0.1 = 0.4 −0.66 + 0.1 = −0.16
Maximum: y(1)
r,max = 0.5 · 1.2 + (−0.3) · 1.8 + 0.1 = 0.6 −0.54 + 0.1 = 0.16
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
13
==PAGE:22==
Thus, the pre­activation bounds are l(1)
r
= −0.16 and u(1)
r
= 0.16.
Since l(1)
r
< 0 < u(1)
r , it’s in the mixed region. The linear bounds are:
Upper bound: hU(y) =
0.16
0.16 −(−0.16)(y + 0.16) = 0.5(y + 0.16)
Lower bound: hL(y) = 0.5y
For any y in the range [−0.16, 0.16]:
hU(y) = 0.5(y + 0.16)
and
hL(y) = 0.5y
The following figure shows the upper and lower bounds calculated for the ReLU activation
function based on the equations above:
Figure 3.4: Upper and Lower Bounds for ReLU Activation Function as given by the equa­
tions hU(y) = 0.5(y + 0.16) and hL(y) = 0.5y.
Using the linear bounds:
Upper bound of the neuron output: fU(x) = 0.5(W (1)
r
· x + 0.16 + b(1)
r )
Lower bound of the neuron output: fL(x) = 0.5(W (1)
r
· x + b(1)
r )
In this example, substituting the given values:
Upper bound of the neuron output: fU(x) = 0.5((0.5 · 1.0 + (−0.3) · 2.0) + 0.16 + 0.1) = 0.08
Lower bound of the neuron output: fL(x) = 0.5((0.5 · 1.0 + (−0.3) · 2.0) + 0.1) = 0.0
14
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:23==
Multi­Layer Network Example
Consider a two­layer network with ReLU activations:
• First layer: W (1) =
! 0.2
0.8
−0.5
0.3
"
, b(1) =
! 0.1
−0.2
"
• Second layer: W (2) =
#
0.7
−0.4
$
, b(2) = 0.2
• Input x =
!1.0
0.5
"
First Layer Pre­Activation:
y(1)
1
= 0.2 · 1.0 + 0.8 · 0.5 + 0.1 = 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 = 0.7
y(1)
2
= −0.5 · 1.0 + 0.3 · 0.5 −0.2 = −0.5 + 0.15 −0.2 = −0.55
First Layer Bounds:
l(1)
1
= min(0.7 −0.2, 0.7 + 0.2) = 0.5,
u(1)
1
= max(0.7 −0.2, 0.7 + 0.2) = 0.9
l(1)
2
= min(−0.55 −0.2, −0.55 + 0.2) = −0.75,
u(1)
2
= max(−0.55 −0.2, −0.55 + 0.2) = −0.35
Second Layer Pre­Activation: Using the post­activation values from the first layer and
applying ReLU:
Φ(1)(x) =
!0.7
0
"
y(2) = 0.7 · 0.7 −0.4 · 0 + 0.2 = 0.49 + 0.2 = 0.69
Second Layer Bounds: Pre­activation bounds for the second layer using post­activation
bounds of the first layer.
3.3
Lipschitz Continuity
A function f is said to be Lipschitz continuous if there exists a constant L ≥0 such that
for all x, y ∈Rn,
∥f(x) −f(y)∥≤L∥x −y∥
(3.5)
The smallest L that satisfies the previous inequality is called the Lipschitz constant. This
shows us that for a small Lipschitz constant, the change in the output of the function will
be smaller than the change in the input to the function. Furthermore, if we could decide
the Lipschitz value for some function, we could in return be in control of the variance in
the output of this function. For neural networks this implies that we can in turn control the
output changes of the neural network based on small perturbations on the input set.
3.3.1
Lipschitz Continuity in neural networks
”Throughout this master thesis, we refer to standard neural networks as those composed
of affine layers (e.g., fully­connected or convolutional layers), with the majority of focus
placed on fully­connected layers. An affine transformation is a crucial concept in this
context. It refers to a linear transformation followed by a translation, mathematically rep­
resented as f(x))Wx + b, where W is a matrix representing the linear transformation, x
is the input vector, and b is a bias vector that translates the result.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
15
==PAGE:24==
For a fully connected neural network with L layers, the output f(x) can be expressed as
a composition of linear transformations and activation functions:
f(x) = φL
%
W(L) %
φL−1
%
W(L−1) · · · φ1
%
W(1)x + b(1)&
+ b(2)&
· · ·
&
+ b(L)&
where x is the input vector, W(l) and b(l) are the weight matrix and bias vector for layer l,
respectively, and φl is the activation function for layer l. More concisely, the same network
can be expressed as:
f(x) = φL ◦φL−1 ◦· · · ◦φ1(x)
where each φl represents the combination of the linear transformation (weights and bi­
ases) and the activation function for layer l. The circle (◦) represents the composition of
functions. In this context, it means that the output of one function is used as the input for
the next function.
If each layer φl is Lipschitz continuous with a Lipschitz constant L, then the whole neu­
ral network is Lipschitz continuous where the Lipschitz constant l is the product of the
Lipschitz constant for each layer,
L(f) ≤
n
'
i=1
L(φ)
(3.6)
To understand why this is the case we first concentrate on the Lipschitz constant for the
first layer. Let φl be Lipschitz continuous for l = 1, 2, ..., L. This means:
∥φl(a) −φl(b)∥≤Ll∥a −b∥, ∀a, b
For the first layer, this implies:
∥φ1(x) −φ1(y)∥≤L1∥x −y∥
Expanding to the next layer:
∥φ2(φ(x)) −φ2(φ1(y))∥≤L2∥φ1(x) −φ1(y)∥
Where what we have on the right side of L2 on the right­hand side of the inequality is the
Lipschitz constant for layer one:
∥φ2(φ(x)) −φ2(φ1(y))∥≤L2L1∥x −y∥
Repeating this for all layers l = 1, 2, ..., L, we get:
∥φL(φL−1(...φ1(x)...)) −φL(φL−1(...φ1(y)...))∥≤LLLL−1...L2L1∥x −y∥
Where we on the left­hand side of the inequality have the difference between two outputs
of the neural network, for two different input vectors x and y. Thus, equation 3.6 holds.
This means that if we can find the Lipschitz constant for each of the layers of the neural
network, we can easily find an upper limit for the Lipschitz constant for the entire network.
16
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:25==
3.3.2
Lipschitz constant for the linear transformation of a dense layer
A single layer in a fully connected neural network consists of two main components. One is
the linear transformation, and the other is the activation function. The linear transformation
is formulated as:
Wx + b
Where W is the weighting matrix, x is the input vector, and the bias vector b. Let Wx + b
be Lipschitz continuous with Lipschitz constant L. This implies:
∥(Wx + b) −(Wy −b)∥≤L∥x −y∥
Where the bias terms cancel each other out,
∥W(x −y)∥≤L∥x −y∥
x and y is a vector of constant, so we can replace the ”x­y”­term with a new constant a
for simplicity’s sake. This leaves us with
∥Wa∥≤L∥a∥
Assuming x ̸= y, this can be rearranged in the following way
∥Wa∥
∥a∥
≤L
which means that the smallest possible Lipschitz constant is the supremum of the left­
hand side of the inequality
L(φfc) = sup
a̸=0
∥Wa∥
∥a∥
This is known as the definition of the operator norm of W. For all of the p­norms discussed
in [18], there exist algorithms for computing them efficiently. For p = 1, the operator norm
is simply the maximum absolute column sum norm. Likewise, the operator norm for p = ∞
is relatively simple. This is found by taking the maximum absolute row sum norm. For
p = 2, the operator norm is the largest singular value in the weighting matrix, also called
the spectral norm. This can be approximated relatively easily using the power method
[18].
3.3.3
Lipschitz constant for the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU
The Lipschitz constant of commonly used activation functions, such as ReLU, can be eas­
ily computed. In this thesis, the ReLU activation function is used, which has a maximum
Lipschitz constant of 1. This is because, when the input is greater than zero, the out­
put changes exactly in proportion to the input. Consequently, the gradient of the ReLU
function is 1 for positive inputs and 0 for non­positive inputs, ensuring that the maximum
Lipschitz constant remains 1. This property simplifies the analysis and ensures stability
in the network’s behavior when ReLU is employed.
3.3.4
The projection function
One crucial thing about choosing the right value for lambda is the trade­off between ac­
curacy and robustness. Moreover, a high lambda value will give a less robust model than
one trained with a lower lambda value. In the same way, a model trained with a high
lambda value will generally experience better training accuracy than once trained with
lower lambda values. This trade­off is previously documented and discussed in research
papers such as those by Gouk et al. (2018) [18], Madry et al. (2017) [9], and Zhang et al.
(2023) [13]. To understand, and get further insight into why this trade­off happens, let’s
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
17
==PAGE:26==
investigate the projection function. This projection function is applied during the training
process, after each weight update. Iterating through every layer in the neural network,
the projection function takes the weights not contained in the feasible space and projects
them into the feasible space. Where the feasible space is limited by the chosen Lipschitz
constant.
π(W, λ) =
1
max
%
1, ∥W∥p
λ
&W.
(3.7)
One intuitive way of thinking about this function is considering the term before W as a
scaling factor. Lower values of λ will make this term smaller, projecting the weights of the
layer into the closest matrix within the feasible space. If the weights are already in the
feasible space, the projection function will leave them untouched.
To give further insight, let’s consider the 2 × 2 matrix
A =
(1.2
−0.7
3.4
2.1
)
.
Example 1: λ = 1 and p­norm = 2
The 2­norm of A, denoted as ∥A∥2, is calculated as follows:
∥A∥2 =
*
(1.2)2 + (−0.7)2 + (3.4)2 + (2.1)2
∥A∥2 ≈4.23
Giving us the projection function
π(A, 1) =
1
max
+
1, 4.23
1
,A
π(A, 1) =
1
4.23A
π(A, 1) =
1
4.23
(1.2
−0.7
3.4
2.1
)
π(A, 1) ≈
(0.2835
−0.1655
0.8033
0.4964
)
Example 2: λ = 5 and p­norm = 2
For this example, let’s use a different lambda value, λ = 5.
The 2­norm of A is still:
∥A∥2 ≈4.23
Now, applying the projection function with λ = 5:
π(A, 5) =
1
max
+
1, 4.23
5
,A
π(A, 5) =
1
max (1, 0.846)A
18
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:27==
Since 1 > 0.846, the maximum value is 1. Therefore:
π(A, 5) = 1
1A
π(A, 5) = A
This means that when λ = 5, the matrix A is already within the feasible space, and the
projection function leaves it unchanged.
By comparing these two examples, it is evident how the value of λ affects the scaling
of the matrix. With a lower λ, the projection scales down the weights more significantly,
whereas a higher λ leaves the weights closer to their original values if they are already
within the feasible space.
Projecting the weights of matrix A into the feasible set is determined by the value of λ
and the p­norm. The projection function normalizes the weights so that the magnitude is
controlled, but their directional properties and the associated geometrical properties are
preserved. This means although the weights of the different layers are constrained, the
way the weights manipulate the input space is untouched.
3.4
Integration into Training
In this section we are going through how one can implement the methods went through in
this chapter as a part of the training of a neural network. Training neural networks using
the CROWN algorithm is done by computing the bounds for the neural network during
training and feeding it to a custom loss function to penalize larger bounds. In contrast,
the Lipschitz method uses weight projection as a means to project weights violating the
Lipschitz constant for this layer.
The CROWN­algorithm
As we have described in this chapter the crown algorithm computes the worst­case upper
and lower bound of a neural network given a small perturbation, ϵ, in the input set. The
value of ϵ is decided by the user, where a bigger value will generally generate a bigger
difference between the upper and lower bound generated from the algorithm.
The first step of the training procedure is to reinitialize the neural network model as a
”bounded model”. This is done by wrapping the model of the neural network with the
BoundedModule class from the auto_LiRPA library. Making it possible to use bound prop­
agation methods on the neural network. Wrapping the neural network you must pass in
the model of the network itself as well as a placeholder tensor of the same shape as your
input data, which is necessary for initializing the bound propagation process. You also
have to specify bound options. This option determines how the bounds are propagated
through the network. Information on specifying the bound options can be found on the
GitHub of theauto_LiRPA library [19].
In addition to this, you also define the perturbation with the PerturbationLpNorm class
found in the auto_LiRPA library. Here you define the type of p­norm you would like to use
for the perturbation as well as the magnitude of the perturbation.
Then, in the for­loop training of the neural network, you go through every datapoint in
the batch, computing the upper and lower bound for the defined perturbation using the
compute_bounds function for the bounded model. It is also an idea creating an own func­
tion for iterating through all of the data points in the batch, computing the bounds, and
adding them to a list, for simplifying the code. The list of upper and lower bounds com­
puted is then fed into a custom loss function.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
19
==PAGE:28==
Custom loss function
The computed bounds are integrated into a custom loss function, which penalizes large
bounds, thereby encouraging the network to be more robust. The loss function combines
standard training loss (e.g., MSE) with a penalty term for the bounds.
L = Lstandard + λLbounds
(3.8)
where Lstandard is the standard training loss, Lbounds is the penalty term for the CROWN
bounds, and λ is a hyperparameter.
Choosing the optimal lambda value
Choosing the optimal lambda value is something of high importance. As a higher value will
penalize the bounds more, and in theory would result in a more robust model. However,
this will be at the cost of the accuracy of the model, as the standard training loss will
be weighted less in comparison. For this project the lambda value chosen was based
on different simulations with synthetic data. These simulations had artificially generated
inflow and height data fed into the model, as well as using the CROWN algorithm to
construct the upper and lower bound for the data. This way we had an illustration of how
the model performed under different values of lambda.
Lipschitz continuity
As mentioned earlier the Lipschitz continuity method uses weight projection as a mean to
project the weights into the feasible space. Before projecting the weights a set of lambda
values is defined in a list. Each lambda value represents the Lipschitz constant for this
exact layer. It is also possible to simply have the same lambda value for each layer,
but as we will see later this may be a sub­optimal solution. In the training loop for the
model, we loop through the parameters in the model, checking if they are weights, and
proceeding with the projection of the weights if so. Thereafter, the weights are projected
by a constructed function, taking in the weights for the current layer, the p­norm used for
projection, and the desired lambda value for the layer. The function projects the weights
using the projection function mentioned earlier in Chapter 3. In contrast to the CROWN
method, this method simply uses standard loss functions (e.g. MSE or MAE loss).
Discussion
The two methods use vastly different methods to train neural networks for robustness.
While CROWN uses the bounds computed during training as a regularization term in the
loss function, the Lipschitz method uses weight projection. In this way, we have direct
control over how much the output of the Lipschitz method is allowed to vary based on
changes in the input space by selecting suitable lambda values. This can be chosen
based on the needs of a specific project. In contrast, we have little to no control over how
much the output of the CROWN model will change based on disturbances in the input.
We simply penalize larger deviations in the output, and by this hope that this gives some
form of robustness.
20
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:29==
4
Implementation
4.1
Introduction
In this section, we detail the implementation of different training methods for neural net­
works to enhance their robustness. We focus on three primary methods: a simple neural
network, the CROWN method, and Lipschitz continuity­based training. Each method is
implemented with specific objectives and evaluated based on accuracy, robustness, and
computational efficiency.
4.2
System Description
The wastewater pumping station under investigation is located in Bornholm, Denmark.
It features a tank with dimensions 8.0m in length, 2.5m in width, and a cross­sectional
area of approximately 20 m2. The operational height of the tank ranges between 1.20m
and 2.20m. The primary function of this station is to collect wastewater from surrounding
plants, farms, other pumping stations, and residential buildings, subsequently directing
the water for processing. Influential factors such as weather conditions and population
density cause variations in the inflow volume, demonstrating seasonal fluctuations.
The system architecture of the wastewater pumping station is depicted in Figure 4.1. It
consists of two levels: the Lower Level, incorporating the Programmable Logic Controller
(PLC), drives, and sensors, and the Upper Level, comprising the cloud architecture (IoT
Azure Cloud Architecture) and the IoT gateway. The height and outflow of the tank are
gathered from the PLC, whereas the drive monitoring data are retrieved directly from the
Danfoss VLT® AQUA Drive.
Grid
PLC
VFD
Switch
Pump
Flow
sensor
Level 
sensor
FlexGate
Frequency 
meter
Analog
Power
Modbus TCP
Profinet
Modbus RTU
Grid
PLC
VFD
Switch
Pump
Flow
sensor
Level 
sensor
FlexGate
Frequency 
meter
Analog
Power
Modbus TCP
Profinet
Modbus RTU
Figure 4.1: System architecture of the wastewater pumping station in Bornholm, Den­
mark. The system includes a PLC, drives, sensors, and an IoT gateway connected to a
cloud architecture for data processing and control.
4.2.1
Model Predictive Control (MPC) Framework
Model Predictive Control (MPC) is a model­based control strategy used to determine the
optimal control actions by predicting future states of the system and solving an optimiza­
tion problem at each time step. In the context of the wastewater pumping station, MPC
is employed to manage the inflow and outflow rates, thereby maintaining the tank height
within the desired operational range while minimizing energy consumption.
The MPC routine is based on real­time optimization over a prediction horizon, using a
mathematical model to predict the future states of the system and to find the optimal
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
21
==PAGE:30==
control strategies. The objective function for the MPC aims to minimize the energy per
volume for the pumps while penalizing deviations from the desired tank height.
min
ω1,ω2
N
-
k=1
(EPV1,k + EPV2,k + whfh(hk))
(4.1)
subject to











Ql,k = fQl(ωl,k)
l ∈{1, 2}
hk+1 = hk + Ts
A (Qin,k −2
l Ql,k)
0 ≤ωl,k ≤ωl,max
hmin ≤hk ≤hmax
(4.2)
where EPVl,k represents the energy per volume for pump l at time step k, fQl is the func­
tion mapping speed to outflow rate, and fh is the penalty function for tank level deviations
.
4.2.2
Neural Network Imitator
This thesis focuses on the training of a neural network used to control the wastewater
tank. The neural network imitator is trained to approximate the optimal control strategies
determined by the MPC. The training process involves using the height and inflow of the
tank as inputs to the neural network, while the outputs of the MPC serve as the ground
truth. The neural network imitator is integrated into the IoT gateway, enabling real­time
inference and control. This approach significantly reduces the computational burden while
maintaining high control performance. The process involves feeding synthetic datasets
to the MPC, which generates the optimal control actions under various conditions. These
ac­ tions serve as the ground truth for training the neural network. The trained neural
network imitator can then emulate the MPC’s functionality, providing a computationally
efficient solution for real­time control [20].
Inputs and Outputs of the Neural Network
The inputs to the neural network are:
• Height of the tank (h): This represents the current water level in the tank.
• Inflow rate (Qin): This represents the rate at which water enters the tank.
The output of the neural network is:
• Control actions (ω): These are the optimal pump speeds determined by the MPC,
used as the ground truth for training the neural network.
The real­world dataset is made up of measurements made between the period spanning
between December 2022 to April 2023. The height of the tank and the outflow were
measured directly. However, there was no measurement of the inflow value of the tank.
An estimate of the real­time inflow values was created by using a Kalman filter and the
differential equation
dh
dt = 1
A (Qin(t) −Qout(t))
(4.3)
Solving for the inflow, we get that:
ˆQin(k) = A
Ts
(h(k) −h(k −1)) + Qout(k)
(4.4)
22
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:31==
The estimation was then smoothed by using a moving average filter with a window size
equal to 7. In summary, the wastewater pumping station in Bornholm utilizes a sophisti­
cated control framework combining MPC and neural network imitation to optimize energy
efficiency and maintain operational stability. This integrated approach leverages real­time
data, advanced control algorithms, and artificial intelligence to enhance the performance
and efficiency of wastewater management systems.
4.3
Dataset Description
The datasets used in this study include a synthetic dataset for training the models and a
real­world dataset for evaluation.
4.3.1
Synthetic Dataset
To generate the training data for the neural network, a synthetic dataset is created. This
synthetic dataset encompasses all possible combinations of the input features (tank height
and inflow rate) and their corresponding optimal control actions as determined by the
MPC. This comprehensive dataset ensures that the neural network can learn the relation­
ship between the inputs and the control actions under a wide range of operating condi­
tions.
Table 4.1: Summary of Synthetic Dataset
Feature
Description
Range
Height (h)
Water level in the tank
[100, 250] cm
Inflow (Qin)
Rate of water entering the tank
[0, 1000] m3/h
Control actions (ω)
Optimal pump speeds
[0, 1500] RPM
The synthetic dataset was generated by varying the height and inflow within realistic
ranges and applying the MPC to determine the corresponding control actions.
4.3.2
Real­world Dataset
The dataset used for simulating real­world behavior is based on the measurements and
estimations made for the wastewater pump station in the period spanning between De­
cember 2022 to April 2023. This dataset contained the following measurements:
1. time: Timestamp of the recorded data in UTC. Represents the exact time the mea­
surements were recorded.
2. height: Height of the tank at the different timestamps measured in centimeters.
3. inflow: Estimation of the inflow rate of wastewater made by the Kalman filter and
differential equation 4.4, measured in cubic meters per hour (m3/s).
4. outflow: Outflow rate of wastewater coming out of the tank, measured in cubic
meters per hour (m3/s).
5. pump1_rpm: Rotational speed of Pump 1.
6. pump1_power: Power consumption of Pump 1.
7. pump1_energy_consumption: Energy consumption of Pump 1.
8. pump4_rpm: Rotational speed of Pump 4.
9. pump4_power: Power consumption of Pump 4.
10. pump4_energy_consumption: Energy consumption of Pump 4.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
23
==PAGE:32==
However, for simulating the real­world behavior of the neural networks, and the MPC only
the height and inflow were used. Furthermore, only the initial height measurement was
used in simulating their behavior. This can be confusing, as when constructing the mea­
surements, the inflow was estimated by using the outflow and height values. However,
the output of the MPC and the neural networks is related to the speed of the pumps, and
the outflow is directly correlated to these. The height is also dependent on the inflow and
the outflow of the tank and is therefore dependent on the speed of the pumps from the
different models (which will be different depending on the model used).
In the simulation pump1 was set to be inactive, and only pump4 was active. For the initial
measurements the height and inflow from the dataset was fed into the trained neural
networks. After getting the resulting output from the models, an inverse transformation
was applied (as the models were trained on scaled data points), resulting in the speed of
the pumps. The speed of pump4 was then used to determine the outflow by the following
equation:
fQ(rpm) =
3
0
if ω ≤ωp4 breakpoint,
aω + b
if ω ≥ωp4 breakpoint,
(4.5)
The outflow remains zero up until a breaking point, following a linear curve afterwards.
The inflow Qin, outflow Qout, the initial height hcurrent, as well as the time interval ∆t was
then used to compute the new height of the tank by the following equation:
hnew = hcurrent +
( Qin
3600 −Qout
3600
)
· ∆t
A
(4.6)
This equation is derived from the differential equation 4.3, and the constants used account
for the conversion from cubic meters per hour to cubic meters per second and ensure that
the resulting height change is accurate. This new height is then used as the hcurrent in
the next iteration to calculate the new height. This way, only the initial measurement of
the height is used.
4.4
Model Architecture
The neural networks used in this study consist of three fully connected layers with ReLU
activation functions. This is a very small and simple structure for a neural network. The
reasoning behind this is that we wanted to keep the focus on the differences between the
different training methods. This way we could easily differentiate between the changes
we make and have a greater opportunity to know how these changes affect the results.
The following sections provide a detailed description of the architecture of the specific
configurations used for each training method.
The common architecture
The common architecture for the neural network models is a fully connected neural net­
work implemented using PyTorch and PyTorch Lightning. The network consists of three
layers:
• Input Layer: Takes 2 input features. In this project the height and inflow of the tank.
• Hidden Layer 1: A fully connected layer with 50 neurons and ReLU activation func­
tion.
• Hidden Layer 2: A fully connected layer with 10 neurons and ReLU activation func­
tion.
24
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:33==
• Output Layer: A fully connected layer with 2 output neurons, which determines the
speed of the pumps.
Height
Inﬂow
Pump1
Pump2
Input Layer
Hidden Layer 1
Hidden Layer 2
Output Layer
Figure 4.2: Neural network architecture. The network consists of an input layer, two
hidden layers, and an output layer.
4.5
Training Procedure
The training procedures differ for each method, incorporating the specific methodologies
described in Chapter 3. Below, we detail the training process for each method.
Simple Neural Network
The training loop for the simple neural network is straightforward. It involves computing
the loss and updating the model parameters using the optimizer. Mean squared error
loss was used for the simple neural network and the model based on Lipschitz continuity.
The MSE loss is defined as:
MSE = 1
n
n
-
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2,
(4.7)
where n is the number of data points, yi is the true value, and ˆyi is the predicted value.
The CROWN method
The CROWN­based method incorporates methods from the auto_LiRPA library to com­
pute bounds during the training loop. It uses a custom loss function (eq 4.8) that combines
the MSE loss and the Bound loss to train for robustness and accuracy. The Bound loss
uses MSE as a means to penalize larger intervals between the upper and lower bound,
encouraging the model to be more robust.
Loss = MSEloss + λ · Boundloss
(4.8)
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
25
==PAGE:34==
where λ is a weighting factor and the Bound loss is computed as the MSE between the
upper and lower bounds for the outputs fed to the loss function. The bounds being fed
to the loss function are calculated during the training of the network with the use of the
CROWN algorithm. A flow chart of the training procedure is shown in the figure below
Start
No
Yes
Complete all
training epochs?
Save  model and
metrics
Define and initialise
model architecture
and custom loss
function
Load and scale data.
Split data into
training, validation
and test sets
Complete all
Batches of data?
For each datapoint in the
current batch, compute
the corresponding
bounds and store these
for subsequentual use
Calculate the batch loss using
the bounds computed and
model predictions in the
custom loss function
No
Yes
Calculate total loss
for epoch, and
compute validation
loss on the validation
set
Backpropagation:
Update model
weights
Figure 4.3: Flowchart depicting the training process of a neural network utilizing the
CROWN method for robustness. This detailed flowchart illustrates key steps including
data preprocessing, model initialization, computation of bounds for robustness, custom
loss calculation, and model weight updates. Although the model’s testing phase on the
test set is an integral part of the process, it is not depicted here to conserve space.
26
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:35==
Lipschitz Continuity
Training based on Lipschitz continuity ensures the model’s robustness by projecting the
weights to satisfy Lipschitz constraints. By contrast, the CROWN method uses a regular
MSE as a loss function. The training method differs from the regular training method by
projecting the weights after having backpropagated through the network and updated the
weights.
This is a key concept of the training procedure and is the part that makes sure the layers
satisfy the Lipschitz constraints. It can be compressed into two steps:
1. Iterating Through Parameters
• During each training iteration, after updating the weights, the model parameters
are checked.
• Iterating through the parameters of the model using a loop. The dimensions of
the parameters to decide if they are weighting matrices, as they typically have
more than one dimension (in contrast to biases).
2. Projecting the weight matrices
• The weights of the model are projected by a custom function project_weights,
which adjusts the weights based on the specified norm (1, 2, or infinity norm)
and the desired Lipschitz constant (lambda_val) for the layer.
• This is done by calculating the Lipschitz constant of the weight matrix for the
layer using the specified norm. If the Lipschitz constant exceeds the specified
lambda_val the weights are projected using the projection function 3.7
4.5.1
Hyperparameters
The hyperparameters for training include the learning rate, batch size, and number of
epochs. These were chosen based on preliminary experiments.
Table 4.2: Hyperparameters Used for Training
Hyperparameter
Value
Learning rate
0.001
Batch size
8
Number of epochs
10
Weight decay
1 × 10−5
4.6
MPC­Based Expert Policy for Neural Network Training
In this thesis, we utilize Model Predictive Control (MPC) as an expert policy to generate
ground truth data from synthetic datasets for training neural network models. MPC is an
advanced control strategy that uses a model of the system to predict future states and
optimize control actions accordingly. The process involves feeding the synthetic dataset
to the MPC. Based on the setup for the MPC this gives us the optimal behavior under the
conditions formed by the synthetic dataset. These outputs are used as the ground truth
when training the neural networks as they are derived from a well­established control
method with clear constraints and optimization problems.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:37==
5
Results
5.1
Introduction
In this chapter, we will go through the results derived from training neural networks based
on the methods described in Chapters 2 and 3 with the implementation strategy outlined in
Chapter 4. We will go into detail about the differences between the results for the different
models, test them under non­nominal circumstances, and showcase how we can optimize
the choice of lambda for the Lipschitz training method.
5.2
The importance of choosing the right lambda value for
LRR
As mentioned in Chapter 3 there is a trade­off between robustness and accuracy when
choosing lambda values for the layers in the Lipschitz training method. Higher lambda
values will generally give higher accuracy, while lower values will give more robustness.
It is also possible to choose different lambda values for each layer. However, we will start
with the same lambda value for each layer to showcase the impact the choice of lambda
value has on the accuracy as well as the robustness of a neural network.
In this section we showcase different results for models trained with λ values 1, 2, and
3. One model trained with λ value 1 for each layer in the network, one with λ value 2 for
each layer, and one with 3. Furthermore, as all the other models trained in this thesis, the
architectural structure of the networks is the same. The only difference in training is the
different lambda values.
Effect on accuracy
First, let’s try to illustrate the impact the choice has on the accuracy of the model. To help
us do this the training and validation loss for the different models is shown in the following
figure:
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.1: Training and validation loss over the different epochs for models trained with
three different lambda values.
The loss function used to obtain these plots is the mean squared error (MSE). The MSE
is a commonly used loss function in regression tasks, which penalizes larger errors more
significantly. It is defined as:
MSE = 1
n
n
-
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2,
(5.1)
where n is the number of data points, yi is the true value, and ˆyi is the predicted value.
The MSE measures the average of the squares of the errors, that is, the average squared
difference between the estimated values and the actual value.
There is a similar trend for all of the models with a decreasing loss through the epochs.
The slight spike in the validation loss for λ = 1 indicates that the model might be over­
fitting. Although, this explanation doesn’t make sense. With a lower lambda value, the
weights are more constrained. This makes the model less likely to overfit as it is more
likely to capture the underlying patterns rather than noise. However, the model might be
underfitting, as the weights might be constrained to a point where it cannot adequately
learn the underlying patterns in the data. We also see that there is a big gap between the
loss for the two other models (2 and 3) and the model trained with λ = 1. This gives further
reason to assume that such a low value is constraining the weights too much, preventing
the model from learning effectively.
One thing worth noting is the discrepancy in the improvement between λ = 1 to λ = 2
and λ = 2 to λ = 3. The improvement in loss is more significant when increasing λ from
30
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:39==
1 to 2 than from 2 to 3. This suggests that the regularization effect of λ follows a pattern
of diminishing returns, where initial increases in λ lead to substantial improvements, but
further increases yield smaller gains.
This observation aligns with the findings by Gouk et al. (2018) [18], where it was found
that selecting a lambda value even slightly too low would result in a massive degradation
in performance. This phenomenon is evident in our figure, as the accuracy drops signif­
icantly from λ = 2 to λ = 1. This indicates that there exists a threshold between these
values where the performance begins to decline significantly.
There is also a clear difference in the models when we simulate the models using the
real­world data described in Chapter 4.
In summary, while increasing λ generally enhances performance by improving regular­
ization, it is crucial to choose an appropriate λ value to avoid substantial performance
drops. This careful balance is essential for optimizing both accuracy and robustness in
the model.
Impact on robustness
As mentioned and showcased earlier; a higher lambda value generally results in better
performance of the model under nominal circumstances. But as discussed earlier and
showcased in the papers mentioned earlier, there exists a trade­off between the accuracy
and robustness of the model. This means that one could expect that the lower lambda
values would assert better performance under certain non­nominal cases, such as the
introduction of significant outliers.
In Figure 5.5, this is showcased when outliers of 10% are introduced to the height of the
tank. Similarly, Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.7 illustrate the model behavior when outliers of
50% and 100% are introduced, respectively.
Figure 5.2: The figure shows the output (speed of the pump) in three different neural
network models when introduced with 10% outliers in the height. The area covered in
grey represents the period where outliers are introduced.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.3: The figure shows the output (speed of the pump) in three different neural
network models when introduced with 50% outliers in the height. The area covered in
grey represents the period where outliers are introduced.
Figure 5.4: The figure shows the output (speed of the pump) in three different neural
network models when introduced with 100% outliers in the height. The area covered in
grey represents the period where outliers are introduced.
Inspecting the plots we can see that the model trained with the lowest lambda value is
reacting the least to the changes in the input data across all of the plots. The two other
lambda values exert more similar behavior. With lambda value 2 being less reactive to
changes of 50% while the lambda value 3 is less reactive to changes of 10%.
32
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:41==
We also introduced outliers in the inflow values as well, with the resulting plots shown
in Figures 5.5, 5.6, and 5.7. From these figures, we observe that the model trained with
a lambda value of 1 is reacting the least to the sudden changes in the input values. In
contrast, the models trained with the other lambda values perform almost identically under
these perturbations. This suggests that there exists a threshold between λ = 1 and λ = 3
where the projection function leaves the weights more or less unaffected.
Figure 5.5: The top plot shows the inflow fed into the model with 50% outliers introduced,
marked as dots. The bottom plot illustrates how the output (speed of the pump) varies for
the different lambda values when subjected to 50% outliers in the inflow.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.7: The top plot shows the inflow fed into the model with 200% outliers introduced,
marked as dots. The bottom plot illustrates how the output (speed of the pump) varies for
the different lambda values when subjected to 200% outliers in the inflow.
Figure 5.6: The top plot shows the inflow fed into the model with 100% outliers introduced,
marked as dots. The bottom plot illustrates how the output (speed of the pump) varies for
the different lambda values when subjected to 100% outliers in the inflow.
5.2.1
Discussion
Based on the results showcased in this section it is clear to say that the lambda values
chosen when training neural networks based on Lipschitz continuity has impact on both
the accuracy as well as the robustness of the said model. Furthermore, there exists a
34
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:43==
trade­off between robustness and accuracy when choosing lambda values for the model.
A higher lambda value generally gives better performance, but less robustness against
outliers. However, there is reason to believe that a higher lambda value doesn’t always
give better performance, as there is research indicating that choosing lambda values not
too high (needs reformulating) might act as a regularization term and can prevent overfit­
ting. It also seems like there exists a threshold value where increasing the lambda value
much further above this region doesn’t yield much better performance. We must also
mention that choosing the same lambda value for each of the layers in a neural network
will most definitely be a sub­optimal solution. This was done to illustrate and stress the
impact different lambda values has on both the robustness as well as the accuracy.
5.3
Hyperparameter Tuning for Lipschitz λ
As previously discussed, there is a trade­off between the accuracy and robustness of neu­
ral network models. Higher lambda values generally result in better performance under
nominal conditions. However, lower lambda values can potentially improve robustness,
particularly in non­nominal cases, such as introduction of significant outliers. To optimize
both accuracy and robustness, we employed a comprehensive hyperparameter tuning
process for the Lipschitz regularization parameters (λ) across different layers of the neu­
ral network. According to the theory we went through earlier, there exists one Lipschitz
constant for each layer that we can tune, rather than tuning a single Lipschitz constant for
the entire network as done in the previous subchapters.
5.3.1
Hyperparameter Tuning Methodology
The goal of our hyperparameter tuning was to identify the optimal values for the Lipschitz
regularization parameters (λfc1, λfc2, λfc3), each indicating the parameter for each layer
in the neural network. To explore a wide range of values, we employed a log­uniform
distribution of the search space. This gives the search space process to include both very
small and very large values in the search for the optimal values. This process was crucial
in ensuring the model’s robustness and accuracy by controlling each layer’s Lipschitz
constant.
5.3.2
Cross­validation Strategy
For this process we also deployed cross­validation. To ensure robust evaluation, we em­
ployed 5­fold cross­validation. This method splits the training data into five subsets, using
four for training and one for validation, rotating this process to cover all subsets. Cross­
validation helps in assessing the model’s performance across different data partitions,
reducing the risk of overfitting.
5.3.3
Objective function
The objective function aimed to minimize the validation loss and maintain a low Lipschitz
constant, combining both accuracy and robustness into a single metric. This combination
is controlled by a weighting factor, α, which balances the importance of accuracy ver­
sus robustness. The choice of α can vary between projects depending on the specific
requirements and goals. The objective function was expressed as:
combined_score = α × loss + (1 −α) × robustness
(5.2)
The combined weighting function uses the weighting factor α as a means to balance the
trade­off between robustness and accuracy. In this context
• α: This parameter ranges between 0 and 1.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
35
==PAGE:44==
– When α is closer to 1, the optimization process prioritizes minimizing the vali­
dation loss (i.e., improving model accuracy).
– When α is closer to 0, the optimization process emphasizes maintaining a low
Lipschitz constant (i.e., enhancing model robustness).
The choice of α is crucial and should reflect the priorities of the specific project. For
instance, in scenarios where robustness to outliers and input perturbations is critical, a
lower α might be preferred. Conversely, in applications where accuracy under nominal
conditions is paramount, a higher α would be more suitable.
In our case, we selected α = 0.5 to give equal importance to both accuracy and robustness.
This balanced approach ensures that the model performs well under both nominal and
non­nominal conditions
5.3.4
Training and validation of the model
The training process involved initializing the model, training it with different lambda values,
and projecting the weights to ensure they satisfy the Lipschitz constraint. The validation
loss and robustness score (overall Lipschitz constant for the neural network) were calcu­
lated for each fold.
Optimization with Hyperopt
The hyperopt library was used to perform the optimization, employing the Tree­structured
Parzen Estimator (TPE) algorithm to efficiently explore the parameter space and minimize
the combined objective function.
To begin the optimization, a Trials object was instantiated to keep track of the previ­
ous evaluations. The fmin function from hyperopt was used to find the best parameters
defined in the search space. This minimizes the objective function by going through the
defined parameters, which in this case was the different λ­values (λfc1, λfc2, λfc3). The
objective function was defined to be the objective function described in the section above,
penalizing both the accuracy and robustness of the model by taking in the Lipschitz con­
stant for the model as well as the average validation loss.
The search space was as previously mentioned defined as a log­uniformed distribution
for each layer in the neural network. The TPE algorithm (tpe.suggest) was chosen as
the optimization algorithm, and the maximum number of evaluations (max_evals) was set
to 50.
At the end the parameters found during the optimization were saved to a CSV file. This
method ensured a fast and effective process for defining and examining the chosen pa­
rameter space, weighting both the accuracy as well as the robustness of the model.
5.4
Training Results
In this section we will go through plots of the training and validation loss for the models:
• Simple model
• Lipschitz model trained with Hyperparameter tuning
• CROWN model
In figure5.8 we have three different plots for the mentioned models. In the top left we
have plotted the Lipschitz Hyperparameter model against the simple model, top right the
CROWN model, and in the bottom the three different lambda values.
36
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:45==
(a) Lipschitz Hyperparameter Model and Simple model
(b) CROWN model
Figure 5.8: Training and Validation Losses for Different Models
In the first plot, it is clear to see bot the models have a decreasing training and validation
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
37
==PAGE:46==
loss, with the Hyperparameter model having a slightly higher loss than the simple model.
There is a slight increase in the validation loss for the Hyperparameter in epoch 6, but
both models have a converging trend with no signs of overfitting. The Hyperparameter
model which is both trained for accuracy as well as robustness shows great promise in
having a loss so close to the simple model as this is only trained for accuracy. For the
second plot, we have the loss for the CROWN model. The CROWN model, in contrast to
the other models, uses a custom loss function, taking into account both the accuracy as
well as the bounds computed. One clear observation is the sudden spike for both losses
in epoch 7, indicating a potential issue or a significant change in the model’s behavior
during training. There can be many explanations for this. Variability in the data split,
learning rate, and optimizer behavior, but maybe the most logical is that it has to do with
the bounds computed for this epoch. The loss for all of the epochs has a much higher
value than what we see in the other models, giving reason to believe that the bounds
portion of the loss function contributes significantly more than the accuracy part.
5.5
Behavior under standard operating conditions
In this section, we are going to showcase model performance under nominal conditions.
This was done by simulating the behavior of four models, and the MPC, with the real­world
dataset described in Chapter 4. This was done over approximately 2.5 hours of data. The
dataset used is resampled every 10 second, taking the rolling average to smooth out short­
term fluctuations in the dataset, to get a clearer picture of the underlying trends. Only the
inflow data was used directly as an input to the models, whereas the height was being
calculated for each timestep as described in Chapter 4. The resulting plot is shown in the
figure below:
38
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.9: The figure shows a comparative analysis of the different model’s responses
to inflow variations over time. The top plot shows the varying inflow. The middle plot
represents the height of the tank, while the bottom plot shows the speed of pump 4.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
39
==PAGE:48==
The top subplot shows the inflow rate over time, the middle subplot depicts the height of
the tank, and the bottom subplot presents the speed of Pump 4. The models compared
include the Simple model, CROWN, and Lip Hyperparameter, with the MPC (Model Pre­
dictive Controller) as the reference. All of the models is managing to keep the level of
the tank well within the safety bounds. However, we see that the CROWN model exhibits
unwanted behavior when the inflow level drops at around 19:00. This indicates that even
though there are regions where the CROWN model works as well as the others, there is
a clear weakness for the model when dealing with low inflow values. Furthermore, we
see that the simple model is doing the best at keeping the level of the tank approximately
around the level that the MPC does. However, we see that the speed of Pump 4 for the
models is almost identical (excluding the CROWN) with the mpc, just way smoother. The
only part where they differ is the starting point, seemingly getting the height of the tank to
the desired levels. More generally it seems like the models have certain optimal operating
points for the height of the tank which lies just above or below the height of the MPC.
All of the models is keeping the height of the tank more or less as stable as the MPC under
nominal conditions. There seems to be a severe fault with the CROWN model where it
malfunctions at very low inflow values. The different models seems to stabilize the height
of the tank at different tank levels. Seemingly just above or below, with more constraint
networks stabilizing the height of the tank at lower height values.
5.6
Handling of noise
One thing that is very common in real­world systems is noisy signals. Either through
noise on the measuring devices, real­world disturbances, or other things. It is therefore of
high interest to see how the different models react to noisy input signals. In this section,
we look at how well the different models can handle noisy signals, as well as how much
variance there is in the output based on different levels of noise. The latter is relevant
because in this system we don’t necessarily want to change the speed of the pumps of
large magnitude during short periods. This is not only cost­inefficient but also can put
unnecessary stress on the motor and even lead to failure.
The models tested included the simple neural network (NN), CROWN, and Lipschitz con­
tinuity trained by hyperparameter tuning (LIP Hyperparameter), and the Model Predictive
Controler (MPC).
5.6.1
Metrics Analyzed
We introduced noise to the input signals by adding Gaussian noise to the inflow measure­
ments. The noise was introduced at the midpoint of the dataset, and its magnitude was
proportional to the absolute value of the inflow. The following metrics were computed to
assess the performance and the stress asserted by the different models:
1. Variance in Pump Speed: Measures the variance in pump speed over time.
2. Maximum Speed Change: The largest change in speed between consecutive time
steps.
3. Mean absolute change in speed: The average of absolute changes in speed be­
tween consecutive time steps.
4. Root mean square (RMS) of Speed Changes: The square root of the average of
squared changes in pump speed between consecutive time steps.
40
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:49==
5.6.2
Results
In figure5.10 a plot of the noisy inputs, as well as the height of the tank, and the speed of
the pumps for the different models are shown.
Figure 5.10: The plot in the top row shows the actual as well as the noisy input signals,
also demonstrating the point where the noise was introduced. The second plot shows the
height of the tank for the different models. Lastly, the speed of the pump is shown in the
last plot.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
41
==PAGE:50==
It is clear from these plots that all of the models do a relatively good job of keeping the
level of the tank within the safety bounds even under very noisy input signals. Worth
mentioning is that the Gaussian noise was made with a random seed. The noise was
then based on the inputs themselves so each model experienced the same amount of
noise.
Table 5.1 presents the performance metrics for each model.
Metric
NN
CROWN
LIP Hyperparameter
MPC
Variance in speeds_p4
9805.08
8930.42
9045.31
10099.60
Maximum speed change
776.15
742.07
751.16
774.59
Mean absolute change in speed
107.29
88.77
94.11
106.87
Root mean square of speed changes
149.95
131.76
139.71
148.62
Table 5.1: Comparison of Model Stress on Pump Speed
5.6.3
Discussion
The results indicate that there isn’t a big difference in the metrics analyzed for the different
models. The simple model exhibits slightly higher variances than the two other models.
The CROWN performs slightly better than the Lipschitz hyperparameter model, with all of
the neural networks outperforming the MPC.
5.7
Limit Testing the Models
In this section, we present the results of limit testing performed on various neural network
models to evaluate their robustness. The aim is to determine the threshold at which each
model starts to exhibit unexpected or undesirable behavior when exposed to extreme
outlier values in the input data. The models tested are:
• Simple model
• CROWN model
• Lipschitz model with Lipschitz constant 1 (LIP1)
• Lipschitz model with Lipschitz constant 2 (LIP2)
• Lipschitz model with hyperparameter tuning (LIP Hyperparameter)
5.7.1
Methodology
To assess the robustness of the neural network models, we introduced extreme outlier
values in the input data and observed the model responses. Specifically, we incrementally
increased the inflow and height values and recorded the point at which each model’s
behavior deviated significantly from the expected performance.
5.7.2
Results
To get a better understanding of the results, let’s explain the general behavior of the mod­
els (at least the simpler ones) when increasing one of the inputs to extreme values (out­
liers). First, after some input value, the model starts outputting full speed for the pump (as
you would expect trying to counteract these high input values). However, if you continue
to increase the input above some threshold, the model starts decreasing the speed. This
is counterintuitive to what you might expect, but it is, as we will see, only for extreme val­
ues, and for some models not at all. In short, this means that at high outlier values, the
models started decreasing the speed, from full speed, downwards to zero.
42
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.11: Speed of pump4 for the different models when introduced with a 16000%
outlier.
Limit Testing for the Inflow
The first model to show the traversing speed behavior (when looking at increasing inflow)
was the simple neural network model. This model started decreasing the speed at inflow
outliers of about 1300%, eventually reaching zero speed at about 16000%. One other
model that we also saw similar behavior at, was the LIP2 model. However, this started
the traversing of the speed at around 1800% and reached its minimum at about (not zero)
at around 6000%.
As shown in Figure 5.11, the simple model has reached a speed of zero. The model
trained with λ = 2 reduced the speed to an intermediate level, while the other three
models (CROWN, LIP1, and LIP_Hyperparameter) continued to operate as expected.
Further increasing the outlier values to 10000000% did not alter the plot noticeably for the
remaining models.
Limit Testing for the Height
Similarly, the models were tested for unexpected behavior under extreme height values.
The CROWN model started showing traversing behavior at about 350% increase in the
height value, reaching zero speed at around 1300% increase.
The other models did
not exhibit any significant changes in speed output even with outlier values exceeding
1000000000%.
5.7.3
Detailed Findings
• LIP_Hyperparameter and LIP1: These models handled outliers up to 1000000000%
without showing signs of confusion, demonstrating high robustness.
• LIP2 and Simple Model: These models began to show confusion around 1800%
and 1300%, respectively, in the inflow values. The simple model displayed zero
outflows for outliers of 16000%, whereas the LIP2 model’s speed never dropped
below 750 RPM even for higher outliers.
• CROWN: The CROWN model handled outliers in the inflow, but performed worse
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.12: Speed of pump4 for the different models when introduced with a height outlier
of 1300%.
on height outliers where it started unexpected behavior around 350%, and displayed
zero outflow for outliers of 1300%. It was also noticed that when
5.7.4
Discussion
The limit testing results reveal distinct differences in the robustness of the neural network
models. The LIP2 and simple models began to struggle at lower outlier values for the
inflow. Notably, the simple model showed a complete loss of outflow control at higher
levels, whereas the LIP2 model maintained a minimum speed, indicating some level of
robustness. In contrast, the LIP1 and CROWN models demonstrated impressive robust­
ness, withstanding outliers of up to 1 million without confusion. Also worth noticing is that
the CROWN model, although showed great promise in extreme inflow values, was the
only model to fail when increasing the height value.
5.8
Conclusion
The limit testing of different neural network models reveals significant differences in their
robustness to extreme input values. While models like LIP1 and LIP Hyperparameter
demonstrate high tolerance to large outliers, others like LIP2, CROWN, and the simple
model show varying degrees of vulnerability. Worth noticing is that the model trained with
the lowest lambda value (LIP1) shows great robustness qualities under these extreme
conditions, as well as the model trained with the hyperparameter tuning method. This
underlines the trade­off between accuracy and robustness in choosing lambda value for
your Lipschitz­trained neural networks and shows great promise for finding the optimal
value through hyperparameter tuning. These insights are crucial for improving the design
and training of robust neural networks capable of handling adversarial conditions.
44
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:53==
6
Discussion
The findings of this study provide valuable insights into the robustness of neural networks
when subjected to extreme outliers and noise. This section interprets the results obtained,
compares them with current literature, discusses their impact, and highlights the limita­
tions of the study.
6.1
Interpretation of Results
6.1.1
CROWN method
Our results show promise for the CROWN training method, though it currently has sig­
nificant deficiencies. The model effectively handled outliers and noise in the inflow data,
suggesting enhanced robustness. However, practical outcomes indicate sub­optimal per­
formance, especially under low inflow conditions.
During training, the CROWN model exhibited a notable increase in training and validation
loss at epoch 7, indicating instability in performance. This instability can be attributed
to the model’s reliance on the regularization term (bounds loss component) in the cus­
tom loss function. Although regularization is intended to reduce overfitting and improve
generalization (Moradi et al., 2020) [21], strong regularization can lead to underfitting, par­
ticularly in low­inflow scenarios. This finding aligns with Gouk et al. (2021, p. 402) [18],
who noted difficulties in training neural networks with added regularization terms due to
poor conditioning of the optimization problem.
The literature emphasizes the need for a balanced approach to regularization to avoid un­
derfitting. While the CROWN model handles outliers and noise well, its fixed penalization
term may lack the flexibility needed to balance accuracy and robustness effectively.
6.1.2
Lipschitz continuity method
The Lipschitz continuity method showed great promise for enhancing robustness against
outliers and noise while maintaining model accuracy. This supports findings by Anil et al.
(2019) [14]], who highlighted the trade­off between accuracy and robustness with Lipschitz
continuity constraints. Increasing the Lipschitz constant improved the accuracy of training
data but made the model more susceptible to outliers. Hyperparameter tuning of the
Lipschitz constant resulted in accuracy comparable to a model trained solely for accuracy,
while also demonstrating effective robustness against extreme outliers. The model with
LIP 1 successfully handled outliers in both inputs without unwanted behavior, making
Lipschitz continuity constraints a viable approach for balancing accuracy and robustness.
6.2
Comparison with Existing Literature
The findings from this study align with key insights from existing literature. Tsuzuku et
al. (2018) [11] and Scaman and Virmaux (2018) [12] demonstrated that using spectral
norms and upper bounding the Lipschitz constant improves neural network robustness
and stability. Our results are consistent with these studies, showing that Lipschitz conti­
nuity constraints can manage the trade­off between robustness and accuracy effectively.
Conversely, the performance of the CROWN model highlights potential pitfalls of strong
regularization. Our empirical evidence supports Gouk et al. (2021) [18] who discussed
the difficulties of training neural networks with additional regularization terms. The insta­
bility observed suggests that practical implementations need a more nuanced approach
to regularization.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
45
==PAGE:54==
6.3
Impact of Findings
The findings have significant implications for developing and deploying robust neural net­
work models. The effectiveness of Lipschitz continuity constraints provides a pathway
for improving robustness without severely compromising accuracy, which is crucial for
applications involving noisy or outlier­prone data. For the CROWN method, the findings
suggest that while the concept is theoretically sound, practical adjustments are needed
to address instability and underfitting. Adaptive regularization techniques that adjust the
strength of regularization dynamically during training may offer a solution.
6.4
Limitations of the Study
Despite promising results, this study has several limitations. The models were tested on
a specific dataset related to inflow and height measurements, which may limit general­
izability to other data types or domains. The focus was primarily on robustness against
outliers and noise, without extensive exploration of computational efficiency or scalabil­
ity. The study utilized a simple neural network architecture; more complex architectures
might provide additional insights. The hyperparameter tuning for the Lipschitz continuity
method was conducted manually, potentially missing optimal settings. Future work could
benefit from more sophisticated hyperparameter optimization techniques to further refine
model performance.
6.5
Future Work
Future research should address the limitations identified in this study. This includes ex­
tending evaluations to diverse datasets and exploring the impact of different types of noise
and outliers. Investigating advanced regularization techniques that adaptively balance ro­
bustness and accuracy during training could provide valuable insights. Exploring the inte­
gration of Lipschitz continuity constraints with other robustness­enhancing methods may
also be beneficial. Automating hyperparameter tuning with techniques like Bayesian op­
timization or grid search could improve model performance. Additionally, applying these
methods to more complex neural network structures, such as Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) and Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM) networks, will be of significant interest.
Finally, examining the computational efficiency and scalability of these methods in real­
world applications will be crucial for their practical deployment.
46
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:55==
7
Conclusion
7.1
Summary of Contributions
This thesis explored advanced regularization techniques to enhance the robustness of
neural networks, focusing on the CROWN method and Lipschitz continuity constraints.
Key contributions include the implementation of a custom loss function integrating the
CROWN algorithm and the application of Lipschitz continuity for stability and robustness.
The study demonstrated the potential of using Lipschitz continuity constraints and the
CROWN method to improve the robustness of neural networks against extreme outliers
and noise. While the CROWN method showed promise, its practical implementation re­
vealed significant limitations, particularly under low inflow conditions. In contrast, the Lip­
schitz continuity method consistently delivered robust performance, effectively balancing
accuracy and robustness. The insights gained from this study contribute to the ongo­
ing discourse on developing robust neural network models, highlighting the importance
of balanced regularization and the potential of Lipschitz continuity constraints. Future
research should build on these findings to develop more adaptive and efficient regulariza­
tion techniques, ensuring the robust and reliable deployment of neural networks in diverse
real­world scenarios.
7.2
Interpretation of results
7.2.1
CROWN Method
The CROWN method was effective in handling outliers and noise but exhibited instability
under low inflow values. The reliance on a strong regularization term may lead to under­
fitting, as indicated by literature on the challenges of optimizing models with additional
regularization terms.
7.2.2
Lipschitz Continuity Method
The Lipschitz continuity approach balanced accuracy and robustness well. Hyperparam­
eter tuning significantly enhanced performance, with the model maintaining stability and
handling noise and outliers effectively. This demonstrates the benefits of a more flexible
regularization approach.
7.3
Final thoughts
The study highlights the nuanced trade­offs between robustness and accuracy in neural
network training. While theoretical advancements provide robust frameworks, practical
implementation requires careful consideration of model stability and performance under
varying conditions. The findings emphasize the need for balanced and flexible regular­
ization approaches to enhance neural network robustness effectively.
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
International Energy Agency. “World Energy Outlook 2016”. In: (2016).
[2]
R. Menke et al. “Approximation of system components for pump scheduling optimi­
sation”. In: Procedia Engineering 119 (2015), pp. 1059–1068.
[3]
Fei Tao et al. “Digital Twins and Cyber–Physical Systems toward Smart Manufac­
turing and Industry 4.0: Correlation and Comparison”. In: Engineering 3.5 (2017),
pp. 667–679. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENG.2017.05.015.
[4]
M. Grieves. “Digital twin: manufacturing excellence through virtual factory replica­
tion”. In: White paper 1.2014 (2014), pp. 1–7.
[5]
Yiding Jiang. “Predicting the Generalization Gap in Deep Neural Networks”. In:
Google AI (2019). URL: https://ai.googleblog.com/2019/07/predicting-generalization-
gap-in-deep.html.
[6]
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. “Explaining and har­
nessing adversarial examples”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 (2014).
[7]
Shreshth Tuli et al. “A survey on the vulnerability of deep neural networks against
adversarial attacks”. In: Progress in Artificial Intelligence 10 (2021), pp. 1–22. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13748-021-00269-9.
[8]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Intriguing properties of neural networks”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6199 (2013). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199.
[9]
Aleksander Madry et al. “Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial
attacks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083 (2017).
[10]
Huan Zhang et al. “Efficient neural network robustness certification with general
activation functions”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00866 (2018). URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1811.00866.
[11]
Yusuke Tsuzuku, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. “Lipschitz­Margin Training:
Scalable Certification of Perturbation Invariance for Deep Neural Networks”. In: Ad­
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2018), pp. 6541–6550.
[12]
Kevin Scaman and Anthony Virmaux. “Lipschitz Regularity of Deep Neural Net­
works: Analysis and Efficient Estimation”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro­
cessing Systems (2018), pp. 3835–3844.
[13]
Huan Zhang et al. “Efficient Neural Network Robustness Certification with General
Activation Functions”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09663 (2023).
[14]
Cem Anil, James Lucas, and Roger Grosse. “Sorting Out Lipschitz Function Approx­
imation”. In: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning
(2019), pp. 291–301.
[15]
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. “Wasserstein GAN”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (2017), pp. 214–
223.
[16]
Tsui­Wei Weng et al. “Evaluating the Robustness of Neural Networks: An Extreme
Value Theory Approach”. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learn­
ing Representations (2018).
[17]
Shen Shen et al. “The Lipschitz Constant of Self­Attention”. In: Proceedings of the
38th International Conference on Machine Learning (2021), pp. 8545–8556.
[18]
Henry Gouk et al. “Regularisation of neural networks by enforcing Lipschitz conti­
nuity”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04368 (2018).
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
49
==PAGE:58==
[19]
Huan Zhang et al. auto_LiRPA: A library for large­scale linear relaxation­based per­
turbation analysis. https://github.com/KaidiXu/auto_LiRPA. Accessed: 2024­08­
19. 2021.
[20]
Alessandro Quattrociocchi et al. “Energy Efficiency Optimization of Wastewater
Pumping Stations through IoT and AI: A Real­World Application of Digital Twins”.
In: (2023).
[21]
Mahdieh Moradi et al. “A Survey of Regularization Strategies for Deep Models”. In:
Machine Learning 109 (2020), pp. 1565–1600.
50
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
==PAGE:59==
Ensuring Robustness and Safety in Wastewater Pump Station Control: A Neural Network Verification
Framework for Smart Controller Implementation
51
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
