==PAGE:1==
HOUSING BOT
Management of Real Estate Investments Using
DNN and Rolling Horizon Optimization
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
HOUSING BOT
Management of Real Estate Investments Using DNN and Rolling Horizon Optimization
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Anders Elm Berner
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Carsten Medom Madsen, 2017
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for DTU Management,
Department of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Anders Elm Berner ­ s194478
Signature
Date
18­07­2024
ii
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
A Time Series Neural Network machine learning model, trained on extensive data from the
Danish housing market from 1993 to present, combined with a ’rolling horizon’ mathemat­
ical optimization model, proves to be a promising framework for a novel tool to manage
large­scale real estate investment portfolios over timescales exceeding 3 years.
This thesis explores the process of collecting, cleaning, analyzing, and encoding all list­
ings from the Danish housing market since 1993 to train three different predictive models.
The aim is to determine the most effective predictions to benefit a rolling horizon mathe­
matical model for buying, selling, or holding properties on a simulated timeline iteratively
over several years. Findings show that a naive price prediction model and a Time Series
Neural Network machine learning price prediction model were able to perform similarly to
industry standards at budgets of 30 million euros and above. This thesis thus serves as
a proof of concept, demonstrating the viability of this combined approach for large­scale,
long­term investments in the real estate market.
HOUSING BOT
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Anders Elm Berner, MSc Industrial Engineering & Management, DTU
Author of this thesis
Guido Cantelmo, Assistant Professor at the Department of Technology, Management
and Economics, Supervisor on this thesis
Filipe Rodrigues, Associate Professor at the Department of Technology, Management
and Economics, Administrator on this project
Special thanks to my supervisor, Guido Cantelmo, for his continuous support and crucial
insights throughout this process. His patience and enthusiasm, despite being from a
different field, were cornerstones in the completion of this work.
Also, special thanks to Camilla Julia Rasmussen from Boliga, who kindly allowed me to
scrape data from their website.
iv
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:6==
Navigation
Glossary
AI
Artificial Intelligence
BL
Baseline
DKK
Danish Kroner
DNN
Deep Neural Network
HFT
High­Frequency Trading
IP
Integer Programming Problem
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
LP
Linear Programming Problem
LSTM
Long Short­Term Memory
MIP
Mixed Integer Programming Problem
MSE
Mean Squared Error
NaN
Not a Number
NN
Neural Network
OR
Operational Research
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
ROI
Return on Investment
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
TF­IDF
Term Frequency ­ Inverse Document Frequency
Abbreviations
App.
Approximately
Excl.
Exclusive
Incl.
Inclusive
Int.
Integer
Mio.
Millions
HOUSING BOT
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Navigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
2
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Segmentation of the Housing Market with Internet Data: Evidence from
Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Machine Learning for Real Estate Time Series Prediction
. . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
A Rolling­Horizon Approach for Multi­Period Optimization . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methodology
6
3.1
Web Scraping and Multiprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Feature engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Methodical Data Analysis and Cleaning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Scaling, Encoding, and Standardization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Deep Neural Network (DNN)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.6
Mathematical Modeling and Operational Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.7
Rolling Horizon Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Data Description
27
4.1
Asking price vs. Sales price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2
Size vs. No. rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.3
Size vs. Sales price
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Sales price vs. Previous Sales price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Modeling
31
5.1
Business case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
The puzzle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Final structure ­ can be viewed in larger format in Appendix E . . . . . . . . 35
6
Results
36
6.1
3 years ­ 50 mio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.2
3 years ­ 100 mio.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.3
3 years ­ 370 mio.
Market comparable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7
Discussion
43
7.1
Answer to the research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7.2
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.4
Short­term, Long­term, Large­scale, Small­scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.5
Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.6
Ethical considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.7
Practical Implementation challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
vi
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:8==
8
Conclusion
47
9
Future work
48
9.1
Regarding the Time Series Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
9.2
You snooze, You lose
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
9.3
Learned behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
9.4
Large scale tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A Appendix A ­ Interview with Asset Management Company
53
B Appendix B ­ sample .jl file of portfolio on a random day during simulation
54
C Appendix C ­ Prediction models
56
C.1 Naive prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
C.2 Regression model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
C.3 Neural network model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
D Appendix D ­ Julia rolling horizon model
64
E
Appendix E ­ Flow diagram of the final structure
69
HOUSING BOT
1
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The real estate investment sector has a rich history spanning centuries, evolving from in­
dividual property ownership to sophisticated portfolio management strategies employed
by institutional investors. Denmark stands out in this landscape due to its meticulous
record­keeping practices, with comprehensive housing market data systematically col­
lected since 19931. This pristine quality of data offers a unique opportunity for applying
advanced analytical techniques to gain insights into market trends and investment oppor­
tunities.
The global real­estate market valued at approximately 6.7 trillion euros in 2023 and pro­
jected to increase to around 8.1 trillion euros by 20322, has seen increasing interest from
institutional investors. As of 2021, firms like Blackstone are holding about 2,500 apart­
ments in Copenhagen alone3.
In recent years, traditional investors have shown an increasing willingness to embrace
AI and machine learning for decision support in portfolio management4 5. This shift to­
wards data­driven decision­making, combined with Denmark’s high­quality historical data,
presents an exciting opportunity to develop more sophisticated investment strategies. The
potential to combine time series neural network forecasting with operational research (OR)
techniques into a tool for daily portfolio management is particularly intriguing, leveraging
the strengths of AI in pattern recognition and prediction while incorporating the optimiza­
tion capabilities of OR to make informed investment decisions.
It is against this backdrop of technological advancement and rich market data that we
pose our central question. In this thesis, we will try to answer the question: ”How can
artificial intelligence provide accurate and profitable investment decisions compared to
traditional investors in the Danish housing market?” This will be done through the de­
velopment and testing of an AI­driven investment tool combining Deep Neural Networks
(DNN) and Rolling Horizon Optimization.
Data from the Danish housing market will be meticulously scraped from Boliga, and the
data will be cleaned and analyzed to outline the best course of action when training and
building the tool.
The performance of this novel tool will be based on research on one representative real
estate investment firm, and comparisons will be made between predictive models fed into
the Rolling Horizon model. These are a simple naive price prediction, a regression­based
1Comprehensive data on Denmark’s housing market is provided by Boligsiden (https://www.boligsiden.
dk), Boliga (https://www.boliga.dk/statistikker), and Danmarks Statistik (https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/
emner/borgere/boligforhold). These platforms have tracked market trends and prices systematically since
the early 1990s.
2IMARC Group, Real Estate Market Size, Growth, Revenue | Statistics [2032], converted from USD to
EUR using the exchange rate of 1 USD = 0.93 EUR. Available online: https://www.imarcgroup.com.
3Between 2017 and 2019, Blackstone acquired 160 properties with approximately 2,300 homes.
Source: Nordic Property News, available at https://nordicpropertynews.com/article/3192/blackstones-latest-
recruitment-copenhagen-holds-attractive-investment-opportunities.
4BlackRock, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Asset Management, October 2019. Available
online: https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/literature/whitepaper/viewpoint-artificial-intelligence-machine-
learning-asset-management-october-2019.pdf.
5LeewayHertz, AI in Portfolio Management: Use Cases, Applications, Benefits and Development. Avail­
able online: https://www.leewayhertz.com.
2
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:10==
price prediction, and a fully trained Time Series Deep Neural Network price prediction, all
held to a ceiling performance of a truth prediction, where the actual future prices are fed
into the Rolling Horizon model.
Marketability will be evaluated based on targets from the market research. Tests of the
tool will be done on multiple time horizons and budgets.
The thesis will furthermore touch on the potential effects of roll­out, both small­scale and
large­scale, of this tool in the real estate investment sector. These considerations are in
regard to scalability, robustness, practical application, and ethics.
Finally, the thesis will cover the potential for combining AI with human expertise for the
safest roll­out of this technology.
HOUSING BOT
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
The intersection of artificial intelligence, real estate investment, and the Danish housing
market presents a unique opportunity for innovation. This literature review explores three
key studies that form the foundation of our development of the AI­driven portfolio man­
agement tool. We will examine works that showcase the potential of machine learning in
financial forecasting, the application of rolling horizon optimization in complex decision­
making scenarios, and the specific characteristics of the Danish housing market that make
it an ideal testing ground for advanced analytical techniques.
By analyzing these studies, we seek to identify areas of potential from where this devel­
opment can come together. The literature reviewed here not only provides theoretical
underpinnings for our work but also serves to contextualize our research question within
the broader landscape of AI applications in the real estate investment sector.
2.1
Segmentation of the Housing Market with Internet Data:
Evidence from Denmark
This paper by Danmarks Nationalbank 1 introduces a novel tool for housing market anal­
ysis using online listings data from Denmark’s largest real estate site. The tool employs
machine learning techniques to segment the housing market into meaningful submarkets
based on characteristics that influence prices.
One significant finding of this paper is the correlation between the distance to water and
the price per square meter. The analysis shows that prices initially decrease as the dis­
tance from the sea increases, but this relationship is non­linear and reverses after a certain
distance. This indicates that proximity to water is a highly valued attribute in the Danish
housing market, but the premium for this attribute diminishes beyond a certain point.
2.1.1
Summary of Findings
The working paper provides valuable insights into the determinants of housing prices
in Denmark, emphasizing the role of geographical features such as proximity to water.
These findings support the inclusion of distance to water as a significant variable in our
analysis of housing prices.
2.2
Machine Learning for Real Estate Time Series Prediction
This paper by Habbab and Kampouridis 2 introduces a novel approach to predicting real
estate investment trust (REIT) prices using machine learning techniques. The study com­
pares the performance of five machine learning algorithms against the traditional ARIMA
model for predicting prices of REITs, stocks, and bonds.
2.2.1
Summary of Findings
The paper provides valuable insights into the effectiveness of machine learning algorithms
for financial time series prediction. The research demonstrates that machine learning
algorithms consistently outperformed ARIMA in predicting prices across all three asset
classes (REITs, stocks, and bonds). Among the machine learning algorithms, Linear Re­
gression (LR) and Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM) neural networks showed the best
1available at https://www.nationalbanken.dk/media/odwpajgc/working­paper­nr­188.pdf
2available at https://kampouridis.net/papers/REITs_UKCI_2022.pdf
4
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:12==
performance. LR ranked first in predicting REIT and stock prices, while LSTM performed
best for bond price prediction.
An important observation from the study is that the RMSE distributions from machine
learning algorithms were less volatile and had lower chances of extreme error rates com­
pared to ARIMA. This suggests that machine learning models provide more stable and
reliable predictions. Interestingly, bond price predictions had the lowest RMSE values
across all models, likely due to their lower volatility compared to stocks and REITs.
These findings support the use of machine learning algorithms, particularly LR and LSTM,
for predicting REIT prices and optimizing multi­asset portfolios that include REITs. The
study’s results underscore the potential of machine learning in improving financial fore­
casting and decision­making in real estate investment.
2.3
A Rolling­Horizon Approach for Multi­Period Optimization
This paper by Glomb et al. 3 introduces a rolling­horizon algorithm for solving multi­period
optimization problems and provides theoretical guarantees on solution quality under cer­
tain conditions. The authors demonstrate the algorithm’s effectiveness on lot­sizing and
tail assignment problems.
2.3.1
Key Contributions and Results
The paper’s main contribution is the development of a new rolling­horizon algorithm (Al­
gorithm 3) that incorporates additional constraints to limit solution quality sacrifices in the
current period. The authors derive conditions under which the algorithm provides prov­
able solution quality guarantees, and demonstrate that these guarantees do not hold for
classical rolling­horizon approaches.
The effectiveness of the algorithm is showcased through its application to lot­sizing and tail
assignment problems. In extensive computational studies on tail assignment problems,
the authors found that for instances with about 800 flights, the rolling­horizon approach
significantly outperforms solving the entire integrated problem. On large­scale instances
with 1500­2300 flights, the algorithm produces high­quality solutions, typically within 10%
of the LP relaxation bound, in reasonable computation times of 1­2 hours.
Notably, in some cases, the safeguarding constraint introduced in Algorithm 3 improves
both solution quality and runtime compared to the classical rolling­horizon approach.
These results demonstrate the algorithm’s effectiveness in solving large­scale, practically
relevant instances of complex optimization problems like tail assignment.
The paper’s findings have significant implications for the field of operations research,
particularly in handling multi­period optimization problems in areas such as supply chain
management, production planning, and transportation logistics, and fits closely with the
methods used throughout this thesis to optimize over large timespans.
3available at https://optimization­online.org/wp­content/uploads/2020/05/7809.pdf
HOUSING BOT
5
==PAGE:13==
3
Methodology
This chapter outlines the elements that comprise the machinery that this thesis is a product
of. The purpose of this chapter is to give the reader a thorough understanding of each
processes and the reasoning behind them such that the combination will seem clear going
forward.
3.1
Web Scraping and Multiprocessing
Web scraping refers to the extraction of data from websites. In this case, a two­step
process of extracting links to all listed properties in Denmark from 1993 to today, followed
by a multithreaded extraction of all available sales data for each address.
(a) The superficial overview of sales data of
properties, when sorted alphabetically with
no filters, thus showing all properties ever
listed on Boligas records.
(b) The specific sales data of a sample prop­
erty, with a closer look at the sales informa­
tion over time
Figure 3.1: Screenshots from the web scraping process, showing different types of data
extracted from the website.
As seen in figure 3.1a, each listing on this particular unfiltered list is a hyperlink which lets
us access all data for a given address throughout time. Since the objective is to train a time
series machine learning model later, information about a property’s price development
through time will come in handy. As can be seen in figure 3.1b, through the link we can
access a list of information for each address, namely:
• Property type
• Address
• Postal code
• City
• Size
6
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:14==
• Price/m²
• Rooms
• Year of construction
• Sale or asking price
• Price
• Sale date
• Trade type
Since the scraping process involves not only retrieving data but also visiting specific web­
site addresses for 1.8 million links, time becomes a critical issue if done sequentially.
This is where multiprocessing becomes essential. While there is no workaround for re­
trieving the links, all 35,000 pages can be accessed one by one to get 51 links per page.
This process takes a total of about 35 hours with a fast internet connection and a decent
server response time. The 35 hours are mostly spent waiting for the server to respond to
each request—the time it takes to send a request to a distant server and for the server to
respond with the requested information.
Performing this sequentially for each link would take 51 times longer—resulting in a total
time far beyond practical limits. This is where multithreading comes in. It is completely
safe to use multithreading in this scenario because, at these high processing speeds,
we can send multiple requests to the server in parallel, and since no process requires
information from another process, deadlock is not a concern. Accessing all 51 links in
parallel requires more processing power but significantly reduces the total time spent
waiting for server responses. This reduces the total retrieval time for all the data to 35
hours for link retrieval and 80 hours for collecting the actual data, totaling about 5 days.
This process yields 554 MB of data with 5.5 million rows of information.
Throughout the thesis, the daily process of all steps is considered such that the final
product not only is testable but feasible for iteration on a daily basis. Keeping with the two­
step multiprocessing process, the daily time consumption for capturing the daily market
and filtering for new listings is approximately 45 seconds. Let’s mark that.
Capture of daily market = 45 seconds
(3.1)
3.2
Feature engineering
With a sub­goal of the thesis being a robust Deep Neural Network, or DNN, feature engi­
neering is essential. The features chosen for the DNN should be ones that are expected
to have an effect on the decision of the buyer of a home. Thus, to get good features, we
can ask two questions:
1) What shows a relation between feature and price?
2) What do we expect frames the choice of the individual to buy a property?
Since Boliga captures all the data we already have in our dataset, it is expected that
this is relevant information, now that the primary users of Boliga are people interested
in the housing market. As is to be discussed in section 3.4, some of the features have
multicollinearity, which we will consider and fix at that point, but for now, we are only
interested in capturing all that is possible.
HOUSING BOT
7
==PAGE:15==
3.2.1
Coordinates
In our analysis, one of the significant features considered is the distance to water. As
discussed in the literature review, the relationship between the distance to water and the
price per square meter is non­linear. Initially, prices decrease as the distance from water
increases, but this trend reverses after a certain point (see Figure 3.2a). This finding is
incorporated into our feature engineering process to ensure that our model accurately
captures this non­linear relationship.
To do so, another web scraping of Dataforsyningen’s API is done for all unique addresses
from our data to extract the following details:1:
1
[
2
{
3
"id": "0a3f507d -e35f -32b8-e044 -0003ba298018",
4
"status": 1,
5
"darstatus": 3,
6
"vejkode": "1170",
7
"vejnavn": "Borgbygård Alle",
8
"adresseringsvejnavn": "Borgbygård Alle",
9
"husnr": "28",
10
"supplerendebynavn": null,
11
"postnr": "2770",
12
"postnrnavn": "Kastrup",
13
"stormodtagerpostnr": null,
14
"stormodtagerpostnrnavn": null,
15
"kommunekode": "0185",
16
"x": 12.6034713,
17
"y": 55.62499651,
18
"href": "https://api.dataforsyningen.dk/adgangsadresser/0a3f507d -e35f -32b8
-e044 -0003ba298018",
19
"betegnelse": "Borgbygård Alle 28, 2770 Kastrup"
20
}
21
]
Listing 3.1: Example JSON data for address information
Here x and y correspond to the longitude and latitude respectively. These are now added
to the data. This process only has to be done initially since properties do not tend to move
over time.
3.2.2
Distance to water
To calculate the distance to the water for each property, we determine the minimum dis­
tance from each coordinate to the nearest edge of the Danish map. The map data is
obtained from the GIS data source 2. The coordinates for each property, represented by
longitude ("x": 12.6034713) and latitude ("y": 55.62499651), are used in the calcula­
tions. Due to a mismatch between the map projection from MAPOG and Dataforsyningen,
the MAPOG map is forced to the EPSG:4326 projection, since it was the closest fit to the
EPSG:7416 projection, which is the Danish standard (the closest representation of Den­
mark with respect to 1 distance unit north being a right angle to 1 distance unit east).
1https://api.dataforsyningen.dk/adgangsadresse?vejnavn=[ROADNAME]&husnr=[HOUSENUMBER]
&postnr=[POSTALCODE]&struktur=mini
2available at https://gisdata.mapog.com/denmark/administrative_boundaries_province_polygon
8
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:16==
(a) log distance to water across Denmark.
(b) log price per square meter across Denmark.
Figure 3.2: Geospatial analysis of Danish housing market.
As can be seen on the top map of all our data, there is a resemblance between the distance
to water and the price/m2.
This information is also added to the data.
3.2.3
Historical interest rates
When the national bank raises the interest rates, house prices go down.3
This means that historical interest rates are essential to add as features.
The rates were found and combined from two primary sources:
• Statistikbanken4
• Danmarks Nationalbank5
The interest rates we are interested in are the effective interest rates including contribution
(percent) (only nominal loan). This is the interest rate that the buyer actually experiences.
Either form should give a DNN model the ability to capture the complex relationship, but
using this form should make it a bit more linear.
The integration of these historical bank rates provides critical context regarding the eco­
nomic environment and monetary policies over time, significantly influencing housing mar­
ket dynamics.
The historical rates are added based on the date of the sale.
3.2.4
Price development in the municipality
The coordinates could reflect askew price developments throughout the Danish cities, but
from word of mouth, it is expected that a nice postal code contributes both when it comes
to looking for a new home or when talking about which town you live in. This could mean
that people are willing to pay more to live in Charlottenlund as opposed to Gentofte even
if the distance is very small with no other differentiating factors. To better capture this,
3Blanchard, Olivier. Macroeconomics, Seventh Edition. Pearson, p. 124. The margin note states that low
interest rates increase the demand for housing and thus push up prices.
4https://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/selectvarval/define.asp?PLanguage=0&subword=tabsel&
MainTable=DNRNURI&PXSId=227435&tablestyle=&ST=SD&buttons=0
5https://nationalbanken.statistikbank.dk/nbf/98214
HOUSING BOT
9
==PAGE:17==
we now have both the coordinates and the postal codes. But a better way of adding the
quality of a municipality could be through the following calculations:
• Median Price per Square Meter (Median_Price/m2): This is calculated as the me­
dian of the prices per square meter for all properties within the same postal code.
For a given postal code p, it is defined as:
Median_Price/m2
p = median({Price/m2
i | postal_codei = p})
(3.2)
• Price Volatility (Price_Volatility): This is calculated as the standard deviation of the
prices per square meter for all properties within the same postal code, considering
a rolling window of one year (6 months forward and 6 months back from the date of
the sale). For a given postal code p, it is defined as:
Price_Volatilityp =
v
u
u
t 1
np
np
X
i=1
(Price/m2
i −Price/m2
i,p)2
(3.3)
where np is the number of properties within postal code p, and Price/m2
i,p is the mean
price per square meter for postal code p, calculated within the 12­month window
centered on the sale date of property i.
• Price Growth Rate (Price_Growth_Rate): This is calculated as the percentage
change in the median price per square meter over a specified period, again con­
sidering a rolling window of one year. For a given postal code p, it is defined as:
Price_Growth_Ratep = Median_Price/m2
end,p −Median_Price/m2
start,p
Median_Price/m2
start,p
× 100%
(3.4)
where Median_Price/m2
start,p and Median_Price/m2
end,p are the median prices per
square meter at the start and end of the period, respectively, for postal code p,
calculated within their respective 12­month windows.
The municipality development is added based on the date of the sale6. These features
should reflect the positive or negative feelings that ground peoples perception of one
different municipalities.
3.2.5
Floors
The floor for each apartment is apparent in the name of the address. This is extracted as
a feature.
6The data these values are being calculated over is from the cleaned dataset, and not the raw data. It
should not reflect patterns within data that we are not going to work with.
10
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:18==
3.2.6
Time on the market
To calculate the time on the market, the challenge was to identify pairs of asking prices to
sales prices in a realistic range within each other. This task was made especially difficult
due to each sales date (or asking price date) being off by 4 days. The histogram of time on
the market generated from asking date to next sales date showed an extreme frequency
decrease of time on market of 1­3 days, with an extreme increase at 4 days. Without
sales date downshift, we saw an average days on the market of approximately 671 days,
but with a 4­day downshift, we got that number down to 130. That is 1 day off the correct
average.7 The final distance of 1 day was handled by calculating extreme overshoots or
undershoots of asking price to sales price to days on market. This identified values that
were expected to be listings that were taken down (which we do not know about through
our data) and then later sold without going on public listings.
A restructuring of the data with found pairs of listing to sales with days on market was
deemed so useful8 that it was worth it to lose data up until 20079 when listing dates and
prices were introduced into the Boliga data.
3.2.7
Previous sale
One would hope that a DNN would be able to capture the development in price over time
for a given coordinate, but since apartments tend to be at the same coordinates some­
times, calculation of previous sales date and sales price would hard­code very important
temporal information10 into the data, that we cannot afford for the DNN to miss. Previous
sale is found and added to the data. Data exclusion due to entries with no previous sale
was minuscule since for our 2007­today range, we still have 1993­today to look for the
previous sale.11
7https://www.boligsiden.dk/nyheder/bolighandel/saa-laenge-tager-det-i-gennemsnit-at-saelge-en-bolig-i-
danmark
8Correlation between ’Sales price’ and ’Asking price’: 0.934
9Data from 1993­2007 does not include date introduced to the market or asking price
10Correlation between ’Sales price’ and ’Previous sales price’: 0.46, with a divergence towards longer time
between (see figure 4.5)
11Previous asking price or listing date were not added since it would exclude the 1993­2007 range to look
for the data
HOUSING BOT
11
==PAGE:19==
3.3
Methodical Data Analysis and Cleaning
Since data analysis and cleaning as well as data exploring are very intertwined in this
thesis, elements discovered in chapter 4 will be taken as a given in this section.
Working with new raw data means that making it ready for training a machine learning
model needs to be done from scratch. At this point we have the features we can get, but
we should not bring our assumptions into the data analysis. A thorough data analysis will
uncover the patterns we need to know in order to prep the data for the DNN.
For our dataset we find the following:
Feature Type
Feature
Numerical Features
Postal code (int)
Property floor area
Number of rooms (int)
Price
Previous selling price
Effective interest rate
Distance to water
Floor (int)
Categorical Features
Type of property (Villa, Vacation home, Townhouse,
Condominium, Country estate)12
Type of sale (Regular free sale, Auction,
Family transfer, Other sale, Unknown)
Binary Features
Sales price/asking price (Sales price, Asking price)
Temporal Features
Year of construction (int)
Date (refers to the date of asking price or date of sale)
Previous date of sale
Spatial Features
Latitude
Longitude
Derived Features
Median Price per Square Meter (for municipality)
Price Volatility (for municipality)
Price Growth Rate (for municipality)
12
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:20==
(a) Histogram and box plot of numerical fea­
tures before cleaning
(b) Histogram and box plot of numerical fea­
tures after cleaning
Figure 3.3: Cleaning of numerical features.
It is noticeable how little change we see. That is due to Boliga keeping very reliable data
with only a few pitfalls that were discovered. The road from figure 3.3a to figure 3.3b was
simply to look at outliers and systematically remove the ones of obviously odd nature.
This was necessary for number of rooms, Price/m2, and the combination of ’Condominium’
as property type to price ratio. This uncovered an odd occurrence of housing sales in
Denmark. If an apartment building is sold in its entirety, every individual apartment is
marked as sold at the price of the sale. That is, the sum of all apartments included.
HOUSING BOT
13
==PAGE:21==
When noticed, this can be found by looking for identical sales prices on the same day
for nearby properties. And once uncovered, they are quite obvious, due to the extremely
high prices. These are removed as outliers.
3.3.1
Type of sale
Figure 3.4: Price per m2 by Type of Sale
Over Every 5 Years
To study the type of sale, we would first
have to ask: what are we interested in
knowing?
The goal is to buy as regular free sales or
at auction. Family transfer, other sale, or
unknown are hard to quantify. But could
all these other sales be relevant for our
training?
If we look at figure 3.4, it can
be seen that it is almost only regular free
sales and family transfers that develop as
expected, in the same trend as the known
market from that time period.
Maybe family transfers would be wise to
include as training data. Let’s see how it
differs.
As can be seen in figure 3.5, the price
throughout the years differs between the
two, with significantly lower price points for family transfers than regular sales, which by
Danish law is allowed to be 15% below the public evaluation.13
Figure 3.5: Family ales development compared to Regular free sales
The development of the family sales do show potential, but since it is missing asking price,
the DNN would need a missing indicator feature to let it differentiate between NaN data
for the family transfers.
These values are ultimately treated as outliers and only regular free sales remain.
This entire cleaning process takes us down from 850.608 entries down to 582.740.
1315%
below
public
evaluation
form
2014,
and
40%
below
before
2014,
data
availible
at
https://info.skat.dk/data.aspx?oid=2350525
14
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:22==
3.4
Scaling, Encoding, and Standardization
Figure 3.6: Distributions of data
HOUSING BOT
15
==PAGE:23==
The features we are introducing into the DNN are ”Type of property”, ”Number of rooms”,
”Floor”, ”Size”, ”Asking price”, ”Distance to water”, ”Median price/m² for the municipality”,
”Year of construction”, ”Effective interest rate”, ”Latitude”, ”Longitude”, ”Price volatility for
the municipality”, ”Price growth rate for the municipality”, ”Date of asking price”, ”Date of
previous sale”, and ”Previous sales price”.
The address and postal code could also be introduced, but for the address, we would use
TF­IDF to encode the text into a numerical value that groups similarly spelled addresses
together. However, we don’t expect this to provide much additional information beyond
what the positional coordinates and other features already offer. The postal code is omit­
ted since the municipality values better reflect the decisions of the buyer, rather than the
specific number of the postal code.
To properly scale and encode the clean data, we need to examine the distributions. As
shown in Figure 3.6 in the data analysis section, some variables appear to have a skewed
normal distribution, namely the features ”Size”, ”Asking price”, ”Distance to water”, and
”Median price/m² for the municipality”. When log­transformed, we observe that these dis­
tributions become much closer to normal, which is desirable. This transformation makes
it easier for the DNN to model the underlying distribution of these variables instead of
grappling with their more complex original forms.
Figure 3.7: Distributions of log transformed features
While ”Number of rooms” and ”Floor” might also appear suitable for log transformation, as
shown in figure 3.7, upon closer inspection, we find that another encoding method may
16
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:24==
be more appropriate for these features.
We also have some categorical features that we can one­hot encode, creating binary
variables for each option of the original variable. This encoding is suitable for ”Type of
property”. The integer variables ”Floor” and ”Number of rooms” could also be treated this
way, as they both have a manageable range of less than 100 unique values each.
To facilitate the DNN’s learning process, we will standardize all the log­scaled features
and the remaining numerical features. Standardization helps the DNN make small ad­
justments during training, preventing situations where one of our many features needs
to be scaled up dramatically on one neural path to reach a large value in the end. We
use standardization (scaling to zero mean and unit variance) rather than normalization
because standardization do not only constrain values between 0 and 1, allowing for out­
of­range values in future data (e.g., future prices might be higher than seen before, and
future dates will naturally be later than those in the training data).
Lastly, we split the ”Date of asking price” and ”Date of previous sale” into their yearly,
monthly, and weekly components to capture potential seasonal patterns and long­term
trends.
3.5
Deep Neural Network (DNN)
In this thesis, we employ two distinct neural network architectures to analyze and predict
housing prices. A Naive estimate is also calculated to see how the simplest calculation
performs using the optimization model compared to the two NNs.
3.5.1
Regression
The first model is a single­layer neural network without an activation function. This archi­
tecture effectively functions as a linear regression model, providing a baseline for compar­
ison with more complex models. By implementing this as a neural network, we maintain
a consistent framework across all our models, varying only the network structure. This
approach allows for a direct comparison between computational requirements and predic­
tive performance across different model complexities. This single­layer network serves
as a baseline for performance comparisons and is equivalent to linear regression.
HOUSING BOT
17
==PAGE:25==
x1
x2
x3
x85
...
ˆy
w1
w2
w3
w4
1
b
Input Layer
(Features)
Output Layer
(Prediction)
ˆy = w1x1 + w2x2 +
· · · + wnxn + b
Linear Regression as
Single­Layer Neural Network
Figure 3.8: Architecture of Linear Regression implemented as a Neural Network
Our expectation from this is not high since we already know that the distance to water
feature for example, do not show a linear relationship with the price, and thus, will be
impossible for this model to capture.
3.5.2
Multi­layer time series Deep Neural Network
The second model is a multi­layer time series Deep Neural Network (DNN) utilizing ReLU
(Rectified Linear Unit) activation functions. This model is designed to predict housing
prices at multiple future time points based on historical data. It features multiple layers and
is structured to handle time series data. The model predicts prices for ten time intervals:
current, one week, two weeks, three weeks, one month, two months, three months, one
year, two years, and three years into the future.
18
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:26==
x1
x2
x85
...
h(1)
1
h(1)
2
h(1)
3
h(1)
64
...
h(2)
1
h(2)
2
h(2)
3
h(2)
32
...
a(1)
1
a(1)
2
a(1)
3
a(1)
64
...
a(2)
1
a(2)
2
a(2)
3
a(2)
32
...
y1
y2
y10
...
Input Layer
LSTM Layer
(64 units)
LSTM Layer
(32 units)
Dense Layer
(64 units)
Dense Layer
(32 units)
Output Layer
(10 units)
Figure 3.9: Architecture of the Multi­layer Time Series Deep Neural Network
This architecture allows the DNN to learn relationships between input features and prices
at specific future time points. By using a time series approach, we ensure that the model
doesn’t inadvertently use future information to predict past prices, maintaining temporal
integrity in our predictions. This concept is known as ”temporal causality” or ”causal fore­
casting.”
Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM) layers are particularly good at learning from sequences
and time series data. The reason for using two of these layers is the same as any other
multi­layer architecture; it lets the model capture more complex temporal patterns.
Dense layers, or fully connected layers, are used to learn non­linear combinations of the
high­level features learned by the LSTM outputs. They are crucial for gradually transform­
ing the outputs of previous layers onto a decreasing number of neurons to let us arrive at
our 10 output layers.
Training a model with 10 different output neurons lets us train a single model that predicts
all the desired horizons simultaneously, saving a little bit on computation, and saving a
lot on not having to train 10 different models, or a much more complex model that can
predict based on a horizon input.
The model was trained once at a learning rate of 0.001, with Mean Squared Error (MSE)
as loss function, 100 epochs, batch_size of 32, and validation split at 20%. The training is
further explained in appendix C. This is a very common setup and can be further tweaked
based on specific use, such as regular re­training.
The optimizer is Adam (Adaptive Moment Estimation), which is an extension of the stochas­
tic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm and offers the following advantages:
• Adaptive learning rate for each parameter (especially helpful since our parameters
are not on the same scale)
• Incorporates momentum, which helps accelerate SGD in the relevant direction and
dampens oscillations
HOUSING BOT
19
==PAGE:27==
• Computationally efficient and has little memory requirements, which is essential
while working on a personal computer
• Many more advantages14
3.5.3
Naive prediction
To adequately compare the two complex prediction methodologies, we first establish a
baseline prediction model for a property’s current price. Let Plast denote the last sale
price of the property and Alast the last sale date. Assuming the property was last sold on
a specific date tlast and the current date is tcurrent, the model projects Plast using a time­
dependent growth rate derived from historical data on price per square meter (price/m2).
Given the historical lookup table L(t), which specifies the national mean price/m2 at any
year t, we define the growth rate r between tlast and tcurrent as:
r = L(tcurrent) −L(tlast)
L(tlast)
The estimated current price per square meter price/m2 at tcurrent, denoted as Lcurrent, is
calculated by:
Lcurrent = L(tlast) · (1 + r)
Finally, the estimated current total price Pcurrent is obtained by scaling the last known total
price Plast based on the ratio of the estimated and last known price/m2 values:
Pcurrent = Plast · Lcurrent
L(tlast)
This model allows us to estimate the current market value of a property by adjusting its
last sale price according to the changes in the average market price per square meter
over time.
3.5.4
Training Data Generation
To train the time series DNN effectively, we developed a baseline model that utilizes all
available historical data to closely capture each property’s price development over time.
We refer to this as the Baseline (BL) of the project.
The BL is calculated by collecting all known sales prices for a given property over time,
applying a rolling mean to the market development, and then scaling this market trend
to fit the known sales points for each property, as can be seen on figure 3.10. This ap­
proach allows us to generate training data for the DNN at each of the ten specified time
projections, even for properties with sparse historical data.
14Advantages of Adam as an optimizer available at: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/adam-optimizer-in-
tensorflow/
20
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.10: Example of property price fit using baseline approach, compared to market
development (rolling mean of 2 months), scaled to fit initial price of property
By providing the DNN with this comprehensive, temporally consistent dataset, we enable
more reliable and robust training. The use of this baseline calculation as a foundation for
our DNN training data ensures that our model can learn from a rich, temporally coherent
dataset, potentially improving its ability to capture both short­term fluctuations and long­
term trends in the housing market.
3.6
Mathematical Modeling and Operational Analysis
In the field of operational research, integer programming seems like an arbitrary subset
of problems, but in reality, solving problems with integer decision variables turns out to be
much more difficult in practice.
Integer programming is used when the decision variables (the variables the model can
change during execution) have to be integer. In the case of this type of portfolio manager,
we could choose a variable for if a property n is bought at time m. This means that such
a variable can be 0 or 1. If such a model also has decision variables that are not required
to be integer, the problem is called a mixed integer programming problem. That is what
we are working with since our rolling budget is float.
The way we encircle the search space of such problems is by using constraints. A con­
straint could be that a property cannot be sold twice to two different buyers at once.
Using our binary variables for if a property p is sold at time t, we can describe this as
∀Xp,t : Xp,t ≤1. Here we make sure that every day, a property is at most sold once.
Working with time­series forecasting, a mixed integer programming model for decision­
making over time enables us to determine the optimal buy, sell, or hold strategy across our
10 horizons. This model addresses the problem of maximizing portfolio value within the
forecasted time frame. We achieve this by introducing time­dependent decision variables
that incorporate two parameters, one of which is time.
A well­modeled mixed integer programming problem, based on a real­world scenario, in­
HOUSING BOT
21
==PAGE:29==
cludes parameters that reflect real­world information. For example, we account for the
prices of properties that can be purchased, our budget, and the estimated costs associ­
ated with selling a property (which includes real estate agent fees). Other relevant param­
eters might include the interest rate for borrowing part of the budget or income from rent­
ing out owned properties. However, this thesis does not explore the known income from
the landlord business, focusing instead solely on investment opportunities. Nonetheless,
these elements could be easily incorporated into the model to align with the customer’s
needs and real­world situations.
Certainty factors can play a role in forecast optimization since we are optimizing in the
presence of uncertainty. The conventional approach to managing uncertainty involves
supplying the model with expected scenarios, such as best case, worst case, and real­
istic. This approach triples the data the model needs to optimize, increasing complexity
and computational intensity. A more straightforward method, suitable for our problem, is
feasible since we have an estimate of today’s price, along with the actual price provided
by baseline calculations. This comparison gives us an indication of the model’s current
accuracy. By applying this level of uncertainty to all projections for a particular property,
the model can operate without additional data beyond the initial setup, requiring only the
computational task of calculating the uncertainty factor for each property. When applied,
the size of the solution space neither increases nor decreases.
3.6.1
Under the hood with Julia and HiGHS
When choosing to model in the coding language Julia, with the solver HiGHS (High Per­
formance Software for Linear Optimization) and JuMP (Julia language model for Mathe­
matical Programming), much of the work in solving MIPs is taken care of for us by these
powerful open­source tools. But under the hood, when attempting to solve these large
problems, the following steps are taken to arrive at an optimal solution:
1. The problem is initialized and HiGHS reads the structure.
In our case, it could
be 1313 rows (constraints), 1323 columns (variables): 1313 binary, 10 continu­
ous (budget), and 13246 identified nonzeros (non­zero coefficients in the constraint
matrix). Copy
2. The solver then begins at the root node of the branch­and­bound tree, to then solve
the initial LP relaxation (allowing integer variables to be continuous).
3. The solver then generates cutting planes to tighten the LP relaxation, which can be
seen during runtime as “Cuts InLp”, which increases from 0 to 35.
4. HiGHS now applies heuristic methods to find a good feasible solution quickly. This
can be seen during runtime in the “BestSol” column, which iteratively displays the
primal bound.
5. Exploration of the solution space is done with branch and bound by branching on
integer variables. It then creates child nodes, solving LP relaxations at each node.
The “Nodes” column during runtime displays this progress.
6. Nodes are pruned if their LP relaxation is worse than the best known integer solution
(prune by bound). This decreases the gap between the best bound and the best
solution (dual and primal gap).
7. HiGHS performs periodic restarts to reduce the problem size. In one example run,
at 67.9% inactive integer columns, at 5.6% inactive integer columns, and at 17.0%
inactive integer columns. Each restart reduces the number of rows and columns in
the model.
22
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:30==
8. The process of branching, bounding, and cutting continues, while keeping track of
the best dual and primal bounds.
9. The algorithm converges when the gap between the best solution and the best
bound is small enough. In our example, the gap is set to 0.00999%, which is within
the specified tolerance of 0.01%.
10. HiGHS reports the final solution as Optimal (if so), while also providing the primal
and dual bounds.
For this one iteration of the rolling horizon problem, 11,962 LP iterations were required,
and 286 nodes were explored. This entire process demonstrates HiGHS’s use of ad­
vanced MIP solving techniques, which is essential for fast problem solving in the tool
developed in this thesis.
3.7
Rolling Horizon Optimization
Combining machine learning and AI with mathematical optimization has proven to be
an interesting approach to problem­solving. While machine learning and Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) can produce better results when it comes to complex data and data
structures, an element of traditional mathematical optimization lets us look under the hood
at the final steps to see how predictions are made. With a rigid framework for optimization
using mathematical modeling, we can observe how those predictions lead to the decisions
the model makes. This also allows us to meddle more with what goes into or out of the
model. If run on a daily basis, an iterative model would let the user look at the prediction­
based decisions and overrule them if the user feels so inclined. This was proven very
effective in 2020 using iteration with optimization over a deep learning model for playing
unseen Atari games. 15 16 17 We keep in mind that the twofold goal of the project is not
only to test if this method works but also to build a model that would work on a daily basis
in practice. The easiest way to reach these goals is to build a model that works on a daily
basis and iterate through thousands of days in simulation.
Let’s consider the knapsack problem.18 Initially, the model would like to buy some prop­
erties while not owning any. From here, the knapsack problem is to find a combination of
available properties that best fit our budget. We can then add the complexity that we do
not want to just fill our portfolio, but rather maximize profit over time. Given T predictions
at different points in time, we can add a dimension and let the model optimize the buying
and selling strategy to fill our portfolio. This lets the model wait until a property is at a low
price to buy and then sell high, all while remaining within the budget. This model needs to
be able to handle which properties it owns and when it owns them. The model should not
only optimize over what to do with the available market. After the initial iteration, it could
potentially own property. For this, it needs to decide when to sell, also using the new
projected prices. These can be built as two very similar mathematical models, and then
combined since the variables don’t overlap.19 From here, we can define our objective
15Bellemare, M.G.; Naddaf, Y.; Veness, J.; and Bowling, M. 2013. The arcade learning environment: An
evaluation platform for general agents.
16Kingma, D.P., and Welling, M. 2013. Auto­encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114.
17Bandres, W.; Bonet, B.; and Geffner, H. 2018. Planning with pixels in (almost) real time. In Thirty­Second
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
18Laurence A. Wolsey, Integer Programming, 2nd edition, Wiley, p. 29.
19We do not allow the model to sell an owned property and plan to buy again later. While this could be
possible in real life, it is highly unlikely that a sold property goes on the market within that short of a time
span, and even more unlikely for us to rely on it for investment purposes.
HOUSING BOT
23
==PAGE:31==
function as the sum of the objective function for the available market and the objective
function for the owned portfolio of properties:
Maximize:
P
X
p=1
T
X
t=1
(−xptPpt + zpt(Ppt −A) + yptPpt⊮t = T) Cp
+
O
X
o=1
T
X
t=1
(sot(Qot −A) + hotQot⊮t=T ) Do
Where:
xpt, ypt, zpt are binary variables for buying, holding, and selling available properties. hot,
sot are binary variables for holding and selling owned properties. Ppt, Qot are projected
prices for available and owned properties. A is the administrative cost. Cp, Do are cer­
tainty factors for available and owned properties. ⊮t=T is an indicator function that equals
1 when t = T and 0 otherwise.
This objective function maximizes the expected profit from both buying and selling avail­
able properties and managing the existing portfolio, taking into account the certainty of
price predictions and administrative costs.20
If we combine all of this, while considering edge cases, we get the following mathematical
model.
20The certainty of a list of predictions are calculated as the Cp = 200 + min
(
100,
1

Pp−Up
Up

)
Where Cp is the certainty factor for property p, Pp is the projected price for property p, and Up is the asking
price (Udbudspris) for property p.
­0.5
0
0.5
200
225
250
275
300
This have a max of 300 and min of 200, which can be seen as penalty for being wrong. There are multiple
ways of going about penalizing wrong guesses.
24
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:32==
Sets and Indices
• P: Set of available properties, indexed by p
• O: Set of owned properties, indexed by o
• T: Set of time points, indexed by t
Parameters
• B: Initial budget
• A: Administrative cost
• Up: Udbudspris (asking price) for property p
• So: Selling price for owned property o
• Ppt: Projected price for property p at time t
• Qot: Projected portfolio price for owned property o at time t
• Cp: Certainty factor for available property p
• Do: Certainty factor for owned property o
Decision Variables
• xpt ∈{0, 1}: Buy property p at time t
• ypt ∈{0, 1}: Hold bought property p at time t
• zpt ∈{0, 1}: Sell bought property p at time t
• hot ∈{0, 1}: Hold owned property o at time t
• sot ∈{0, 1}: Sell owned property o at time t
• Rt ≥0: Remaining budget at time t
Objective Function
Maximize:
P
X
p=1
T
X
t=1
(−xptPpt + zpt(Ppt −A) + yptPpt⊮t=T ) Cp
+
O
X
o=1
T
X
t=1
(sot(Qot −A) + hotQot⊮t=T ) Do
(3.5)
Constraints
1. Can only sell if bought previously:
zpt ≤
t
X
s=1
xps
∀p ∈P, t ∈T
(3.6)
2. Each property can only be bought once:
T
X
t=1
xpt ≤1
∀p ∈P
(3.7)
3. Each property can only be sold once:
T
X
t=1
zpt ≤1
∀p ∈P
(3.8)
4. Can hold only if bought and not sold before:
ypt ≤
t
X
s=1
xps −
t
X
s=1
zps
∀p ∈P, t ∈T (3.9)
HOUSING BOT
25
==PAGE:33==
5. Each owned property can only be sold once:
T
X
t=1
sot ≤1
∀o ∈O
(3.10)
6. Can hold owned property only if not sold be­
fore:
hot ≤1 −
t
X
s=1
sos
∀o ∈O, t ∈T
(3.11)
7. Initial budget constraint (Day 1):
P
X
p=1
xp1Up −
O
X
o=1
so1(So −A) ≤B
(3.12)
8. Remaining budget after Day 1:
R1 = B −
P
X
p=1
xp1Up +
O
X
o=1
so1(So −A) (3.13)
9. Budget update for subsequent days:
Rt = Rt−1 +
P
X
p=1
zp,t−1(Pp,t−1 −A)
−
O
X
o=1
sot(Qo1 −A)
−
P
X
p=1
xptPpt
∀t ∈{2, . . . , T}
(3.14)
10. Non­negativity of remaining budget:
Rt ≥0
∀t ∈T
(3.15)
where ⊮t=T is an indicator function that equals 1 when t = T and 0 otherwise.
As illustrated on figure 3.11, this model optimizes over small slices of prediction, and
though iteration end up covering the entire timeline, one day at a time, even though fore­
casts does not cover every day.
Figure 3.11: Rolling horizon decision practice
26
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:34==
4
Data Description
During cleaning and encoding, much of the data exploration is already covered, and this
chapter stands as a extension of section 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4, with a bit more comprehensive
deep dive into the more interesting features and their relationship.
To properly explore the data, a complete overview of all numerical features and their
correlation is given by a matrix of hexbin plots.
Figure 4.1: Matrix of hexbin plots for all combinations of numerical features
As can be seen on figure 4.1 many of the features does not show much sign of any
correlation, but some still show linearity or more complex relationships. Obvious examples
of complex relationships is the relationship between latitude and longitude, which just
shows a map of Denmark. The relationship between the year and the interest rate which
HOUSING BOT
27
==PAGE:35==
shows the interest rate over time, and something like the price per m2 compared to the
postal code, which shows lover prices at higher postal code.
In this section, we will explore some of the ones that hold important relationships that a
predictive model needs to capture.
4.1
Asking price vs. Sales price
Figure 4.2: Hexbin plot of Asking price vs.
Sales price
The correlation between the asking price
and sales price on a log­log plot, looks very
linearly correlated, with a correlation factor
of 0.93. The hexbin plot type shows how
deviations happen, but the most dense
area does represent a very linear relation­
ship, throughout all price ranges.
4.2
Size vs. No. rooms
Figure 4.3: Hexbin plot of Size vs.
no.
rooms
A good example of expected correlation is
between the size of the propertya in rela­
tion to the no. rooms, which has a corre­
lation factor of 0.82, and displays a clear
trend that larger places tend to have more
rooms.
The streaks of ”missing” data is
just the result of integer values on log No.
rooms axis.
aIndoor m2 area
4.3
Size vs. Sales price
Figure 4.4: Hexbin plot of Size vs. Sales
price
One interesting comparison is the size of
the property with the sales price, which
has a correlation factor of 0.36 which does
seem to capture a trend, but much less
than the size vs. no. rooms. We do see a
relationship displayed on the hexbin plot as
a blob with center around a size of e4.5 ≈90
m2 and sales price of e4.5 ≈1.2 mio. DKK.
This will require higher dimensionality to
uncover the nuances in this relationship.
28
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:36==
4.4
Sales price vs. Previous Sales price
Figure 4.5: Hexbin plot of Sales price vs.
Previous Sales price
A very interesting relationship is between
the sales price, and the previous sales
price. Here we find a correlation factor of
0.46, which isn’t bad, but when shown on
the hexbin plot, we see what appears to be
two different linear relationships converg­
ing at 18 on the x­axis and 18 on the y­axis.
So let us ask ourselves; what would have
an effect on different relationships between
sales price and previous sales price?
A
good guess would be renovations, and
market development.
And these are re­
flected in the time between the previous
sale and the sale in question.
Figure 4.6: 3D scatter plot of log prices and
days difference (sampled data) ­ view 1
Figure 4.7: 3D scatter plot of log prices and
days difference (sampled data) ­ view 2
As can be seen on figure 4.6 and 4.7, the triangle shape persists, but shows one linear
relationship at the purple range and other linear relationships at every layer of days dif­
ference. When turning the plot such that the view is down the direction of linearity at time
difference = 0, we see that the whole graph tends to bend a bit to the left, representing a
tendency for the price difference to be larger at larger interval between sales.
The purple line is more pronounced in the 3D plot because the linearity is stronger at
close intervals between sales and previous sales, but the density is stronger for sales
with longer time between as clearly shown on the hexbin plot.
4.4.1
Closing remarks
The data looks clean, reliable, and ready for training. A very important feature when
it comes to deciding whether to buy a property or not, would be the owners expenses.
This is something that is not available for web scraping, but does appear in commercially
available APIs that were beyond the scope of this thesis financially.
HOUSING BOT
29
==PAGE:37==
Owners expenses, or in danish; ”Ejerudgift” is a Danish term commonly seen on property
listings in Denmark. It refers to the monthly expenses associated with owning a prop­
erty, beyond the mortgage payments. It typically covers: Property taxes (ejendomsskat),
Building insurance (bygningsforsikring), Common expenses for shared areas in apartment
buildings or housing associations (fællesudgifter), Contributions to the homeowners’ as­
sociation or cooperative housing society (if applicable), Water and sewage fees, Garbage
collection fees, Pest control, Chimney sweeping (if relevant).
30
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:38==
5
Modeling
From the methods described in the methodology chapter, a business case analysis must
be conducted to ensure that the methods are fitted and assembled in the correct way to
ensure trustworthy results.
5.1
Business case
From an interview with a Asset Management Company (see Appendix A), the current
standard for locating investment opportunities on different housing markets from the per­
spective of an asset management company, are though external entities that can deliver
information about interesting markets in respect to preferable KPIs.
The company in question is already developing AI­based tools to enhance their decision­
making processes. They report an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) between 4% and 7% on
investments ranging from 30 to 50 million euro.
These figures provide a valuable benchmark for our project. If the tool developed in this
thesis can achieve or exceed this performance range, it could have significant real­world
applications. The company’s current investment in AI technology also suggests a market
readiness for advanced analytical tools in the real estate investment sector.
The combination of their reported returns (4­7% IRR) on substantial investments (30­50
million euro), along with their interest in AI, indicates that there’s potential for practical
application of our tool. If we can demonstrate that our AI­driven approach can match or
improve upon these returns, it could be particularly attractive to companies like this one,
who are already exploring AI solutions in their investment strategies.
The business case for this tool becomes as follows:
5.1.1
Market opportunity
Real estate investment firms are actively seeking AI solutions to enhance decision­making
processes. There are demonstrated willingness to adopt new technologies in the sector.
5.1.2
Performance Benchmark
Current industry performance: 4­7% IRR on interments of 30­50 million euro. This marks
a clear target for the AI tool to meet or exceed.
5.1.3
Value Proposition
The tool automates and optimize the property listing evaluation process. It also potentially
increase IRR by identifying better investment opportunities more quickly and widespread,
while reducing human error and bias in the investment selection process.
5.1.4
Competitive Advantage
This tool is leveraging an novel combination of traditional OR and rolling horizon opti­
mization with state of the art AI models to provide more accurate and faster investment
recommendations, tailored to very specific portfolios and budgets.
It also has the ability to process and analyze vast amounts of data beyond human capa­
bilities.
5.1.5
Target Market
The target market for this tool is medium to large­scale real estate investment firms man­
aging portfolios in Denmark of 30­50 million euro, or are ready to. Another market is
companies already exploring or open to AI solutions in their operations.
HOUSING BOT
31
==PAGE:39==
5.1.6
Revenue Model
The revenue model for this tool in application could be one of the following:
• SaaS (Software as a Service):
– Model with tiered pricing based on portfolio size or number of listings analyzed.
• PSS (Result based Product Service System):
– Ownership of the software, data processing and data security is done in­house.
– Portfolio management recommendations provided to the customer on a daily
basis.
– Monthly review on the decision making process of the tool.
– Active month­to­month tweaking.
5.1.7
Potential ROI for Clients
If the tool can improve IRR by even 0.5­1%, it could translate to significant additional
returns on large investments.
If given the data of the past portfolios of the company, the simulation would be able to tell
which IRR increase they would have experienced if they used this tool in the past number
of years
Time savings in the investment evaluation process could allow firms to assess more op­
portunities and potentially close deals faster. This could reduce internal complexity sig­
nificantly.
5.1.8
Development and Implementation
The research and development in this thesis would be leveraged as foundation for further
development of the tool.
Partnering with a real estate investment firm for beta testing and refinement could be
beneficial for both parties, while preparing the tool for real­world application.
5.1.9
Risk and Mitigation
In the further development phase, addressing potential concerns about AI reliability in
high­stakes investment decisions, would be crucial.
Implementation of robust data privacy and security measures is necessary when handling
sensitive information for large investors. Further training the AI model on the performance
from these cases, would be beneficial, and to do so, the data would need to be inacces­
sible after training.
Development of a hybrid model that combines AI recommendations with human expertise
in the area, for final decision­making would provide great learning opportunities and unveil
areas for improvement in the model.
5.1.10
Future Scalability
The potential to expand into other real estate markets or countries would be a natural
development over time, since the model is independent on the market in question, so the
tool would just have to be trained on a new market, maybe even with the Danish data as
pre­training, for a more robust model. The bigger the model, the better performance is to
be expected.1
1Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T. B., Chess, B., Child, R., Gray, S., Radford, A.,
Wu, J., & Amodei, D. (2020). Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361.
32
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:40==
There are also potential for adapting the tool for other types of investments beyond real
estate.
5.2
The puzzle
Now that we have some targets, and some methodology to work with, the next step is
how to assemble it to meet the following requirements:
1. Performance tests must reflect the real price developments to the best extent pos­
sible.
2. Performance tests should be unleveraged and should not consider potential income
from renting out owned properties.
3. Performance tests should take less than 2 days to run.
4. Optimal operation of the tool should not take longer than 2 hours per iteration.
5. Inputs and outputs should be readable at point of entry of the prediction models and
the optimization model.
6. The daily portfolios should include all relevant information of the current state of
portfolio. This includes:
(a) All properties owned
(b) The remaining budget
To achieve meaningful development of the tool while keeping benchmarking and testing
(with potential downscaling of large calculations for faster test run times) in mind, we can
split the tool into 3 components with an additional component for evaluation.
The first component will be the web­scraping part which can be performed completely
separately from the rest of the project and can be used to update the database every
once in a while. For tests, this component only needs to be run once for it to capture all
data available.
The next component is the training of the neural network and regression. Here the clean­
ing, scaling, encoding, and training of both models take place. This can also be done
every once in a while for real­time use, but for the test, once is all that is needed.
The final component is the simulation itself. This can be used in one of two ways: with a
loop that advances every iteration (this is for testing), or a real­time advancement that uses
the actual day (this is for real­time use). In this component, the data from the database of
listings are used to provide the prediction models with all listings available. Other inputs
are the portfolio of the previous day with the remaining budget. After the predictions, the
Julia model optimizes the portfolio based on these predictions one by one, and outputs
information which shows the current plan for future actions, as can be seen in listing
5.1. All decisions made at time point 1 are applied and translated into the portfolio for
tomorrow. These are then fed into the prediction models again so that the Julia model
has information about the selling price development from the perspective of tomorrow.
Then the cycle repeats until the simulation reaches the end.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361
HOUSING BOT
33
==PAGE:41==
1
Future Actions Planned:
2
Plan to buy Henningsens Alle 68, 2900 at time point 1
3
Plan to buy Toldbodgade 29B, 5, 1253 at time point 1
4
Plan to buy Toftevej 59, 3250 at time point 2
5
Plan to hold Henningsens Alle 68, 2900 at time point 10
6
Plan to hold Toftevej 59, 3250 at time point 10
7
Plan to hold Toldbodgade 29B, 5, 1253 at time point 10
8
--------------------------------------
9
Plan to sell Strandvejen 198, 2920 at time point 1
10
Plan to hold Fuglsigvej 161, 9800 at time point 10
11
Plan to hold Hesseldalsvej 4, 3660 at time point 10
12
Plan to hold Hvidtvedgårdsvej 1, 8410 at time point 10
13
Plan to hold Høbjergvej 29A, 3200 at time point 10
14
Plan to hold Jelshøjvej 127, 8320 at time point 10
15
Plan to hold Milrimvej 85, 9981 at time point 10
16
Plan to hold Rejnstrupvej 7, 4640 at time point 10
17
Plan to hold Stasevangsvej 7, 2970 at time point 10
18
Plan to hold Tvedvej 3, 7490 at time point 10
19
Plan to hold Vedbæk Strandvej 484, 2950 at time point 10
20
Plan to hold Veksebovej 23A, 3480 at time point 10
21
Plan to hold Vesterskov 4, 9280 at time point 10
22
--------------------------------------
Listing 5.1: Example of Julia output
Time points 1 through 10 on listing 5.1 correspond to the 10 time interval predictions the
models provide, with 1 being today and 10 being in 3 years.
After a simulation, or during a real investment, the performance can be investigated and
evaluated by the evaluation component which is fed all the portfolios of the test along with
information about which date they have taken place and which type of prediction is used.
From here, a graph of the test, a statistical performance analysis, and a map visualization
can be made. And as an investigation feature, a property­by­property showcase of the
price development vs. the prediction can be requested for any property in any test, to see
how the prediction models ”think”.
With the current setup, 1 iteration corresponding to everyday use would take approxi­
mately 8 minutes to run, with the additional re­training of the prediction model every week
taking around 10 hours, depending on the GPU specifications.
34
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:42==
5.3
Final structure ­ can be viewed in larger format in
Appendix E
Figure 5.1: Flow diagram of the 4 components
HOUSING BOT
35
==PAGE:43==
6
Results
This chapter outlines the results from running the simulation presented in chapter 5 ­
modeling.
6.1
3 years ­ 50 mio.
To ensure a comprehensive evaluation of the different portfolio strategies, the tests were
conducted across multiple time periods. Specifically, nine distinct start dates were chosen,
primarily spanning from late 2012 to mid­20131. This focused time frame allows for the
assessment of the strategies’ performance under relatively consistent market conditions,
providing a more targeted analysis of their effectiveness. By using multiple start dates
within this period, the study aims to capture any short­term market fluctuations that might
influence strategy performance. Known market crashes were avoided, such as those in
2008 and 2020.
The simulation was given 50 million DKK as starting capital and was run every 30 days2
over the course of 3 years.
Table 6.1: Portfolio Statistics for Different Test Types (3 year test ­ 50 mio.)
Statistic
Naive
Regression
NN
BL
Initial Median Value (DKK)
50,000,000
50,000,000
50,000,000
50,000,000
Final Median Value (DKK)
82,121,495
52,231,962
58,623,105
103,882,473
Total Return (%)
64.24
4.46
17.25
107.76
Annualized Return (%)
17.72
1.45
5.37
27.18
Mean (DKK)
62,426,479
52,024,321
52,502,985
75,056,582
Standard Deviation (DKK)
10,608,693
6,460,983
7,006,006
23,444,678
Minimum (DKK)
44,394,187
42,087,652
37,608,272
42,271,667
25th Percentile (DKK)
54,039,397
48,984,839
47,338,768
54,947,855
Median (50th Percentile) (DKK)
60,643,241
50,000,000
51,081,421
70,039,589
75th Percentile (DKK)
69,607,087
51,732,149
56,824,372
86,927,984
Maximum (DKK)
98,699,753
77,435,734
76,075,906
157,390,558
As shown in Table 6.1, the BL strategy achieved the highest annualized return of 27.18%,
which is the highest possible return. Regression performed the worst with a annualized
return of 1.45%, which is slightly worse than random selection. The Neural Network per­
formed better with a annualized return of 5.37%, which is a decent return. The Naive
approach performed extremely well compared to the expectations, with a staggering an­
nualized return of 17.72%.
All models display similar standard deviations compared to their mean, but the Neural
Network show greater uncertainty with a 25th percentile being significantly lower than the
other models, in respect to their return over time.
1The specific start dates are: December 16, 2010; March 8, 2011; September 6, 2011; January 1, 2012;
January 13, 2012; February 13, 2013; March 12, 2013; May 16, 2013; and September 16, 2013.
2The model is built to be most effective if run every 1­7 days. But tests of this frequency were not feasible
due to time limitations.
36
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.1: Portfolio Value for Different Test Types (3 year test ­ 50 mio.)
If we take a look at figure 6.1, we see the development of portfolio value over time. The
large deviations on portfolio value for the baseline model between 1 and 2.5 year after
the start date, is likely due to fact that the model is making decisions with a max outlook
of 3 years, and if local minima and maxima appear in between a global minima at the
starting date, and a global maxima at the 3 year mark, drops in value still reflect a optimal
investment strategy. While the model is not build to optimize for a certain end point, but to
develop continuous 3 year strategies, this effect would persist as long as the investment
is going on.
Similar dips in portfolio value is apparent with high certainty for both the naive model and
the neural network around the 2.5 year mark. This could be the result of the dates chosen
for the simulation.
HOUSING BOT
37
==PAGE:45==
6.1.1
Decision making over Time
(a) Naive model predictions
(b) Regression model predictions
(c) Neural Network model predictions
(d) Baseline model predictions
Figure 6.2: Comparison of model predictions
Seen on 6.2, is the actual price development on the left of the dateline, and the respective
model’s predictions on the right. 3 datelines for the same simulation is shown for each
model, so show how the model predictions fit with the reality. A random simulation, both
in respect to time, and performance was chosen. Each projection is anchored to the
current price at the dateline, and therefore does not reflect the uncertainty at the time of
the dateline.
38
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:46==
We find that the Naive model (a) does exactly what we expect and project a linear estimate
of the property price. The regression model (b) did not find significant enough correlation
between sales date and price for it to show any variation3 over time. The Neural Net­
work (C) shows almost linear projection, with slight short term divergence. And lastly the
baseline model (d) predicts the exact course of the future prices at the 9 different time
intervals.
6.1.2
Geographical investments
Lets investigate how the different models actually invests geographically.
Figure 6.3: Geographical investment over 3 models (red: Baseline, blue: Neural Network,
green: Naive) after 1000 days
Since Copenhagen tends to be a very attractive area of investment for all models, the
greater Copenhagen area is displayed for itself for all 4 plots. As can be seen on Fig­
ure 6.3, all three models display very similar geographical behavior, but all very spread
across the country. Thus confirming the ”hidden gem” theory, that a predictive model with
OR optimization would be able to uncover unique investment opportunities across all of
Denmark, though with a clear cluster around central Copenhagen.
3Variations of ± 10 DKK was showing over the course of several years.
HOUSING BOT
39
==PAGE:47==
6.2
3 years ­ 100 mio.
To ensure stability in performance of the tool, we conduct a test of twice the budget to see
the change.
Table 6.2: Portfolio Statistics for Different Test Types (3 year test ­ 100 mio.)
Statistic
Naive
Regression
NN
BL
Initial Median Value (DKK)
100,000,000
100,000,000
100,000,000
100,000,000
Final Median Value (DKK)
145,062,262
101,772,324
111,926,876
183,287,330
Total Return (%)
45.06
1.77
11.93
83.29
Annualized Return (%)
13.01
0.58
3.77
21.41
Mean (DKK)
119,399,978
100,531,016
101,294,987
135,963,045
Standard Deviation (DKK)
19,661,057
4,827,909
12,447,346
37,033,215
Minimum (DKK)
79,293,376
91,619,466
64,147,906
83,243,043
25th Percentile (DKK)
104,227,015
98,176,241
93,414,107
102,935,761
Median (50th Percentile) (DKK)
117,983,985
99,905,948
100,312,258
130,272,523
75th Percentile (DKK)
132,932,211
101,565,851
108,912,402
160,037,587
Maximum (DKK)
197,555,200
124,746,594
145,233,017
264,363,163
At twice the budget over the same horizon and same start dates, we find very similar
results as we did at 50 mio. The only noticeable difference to take away is the standard
deviation across all models have fallen relative to the mean values.
This can also be observed on figure 6.4
Figure 6.4: Portfolio Value for Different Test Types (3 year test ­ 100 mio.)
Annualized returns across all models have fallen in comparison to the 50 mio. budget
test.
40
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:48==
6.3
3 years ­ 370 mio.
Market comparable
To compare with the market standard from the interview, a budget size (unleveraged) of 50
mio. € (around 370 mio. DKK), is used to see the performance of the tool at these levels.
At this budget we expect the administration costs of selling properties is outweighed by
the certainty gained from the increase in diversity of the portfolio.
Table 6.3: Portfolio Statistics for Different Test Types (3 year test ­ 370 mio.)
Statistic
Naive
Regression
NN
BL
Initial Median Value (DKK)
370,000,000
370,000,000
370,000,000
370,000,000
Final Median Value (DKK)
457,786,972
370,808,129
441,368,978
627,298,866
Total Return (%)
23.73
0.22
19.29
69.54
Annualized Return (%)
7.25
0.07
5.97
18.96
Mean (DKK)
409,036,224
369,450,295
392,360,313
483,670,177
Standard Deviation (DKK)
50,893,804
9,006,188
43,033,197
106,251,068
Minimum (DKK)
292,668,666
352,298,153
291,927,870
329,481,626
25th Percentile (DKK)
376,384,766
364,389,609
366,336,996
389,811,170
Median (50th Percentile) (DKK)
407,730,635
368,135,324
390,604,579
455,144,815
75th Percentile (DKK)
439,090,458
371,109,345
414,208,182
583,224,245
Maximum (DKK)
658,935,670
416,926,130
589,933,403
776,893,773
Figure 6.5: Portfolio Value for Different Test Types (3 year test ­ 370 mio.)
The baseline results did decrease, but the Neural Network model came much closer to
the naive, and well within the 4­7% range that we see in the industry. In a surprising
turn of events, the regression model beat the market by staying at almost exactly 0 all
the way through, and thus mitigating the natural increase of the market. Disappointing
performance, but interesting nonetheless.
Since the baseline model does not see any benefit from certainty, since every projection is
correct, diversifying the investments was not equal to a better performance. This was not
the case with the Neural Network. For the Neural Network model, we saw a convergence
HOUSING BOT
41
==PAGE:49==
towards the expected certainty on average from the diversification of the investment port­
folio. This mitigated the loss from administration costs, and took the performance much
closer to that of the Naive models performance.
On 3 year investment strategies, it seems that the Neural Network model experience a dip
in annualized return around the 100 mio. mark, from where it hones in on the performance
of the Naive models performance.
We find that the need for a more advanced methods for prediction like Time series Deep
Neural Network, is indeed better than simple linear regression. And thus underpins the
need for the additional complexity and computation.
42
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:50==
7
Discussion
In this chapter we will try to answer the research question; ”How can artificial intelligence
provide accurate and profitable investment decisions compared to traditional investors in
the Danish housing market?”, by looking at model performance, scalability, time horizons,
assumptions and limitations. We will also go though Ethical considerations in regard to
large­scale adoption of AI tools, as well as computational efficiency. The chapter will
conclude with a few words on future potential and market impact considerations.
7.1
Answer to the research question
How can artificial intelligence provide accurate and profitable investment decisions com­
pared to traditional investors in the Danish housing market?
This thesis stands as a proof of concept of a strategy that combines prediction models
with operational analysis, to achieve results that does in fact perform within the range of
traditional investors in the danish housing market.
With a target of 4­7% IRR on a 50 mio. euro investment (unleveraged), our two best
performing models, Neural Network projection and Naive projection, perform at 5.97%
and 7.25% respectively for a budget on 50 mio. euro. With the standard deviation (at the
3 year mark) this result lands at 4.1­6.8% for the Neural Network, and 5.4%­11.2%. This
lands the Neural network performance very close, if not exactly at the traditional investors
level, and even narrowing the span a with a small margin.
The main take away from the model comparison is that the Neural Network tends to close
in in the performance of the Naive approach at larger budgets. The Naive approach per­
forms surprisingly well. And the regression model does not seem to capture any mean­
ingful information that leads to predictions that the OR model can leverage for any market
advantage.
The gap between the two best models and the baseline is still large, which leaves theo­
retical room for improvement with the predictors.
From this point on, we will continue the discussion solely based on the Neural Network
estimation strategy. Using this as a predictor for the Julia OR model in combination with
the rest of the framework presented in chapter 5 as the ”tool”, the scalability, impacts, time
horizons, assumptions and limitations will be covered1.
7.2
Assumptions
The assumptions made in the production of these results are the following:
The Neural Network were trained, validated and tested on all data available, which intro­
duces future bias into the model which could have been mitigated if a new unique model
was trained before each simulation of data only predating the start date of the test. We
assume that the patterns introduced into the Neural network was not overwhelming since
it did not outperform the naive estimates, and did not show signs of over­fitting.
The Julia optimization model were able to sell any property at a moments notice and
spend the money the next iteration. We assume that the sales price is fairly accurate, but
1The naive estimation can be added as a feature for the Time series Deep Neural Network. We can expect
a performance increase from this implementation, which goes under future work.
HOUSING BOT
43
==PAGE:51==
the sales time could be estimated separately for the model to have the funds to reinvest
after a certain amount of time. We do not expect this to have a significant impact on the
performance since single delays of funds should be mitigated at large budgets. And since
the model does not sell very often per test, this should not be noticeable in the results.
It is assumed that a prediction that is further off of the correct current asking price of a
property, is also less trustworthy on its estimate of future price development, even though
this is not tested.
The tests assume no maintenance, tax costs or income from owning a property. These
factors should as a minimum cancel out2, and thus were disregarded. The comparison
with the traditional investors experience the 4­7% IRR with the value of renting out real
estate, which ours do not. This shows potential for better profit margins.
7.3
Limitations
The Time series Deep Neural Network are missing lagged temporal variables such as
price at earlier points in time. It is missing a feature representing the owners expenses,
which we know has an impact on purchase decisions.
Some traditional investment strategies are very complex and completely outside of the
scope of this tool to capture, but nonetheless trained into the past price developments,
such as Property subdivision, or Tenure conversion where a fund buy up a housing unit
and converts it to the Danish cooperative housing apartments. While the second has
been mitigated slightly, remains of the removal of these is still present in the training data.
Having it fully introduced not only as something that happens, but a possibility for this
model could significantly boost the performance.
7.4
Short­term, Long­term, Large­scale, Small­scale
The marketability of this tool is limited to the terms and scale in which it outperforms
traditional strategies, and thus the current form with its limitations shows comparable to
traditional results on large scale investments long­term (3+ years), and any improvement
in prediction models and the OR model would only further increase the market capture.
With the global real­estate market being 6.732 trillion euro in 2023, and projected to in­
crease to around 8.048 trillion euro by 20323, and with a increasing interest in AI solutions
in the sector, this tool could prove valuable for further work. With implementation of the
business model outlined in Chapter 5, potential is showing.
7.5
Robustness
Using fully trained Neural Network models, unusual market conditions or crises would be
very hard to predict, and strategies in such situations could be hard coded into the third
component of the tool (the OR model) to handle situations of divergence from expected
developments over time, such as a stop and hold strategy, that displays the ”diamond
hands” effect known from stock investments, where the investors hold on to assets longer
than normally, to wait out the crisis. Other strategies could also be implemented.
7.5.1
AI in the sector
The industry is already displaying a readiness for machine learning and AI in regards to
investments, but today, a strong Time series Deep Neural Network, is used as a basis for
2Based on the fact that land lording is a profitable industry
3IMARC Group, Real Estate Market Size, Growth, Revenue | Statistics [2032], converted from USD to
EUR using the exchange rate of 1 USD = 0.93 EUR. Available online: https://www.imarcgroup.com.
44
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:52==
considering prices of owned properties at any given moment, or for real estate agents to
help evaluate properties4. In these situations, the mean absolute error of the estimation
models can have big impacts on case by case buy or selling decisions. This is where
diversification, can help mitigate the effect from these errors.
7.6
Ethical considerations
Assuming that this model, or similar approaches is adopted on a large scale in the real­
estate investment industry, ”High­Frequency Trading” (HFT) effects might show on the
real estate market. If adopted on large enough scale, and with liquid gains satisfactory
without renting out, a third part implementation of the cost of ownership could manifest
such that the houses, residents and costs do not change hands5, this would give large
scale investors with the capabilities of High­Frequency Trading the option to affect the
market in such a way that the influence of a tool such as this one, is unpredictable. In such
a situation, Flash Crashes such as the one on May 6th 2010, where the Dow Jones indus­
trial average plunged about 9%, only to recover within minutes would result in extreme
volatility, and could harm ordinary buyers of homes. Widespread increase on volatility is
also a concern since this tool is able to react to and amplify small price movements.
A natural response to this would be regulatory, and could increase scrutiny and regulation
of HFT and algorithmic trading practices, in much the same way as seen in for the stock
market.
The debate about the cost of efficiency and market liquidity vs. stability and fairness
remains, and would transfer to the housing sector which is notorious for being a ”safe bet”
as shown by the public display of purchase leading up to the 2008 housing crash.
Another ethical topic when it comes to AI is the underlying computation. As this thesis
stands as a proof of concept, and the underlying models were trained, run and tested
on a GeForce RTX 4070 graphics card primarily, the computational burden and power
consumption remains low and cheap. But as previously discussed, since bigger models,
longer training times, and more frequent iterations would result in better performance, the
shown market tendency is as simple as price to profit. This leaves the environment as
the benefactor for this profit.
In recent times, we do see incredible strides when it comes to green energy initiatives6,
and computational efficiency in the AI sector7. Along with the fact that the current setup
of the tool buys and holds existing houses, instead of tearing down and building new, is
more environmentally friendly than the alternative.
4Available online: https://www.boliga.dk/tjek-prisen
5Comparable to trading of crude oil, where movement, storage and handling is handled into the trading
price and is dealt with by the trade providers
6Executive Summary – Denmark 2023, International Energy Agency (IEA), detailing Denmark’s ambitious
targets for renewable energy and the integration with European energy markets. Available online: https:
//www.iea.org
7World Economic Forum, discussing the role of AI in accelerating the energy transition through digital
technologies. Available online: https://www.weforum.org
HOUSING BOT
45
==PAGE:53==
7.7
Practical Implementation challenges
The expected challenges for implementing this tool in practice would be plenty, such as
the following:
Reliable access to quality data for daily use is essential for reliable results that can be
produced daily for many years. Integrating AI tools with existing real estate investment
processes and systems can be very complex, and many real estate firms use legacy
systems that may not be compatible with this technology. So restructuring could be nec­
essary. IT infrastructure upgrades and insurance that the tool is compatible with existing
software though APIs or middle ware could facilitate a smoother integration.
The real estate market is heavily regulated. Any AI system employed must comply with
local regulation concerning data pricavy, investment practices, and property transaction.
Engagement with legal experts to ensure all activities adhere to Danish and EU regula­
tions would solve this issue, partly though audits and compliance checks.
Convincing traditional investors and real estate professionals to trust and rely on AI for
investment decisions can be challenging due to the perceived risks and unfamiliarity with
the technology, especially while as of the submission of this thesis, Deep Neural Networks
post AlexNet remain a black box8. The solution would be development of user­friendly
interfaces that provide clear explanation of how the AI makes decisions, and demonstrates
the reliability and benefits of AI. This would especially be crucial within the 0­3 year span
where the uncertainty is expected to rise before going back gown to a stable level at the
3 year mark.
All in all, the science is promising, and with further testing, obvious advancements, and
potentially a business strategy leading to market entry, could prove beneficial as a invest­
ment tool compared to transitional real­estate investment strategies. Especially with a
slow roll out and a hybrid model, combining human expertise with the tools capabilities.
8Available
online:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2012/file/
c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf.
46
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:54==
8
Conclusion
This thesis set out to answer the question: ”Can Artificial Intelligence Provide More Accu­
rate and Profitable Investment Decisions Than Traditional Investors in the Danish Housing
Market?”. Through the development and testing of an AI­driven investment tool combining
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) and Rolling Horizon Optimization, we have demonstrated
that AI can indeed compete with, and in some cases outperform, traditional investment
strategies.
In regards to performance, the Neural Network model achieved an annualized return of
5.97% on a 50 mio. euro investment over a 3­year period, falling within the 4­7% range
reported by one traditional investor, stated to be representative of the sector. This demon­
strates that AI can make investment decisions comparable to human experts. Leveraging
wide range knowledge and simultaneous investments across all of Denmark, yield benefi­
cial. The novel tool developed, showed performance improvement with larger investment
sizes, suggesting its potential for application in large­scale real estate investments. While
the model showed some vulnerability to market fluctuations, it demonstrated the ability to
adapt to different market conditions over time. Especially after reaching the furthest in­
vestment horizon from time 0 (3 year). The tool’s ability to process vast amounts of data
and make rapid decisions offers a significant advantage over traditional methods, poten­
tially allowing investors to identify and act on opportunities more quickly. The research
highlighted important ethical considerations, including the potential for market volatility
and the need for regulatory oversight as AI tools become more prevalent in real estate
investment.
While the tool shows promise, it also has limitations. The lack of consideration for rental
income and the simplification of some real­world complexities in the model suggest areas
for future improvement.
In conclusion, this research demonstrated that AI can provide accurate and profitable
investment decisions in the Danish housing market, competing effectively with traditional
investors. However, the optimal approach may lie in combining AI capabilities with human
expertise, leveraging the strength of both to make more informed and robust investment
decisions.
HOUSING BOT
47
==PAGE:55==
9
Future work
Throughout this thesis, much work was done, but many questions remain unanswered,
which fall outside the scope of this project.
In this chapter, the more obvious areas of interest for further research are presented.
Areas that, if explored thoroughly, could uncover the true potential of this technology,
both in regards to its current capabilities and limitations at intense usage, but also when
it comes to the innovative opportunities we find.
9.1
Regarding the Time Series Neural Network
What could be desired from the time series model, while very complex and decently per­
forming as shown in the results chapter, would be lagged features for some of the temporal
development features. Here we would like to build a training set that uses time­shifted
features for the municipality descriptive features that tell about the past year for price
growth, price volatility and average price/m2. Using the sliding window approach to make
one more of these features for each of the time horizons lagged into the past would give
the model a better way of predicting these features’ impact on future predictions.
9.2
You snooze, You lose
One of the major downfalls of the current model is that it does not consider the possibility
that a property it wishes to buy in 3 weeks, for example, could be taken off the market
before then, thus yielding another potentially better strategy. The positive side effect of
this is that the model waits until the perfect time to buy and does not rush procurement at
time 0.
To introduce a golden middle way to capture this for the model, a new factor could be
introduced into the mathematical model like this:
At = max(0, 1 −α(t −1))
∀t ∈T
(9.1)
Where At is the availability certainty at time t, α is the rate of decrease in certainty (e.g.,
0.1 for a 10% decrease per time point), and T is the set of time points. For the modified
objective function:
Maximize:
P
X
p=1
T
X
t=1
(−xptPptAt + zpt(Ppt −A) + yptPpt⊮t = T) Cp
+
O
X
o=1
T
X
t=1
(sot(Qot −A) + hotQot⊮t=T ) Do
(9.2)
Where all variables are as defined in the original model, and At is the new availability
certainty factor at time t
α could be chosen based on the rate (days) at which different types of properties are taken
off the market.
With this implementation, the performance of even the baseline model could be improved.
48
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:56==
9.3
Learned behavior
Based on the housing data, a series of machine learning analyses could be conducted to
achieve ”better” guesses in regards to:
The administration costs of selling a particular property.
1) The leveraged costs of the model, i.e., an estimate of the effective rates at which a
model could borrow money.
2) The estimated time on market for a property, and the resulting expected drop in price
from this elapsed time. This would allow the model to wait until the right time to bid, at a
lower price.
3) The expected income from renting out a property. This information is also attainable
through private companies that specialize in property administration at a 10% fee.
4) This would combine into a much more complex model with many more biases, which
need to be taken into account.
9.4
Large scale tests
We would like to see the performance across multiple time frames, durations, budgets,
special conditions in model building (as presented in section 9.3), frequency of NN training
during simulation runs, and financial crisis analysis.
At present, the runtime on simulations is 25 hours for a 3­year simulation across 4 pro­
jection models with 9 sample runs per simulation, with 30­day gaps between iterations.
These kinds of tests would require further optimization of the code. Maybe even a smarter
cut of undesirable candidates in the listings data using data analysis in Python, before
handing the information to Julia. To run these tests, server farms could be utilized to run
multiple simulations simultaneously. The result would be a very strong analysis of the
performance of this tool under many relevant conditions.
HOUSING BOT
49
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1] ”Advantages of Adam as an optimizer,” available at: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/
adam-optimizer-in-tensorflow/.
[2] Bellemare, M.G.; Naddaf, Y.; Veness, J.; Bowling, M., ”The arcade learning environ­
ment: An evaluation platform for general agents,” 2013.
[3] BlackRock, ”Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Asset Management,” Oc­
tober
2019.
Available
online:
https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/literature/
whitepaper/viewpoint-artificial-intelligence-machine-learning-asset-management-
october-2019.pdf.
[4] Blanchard, Olivier, Macroeconomics, Seventh Edition, Pearson, p. 124.
[5] ”Blackstone’s Latest Recruitment: Copenhagen Holds Attractive Investment Op­
portunities,” Nordic Property News, available at https://nordicpropertynews.com/
article/3192/blackstones-latest-recruitment-copenhagen-holds-attractive-investment-
opportunities.
[6] ”Så længe tager det i gennemsnit at sælge en bolig i Danmark,” available
at: https://www.boligsiden.dk/nyheder/bolighandel/saa-laenge-tager-det-i-gennemsnit-
at-saelge-en-bolig-i-danmark.
[7] Boliga, Danish housing market statistics, available at:
https://www.boliga.dk/
statistikker.
[8] Boligsiden, Danish housing market data, available at: https://www.boligsiden.dk.
[9] Danmarks Statistik, Danish housing statistics, available at: https://www.dst.dk/en/
Statistik/emner/borgere/boligforhold.
[10] Danmarks Nationalbank, available at: https://nationalbanken.statistikbank.dk/nbf/
98214.
[11] ”Executive Summary – Denmark 2023,” International Energy Agency (IEA), available
at: https://www.iea.org.
[12] IMARC Group, ”Real Estate Market Size, Growth, Revenue | Statistics [2032],” avail­
able online: https://www.imarcgroup.com.
[13] Kaplan, J., et al., ”Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.08361, 2020, available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361.
[14] Kingma, D.P.;
Welling, M., ”Auto­encoding variational bayes,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
[15] LeewayHertz, ”AI in Portfolio Management: Use Cases, Applications, Benefits and
Development,” available online: https://www.leewayhertz.com.
[16] Nationalbanken, ”Working Paper Nr. 188,” available at: https://www.nationalbanken.
dk/media/odwpajgc/working-paper-nr-188.pdf.
[17] Bandres, W.; Bonet, B.; Geffner, H., ”Planning with pixels in (almost) real time,”
Thirty­Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
50
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:58==
[18] Statistikbanken,
available
at:
https://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/
selectvarval/define.asp?PLanguage=0&subword=tabsel&MainTable=DNRNURI&
PXSId=227435&tablestyle=&ST=SD&buttons=0.
[19] ”World Economic Forum,” available at: https://www.weforum.org.
[20] Wolsey, Laurence A., Integer Programming, 2nd edition, Wiley, p. 29.
[21] Glomb, P., et al., ”A Rolling­Horizon Approach for Multi­Period Optimization,” avail­
able at: https://optimization-online.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/7809.pdf.
[22] Habbab, G.; Kampouridis, M., ”Machine Learning for Real Estate Time Series Pre­
diction,” available at: https://kampouridis.net/papers/REITs_UKCI_2022.pdf.
HOUSING BOT
51
==PAGE:59==
Appendices Overview
Appendix A contains the interview with a stakeholder at a industry standard investment
portfolio management company.
Appendix B contains a sample Julia file of a portfolio on a random day during a simulation
Appendix C contains the code for using and training (if applicable) of the three prediction
models; naive model, regression model, and neural network model.
Appendix E contains the flow diagram of the final structure of the tool for daily use or
simulation (split into 3 for increased readability).
52
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:60==
A
Appendix A ­ Interview with Asset
Management Company
This appendix contains the transcript of an interview conducted with a representative from
an asset management company specializing in housing investments.
1. Question: Could you describe the process you follow to search for and evaluate
housing investment opportunities at your company?
Answer: We are conducting a precise market research, consulting with our invest­
ment sourcing team and source investments in preferable areas.
2. Question: Would a tool, such as a desktop application that automatically identifies
available listings fitting the current housing portfolio and budget, be beneficial for
your company?
Answer: Yes, we are currently looking to develop our AI based decision making
processes.
3. Question: Do you or any of your coworkers currently have the responsibility of
reviewing public property listings to find investment opportunities as part of your
daily tasks?
Answer: No, we are working with externals.
4. Question: ... What kind of budget are you working with, and what is the typical
return on investment year to year? This would be used as a real world benchmark
comparison.
Answer: 30­50 Mio. (€) Equity with IRRs in the range of 4­7% (unleveraged).
The identity of the interviewee and the management company in question is to remain
confidential. This was the condition under which these figures were obtained.
HOUSING BOT
53
==PAGE:61==
B
Appendix B ­ sample .jl file of portfolio
on a random day during simulation
owned = [
"Adresse";
"Christiansholms Tværvej 11, 2930";
"Gl Strandvej 142, 5500";
"Henningsens Alle 68, 2900";
"Hesseldalsvej 4, 3660";
"Jelshøjvej 127, 8320";
"Onsgårdsvej 39, 2900";
"Rejnstrupvej 7, 4640";
"Stasevangsvej 7, 2970";
"Veksebovej 23A, 3480"
];
NN_estimate = [
"Adresse" "Price_Today" "Price_1_Week" "Price_2_Weeks" "Price_3_Weeks"
"Price_1_Month" "Price_2_Months" "Price_3_Months" "Price_1_Year" "
Price_2_Years" "Price_3_Years";
"Christiansholms Tværvej 11, 2930" 16363203.851059752 16370107.69669566
9 16377014.45515263 16383924.127659597 16393120.51548205 16423091.8
76210662 16453118.033246242 16722203.824127294 17089080.065304406 1
7464005.3757164;
"Gl Strandvej 142, 5500" 5620667.069227009 5623038.500773668 5625410.93
2857721 5627784.365901307 5630943.272595864 5641238.263833556 56515
52.077289739 5743981.50965326 5870001.403192166 5998786.10604337;
"Henningsens Alle 68, 2900" 24322159.31774597 24332421.148802426 243426
87.30945705 24352957.801536568 24366627.25232392 24411176.487134296
24455807.17081741 24855774.532681383 25401096.981086105 25958383.5
13424043;
"Hesseldalsvej 4, 3660" 6903325.568606052 6906238.170229421 6909152.000
716782 6912067.060586609 6915946.842307318 6928591.191343545 694125
8.657903113 7054780.8530212445 7209558.98567086 7367732.868074522;
"Jelshøjvej 127, 8320" 9994567.988552757 9998784.825012086 10003003.440
60882 10007223.836093595 10012840.94654319 10031147.312780395 10049
487.1483443 10213843.48443798 10437929.767858071 10666932.38492803;
"Onsgårdsvej 39, 2900" 37811760.28389079 37827713.55065922 37843673.548
31558 37859640.2796997 37880891.106554 37950148.32033483 38019532.1
5631279 38641330.15584921 39489100.348747306 40355470.16792814;
"Rejnstrupvej 7, 4640" 8665908.719452854 8669564.977520565 8673222.7782
10463 8676882.122173399 8681752.504412932 8697625.256389625 8713527
.028343009 8856034.138973791 9050330.8088873 9248890.244204268;
"Stasevangsvej 7, 2970" 22358532.06548527 22367965.417011704 22377402.7
4859017 22386844.061899915 22399409.922099818 22440362.515247 22481
389.9815668 22849066.34485985 23350362.68493398 23862657.199584648;
"Veksebovej 23A, 3480" 12263273.605586205 12268447.63805164 12273623.85
3507755 12278802.25287558 12285694.41293643 12308156.212000486 1233
0659.077723064 12532323.293788932 12807275.78878291 13088260.595003
72;
];
selling_price = [
"Adresse" "price";
54
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:62==
"Christiansholms Tværvej 11, 2930" 13478527.703507807;
"Gl Strandvej 142, 5500" 3029754.381853551;
"Henningsens Alle 68, 2900" 13533109.796363903;
"Hesseldalsvej 4, 3660" 3728711.3542989935;
"Jelshøjvej 127, 8320" 4042803.579116897;
"Onsgårdsvej 39, 2900" 22436078.71978641;
"Rejnstrupvej 7, 4640" 3723764.451101374;
"Stasevangsvej 7, 2970" 14411010.118935345;
"Veksebovej 23A, 3480" 5861727.257757932;
];
remaining_budget = 290224
Listing B.1: Example of portfolio
NN_estimate represents the price projection method. In this exsample Time series Neural
Network was used.
selling_price represent the price at which the model is able to sell the property.
HOUSING BOT
55
==PAGE:63==
C
Appendix C ­ Prediction models
C.1
Naive prediction
1
import csv
2
import datetime
3
import pandas as pd
4
5
def find_last_sale_price(adresse , sales_data , current_date):
6
last_sale_price = None
7
last_sale_date = None
8
9
for row in sales_data:
10
if row["Adresse"] == adresse:
11
sale_date = datetime.datetime.strptime(row["Udbudsdato"], "%Y-%m-%
d")
12
if sale_date < current_date:
13
sale_price = float(row["Salgspris"])
14
if last_sale_date is None or sale_date > last_sale_date:
15
last_sale_date = sale_date
16
last_sale_price = sale_price
17
18
return last_sale_price , last_sale_date
19
20
def estimate_current_price(adresse , last_sale_price , last_sale_date ,
sales_data , current_date , lookup_table):
21
if last_sale_price is None or last_sale_date is None:
22
return None
23
24
last_sale_year = last_sale_date.year
25
current_year = current_date.year
26
27
if last_sale_year not in lookup_table.index or current_year not in
lookup_table.index:
28
return None
29
30
last_sale_price_per_sqm = lookup_table.loc[last_sale_year , "
National_Mean_Price_per_SQM"]
31
current_price_per_sqm = lookup_table.loc[current_year , "
National_Mean_Price_per_SQM"]
32
33
growth_rate = (current_price_per_sqm - last_sale_price_per_sqm) /
last_sale_price_per_sqm
34
35
estimated_current_price = last_sale_price * (1 + growth_rate)
36
37
return estimated_current_price
Listing C.1: Python Script for Naive Real Estate Price Estimation
C.2
Regression model
1
import pandas as pd
2
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
3
from sklearn.metrics import mean_absolute_error
4
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
5
from tensorflow.keras.models import Sequential
6
from tensorflow.keras.layers import Dense
7
56
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:64==
8
# Assuming you have the processed data in the 'data' DataFrame
9
10
# Split the data into features and target
11
X = data.drop(columns=['Salgspris'])
12
y = data['Salgspris']
13
14
# Split the data into training and testing sets
15
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.2,
random_state=42)
16
17
# Create the Keras Sequential model for linear regression
18
model = Sequential()
19
model.add(Dense(1, activation=None, input_shape=(X_train.shape[1],)))
20
21
# Compile the model
22
model.compile(optimizer='adam', loss='mean_squared_error')
23
24
25
# Train the model
26
history = model.fit(X_train , y_train , epochs=100, batch_size=32,
validation_split=0.2, verbose=1)
27
28
# Make predictions on the training and testing sets
29
y_pred_train = model.predict(X_train)
30
y_pred_test = model.predict(X_test)
31
32
# Convert the predictions and actual values to DKK
33
y_train_dkk = y_train
34
y_test_dkk = y_test
35
y_pred_train_dkk = y_pred_train.flatten()
36
y_pred_test_dkk = y_pred_test.flatten()
37
38
# Calculate the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) in DKK
39
mae_train_dkk = mean_absolute_error(y_train_dkk , y_pred_train_dkk)
40
mae_test_dkk = mean_absolute_error(y_test_dkk , y_pred_test_dkk)
41
42
print(f'Mean Absolute Error in DKK (Training): {mae_train_dkk:.2f}')
43
print(f'Mean Absolute Error in DKK (Testing): {mae_test_dkk:.2f}')
44
45
# Plotting the fitted line for actual vs predicted values on the testing
dataset
46
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
47
plt.scatter(y_test_dkk , y_pred_test_dkk , s=3, alpha=0.5, label='Actual vs.
Predicted')
48
plt.plot([y_test_dkk.min(), y_test_dkk.max()], [y_test_dkk.min(), y_test_dkk.
max()], 'k--', lw=2, label='Identity Line')
49
plt.xlabel('Actual Sales Price (DKK)')
50
plt.ylabel('Predicted Sales Price (DKK)')
51
plt.title('Actual vs. Predicted Sales Prices')
52
plt.legend()
53
54
# Use ticklabel_format to display full numbers
55
plt.gca().ticklabel_format(style='plain', axis='both')
56
57
# Set a specific format for the ticks to improve readability
58
plt.gca().xaxis.set_major_formatter(plt.FuncFormatter(lambda x, _: f'{int(x)
:,}'))
59
plt.gca().yaxis.set_major_formatter(plt.FuncFormatter(lambda x, _: f'{int(x)
:,}'))
60
61
plt.show()
62
HOUSING BOT
57
==PAGE:65==
63
# Plot the training progress
64
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
65
plt.plot(history.history['loss'], label='Training Loss')
66
plt.plot(history.history['val_loss'], label='Validation Loss')
67
plt.xlabel('Epoch')
68
plt.ylabel('Loss')
69
plt.title('Training Progress')
70
plt.legend()
71
plt.show()
Listing C.2: Python Script for Regression Real Estate Price Estimation
Figure C.1: Regression training performance
Figure C.2: Regression training loss over 100 epochs
Figure C.1 Shows typical signs of regression training without enough information about
to properly train the model.
58
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:66==
Training was conducted once, and upon evaluation we see diminishing return after the
first 40 Epochs, which should be enough for weekly training.
HOUSING BOT
59
==PAGE:67==
C.3
Neural network model
1
import pandas as pd
2
import numpy as np
3
from sklearn.preprocessing import OneHotEncoder , StandardScaler
4
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
5
from tensorflow.keras.models import Sequential
6
from tensorflow.keras.layers import Dense
7
from tensorflow.keras.optimizers import Adam
8
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
9
import joblib
10
11
# Read the raw CSV file
12
data = pd.read_csv('sales_data_2_1_no_nan.csv')
13
14
# Read the baseline prices file
15
baseline_prices = pd.read_csv('baseline_price_results/baseline_prices_1095d.
csv')
16
17
# Merge the baseline prices with the original data
18
data = pd.merge(data, baseline_prices[['Adresse'] + [f'price_{h}d' for h in
[0, 7, 14, 21, 30, 60, 90, 365, 730, 1095]]], on='Adresse', how='left')
19
20
# Define the feature sets
21
one_hot_features = ['Boligtype', 'Vær.', 'floor']
22
log_standardize_features = ['Størrelse', 'Udbudspris', 'distance_to_edge', '
Median_Pris/m2', 'Tidligere_salgspris']
23
standardize_features = ['Byggeår', 'Effektiv rentesats', 'Latitude', '
Longitude', 'Price_Volatility', 'Price_Growth_Rate']
24
25
# Process dates
26
data['Udbudsdato'] = pd.to_datetime(data['Udbudsdato'])
27
data['Udbudsdato_year'] = data['Udbudsdato'].dt.year
28
data['Udbudsdato_month'] = data['Udbudsdato'].dt.month
29
data['Udbudsdato_dayofweek'] = data['Udbudsdato'].dt.dayofweek
30
31
data['Tidligere_salgsdato'] = pd.to_datetime(data['Tidligere_salgsdato'])
32
data['Tidligere_salgsdato_year'] = data['Tidligere_salgsdato'].dt.year
33
data['Tidligere_salgsdato_month'] = data['Tidligere_salgsdato'].dt.month
34
data['Tidligere_salgsdato_dayofweek'] = data['Tidligere_salgsdato'].dt.
dayofweek
35
36
# Remove the original date columns after processing
37
data = data.drop(columns=['Udbudsdato', 'Tidligere_salgsdato'])
38
39
# One-hot encode categorical features
40
one_hot_encoder = OneHotEncoder(handle_unknown='ignore')
41
one_hot_encoded = one_hot_encoder.fit_transform(data[one_hot_features]).
toarray()
42
one_hot_columns = one_hot_encoder.get_feature_names_out(one_hot_features)
43
one_hot_df = pd.DataFrame(one_hot_encoded , columns=one_hot_columns , index=data
.index)
44
data = pd.concat([data, one_hot_df], axis=1)
45
46
# Remove the original categorical features after one-hot encoding
47
data = data.drop(columns=one_hot_features)
48
49
# Log transform and standardize features
50
log_scaler = StandardScaler()
51
data[log_standardize_features] = log_scaler.fit_transform(np.log1p(data[
log_standardize_features]))
52
53
# Standardize features
60
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:68==
54
scaler = StandardScaler()
55
data[standardize_features] = scaler.fit_transform(data[standardize_features])
56
57
# Prepare features and targets
58
X = data.drop(columns=['Adresse', 'Postnummer', 'By', 'Pris/m2', 'Salgstid (
dage)', 'Salgsdato', 'Salgspris'] + [f'price_{h}d' for h in [0, 7, 14, 21,
30, 60, 90, 365, 730, 1095]])
59
y = data[[f'price_{h}d' for h in [0, 7, 14, 21, 30, 60, 90, 365, 730, 1095]]]
60
61
# Check for NaN values
62
print("NaN values in X:", X.isna().sum().sum())
63
print("NaN values in y:", y.isna().sum().sum())
64
65
# Remove rows with NaN values
66
mask = ~(X.isna().any(axis=1) | y.isna().any(axis=1))
67
X = X[mask]
68
y = y[mask]
69
70
print("Shape of X after removing NaN:", X.shape)
71
print("Shape of y after removing NaN:", y.shape)
72
73
# Convert data to float32
74
X = X.astype('float32')
75
y = y.astype('float32')
76
77
# Split the data into training and testing sets
78
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.2,
random_state=42)
79
80
# Create the Keras Sequential model
81
model = Sequential([
82
Dense(64, activation='relu', input_shape=(X_train.shape[1],)),
83
Dense(32, activation='relu'),
84
Dense(32, activation='relu'),
85
Dense(10)
# 10 outputs for 10 time horizons
86
])
87
88
# Compile the model
89
model.compile(optimizer=Adam(learning_rate=0.001), loss='mse')
90
91
# Train the model
92
history = model.fit(X_train , y_train , epochs=100, batch_size=32,
validation_split=0.2, verbose=1)
93
94
# Make predictions
95
y_pred_train = model.predict(X_train)
96
y_pred_test = model.predict(X_test)
97
98
# Calculate Mean Absolute Error for each time horizon
99
time_horizons = [0, 7, 14, 21, 30, 60, 90, 365, 730, 1095]
100
for i, horizon in enumerate(time_horizons):
101
mae_train = np.mean(np.abs(y_train.iloc[:, i] - y_pred_train[:, i]))
102
mae_test = np.mean(np.abs(y_test.iloc[:, i] - y_pred_test[:, i]))
103
print(f'Mean Absolute Error for {horizon}-day horizon (Training): {
mae_train:.2f}')
104
print(f'Mean Absolute Error for {horizon}-day horizon (Testing): {mae_test
:.2f}')
105
106
# Plot actual vs predicted for a specific time horizon (e.g., 30 days)
107
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
108
plt.scatter(y_test.iloc[:, 4], y_pred_test[:, 4], alpha=0.5)
HOUSING BOT
61
==PAGE:69==
109
plt.plot([y_test.iloc[:, 4].min(), y_test.iloc[:, 4].max()], [y_test.iloc[:,
4].min(), y_test.iloc[:, 4].max()], 'r--')
110
plt.xlabel('Actual Price (30 days)')
111
plt.ylabel('Predicted Price (30 days)')
112
plt.title('Actual vs Predicted Prices (30-day horizon)')
113
plt.show()
114
115
# Plot training progress
116
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
117
plt.plot(history.history['loss'], label='Training Loss')
118
plt.plot(history.history['val_loss'], label='Validation Loss')
119
plt.xlabel('Epoch')
120
plt.ylabel('Loss')
121
plt.title('Training Progress')
122
plt.legend()
123
plt.show()
124
125
# Save the trained model and preprocessing objects
126
model.save('machine_learning_files/time_series_model.h5')
127
joblib.dump(one_hot_encoder , 'machine_learning_files/one_hot_encoder.pkl')
128
joblib.dump(log_scaler , 'machine_learning_files/log_scaler.pkl')
129
joblib.dump(scaler , 'machine_learning_files/scaler.pkl')
Listing C.3: Python Script for Time series Neural Network Real Estate Price Estimation
Figure C.3: Time series Neural Network training performance
62
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:70==
Figure C.4: Time series Neural Network training loss over 100 epochs
Figure C.3 shows the actual vs predicted prices for the 30 day horizon specifically. All
other horizons perform similarly.
Training was conducted once, and upon evaluation we see diminishing return after the
first 20 Epochs, which should be enough for weekly training.
HOUSING BOT
63
==PAGE:71==
D
Appendix D ­ Julia rolling horizon
model
1
# THIS METHOD CONTAINS CERTAINTY
2
3
4
using Pkg
5
Pkg.add("JuMP")
6
Pkg.add("HiGHS")
7
Pkg.add("CSV")
8
Pkg.add("DataFrames")
9
using JuMP, HiGHS, Printf, CSV, DataFrames
10
11
# Check command -line arguments
12
if length(ARGS) < 3
13
println("Usage: julia script.jl <data_file > <portfolio_file > <output_file >
")
14
exit(1)
15
end
16
17
data_file = ARGS[1]
18
portfolio_file = ARGS[2]
19
output_file = ARGS[3]
20
21
# Include data and portfolio files
22
include(data_file)
23
include(portfolio_file)
24
25
# Initialize variables from data or set defaults if data is empty
26
#------------------------------------------------------------------------#
27
AvailableProperties = size(NN, 1) > 1 ? NN[2:end, 1] : String[]
28
#------------------------------------------------------------------------#
29
P = length(AvailableProperties)
30
OwnedProperties = size(owned, 1) > 1 ? owned[2:end, 1] : String[]
31
O = length(OwnedProperties)
32
Udbudspris = size(BL, 1) > 0 ? BL[2:end, 2] : Float64[]
33
#------------------------------------------------------------------------#
34
ProjectedPrices = size(NN, 1) > 1 ? NN[2:end, 2:end] : Float64[]
35
#------------------------------------------------------------------------#
36
37
ProjectedPortfolioPrices = size(NN_estimate , 1) > 1 ? NN_estimate[2:end, 2:end
] : Float64[]
# Adjusted for multiple time points
38
SellingPrices = size(selling_price , 1) > 1 ? selling_price[2:end, 2] : Float64
[]
39
40
AvailableCertainty = [200+min(100, (1 / ((abs(ProjectedPrices[p] - Udbudspris[
p]) / Udbudspris[p])))) for p in 1:P]
41
OwnedCertainty = [200+min(100, (1 / ((abs(ProjectedPortfolioPrices[o] -
SellingPrices[o]) / SellingPrices[o])))) for o in 1:O]
42
43
TimePoints = size(NN, 2) - 1 # Assuming time points start from the 2nd column
44
45
# Define the budget and administrative cost
46
Budget = remaining_budget
47
AdminCost = 200000
48
49
# Set up the optimization model
50
investment_model = Model(HiGHS.Optimizer)
64
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:72==
51
@variable(investment_model , buy[1:P, 1:TimePoints], Bin)
52
@variable(investment_model , post_buy_hold[1:P, 1:TimePoints], Bin)
53
@variable(investment_model , post_buy_sell[1:P, 1:TimePoints], Bin)
54
55
if O > 0
56
@variable(investment_model , hold[1:O, 1:TimePoints], Bin)
57
@variable(investment_model , sell[1:O, 1:TimePoints], Bin)
58
end
59
60
@variable(investment_model , remaining_budget_at_time[1:TimePoints] >= 0)
61
62
#************************************************************************
63
# NEW INVESTMENTS
64
# Buying contribution: Reflecting the cost as negative
65
buy_contribution = P > 0 ? sum(-buy[p, t] * ProjectedPrices[p, t] *
AvailableCertainty[p] for p in 1:P, t in 1:TimePoints , init=0.0) : 0.0
66
67
# Selling contributions
68
post_buy_sell_contribution = P > 0 ? sum((post_buy_sell[p, t] * (
ProjectedPrices[p, t] - AdminCost) * AvailableCertainty[p]) for p in 1:P,
t in 1:TimePoints , init=0.0) : 0.0
69
70
# Holding contributions
71
post_buy_hold_contribution = P > 0 ? sum((post_buy_hold[p, t] *
ProjectedPrices[p, t] * (t == TimePoints)* AvailableCertainty[p]) for p in
1:P, t in 1:TimePoints , init=0.0) : 0.0
72
73
#************************************************************************
74
# PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
75
# Selling contributions
76
sell_contribution = O > 0 ? sum((sell[o, t] * (ProjectedPortfolioPrices[o, t]
- AdminCost) * OwnedCertainty[o]) for o in 1:O, t in 1:TimePoints , init
=0.0) : 0.0
77
78
# Holding contributions
79
hold_contribution = O > 0 ? sum((hold[o, t] * ProjectedPortfolioPrices[o, t] *
(t == TimePoints) * OwnedCertainty[o]) for o in 1:O, t in 1:TimePoints ,
init=0.0) : 0.0
80
81
82
83
# Objective function
84
if O == 0
85
@objective(investment_model , Max, buy_contribution +
post_buy_hold_contribution + post_buy_sell_contribution)
86
end
87
if O > 0
88
@objective(investment_model , Max, buy_contribution +
post_buy_hold_contribution + hold_contribution +
post_buy_sell_contribution + sell_contribution)
89
end
90
91
#************************************************************************
92
# NEW INVESTMENTS
93
# Constraint: Can only sell if bought previously
94
@constraint(investment_model , [p=1:P, t=1:TimePoints],
95
post_buy_sell[p, t] <= sum(buy[p, s] for s in 1:t))
96
97
# Constraint: Each property can only be bought once
98
@constraint(investment_model , [p=1:P], sum(buy[p, t] for t in 1:TimePoints) <=
1)
99
HOUSING BOT
65
==PAGE:73==
100
# Constraint: Each property can only be sold once
101
@constraint(investment_model , [p=1:P], sum(post_buy_sell[p, t] for t in 1:
TimePoints) <= 1)
102
103
# Constraint: Can hold only if bought and not sold before
104
@constraint(investment_model , [p=1:P, t=1:TimePoints],
105
post_buy_hold[p, t] <= sum(buy[p, s] for s in 1:t) - sum(post_buy_sell[p,
s] for s in 1:t))
106
107
#************************************************************************
108
# PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
109
110
if O > 0
111
# Ensure each property in the existing portfolio can only be sold once
112
@constraint(investment_model , [o=1:O], sum(sell[o, t] for t in 1:
TimePoints) <= 1)
113
114
# Constraint: Can hold only if not sold before
115
@constraint(investment_model , [o=1:O, t=1:TimePoints],
116
hold[o, t] <= 1 - sum(sell[o, s] for s in 1:t))
117
end
118
119
# Prevent buying properties that are already owned
120
owned_property_set = Set(OwnedProperties)
121
for p in 1:P
122
if AvailableProperties[p] in owned_property_set
123
for t in 1:TimePoints
124
@constraint(investment_model , buy[p, t] == 0)
125
end
126
end
127
end
128
129
#************************************************************************
130
# BUDGET
131
#************************************************************************
132
# WITHOUT PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
133
if O == 0
134
# Initial Budget Constraint for Day 1
135
@constraint(investment_model , sum(buy[p, 1] * Udbudspris[p] for p=1:P) <=
Budget)
136
137
# Initialize the remaining budget after day 1 considering initial buys
138
@constraint(investment_model , remaining_budget_at_time[1] == Budget - sum(
buy[p, 1] * Udbudspris[p] for p in 1:P))
139
140
# Update the remaining budget for each subsequent day
141
@constraint(investment_model , [t=2:TimePoints],
142
remaining_budget_at_time[t] == remaining_budget_at_time[t-1]
143
+ sum(post_buy_sell[p, t-1] * (ProjectedPrices[p, t-1] - AdminCost)
for p in 1:P)
144
- sum(buy[p, t] * ProjectedPrices[p, t] for p in 1:P))
145
end
146
147
#************************************************************************
148
# WITH PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
149
if O > 0
150
# Adjusting Day 1 budget for existing assets potentially held
151
@constraint(investment_model , sum(buy[p, 1] * Udbudspris[p] for p=1:P)
152
- sum(sell[o,1] * (SellingPrices[o,1] - AdminCost) for o=1:O) <=
Budget)
153
66
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:74==
154
# Initialize the remaining budget after day 1 considering both new and
existing assets
155
@constraint(investment_model , remaining_budget_at_time[1] == Budget
156
- sum(buy[p, 1] * Udbudspris[p] for p=1:P)
157
+ sum(sell[o,1] * (SellingPrices[o,1] - AdminCost) for o=1:O))
158
159
# Update the remaining budget for each subsequent day
160
@constraint(investment_model , [t=2:TimePoints],
161
remaining_budget_at_time[t] == remaining_budget_at_time[t-1]
162
+ sum(post_buy_sell[p, t-1] * (ProjectedPrices[p, t-1] - AdminCost)
for p in 1:P)
# gains from selling previous holdings
163
- sum(sell[o, t] * (ProjectedPortfolioPrices[o, 1] - AdminCost) for o
in 1:O)
# cost from selling today
164
- sum(buy[p, t] * ProjectedPrices[p, t] for p in 1:P))
# cost of
buying new properties
165
end
166
167
# Solve the optimization model
168
optimize!(investment_model)
169
println("Termination status: $(termination_status(investment_model))")
170
171
@printf("%.2f\n", value(Budget))
172
@printf("%.2f\n", value(remaining_budget_at_time[1]))
173
174
# Optionally print future planned actions for verification
175
println("Future Actions Planned:")
176
for t in 1:TimePoints
177
for p in 1:P
178
if value(buy[p, t]) > 0.001
179
println("Plan to buy ", AvailableProperties[p], " at time point ",
t)
180
end
181
if value(post_buy_sell[p, t]) > 0.001
182
println("Plan to sell ", AvailableProperties[p], " at time point "
, t)
183
end
184
if value(post_buy_hold[p, t]) > 0.001
185
println("Plan to hold ", AvailableProperties[p], " at time point "
, t)
186
end
187
end
188
end
189
println("--------------------------------------")
190
for t in 1:TimePoints
191
for o in 1:O
192
if value(sell[o, t]) > 0.001
193
println("Plan to sell ", OwnedProperties[o], " at time point ", t)
194
end
195
if value(hold[o, t]) > 0.001
196
println("Plan to hold ", OwnedProperties[o], " at time point ", t)
197
end
198
end
199
end
200
201
# If the optimization is successful , you can print the results here if needed
202
if termination_status(investment_model) == MOI.OPTIMAL
203
# Uncomment these lines if you want to print the objective value
204
# println("RESULTS:")
205
# println("Total Expected Profit = $(@sprintf("%.0f", objective_value(
investment_model)))")
206
else
207
println("No solution found")
HOUSING BOT
67
==PAGE:75==
208
end
209
println("--------------------------------------")
210
211
# Function to update portfolio CSV
212
function update_portfolio_csv(output_file)
213
current_owned = DataFrame(Adresse = OwnedProperties)
214
sold_properties = O > 0 ? [OwnedProperties[o] for o in 1:O if value(sell[o
]) > 0.001] : String[]
215
bought_properties = [AvailableProperties[p] for p in 1:P if value(buy[p])
> 0.001]
216
new_owned = setdiff(current_owned.Adresse , sold_properties)
217
new_owned = union(new_owned , bought_properties)
218
219
if isempty(new_owned)
220
# If no properties , create a single row DataFrame with only
RemainingBudget
221
output_df = DataFrame(Adresse = [""], RemainingBudget = [@sprintf("%.0
f", value(remaining_budget_at_time[1]))])
222
else
223
# Create the DataFrame for output with properties
224
output_df = DataFrame(Adresse = new_owned)
225
output_df[:, :RemainingBudget] = [@sprintf("%.0f", value(
remaining_budget_at_time[1])) for _ in 1:size(output_df , 1)]
226
end
227
228
# Save the DataFrame to the output file
229
CSV.write(output_file , output_df)
230
end
231
232
233
234
235
# Call the function to update portfolio and output to CSV
236
update_portfolio_csv(output_file)
Listing D.1: Julia Investment Model with Certainty
68
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:76==
E
Appendix E ­ Flow diagram of the final
structure
HOUSING BOT
69
==PAGE:77==
Figure E.1: First part of the flow diagram of the final structure
70
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:78==
Figure E.2: Second part of the flow diagram of the final structure
HOUSING BOT
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure E.3: Third part of the flow diagram of the final structure
72
HOUSING BOT
==PAGE:80==
Non­existence is not a result of something that is impossible,
or something that never worked.
Sometimes, good things come to those who just do... and keep doing.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
