==PAGE:1==
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting
from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
Master’s Thesis
DTU Autonomous Systems
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting
from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitor­
ing
Master’s Thesis
August, 2024
Author:
Koral Yozbey(s213064@dtu.dk)
Supervisors:
Lazaros Nalpantidis (lanalpa@dtu.dk)
Andreas Franz Heinrich Ibrom (anib@dtu.dk)
Anastasia Gorlenko (anago@dtu.dk)
Ronja Güldenring (ronjag@dtu.dk)
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Address:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Elektrovej,
Building 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Preface
The present MSc thesis is a partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Master of Science
degree in Autonomous Systems at Technical University of Denmark.
The project accounts for 32.5 ECTS and is conducted between 19.02.2024 and 31.08.2024.
The exact topic along with the objectives of the project are defined in collaboration be­
tween the author and the supervisors.
Koral Yozbey ­ s213064
ii
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
31/08/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The rapid increase in vehicular traffic has become a significant contributor to greenhouse
gas emissions, necessitating more accurate and efficient methods for monitoring these
emissions. This thesis presents a novel approach for automated vehicle detection and
counting by using video cameras to facilitate greenhouse gas emission monitoring. Lever­
aging advancements in computer vision and machine learning, several detection mod­
els, including DETR, RetinaNet, YOLO, and Faster R­CNN, were evaluated to determine
their effectiveness under various real­world conditions. The research highlighted the chal­
lenges of detecting small and distant vehicles, especially in adverse weather conditions,
and addressed these challenges by implementing optimized detection and tracking algo­
rithms. A comprehensive dataset was developed to simulate different real­world scenar­
ios, ensuring robust model performance across diverse conditions. The results indicate
that while models like DETR show promising accuracy in vehicle detection under specific
conditions, further refinement and data expansion are necessary to enhance reliability.
This study contributes to the field by offering a scalable solution for vehicle detection and
counting, which can be integrated into larger environmental monitoring frameworks to
improve traffic management and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Lazaros Nalpantidis, Andreas Franz
Heinrich Ibrom, Anastasia Gorlenko, and Ronja Güldenring who with their great knowl­
edge, constant guidance, and calming demeanor supported me throughout the entire
project.
iv
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Artificial Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Backpropogation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Vehicle Counting Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.1
Manual Counting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.2
Rubber Tubes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.3
Radars
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.4
Magnetic Coil Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.5
Ultrasonic Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.6
Video Cameras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.6.1
Vehicle Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.6.1.1
Detection Methods Based on Motion Detection . .
8
2.4.6.1.1.1
Background Subtraction . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.6.1.1.2
Optical Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.6.1.1.3
Frame Differencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.6.1.2
Detection Methods Based on the Inherent Fea­
tures of Vehicle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.6.1.2.1
Representative Approaches
. . . . . . . . 10
2.4.6.1.2.2
CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4.6.1.2.3
DETR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4.6.1.2.4
FASTER R­CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.6.1.2.5
YOLOX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.6.1.2.6
RETINANET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.6.1.2.7
YOLO v3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.6.2
Vehicle Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.6.2.1
Template Match . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.6.2.2
IoU­Based Match
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.6.2.3
SORT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.6.2.4
Deep SORT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Methods
15
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Research Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
v
==PAGE:8==
3.4
System Development & Implementations Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4.1
System Architecture & Algorithm Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4.1.1
Target Region Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4.1.2
Detection Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4.1.3
Tracking Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4.1.4
Counting Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.5
Evaluation Metric of Vehicle Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Results
19
4.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Dataset Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2.1
Intorduction to the Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2.2
Dataset Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2.3
Examples of Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Vehicle Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Association and Grouping of Vehicles Across Frames
. . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.5
Counting Vehicles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Conclusion
39
6
Future Work
41
Bibliography
43
vi
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Climate change is a serious threat which endangers all humans as well as the lives of all
living creatures. The primary disturbance that changes the climate is the rise of carbon
dioxide proportion in the atmosphere. This change of the carbon dioxide ratio mainly
occurs due to anthropogenic CO2 emissions[1]. Knowing all of the anthropogenic CO2
emissions 80% is originated by combustion of fossil fuels, investigating the emission rate
caused by vehicles plays a crucial role in the prevention of climate change[2].
The calculation of the vehicle induces anthropogenic CO2 emission brings out various
challenges. The main cause of all challenges is that all methods more or less require
great efforts and costs which are inevitable according to the required level of accuracy.
Most of the time, sacrificing ground truth of the real data is the chosen path to save money
and time. For example, one can count the vehicles as all the same and compare this data
with the emission data from a CO2 sensor located nearby and create a model instead
of collecting the data of each particular vehicle’s emission which is nearly impossible or
incredibly costly. Therefore, an accuracy trade­off with costs and with efforts has to be
made. A model can be created by past research with reasonable and solid assumptions.
A good model can decrease lots of parameters and still can obtain satisfactory accuracy.
A simple yet powerful model of CO2 emission of vehicles can be constructed by density
change of vehicles and change of CO2 emission in the area instead of putting expen­
sive sensors on all vehicles. However, counting the vehicles in a certain area is a whole
another challenge. There are quite many options to count such as; manual counting, rub­
ber tubes, radars, magnetic coil detectors, ultrasonic sensors, automatic plate recognition
cameras, video cameras, etc. Also, even if there is a system ready to count vehicles, there
should be a nearby sensor to detect greenhouse gasses change. All counting methods
have their own problems, but two common problems are the installation cost and legal
obstacles to install them. Best way to tackle those problems is using the already installed
and accessible systems.
In our case study, we have access to a tall tower which has gas analyzers to monitor
gas exchanges in the atmosphere. Also, the tower has cameras to monitor phenological
changes. Those cameras can be used to monitor certain roads, and those digital images
produced by the cameras can be processed to obtain vehicle counting of the chosen
roads. In this current state, turning those digital image data into vehicle counting is the
necessary task which is the aim of this master thesis.
1.1
Motivation
Climate change has been accelerating since the industrial revolution, currently presenting
extraordinary and threatening rates. This change is mainly due to rising greenhouse gas
emissions from fossil fuel combustion. Besides contributing to global warming, green­
house gas emissions drop air quality, affecting human health through increased respi­
ratory diseases. Moreover, emissions reduce visibility and sunlight, causing ecological
issues.
Current studies show that emissions due to the transport sector have risen in the last
decades in the European Union.
Transport sector of the European Union generates
roughly one third of the overall greenhouse gas emissions including those emissions
by aviation and international shipping[3]. During 2019, Danish Energy Agency reveals
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
1
==PAGE:10==
that the transport sector of Denmark produces 44% of all CO2 emissions [4]. Another
study from Denmark presents, in 2020, among road transport vehicles the primary CO2
emission source is passenger vehicles by 54% and second highest emission caused by
heavy­duty vehicles[5].
In urban areas of the cities, there are many different sources of greenhouse gas emission
such as residential buildings, commercial buildings, public buildings, waste management,
industrial activities, and transportation. Among all of those it is quite complicated to ana­
lyze emissions of vehicles by using the emission change in air. However, studying trans­
portation and greenhouse gas emissions in rural areas may reveal stronger correlation
between emission due to transportation and global warming. Moreover, recent devel­
opments of electric vehicles and the trend of shifting from fossil fuel vehicles to electric
vehicles might decrease the emission of greenhouse gasses, but still energy consump­
tion of these electric vehicles is important as the energy will be produced, transported, and
stored somewhere as all those implicitly contribute to global warming. Therefore, collect­
ing accurate data of transportation plays a crucial role in slowing the climate change and
protecting the environment.
1.2
Background
The importance of acquiring reliable vehicle data on the roads cannot be overstated when
humanity takes actions to decrease greenhouse gas emissions. Also, collecting huge
amounts of data is both tedious and costly. To tackle this problem, one needs to choose
the best option among other possible ways to obtain data. There are several well known
and used techniques to count vehicles on the roads such as manual counting[6], rubber
tubes[7], radars[8], inductive loops[8], ultrasonic sensors[9], video cameras[10]. Manual
counting requires too much human effort and it becomes extremely expensive and time
consuming. Other techniques like inductive loops, rubber tubes etc. require high instal­
lation costs, suspension of the traffic, legal permissions. The techniques such as radars
overcome some of the problems previously mentioned techniques have, yet they are only
able to observe a certain road. On the other hand, video cameras like CCTV cameras
can perceive multiple roads at the same time and can be used to detect vehicles and
count them even when the license plate is not visible which is not the case when using
plate recognition cameras. Moreover, development of image processing techniques, in
the last decades, attracted many researchers to study vehicle detection on images and
tracking of moving objects on video sequences. However, due to the complex nature of
perceiving the real world and turning it to reliable information by computer vision, there
are a vast number of techniques and problems to overcome. One of the biggest problems
in the use of CCTV cameras in a rural area to monitor multiple roads is that the camera is
very far away from the roads, therefore vehicles are significantly small for common object
detection and classification models [11].
1.3
Problem Statement
The rapid increase in vehicle numbers and road infrastructure have led to significant
challenges in traffic management, urban planning, and greenhouse gas emissions con­
trol. Traditional methods of vehicle detection and counting, such as manual counting
and sensor­based systems, are becoming increasingly insufficient due to their high la­
bor costs, limited scalability, and inability to provide real­time data. Consequently, there
is a growing need for more advanced, efficient, and scalable solutions. Automated vehi­
cle detection and counting from images, leveraging advancements in computer vision and
machine learning, presents a promising alternative. However, despite significant progress
2
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:11==
in these fields, several critical challenges and research gaps remain that need to be ad­
dressed to make these systems more robust, accurate, and widely applicable. Also, while
many possible strategies exist for vehicle detection and counting from images, there are
still countless challenging cases where they do not perform very well.
Some of the challenges are due to the dynamic nature of weather and lightning conditions
and the perception capabilities of camera systems which may decrease the performance.
The focus is on rural traffic, which has roads that are too far away and is heavily influ­
enced by visibility. Since this method focuses on traffic surveillance rather than long­term
planning and policy­making, it needs to produce results rapidly. Additionally, it should be
easily adaptable to different locations and roads.
1.4
Thesis Structure
The present report is organized to mirror the workflow of the thesis project conducted
during the spring of 2024. It begins with a comprehensive review of existing literature
to establish a foundational understanding of relevant fields and the latest advancements.
Based on this review, the selection of a suitable starting point for vehicle counting deter­
mined. The next phase covers the obtaining real­world data to work on and followed by the
experimenting of different methods. During the development phase, various experiments
and evaluations are performed to evaluate performance of various approaches.
The chapters are arranged as follows: Chapter 2 provides an overview of the theoretical
background and related work in the field; Chapter 3 examines the methodology used;
Chapter 4 presents the experimental results and their analysis; Chapter 5 summarizes
the conclusions of the thesis; Chapter 6 suggests directions for future research.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:13==
2
Related Work
2.1
Machine Learning
Machine learning focuses on creating computers that can improve their performance auto­
matically through experience. It is a rapidly expanding field that blends computer science
and statistics, forming a crucial part of artificial intelligence and data science. Recent
advancements in machine learning have been carried out by innovations in learning algo­
rithms and theories, as well as the surge in available online data and affordable computing
power. Data­driven machine learning techniques are increasingly used across various
sectors, including healthcare, manufacturing, education, finance, law enforcement, and
marketing, leading to more data­informed decision­making [12].
2.1.1
Types
Machine learning algorithms are categorized based on their intended outcomes. The main
types include [13]:
• Supervised Learning: The algorithm creates a function that maps inputs to specific
outputs. A common example is classification, where the goal is to learn how to
assign inputs to one of several predefined classes based on examples.
• Unsupervised Learning: The algorithm models input data without using labeled ex­
amples.
• Semi­Supervised Learning: This approach uses a combination of labeled and unla­
beled examples to develop a function or classifier.
• Reinforcement Learning: The algorithm learns how to make decisions by observing
the environment and receiving feedback based on its actions.
• Transduction: This method is similar to supervised learning but does not explicitly
create a function. Instead, it predicts outputs for new inputs using existing training
data.
• Learning to Learn: The algorithm improves its ability to learn based on previous
experiences.
The analysis of machine learning algorithms’ performance and efficiency is part of a field
in statistics called computational learning theory. Machine learning focuses on creating
algorithms that enable computers to learn from data, which involves identifying patterns
or regularities rather than conscious thought. Consequently, machine learning methods
often differ from human learning processes but can provide valuable insights into the
complexity of learning in various settings.
2.2
Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial neural networks (ANNs), or simply neural networks, are a machine learning ap­
proach inspired by the human brain’s functioning. In modern drug discovery, where there
is an explosion of data, advanced analysis methods are needed to reveal hidden causal
relationships between various responses and a broad range of properties. ANNs are ver­
satile tools well­suited for this task, offering advantages over traditional regression meth­
ods by modeling complex nonlinear relationships. They are also fault­tolerant, fast, and
highly scalable due to parallel processing capabilities. This chapter provides an overview
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
5
==PAGE:14==
of the development of ANNs, explains fundamental concepts necessary for understand­
ing more advanced networks, and briefly covers commonly used learning methods and
network configurations [14].
In basic terms, when an input value is given to a neuron (x1, x2, ..., xn), it passes through
the synapse, and its value is multiplied by the synapse’s weight (w1, w2, ..., wn). A bias b
is then added to the sum of these products, resulting in the output of the neuron. Since
neurons lack an inherent boundary, an activation function is needed to map the inputs to
the outputs. In a fully connected feed­forward multi­layer network, all outputs from one
layer of neurons serve as inputs to every neuron in the next layer. Consequently, some
layers process the original input data, while others process data derived from neurons in
the previous layer. Thus, the number of weights for any neuron is equal to the number of
neurons in the layer before it.
A multi­layered artificial neural network typically includes three types of layers: an input
layer, one or more hidden layers, and an output layer. The input layer generally passes
data through without alteration. The majority of the processing takes place in the hidden
layers. The output layer translates the activation of hidden layer into a final output, such
as a classification. The outputs of each hidden layer are used as inputs for the next hidden
layer. The number of neurons in the output layer corresponds to the number of classes
the neural network has been trained to recognize [15].
2.2.1
Backpropogation
Although artificial neural networks have recently demonstrated significant applications in
various fields and facilitated groundbreaking innovations, the concept of neural networks
is actually quite old. Initially known as ”perceptrons,” neural networks have been around
since the 1940s. However, they were not as popular then as they are today because they
were single­layered and required substantial computational power and data, which were
difficult to obtain at the time. Their rise to prominence is largely due to the introduction
of a technique called ”backpropagation.” This method, first proposed by Rumelhart et al.
In 1986, allows networks to adjust the weights of hidden layers when the output does not
match the expected result. The error is computed and propagated back through all layers
of the network to modify the weights as needed [16].
2.3
Computer Vision
Computer vision is a field of study where computers are enabled to see, recognize, and
interpret visual information in a way similar to humans. The primary goal of computer
vision is to extract meaningful information from images and video data to make inferences
about the world. It is considered a sub­field of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
This differs from image processing, which focuses on manipulating or enhancing visual
information without necessarily understanding its content [17].
Computer vision has a variety of applications, including image classification, object de­
tection, reconstructing 3D scenes from 2D images, image retrieval, augmented reality,
machine vision, and traffic automation. Nowadays, machine learning is an essential com­
ponent of many computer vision algorithms. These algorithms often combine image pro­
cessing and machine learning techniques. They need to be capable of handling large
volumes of image and video data and performing computations in real time for various
applications, such as real­time detection and tracking [18].
6
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Vehicle Counting Methods
The goal of vehicle detection is to determine if there are cars moving through a detection
region and to establish corresponding tracking objects. This process helps gather infor­
mation such as traffic flow, vehicle speed, acceleration, and trajectory. To achieve this,
vehicles must be extracted from a sequence of images, which involves separating the
vehicle from the background—a task related to target recognition and motion detection in
computer vision. The accuracy of vehicle detection is crucial for vehicle tracking, under­
standing vehicle movements, and behavior analysis, serving as a foundation for further
processing.
Generally, vehicle detection algorithms involve three main steps: capturing images, gen­
erating potential vehicle candidates, and verifying these candidates [19]. In video­based
vehicle detection methods, vehicle characteristics such as shape and color are utilized to
identify vehicles from a sequence of images. With advancements in embedded technol­
ogy and smart cameras, there is a growing demand for more instantaneous and accurate
detection algorithms. This has led to increased research efforts aimed at reducing the
complexity and improving the accuracy of vehicle detection algorithms.
However, vehicle detection becomes more challenging in real­world traffic scenarios due
to factors like changing lighting conditions, shadows, weather, complex backgrounds,
camera parameter drift, and vehicle occlusion. Therefore, developing more intelligent
and robust algorithms to mitigate these challenges is essential for improving adaptability
and detection accuracy. There are two main research approaches in this field: Firstly, us­
ing inherent vehicle features to detect vehicles or differentiate them from the background,
and secondly, using the ”moving” characteristic to distinguish vehicles from a relatively
static background. The remainder of the this section will explore these two commonly
used methods in vehicle detection.
2.4.1
Manual Counting
Manual counting involves a person counting the number of individuals entering an area
or vehicles traveling down a road, rather than using an automated counting system. This
method is less accurate than automatic systems, provides limited data, and involves
higher labor costs. Hand­held tally counters, tally counter apps on mobile phones, or
simple tick marks on paper are often used for manual counting. Studies have shown that
manual counts, whether using sheets or clickers, tend to underestimate pedestrian vol­
umes, with error rates ranging from 8% to 25%. In contrast, automated video counting
with AI­powered software has a lower error rate of 2% to 5%. The error rates for manual
counting are often higher at the beginning and end of the observation period, possibly due
to the observer’s inexperience or fatigue [6].
According to Christof Kutschera et al[20], manual counting may be suitable for short peri­
ods with low to medium densities of people. However, for longer durations or high­density
situations, the data collected manually is often not representative or accurate.
Automated counting systems offer several advantages over manual counting, such as the
ability to collect data for extended periods and track changes in volume over time.
2.4.2
Rubber Tubes
A traditional method for detecting vehicles, involves stretching rubber hoses across the
road that are connected to a data logger. When vehicles pass over the tubes, air pressure
changes trigger the logger to record the event. While it is claimed to have high accuracy,
practical use often shows an error rate around 10%. This method faces challenges like
difficulty in distinguishing closely spaced vehicles and limitations when vehicles cross
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
7
==PAGE:16==
simultaneously. Additionally, data must be manually retrieved from the roadside, and
installation requires traffic disruption [7].
2.4.3
Radars
Doppler microwave detection devices work by transmitting a continuous low­energy mi­
crowave signal toward a target area and analyzing the reflected signal. They detect mov­
ing vehicles by registering frequency changes when the vehicle and microwave source
move relative to each other. Radar, on the other hand, uses high­frequency radio waves
to detect distant objects, determining their position and speed based on the return signal’s
time delay. While effective for detecting moving vehicles, radar is not ideal for dense traffic
situations due to its limitations in differentiating closely spaced objects [8].
2.4.4
Magnetic Coil Detectors
This method detects vehicles by sensing changes in the Earth’s magnetic field as vehicles
pass over the sensor. The traffic counting sensor is typically installed either within the road
surface or housed in a roadside box. When vehicles are traveling very closely together,
the magnetic detector may struggle to differentiate between individual vehicles [8].
2.4.5
Ultrasonic Sensors
Ultrasonic car counter is a straightforward technology used to monitor vehicle movement
and occupancy within a facility. Installed overhead on ramps, ultrasonic level counters
provide real­time occupancy data for signage. Ultrasonic pass counters measure traffic
flow throughout the facility, offering insights into usage patterns. Both types of counters
are bidirectional, capable of detecting traffic in either direction [9].
2.4.6
Video Cameras
Various sensor technologies used for automated vehicle classification and counting, em­
phasizing non­intrusive sensors. Video cameras are identified as the most practical for
traffic data collection due to their portability and flexibility in placement. Accurate count­
ing relies on optimal camera placement and proper lighting to ensure high­quality video,
which enhances the performance of deep learning algorithms used for classification. In
areas with limited cloud access, offline processing is recommended. The study also high­
lights potential improvements in camera placement strategies and algorithm development
[10].
2.4.6.1
Vehicle Detection
2.4.6.1.1
Detection Methods Based on Motion Detection
Research is focused on
real­time video analysis within a car to detect and track vehicles ahead for safety, au­
tonomous driving, and target tracing. A method for locating target vehicles in varying en­
vironmental conditions is described, where geometric features from the video are contin­
uously projected onto a 1­D profile and tracked. Vehicle identification is achieved through
the use of temporal information and motion behavior, modeled probabilistically using a
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) to distinguish target vehicles from the background. The ap­
proach is demonstrated to be effective under different lighting conditions and road types,
enabling real­time processing [21].
2.4.6.1.1.1
Background Subtraction
Background subtraction is recognized as one of
the most effective and straightforward methods for detecting and extracting objects from
images or videos. When a scenario is considered where a picture of a highway with cars
(the foreground image) is available, along with another picture of the same highway with­
out cars (the background image). Using this approach, segmentation techniques can be
applied to differentiate the cars from the background image and then use the mask to ex­
tract the cars. If this method is viable, why is background subtraction still necessary? This
8
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:17==
technique becomes crucial when a clear background image is not available. Practically
speaking, capturing a clear image of a highway with moving cars is challenging. In such
cases, background subtraction techniques can detect real­time movement, not just static
images. The key advantage of this algorithm is its speed, adaptability, and efficiency
compared to traditional methods [22].
2.4.6.1.1.2
Optical Flow
Optical Flow Motion Detection is a computer vision technique
used to estimate the apparent motion of objects, surfaces, or features within a sequence
of images, based on the changes in intensity patterns over time. By calculating the flow
of pixels between consecutive frames, optical flow determines the direction and velocity
of motion for each point in an image, allowing for the detection and analysis of move­
ment across the visual field. This technique is particularly useful in applications such
as video surveillance, autonomous navigation, and human­computer interaction, where
understanding dynamic scenes and tracking moving objects in real time are essential. Op­
tical flow methods can be dense, computing motion for every pixel, or sparse, focusing on
specific features, providing flexibility in balancing computational efficiency and accuracy
[23].
2.4.6.1.1.3
Frame Differencing
Frame Differencing involves subtracting the previous
image from the current one in a sequence. A key assumption for this method is that the
camera must remain stationary; if the camera moves, more advanced techniques such
as camera motion compensation will need to be employed to accurately identify moving
objects. Even with a stationary camera, this method can be challenging due to numerous
shadows that may create false targets. However, additional steps are required to develop
an effective object detector, as illustrated in the image below. It becomes evident that
frame difference alone is not a reliable indicator of object motion, particularly when scaling
the image to reveal noise. Speckles in the background appear in the frame difference
despite not being actual moving objects. These speckles result from image noise and
potential camera vibrations [24].
2.4.6.1.2
Detection Methods Based on the Inherent Features of Vehicle
The inher­
ent features­based approach relies on the notion that vehicles possess distinctive features
that can be used to distinguish them from other objects in traffic scenes. Various features,
such as color, texture, edge information, and shape symmetry, are utilized to identify ve­
hicle candidates. These methods can be applied to both traffic videos and images and
avoid the challenges associated with motion­based approaches, though some methods
can be time­consuming.
A novel color­based method for vehicle detection from images has been proposed by re­
searchers, who introduced a statistical linear model of color change space to consolidate
vehicle colors and thus narrow down potential vehicle locations. Another approach in­
volves a generative model based on edges, with a Markov chain Monte Carlo method used
to detect and segment vehicles in static images. Nighttime vehicle detection algorithms
have also been developed to identify and analyze vehicle lights for traffic surveillance.
Additionally, vehicle detection in videos has been performed by matching a vehicle model,
based on a mixture of deformable part models, with features extracted using sliding win­
dows of histograms of oriented gradients. Recent research has led to the creation of a
multi­scale model to detect vehicles at various distances from the camera in traffic im­
ages. A special and­or graph, hybrid image template, and part­based model have been
constructed to represent and detect vehicles in congested traffic conditions. Another study
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
9
==PAGE:18==
developed a deformable model, ABM, from training images for vehicle detection in new
traffic images through template matching, utilizing edge and color symmetry features to
enhance recognition performance. Furthermore, some studies have integrated inherent
features such as color and edge with motion information for improved vehicle detection
[25].
2.4.6.1.2.1
Representative Approaches
The representative approaches refer to meth­
ods that utilize information about the inherent visual characteristics of a vehicle, such as
symmetry [26], color [27], edges [28], contours [29], texture [30], shadows [31], and spe­
cific parts like vehicle lights [32], windshields [33], and tires [34].
Many popular techniques based on local image patches consider each patch as a whole,
combining visual features such as contour, texture, and color into a single descriptor. For
instance, a multi­feature method was employed for vehicle detection. On the other hand,
the representation and recognition of compositional objects were also analyzed. These
methods vary in the features they use, which leads to different levels of computational
complexity. Moreover, these approaches are based on a subjective hypothesis about the
vehicle, meaning that a human first learns and describes the vehicle’s features and then
teaches the computer how to detect it [35].
2.4.6.1.2.2
CNN
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) utilize artificial neurons known
as perceptrons. A perceptron is a supervised learning algorithm used for binary classifi­
cation, meaning it can determine whether an input, represented as a vector of numbers,
belongs to a specific class or not. It functions as a linear classifier, making predictions
based on a linear combination of weights and feature vectors. Inputs are weighted ac­
cording to their significance, and these weighted inputs are fed into perceptrons, which
fire in a binary manner. Each perceptron has a threshold that dictates when it will fire: if
the sum of the weighted inputs exceeds this threshold, the output is 1; if not, the output is
0.
CNNs are designed to scan sections of an image to identify features such as shapes,
symbols, and numbers, determining which type of sign is most likely present. The CNN
employs ’Stochastic Gradient Descent with Momentum’ (SGDM) during training. SGDM
is preferred over standard gradient descent because it updates neuron weights more ef­
ficiently without redundant computations, which speeds up the training process and im­
proves performance by allowing frequent updates with high variance. This helps the net­
work avoid local minima and improve detection accuracy [36].
2.4.6.1.2.3
DETR
DETR (DEtection TRansformer) is a novel object detection algo­
rithm introduced in 2020 by researchers at Facebook AI Research (FAIR). It leverages
the transformer architecture, a robust sequence­to­sequence model originally designed
for natural language processing tasks. Unlike traditional object detection methods, such
as R­CNN and YOLO, which involve complex frameworks with numerous variations and
rely on hand­designed components like non­maximum suppression (NMS), DETR em­
ploys a more streamlined approach. It is a direct set prediction model utilizing a trans­
former encoder­decoder architecture to simultaneously predict all objects in an image.
This method offers a simpler and more efficient alternative to conventional object de­
tectors while achieving comparable performance on the COCO dataset. The DETR ar­
chitecture is composed of three primary elements: a CNN backbone (e.g., ResNet) for
feature extraction, a transformer encoder­decoder, and a feed­forward network (FFN) for
generating final detection predictions. The CNN backbone processes the input image to
10
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:19==
produce an activation map. The transformer encoder then reduces the channel dimen­
sion and applies multi­head self­attention mechanisms along with feed­forward networks.
The transformer decoder performs parallel decoding of object embeddings, independently
predicting bounding box coordinates and class labels using object queries. DETR ben­
efits from its ability to reason about all objects collectively by utilizing pairwise relations
and considering the entire image context [37].
2.4.6.1.2.4
FASTER R­CNN
Faster R­CNN (Region­based Convolutional Neural Net­
work) is an advanced deep learning framework for object detection that integrates region
proposal generation and object classification into a single, unified model. Unlike its prede­
cessors, such as R­CNN and Fast R­CNN, Faster R­CNN introduces a Region Proposal
Network (RPN) that efficiently generates high­quality region proposals directly from the
convolutional feature maps, significantly reducing the computational cost and improving
detection speed. The RPN shares the same convolutional layers as the detection net­
work, allowing the entire model to be trained end­to­end for both object localization and
classification. This approach enables Faster R­CNN to achieve state­of­the­art accuracy
and speed in detecting objects of various sizes and shapes in complex images, making
it suitable for real­time applications like autonomous driving, video analysis, and robotics
[38].
2.4.6.1.2.5
YOLOX
YOLOX is an enhanced version of the YOLO (You Only Look Once)
object detection algorithm, designed to improve performance by adopting anchor­free de­
sign and advanced training strategies. Unlike traditional YOLO models that rely on anchor
boxes to predict object locations and sizes, YOLOX eliminates the need for predefined an­
chors, simplifying the model and reducing computational complexity. It employs dynamic
label assignment, decoupled head architecture, and a combination of innovative training
techniques like MixUp and Mosaic data augmentation to boost both detection accuracy
and generalization. YOLOX achieves superior real­time object detection performance,
particularly in detecting small and densely packed objects, making it highly effective for
diverse applications, including video surveillance, autonomous driving, and robotics [39].
2.4.6.1.2.6
RETINANET
RetinaNet is a state­of­the­art object detection framework that
combines the strengths of one­stage detectors for speed with the accuracy of two­stage
detectors, achieved through the introduction of the Focal Loss function. Unlike traditional
object detectors that struggle with the imbalance between foreground and background
classes, RetinaNet’s Focal Loss dynamically down­weights the loss contribution of easy­
to­classify examples, focusing more on hard­to­classify, rare objects. The architecture
of RetinaNet comprises a backbone network, typically a ResNet or ResNeXt, for feature
extraction, followed by a feature pyramid network (FPN) that enhances its capability to
detect objects at different scales [40].
2.4.6.1.2.7
YOLO v3
YOLOv3 (You Only Look Once, Version 3) is a real­time object
detection algorithm that uses a single convolutional neural network (CNN) to simultane­
ously predict multiple bounding boxes and their corresponding class probabilities from
an input image. Unlike traditional region­based detection methods that require multiple
passes or stages, YOLOv3 efficiently processes the entire image in one pass, breaking
it into a grid and assigning bounding box predictions to each grid cell. It is designed to
balance speed and accuracy, making it suitable for applications requiring real­time object
detection, such as autonomous driving and video surveillance. YOLOv3 introduces sev­
eral improvements over its predecessors, including a deeper network architecture, multi­
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
11
==PAGE:20==
scale predictions, and improved handling of small objects, enhancing both the precision
and robustness of detections across diverse scenarios [41].
2.4.6.2
Vehicle Tracking
Tracking a vehicle involves estimating its position within an image sequence and con­
structing its trajectory. It may also require estimating vehicle motion parameters, such as
velocity and acceleration. During vehicle tracking, addressing issues such as the occlu­
sion of multiple targets and the correlation of data between them is crucial. Most vehicle
tracking algorithms operate on a fundamental principle: if the spatial distance between
vehicles in two consecutive frames is small, they are considered to be the same vehicle.
Tracking is then carried out in the time domain based on this principle.
Vehicles are generally considered as rigid bodies. To track a vehicle, it must first be
represented. Current methods for representation range from simple to complex, including
points, areas, outlines, and models. Point­based representation is suited for tracking
small targets in an image. Area representation involves describing moving targets with
basic geometric shapes, such as rectangles or ovals, which is ideal for simple rigid or non­
rigid objects. Contour representation uses closed curve contours to represent moving
objects, allowing for continuous automatic updates, making it suitable for complex, non­
rigid motion targets. Model representation typically employs 2­D shape models, such as
skeletal articulated models and volumetric models. The choice of method depends on the
specific application, including the behavior of the moving target or accuracy requirements.
Vehicle tracking methods can be classified into two types based on the need for prior
knowledge: methods that rely on prior knowledge and those that do not rely on prior
knowledge.
2.4.6.2.1
Template Match
The template matching tracking algorithm involves search­
ing for a specific template within vehicle images and is widely used in computer vision
research. This algorithm is applicable for both static and dynamic vehicle image recog­
nition. Traditional methods using rectangular templates with gray correlation matching
require extensive computation and can be time­consuming. Despite this, the method is
straightforward to understand and achieves high matching accuracy [42].
2.4.6.2.2
IoU­Based Match
IOU­based tracking is a simple and efficient method for
multi­object tracking that uses the Intersection over Union (IOU) metric to associate de­
tected bounding boxes of objects across consecutive video frames. The process involves
detecting objects in each frame, predicting their positions, computing IOU scores between
detected and predicted boxes, and assigning detections to tracked objects based on max­
imum IOU values. It’s computationally efficient and suitable for real­time applications but
may struggle with handling occlusions, fast­moving objects, and relies heavily on accurate
object detection. Despite its simplicity, it is widely used in surveillance, traffic monitoring,
and other real­time scenarios where speed is crucial [43].
2.4.6.2.3
SORT
SORT operates through a combination of Kalman filtering, data as­
sociation, and the Intersection over Union (IoU) metric. The Kalman filter is employed to
predict the location of an object in the subsequent frame, while the IoU metric is utilized to
match the detection with the predicted location. The data association task is framed as an
assignment problem, aimed at uniquely assigning each detection to an object. To address
this assignment problem, SORT utilizes the Hungarian algorithm, which minimizes the to­
tal association costs between detections and predicted locations. Once the associations
are established, the predicted locations are updated based on the matched detections,
and this process is iteratively applied to each subsequent frame [44].
12
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:21==
2.4.6.2.4
Deep SORT
DeepSORT can be conceptualized as a two­stage process:
tracking and sorting. The tracking stage is responsible for predicting the movement of
objects between frames, generating motion forecasts that are subsequently utilized by
the sorting stage. The sorting stage then verifies and associates objects across frames,
effectively addressing challenges such as occlusions, changes in perspective, and inter­
actions between objects. Central to DeepSORT is a deep learning model that extracts
feature representations of the tracked objects. These features encapsulate crucial at­
tributes that enable the algorithm to differentiate between distinct objects and track their
trajectories with greater accuracy. By employing neural networks, DeepSORT learns in­
tricate patterns and relationships in object movements, thereby enhancing its adaptability
to diverse scenarios [45]. DeepSORT consists of several components,
1. Detection: DeepSORT begins with object detection using models like YOLO or
Faster R­CNN to locate and classify objects in each frame.
2. Feature Extraction: Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are used to extract high­
dimensional features from detected objects, facilitating accurate comparison and
matching across frames.
3. Motion Prediction: The algorithm predicts object movement between frames based
on historical positions and motion patterns, using techniques such as Kalman filters
or recurrent neural networks (RNNs).
4. Data Association: In the sorting stage, objects are matched across frames. Meth­
ods like the Hungarian algorithm are employed to optimize these associations and
reduce tracking errors.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:23==
3
Methods
3.1
Overview
This chapter outlines the methodology used to develop and evaluate the vehicle track­
ing system. The methodology is detailed in multiple sections, starting with the research
design and followed by data collection methods, system architecture, algorithm selection,
implementation details, and evaluation metrics. The methods described aim to ensure the
replicability of the study and provide a comprehensive understanding of how the vehicle
tracking system was developed and tested.
3.2
Research Design
The research design for this study is structured around a quantitative and experimental
approach, focusing on the development of a computational system for vehicle tracking.
The study consists of three primary phases such as data collection, system development,
and system evaluation. Each phase was rigorously planned to address the research ob­
jectives, and a step­by­step approach was adopted to systematically build and improve
the vehicle counting system. The choice of methods was guided by a need for high accu­
racy and robust performance, given the application domain of vehicle counting in dynamic
and uncontrolled environments.
3.3
Data Collection
To develop a robust vehicle counting system capable of performing accurately across var­
ious environments, diverse datasets were required. The data collection process involved
obtaining several custom­recorded video footage. High­definition cameras were used on
fixed surveillance setups to capture diverse perspectives. This custom dataset aimed to
capture real­world variability, including different traffic densities, lighting conditions and
weather scenarios. More details of the dataset can be found in section 4.2.2 Dataset De­
tails. Also, data preprocessing is a critical step in ensuring the quality and reliability of the
datasets used for testing the vehicle detection models. Custom data was manually anno­
tated to create ground truth labels for vehicle locations within each frame. This annotation
process involved drawing bounding boxes around each vehicle.
3.4
System Development & Implementations Details
The vehicle counting system’s development involved designing a system architecture tai­
lored to video processing, selecting appropriate algorithms for detection and tracking,
counting, and implementing these algorithms using modern machine learning and image
processing libraries. All of the system was implemented using Python, leveraging several
libraries for computer vision,deep learning, and computation.
3.4.1
System Architecture & Algorithm Selection
The architecture of the vehicle counting system was designed to efficiently handle video
streams and ensure high accuracy in vehicle detection and tracking. The architecture
consists of several key components which are explained below.
3.4.1.1
Target Region Module
This module is responsible for preparing target regions to make vehicle detection. The In­
teresting roads section is marked manually with several points on an image from the scene
by using an interface prepared with OpenCV. Also, the user enters preferred window size
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
15
==PAGE:24==
for detection and minimum overlapping ratio of these windows to not miss detections. Ad­
ditionally, the user can decrease or increase the vertical window margin virtually as most
of the detection area will be background if the road is roughly horizontal. This feature is in
use after the detection process to wipe detection that are not in the road section. Finally,
the module creates window locations that will be used for detection.
3.4.1.2
Detection Module
In the detection module, all images in the video footage are renamed from 0 to N(where
N is the number of the frames ­1) in their corresponding time order to ease operations.
MMDetection, which is an open source object detection toolbox based on PyTorch, a
library used to employ detection models. Decided detection model, which can be eas­
ily changed just by feeding another model’s configuration and checkpoint, initiated by
init_detector function and image frames fed into the model with inference_detector
function in the MMDetection toolbox. Detection results are post processed in several
ways. First, non­vehicle objects in the detections are discarded, then detections with
confidence scores lower than 30% discarded. It is followed by non­maximum suppres­
sion with 0.75 IoU to clear multiple detections on the same vehicle. Finally, remaining
detections are masked according to the given margin from section 3.4.1.1 Target Region
Module and saved into a file for further process by tracking module.
3.4.1.3
Tracking Module
Once vehicles are detected, the tracking module employs a tracking algorithm to maintain
consistent vehicle tracking across frames. Template matching method was chosen for its
ability to handle multiple object tracking and its robustness in re­identifying vehicles when
they reappear after temporary occlusion. Our algorithm searches the template in next and
previous N images to provide more robust results. N is manually assigned according to
the average number of frames a car is visible in the detection region. The pseudo code of
the algorithm given in the listing 3.1. Also, we employ a similarity parameter for template
matching as it always returns a result. Template matching returns a value between 0
and 1, 0 being a perfect match, however between the frames appearance of the vehicle
changes and value is always higher than 0. Therefore, the algorithm blacks out the given
result location and runs another search, then the first result is divided by the second
one to achieve a more robust match as this approach neutralizes the effect of different
environment conditions.
1
FOR each detection in detections of an image
2
initiate a track
3
template = detection box
4
FOR next N images
5
match = search template
6
IF match has a track
7
unite tracks
8
ELSE
9
assign track of the template
10
FOR previous N images
11
match = search template
12
IF match has a track
13
unite tracks
14
ELSE
15
assign track of the template
Listing 3.1: Tracking Algorihtm Pseudo Code
3.4.1.4
Counting Module
The counting module is responsible for maintaining a count of vehicles as they move
through predefined regions of interest (ROIs) in the video frame. This module utilizes
16
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:25==
the tracking data to increment the vehicle count whenever a tracked vehicle is observed
in all of the ROIs. This method ensures that only unique vehicles are counted, reducing
errors such as double counting. The use of tracking data helps in maintaining a consistent
count even when vehicles temporarily disappear from the frame due to occlusions. Also,
false detections lead to the stationary points tracked on the road section and algorithm
successfully discards them from counting by the use of multiple ROIs.
3.5
Evaluation Metric of Vehicle Detection
Detection accuracy measures the proportion of correctly identified vehicles compared to
the total number of vehicles in the video footage. A high detection accuracy indicates
that the model effectively detects vehicles in diverse conditions. We used the Average
Precision(AP) performance metric to evaluate the accuracy of object detection models. It
measures how well a model detects and locates objects in an image or video. The AP
score considers both the correctness of the predicted bounding boxes and the confidence
scores assigned to these predictions. Obtaining AP score consists of several steps given
below.
1. Precision is the ratio of true positive detections (correctly detected objects) to the
total number of positive detections (both true positives and false positives). It mea­
sures how accurate the predictions are.
Precision =
True Positives
True Positives + False Positives
(3.1)
2. Recall is the ratio of true positive detections to the total number of actual objects
present in the ground truth. It measures how well the model captures all the objects.
Recall =
True Positives
True Positives + False Negatives
(3.2)
3. Intersection over Union(IoU) is a metric used to evaluate the overlap between the
predicted bounding box and the ground truth bounding box. It is calculated as the
area of overlap divided by the area of union between the predicted and ground truth
bounding boxes. Typically, an IoU threshold (e.g., 0.5) is set to determine whether
a predicted bounding box is considered a true positive. If the IoU is above the
threshold, it is a true positive; otherwise, it is a false positive. In all of our results we
used 0.5 threshold.
IoU = Area of Overlap
Area of Union
(3.3)
Calculating Average Precision (AP)
Average Precision (AP) is calculated for each class all vehicles in the dataset. It repre­
sents the area under the Precision­Recall (P­R) curve for that class. The P­R curve is a
plot of precision values on the y −axis and recall values on the x −axis, generated as
the confidence threshold for the predictions varies from 0 to 1.
To compute AP:
1. Sort predictions by their confidence scores from highest to lowest.
2. Calculate precision and recall at each prediction in the sorted list.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
17
==PAGE:26==
3. Plot the precision­recall curve.
4. Compute the area under the precision­recall curve using numerical integration. This
area is the Average Precision (AP) for that class.
AP provides a single number that summarizes the model’s ability to balance precision and
recall across different confidence thresholds.
18
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
In this chapter, we describe the experiments carried out during the course of the thesis
and provide an overview of the results of experiments conducted. This chapter includes
the explanation of the section 4.1 experimental setup, and section 4.2 description of the
dataset. Then, we present an in­depth analysis of result that we gathered during our
experiments, enlighten the effectiveness of some common object detection models on our
dataset in section 4.3. Following the detection results, results of the template matching
and tracking a vehicle examined in section 4.4. Finally, the section lays out the results
of whole system which counts the vehicles in section 4.5 and the overall success of this
study.
4.1
Experimental Setup
DTU Sustain, a university department specialized in environmental and resource engi­
neering, currently working on greenhouse gas emissions and sources in a Danish agri­
cultural area. A tall tower, which shown in fig. 4.1, is equipped with several instruments
and sensors and in use by a group of researchers from DTU Sustain. This tower is lo­
cated in a rural Danish landscape in Hove, Sjaelland. The exact coordinates of the tall
tower is 55°42’59’’N, 12°14’14’’E. The tall tower is equipped with two gas analyzers and
three sonic anemometers. An example of an anemometer can be seen in fig. 4.2. Those
sensors are gathering, at high frequency, data of flux of carbon dioxide(CO2), methane
(CH4), nitrous oxide(N2O) and carbon monoxide (CO). Data acquired by sensor readings
can be used with eddy covariance method to obtain fluxes, and that information is planned
to be used with vehicle counting in the area to determine the source of greenhouse gas
while estimating the emissions by vehicles.
Figure 4.1: Picture of the tall tower in Hove with the view on some atmospheric instru­
ments and two cameras used for data collection. Courtesy of Anastasia Gorlenko, May
2024.
The tall tower also has two cameras at 58m height installed on it. The main object of
the cameras is to monitor land use and phenological changes. However, it may also
be used to help document the road usage of vehicles and implicitly the CO emissions
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.2: Sonic Anemometers on the tall tower. Courtesy of Anastasia Gorlenko, May
2024.
coming from vehicle traffic. The arrangement of cameras is in such a way they face
in opposite directions, one of them is pointed towards to southwest and the other one
is pointed towards to northeast direction. The model of the cameras on the tall tower
is UNV IPC6424SR­X25­VF 4MP 25x Lighthunter Network PTZ Dome Camera and it’s
appearance can be seen in fig. 4.3. This specific camera is able to grab high quality
images with 4MP, 1/2.8” CMOS sensor. Also, it can provide 2688x1520 pixel resolution
while streaming at 30 frames per second. As the rural landscape can be perceived in
far distances from the tall tower, 25x optical zoom capability of the camera provides an
important usefulness in many roughly observable cases. As it is a PTZ camera, it allows
the user to pan and tilt the camera sensor to monitor different scenes in the area.
The site of the tall tower experiences most of the possible weather conditions such as;
sunny, cloudy, rainy, foggy, and snowy weather. Those conditions affect the performance
of the system drastically as they change the visibility of the camera frames. In the land­
scape of the tall tower, the visible area has many different small buildings, agricultural
lands, bosks, tree plantations, and ponds. The variety around the tall tower can be seen
in fig. 4.4. Also, the location of the tall tower is surrounded by plenty of little, medium and
large roads which are used by different vehicle types including cars, trucks, buses, mo­
torcycles, and lorries. Road classifications around the tall tower reconstructed in fig. 4.5.
The closest road to the tower is approximately four hundred meters far and distant ones
go beyond five kilometers. By using the cameras on the tall tower, some parts of the roads
can be monitored. The vehicle counts from the perceivable part of the roads are planned
to be gathered for all the aforementioned calculations of sustainability of transportation,
greenhouse gas emission estimations, and greenhouse gas source detections. For the
purpose of the thesis, this experimental setup was arranged to monitor visible parts of
some selected roads. Obtained camera data studied on to count vehicles on the selected
road parts during the thesis.
All of the computational processes are performed on a same personal laptop to observe
20
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: Camera model and visual
Figure 4.4: Satellite view region around the tall tower. Courtesy of Anastasia Gorlenko.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.5: Classification of roads around the tall tower. Courtesy of Anastasia Gorlenko.
differences without hardware effect. The laptop is Razer Blade 15 2021 and it has GeForce
RTX 3060 GPU, 16GB RAM with Intel i7­11800H CPU. Software development done on
Ubuntu 20.04.6 LTS operating system. Project codes run with Python 3.8.10 interpreter
and necessary tool CUDA installed with version 12.1. For the object detection models,
MMDetection library, which is an open source object detection toolbox based on PyTorch,
has been used. Grouping the same vehicle detections which appeared on different frames
is done by using Template Matching function provided by OpenCV 4.9.0 library.
4.2
Dataset Overview
4.2.1
Intorduction to the Dataset
The dataset used in this research is a collection of road images sourced from the tall
tower at Hove. Both of the aforementioned cameras used to collect data from different
road sections. This dataset is crucial for the developing and evaluating proposed system
in this master’s thesis project, as it contains a diverse set of images representing different
roads, distance, lightning, and weather conditions of the real environment.
4.2.2
Dataset Details
The dataset comprises images collected from the two cameras on the tall tower at Hove.
All of the collected subsets consist of continuous sequences which provide information of
motion. Also, all of the camera frames collected in maximum possible resolution which
is 2688x1520 pixels. During the first iterations and trials of the project, the dataset set
is collected from the East camera. This dataset was collected by me and the reason for
preference was based on the closest road visible in this camera perspective. This first
test dataset consists of approximately 45 images with 17 frames per second(FPS). Initial
dataset mainly used to observe capabilities of the basic image processing techniques
to detect movement. Later on, 3 different dataset with 85, 99, and 58 images at the
same FPS collected from the same camera but in different perspectives to study roads in
different distances. These first 4 dataset were omitted during the project as we continued
with more systematized and performance oriented dataset. Also, the full dark night case
is omitted in this study as it requires different methodology to tackle. One example image
from first, second, third and fourth dataset can be seen in fig. 4.6, fig. 4.7, fig. 4.8, fig. 4.9
22
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:31==
respectively.
The final dataset has some differences and it was collected by Anastasia Gorlenko. The
main change occurred in FPS which decreased to 1 FPS, in this way, we were able to work
with longer duration sequences and use less data transfer, storage and computational
cost. Also, we started to collect data from the West camera at the tall tower, because
the East camera had some malfunction and we observed a very good perspective with 3
roads visible in one scene with the West camera. Final dataset consisted of 5 different
subsets which consisted of 1254, 150, 150, 150, 150 and 150 images. All of those are
looking at the exactly the same scene and used for the final evaluation in the results.
The first subset consists of 1254 images and it corresponds to approximately 21 min­
utes of footage. During the recording of this subset, weather was sunny/cloudy which
can be seen in fig. 4.10. This subset was collected on Friday 06/28/2024 at 15:27:30 to
15:48:24 CEST. During the sequence, the scene is mostly cloudy and in some time peri­
ods sunlight is directly on the road sections. This long sequence was collected to evaluate
the project on high traffic and long duration, so that more reasonable results can be in­
terpreted. Rest of the subsets consist of 150 frames which correspond to two and half
minute sequences. The second subset was collected on Friday 28/06/2024 at 05:27:30 to
05:30:00 CEST. During this sequence, the weather was foggy and a little dark which can
be seen in fig. 4.11, due to the night time there are not many vehicles and the observable
vehicles are very hard to notice. The third subset was collected on Sunday 30/06/2024
at 12:27:30 to 12:30:00 CEST, also there was heavy rain during this time period. An ex­
ample image of this given in fig. 4.12. The fourth subset was collected on a sunny period
on Tuesday 27/06/2024 at 10:27:30 to 10:30:00 CEST. The last, or the fifth, subset was
collected on Monday 01/07/2024 at 18:27:30 to 18:30:30 CEST, the weather was cloudy
with no direct sunlight on the road sections. Example images of fourth and fifth subset
can be found in fig. 4.13, and fig. 4.14, respectively. All of the subsets chosen based
on the situation with most vehicles. Last four subset were chosen to examine different
weather and lightning conditions. Also, in all of the frames of subsets, sections of three
different roads are visible. The roads are considered small, medium, and large based on
their traffic frequency.
4.2.3
Examples of Dataset
4.3
Vehicle Detection
The initial approach for detecting vehicles to track them is done by motion detection tech­
niques on a sequence which are common techniques in basic image processing. These
methods were examined due to their simplicity, low computational cost, and high capabil­
ity. The idea was to compute the difference between consecutive video frames to detect
motion, identifying moving vehicles as regions with significant pixel changes. The power
of these methods is that they do not require a lot of information or features to detect vehi­
cles and may work in harder scenarios, which was aligned with the project’s early­stage
motivation. Also, they don’t need large labeled datasets for training and their results are
often more interpretable unlike the machine learning based approaches.
In the early stages, our aim was to count vehicles all times of the day, even if vehicles are
not visible in the dark, their headlights on the road are visible and motion is observable.
Besides, vehicles are too small in the images and they are extremely hard to identify by
just one image. Therefore, it was especially promising to start with basic motion detection
techniques such as; background subtraction, frame difference, and optical flow methods.
After the initial trials, we observed more or less all of these techniques gave similar results.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.6: An example image from first dataset.
Figure 4.7: An example image from second dataset.
24
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.8: An example image from third dataset.
Figure 4.9: An example image from fourth dataset.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.10: An example image from first subset of final dataset. Long video sequence.
Figure 4.11: An example image from second subset of final dataset. Foggy video se­
quence.
26
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.12: An example image from third subset of final dataset. Heavy rain video
sequence.
Figure 4.13: An example image from fourth subset of final dataset. Sunny video se­
quence.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.14: An example image from fifth subset of final dataset. Cloudy video sequence.
34th and 35th frames of the first dataset given in fig. 4.15, and example of motion detection
between those frames with frame difference, background subtraction, and optical flow
methods given in fig. 4.16, fig. 4.17, and fig. 4.18, respectively. Also, it became clear that
those basic techniques were not sufficiently robust for the intended application of vehicle
tracking. There were various reasons to come to this conclusion. First of all, nearly all
of the environmental conditions made these approaches excessively fragile. Dynamic
lighting of the scene due to moving clouds or some light beams from the sun created
much irrelevant motion in the sequence. Also, weather conditions such as rain, snow, or
moving fog made plenty of unwanted noise in the resulting frames. Wind was another
insufferable difficulty as it makes all of the trees wave and shakes the tower which has the
camera on it. As a consequence of wind, all of the basic techniques analyzed the video in
motion and full of noise. In some cases, animal movements near the road were observed
and they presented similar characteristics with vehicles in the motion analysis. One of the
most significant complications occurred due to the small size of the vehicles as they were
nearly the same size as the noises in the image.
Furthermore, there is a huge necessity for extensive post processing when these tech­
niques are used. Even if point clouds connected into successful blobs which is a pretty
hard task, then these blobs should be associated with consecutive frames and analyzed
by their movement. Additionally, these methods do not have learning capability over time
unlike the machine learning approaches that can improve with more data and experi­
ences. Thus, future improvements require more sophisticated algorithms and plenty of
predefined rules. Finally, recognizing the limitations of the motion detection methods, the
decision was made to explore more advanced techniques for vehicle tracking.
The subsequent approach involved leveraging well known object detection models. These
models generally use visual information such as; color, shape, and texture. This kind of
information can help to detect stationary vehicles, as well as identify them as vehicles in
contrast to motion detection based approaches. Besides, they proved their success and
capability in a wide range of applications in the last several decades. For that matter, we
28
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.15: Above 34th and below 35th frame of the first dataset.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.16: An example image of frame difference method applied on 34th and 35th
frames of first dataset.
Figure 4.17: An example image of background subtraction method applied on 34th and
35th frames of first dataset.
30
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.18: An example image of optical flow method applied on 34th and 35th frames
of first dataset.
focused our sources on demonstrating their suitability to this master’s thesis study.
The primary challenge faced by all object detection models was in accurately detecting
vehicles that were too far away from the camera as we expected. There are several rea­
sons for this performance degradation. First one is that as vehicles move further away
from the camera, their representation in the image becomes smaller. This leads to fewer
pixels being available to represent each vehicle, also this was the main reason priorly tried
motion based techniques to fail. Object detection models rely on a certain level of details
to distinguish vehicles from the background and identify them. This issue is the ground
of next performance degradation which is loss of distinctive features. As the distance
increases, distinctive features of the vehicle fade away and this makes it challenging for
the model to identify vehicles. Akyon et al. proposed slicing the target image into small
windows and conducting object detection in these windows. Hence, they achieved signif­
icant performance increases in their work [46]. Additionally, when the architecture, inner
processes, and training dataset of some models are investigated, the reasons for better
accuracy can be elucidated. Due to their architecture some models lose object features
when the object is small in the image, as the relative size of the object increases in the
image these features tend to be preserved. On the other hand, models like YOLO, re­
sizes the input image to a lower resolution before processing, therefore loses most of the
necessary information. Finally, most of the pretrained models trained with datasets where
objects are relatively large and centrally located. This can lead to a model that expects
certain scales and locations for the objects.
In the light of previous works and researches, we conducted our experiments by using
small detection windows in possible vehicle locations in the given scene. As we can con­
trol the camera’s pan and tilt angles, we were able to fix camera view and manually marked
the road section to generate detection windows. Application of small detection windows
with virtual margin(virtual margins used in post processing the detection results to clear
false detection in non­road section in the detection window) can be seen in fig. 4.19.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
31
==PAGE:40==
We achieved complementary results with the literature, and capability of this approach
demonstrated in fig. 4.20.
Figure 4.19: An example image of detection windows. Size of the detection windows are
640x480 pixels marked with green. Virtual detection margins marked with blue.
Outcomes of the object detection models were promising hope and we continued with
investigation of different object detection models as there are plenty of options. These
models vary in their architectures, capabilities, strength, and weaknesses, and these
differences can significantly impact their performance on a specific task. For instance,
models like Faster R­CNN are often better at detecting small objects due to their multi­
scale feature extraction capabilities. On the other hand, YOLO models, which process
the entire image at once, might be more suited for detecting larger objects. Models like
RetinaNet, which use focal loss to handle class imbalance, can perform better in scenar­
ios with high background noise. Moreover, as transformer­based architectures gained
attention and developed significantly in the last years, object detection received contribu­
tion from these developments with the DETR model. The DETR model has an attention
mechanism which does not rely on predefined grid structures, which are used by most
of the other models, that can miss small objects. Also, the attention mechanism allows
the model to understand the global context of the scene, hence particularly encouraging
when detecting small vehicles that may blend into the background.
Finally, we compared five different pretrained models which are DETR, Faster R­CNN,
YOLOX, RetinaNet, and YOLOv3. One long video sequence inferred by models to calcu­
late their general accuracy on a normal day. Three different road sections were used to
examine models’ performance on different distances. Similarly, to verify their robustness,
five different weather conditions were given to the models.
Results showed that The DETR model overperformed the other models on the most dis­
tant road which has medium traffic load and can be found in table 4.2. This is particularly
important as it is the hardest case and was one of the most challenging parts of this project.
Also, in table 4.1, tests on the long video sequence revealed that the DETR model sur­
passed the rest of the models on two distance scenarios and came second on the third
32
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.20: Detection results of the DETR model (above) without using small detection
windows and (below) by using small detection windows.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
33
==PAGE:42==
scenario. Additionally, all of the models failed to detect vehicles in low visibility scenar­
ios such as foggy weather. In the case of computational speed, some models such as
YOLOX and YOLOv3 bring significant assurance when real time operation is needed and
detailed comparison can be seen in table 4.3. Furthermore, some of these results should
be investigated deeper as we were able to collect and annotate a limited amount of data
during the course of this project. However, as past works suggest and we confirmed with
our experiments, the DETR model fits necessary vehicle detection tasks better than other
examined models in a variety of scenarios.
Table 4.1: AP Scores of different detection models on medium distant road with high
traffic load.
Date & Time(CEST)
Weather
Condition
Number of
Frames
Number of
Detection
DETR
Faster
R­CNN
YOLOX
RetinaNet
YOLOv3
Friday 06/28/2024
15:27:30 ­ 15:48:24
Cloudy/
Sunny
1254
548
95.25%
90.53%
92.83%
90.68%
74.59%
Friday 28/06/2024
05:27:30 ­ 05:30:00
Foggy
150
4
0%
0%
0%
25.00%
0%
Sunday 30/06/2024
12:27:30 ­ 12:30:00
Heavy
Rain
150
30
68.73%
81.86%
66.74%
83.77%
46.66%
Tuesday 27/06/2024
10:27:30 ­ 10:30:00
Sunny
150
18
94.44%
88.89%
94.44%
88.89%
83.33%
Monday 01/07/2024
18:27:30 ­ 18:30:30
Cloudy
150
14
92.86%
92.86%
92.86%
92.86%
92.86%
Table 4.2: AP Scores of different detection models on far distant road with medium traffic
load.
Date & Time(CEST)
Weather
Condition
Number of
Frames
Number of
Detection
DETR
Faster
R­CNN
YOLOX
RetinaNet
YOLOv3
Friday 06/28/2024
15:27:30 ­ 15:48:24
Cloudy/
Sunny
1254
242
61.84%
49.13%
15.70%
49.72%
12.08%
Friday 28/06/2024
05:27:30 ­ 05:30:00
Foggy
150
9
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
Sunday 30/06/2024
12:27:30 ­ 12:30:00
Heavy
Rain
150
7
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
Tuesday 27/06/2024
10:27:30 ­ 10:30:00
Sunny
150
14
54.94%
15.60%
7.14%
15.60%
0%
Monday 01/07/2024
18:27:30 ­ 18:30:30
Cloudy
150
8
62.50%
58.27%
0%
37.50%
0%
Table 4.3: Average computational speed of different detection models on 640x480 pixel
window. Values are average of 500 detection call.
DETR
Faster R­CNN
YOLOX
RetinaNet
YOLOv3
Computation Time(ms)
43.44
66.52
10.69
72.87
11.64
4.4
Association and Grouping of Vehicles Across Frames
After obtaining the vehicle detections, the next step was to associate or group the same
vehicles across consecutive frames. This step is crucial for maintaining a consistent iden­
tity for each vehicle, which allows for the analysis of individual vehicle trajectories. Several
methods can be employed for associating vehicle detections across frames such as; tem­
plate matching, IoU­based matching, Kalman filter with data association, or deep learning
based matching. All of the mentioned methods have their own strengths and weaknesses
based on their working principles. Template matching is a simple and strong method to
associate detected vehicles with consecutive frames as it searches for a highly similar
appearance while susceptible to failure if appearance changes intensively. On the other
hand, IoU­based match works on the assumption that vehicles change places very little
amount and tends to fail when two vehicles interlace or there is no detection in the consec­
utive frames. The SORT algorithm uses Kalman filter and Hungarian algorithm to track
vehicles, however it requires parameter tuning and may be computationally expensive.
34
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:43==
In the Deep SORT model, the SORT algorithm combined with appearance information by
using deep learning. The final method can be the most robust solution, though it requires
substantial computational resources and extensive training data.
Based on the nature of our problem domain and resources we have, the template match­
ing method was a sensible choice. Moreover, initial experiments with the template match­
ing method gave pretty successful results. Six consecutive frames with tracked detections
and track lines of vehicles given in fig. 4.21 and fig. 4.22, respectively. One of the strongest
capabilities of this approach is that it continues to find vehicles after occlusion and it finds
the vehicle even if there is no detection by object detection models in the consecutive
frames. Also, it requires only two parameters to tune in our algorithm. Besides, efficiency
of the method can be enhanced just by increasing the frame rate as the appearance of
the vehicle changes less in higher FPS. In conclusion, template matching deals with the
association task in an efficient manner as we had limited time to investigate this problem.
In the long run, other methods deserve a shot as they may increase tracking performance
of the system.
Figure 4.21: Tracking by template matching method on 6 consecutive frames. Green
boxes for detections. Blue box is the detection region.
4.5
Counting Vehicles
Multiple counting regions were defined in the region of interest of the camera view. The
counting logic was implemented to differentiate between vehicles entering, moving, and
exiting the scene. If the visible road section is small, two counting regions used as this
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.22: Example of reconstructed tracks. Gray lines shows the road section and
green dots shows the detected position of vehicle on the road and track.
reduces the approach to a simple counting line. In the cases of large visible road sec­
tions, three counting regions are preferred as this prevents the oscillating false detections
around the counting line. Number of the counting regions can be increased to get more ac­
curate results, if the observable road section is large and the FPS of the inspected footage
is high enough. A representative counting of the tracks in fig. 4.22 given in fig. 4.23
The vehicle counting system was tested on a dataset consisting of one long 21 minutes of
video footage and four short 2.5 minutes of video footage recorded from urban settings.
Detection results of the DETR model used to count vehicles. In the most illustrative case,
the long video footage, the system was able to capture 101 vehicle counts when there
are 100 true vehicles on the medium distance, high frequency road and 36 vehicle counts
when there are 37 true vehicles on the far distance, medium frequency road. In various
scenarios, the system gave promising results as they can be seen in table 4.4. Also, the
counting system tested again by increasing similarity parameter of the template matching
method for the medium distance, high frequency road and results are given in table 4.5.
Overall, the vehicle counting results demonstrate the potential of the proposed approach
for traffic monitoring and vehicle counting. However, some challenges were identified
that affected the performance. One of the most significant reasons for poor performance
occurred due to false or missing detections which were provided by the object detection
model. Also, vehicles often occlude one another during high traffic and vehicles overlap
each other when coming from the opposite directions. Although the system performed
well under various lighting conditions, there were instances that difficult weather condi­
tions such as rain and fog led to decrease in the overall performance of the system. How­
ever, future enhancements could further improve the system’s robustness and accuracy,
especially in complex and unpredictable traffic scenarios.
36
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:45==
Table 4.4: Vehicle count result of different road sections on different weather conditions.
Similarity parameter controls the associating quality of template matching method.
Case
Number of
images
Number of
Vehicles
Weather
Condition
Vehicle Counts
by Our System
Similarity
Parameter
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
1254
100
Sunny/
Cloudy
101
0.5
Far Distance
­ Medium Traffic
1254
37
Sunny/
Cloudy
36
0.6
Close Distance
­ Low Traffic
1254
2
Sunny/
Cloudy
1
0.5
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
150
1
Foggy
0
0.5
Far Distance
­ Medium Traffic
150
1
Foggy
0
0.6
Close Distance
­ Low Traffic
150
0
Foggy
0
0.5
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
150
5
Heavy Rain
4
0.5
Far Distance
­ Medium Traffic
150
1
Heavy Rain
0
0.6
Close Distance
­ Low Traffic
150
1
Heavy Rain
1
0.5
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
150
4
Sunny
0
0.5
Far Distance
­ Medium Traffic
150
2
Sunny
2
0.6
Close Distance
­ Low Traffic
150
0
Sunny
0
0.5
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
150
3
Cloudy
3
0.5
Far Distance
­ Medium Traffic
150
1
Cloudy
1
0.6
Close Distance
­ Low Traffic
150
0
Cloudy
0
0.5
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.23: Example of counting vehicles method. Gray lines shows the road section
and vertical cyan lines shows border of counting regions. Dots represents the position of
detection. Correctly counted vehicles marked with green while wrong ones are in red.
Table 4.5: Increased similarity parameter effect on vehicle count results of medium road
section on different weather conditions.
Case
Number of
images
Number of
Vehicles
Weather
Condition
Vehicle Counts
by Our System
Similarity
Parameter
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
1254
100
Sunny/
Cloudy
107
0.6
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
150
1
Foggy
0
0.6
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
150
5
Heavy Rain
5
0.6
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
150
4
Sunny
3
0.6
Medium Distance
­ High Traffic
150
3
Cloudy
3
0.6
38
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:47==
5
Conclusion
This thesis contained two main objectives, the investigation of vehicle counting methods
by using camera data and the implementation of a prototype to count vehicles in a rural
environment by camera which is far distance from the visible roads.
For the first objective, plenty of methods were investigated and their advantages and dis­
advantages presented. Motion based detection techniques demonstrated powerful capa­
bility, however efforts to make them work autonomously in more generalized conditions
and post­processing their results turn out to be extremely difficult and require a lot of hard
work. On the other hand, advanced machine learning methods such as DETR, YOLO,
Faster R­CNN, and RetinaNet presented high potential in easily visible, but highly diverse
scenarios. Also, the DETR model outperformed other models in a variety of cases for
detection, while models like YOLO preserved top place in computational speed. For the
tracking of the vehicles, the template matching method proved that it is particularly suit­
able in our vehicle tracking as vehicles do not suddenly change appearance. As the last
step, vehicles have been counted by using virtual regions as the vehicle should appear in
all of them if it is moving. This method has a very basic, but extremely logical and robust
idea as it provided impressive results on counting vehicles.
For the second objective, a full pipeline of a prototype developed and evaluated on col­
lected datasets. In the prototype, video footage fed into an object detection model(specific
model can be changed easily) which was used for vehicle detections and the template
matching method employed for tracking. Finally, suitable tracks counted as a vehicle.
Several challenges were identified during the experiments of the vehicle counting pro­
totype, such as occlusions during high traffic, overlapping vehicles from opposite direc­
tions, and false detections of object detection models. Additionally, environmental con­
ditions like lighting changes and weather variations pose significant hurdles which lower
the chance of detection, necessitating further advancements in algorithm robustness.
In conclusion, this thesis contributes to the field of vehicle counting by video cameras
and showcasing the effectiveness of state­of­the­art approaches and simple methods.
However, it is important to acknowledge the limitations of this study. The small size of the
annotated dataset led to incomprehensible results. On the other hand, researching and
testing the extensive work in the field is beyond the time limit of this study. Therefore,
additional research and an expanded dataset are required to validate and broaden our
findings. The results presented in this study provide a foundation for future research and
developments in the field, potentially leading to more precise and dependable vehicle
counting methods in various practical applications.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:49==
6
Future Work
By obtaining inspiration from the conclusions section, we can propose several directions
to further enhance the performance and capabilities of our vehicle counting model. Ex­
panding the scope and the amount of the dataset is definitely a potential way for future
improvement. Expanding the dataset to include more diverse scenarios can help to better
understand the shortcomings of the system and leads to possible enhancements.
As for the vehicle detection part, motion based detection approaches still pose an im­
portant position. As vehicles use the roads during the night time and in hard weather
conditions, object detection models have a very slight chance of successful detection,
however motion based approaches can work with less information and they may detect
vehicles even from the headlights of the vehicles. On the other hand, object detection
models can be trained with custom data to achieve much higher performance in detecting
far distance vehicles. Furthermore, both approaches can be combined to answer the full
day vehicle counting problem.
Finally, in vehicle tracking, the template matching algorithm can be developed more by
using in combination with other algorithms which uses different information such as po­
sition, speed, etc. of the vehicle. Also, state­of­the­art methods such as SORT or Deep
SORT can be employed and compared with current approaches. Also, increasing the
FPS of the camera could improve template matching accuracy due to the appearance of
vehicles changing less in higher FPS.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Climate Change 2007: Syn­
thesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assess­
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, 2007.
[2]
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Climate Change 2021 – The
Physical Science Basis: Working Group I Contribution to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University
Press, 2023.
[3]
Mikkel Strunge Kany et al. “Energy efficient decarbonisation strategy for the Danish
transport sector by 2045”. In: Smart Energy 5 (2022), p. 100063. ISSN: 2666­9552.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.segy.2022.100063. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2666955222000016.
[4]
Drivkraft Danmark. “Energistatistik 2019”. In: Lokaliseret d 13 (2019), p. 19.
[5]
Morten Winther. Danish emission inventories for road transport and other mobile
sources Inventories until year 2020. 2022.
[6]
Mara Chagas Diogenes et al. “Pedestrian Counting Methods at Intersections: A
Comparative Study”. In: Transportation Research Record 2002.1 (2007), pp. 26–
30. DOI: 10.3141/2002-04. eprint: https://doi.org/10.3141/2002-04. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.3141/2002-04.
[7]
Windmill Software. Pneumatic Tube Vehicle Counting. [Online; accessed 27­August­
2024]. 2023.
[8]
Windmill Software. Vehicle Detection: Ten Ways to Count Traffic. [Online; accessed
27­August­2024]. 2023.
[9]
ParkHelp Technologies. Ultrasonic Car Counters. [Online; accessed 27­August­
2024]. 2024.
[10]
Khairul Khaizi Mohd Shariff et al. “VIDEO CAMERA TECHNOLOGY FOR VEHICLE
COUNTING IN TRAFFIC CENSUS: ISSUES, STRATEGIES AND OPPORTUNI­
TIES”. In: PLANNING MALAYSIA 21.28 (Aug. 2023). DOI: 10.21837/pm.v21i28.
1316. URL: https://www.planningmalaysia.org/index.php/pmj/article/view/1316.
[11]
Yang Liu et al. “A survey and performance evaluation of deep learning methods for
small object detection”. In: Expert Systems with Applications 172 (2021), p. 114602.
ISSN: 0957­4174. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.114602. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417421000439.
[12]
M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell. “Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects”.
In: Science 349.6245 (2015), pp. 255–260. DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa8415. eprint:
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aaa8415. URL: https://www.
science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.aaa8415.
[13]
Taiwo Oladipupo Ayodele. “Types of Machine Learning Algorithms”. In: New Ad­
vances in Machine Learning. Ed. by Yagang Zhang. Rijeka: IntechOpen, 2010.
Chap. 3. DOI: 10.5772/9385. URL: https://doi.org/10.5772/9385.
[14]
Jinming Zou, Yi Han, and Sung­Sau So. “Overview of Artificial Neural Networks”. In:
Artificial Neural Networks: Methods and Applications. Ed. by David J. Livingstone.
Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2009, pp. 14–22. ISBN: 978­1­60327­101­1. DOI: 10.
1007/978-1-60327-101-1_2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-60327-101-1_2.
[15]
Christopher M Bishop. “Pattern recognition and machine learning”. In: Springer
google schola 2 (2006), pp. 1122–1128.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
43
==PAGE:52==
[16]
Vinícius Gonçalves Maltarollo, Káthia Maria Honório, and Albérico Borges Ferreira
da Silva. “Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Problems”. In: Ar­
tificial Neural Networks. Ed. by Kenji Suzuki. Rijeka: IntechOpen, 2013. Chap. 10.
DOI: 10.5772/51275. URL: https://doi.org/10.5772/51275.
[17]
Margaret Rouse. Technopedia, What Is Computer Vision? [Online; accessed 27­
August­2024]. 2019.
[18]
Abbas Cheddad, Huseyin Kusetogullari, and Håkan Grahn. “Object recognition us­
ing shape growth pattern”. In: Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on
Image and Signal Processing and Analysis. 2017, pp. 47–52. DOI: 10.1109/ISPA.
2017.8073567.
[19]
Norbert Buch, Sergio A. Velastin, and James Orwell. “A Review of Computer Vi­
sion Techniques for the Analysis of Urban Traffic”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelli­
gent Transportation Systems 12.3 (2011), pp. 920–939. DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2011.
2119372.
[20]
Christof Kutschera et al. “A Flexible Sensor­mat to Automate the Process of People
Counting”. In: roceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Advances in
Circuits, Electronics and Micro­electronics, Nice/Saint Laurent du Var, France, Aug.
21­27, 2011. 2011. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:65351810.
[21]
Amirali Jazayeri et al. “Vehicle Detection and Tracking in Car Video Based on Motion
Model”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 12.2 (2011),
pp. 583–595. DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2011.2113340.
[22]
Aman Preet Gulati. Vehicle Motion Detection using Background Subtraction. [On­
line; accessed 27­August­2024]. 2022.
[23]
Wei Sun et al. “Moving Vehicle Detection and Tracking Based on Optical Flow
Method and Immune Particle Filter under Complex Transportation Environments”.
In: Complexity 2020.1 (2020), p. 3805320. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/
3805320. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1155/2020/3805320.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/2020/3805320.
[24]
Isaac Berrios. Introduction to Motion Detection: Part 1. [Online; accessed 27­August­
2024]. 2023.
[25]
Shiva Kamkar and Reza Safabakhsh. “Vehicle detection, counting and classification
in various conditions”. In: IET Intelligent Transport Systems 10.6 (2016), pp. 406–
413. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-its.2015.0157. eprint: https://ietresearch.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1049/iet-its.2015.0157. URL: https://ietresearch.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/iet-its.2015.0157.
[26]
W. von Seelen et al. “Scene analysis and organization of behavior in driver assis­
tance systems”. In: Proceedings 2000 International Conference on Image Process­
ing (Cat. No.00CH37101). Vol. 3. 2000, 524–527 vol.3. DOI: 10.1109/ICIP.2000.
899483.
[27]
Dong Guo et al. “Color modeling by spherical influence field in sensing driving en­
vironment”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium 2000 (Cat.
No.00TH8511). 2000, pp. 249–254. DOI: 10.1109/IVS.2000.898350.
[28]
N.D. Matthews et al. “Vehicle detection and recognition in greyscale imagery”. In:
Control Engineering Practice 4.4 (1996), pp. 473–479. ISSN: 0967­0661. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0967-0661(96)00028-7. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0967066196000287.
[29]
Massimo Bertozzi, Alberto Broggi, and Stefano Castelluccio. “A real­time oriented
system for vehicle detection”. In: Journal of Systems Architecture 43.1 (1997), pp. 317–
325. ISSN: 1383­7621. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1383-7621(96)00106-3. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1383762196001063.
44
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:53==
[30]
Robert M. Haralick, K. Shanmugam, and Its’Hak Dinstein. “Textural Features for
Image Classification”. In: IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
SMC­3.6 (1973), pp. 610–621. DOI: 10.1109/TSMC.1973.4309314.
[31]
H. Mori and N.M. Charkari. “Shadow and rhythm as sign patterns of obstacle detec­
tion”. In: ISIE ’93 ­ Budapest: IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electron­
ics Conference Proceedings. 1993, pp. 271–277. DOI: 10.1109/ISIE.1993.268796.
[32]
Rita Cucchiara and Massimo Piccardi. “Vehicle Detection under Day and Night Il­
lumination”. In: IIA/SOCO. 1999. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
1317180.
[33]
Jun Yang et al. “Vehicle detection and tracking with low­angle cameras”. In: 2010
IEEE International Conference on Image Processing. 2010, pp. 685–688. DOI: 10.
1109/ICIP.2010.5649575.
[34]
Zehang Sun, G. Bebis, and R. Miller. “On­road vehicle detection: a review”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 28.5 (2006), pp. 694–
711. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2006.104.
[35]
Liang Lin et al. “A stochastic graph grammar for compositional object representation
and recognition”. In: Pattern Recognition 42.7 (2009), pp. 1297–1307. ISSN: 0031­
3203. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2008.10.033. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031320308004603.
[36]
Izzah Amani Tarmizi and Azrina Abd Aziz. “Vehicle Detection Using Convolutional
Neural Network for Autonomous Vehicles”. In: 2018 International Conference on
Intelligent and Advanced System (ICIAS). 2018, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/ICIAS.2018.
8540563.
[37]
Fahim Rustamy. DEtection TRansformer (DETR) vs. YOLO for object detection.
[Online; accessed 27­August­2024]. 2023.
[38]
Quanfu Fan, Lisa Brown, and John Smith. “A closer look at Faster R­CNN for vehicle
detection”. In: 2016 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV). 2016, pp. 124–129.
DOI: 10.1109/IVS.2016.7535375.
[39]
Mingshen Wang, Xufei Zhuang, and Haitong Zhao. “YOLOX­based dynamic vehi­
cle target detection”. In: 2022 IEEE 4th International Conference on Civil Aviation
Safety and Information Technology (ICCASIT). 2022, pp. 244–251. DOI: 10.1109/
ICCASIT55263.2022.9987008.
[40]
Luyang Zhang et al. “Vehicle Object Detection Based on Improved RetinaNet”. In:
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1757.1 (Jan. 2021), p. 012070. DOI: 10.
1088/1742-6596/1757/1/012070. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1757/
1/012070.
[41]
Xu Chaojun et al. “Research on Vehicle Detection Based on YOLOv3”. In: 2020
2nd International Conference on Information Technology and Computer Application
(ITCA). 2020, pp. 433–436. DOI: 10.1109/ITCA52113.2020.00097.
[42]
P. Fieguth and D. Terzopoulos. “Color­based tracking of heads and other mobile
objects at video frame rates”. In: Proceedings of IEEE Computer Society Confer­
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 1997, pp. 21–27. DOI: 10.1109/
CVPR.1997.609292.
[43]
Erik Bochinski, Volker Eiselein, and Thomas Sikora. “High­Speed tracking­by­detection
without using image information”. In: 2017 14th IEEE International Conference on
Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance (AVSS). 2017, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.
1109/AVSS.2017.8078516.
[44]
Alex Bewley et al. “Simple Online and Realtime Tracking”. In: CoRR abs/1602.00763
(2016). arXiv: 1602.00763. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.00763.
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
45
==PAGE:54==
[45]
Nicolai Wojke, Alex Bewley, and Dietrich Paulus. “Simple Online and Realtime Track­
ing with a Deep Association Metric”. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (ICIP). IEEE. 2017, pp. 3645–3649. DOI: 10.1109/ICIP.2017.
8296962.
[46]
Fatih Cagatay Akyon, Sinan Onur Altinuc, and Alptekin Temizel. “Slicing Aided Hy­
per Inference and Fine­Tuning for Small Object Detection”. In: 2022 IEEE Interna­
tional Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). 2022, pp. 966–970. DOI: 10.1109/
ICIP46576.2022.9897990.
46
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
==PAGE:55==
Automated Vehicle Detection and Counting from Images for Greenhouse Gas Monitoring
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://electro.dtu.dk/
