==PAGE:1==
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Jawad Zaheer
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Covert watermarking is a security and privacy-related technique for subtly embedding a
concealed identifier into a digital document that is not easily perceptible to human senses
but can be retrieved by those with the right tools and knowledge. In this study, we use
this technique to watermark personalized copies of PDF and printed documents to track
information leaks online. This is to discourage the unauthorized sharing of company-
confidential memos, documents with customers’ personal information, etc. The study
involves surveying existing tools, devising a robust watermark method, and embedding
bit strings into documents through spacing modifications. Evaluation includes compar-
ing original and modified documents, detecting encoded information, and measuring the
accuracy and error rate by comparing Levinshtein distance. Furthermore, strategies are
proposed to ensure the watermark’s resilience against printing-and-scanning, and screen-
shotting.
Keywords: watermarking, steganography, information hiding, encryption, decryption
ii
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Jawad Zaheer, MSc Engineering, DTU
I would like to sincerely thank the SECCLO consortium for providing the invaluable oppor-
tunity to undertake this research. Thanks to Eija and Emma for their consistent adminis-
trative support throughout this process. My heartfelt thanks also go to Professor Tuomas
Aura and Professor Nicola Dragoni for their exceptional mentorship and constructive
feedback, which have been crucial in guiding and refining this work.
Finally, I wish to thank everyone who has contributed to this journey, offering their support
and encouragement. Your contributions have been deeply appreciated.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
DRM & Digital Rights Management
OCR & Optical Character Recognition
LSB & Least Significant Bit Insertion
NLP & Natural Language Processing
TEI & Text Encoding Initiative
ODF & Open Document Format
PPT & PowerPoint Presentation
DNA & Deoxyribonucleic acid
XML & Extensible Markup Language
SRL & Semantic Role Labeling
DCT & Discrete Cosine Transform
DWT & Discrete Wavelet Transform
GDPR & General Data Protection Regulation
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Notes on Typography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Word Spacing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Kerning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Optical Character Recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
How Optical Character Recognition (OCR) Works
. . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Tesseract OCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Steganography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.2
Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Watermarking for DRM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
PDF Document Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.1
Header
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.2
Body . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.3
Cross-Reference Table (xref table) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.4
Trailer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5.5
Document Catalog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5.6
Page Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5.7
Content Streams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Design and Implementation
15
3.1
Encoding the PDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.1
PDF noramlization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.2
Detect lines and word spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.1.3
Generating unique Pseudorandom bit strings . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.4
Encode bit string by narrowing and widening spaces . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Decoding the PDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.1
Converting to Bitmap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.2
OCR to detect lines and word spaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.3
Scaling Bitmaps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2.4
Comparing word spaces length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2.5
Comparing watermarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3
Design Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Experimental Evaluation
31
vi
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:9==
4.1
Identifying Watermarks in Leaked Document
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Confidence in Correct Watermark Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Summary Graph for multiple watermarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3.1
Summary Graph for documents of one type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3.2
Summary Graph for documents of different types . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Identifying watermarks in printing-and-scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.5
Impact of Parameter Variations on Watermark Detection . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Discussion
41
5.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Usefulness of our method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3
Managing Word Space Variations and Decoding Errors
. . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.4
Handling Leaks of Original or Unvaried Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.5
Visible Watermarks for GDPR Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.6
Alternate Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Related Work
47
6.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.1.1
Excluded Literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.1.2
Further Analysis of relevant research papers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.1.3
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
In today’s information technology age, the secure transmission of confidential documents
is crucial for organizations across various sectors. Documents such as company meeting
memos, customer records, and personal data need to be shared, often in personalized
PDFs or printed copies. However, the rise in unauthorized sharing of such confidential
documents has become a significant concern, leading to potential leaks online.
Watermarking has been extensively researched to protect the authenticity of digital me-
dia. Traditionally, watermarking techniques have been applied to images, videos, and
audio files, embedding hidden information within the media to verify authenticity, assert
ownership, or trace the distribution source. Anderson and Peticolas [1] mentioned one of
the earliest claimed examples of watermarking for tracing leaks for printed copies of digital
documents. Similarly, Kutter et al. discuss the applications of watermarking in multimedia
security, highlighting its importance in protecting digital content from unauthorized use [2].
Cox et al. provide an in-depth analysis of digital watermarking techniques, emphasizing
their role in ensuring the integrity and provenance of digital media [3]. The focus of this
thesis is on the use of watermarking for tracing the origin of leaked digital documents.
Problem
Despite significant advancements in watermarking multimedia content, apply-
ing robust watermarking techniques to digital documents remains a relatively underex-
plored area. PDFs are a widely used format for transmitting textual and graphical infor-
mation due to their platform independence. However, the structure of PDFs poses spe-
cific challenges for watermarking. Unlike images or audio files, where watermarks can be
embedded in a continuous data stream, PDFs consist of discrete objects, including text,
images, and vector graphics, complicating the watermarking process.
One significant challenge in adding watermarks to digital documents is maintaining the wa-
termark’s durability through various transformations. Transformations, such as, screen-
shotting, printing and scanning, can compromise the watermark’s integrity. These trans-
formations may distort the hidden information, making it hard to detect and extract the
watermark reliably. For instance, when a document is printed and scanned, the output
quality and scanner resolution can introduce noise and distortions, hindering the water-
mark detection.
Protecting PDF documents against printing and scanning involves implementing mea-
sures to prevent unauthorized copying, scanning, or reproduction of printed documents
without compromising their readability or visual appearance. Techniques for protection
against printing-and-scanning may include embedding invisible watermarks or digital sig-
natures in the document’s content, which can be detected and verified during scanning or
photocopying [4].
To overcome these obstacles described above, it is crucial to create watermarking meth-
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
1
==PAGE:12==
ods to withstand such changes. A durable watermark should stay intact and be retriev-
able even after the document undergoes transformations. This requires developing wa-
termarking techniques that can embed information in a way that resists noise, distortion,
and other degradations caused by document transformations, in addition to a visible wa-
termark.
The goals of the thesis project are to achieve a comprehensive understanding of water-
marking techniques and explore various methodologies and their practical applications.
More specifically, the aim is to develop robust watermarking techniques that can with-
stand various transformations. In the applied part of the thesis, the goal is to design and
implement a scalable software solution capable of efficiently handling the watermarking
needs for distributing a large number of digital documents.
The contributions of this research are as follows:
• Developed a watermarking solution for PDF documents, particularly LaTeX-generated
PDFs (3).
• Embedding of watermarks through modification of word spacing, preserving the docu-
ment structure and minimizing visual alterations (3).
• Evaluated the watermarking technique showing that the watermark can withstand screen-
shotting, and printing and scanning (4).
The rest of the thesis is structured as follows.
Chapter 2 covers different fonts and their characteristics, steganography, watermarking
for DRM, PDF document structure, Levenshtein distance, and OCR technology. These
foundational concepts provide the necessary context for understanding the design and
implementation of the robust watermarking application.
Chapter 3 provides a detailed overview of the application, presenting high-level archi-
tectural designs and illustrating various implementation stages with examples of gener-
ated PDFs. Chapter 4 section presents the results of experiments conducted to assess
the algorithm’s robustness against different transformations, including screenshotting and
printing-and-scanning. It establishes a mathematical relationship between Levenshtein
distance and different versions of the PDF image through graphical representations and
empirical data. Chapter 5 compares our results with our original goals, then provides us
an insight into how useful are our methods for watermarking digital documents and dis-
cusses some of their limitations and alternate approaches, which detail how they could
be better or worse. Finally, Chapter 6 explains the methodology for filtering relevant pa-
pers within the scope of the research. The focus then narrows down to papers discussing
watermarking for digital documents, specifically PDFs, and compares those papers with
our implemented solution.
2
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This section delves into some topics in typography relevant to our work and then moves on
to explain steganography and its techniques before exploring its applications in digital wa-
termarking. It then discusses watermarking within the Digital Rights Management (DRM)
context. Following this, the Optical Character Recognition (OCR) process employed to
decode the bit strings is detailed. Subsequently, the Levenshtein distance algorithm is ex-
plained, that is used to compare encoded and decoded bit strings. Finally, the structure
of PDF documents is analyzed, with a focus on content streams.
2.1
Notes on Typography
Typography plays a crucial role in the presentation and readability of textual content. Word
spacing and kerning are essential concepts in typography, contributing significantly to the
readability and visual appeal of text. [5]
2.1.1
Word Spacing
Word spacing refers to the amount of space between words in a block of text. If the space
between words is too wide, it can cause the text to appear disjointed and fragmented.
Conversely, if the spacing is too narrow, words can run together, making it difficult to
distinguish where one word ends and another begins. Different fonts have different default
word spacing. For example, monospace fonts have uniform character spacing, while
proportional fonts vary in character spacing. Larger font sizes might require more word
spacing to maintain readability. In justified text, word spacing is adjusted to ensure that
both the left and right margins are aligned. This can sometimes lead to uneven word
spacing.
In LaTeX, word spacing is generally handled automatically, but we can adjust it if needed.
For example, we can use the ”spaceskip” command to set the spacing between words.
\spaceskip=1.5em plus 0.5em minus 0.2em
2.1.2
Kerning
Kerning is the process of adjusting the space between individual characters (letters) in a
piece of text to improve its appearance and readability. Kerning ensures that the spacing
between specific pairs of letters is visually balanced. This is particularly important for
certain letter combinations where the default spacing might appear too wide or too narrow.
Some fonts are designed with built-in kerning pairs to automatically adjust the spacing
between specific characters. Similarly, certain combinations of characters, like ”AV” or
”To,” often require kerning adjustments due to their shapes and how they fit together.
In LaTeX, you can adjust kerning using the ”kern” command. For example, to adjust the
space between the letters ”A” and ”V”, you could use:
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
3
==PAGE:14==
A\kern-0.2emV
This reduces the space between ”A” and ”V” by 0.2 em units. However, we won’t need
to adjust the kerning ourselves since it is a subtle art, and kerning rules are built into
typesetting systems and fonts.
2.2
Optical Character Recognition
This section explains the Optical Character Recognition (OCR) process in detail, focusing
on the technical steps involved. OCR is a technology used to convert documents, such as
scanned paper documents, PDFs, or images captured by a digital camera, into editable
and searchable data. The fundamental purpose of OCR is to recognize text within images
and translate it into a machine-readable format. Section 2.2.1 explains how OCR works
and the different technologies to be used within that process. Moving on, section 2.2.2
explains a brief history of tesseract-ocr that is used in our watermarking framework to
detect lines and spaces for the decoding process. It then explains applications, strengths,
and limitations in the context of our study.
2.2.1
How Optical Character Recognition (OCR) Works
This section will explain the different stages in the OCR process. It will start by explain-
ing the stages of obtaining images, then preprocessing them for detection, followed by
performing character segmentation and feature extraction. Finally, it will cover feature
extraction and character recognition on the template, and in the end, perform some post-
processing on the obtained text to fix spelling or formatting errors.
Image Acquisition
The initial step in OCR is image acquisition, which involves obtain-
ing a high-quality image of the text document either through scanning or photographing.
Scanning uses a flatbed scanner to digitize physical documents, producing high-resolution
images. Photography involves using digital cameras or smartphones to capture images,
requiring good lighting and focus to ensure clarity. The significance of this step lies in the
fact that the accuracy of OCR relies heavily on the clarity and resolution of the image;
low-quality images can lead to recognition errors.
Pre-Processing
This step is aimed at enhancing image quality to improve text recogni-
tion. Common pre-processing techniques include grayscale conversion, noise reduction,
and binarization. Grayscale conversion simplifies processing by reducing the image to
shades of gray, removing unnecessary color information. This is implemented by con-
verting each pixel’s color value to a gray value based on its luminance. Noise reduction
eliminates irrelevant artifacts such as smudges or dust. Techniques for noise reduction
include median filtering, which uses the median of neighboring pixel values to replace
each pixel’s value, and Gaussian blur, which smooths the image to reduce minor noise.
Binarization converts the grayscale image into a binary format, distinguishing text from the
4
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:15==
background, with Otsu’s method being a common technique to automatically determine
the threshold for separating black and white pixels.
Character Segmentation
It involves identifying and isolating text areas within the im-
age, effectively separating text from non-text elements. This step differentiates distinct
regions containing text through various methods. One common method is connected
component analysis, which groups pixels into components based on their connectivity.
Another method is edge detection, which uses algorithms such as Canny or Sobel to
find edges and define text boundaries. These techniques ensure that the text is accu-
rately segmented from the background and other non-text elements, facilitating subse-
quent recognition processes.
Feature Extraction
Involves extracting the unique features of each character to dis-
tinguish them effectively. Structural features, such as lines, curves, and intersections,
define the character’s shape. Statistical features, including pixel distributions and zon-
ing (dividing the character into zones and analyzing pixel density), provide further detail.
These features can be compared with predefined templates through pattern recognition
or identified using machine learning models trained on large datasets. Both approaches
contribute to the precise identification and differentiation of characters in the text.
Spell Checking
Once the characters are recognized, the OCR software applies post-
processing techniques to enhance the accuracy of the output text. This post-processing
may include spell checking, which corrects potential errors in the recognized text using
language models. Additionally, formatting is preserved to retain the original layout and
formatting of the document, such as bold or italicized text, tables, and columns. These
steps ensure that the final output closely matches the original document in both content
and appearance.
OCR technology has transformed document handling by simplifying the digitization and
management of large volumes of text data. It is extensively used in applications such
as digitizing historical documents, automating data entry processes, and enabling text-to-
speech functionalities for the visually impaired.
2.2.2
Tesseract OCR
Tesseract OCR is an open-source optical character recognition engine widely used to
convert printed or handwritten text in images into machine-readable text. Originally de-
veloped by Hewlett-Packard in the 1980s, it became open-source with sponsorship from
Google. Tesseract supports over 100 languages, including complex scripts like Chinese,
Japanese, and Korean, as well as right-to-left scripts like Arabic and Hebrew. This section
provides an overview of Tesseract OCR, including its features, workflow, usage, applica-
tions, strengths, and limitations as explained in [6].
Tesseract offers several capabilities, including text detection in various image formats
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
5
==PAGE:16==
(e.g., TIFF, JPEG, PNG) and multi-page document processing, making it ideal for large-
scale digitization projects. It includes layout analysis features to preserve document struc-
ture and format, such as paragraphs, columns, and tables. Additionally, users can train
Tesseract on new fonts or languages to enhance accuracy for specific use cases.
Tesseract is widely used for document digitization, including books, historical documents,
and legal papers. It also facilitates data entry automation by extracting text data from
forms and invoices. Additionally, Tesseract enhances accessibility by converting printed
text to digital formats, allowing screen readers to read the content aloud for the visually
impaired.
Strengths
Its accuracy, particularly with printed text, ensures reliable and precise text
extraction, which is critical for applications like document digitization and data entry au-
tomation. This accuracy results from advanced algorithms and continuous updates that
enhance its performance.
Teserract supports a wide range of languages, including complex scripts such as Chinese,
Japanese, and Korean, and right-to-left scripts like Arabic and Hebrew. Furthermore, it
can be trained on new fonts and languages, allowing users to customize and improve its
accuracy for specific use cases, expanding its flexibility.
Limitations
Tesseract, despite its many strengths, also has certain limitations. The
quality of OCR depends significantly on the quality of the pre-processed image; poor im-
age quality can lead to recognition errors, necessitating robust pre-processing techniques
to enhance image clarity. Furthermore, Tesseract might struggle with very complex lay-
outs or heavily formatted documents, such as those with multiple columns, intricate tables,
or varied font styles, which can affect its ability to accurately detect and preserve the doc-
ument’s structure and content. Figure 3 shows the output of tesseract-ocr for lines and
word detection for the decoding process in our specific use case.
2.3
Steganography
Steganography is the practice of concealing messages or information within non-secret
text or data. Historically, steganography dates back to ancient civilizations, where mes-
sages were hidden in wax tablets, beneath layers of wax, or tattooed on messengers’
scalps beneath their hair. The term itself comes from the Greek words steganos (meaning
covered) and graphia (meaning writing). Over time, methods evolved to include invisible
ink, microdots, and complex ciphers. [7]
This ancient art of hidden writing has evolved significantly with the advent of digital tech-
nology, making it a sophisticated method for covert communication and data protection in
the modern age [8].
6
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:17==
2.3.1
Applications
Steganography finds its applications in copyright protection where by embedding a digital
watermark in the form of modified word spaces, document owners can assert ownership
and protect their intellectual property from unauthorized use. Similarly, watermarks can
be used to verify the authenticity of official documents, ensuring that they have not been
tampered with. Organizations can embed unique watermarks in distributed documents to
trace their distribution and identify potential leaks.
Digital watermarking, often used for copyright protection, involves embedding a hidden
watermark in media files to prove ownership or authenticity. Modifying word spaces in
PDF documents is a subtle and effective method for embedding digital watermarks. Since
readers are used to variations in word spacing, e.g. in justified text, hence this technique
is an ideal approach for hiding information within a document without altering its visible
content. [3]
Modifying word spaces in a PDF document involves adjusting the horizontal spacing be-
tween words to encode binary data. This form of steganography can be used to embed
a digital watermark for various purposes, such as verifying document authenticity, pro-
tecting intellectual property, or tracing document distribution. The data to be embedded
is first converted into a binary format. Each bit of this binary data will correspond to a
specific adjustment in the spacing between words. Finally, the spacing between words in
the document is slightly altered to reflect the binary data.
2.3.2
Techniques
In the digital realm, steganography often involves embedding information within multime-
dia files such as images, audio, and video. The techniques can be broadly categorized
into several types. Least significant bit (LSB) is one of the most common techniques. In
this technique, the least significant bits of the host file’s data are replaced with the bits
of the secret message. For instance, in an image, (LSB) of the pixel values (generally
imperceptible to the human eye) can be altered to hide information [9]. Masking and fil-
tering are more advanced and are often used with audio files. It involves hiding data in the
image by manipulating frequencies in a way that is masked by the original sound. This
makes it nearly impossible to detect the hidden message without the correct decoding
mechanism [10].
Transform domain techniques involve embedding information in the transform space of
a file, such as in the frequency or wavelet domain. For images, this might include em-
bedding data within the coefficients of a Discrete cosine transform (DCT), used in JPEG
compression [11]. Similar to techniques used in secure communications, spread spec-
trum steganography distributes the secret information across a broader bandwidth of the
host medium, making it harder to detect or remove without significant distortion of the
host [12].
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
7
==PAGE:18==
2.4
Watermarking for DRM
Watermarking is a key technique in Digital rights management (DRM) for protecting copy-
righted content. It involves embedding information into digital media—such as images,
audio, or video—to identify the rightful owner, verify authenticity, or trace unauthorized
copies. [13]
Applications
Watermarks can carry information about the owner or creator of the con-
tent, aiding to prove ownership in legal disputes [14]. By embedding a watermark, content
creators can mark their work to help prevent unauthorized distribution. Moreover, water-
marks can contain information that restricts copying or setting rules for how the content
can be used [15]. Also, invisible watermarks can be used to trace the source of unau-
thorized copies, helping to identify leaks or breaches in security [14]. Finally, watermarks
ensure that the media has not been altered or tampered with, preserving the integrity of
the content [16].
Types of Watermarks
Visible watermarks are visible to viewers, often displayed as lo-
gos, text, or other identifying marks. They act as a deterrent to unauthorized use [17].
Conversely, invisible watermarks are embedded into the media in a way that is imper-
ceptible to human senses. They can be extracted or detected with the right tools and are
often used for tracing and verification without affecting the user experience [14].
Techniques
Techniques that can be considered while selecting an appropriate water-
mark are to take into account human sensory models to ensure that the watermark re-
mains imperceptible while maintaining robustness known as perceptual watermarking [18].
Similarly, adaptive watermarking adjusts the embedding process based on the content
characteristics to enhance both robustness and imperceptibility. Furthermore, embedding
several watermarks in digital media can enhance security and robustness by providing
redundancy and several layers of protection. This approach can be particularly effective
in scenarios where a single watermark might be insufficient to ensure comprehensive
protection against various attacks and manipulations [3].
Considerations
Some of the considerations while developing robust watermarks are
that they must withstand various forms of processing, such as compression, cropping,
resizing, and format conversion [19]. Especially for invisible watermarks, the watermark
must not degrade the user experience or the quality of the content. The amount of in-
formation that can be embedded should be sufficient for the intended purpose without
compromising robustness or imperceptibility. Finally, watermarks should be resistant to
removal or tampering by unauthorized parties. This often involves using encryption and
other cryptographic techniques [20].
8
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:19==
2.5
PDF Document Structure
The PDF (Portable Document Format) is a widely used file format developed by Adobe
Systems for presenting documents in a manner independent of application software, hard-
ware, and operating systems. The structure of a PDF document is complex, but it can
be broken down into several key components [21]. In this section, we start by explaining
the header of the PDF, and then we proceed towards explaining the important compo-
nents within its body, then cross-reference tables, and then proceed towards explaining
the trailer. Moving on, we explain the content streams in section 2.5.7, which is the most
important component for our study since it contains information about the words and the
spaces necessary for the modification.
2.5.1
Header
The header is the first line of a PDF file and contains the PDF version number. For ex-
ample:
1
%PDF-1.7
2.5.2
Body
The body of a PDF file contains the document’s actual content, including text, images,
fonts, and other resources. The document structure is comprised of several key compo-
nents. Pages represent individual sections of the document, serving as the fundamen-
tal units that organize content. Text objects define the textual content that appears on
these pages, ensuring that the written information is presented. Image objects are used
to embed images into the document, enhancing visual appeal and supporting the text.
Font objects specify the fonts used, contributing to the document’s overall aesthetic and
readability. Additionally, graphics objects include vector graphics and shapes, which add
graphical elements and illustrations to the document.
Objects are typically described using a combination of streams and dictionaries.
2.5.3
Cross-Reference Table (xref table)
The cross-reference table contains the byte offsets of all the objects within the body of
the file. It allows quick access to any object. The table starts with the keyword Xref and
xref
0 5
0000000000 65535 f
0000000010 00000 n
0000000075 00000 n
0000000140 00000 n
0000000205 00000 n
Listing 1: Excerpt from an xref table in a PDF document.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
9
==PAGE:20==
trailer
<<
/Size 5
/Root 1 0 R
/Info 2 0 R
>>
startxref
123456
%%EOF
Listing 2: Trailer for a PDF document.
is followed by a series of entries as shown in listing 1.
2.5.4
Trailer
The trailer provides information about the document and includes a pointer to the cross-
reference table.
It ends with the startxref keyword followed by the byte offset at the
cross-reference table’s beginning. The trailer also contains the root object of the doc-
ument, which points to the document catalog (the root of the object hierarchy), as shown
in listing 2.
2.5.5
Document Catalog
The document catalog is the root of the document’s object hierarchy and is identified by
the /Root entry in the trailer. It contains references to various document elements, such
as the page tree.
2.5.6
Page Tree
The page tree is a hierarchical structure that organizes the pages of the document. It
consists of parent and child nodes, where the child nodes are either individual pages or
further branches in the tree.
Listing 3 shows a simplified example of a PDF structure. Understanding the PDF structure
is crucial for PDF generation, parsing, and manipulation tasks. The format’s flexibility and
robustness are key reasons for its widespread use for document exchange.
2.5.7
Content Streams
In a PDF document, the content stream is a crucial component that contains the instruc-
tions for rendering the content on a page. This stream consists of a sequence of PDF
graphics operators and operands that define the appearance of text, images, and graph-
ics on the page.
Content streams in a PDF file are represented as stream objects. A stream object con-
sists of a dictionary followed by a sequence of bytes, known as the stream data, which
is enclosed between the keywords ”stream” and ”endstream”. The dictionary provides
metadata about the stream, including its length and other attributes.
10
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:21==
%PDF-1.4
1 0 obj
<< /Type /Catalog /Pages 2 0 R >>
endobj
2 0 obj
<< /Type /Pages /Kids [3 0 R] /Count 1 >>
endobj
3 0 obj
<< /Type /Page /Parent 2 0 R /MediaBox [0 0 612 792] /Contents 4 0 R >>
endobj
4 0 obj
<< /Length 44 >>
stream
BT
/F1 24 Tf
100 700 Td
(Hello, World) Tj
ET
endstream
endobj
xref
0 5
0000000000 65535 f
0000000009 00000 n
0000000074 00000 n
0000000179 00000 n
0000000274 00000 n
trailer
<< /Size 5 /Root 1 0 R >>
startxref
357
%%EOF
Listing 3: Complete PDF structure
In the stream dictionary shown in listing 4, « /Length 44 » specifies that the length of the
stream data is 44 bytes. The content stream includes a sequence of PDF graphics opera-
tors and operands. These commands are utilized to render text, shapes, and images. The
following are explanations of some common graphic operators used in a content stream.
Text Operators
In a PDF content stream shown in listing 4, the BT and ET operators
are used to begin and end a text object, respectively. The Tf operator sets the font and
font size, such as ”/F1 24 Tf”, which specifies that the font is ”F1” with a size of 24. The
Td operator adjusts the text position; for instance, ”100 700 Td” moves the text cursor
to the coordinates (100, 700). To display a text string, the Tj operator is employed. For
example, ”(Hello, World) Tj” outputs the text ”Hello, World” at the current text position.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
11
==PAGE:22==
Graphics Operators
In a PDF content stream shown in listing 5, the m operator is used
to move to a specific point, such as 100 100 m, which moves the current position to the
coordinates (100, 100). The l operator draws a line from the current position to a new
point, for example, 200 200 l draws a line to the coordinates (200, 200). The h operator
closes a path, connecting the last point back to the starting point. The re operator draws
a rectangle, with an example being 100 100 200 150 re, which draws a rectangle starting
at (100, 100) with a width of 200 units and a height of 150 units. To outline or stroke the
path, the S operator is used, and to fill the path with color, the f operator is applied.
Color Operators
Color operators are used to specify colors for stroking and filling paths.
The RG and rg operators set the stroke and fill colors in RGB color space, respectively.
For grayscale colors, the G and g operators are used to set the stroke and fill colors. For
CMYK colors, the K and k operators define the stroke and fill colors.
Listing 5 shows an example of a content stream that demonstrates the use of the afore-
mentioned objects. The BT operator begins a text object, and /F1 24 Tf sets the font to
F1 with a size of 24. The 100 700 Td command moves the text position to the coordinates
(100, 700), while (Hello, World) Tj displays the text ”Hello, World” at that position. The
ET operator ends the text object. For drawing graphics, 100 600 m moves the current
position to (100, 600), and 200 600 l draws a line to (200, 600). Similarly, 200 700 l draws
a line to (200, 700), and 100 700 l completes the path by drawing a line back to (100,
700). The h operator closes the path, and S outlines the shape by stroking the path.
Difference Between Tj and TJ
In the PDF standard, particularly in the context of the
text content stream, Tj and TJ are operators used for showing text, but they have different
functionalities.
The Tj operator, which stands for ”Show Text,” is used in a PDF content stream to display
a string of text at the current text position. The operator is denoted by Tj and is used with
the syntax (text) Tj, where the text string is enclosed in parentheses. This operator places
4 0 obj
<< /Length 44 >>
stream
BT
/F1 24 Tf
100 700 Td
(Hello, World) Tj
ET
endstream
endobj
Listing 4: Stream Dictionary
12
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:23==
BT
/F1 24 Tf
100 700 Td
(Hello, World) Tj
ET
100 600 m
200 600 l
200 700 l
100 700 l
h
S
Listing 5: Content Stream
BT
/F1 12 Tf
100 700 Td
(Hello, World) Tj
ET
Listing 6: Use of Tj in content stream
the text exactly as specified without making any inter-character adjustments or additional
spacing modifications. It is primarily used to render text in its raw form at the position
defined by previous text positioning operators.
In a PDF content stream shown in listing 6, BT and ET define the beginning and end of a
text object, respectively. The command /F1 12 Tf sets the font to F1 and the font size to
12. The operator 100 700 Td moves the text position to the coordinates (100, 700), and
(HelloTj, World) Tj displays the text ”Hello, World!” at that position.
The TJ operator, known as ”Show Text with Individual Glyph Positioning,” is used in a PDF
content stream to display text while allowing for adjustments to the positioning of individual
glyphs. The operator is denoted by TJ and is used with the syntax [ array ] TJ. This array
consists of text strings and numeric values. The text strings are displayed in sequence,
and the numeric values adjust the positioning of the next glyph. Positive numbers move
the next glyph to the right, while negative numbers move it to the left, allowing for precise
text positioning adjustments, such as custom kerning or other effects.
In this example shown in listing 7, (He) displays ”He”, followed by the value 120, which
moves the next glyph 120 units to the right. The segment (llo, ) then displays llo, followed
by the value -30, which moves the next glyph 30 units to the left. Finally, (World) displays
”World”. In summary, the Tj operator is used for simple text display at the current text
position, while the TJ operator allows for detailed positioning control of individual text
segments. This functionality is particularly useful for custom kerning and fine-tuning text
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
13
==PAGE:24==
BT
/F1 12 Tf
100 700 Td
[ (He) 120 (llo, ) -30 (World) ] TJ
ET
Listing 7: Use of TJ in content stream
4 0 obj
<< /Length 67 /Filter /FlateDecode >>
stream
...compressed data...
endstream
endobj
Listing 8: Compression of content streams
appearance.
Finally, content streams can be compressed using various methods, such as Flate (ZIP)
compression to reduce the file size as shown in listing 8. When compressed, the stream
dictionary will include an additional entry indicating the compression method.
14
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:25==
3
Design and Implementation
This section provides a comprehensive overview of the watermarking algorithm frame-
work, detailing each step involved and the libraries and packages utilized. The following
paragraphs will explain each step and the corresponding algorithm in detail.
The complete encoding process we employ for covertly encoding our watermark inside the
PDF document is explained in 3.1. The algorithm and necessary steps involved in decod-
ing the watermark from the original document and the screenshots or print-and-scanned
version of the document are explained in 3.2. Finally, some of the design considerations
we take while designing our watermarking framework and the reasons for making those
design decisions are explained in 3.3.
3.1
Encoding the PDF
This section provides an overview of bit string encoding within our PDF file. First, the
total number of word spaces in the PDF is counted, and a pseudorandom bit string of this
length is generated. This bit string is then encoded into the PDF by modifying the content
streams. Figure 1 illustrates the steps involved in this encoding process.
We start with explaining the normalization process in 3.1.1 which lists the steps necessary
to convert a PDF into a suitable version, which we use for detecting the content streams.
Then proceed towards discussing the detection of lines and word spaces within that PDF
version in section 3.1.2 and explain the different intricacies involved in different steps for
detection. Finally, bit string generation is discussed in section 3.1.3, and then the encoding
of the bit string in the document by narrowing and widening the word spaces is discussed
in section 3.1.4.
3.1.1
PDF noramlization
In this step, the PDF is normalized to extract the required content streams. The Python
library PyPDF2 is used for this purpose, leveraging the underlying QPDF package to
decode the content streams under the PDF specifications [21]. PyPDF2 is a Python library
designed to manipulate PDF files. It enables reading, merging, splitting, and writing PDFs,
among other functionalities. One of the crucial tasks in handling PDFs is decoding the
Figure 1: Encoding a pseudorandom bit string
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
15
==PAGE:26==
content streams, which is often necessary to extract text, images, and other elements
from the document. PyPDF2 leverages the capabilities of QPDF, a powerful and versatile
PDF transformation software, to achieve this. PyPDF2 leverages QPDF to obtain the
content streams using below steps:
• Role of QPDF
• PyPDF2 and QPDF Integration
• Reading and Loading PDFs
QPDF is a command-line program and C++ library that performs transformations on PDF
files. These include linearization (for fast web viewing), encryption, and decryption. Addi-
tionally, it can manage complex PDF structures and is capable of decrypting and decoding
content streams.
While PyPDF2 provides a high-level API for PDF manipulation, it relies on QPDF for han-
dling lower-level operations, especially those involving decryption and decoding content
streams.
For integration of PyPDF2 and QPDF, PyPDF2 reads a PDF file and parses its structure
by loading various PDF objects, such as dictionaries, arrays, strings, and streams that
make up the PDF document. If PyPDF2 encounters an encrypted content stream it uti-
lizes QPDF to decrypt it. QPDF’s robust encryption handling allows PyPDF2 to process
files protected by various encryption methods, including password protection. Once the
content is decrypted, PyPDF2 utilizes QPDF to decode the content streams. Content
streams in PDFs can be compressed or encoded in various ways (e.g., using FlateDe-
code, ASCII85Decode, and LZWDecode).
QPDF can decompress and decode these streams, converting them into a readable for-
mat. After decoding, PyPDF2 can access the raw text and graphical data within the PDF.
This enables a wide range of manipulations, such as text extraction, merging pages from
different PDFs, adding or removing pages, and modifying metadata. PyPDF2 can com-
bine multiple PDFs into one or split a PDF into multiple files.
PyPDF2 offers several functionalities for managing PDF files. It can merge multiple PDFs
into one or split a single PDF into multiple files. The library allows for text extraction
from decoded content streams, enabling analysis or conversion of the text. Additionally,
PyPDF2 can read and modify the metadata of PDFs. It provides features for page manip-
ulation, such as adding, removing, or reordering pages within a PDF. Moreover, PyPDF2
supports encryption and decryption, allowing users to apply or remove encryption to pro-
tect or unprotect PDF files.
16
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:27==
def process_data(object, replacements, space_adjustment = 50,
encoded_bit_sequence = '', bit_list_index = 0):
,→
data = object.get_data()
decoded_data = data.decode()
replaced_data, updated_bit_list_index = replace_text(decoded_data,
replacements, encoded_bit_sequence, space_adjustment,
bit_list_index)
,→
,→
encoded_data = replaced_data.encode()
if object.decoded_self is not None:
object.decoded_self.set_data(encoded_data)
else:
object.set_data(encoded_data)
return updated_bit_list_index
Listing 9: Decoding content stream
Example Workflow in QPDF
QPDF reads the raw bytes of the PDF file and parses its
structure, building an in-memory representation of objects as shown in listing 10. If the
PDF is encrypted, QPDF uses the provided password to decrypt the encryption key and
then decrypts the content streams.
QPDF identifies and applies the necessary decompression filters to decode the content
streams into plain text or graphics commands. Listing 9 shows our function that decodes
the content streams and then does the processing. It parses the text objects and operators
in the decoded content streams to extract readable text. The extracted text can then be
outputted, manipulated, or saved as needed. Listing 11 shows the replace text function
that modifies the lines and spaces.
3.1.2
Detect lines and word spaces
This section explains the steps involved in detecting all the words and word spaces within
the content streams. To accomplish this, the content stream is parsed, focusing on each
line ending with either ”TJ” or ”Tj”, which contains words and characters within a PDF.
Next, all the words within each of these lines, represented within brackets, are detected.
() or <>. Subsequently, each number between these words, typically represented by
negative floating-point numbers or integers, is marked as a space. 12 shows the out-
put generated by the algorithm. It can be seen that between the word Introduction, there
are multiple spaces between characters represented by w:(In),s:26:(tro),s:-26,w:(duction).
These spaces are ignored because they represent kerning between characters for a par-
ticular font. This kerning adjusts the spacing between characters, resulting in varying
space widths.
Spaces within the ”()” brackets, either at the start or end, are marked with ”sw” in the code
for detection. This issue commonly arises in PDFs converted from Word documents or
PowerPoint presentations. 13 shows a sample with such a format.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
17
==PAGE:28==
reader = PdfReader(input_filePath)
writer = PdfWriter()
bit_list_index = 0
for page_number in range(0, len(reader.pages)):
page = reader.pages[page_number]
contents = page.get_contents()
if len(contents) == 1 and isinstance(contents,
DecodedStreamObject) or isinstance(contents,
EncodedStreamObject):
,→
,→
updated_bit_list_index = process_data(contents,
transformed_input_output, space_adjustment,
encoded_bit_sequence, bit_list_index )
,→
,→
if contents.decoded_self is not None:
page[NameObject("/Contents")] = contents.decoded_self
else:
page[NameObject("/Contents")] = contents
elif len(contents) > 0:
for index, obj in enumerate(contents):
streamObj = None
if isinstance(obj, DecodedStreamObject) or
isinstance(obj, EncodedStreamObject):
,→
streamObj = obj
elif isinstance(obj, IndirectObject):
streamObj = obj.get_object()
else:
continue
updated_bit_list_index = process_data(streamObj,
transformed_input_output, space_adjustment,
encoded_bit_sequence, bit_list_index)
,→
,→
if streamObj is not None and streamObj.decoded_self is
not None:
,→
contents[index] = writer._
add_object(streamObj.decoded_self)
page[NameObject("/Contents")] = contents
writer.add_page(page)
bit_list_index = updated_bit_list_index
Listing 10: Reading and parsing PDF
18
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:29==
def replace_text(content, transformed_input_output, encoded_bit_sequence,
space_adjustment, bit_list_index):
,→
lines = content.splitlines()
page_pdf_content = []
result = ""
in_text = False
for line in lines:
if line == "BT":
page_pdf_content.append(line)
in_text = True
elif line == "ET":
page_pdf_content.append(line)
in_text = False
elif in_text:
cmd = line[-2:]
if cmd.lower() == 'tj':
transformed_input = word_spacing.transform_input(line)
...
...
else:
page_pdf_content.append(line)
transformed_input_output.append(line)
else:
page_pdf_content.append(line)
page_pdf_content.append("\\n")
result += line + "\n"
...
...
output = detect_pdf_lines.
detectPdfLines(page_pdf_content)
updated_output, updated_bit_list_index =
modifed_pdf_lines.modified_pdf_lines(output,
encoded_bit_sequence, space_adjustment, bit_list_index)
,→
,→
....
updated_result = '\n'.join(updated_output)
return updated_result, updated_bit_list_index
Listing 11: Replace text function
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
19
==PAGE:30==
Similarly, in cases where multiple words are enclosed within parentheses, the spaces be-
tween these words are detected and marked accordingly as shown in 14. Here w:( ) sw:0.5
represents the space between two different words. After detection, these spaces are then
adjusted—either increased or decreased—based on a specified space-adjustment value
explained in 3.1.4.
Occurrences of Td and Tm are identified within the content streams, which provide the x
and y coordinates for text positions. Changes in these coordinates signify the beginning
of new lines in the PDF. 15 shows a simplified version of a sample output that detects
different lines and spaces inside a PDF document.
{'line-no': 'line-1', 'x': '167.702', 'y': '665.282', 'index': 0,
'line-adjustment': ['/F37 17.2154 Tf 167.702 665.282 Td '],
,→
'content': ['[', 'w:(Exercise)', 's:-302', 'w:(Sheet)', 's:-302',
'w:(1:)', 's:-406', 'w:(In)', 's:26', 'w:(tro)', 's:-26',
'w:(duction)', 's:-302', 'w:(to)', 's:-302', 'w:(Cloud)', ']']}
,→
,→
{'line-no': 'line-2', 'x': '99.245', 'y': '-21.918', 'index': 18,
'line-adjustment': 'TJ 99.245 -21.918 Td ', 'content': ['[',
'w:(Computing)', ']']}
,→
,→
...
...
...
Listing 15: Line detection output for PDFs
3.1.3
Generating unique Pseudorandom bit strings
In this step, a unique pseudorandom bit string is generated with a length equal to the
number of spaces in the PDF document. This bit string is then encoded into the doc-
ument. To generate the pseudorandom bit string, a personalized ID can be used as a
seed. For instance, this ID could be the user’s employee code in an organization or the
student’s number at a university. Listing 17 provides the algorithm used to generate a
/F37 17.2154 Tf 167.702 665.282 Td
[
w:(Exercise) s:-302 w:(Sheet) s:-302 w:(1:)
s:-406 w:(In) s:26 w:(tro) s:-26 w:(duction)
s:-302 w:(to) s:-302 w:(Cloud)
]
Listing 12: Detection of words and spaces
20
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:31==
[
w:(W) s:9.5
w:(a) s:-3.9
w:(l) s:-1
w:(t) s:-3.3
w:(h) s:-6.2
w:(a)
s:-3.9
w:(m) s:2.8
w:(,) sw:-4 w:( M) s:-1.5
w:(A 02453
|)sw:1.2
w:(
e) s:3
w:(:) sw:1.9
w:( )]
,→
,→
TJ
Listing 13: Detection of spaces within brackets
[ w:(i) s:1.5
w:(nu) s:6.1
w:(t) s:3.5
w:(es) sw:-2
w:( ) sw:0.5
w:(T) s:1.3
w:(em) s:1.6
w:(pl) s:7.4 w:(at) s:3.6 w:(e ) sw:0.5
w:(\()]
,→
,→
[(i)1.5 (nu)6.1 (t)3.5 (es)-22.0( )0.5(T)1.3 (em)1.6 (pl)7.4 (at)3.6
(e )-19.5(\()]TJ
,→
Listing 14: Detection of spaces between multiple words in parenthesis.
pseudorandom bit sequence of 0’s and 1’s based on the provided seed value.
3.1.4
Encode bit string by narrowing and widening spaces
After detecting the lines and spaces, each line in the PDF is iterated through, and the
spaces are adjusted according to the bit string. If a bit is 1, the space is widened; if a bit
is 0, the space is narrowed by a specified adjustment value.
Listing 16 explains the process of calculating this adjustment value. To determine its
value, the longest line length is first detected, and the total number of 1s and 0s in the bit
string is counted. The bit difference is then calculated and multiplied by a space value,
which controls the subtlety of the changes. This product is finally divided by the length of
the longest line. This will result in a personalized PDF with the bit string incorporated as
a watermark.
line_length_change = (ones_count-zeros_count) * space_value
one_space_value = space_value
zeros_space_value = space_value
if line_length_change > 0:
one_space_value -= line_length_change/ones_count
if line_length_change < 0:
zeros_space_value -= line_length_change/zeros_count
Listing 16: Calculation of space adjustment value
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
21
==PAGE:32==
def generate_bit_sequence(length, pseudo_random_seed = 12345):
random.seed(pseudo_random_seed)
return ''.join(random.choice('01') for _ in range(length))
Listing 17: Generation of unique pseudorandom bit sequence
Figure 2: Decoding a pseudorandom bit string
3.2
Decoding the PDF
This section provides an overview of the process for decoding the bit string within a PDF
file. Figure 2 illustrates the conversion of the original PDF into a bitmap. Subsequently,
a transformed version of the PDF is obtained. OCR is then performed on both images
to detect lines and spaces. By comparing the spaces in the two images, the bit string is
decoded. The Levenshtein distance is used to assess the difference between the original
and decoded bit strings, identifying which is closest to the decoded version. This approach
helps pinpoint the user with the personalized version of the document, thus aiding in
detecting document leakage.
This section starts with an explanation of the decoding process. The first step to convert-
ing the original and personalized documents into bitmaps is discussed in section 3.2.1.
Moving further detection of lines and spaces using OCR is explained in section 3.2.2.
Then we proceed towards scaling the bitmaps explained in section 3.2.3. Then we dis-
cuss comparing the normalized word space lengths in section 3.2.4. Finally, we compare
the decoded watermark with the matching and non-matching candidate watermarks using
Levenshtein distance in section 3.2.5. By meticulously following these steps, an accurate
and reliable decoding process is ensured, capable of effectively handling variations in
document formatting and resolution.
3.2.1
Converting to Bitmap
This section discusses the process of converting the PDFs into respective bitmaps. In
this initial step, the original and personalized PDF documents are converted into bitmap
images. Bitmap images depict the PDF pages as grids of pixels, which simplifies the
processing and analysis of the visual content. The Python library pdf2image is used to
perform this conversion. It efficiently converts PDF files into high-quality bitmap images.
22
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:33==
pip install pdf2image
pages = convert_from_path(f"{filename}.pdf", dpi='500',fmt='bmp',
poppler_path=poppler_path)
,→
Listing 18: Installation of pdf2image
Listing 18 shows the installation of the library for converting the PDF into the respective
image. The conversion process involves reading each page of the PDF and converting it
into an image format such as BMP or JPEG specified by fmt option. Moreover, dpi sets
the quality of the image for each of our test scenarios.
3.2.2
OCR to detect lines and word spaces
Once the bitmap images are obtained, they undergo pre-processing. The images are first
converted to grayscale and then subjected to binary thresholding to enhance the contrast
between the text and the background. These techniques are employed to optimize OCR
detection for the specific use case of processing the images line by line. Optical Character
Recognition (OCR) is then performed on the processed images, enabling the technology
to scan and identify text, including lines and individual words.
OCR can be performed using libraries such as Tesseract, widely used for image text
detection. The process starts with line detection which involves identifying the lines of text
within the bitmap image. Following this, word detection is carried out to detect individual
words within each line. Finally, space calculation is performed by measuring the distances
between words’ coordinates, determining each word’s position, and computing the gaps
between adjacent words.
The configuration used for OCR detection is shown in listing 19, where ”–oem 3” utilizes
both the legacy Tesseract OCR engine and the LSTM OCR engine. This hybrid approach
leverages the strengths of both engines to enhance overall recognition accuracy, particu-
larly in scenarios where one engine may perform better on specific types of text or images.
The ”–psm 6” setting assumes a single uniform block of text. This process yields a sample
dictionary containing all detected words and their bounding boxes. This dictionary is con-
verted into a data frame using the Pandas library. The data frame rows are then iterated
through to identify individual lines, the words within those lines, and the bounding boxes
for each line.
Similarly, spaces between those words are detected. Figure 3 shows the sample output
of OCR detection and marks the word spaces with a red rectangle to represent a ”0”
encoded at that particular location through space modification. Similarly, it marks space
with a green rectangle to indicate a ”1” encoded at that particular location.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3: Decoding a watermark
24
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:35==
data= pytesseract.image_to_data(image,config='--oem 3 --psm 6',
output_type='dict')
,→
Listing 19: Configuration for OCR detection.
3.2.3
Scaling Bitmaps
Since bitmap images can vary in resolution, it is important to standardize them to ensure
accurate comparison. This involves scaling the images so that differences in resolution
do not affect the decoding process. The scaling method involves determining the longest
line length in each bitmap image. The bitmap images are then scaled by dividing their di-
mensions by the longest line length and multiplying by a scaling factor. This normalization
process ensures that the images are comparable regardless of their original resolutions.
We calculate the longest line width using the function explained in listing 20. We loop
through all lines on the page and then detect the longest line width and then use that to
scale all the pages of different resolutions.
After calculating the longest line width, we divide the space length by this value to deter-
mine the normalized word space widths for comparison in section 3.2.4.
3.2.4
Comparing word spaces length
The core of the decoding process involves comparing the lengths of spaces between
words in the original and personalized PDFs. The decoding logic involves a series of
steps. First, a space comparison is performed where the length of each corresponding
space between words in the original and personalized bitmap images is measured. This
is followed by bit representation: if the space in the personalized PDF is longer than in the
original PDF, it is interpreted as a ”1”; if the space is shorter, it is interpreted as a ”0”. By
comparing each space, a bit string is constructed to represent the encoded information.
The outcome of this process is a decoded bit string that reveals the hidden information
encoded in the variations of word spaces within the personalized PDF.
def get_max_width_line(page_par_line_dict = {}):
longest_line_width = None
line_information = None
for entry in page_par_line_dict:
line = page_par_line_dict[entry]['box']
line_width = abs(line[2] - line[0])
if longest_line_width is None or line_width > longest_line_width:
longest_line_width = line_width
line_information = entry
return longest_line_width, line_information
Listing 20: Calculation of longest line width for scaling bitmaps
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
25
==PAGE:36==
3.2.5
Comparing watermarks
After obtaining the decoded string, our next step is to calculate the Levenshtein distance
between the original bit strings and a set of pseudorandom bit strings. These pseudo-
random bit strings correspond to the original owner of the personalized copy as well as
to other potential owners. The Levenshtein Distance, also known as the edit distance,
measures the minimum number of single-character edits (insertions, deletions, or substi-
tutions) required to change one string into another. By calculating the Levenshtein dis-
tance, the individual with the smallest distance can be identified as the most likely owner
of the document. Additionally, this method allows us to narrow down the potential owners
from a larger list, providing a subset of personnel to whom the document could plausibly
belong.
Using Levenshtein Distance is particularly advantageous because it accounts for various
types of discrepancies that might occur in the bit strings. Bit flips, for example, can hap-
pen due to noise or errors in transmission, and the Levenshtein Distance can effectively
handle these minor alterations. Furthermore, in cases where there are changes in font,
inclusion of figures, or special characters, some spaces or characters might be skipped or
altered. The Levenshtein Distance helps accommodate these variations, enabling a more
accurate comparison by focusing on probabilistic similarity rather than exact matches. In
the following paragraphs, we explain the different steps of this process. In our work, we
use the default weights for Levenshtein distance and below we explain the algorithm and
the pseudocode.
Levenshtein Distance
The Levenshtein distance, a metric used in string metric com-
putations, measures the minimal number of single-character edits required to transform
one string into another. These edits include insertions, deletions, or substitutions of char-
acters. Understanding it is crucial for various applications, including spell-checking, DNA
sequence analysis, and natural language processing. [22]
Consider the words ”kitten” and ”sitting”. Calculating the Levenshtein distance between
them involves a step-by-step process to determine the minimal edits required to transform
”kitten” into ”sitting”. This comparison, crucial for applications such as spell checking, DNA
sequence analysis, and natural language processing, identifies the differences at multiple
points in the words.
Through this process, it’s evident that a minimum of three edits is required: two substitu-
tions k →s, e →i and one insertion (add ”g”). Hence, the Levenshtein distance for the
above example would be three.
The practical implementation of the Levenshtein distance utilizes a dynamic programming
approach, which involves constructing a matrix to compute the edit distances between
substrings of the two input strings. Each cell in the matrix represents the Levenshtein
distance for the substrings up to that position. The final entry in the matrix indicates
26
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:37==
function LevenshteinDistance(s1, s2):
len_s1 = length(s1)
len_s2 = length(s2)
dp = matrix of size (len_s1 + 1) x (len_s2 + 1)
for i from 0 to len_s1:
dp[i][0] = i
for j from 0 to len_s2:
dp[0][j] = j
for i from 1 to len_s1:
for j from 1 to len_s2:
if s1[i-1] == s2[j-1]:
cost = 0
else:
cost = 1
dp[i][j] = min(dp[i-1][j] + 1,
// deletion
dp[i][j-1] + 1,
// insertion
dp[i-1][j-1] + cost) // substitution
return dp[len_s1][len_s2]
Listing 21: Levenshtein Distance
the Levenshtein distance between the two complete strings. Listing 21 shows a brief
pseudo-code outline illustrating the dynamic programming approach for calculating the
Levenshtein distance.
This algorithm efficiently computes the distance by solving smaller subproblems. Each
cell (i, j) in the matrix represents the Levenshtein distance between the first i characters
of s1 and the first j characters of s2. The cost is computed based on whether the current
characters of the two strings match. It is possible to define the cost for insertion, deletion,
and substitution, and even separate costs for different symbols.
Generate Pseudorandom Bit Strings
Generating pseudorandom bit strings for each
potential owner involves several steps. First, pseudorandom bit strings are generated us-
ing the function shown in listing 17 and this bit string represents their personalized copies,
incorporating unique identifiers or watermarks specific to each individual. In this frame-
work, the space count in the PDF text is detected and used to generate a pseudorandom
bit string, which is then encoded into each document.The code to detect the total spaces
in the document and generate the pseudorandom bit string is shown in listing 22.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
27
==PAGE:38==
def count_spaces_in_pdf(pdf_path):
# Open the PDF file
with open(pdf_path, 'rb') as file:
reader = PdfReader(pdf_path)
num_spaces = 0
# Iterate through each page
for page in reader.pages:
text = page.extract_text()
if text:
num_spaces += text.count(' ')
return num_spaces
Listing 22: Detection of spaces in PDF
Calculate Levenshtein Distance
Compare the decoded bit string with each pseudo-
random bit string using the Levenshtein Distance algorithm to obtain a similarity score for
each comparison.
Identify the Closest Match
The bit string with the smallest Levenshtein distance to the
decoded string is likely the original owner’s personalized copy, requiring fewer edits to
match the decoded string.
Generate a Subset of Potential Owners
Based on the Levenshtein Distance scores,
create a subset of potential owners with the smallest distances. This subset is more likely
to contain the true owner, thereby narrowing down the search.
Account for Variations
Levenshtein distance provides robustness against variations
like bit flips, font changes, and altered special characters, improving the reliability of iden-
tifying the correct owner even with imperfect matches. Below is an example of the Lev-
enshtein distance calculation. A watermark was encoded into a document and then de-
coded. The Levenshtein distance was computed between the matching watermark and
the decoded string, as well as between one example of a non-matching watermark and
the decoded string.
The original encoded string closely matches the decoded string with the correct bit string
watermark, while the distance is much larger with the incorrect watermark. This significant
difference aids in reliably identifying the original owner of the personalized copy.
3.3
Design Considerations
This section will explore some of the design considerations adopted in the solution and
explain why certain alternative approaches were not used for the encoding and decoding
process.
28
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:39==
Matching watermark:
10110110101100101000001101
10100001010010100010011000
1000110110001010010010011101000101000010
Decoded String:
10110110101100101000001101
10100001010010100010011000
100011011000101001000011101000101000010
Original 1
Non-matching watermark:
000100000011011001100010100
001100010000001110001111001
01001001001010110000111111101110001100
Decoded String:
1011011010110010100000110
110100001010010100010011
000100011011000101001000011101000101000010
Random:
30
Listing 23: Comparision of Levenshtein distance for matching and non-matching water-
mark.
Avoiding Bit String Encoding in PDF Bitmaps
Encoding directly in the PDF offers
several advantages for this specific use case. One primary reason is the need to pre-
serve the high-quality, original format of personalized PDF copies, maintaining all struc-
tural elements as described in [21]. Converting a PDF into a bitmap introduces several
issues.
Firstly, the conversion of a PDF into a bitmap can result in visible distortions, leading to a
loss of visual quality. The fine details and sharpness inherent in vector graphics are lost
when converted to a pixel-based format. This degradation is particularly problematic for
documents that require high readability and precision, such as academic papers, technical
documents, and legal contracts. The loss of quality is further exacerbated by added noise
during the bitmap conversion process, which can manifest as artifacts or blurring, making
the document less appealing and potentially less legible.
Secondly, the loss of covert watermarking properties is another significant issue. Visible
changes introduced through the bitmap conversion can be easily detected, compromising
the stealth of our watermarking technique. As described in [23], the process of adding a
watermark to a bitmap image can introduce noise that stands out to the naked eye or
under digital scrutiny. This visibility can alert adversaries to the presence of a watermark,
defeating the purpose of a covert marking system.
Lastly, the process of encoding bit strings within bitmaps is quite slow. This involves
converting each page into an image and then altering the spaces between words, which is
time-consuming. Scaling such a solution for a large user base in a production application,
where a watermarking framework might be employed, presents significant challenges.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
29
==PAGE:40==
Converting PDFs to Bitmaps for Decoding
Accurately detecting spaces between words
within a PDF, especially during font changes, and in sections containing mathematical
equations and figures poses significant challenges for PDFs. In a PDF, the text and space
encoding depends on the fonts and their metrics. Changes in fonts can significantly alter
word space widths, complicating consistent detection and measurement of spaces. Math-
ematical equations further complicate space detection due to non-standard spacing and
numerous special characters. Additionally, figures and embedded objects use graphical
elements instead of straightforward text, and their varying placement and alignment make
detecting subtle changes or spaces very difficult.
Another critical threat is an adversary converting the watermarked PDF into an image,
known as a scan attack, which neutralizes many watermarking techniques dependent
on the PDF’s native structure. Hence even if an adversary converts the watermarked
PDF into an image, the watermark remains intact because it is embedded in the visual
representation of the text. Optical Character Recognition (OCR) can still be performed
on these images to decode the hidden information, preserving the integrity of our water-
marking method.
Therefore, while decoding directly from the PDF might seem more straightforward, it is
fraught with challenges related to font variations, mathematical notations, and figures.
Additionally, it is vulnerable to transformations that convert the document to an image for-
mat. Using bitmaps and OCR addresses these challenges and enhances the robustness
of the watermarking algorithm against various adversarial tactics, ensuring consistent and
reliable information retrieval.
30
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:41==
4
Experimental Evaluation
This section presents the experimental evaluation of our work. We begin by addressing
whether it is possible to identify a watermark in a leaked document and assess our confi-
dence in its identification. Next, we showcase our results under various transformations,
such as printing-and-scanning, changes in image quality, and image degradation. Finally,
we provide summary graphs comparing sets of similar and different types of documents,
highlighting the relationship between matching and non-matching candidate watermarks
to derive key insights.
4.1
Identifying Watermarks in Leaked Document
In this section, we experimented with one leaked document and calculated the Leven-
shtein distance between that document and the matching watermark candidate and 1000
non-matching watermark candidates for a set of files in a folder and show a plot graph
with these results.
Figure 4 illustrates a scatter plot comparing one matching candidate document with
1000 non-matching candidate watermarks and repeats it for 10 different documents
for our particular case to show for documents of various types how our algorithm can
distinguish between the matching and non-matching candidate watermarks. This graph
provides us with an insight into the performance of our algorithm against multiple non-
matching watermarks.
Then, we plotted a histogram that shows our results for one particular case. where we
have 1000 non-matching candidate watermarks and compare them with one candidate
watermark. It can be seen quite clearly in the graph from the separation between the
matching watermark and non-matching candidate watermarks that our approach can dis-
tinguish between the watermarks of the two different candidates.
Figure 5 shows us that there is a clear separation between the Levenshtein distance of the
actual candidate with the watermark and the non-candidates for the watermarks. Here,
the actual candidate refers to the candidate who owned the personalized copy of the
document and non-candidates refer to other owners of their respective copies. We can
see clearly that the Non-matching candidates’ graph fits closer to a normal distribution
curve, with most values centered around the mean. Hence further analysis of this can
help us derive a relationship between the standard deviation for this data and the matching
candidate watermark.
4.2
Confidence in Correct Watermark Identification
This section explains the confidence level of our technique for watermark identification.
Referring to Figure 5, we can see that there is always a clear separation but here we will
derive a threshold value from that separation which can be generalized for any particular
document.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4: Levenshtein Distance of the decoded watermark to candidate watermarks for
individual exercises.
Listing 24 provides us with a threshold to identify a matching watermark from a non-
matching watermark. We will use the p-value test to figure out that if we have a random
watermark, how likely is the value smaller than the threshold? For this purpose, our null
hypothesis is that our matching candidate watermark belongs to the normal distribution
curve of non-matching watermark candidates. Our p-value is the cumulative distribution
function until the point of the matching candidate watermark from the curve. if it is very
mall, such as, in our case it is below 10−6, then we reject the null hypothesis and conclude
that the point does not belong to the curve and hence has a lower distance.
4.3
Summary Graph for multiple watermarks
This section will provide us insights into the difference between matching candidate and
non-candidate watermarks in case of multiple documents of a particular type and then of a
import scipy.stats as stats
mean = 52.3
std_dev = 3.533
x = 34.9
value = stats.norm.cdf(x, mean, std_dev)
print(value)
Output: 4.218170353208494e-07
Listing 24: Calculation of the threshold for watermark detection
32
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5: Levenshtein Distance of the decoded watermark to candidate watermarks
different type. Then we proceed to compare the graphical results in both these scenarios
and try to extract valuable insights from the data. Below we will be providing some of
these examples.
4.3.1
Summary Graph for documents of one type
The graph shown in figure 6 illustrates the comparison of different documents of the same
type against 1,000 non-matching and one matching watermark. Documents of this type
include scalable cloud exercises exported as a PDF. The x-axis represents the normal-
ized Levenshtein distance calculated using listing 25, and the y-axis shows the distribution
percentage. We calculate the normalized distance because now we have multiple doc-
uments with different numbers of spaces; hence we need to normalize the distance by
dividing the watermark length to get a uniform summary of the data.
The histogram for non-matching candidates, shown in red, follows a near-normal distri-
bution centered around a higher Levenshtein distance value. The peak of this distribution
suggests that most non-matching candidates exhibit a similar range of distances, making
them easily distinguishable from the matching candidate.
Distribution of matching watermarks: The histogram for the matching candidate, depicted
in blue, shows distinct peaks at lower Levenshtein distance values. The matching can-
didate’s distribution is more focused and less spread out compared to the non-matching
candidates, indicating a high level of similarity and consistency in distance measurements.
A normal distribution curve is overlaid on the histogram for non-matching candidates, high-
lighting the bell-shaped nature of the distribution. This curve emphasizes the clustering
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
33
==PAGE:44==
def compute_edit_distance_normalized(str1, str2):
# return Levenshtein.ratio(str1, str2)
edit_distance = Levenshtein.distance(str1, str2)
compute_edit_distance_normalize = edit_distance /
max(len(str1),len(str2))
,→
return compute_edit_distance_normalize
Listing 25: Calculation of normalized Levenshtein distance.
Figure 6: Levenshtein Distance of the decoded watermark to candidate watermarks for
same document types.
of non-matching candidates around the mean distance value, with few outliers.
By analyzing the distance metrics, it is possible to define a cutoff point where distances
below this value can be confidently classified as matching and those above it as non-
matching. This separation is further validated by the p-value analysis explained in list-
ing 24. Compared with section 4.2, we note that stronger evidence of matching water-
mark is obtained by calculating the threshold or p-value separately for each watermarked
image.
4.3.2
Summary Graph for documents of different types
The graph shown in figure 7 provides a comparative analysis of various document types
when tested against 1,000 non-matching watermarks and one matching watermark. This
test included company meeting memos, exported from Word to PDF, linear algebra, scal-
able cloud, applied mathematics, and information security exercises. On the x-axis, we
have the normalized Levenshtein Distance calculated using listing 25, which measures
the difference between the watermarks, with lower values indicating more similarity. The
34
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:45==
Figure 7: Levenshtein distance of the decoded watermark to candidate watermarks for
different document types
y-axis represents the distribution percentage, showing how frequently each Levenshtein
Distance value occurs within the dataset.
The graph reveals that there is not a clear distinction between the distributions of matching
and non-matching watermarks. This means that the normalized Levenshtein Distances for
both matching and non-matching watermarks can be quite similar, leading to overlapping
areas in the graph. Unlike a typical normal distribution curve, the non-matching watermark
candidates exhibit a more complex pattern. They do not follow a single, smooth bell
curve, but rather show multiple peaks and troughs, indicating variability in the distances
depending on the document type.
The minimal separation between different document types results in the overlapping of the
Levenshtein distances for matching and non-matching watermarks. This overlap implies
that it is challenging to distinguish between a matching and a non-matching watermark
purely based on the normalized Levenshtein distance when different document types are
involved. In Figure 6, where documents of the same type are compared, the matching
and non-matching watermarks are more distinguishable. This indicates that document
type consistency plays a crucial role in the accuracy of watermark matching using the
normalized Levenshtein distance.
The graph underscores the complexity of watermark matching across different document
types. It shows that while the normalized Levenshtein distance is a useful measure for
measuring the leakage of a single document, its effectiveness diminishes when dealing
with a variety of document types or summarizing data in such cases due to overlapping
distributions. The conclusion is that we need to determine the threshold separately for
each document as in 4.2 or document type 4.3.1.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 8: Levenshtein distance of the decoded watermark to candidate watermarks for a
printed-and-scanned document.
4.4
Identifying watermarks in printing-and-scanning
In this section, experimentation was done with one leaked document that was printed and
then scanned, and then it was used to identify one matching watermark candidate against
1000 non-matching watermarked candidates. Figure 8 shows us the histogram for the
printed and scanned version of our PDF, for the same document in Figure 5. Here we can
see the separation between the matching and non-matching documents is much lower
due to degradation of image quality. However, our threshold detection formula defined in
24 remains intact.
Using the formula defined in 24, the p-value corresponds to 1.5×10−10 i.e. the probability
of wrongly identifying a non-matching watermark as matching is less than one in a billion.
Overlapping matching and non-matching candidates
In the context of print-and-
scan scenarios, another challenge arises in certain cases where documents contain many
mathematical equations or in some cases it has fewer lines of text. What happens is that
the separation between matching and non-matching candidates becomes problematic as
they tend to overlap on the curve representing non-matching watermark candidates. This
overlap is depicted in figure 9 where again one leaked document was printed and then
scanned, and then it was used to identify one matching watermark candidate against 1000
non-matching watermarked candidates Here, we observe that the non-matching candi-
dates encroach on the distribution curve typically occupied by matching candidates. This
encroachment complicates the differentiation process, making it difficult to distinguish be-
tween genuine watermarks and false positives.
36
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:47==
Figure 9: Levenshtein distance of the decoded watermark to candidate watermarks for a
printed-and-scanned document with limited text.
In such cases, the threshold detection method, as outlined in listing 24 gives us a p-value
of 0.00032 away from the non-matching candidates. This small separation indicates that
the current threshold is insufficient for reliable detection, as it does not provide a clear
demarcation between matching and non-matching candidates.
4.5
Impact of Parameter Variations on Watermark Detection
This section focuses on varying image quality and then space-adjustment value and then
analyzing its effects on the matching and non-matching candidate watermarks. We will
use the same comparison of one watermarked document against 1000 non-matching and
one matching candidate document and see how the matching candidate varies when we
change the values for image quality using dpi and then change the space-adjustment
value keeping all other parameters constant. The purpose of this analysis is to show
how the separation changes with changes in word-space adjustment and image quality
changes.
Changes in image quality
It can be seen in figure 10 that as we increase the image
quality the separation between the matching and non-matching candidate watermark also
increases, however, the value for candidate watermark decreases. This is due to better
detection in high-quality images. It can be seen in Figure 10 when we move from dpi=200
to dpi=350 the Levenshtein distance for the matching-candidate watermark decreases
from 30 to 22 showing better detection and greater separation between the matching and
non-matching candidate watermarks.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 10: Levenshtein distance between the decoded watermark and candidate water-
marks with varying image quality.
Firstly, with increased image quality, there is a marked enhancement in the separation
between the histograms of matching and non-matching candidate watermarks. This im-
proved separation indicates that the system is more adept at distinguishing between can-
didates that correctly match the watermark and those that do not. High-resolution images
capture finer details and subtle differences more accurately, which helps in differentiating
between valid and invalid watermark candidates.
This decrease in Levenshtein distance signifies that the candidate watermarks identified
as matching align more closely with the original watermark. In other words, higher image
quality leads to more precise detection, as the system can better capture and compare
the nuances of the watermark text. This reduction in Levenshtein distance highlights the
enhanced accuracy of watermark detection with improved image quality. Higher resolu-
38
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:49==
Figure 11: Levenshtein distance between the decoded watermark and candidate water-
marks with varying word space adjustment.
tion provides a clearer and more detailed representation of the text, allowing the detec-
tion system to identify and differentiate between similar watermark candidates accurately.
Consequently, the detection system becomes more effective at recognizing true matches
and distinguishing them from false positives.
Change in word space adjustment
It can be seen in Figure 11 that as we increase the
word space adjustment the separation between the matching and non-matching candidate
watermark also increases, and, the value for candidate watermark decreases. This is due
to better detection in high-quality images. It can be seen in Figure 11 when we move from
an adjustment value of 30 to an adjustment value of 125 the Levenshtein distance for
the matching-candidate watermark decreases from 23 to 19 showing better detection and
greater separation between the matching and non-matching candidate watermarks.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
39
==PAGE:50==
40
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:51==
5
Discussion
In this section, we begin by discussing the limitations of our approach in section 5.1. Then
we discuss the usefulness of our method against our goals in section 5.2. Moving on, we
discuss how we handle decoding errors in case differences are minimal in section 5.3.
Then, we proceed towards discussing our limitation of handling leaks in original or un-
varied documents and any future research in that regard in section 5.4. Furthermore,
we discuss adding visible watermarks in addition to the invisible for GDPR compliance in
section 5.5. Finally, we discuss alternate approaches to our methods in section 5.6, and
how they are better or worse than our method.
5.1
Limitations
This section examines the limitations of our algorithm. Recognizing these constraints is
essential for understanding the current boundaries of the methodology and identifying
areas for further research and improvement. Each limitation is discussed in detail below,
offering insights into the challenges faced and potential directions for future work.
Detection of Unusual Word Spacing by Adversaries
A primary vulnerability of our
watermarking technique is that an adversary might detect unusual word spacing through
careful analysis. If an adversary suspects watermarking, they can detect irregular word
spacing, compromising and potentially removing or randomizing the watermark.
Comparison of Multiple Watermarked Copies
An adversary with two watermarked
copies can compare and neutralize the watermark. An adversary can pinpoint and disrupt
the watermark by comparing two copies, risking the method’s integrity. Hence, there
should be a focus on dynamic or adaptive watermarking that evolves over time or with
document interactions, making comparison and detection harder for adversaries.
Requirement for Long Lines of Text
The effectiveness of our watermarking method
is contingent on the presence of sufficient long lines of text in the document. Sparse
text or short lines limit watermarking opportunities, restricting our technique’s applicability
to certain documents. Hence, alternative methods for documents with minimal text or
embedding watermarks in images or metadata should be explored.
Dependence on Original and Modified Documents
Detecting the encoded text re-
quires access to both the original and modified versions of the document. This reliance
complicates verifying a document’s integrity and authenticity when only the modified ver-
sion is available. Hence, in the future techniques should be developed to verify water-
marking from a single document without needing the original.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
41
==PAGE:52==
{'line-no': 'line-5', 'x': '60', 'y': '215', 'index': 50,
'line-adjustment': '1 0 0 -1 60 215 Tm', 'content':
['<00290034...0017001E00150012001C> Tj', '/F4 7 Tf', '1 0 0 -1
166.90625 215 Tm', '<0064007B0064> Tj', '/F4 7 Tf', '1 0 0 -1
171.46875 215 Tm', '<00380054005A0057> Tj', '13.6958008 0 Td
<0048> Tj', '3.0419922 0 Td <004A001F00050029002700310035> Tj',
'/F4 8 Tf']}
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
...
{'line-no': 'line-6', 'x': '60', 'y': '264', 'index': 61,
'line-adjustment': '1 0 0 -1 60 264 Tm', 'content':
['<0028002E0039> Tj', '10.6328125 0 Td <0026> Tj', '4.03125 0 Td
<0039002E003400330038> Tj', '/F4 12 Tf']}
,→
,→
,→
Listing 26: Encoded text with space characters
Challenges with Font Changes and Mathematical Equations
Detecting word spaces
in sections with font changes and math equations is challenging due to varying space
widths. Mathematical notations and font changes cause spacing inconsistencies, com-
plicating watermark detection and limiting our method’s use in diverse or complex doc-
uments. Hence, robust algorithms to handle diverse fonts and mathematical content,
potentially through specialized techniques or improved space detection should be devel-
oped.
Encoded Text within Angle Brackets
There are many different ways to encode text in
PDF documents. For example, the text can be split into arbitrary segments that do not
respect word boundaries or line endings. Also, the text segments do not need to be in the
same order in the PDF file as they are in the visible document. We found a small number
of documents where our current tools were unable to find the word spaces. One such
case is shown in listing 26.
Addressing these limitations can enhance the robustness and applicability of the water-
marking algorithms, paving the way for more secure and versatile document authentica-
tion methods.
5.2
Usefulness of our method
This section will explain some of the usefulness of our method in line with our original
goals. We will be comparing our results with our original goals below and explain how are
method complies with each of our original goals, hence giving a complete overview of our
method with the original goals.
Robust Watermarking Solution for PDF Documents
Our watermarking solution first
normalizes the PDF using QPDF as explained in section 9. It then proceeds to increase
42
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:53==
Figure 12: Watermarking PDF
and decrease the spaces by a specific adjustment value. Finally, it uses Levenshtein
distance explained in section 21 for detecting the difference between the matching and
non-matching bit strings to account for any errors during encoding or decoding. These
techniques make it quite robust to handle different types of errors due to font changes,
mathematical equations and many more. Hence, this helps us to explain our first goal of
having robustness in our watermarking algorithm.
Subtle Watermark Embedding through Word Spacing Modification
We detect the
spaces and words in our algorithm using steps explained in section 3.1.2. This enables us
to efficiently detect different spaces for different types of PDFs generated from Word, and
LaTeX documents, and for each of these, we modify spaces by modification of space-
adjustment value explained in section 3.1.4. This enables us to keep the right margin
aligned for our documents which you can see in figure 12. This enables robust water-
marking based on subtle space modification.
Resilience to Screenshotting and printing and scanning
We explain the resilience
of our watermarking algorithm against printing-and-scanning as well as screenshotting in
section 4, where we explain through the formula in listing 24, how we can get a separation
between the matching and non-matching candidate watermarks from our detection algo-
rithm. This equation gives us a standard deviation which when large enough provides us
with the required threshold value for detecting the changes between the matching candi-
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
43
==PAGE:54==
date documents from non-matching ones. Hence, this threshold is similar in both types of
scenarios although in print scan attacks the separation factor is much lower due to image
degradation which we can see in figure 8.
5.3
Managing Word Space Variations and Decoding Errors
When the differences in spaces are small, there is a possibility of decoding errors in the
zeros and ones of the watermark. However, it’s important to note that such errors do not
necessarily lead to a loss of information regarding the correlation between the matching
and decoded watermark. This inherent resilience in the watermarking technique ensures
that even with minor decoding errors, the correlation between the original and extracted
watermark remains largely intact.
If we were to ignore certain spaces due to their small differences, we risk losing the ability
to detect the watermark in very noisy images. By marking and processing even the small-
est spaces, we enhance the robustness of the watermark detection process, ensuring that
the watermark can still be identified despite noise or minor alterations in the document.
Future research could focus on comparing a document with itself to better understand and
mitigate the effects of noise and small spatial differences on watermark detection. Such
studies could provide insights into optimizing the watermarking algorithm to enhance its
accuracy and reliability under various conditions.
Enhanced watermark decoding
The current decoding method first converts negative
changes in word space into a 0-bit and positive changes into a 1-bit. The distance com-
parison is done with the resulting binary string in section 3.2.5. It would be possible to
consider the size of negative and positive changes in the decoding process, giving a larger
distance metric to a larger change in each word space. This might result in more accurate
decoding and distance metrics when image quality is low. As shown by the experiments,
binary decoding works well for relatively high-resolution documents.
5.4
Handling Leaks of Original or Unvaried Documents
One possible scenario that we have not considered in this thesis is that the original, un-
watermarked document might leak. When such a document is discovered, our algorithm
cannot differentiate it from a document with an unknown watermark.
When an unwatermarked document is leaked, it becomes indistinguishable from any po-
tentially watermarked copies under our current algorithm. This lack of distinction means
that, in forensic scenarios, there is a risk of misclassifying a leaked original as a ver-
sion that simply contains an unidentified watermark. Such a misclassification can lead to
erroneous conclusions about the source and distribution of the document, thereby com-
plicating efforts to trace the leak back to its origin or to verify the integrity of the document.
Hence, for forensic analysis of document leaks, it might be beneficial to develop meth-
ods for identifying low-quality versions of unwatermarked document. Incorporating such
44
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:55==
methods into the forensic analysis process would enhance our ability to accurately assess
the provenance of a document and improve the robustness of our watermarking system.
This would not only help in identifying unauthorized distributions but also in verifying the
authenticity and integrity of documents under scrutiny, particularly in environments where
both watermarked and unwatermarked versions might coexist.
5.5
Visible Watermarks for GDPR Compliance
Ensuring the security and privacy of personalized information has become a critical con-
cern, particularly in the context of regulatory frameworks such as the General Data Protec-
tion Regulation (GDPR). The watermarks identify the person for whom the watermarked
copy was created. Therefore, the watermark and the entire document can be considered
personal data. Embedding invisible watermarks may therefore raise legal and ethical
issues.
Visible watermarks as a security measure
Visible watermarks serve as an effective
security measure by overlaying identifiable markers such as the personalized number as
shown in 12 directly onto the content of a document. When the personal watermarks are
visible in the document any users who shares the copy of their document, is making an
informed choice of sharing their personal information. This removes the legal and ethical
issues associated with the invisible watermark. Additionally, the visible watermark may
discourage the owners from sharing personalized copies of confidential documents.
The visible watermarks can include information that ties the document to a specific user or
recipient, creating a trail of accountability. If a breach occurs, the presence of a watermark
can help identify the source of the leak, thus facilitating the investigation and enforcement
of GDPR compliance. Moreover, the presence of a visible watermark on documents con-
taining personal data serves as a constant reminder of the document’s sensitivity. This
visual cue can deter individuals from unauthorized sharing, reducing the likelihood of data
being distributed outside of the intended audience. Finally, visible watermarks comple-
ment other data security measures, such as encryption and access controls.
While visible watermarks provide significant benefits in terms of GDPR compliance and
data protection, it is essential to balance these benefits with the usability of the docu-
ment. Overly intrusive watermarks could obscure critical information or detract from the
document’s readability. Therefore, careful consideration must be given to the design and
placement of watermarks, ensuring they are visible enough to serve their purpose without
compromising the document’s functionality. Moreover, the integration of watermarks must
be executed in a manner that aligns with the document’s use case. For instance, a docu-
ment intended for internal use within a secure environment may require a less prominent
watermark compared to a document that will be shared externally. Organizations must
also consider the potential for watermarks to be removed or altered and implement addi-
tional safeguards to prevent such tampering. Due to these reasons, we employ our covert
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
45
==PAGE:56==
watermarking technique explained in 3, in addition to adding a visible watermark to the
document.
5.6
Alternate Approaches
Yang et al. [24] explored a font-based approach for watermarking, where they detailed
a method involving the generation of different font files from Word or PDF documents.
Their approach entails modifying the font dictionary and utilizing this updated dictionary
to embed a watermark into the PDF file. However, this method requires identifying the
font information and the associated font dictionary, a step not necessary for the approach
discussed in this thesis. In contrast, the method proposed here embeds the watermark
directly into word spaces, thereby bypassing the need for font dictionary management.
Their approach necessitates maintaining font dictionaries for various PDF documents, es-
pecially when multiple fonts are used throughout the encoding process. Their method also
involves converting PDFs to images to embed the location of the glyph centroid, which can
significantly slow down the encoding process and reduce scalability. In comparison, the
technique proposed in this thesis embeds the watermark directly into the PDF structure,
offering a more efficient and scalable solution. This direct embedding approach eliminates
the need for image processing during encoding, leading to faster runtime performance as
detailed in section 3.1. However, they have a way to decode watermarks without using
OCR through font dictionaries, which seems something that could be looked into for future
research perspectives.
Moving on, another approach by Lu et al. [4] involves multiple image processing steps,
including color space conversion, binary image creation, and pixel manipulation. This
can be computationally intensive and slower, particularly because it requires converting
PDFs into images and performing character segmentation on each image. In contrast,
our method embeds watermarks directly into the PDF structure, bypassing the need for
image conversion and processing, which generally results in a faster and more efficient
encoding process.
Furthermore, the image-based approach described by in [4] may face scalability issues
due to the need for image conversion and processing, which can be time-consuming
and resource-intensive. The direct PDF embedding method in this thesis is likely to be
more scalable, as it avoids these additional steps and operates directly within the PDF
file format.
Finally, their method requires detailed operations such as character segmentation and
pixel-based adjustments, which adds complexity to the watermarking process. The pro-
posed method in this thesis simplifies the process by embedding the watermark directly
into the PDF, reducing the overall complexity and potential for errors during encoding.
46
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:57==
6
Related Work
This section outlines the methodology employed to filter papers relevant to the focus of
this research. The primary objective is to develop a robust framework for the covert water-
marking of digital documents. To achieve this, the process began with a broad search for
literature in the fields of steganography and information hiding, followed by a refinement
of the scope to address the core issues specifically related to the research problem.
6.1
Methodology
Initially, an extensive review of literature related to watermarking and document security
was conducted, resulting in approximately 1,350 relevant papers. The initial query en-
compassed a broad range of topics, including video processing, signal processing, DNA
watermarking, and vitamin watermarking, as well as applications in medical, video, and
speech domains. To refine the focus, the scope was narrowed to include only document-
related studies, with a particular emphasis on PDFs, which are central to the watermarking
research presented in this study. Additionally, literature on watermarking techniques for
Word, Extensible Markup Language (XML), and PowerPoint documents was reviewed to
achieve a comprehensive understanding of watermarking methodologies across different
document types.
The refined search resulted in a focused set of approximately 170 papers. It is noted
that the number of relevant papers may have increased since the original search was
conducted. The query used to filter the literature can be expressed in plain text as follows:
6.1.1
Excluded Literature
This query facilitated the exclusion of irrelevant papers, allowing a focus on those most
pertinent to the research on covert watermarking of digital documents. Each exclusion
criterion was designed to eliminate papers from unrelated fields, thereby ensuring that
the search results were closely aligned with the scope of our work.
Biometric
Research papers focused on biometric systems, such as fingerprint and fa-
cial recognition, were excluded because these topics are centered around personal identi-
1
digital AND watermarking AND Documents AND NOT Biometric AND NOT DNA AND
NOT VITAMIN AND NOT Software AND NOT Speech AND NOT Retail AND NOT
patients AND NOT IMAGES AND NOT PHOTO AND NOT GYNAECOLOGY AND NOT
(AMINO AND ACID) AND NOT DOPAMINE AND NOT DISEASE AND NOT TRANSMITTER
AND NOT CCP AND NOT MONOAMINES AND NOT (BRAIN AND TISSUES) AND NOT
(data AND packets) AND NOT NEUROTRANSMITTER AND NOT NANOMEDICINE AND
NOT BIOTECHNOLOGY AND NOT AUDIO AND NOT (TREElike AND DATABASES) AND
NOT ULTRASOUND AND NOT (occupational AND health)
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
Listing 27: Querying relevant Literature
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
47
==PAGE:58==
fication and security through physiological and behavioral traits. While biometric systems
are critical in identity verification, their techniques and applications do not pertain to the
watermarking of digital documents, which involves embedding information into digital con-
tent rather than physical or biological attributes.
DNA
Papers discussing DNA, including genetic watermarking or biological research,
were excluded due to their focus on genetic information and biological processes. Ge-
netic watermarking, though a relevant field, pertains to embedding information in genetic
sequences rather than in digital documents. The focus of this thesis is on digital wa-
termarking techniques for documents, which makes research in the field of DNA less
relevant.
Vitamin
Research involving vitamin-related watermarking techniques was excluded. This
field, though potentially interesting, is not pertinent to digital document watermarking. The
techniques discussed in this context are likely related to health and nutritional applications
rather than the embedding and detection of watermarks in digital documents.
Software
Papers that that did not specifically address document-related watermarking
within the software context were excluded to maintain relevance. However, papers that
discussed various software methods for embedding watermarks into digital content, which
aligns closely with the scope of the thesis.
Speech
Research on speech or audio watermarking was excluded because it involves
embedding watermarks in audio signals rather than in digital documents. While audio
watermarking shares some principles with document watermarking, the specific applica-
tion to audio rather than textual or graphical digital documents makes this research less
relevant to the current thesis.
Retail
Papers related to retail applications were excluded as they focus on business and
consumer applications rather than digital document watermarking. The context of these
papers is centered on commercial practices and technologies in the retail sector, which
do not align with the focus on watermarking digital documents.
Patients
Research papers discussing patients, particularly in medical contexts, were
excluded. These papers are likely focused on medical research and patient data man-
agement rather than digital document watermarking. The techniques and applications
related to patient information are not relevant to the thesis on embedding watermarks in
digital documents.
48
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:59==
Images
Papers on image watermarking were included only if they dealt with embedding
watermarks in images and not digital documents. Since image watermarking shares sim-
ilarities with document watermarking, such papers were relevant. However, any papers
focusing solely on image-based watermarking without application to documents were ex-
cluded.
Gynecology
Papers related to gynecology, a medical specialty focused on women’s
health, were excluded as they are unrelated to digital document watermarking. The con-
tent of these papers focuses on medical research rather than on the technologies and
methodologies for watermarking digital documents.
Amino Acids
Research discussing amino acids was excluded because it pertains to
biochemical and nutritional studies. Techniques related to amino acids do not intersect
with digital watermarking, which focuses on embedding and verifying information within
digital content rather than biochemical substances.
Dopamine
Papers focused on dopamine, a neurotransmitter involved in brain functions,
were excluded. This research is centered on neuroscience and neurochemistry, which are
unrelated to digital watermarking techniques for documents. The focus on neurotransmit-
ters does not align with the objectives of the thesis.
Disease
Research papers on diseases were excluded as they deal with medical and
health-related topics rather than digital watermarking. The techniques and discussions
surrounding disease are unrelated to the technology of embedding and protecting infor-
mation in digital documents.
Transmitter
Papers discussing transmitters, particularly in telecommunications, were
excluded. These papers focus on signal transmission technologies rather than on water-
marking techniques for digital documents. The research on transmitters does not align
with the thesis’s focus on document-specific watermarking.
Monoamines
Research on monoamines, another class of neurotransmitters, was ex-
cluded. This field of study is related to neuroscience and psychopharmacology rather
than digital document watermarking. The relevance of monoamines to document protec-
tion and information embedding is minimal.
Brain and Tissues
Papers mentioning both brain and tissues were excluded due to their
focus on neurological or medical research. The techniques and applications discussed
in these papers are centered on brain and tissue studies, which do not pertain to the
watermarking of digital documents.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
49
==PAGE:60==
Data and Packets
Research discussing data packets and networking was excluded as it
pertains to networking and telecommunications rather than document watermarking. The
focus on data transmission and packet structures is not relevant to embedding information
within digital documents.
Neurotransmitter
Papers on neurotransmitters were excluded as they focus on neuro-
science. Neurotransmitter research is unrelated to the practice of embedding and detect-
ing watermarks in digital documents, thus falling outside the scope of the thesis.
Nanomedicine
Research on nanomedicine, which involves the application of nanotech-
nology in medical fields, was excluded. Although nanotechnology is a significant area of
research, its applications in medical science do not intersect with the techniques used for
watermarking digital documents.
Biotechnology
Papers discussing biotechnology, which involves the use of living sys-
tems and organisms in technology, were excluded. While biotechnology encompasses
many innovative technologies, it does not directly relate to digital watermarking techniques
for documents.
Audio
Research on audio watermarking was included when it involved embedding wa-
termarks in sound files. Despite its relevance to watermarking, the specific focus on audio
rather than documents led to the exclusion of papers that did not address document-
specific watermarking.
Databases
Papers discussing tree-like databases and database structures were ex-
cluded as they focus on specific types of database technology rather than on digital doc-
ument watermarking. The techniques related to database structures do not align with the
primary focus on watermarking digital documents. The following detailed elaboration on
each excluded area provides the rationale behind their exclusion from the thesis review.
Ultrasound
Research on ultrasound technology, which is used in medical imaging and
other fields, was excluded. The application of ultrasound technology does not intersect
with the techniques for watermarking digital documents.
Occupational and Health
Papers on occupational health, focusing on workplace health
and safety, were excluded as they are unrelated to digital watermarking. The content of
these papers centers on workplace issues rather than on document protection technolo-
gies.
By including these specific exclusions, the query becomes highly focused on retrieving
research papers that discuss digital watermarking in documents, while filtering out a wide
50
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:61==
array of unrelated topics discussed above. This helps in narrowing down the search re-
sults to the most relevant papers, avoiding noise from other fields that might share some
terminology but are not pertinent to the specific interest in document watermarking.
6.1.2
Further Analysis of relevant research papers
Several research papers were further excluded from this literature review due to their fo-
cus on areas that diverge from the specific scope of digital watermarking in documents
or due to accessibility issues related to language barriers. However, some of the tech-
niques discussed in these papers have potential applications in digital watermarking. The
following analysis provides insight into the techniques discussed in the excluded research
papers and explains the rationale behind their exclusion from this review.
Machine Learning Techniques for Fake News Detection
Research in this area uti-
lizes hybrid deep learning approaches, such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) net-
works combined with optimization algorithms like hunter-prey optimization, to improve
the detection of fake news in Arabic text. Although these methods show promise for en-
hancing machine learning models, their focus is on natural language processing and fake
news detection rather than on watermarking digital documents. The techniques involved,
while potentially adaptable for improving watermark robustness and accuracy, are not
directly aligned with the primary goals of digital watermarking.
Cryptographic Protocol Enhancements
Studies enhancing cryptographic protocols
through bigram character encoding and identity-based signatures focus on securing com-
munication and data integrity. While the principles of encoding and secure signatures
could inspire new approaches for embedding and verifying watermarks, the research is
centered on cryptographic methods rather than digital watermarking. The exclusion of this
research was due to its primary focus on cryptographic security rather than watermarking
techniques.
Data Privacy in IoT Environments
Research integrating compression sensing with dig-
ital watermarking techniques addresses data privacy issues in the Internet of Things (IoT).
While compression sensing could offer valuable insights for optimizing watermark embed-
ding and reducing data size impacts, the application to IoT data privacy differs significantly
from general document watermarking. Therefore, despite the relevance of the techniques,
this research was excluded due to its focus on IoT-specific applications.
Blockchain Technology for Document Verification
The use of blockchain technology
and smart contracts for verifying academic diplomas and other documents involves creat-
ing secure, decentralized verification systems. While the principles of blockchain, such as
immutability and decentralized control, could be integrated with watermarking methods to
enhance document security, the focus on blockchain for document verification diverges
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
51
==PAGE:62==
from the specific techniques of watermarking. This led to the exclusion of this research
from the review.
Text Steganography
Research on reversible linguistic steganography and Bayesian
modeling involves hiding information within text using advanced encoding techniques.
These methods could be adapted for watermarking digital documents, especially in sce-
narios involving textual content. However, the primary focus on text steganography rather
than document watermarking led to the exclusion of this research due to its specific ap-
plication to text rather than general document protection.
Spread Spectrum Modulation
This research explores spread spectrum modulation
techniques within signal processing contexts to embed information robustly. Although
these techniques are directly relevant to watermarking by providing robustness against
interference, their application is primarily within signal processing rather than document
watermarking. The specific focus of this research on signal processing contexts was a
key factor in its exclusion from the review.
Watermarking Relational Databases
Techniques discussed for watermarking relational
databases, such as word segmentation and embedding, involve methods applicable to
structured data. While some concepts could be adapted for digital document watermark-
ing, the focus on databases and specific linguistic techniques limited the relevance to
general document watermarking. This focus on structured data led to the exclusion of
this research.
Text Steganography Using Binary Mapping
Research involving text steganography
with binary digit mapping on ASCII characters addresses methods for hiding information
within text. These techniques could potentially be adapted for digital document water-
marking, but the focus on text steganography rather than general document watermarking
led to its exclusion from the review.
Invisible Digital Watermarks
Although this research discusses invisible digital water-
marks, it was excluded due to being written in a language other than English, which pre-
sented accessibility challenges. Despite the relevance of the techniques to digital wa-
termarking, the language barrier prevented a thorough evaluation and inclusion in the
review.
RFID Security
Research on RFID technology focuses on securing communication and
data in RFID systems. While the security concepts could offer insights into watermarking,
the specific focus on RFID technology rather than document watermarking was a reason
for its exclusion.
52
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:63==
Categorical Data Watermarking
This research involves watermarking categorical data
using techniques suited for structured data types. Although the methods could be rele-
vant for document watermarking, the primary focus on categorical data rather than digital
documents led to its exclusion from the review.
Printed Document Verification Using Barcodes
The use of barcodes for verifying
printed document integrity involves tracking and authentication methods. While related
to document security, barcodes do not involve watermarking techniques. Therefore, this
research was excluded due to its focus on barcode-based verification rather than water-
marking.
In summary, while some techniques discussed in these papers have potential applications
in digital watermarking, their primary focus on different technologies or specific contexts,
such as IoT, blockchain, or text steganography, led to their exclusion from this review.
The relevance of these techniques to digital watermarking was insufficient to justify their
inclusion, given their differing core objectives and methodologies.
6.1.3
Literature Review
Recent advancements in digital watermarking and document security have significantly
shaped the field. Zu et al. employed semantic analysis to embed watermarks in Open Doc-
ument Format (ODF) files using steganography similar to ours technique, enhancing wa-
termark robustness in cloud environments. Their technique leverages an understanding
of the document’s content to optimize watermark effectiveness. It successfully addresses
weaknesses of removal and tampering, offering strong concealment and durability which
is one of the goals of our work as well.[25]
Lu et al. developed a watermarking technique specifically designed to resist print-scan
attacks, which aligns with one of the objectives of the proposed watermarking algorithm.
Their method involves converting the PDF into a series of bitmap images, applying wa-
termarks to the character edge strokes within these images, and then recombining the
bitmaps to reconstruct the PDF [4].
Yang et al. presented a new font-based approach to text watermarking, which, unlike pre-
vious methods limited to specific languages, this scheme works across various languages
and is particularly robust against cross-media distortions, such as when text is captured
by cameras from screens or paper, something which is also the goal of our work. A key
innovation is the use of a glyph centroid modification algorithm to automatically generate
fonts that closely resemble the original, streamlining the process. The watermark is em-
bedded by altering the relative centroid position (RCP) of glyphs, ensuring the watermark
remains intact even after lossy compression and other distortions. Additionally, the water-
mark can be extracted without relying on OCR to understand the text’s meaning, making
it a versatile and efficient solution for modern text watermarking needs. [24].
Liu et al. explored the application of natural language processing (NLP) techniques to im-
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
53
==PAGE:64==
prove the accuracy of watermark detection in PDF documents. Their approach enhanced
the recognition and extraction of watermarks embedded within textual content [26].
Frattolillo et al. offered essential insights into watermarking protocols and principles. This
foundational knowledge serves as a basis for the current approach, which applies these
principles specifically to PDF documents. The focus is on employing subtle watermarking
techniques that align with the methodologies outlined in their guide. [27]
Ryman et al. investigated the application of watermarking to enhance plagiarism detec-
tion in documents. Their approach involved embedding watermarks to identify and pre-
vent unauthorized use or duplication, which aligns with one of the potential applications of
the proposed algorithm in this research. Specifically, the paper details a method for em-
bedding watermarks within the source code of documents. While this technique similarly
aims to improve document security through the integration of identification and verification
information, it faces limitations in terms of resilience to screenshotting or printing/scan-
ning. [28]
Tzeng et al. proposed an advanced watermarking approach for PowerPoint presenta-
tions, employing a multilevel strategy to bolster document integrity and protection against
unauthorized use. This method incorporates multiple layers of watermarks, enhancing
security and making it particularly effective for dynamic and multimedia-rich documents
such as PowerPoint presentations. The multilevel watermarking approach for Power-
Point presentations involves embedding multiple types of watermarks at different levels
to enhance document security. This method includes a robust primary watermark (CP)
featuring a visible image and text, which provides strong protection against unauthorized
modifications. In addition, three distinct fingerprint watermarks (FP1, FP2, FP3) are em-
bedded, each containing unique text sequences. These fingerprints add extra layers of
identification and security, making it difficult for attackers to alter or tamper with the pre-
sentation. This comprehensive strategy ensures high levels of protection and integrity for
dynamic and multimedia-rich PPT files. [29].
Al-Wesabi et al. integrated various algorithms to enhance content authentication and tam-
pering detection for Arabic text transmitted over the internet, focusing on improving over-
all security and content verification. Their approach employs a combination of techniques
to ensure the integrity of digital text, addressing challenges in content authentication and
tampering detection. Their method, SAMMZWA, presents a specialized approach by com-
bining the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) with zero-watermarking. This hybrid technique
is designed to embed watermarks in Arabic text without altering the original content, pro-
viding a robust solution for content authentication and tampering detection. [30].
Liu et al. developed a watermarking method for electronic bills that integrates with the
Open Fixed-Layout Document (OFD) format to ensure document security and prevent
fraud. Their approach involves embedding watermark information into text by modify-
ing the structural contours of characters in a specially designed font. Each character in
54
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:65==
this watermark font represents different watermark bits through unique glyph variations.
The watermark is embedded by selecting and using these modified characters. For ex-
traction, they compare the watermarked document’s characters with standard ones using
normalized cross-correlation (NCC) to detect and decode the watermark. This technique
enhances the integrity of electronic bills by making unauthorized alterations detectable.
Although their method is for electronic bills, it still employs text watermarking techniques
using glyphs which is related to digital watermarking. [31]
Kuribayashi et al. proposed a data-hiding method for PDF files that avoids visual distortion
by manipulating space values between characters rather than altering character positions.
The approach involves dividing the binary payload into bit segments and embedding these
segments by splitting each space value into multiple related values. For each space
value, one segment is reserved for corrective data, while the remaining segments encode
parts of the payload. The adjusted space values are then encoded using the TJ operator,
ensuring that the visual appearance of the document remains unchanged when viewed
with any PDF reader. This method maintains the document’s quality, allows for scalable
payloads, and controls data secrecy with a simple access control mechanism provided
by the PDF standard. Additionally, the Cross-Reference Table (CRT) must be updated
post-processing to reflect these modifications and prevent potential compatibility issues
with PDF viewers. Encoding of PDF documents with similar techniques of manipulating
the word spaces TJ and Tm operators is done in our work as well, which we described in
section 3.2.2. [32]
d’Amore et al. addressed watermarking techniques specifically designed to resist traitor
attacks, where malicious users attempt to compromise or tamper with watermarked docu-
ments. Although the proposed method emphasizes word spacing adjustments, it similarly
aims to ensure watermark robustness and effectiveness against various forms of trans-
formations. [33]
Arora et al. presented a sophisticated method for embedding multiple watermarks in MS
Word documents to enhance authentication and copyright protection. Their technique
involves the insertion of several layers of watermarks: one visible within the document
content and another invisible within the metadata or formatting information. The visible
watermark typically includes text or logos indicating ownership or authenticity, while the
invisible watermark contains encoded information for tracking and verification. This dual-
layer system provides robust protection by making it challenging for unauthorized users to
remove or tamper with the watermarks without compromising the document’s integrity. [34]
Salleh et al. addressed a specific challenge in digital watermarking related to detect-
ing unauthorized copies of watermarked PDF documents when they are photocopied in
grayscale. The study explores embedding identifiable marks in PDF files to trace and ver-
ify the authenticity of printed copies. It focuses on leveraging color theory and luminance
concepts to ensure that watermarks remain detectable even after the document has been
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
55
==PAGE:66==
photocopied in grayscale. This approach addresses the common issue of watermarks
becoming less visible or disappearing entirely when color information is lost during photo-
copying. The technique is specialized for grayscale photocopies and highlights the need
for distinct approaches for color copies, thus providing a nuanced solution to watermark
visibility challenges. [35]
Al Wasebi et al. discussed zero-watermarking techniques using Markov models to invisibly
embed watermarks in English text documents, employing a third-level order and word
mechanism within the Markov model. [36]
F. Deguillaume et al. presented a hybrid watermarking method designed to address mul-
tiple security needs for multimedia documents. It combines a robust watermark for copy-
right protection with a fragile or semi-fragile watermark for tamper detection and authen-
tication. This approach aims to overcome the limitations of existing methods, particularly
the vulnerability to copy attacks where watermarks can be transferred between docu-
ments. The proposed method ensures that the fragile watermark can detect modifications
while maintaining the robustness of the copyright protection watermark. [37]
Blinova et al. explored various steganographic techniques for embedding hidden data
within electronic text documents. Their methods aim to conceal information within the
text without altering its visual appearance, which is similar to the approach used in this
study. However, while their focus encompasses a range of steganographic methods, the
proposed technique specifically employs word spacing adjustments in PDFs to embed
watermarks. This approach ensures the watermark’s subtlety and robustness, offering a
specialized solution for document security. [38]
Chen et al. introduced an innovative watermarking method that utilizes semantic role la-
beling (SRL) to embed watermarks in text documents. SRL, a technique from natural
language processing (NLP), analyzes the roles of different words or phrases within a sen-
tence. By leveraging SRL, their algorithm embeds watermarks by modifying the semantic
roles within the text, ensuring robustness and resilience against common text modifica-
tions. This method maintains watermark integrity even when documents are paraphrased
or rephrased, offering enhanced security. The approach embeds information in a contex-
tually aware manner, making the watermark less detectable and providing a sophisticated
layer of protection for text-based documents. [39]
Saini provided a comprehensive overview of various watermarking techniques designed
to protect web content from unauthorized use and piracy. The survey examines differ-
ent approaches for embedding watermarks into web content, including both visible and
invisible methods, and assesses their effectiveness in safeguarding copyright. While this
work focuses broadly on watermarking techniques for web content, the present study spe-
cializes in watermarking within PDFs. Specifically, it involves subtle adjustments to word
spacing in PDF documents to embed watermarks, ensuring the watermark remains in-
conspicuous while preserving the document’s visual integrity. This technique contributes
56
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:67==
to the broader field of watermarking by offering a specialized solution tailored to PDF
security. [40]
Mir investigated advanced methods for securing web content through invisible text water-
marking. The study explores sophisticated techniques that embed information within the
text in a manner imperceptible to users while ensuring the watermark’s integrity and ro-
bustness. The paper highlights the use of advanced algorithms to embed watermarks by
manipulating text elements at both syntactic and semantic levels. This approach involves
altering text properties in ways that do not affect readability or appearance but facilitate
effective detection and verification of the watermark. Techniques discussed include subtle
modifications in text formatting, structure, and syntax, combined with cryptographic meth-
ods to enhance security. These methods ensure the watermark remains secure against
common forms of text manipulation and unauthorized copying, providing a robust solution
for copyright protection of web content. [41]
Yingjie et al. introduced a sophisticated watermarking technique that, similar to the cur-
rent approach, aims to enhance text document security but employs different methodolo-
gies. Their technique uses the Chinese Edit Distance combined with information gain and
Chinese machine code to develop a robust zero-watermark. This zero-watermarking ap-
proach measures the edit distance between characteristic words to detect distortions and
maintain watermark integrity, particularly against attacks such as sentence rephrasing or
word substitutions. [42]
Shaikhli et al. proposed a novel method for securing PDF documents through the use
of invisible digital signatures. Their approach addresses concerns related to document
integrity and ownership during digital distribution. The authors introduce a technique that
embeds a digital signature as an invisible watermark within the PDF’s cross-reference ta-
ble. By utilizing the space character to overwrite data without altering the file size, the
method ensures that the signature remains inconspicuous while preserving the docu-
ment’s integrity. This approach leverages the existing offset indices at the end of the
file for efficient embedding and extraction of the signature. [43]
Zhao et al. explored advanced techniques in digital rights management (DRM) through
the application of digital watermarking, emphasizing the integration of watermarking with
DRM systems to protect digital content. The paper details a mechanism for embedding
and extracting watermarks in Word documents, focusing on encryption and disordering
of watermark information to ensure security. Their system employs a two-dimensional
matrix for watermark generation, utilizing XOR operations for encryption and a random
matrix created with user-defined keys. The method includes embedding watermarks by
adjusting character spacing and retrieving these watermarks from both text documents
and binary images. This approach highlights the robustness and minimal impact on doc-
ument formatting, aligning with the focus of this study on watermarking PDFs. [44]
Cheung et al. explored a novel application of digital watermarking technology for secur-
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
57
==PAGE:68==
ing the distribution of intelligence documents. They introduced a watermark-based distri-
bution protocol designed to complement traditional cryptography-based access controls.
This protocol aimed to enhance non-repudiation and traceability of document distribution,
specifically targeting sensitive intelligence documents. It integrated watermarking with
user certificates to embed user identities into documents, allowing for traceability while
maintaining confidentiality between document providers and recipients. [45]
Qadir et al. addressed the challenge of secure communication of data, emphasizing the
need to protect text documents while preserving their original content and integrity. They
introduced a novel encoding scheme designed to embed watermark information into plain
text (ASCII) without altering the visible text. This approach ensured that the watermark
remained hidden and secure, making it difficult for attackers to detect or tamper with the
embedded information. The paper detailed the developed system based on this encoding
scheme and demonstrated its effectiveness in securely delivering and concealing data
within digital documents. [46]
Micic et al. explored methods for authenticating electronic text documents through digital
watermarking, addressing a crucial aspect of copyright protection and document security.
They examined various watermarking techniques, including line-shift coding, word-shift
coding, and feature coding, each employing different approaches to embedding and de-
tecting watermark information. Line-shift coding involves shifting lines based on specific
bits, word-shift coding manipulates word groups within lines, and feature coding alters text
features to encode data. The paper presented a new method that enhanced document se-
curity by preventing unauthorized changes, offering an improved approach over existing
techniques. Detailed algorithms for embedding and detecting watermarks were provided,
and their effectiveness was demonstrated through simulations. The study highlighted the
practical importance of digital watermarking for document authentication and protection
against unauthorized modifications. The word-shifting technique described was used to
shift word spaces and encode the pseudorandom bit string in this research. [47]
Kankanhalli et al. addressed the challenge of protecting electronic text documents from
unauthorized redistribution and copying, a significant concern for commercial publish-
ers. They introduced a robust watermarking technique that embeds semantics-preserving
modifications into the text of electronic documents. This method ensures that multiple
copies of the same document retain their meaning while allowing for the identification of
the authorized source and recipient through these modifications. The proposed approach
is designed to be accurate, robust against various attacks such as partial copying of text,
scalable for documents of varying lengths, and secure against attempts to remove or al-
ter the watermark. The paper emphasized the potential of this technique to facilitate the
secure distribution of valuable digital content, including newspapers, journals, and other
electronic publications. [48]
Finally, Podilchuk et al. provided a comprehensive overview of digital watermarking tech-
58
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:69==
niques and their applications across various media types, including text, images, video,
and audio. The paper presents a general framework for watermark embedding and detec-
tion/decoding and reviews several algorithms developed for different types of multimedia
content. It emphasizes the distinctions in watermarking approaches based on specific ap-
plications such as copyright protection, authentication, tamper detection, and data hiding.
Additionally, the paper discusses the varying technological and system requirements for
implementing watermarking in different media formats. [49]
Synthesizing insights from the reviewed literature reveals that the proposed watermarking
algorithm represents a notable advancement in the field. By focusing on subtle adjust-
ments to word spacing within PDFs and employing the Levenshtein distance to compare
the decoded string with the original, the algorithm provides a unique approach for identify-
ing the original owner of a personalized copy of a PDF. This method not only complements
but also builds upon existing watermarking techniques, addressing specific needs in dig-
ital document protection and offering enhanced security features that advance current
practices in the field.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
59
==PAGE:70==
60
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:71==
7
Conclusion
This research developed a robust method, explained in section 3, for embedding and
detecting watermarks in PDFs to safeguard ownership and prevent unauthorized distri-
bution. The primary objectives were to design a watermarking algorithm that resists com-
mon transformations discussed in section 1, functions effectively with PDFs, and embeds
information invisibly. The proposed method achieved these goals through a detailed pro-
cess involving the detection of line and word spaces in the original PDF, the generation
of a pseudo-random bit string based on a seed value that could be a personalized ID of
the user, and the embedding of this bit string by modifying these spaces, as explained in
section 3.1.
To validate the watermarking process, both the original and watermarked PDFs were con-
verted to bitmaps. Optical Character Recognition (OCR) was employed to detect and
compare lines and spaces between the two versions. Differences were quantified us-
ing the Levenshtein distance metric, which facilitated the detection of the embedded bit
string and confirmed the watermark’s presence. This approach ensured that the water-
mark remained imperceptible and robust, preserving both the document’s integrity and
ownership, as detailed in section 3.2.
Future research could build on this work by addressing several key areas. One potential
direction is to explore watermark detection in original or unmodified documents, as dis-
cussed in 5.4. Additionally, further investigation into detecting and correcting decoding
errors related to font changes and mathematical equations and for encoded text inside
the PDF, as mentioned in 5.1, could further enhance the robustness of the watermarking
technique.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
61
==PAGE:72==
62
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Ross Anderson and Fabien Petitcolas. “On The Limits of Steganography”. In: IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 16 (Dec. 1998). DOI: 10.1109/49.
668971.
[2]
F. Hartung and M. Kutter. “Multimedia watermarking techniques”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE 87.7 (1999). DOI: 10.1109/5.771066.
[3]
Ingemar Cox et al. Digital Watermarking and Steganography. 2nd ed. San Fran-
cisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2007. ISBN: 9780080555805.
[4]
Lei Li et al. “Robust PDF Watermarking against Print–Scan Attack”. In: Sensors 23
(2023). ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10.3390/s23177365.
[5]
R. Carter et al. Typographic Design: Form and Communication. Wiley, 2018. ISBN:
9781119312567.
[6]
R. Smith. “An Overview of the Tesseract OCR Engine”. In: Ninth International Con-
ference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR 2007). Vol. 2. 2007. DOI:
10.1109/ICDAR.2007.4376991.
[7]
F.A.P. Petitcolas, R.J. Anderson, and M.G. Kuhn. “Information hiding-a survey”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 87.7 (1999). DOI: 10.1109/5.771065.
[8]
David Kahn. The Codebreakers: The Comprehensive History of Secret Communi-
cation from Ancient Times to the Internet. New York: Scribner, 1996. ISBN: 978-
0684831305.
[9]
Tuomas Aura. “Practical invisibility in digital communication”. In: Information Hiding.
Ed. by Ross Anderson. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1996. ISBN:
978-3-540-49589-5. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-61996-8_46.
[10]
Walter Bender et al. “Techniques for Data Hiding”. In: IBM Systems Journal 35 (Jan.
1996). DOI: 10.1147/sj.353.0313.
[11]
I.J. Cox et al. “Secure spread spectrum watermarking for multimedia”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing 6.12 (1997). DOI: 10.1109/83.650120.
[12]
L.M. Marvel, C.G. Boncelet, and C.T. Retter. “Spread spectrum image steganog-
raphy”. In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 8.8 (1999). DOI: 10.1109/83.
777088.
[13]
Yan-Feng Zhao and Yang-Xia Luo. “The research of watermark technology in digital
right management”. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Computer Science
and Automation Engineering. 2011. DOI: 10.1109/CSAE.2011.5953230.
[14]
Imad Fakhri Al Shaikhli et al. “Protection of Integrity and Ownership of PDF Doc-
uments Using Invisible Signature”. In: 2012 UKSim 14th International Conference
on Computer Modelling and Simulation. 2012. DOI: 10.1109/UKSim.2012.81.
[15]
Nighat Mir and Mohammad A. U. Khan. “Copyright Protection for Online Text In-
formation: Using Watermarking and Cryptography”. In: 2020 3rd International Con-
ference on Computer Applications & Information Security (ICCAIS). 2020. DOI: 10.
1109/ICCAIS48893.2020.9096817.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
63
==PAGE:74==
[16]
Igor Fischer and Thorsten Herfet. “Visual Document Authentication Using Human-
Recognizable Watermarks”. In: Emerging Trends in Information and Communica-
tion Security. Ed. by Günter Müller. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2006. ISBN: 978-3-540-34642-5.
[17]
Sameeka Saini. “A survey on watermarking web contents for protecting copyright”.
In: 2015 International Conference on Innovations in Information, Embedded and
Communication Systems (ICIIECS). 2015. DOI: 10.1109/ICIIECS.2015.7193239.
[18]
C.I. Podilchuk and E.J. Delp. “Digital watermarking: algorithms and applications”.
In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 4 (2001). DOI: 10.1109/79.939835.
[19]
Vidhi Khanduja, Shampa Chakraverty, and Om Verma. “Watermarking Categori-
cal Data : Algorithm and Robustness Analysis”. In: Defence Science Journal (May
2015). DOI: 10.14429/dsj.65.8444.
[20]
Muhammad Abdul Qadir and Ishtiaq Ahmad. “Digital Text Watermarking: Secure
Content Delivery and Data Hiding in Digital Documents”. In: Aerospace and Elec-
tronic Systems Magazine, IEEE 21 (Dec. 2006). DOI: 10.1109/MAES.2006.284353.
[21]
PDF Reference, Sixth Edition, Adobe Portable Document Format Version 1.7. 2006.
[22]
Vladimir I. Levenshtein. “Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions,
and reversals”. In: Soviet physics. Doklady (1965).
[23]
David Clark, Sebastian Hunt, and Pasquale Malacaria. “Quantitative Analysis of
the Leakage of Confidential Data”. In: Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer
Science 59 (Jan. 2001). DOI: 10.1016/S1571-0661(04)00290-7.
[24]
Xi Yang et al. “Language universal font watermarking with multiple cross-media
robustness”. In: Signal Processing 203 (2023). ISSN: 0165-1684. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2022.108791.
[25]
Lijun Zu et al. “E-SAWM: A Semantic Analysis-Based ODF Watermarking Algorithm
for Edge Cloud Scenarios”. In: Future Internet 15 (2023). ISSN: 1999-5903. DOI:
10.3390/fi15090283.
[26]
Rui Liu et al. “Research on a watermarking recognition method for PDF documents
based on natural language processing”. In: Fourth International Conference on
Computer Science and Communication Technology (ICCSCT 2023). Ed. by Cheng
Siong Chin, Wenbing Zhao, and Changbo Cheng. Vol. 12918. International Society
for Optics and Photonics. SPIE, 2023, p. 129180M. DOI: 10.1117/12.3009389.
[27]
Franco Frattolillo. “Watermarking Protocols: A Short Guide for Beginners”. In: Future
Internet 15.5 (2023). ISSN: 1999-5903. DOI: 10.3390/fi15050163.
[28]
Dylan Ryman, P.K. Imbrie, and Jeff Kastner. “Enhancement of Plagiarism Detection
Techniques via Watermarking”. In: 2022 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference
(FIE). 2022. DOI: 10.1109/FIE56618.2022.9962396.
[29]
Wen-Shyang Tzeng et al. “Multilevel Multipurpose Watermarking Schemes for PPT
Documents”. In: Journal of Internet Technology 13.4 (2022).
64
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:75==
[30]
Fahd N. Al-Wesabi. “A Hybrid Intelligent Approach for Content Authentication and
Tampering Detection of Arabic Text Transmitted via Internet”. In: Computers, Mate-
rials & Continua 1 (2021). ISSN: 1546-2226. DOI: 10.32604/cmc.2020.012088.
[31]
Dan Liu et al. “Research on Content Authentication Technology of Electronic Bills
Based on Text Watermarking Algorithm”. In: June 2021. ISBN: 978-3-030-78620-5.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-78621-2_18.
[32]
Minoru Kuribayashi and KokSheik Wong. “StealthPDF: Data hiding method for PDF
file with no visual degradation”. In: Journal of Information Security and Applications
61 (2021). ISSN: 2214-2126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2021.102875.
[33]
Fabrizio d’Amore and Alessandro Serpi. “Traitor-Proof PDF Watermarking”. In: ArXiv
abs/2109.09712 (2021).
[34]
Ayush Arora, Drishti Agarwal, and Jeebananda Panda. “A Novel MS-Word Text
Document Multiple Watermarking Technique for Authentication and Copyright Pro-
tection”. In: International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology 68 (May
2020). Seventh Sense Research Group. DOI: 10.14445/22315381/IJETT-V68I5P201S.
[35]
Norhaziah Md. Salleh and Soong Hoong Cheng. “PDF Digital Watermarking: Grayscale
Photocopy Detection of Printed Documents”. In: International Journal of Computer
Applications 175.2 (2020).
[36]
Fahd Al-Wesabi. “A Smart English Text Zero-Watermarking Approach Based on
Third-Level Order and Word Mechanism of Markov Model”. In: Computers, Materi-
als & Continua 65 (Jan. 2020). DOI: 10.32604/cmc.2020.011151.
[37]
F. Deguillaume, S. Voloshynovskiy, and T. Pun. “Secure hybrid robust watermarking
resistant against tampering and copy attack”. In: Signal Processing 83.10 (2003).
ISSN: 0165-1684. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-1684(03)00172-5.
[38]
E. Blinova and A. Sushchenia. “Several steganographic methods using for embed-
ding of hidden data in electronic text documents”. In: Sistemnyj Analiz i Prikladnaâ
Informatika (Aug. 2019). DOI: 10.21122/2309-4923-2019-2-32-38.
[39]
Jianping Chen et al. “Text watermarking algorithm based on semantic role label-
ing”. In: 2016 Third International Conference on Digital Information Processing,
Data Mining, and Wireless Communications (DIPDMWC). 2016. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
DIPDMWC.2016.7529374.
[40]
Sameeka Saini. “A survey on watermarking web contents for protecting copyright”.
In: 2015 International Conference on Innovations in Information, Embedded and
Communication Systems (ICIIECS). 2015. DOI: 10.1109/ICIIECS.2015.7193239.
[41]
Nighat Mir. “Copyright for web content using invisible text watermarking”. In: Com-
puters in Human Behavior 30 (2014). ISSN: 0747-5632. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.chb.2013.07.040.
[42]
Meng Yingjie et al. “Text Zero-Watermark Based on Chinese Edit Distance”. In: 2013
International Conference on Computational and Information Sciences. 2013. DOI:
10.1109/ICCIS.2013.186.
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
65
==PAGE:76==
[43]
Imad Fakhri Al Shaikhli et al. “Protection of Integrity and Ownership of PDF Doc-
uments Using Invisible Signature”. In: 2012 UKSim 14th International Conference
on Computer Modelling and Simulation. 2012. DOI: 10.1109/UKSim.2012.81.
[44]
Yan-Feng Zhao and Yang-Xia Luo. “The research of watermark technology in digital
right management”. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Computer Science
and Automation Engineering. Vol. 1. 2011. DOI: 10.1109/CSAE.2011.5953230.
[45]
Shing-Chi Cheung, Dickson K. W. Chiu, and Cedric Ho. “The Use of Digital Wa-
termarking for Intelligence Multimedia Document Distribution”. In: Journal of Theo-
retical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research (2008). ISSN: 0718-1876. DOI:
10.4067/S0718-18762008000200008.
[46]
Muhammad Abdul Qadir and Ishtiaq Ahmad. “Digital Text Watermarking: Secure
Content Delivery and Data Hiding in Digital Documents”. In: Aerospace and Elec-
tronic Systems Magazine, IEEE 21 (Dec. 2006). DOI: 10.1109/MAES.2006.284353.
[47]
A. Micic, D. Radenkovic, and S. Nikolic. “Autentification of Text Documents Using
Digital Watermarking”. In: TELSIKS 2005 - 2005 uth International Conference on
Telecommunication in ModernSatellite, Cable and Broadcasting Services. Vol. 2.
2005. DOI: 10.1109/TELSKS.2005.1572162.
[48]
Mohan S. Kankanhalli and K. F. Hau. “Watermarking of Electronic Text Documents”.
In: Electronic Commerce Research 2.1 (Jan. 2002). ISSN: 1572-9362. DOI: 10.
1023/A:1013312707578.
[49]
C.I. Podilchuk and E.J. Delp. “Digital watermarking: algorithms and applications”.
In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 18.4 (2001). DOI: 10.1109/79.939835.
66
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
==PAGE:77==
Covert watermarking of Digital Documents
67
==PAGE:78==
Covert watermarking is a security and privacy-related technique for subtly embedding a concealed
identifier into a digital document that is not easily perceptible to human senses but can be retrieved by
those with the right tools and knowledge. In this study, we use this technique to watermark personal-
ized copies of PDF and printed documents to track information leaks online. This is to discourage the
unauthorized sharing of company-confidential memos, documents with customers’ personal infor-
mation, etc. The study involves surveying existing tools, devising a robust watermark method, and
embedding bit strings into documents through spacing modifications. Evaluation includes comparing
original and modified documents, detecting encoded information, and measuring the accuracy and
error rate by comparing Levinshtein distance. Furthermore, strategies are proposed to ensure the
watermark’s resilience against printing-and-scanning, and screenshotting.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
