==PAGE:1==
Event detection in video games using deep
learning
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Event detection in video games using deep learning
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
August, year
By
Jiaqi Zhao
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Jiaqi Zhao ­ s212613
Signature
Date
ii
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Event detection in video games is a complex task that involves recognizing and classifying
various in­game activities such as combat, dialogue, cutscenes, and player deaths. The
advent of deep learning has significantly advanced the field of computer vision, enabling
more accurate and efficient event detection systems. This paper presents a comprehen­
sive methodology for detecting events in video games using a 3D Convolutional Neural
Network (3D CNN). The proposed system leverages spatiotemporal features from video
frames to identify different game events. The paper details the data preprocessing, model
architecture, training procedure, and inference methods. The results demonstrate the ef­
fectiveness of the 3D CNN model in accurately detecting and classifying game events,
offering valuable insights for automated gameplay analysis and content creation.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Jiaqi Zhao, MSc Computer Science, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
iv
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Event Detection in Video Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Deep Learning Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Applications of Deep Learning in Gaming Environments . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Related Works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Hybrid Approach: 3D CNN and CLIP Integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Data Collection and Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Model Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Training and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
3D CNN Implementation
19
4.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Model Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Model Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
CLIP Implementation
35
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Data Preparation and Labeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
Model Design and Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Generating Predictions for Video Frames
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.5
Application and Implementation of the Trained Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
EEG Data Collection
43
6.1
Introduction to EEG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
EEG Data Acquisition Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3
EEG Data Collection Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.4
Common Issues in EEG Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.5
EEG Data Collection Code and Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.6
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Discussion
51
7.1
Summary of Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.2
Interpretation of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Event detection in video games using deep learning
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
53
vi
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The video game industry has seen an exponential growth over the past few decades,
transforming from simple pixelated adventures into highly immersive, graphically advanced,
and interactive experiences. This evolution has driven the need for deeper insights into
player behavior, game dynamics, and event occurrences within games. Understanding
these aspects is crucial for various stakeholders, including game developers, researchers,
and content creators. Event detection in video games, which involves recognizing and
classifying key activities such as combat, dialogue, cutscenes, and player deaths, is a
vital component of this understanding.
1.1
Background and Motivation
In summary, the background of this project highlights the rapid evolution of the video
game industry and the increasing need for sophisticated tools to analyze gameplay and
player behavior. The advancements in machine learning and computer vision, particularly
the development of 3D CNNs, offer promising solutions for automated event detection in
video games. By addressing the current challenges and research gaps, this project aims
to contribute significantly to the field of game analytics and beyond, providing valuable
insights and enhancing the understanding of complex gaming environments.
The video game industry has evolved dramatically over the past few decades, transi­
tioning from simple, pixelated games to highly immersive, visually rich, and interactive
experiences. This evolution has been driven by advancements in hardware and software
technologies, enabling game developers to create more complex and engaging virtual
worlds. As the industry has grown, so too has the need for sophisticated tools and tech­
niques to analyze and understand gameplay, player behavior, and in­game events.
1.1.1
Historical Perspective on Video Game Analysis
In the early days of video gaming, analysis was often limited to basic metrics such as
scores and completion times. Developers and researchers relied heavily on manual ob­
servations and player feedback to understand gameplay mechanics and player interac­
tions. This approach was labor­intensive and prone to human error, limiting the scope
and accuracy of the analysis.
With the advent of more advanced computer systems and the proliferation of data, the field
of game analytics began to emerge. Game analytics involves the systematic analysis of
game­related data to gain insights into player behavior, game design, and overall game
performance. Early game analytics focused on logging player actions, in­game events,
and system performance metrics. These logs were then analyzed using statistical meth­
ods to identify patterns and trends.
1.1.2
Introduction of Machine Learning in Game Analysis
The introduction of machine learning marked a significant milestone in the field of game
analytics. Machine learning algorithms, such as decision trees, support vector machines
(SVMs), and k­nearest neighbors (k­NN), enabled more sophisticated analysis of game
data. These algorithms could automatically identify patterns and make predictions based
on large datasets, reducing the reliance on manual analysis and improving accuracy.
One of the early applications of machine learning in game analysis was player model­
ing. Player modeling involves creating computational models that predict player behavior
Event detection in video games using deep learning
1
==PAGE:10==
and preferences. These models help developers tailor game experiences to individual
players, enhancing engagement and satisfaction. For example, machine learning algo­
rithms can analyze player actions to identify different playstyles, which can then be used
to dynamically adjust game difficulty or provide personalized content recommendations.
The motivation behind this project stems from the rapid growth and evolution of the video
game industry, which has transformed from simple, pixelated adventures into highly im­
mersive and interactive experiences. This transformation has created a need for deeper
insights into player behavior, game dynamics, and event occurrences within games. Un­
derstanding these aspects is crucial for various stakeholders, including game developers,
researchers, and content creators. Event detection in video games, which involves rec­
ognizing and classifying key activities such as combat, dialogue, cutscenes, and player
deaths, plays a vital role in this understanding.
1.1.3
Significance for Game Developers
For game developers, understanding player behavior and game dynamics is essential
for fine­tuning gameplay mechanics and enhancing the overall gaming experience. Au­
tomated event detection can provide valuable feedback on how players interact with dif­
ferent game elements, identify common points of player frustration or engagement, and
highlight areas that may require balancing or improvement. This feedback loop is cru­
cial for iterative game design and helps developers create more engaging and enjoyable
games.
For instance, by automatically detecting combat events, developers can analyze how
players use different strategies and weapons, adjust difficulty levels, and identify bugs or
exploits. Similarly, detecting dialogue and cutscene events can help developers under­
stand how players engage with the storyline and characters, which is vital for narrative­
driven games.
1.1.4
Importance for Researchers
Researchers in the field of game studies and psychology can benefit greatly from au­
tomated event detection. By analyzing player behavior patterns, researchers can study
the psychological and social aspects of gaming. This includes understanding how differ­
ent game mechanics influence player emotions, behavior, and social interactions. For
example, detecting moments of player frustration or excitement can help researchers un­
derstand the emotional impact of specific game elements.
Moreover, event detection can facilitate large­scale studies on gaming behavior by provid­
ing automated and accurate annotations of gameplay footage. This enables researchers
to collect and analyze data from a broader and more diverse pool of players, leading to
more generalizable and robust findings.
1.1.5
Enhancements for Content Creators
Content creators, such as streamers and YouTubers, can use automated event detection
to enhance their content. By automatically highlighting key moments in their gameplay
footage, such as intense combat sequences or significant plot developments, content
creators can produce more engaging and dynamic videos. This not only saves time in the
editing process but also ensures that viewers are presented with the most exciting and
relevant parts of the gameplay.
Additionally, real­time event detection can enable interactive and live­streaming experi­
ences, where viewers receive instant highlights and insights into the gameplay. This can
increase viewer engagement and create more immersive and interactive content.
2
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:11==
1.1.6
Technical Motivation
From a technical perspective, event detection in video games presents a challenging
problem that pushes the boundaries of current computer vision and machine learning
techniques. Traditional methods of event detection relied heavily on manual annotation
and heuristic­based approaches, which are time­consuming and prone to errors. The
advent of deep learning, particularly Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), has provided
a powerful tool for automatically learning hierarchical features from raw data.
However, video game data is inherently spatiotemporal, meaning that both spatial and
temporal features are crucial for accurate event detection. This necessitates the use
of advanced models such as 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (3D CNNs), which can
capture and process spatiotemporal information. The development and implementation
of such models are at the forefront of computer vision research and have applications
beyond gaming, including in fields such as security surveillance, sports analytics, and
video content analysis.
1.1.7
Research Gap and Objectives
Despite the potential benefits, there is a gap in the current research and application of
deep learning for event detection in video games. Most existing studies focus on specific
aspects such as action recognition or object detection, but comprehensive solutions for
detecting a wide range of events in diverse gaming environments are still lacking. This
project aims to address this gap by developing a robust and generalizable event detection
system using 3D CNNs.
The primary objectives of this project are:
• To develop a comprehensive methodology for preprocessing and preparing video
game data for 3D CNNs.
• To design and implement a 3D CNN model capable of accurately detecting and
classifying various in­game events.
• To evaluate the performance of the proposed model using a diverse dataset of video
game footage.
• To provide insights and guidelines for the application of deep learning techniques in
the gaming industry and related fields.
1.1.8
Advancements in Computer Vision and Deep Learning
The field of computer vision has seen tremendous advancements in recent years, largely
driven by the development of deep learning techniques. Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), a class of deep learning models, have revolutionized image and video analysis.
CNNs are designed to automatically learn hierarchical features from raw data, making
them particularly well­suited for tasks such as image classification, object detection, and
action recognition.
In the context of video game analysis, CNNs have been used to detect and classify var­
ious in­game objects and actions. For example, researchers have employed CNNs to
recognize player actions in first­person shooter games, identify characters and objects
in role­playing games, and detect anomalies or glitches in game environments. These
applications have demonstrated the potential of deep learning to automate and enhance
game analysis.
1.1.9
From 2D CNNs to 3D CNNs
While 2D CNNs excel at analyzing spatial features in images, they are limited in their
ability to capture temporal dynamics in videos. Video data is inherently spatiotemporal,
Event detection in video games using deep learning
3
==PAGE:12==
meaning that both spatial and temporal features are crucial for accurate analysis. To
address this limitation, 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (3D CNNs) were introduced.
3D CNNs extend the convolution operation to the temporal dimension, allowing them to
capture motion and changes over time.
3D CNNs have shown great promise in video analysis tasks, such as action recognition
and event detection. By learning spatiotemporal features, 3D CNNs can understand the
dynamic nature of video data, making them ideal for analyzing complex events in video
games. For instance, a 3D CNN can distinguish between different types of combat scenes
based on both the actions of the characters and the temporal sequence of those actions.
1.1.10
Current Challenges in Video Game Event Detection
Despite the advancements in deep learning and computer vision, several challenges re­
main in the field of video game event detection. Video games are highly diverse, with
each game featuring unique graphics, gameplay mechanics, and event types. This diver­
sity makes it difficult to develop a one­size­fits­all solution for event detection. Additionally,
video game events are often context­dependent, meaning that the same action may rep­
resent different events in different contexts. For example, a character drawing a weapon
could indicate the start of combat in one scenario and a dramatic cutscene in another.
Another significant challenge is the computational complexity associated with processing
video data. Analyzing high­resolution frames and long video sequences requires sub­
stantial computational resources, necessitating the use of high­performance computing
systems and optimized algorithms. Ensuring real­time or near­real­time processing adds
another layer of complexity, especially for applications such as live­streaming and inter­
active gameplay analysis.
1.1.11
Potential Applications and Impact
The development of a robust event detection system for video games has significant im­
plications for the gaming industry and beyond. For game developers, such a system
can provide detailed insights into player behavior and game dynamics, facilitating more
informed decision­making and iterative design processes. For researchers, it offers a
powerful tool for studying the psychological and social aspects of gaming, enabling large­
scale analysis of player interactions and experiences.
Content creators can leverage automated event detection to produce more engaging and
dynamic videos, highlighting key moments and providing real­time feedback to viewers.
Furthermore, the methodologies and findings of this project can be applied to other do­
mains that require video analysis, such as sports analytics, security surveillance, and
video content creation.
1.2
Conclusion
In summary, this chapter introduced the growing importance of event detection in video
games, highlighted the current state of research, and identified the gaps that this project
aims to address. The subsequent chapters will delve into the methodology, implemen­
tation, and evaluation of a 3D CNN­based system designed to meet these challenges,
providing a comprehensive approach to automating event detection in the diverse and
dynamic world of video games.
4
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.1: Overview of the event detection process in video games.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
Event detection in video games and the application of deep learning techniques in gaming
environments have garnered significant research interest in recent years. This literature
review aims to provide an overview of existing research and methodologies relevant to the
project of event detection in video games using deep learning. By building upon existing
research and methodologies, this thesis project aims to contribute to the advancement of
event detection techniques in gaming environments using deep learning approaches.
2.1
Event Detection in Video Games
Event detection in video games plays a crucial role in understanding player interactions
and behaviors within gaming environments. Previous research has explored various ap­
proaches to event detection, including rule­based systems, machine learning techniques,
and deep learning methods.
Event detection in video games is a relatively new area of research, focusing on identifying
specific events during gameplay to enhance user experience and optimize game design.
Traditional methods rely on manual annotation and rule­based systems, which are time­
consuming and lack scalability. Recent advancements in machine learning and deep
learning have opened new avenues for automated event detection.
In a study by Weber et al. (2011) [1], gameplay data was used to model player behavior
and predict in­game events. The authors employed machine learning techniques such as
decision trees and support vector machines (SVM) to analyze player actions and identify
patterns leading to significant events. This approach involved extensive feature engineer­
ing to capture relevant gameplay metrics, such as player movement, action sequences,
and in­game events like achievements or level completions. Although effective in their
domain, this method was limited to specific game genres and required significant manual
effort in designing the features.
2.1.1
Rule­based Systems
Early approaches to event detection in video games often relied on rule­based systems,
where events were predefined based on specific game mechanics or conditions. For ex­
ample, if a player’s health drops below a certain threshold, a ”critical health” event might be
triggered. While effective for simple events, rule­based systems lack flexibility and scal­
ability, making them less suitable for complex and dynamic gameplay scenarios. These
systems also struggle to adapt to unforeseen situations or new gameplay mechanics,
limiting their applicability in modern, constantly evolving games.
2.1.2
Machine Learning Techniques
Machine learning techniques, such as supervised learning and pattern recognition, have
been applied to event detection in video games with promising results. These approaches
typically involve training classifiers on annotated data to automatically identify events
based on input features extracted from gameplay data.
For instance, Andersen et al. (2012) [andersen2012modeling] used a Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) to model player actions in a role­playing game (RPG). The HMM was trained
on sequences of player actions to predict the likelihood of certain events, such as combat
encounters or quest completions. This approach was particularly effective in games with
well­defined action sequences but required significant labeled data to train the model.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Deep Learning Techniques
In recent years, deep learning has emerged as a powerful tool for event detection in
video games, offering advantages such as automatic feature extraction, scalability to large
datasets, and the ability to handle complex data modalities. Various deep learning archi­
tectures have been explored for event detection, including Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), and their hybrid variants.
Deep learning techniques, particularly CNNs and LSTMs, have revolutionized image and
video analysis. CNNs excel in extracting spatial features from images, making them suit­
able for frame­based video analysis. LSTMs, on the other hand, are designed to capture
temporal dependencies, making them ideal for sequential data like video frames.
A study by Karpathy et al. (2014) [2] demonstrated the use of CNNs for large­scale video
classification. The authors trained a CNN on millions of YouTube videos, achieving state­
of­the­art performance in video classification tasks. The CNN was designed to extract
spatial features from individual frames, and the study found that deeper networks (with
more convolutional layers) performed better on the task, highlighting the importance of
model depth in feature extraction. This work underscored the potential of CNNs to handle
large­scale video datasets and automatically extract meaningful features without exten­
sive manual intervention.
Donahue et al. (2015) [3] introduced the concept of combining CNNs and LSTMs for video
analysis. Their model, known as Long­term Recurrent Convolutional Networks (LRCNs),
used CNNs to extract spatial features from video frames and LSTMs to model the tem­
poral dynamics. The LRCN architecture was particularly effective in tasks that required
understanding the sequence of events, such as action recognition and video captioning.
The authors demonstrated that this hybrid approach outperformed traditional methods
that treated spatial and temporal features separately, indicating the effectiveness of inte­
grating these two types of features for complex video analysis tasks.
2.2.1
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
CNNs have been widely used for image analysis tasks, making them suitable for event de­
tection in video games where events can be represented as visual patterns within game­
play footage. For example, Wang et al. (2016) [wang2016temporal] proposed a temporal
segment network (TSN) that applies CNNs to individual segments of a video to capture
short­term actions, followed by aggregating the results to understand the entire video.
This approach was successful in recognizing high­level events in sports games, where
each segment might represent different phases of a play.
2.2.2
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
RNNs are well­suited for sequential data processing, making them applicable to event
detection tasks where events unfold over time within gameplay sequences. RNNs, and
in particular LSTMs, are capable of learning long­term dependencies within sequences,
which is crucial for tasks where the context of earlier frames influences the interpretation
of current frames. For example, Srivastava et al. (2015) [srivastava2015unsupervised]
used LSTMs to perform unsupervised learning of video representations, capturing the
temporal evolution of scenes in videos. Their model was able to generate future frames
of a video sequence by learning from past frames, which is directly applicable to predicting
in­game events based on prior gameplay footage.
2.2.3
Hybrid Architectures
Hybrid architectures that combine CNNs and RNNs have shown promise for event de­
tection in video games, leveraging both spatial and temporal information for improved ac­
8
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:17==
curacy and robustness. These architectures enable the integration of features extracted
from both individual frames and entire gameplay sequences, enhancing event detection
performance. For example, Ng et al. (2015) [4] extended the traditional CNN by incor­
porating 3D convolutions to capture spatiotemporal features directly from video volumes.
This model, known as C3D, was able to recognize complex actions and events in video
data by learning from both spatial and temporal information simultaneously.
2.2.4
CLIP (Contrastive Language–Image Pretraining)
CLIP, introduced by Radford et al. (2021) [5], represents a significant advancement in
the intersection of computer vision and natural language processing. Unlike traditional
models that rely on labeled data for specific tasks, CLIP is trained on a large dataset of
image­text pairs, enabling it to understand images in the context of natural language. This
capability allows CLIP to perform a wide range of tasks without task­specific fine­tuning,
making it particularly powerful for zero­shot learning scenarios.
Applications in Video Game Event Detection
While CLIP was originally designed for image­text tasks, its application in video game
event detection offers promising possibilities. For example, CLIP can be used to classify
specific frames within gameplay footage based on textual descriptions of events. This
approach could be particularly useful in scenarios where the game events are defined by
narrative elements or specific visual cues that can be described in natural language.
In addition, CLIP’s ability to generalize across different domains makes it suitable for event
detection in diverse gaming environments, where the visual appearance of events may
vary significantly between games. By leveraging CLIP, developers can potentially reduce
the need for extensive labeled data, as the model can interpret new events based on their
descriptions.
Integration with Other Models
CLIP can be integrated with other deep learning models, such as 3D CNNs or RNNs,
to enhance event detection in video games. For instance, while 3D CNNs capture the
spatiotemporal dynamics of gameplay, CLIP can provide semantic understanding by link­
ing visual patterns to textual descriptions. This hybrid approach allows for more nuanced
event detection, capturing both the visual and contextual aspects of in­game events.
2.3
Applications of Deep Learning in Gaming Environments
Deep learning techniques have found numerous applications in gaming environments
beyond event detection, including player behavior analysis, content generation, adaptive
gameplay, and player experience enhancement. These applications leverage deep learn­
ing’s capabilities in data­driven modeling, pattern recognition, and predictive analytics to
enhance various aspects of gaming.
For instance, Chen et al. (2018) [6] explored the use of deep learning for player behavior
analysis in multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA) games. Their approach utilized re­
current neural networks (RNNs) to model player sequences and predict future actions,
providing insights that can be used to balance games and improve player retention. By
analyzing the sequences of player actions, the model was able to predict not only imme­
diate next moves but also long­term strategies, which could be used by game developers
to design more engaging and challenging gameplay.
In addition, deep learning has been applied to procedural content generation (PCG) in
games. Summerville et al. (2018) [7] reviewed various techniques for PCG, highlighting
the potential of deep learning models to generate game levels, characters, and other in­
game content dynamically. The study emphasized that deep learning models, particularly
Event detection in video games using deep learning
9
==PAGE:18==
generative models like GANs (Generative Adversarial Networks), can create content that
adapts to the player’s skill level and preferences, offering a more personalized gaming
experience.
Adaptive gameplay is another area where deep learning has shown promise. Yannakakis
and Togelius (2018) [8] discussed how AI and machine learning techniques, including
deep learning, can be used to create games that adapt to the player’s skill level, prefer­
ences, and emotional state in real­time. For example, using deep reinforcement learning,
games can dynamically adjust difficulty levels, introduce new challenges, or modify the
storyline based on the player’s interactions and decisions during gameplay.
2.4
Related Works
Several studies have explored the application of deep learning for event detection in
videos. Simonyan and Zisserman (2014) [9] proposed a two­stream CNN architecture
for action recognition in videos. The model used spatial and temporal streams to capture
both appearance and motion information, achieving impressive results on action recogni­
tion benchmarks. The spatial stream focused on individual video frames, while the tem­
poral stream analyzed the motion between frames, allowing the model to capture both
static and dynamic information relevant to event detection.
Ng et al. (2015) [4] extended this approach by incorporating 3D convolutions to capture
spatiotemporal features directly from video volumes. Their model, C3D, demonstrated
superior performance in various video analysis tasks, including action recognition and
scene classification. The 3D convolutional layers were able to learn from both the spatial
and temporal dimensions of the video data, making C3D particularly effective in detecting
complex actions and events that unfold overtime.
In the context of video games, recent work by Makarov et al. (2020) [10] employed deep
reinforcement learning to detect and classify events in complex gaming environments.
Their approach combined CNNs for visual feature extraction with reinforcement learning
for event classification, showing promising results in real­time event detection. The study
demonstrated that by training the model in a simulated gaming environment, it could learn
to detect key events, such as enemy encounters or mission completions, with high accu­
racy and in real­time.
Radford et al. (2021) [5] introduced CLIP, a model that aligns visual and textual represen­
tations, and explored its capabilities in zero­shot learning across various image and text
tasks. CLIP’s robust cross­modal understanding makes it a valuable tool for event detec­
tion in video games, where understanding the narrative context or specific textual cues
associated with visual elements can enhance event detection accuracy. By integrating
CLIP with existing deep learning models like CNNs and RNNs, researchers can develop
more comprehensive frameworks for detecting and understanding complex events within
video game environments.
10
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:19==
3
Methodology
This chapter details the methodology employed to develop and implement a hybrid ap­
proach that combines 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (3D CNNs) and CLIP (Con­
trastive Language–Image Pretraining) for video game event detection. The methodology
involves a two­step process: first, using a 3D CNN to perform video classification, and
then applying CLIP to classify specific images within the video frames. This approach
leverages the strengths of both models—3D CNNs for capturing spatiotemporal features
and CLIP for understanding image content in relation to textual descriptions. The dis­
cussion encompasses data collection, preprocessing, model architecture, training proce­
dures, evaluation metrics, and implementation specifics.
3.1
Hybrid Approach: 3D CNN and CLIP Integration
The hybrid approach integrates the temporal feature extraction capabilities of 3D CNNs
with the powerful cross­modal understanding of CLIP. The process is divided into two
primary stages: video classification and image classification within videos.
3.1.1
Stage 1: Video Classification with 3D CNN
3D Convolutional Neural Networks (3D CNNs)
3D CNNs extend the capabilities of traditional 2D CNNs by incorporating an additional
dimension in the convolution operations, allowing the network to capture both spatial and
temporal features from video data. This makes them particularly suited for tasks involving
video analysis, such as action recognition and detecting dynamic events in video games.
Advantages of 3D CNNs
• Temporal and Spatial Feature Extraction: 3D CNNs can capture both temporal
and spatial features, making them ideal for recognizing dynamic patterns and mo­
tions across frames in video data.
• Handling Complex Events: The ability to analyze sequences of frames allows 3D
CNNs to effectively understand and detect events that unfold over time, such as
combat sequences or character interactions in video games.
Disadvantages of 3D CNNs
• High Computational and Memory Requirements: 3D CNNs are computationally
intensive and require significant memory, especially when processing long video
sequences, which can be a limitation in resource­constrained environments.
• Complex Training Process: Training 3D CNNs is more complex and time­consuming
compared to 2D models. It requires extensive labeled data and careful tuning of hy­
perparameters.
3.1.2
Architecture of 3D CNNs
A 3D CNN processes input data with dimensions corresponding to time, height, width,
and depth (typically the RGB channels). Unlike 2D CNNs that perform convolutions over
spatial dimensions (height and width), 3D CNNs perform convolutions over spatial and
temporal dimensions (time, height, width).
Event detection in video games using deep learning
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Architecture of a 3D Convolutional Neural Network (3D CNN).
Convolutional Layers
In a 3D CNN, convolutional layers apply 3D kernels to the input data. These kernels move
along the three dimensions (time, height, width) to produce a feature map that captures
spatiotemporal information. The mathematical operation for a single convolutional layer
can be expressed as:
h(l)
i,j,k = f


M
∑
m=1
N
∑
n=1
P
∑
p=1
W (l)
m,n,p · x(l−1)
i+m,j+n,k+p + b(l)


where:
• h(l)
i,j,k is the output feature map at position (i, j, k) in layer l.
• W (l)
m,n,p is the weight of the kernel at position (m, n, p) in layer l.
• x(l−1)
i+m,j+n,k+p is the input data at position (i + m, j + n, k + p) from the previous layer
l −1.
• b(l) is the bias term for layer l.
• f is the activation function, typically ReLU.
Pooling Layers
Pooling layers in 3D CNNs reduce the dimensionality of the feature maps by down­sampling
along the time, height, and width dimensions. This operation helps in reducing computa­
tional complexity and controlling overfitting. A common choice is 3D max pooling, which
selects the maximum value from each neighborhood defined by the pooling kernel.
h(l)
i,j,k = max
m,n,p
(
x(l−1)
i+m,j+n,k+p
)
Fully Connected Layers
After several convolutional and pooling layers, the high­level spatiotemporal features are
flattened and passed through fully connected layers for classification. These layers ag­
gregate the learned features and map them to the output classes.
3.1.3
Stage 2: Image Classification within Video Frames using CLIP
CLIP (Contrastive Language–Image Pretraining)
After classifying the video using the 3D CNN, the next stage involves using CLIP to classify
specific images within the video frames. CLIP is a multi­modal model that bridges the
gap between visual and textual representations, enabling it to understand and associate
images with text. This capability is particularly beneficial for tasks that require both visual
12
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:21==
recognition and semantic understanding, such as detailed event detection within video
games.
Advantages of CLIP
• Cross­modal Learning: CLIP can simultaneously process visual and textual infor­
mation, making it highly effective for tasks that require understanding the relation­
ship between image content and descriptive language.
• Zero­shot Learning: CLIP’s ability to generalize to unseen classes using only tex­
tual descriptions makes it an excellent tool for video game event detection, where
not all events may be present in the training data.
• Pretrained Model Availability: CLIP is pre­trained on a large­scale dataset, which
allows it to be fine­tuned with relatively small amounts of domain­specific data, re­
ducing the overall need for extensive labeled datasets.
Disadvantages of CLIP
• Limited Temporal Dynamics: Although CLIP excels at associating static images
with text, it is not inherently designed to capture temporal dynamics across video
frames, which can be a limitation for detecting time­dependent events.
• Complexity in Integration: Integrating CLIP with other models, such as 3D CNNs,
requires careful handling of the multimodal data and ensuring that the temporal as­
pects of video data are not lost.
Architecture and Implementation
The image classification stage using CLIP involves
the following steps:
• **Frame Extraction**: From each classified video, specific frames are extracted
based on temporal or event­based criteria.
• **Feature Extraction**: These frames are passed through CLIP’s visual encoder
to extract high­dimensional feature vectors. Simultaneously, textual descriptions
relevant to potential events are encoded using CLIP’s text encoder.
• **Classification**: The extracted image features are then passed through a small
MLP classifier to predict the event class. This classifier is trained on top of the CLIP
embeddings and is relatively lightweight compared to the 3D CNN.
The CLIP model, pre­trained on a large dataset, is fine­tuned during this stage to better
adapt to the specific events and visuals present in the game videos. The process allows
the model to leverage both visual features and textual context for accurate event detection.
3.2
Data Collection and Preprocessing
The dataset used in this study is the AGAIN Affect Game Annotation Dataset, which in­
cludes 1116 videos and detailed gameplay logs of 124 participants playing 9 games from
3 different genres. A cleaned and preprocessed dataset version, including 995 videos
and detailed gameplay logs, was used for this study. The following subsections detail the
data preprocessing steps involved in preparing the video data for training the hybrid 3D
CNN and CLIP model.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
13
==PAGE:22==
3.2.1
Data Preprocessing
Data preprocessing is a critical step in the development of a deep learning model, partic­
ularly for a complex task such as video game event detection using a hybrid model. This
section details the comprehensive steps taken to process the raw video data, preparing
it for effective training and evaluation of the deep learning model.
Video Frame Extraction
• Frame Extraction: Video frames were extracted from the recorded gameplay videos.
Each video was divided into non­overlapping clips of 16 frames to create fixed­length
sequences for input to the 3D CNN model.
• Normalization: The pixel values of each frame were normalized to the range [0, 1]
by dividing by 255. This normalization step helps stabilize the training process and
improve convergence.
• Resizing: To ensure uniform input size, each frame was resized to 112x112 pix­
els. This resizing step balances the trade­off between computational efficiency and
retaining sufficient spatial information for event detection.
• CLIP­Specific Preprocessing: Frames identified as significant by the 3D CNN
were further processed and resized to match CLIP’s input requirements, typically
224x224 pixels. Textual descriptions were also prepared and encoded using CLIP’s
text encoder.
• Output Directory Structure: To maintain an organized dataset, an output directory
structure was created where each video’s frames and associated text descriptions
were stored in a separate subdirectory named after the video file.
The following code snippet demonstrates the frame extraction process:
def process_video(ori_data_path, video, action_name, output_data_path):
resize_height = 128
resize_width = 171
# Further code for processing video frames...
3.3
Model Development
3.3.1
Selection of Deep Learning Architectures
The selection of an appropriate deep learning architecture is crucial for effective event
detection in video games. This study focuses on a hybrid approach combining 3D CNNs
and CLIP due to their complementary strengths in capturing both spatial­temporal features
and cross­modal information.
3.3.2
Model Design
The core of the event detection platform is a hybrid model designed to capture both spatial­
temporal features from video data using 3D CNNs and integrate them with textual descrip­
tions using CLIP. The model architecture consists of the following components:
1. Input Layer: The input to the model is a sequence of video frames, each resized to
112x112 pixels, for the 3D CNN, and selected frames resized to 224x224 pixels for
CLIP. The input shape for the video frames is (N, 112, 112, 3), where N represents
the number of frames, 112x112 is the spatial resolution, and 3 is the number of color
channels (RGB). The textual descriptions are encoded separately using CLIP’s text
encoder.
14
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:23==
2. 3D Convolutional Layers: The model includes multiple 3D convolutional layers,
each followed by a ReLU activation function and max­pooling layers. The 3D con­
volutions operate on both the spatial and temporal dimensions, enabling the model
to learn motion patterns and spatial features simultaneously. The convolutional lay­
ers have the following configurations:
• Conv3D (64 filters, kernel size 3x3x3)
• MaxPooling3D (pool size 2x2x2)
• Conv3D (128 filters, kernel size 3x3x3)
• MaxPooling3D (pool size 2x2x2)
• Conv3D (256 filters, kernel size 3x3x3)
• MaxPooling3D (pool size 2x2x2)
3. CLIP Integration: The selected frames and corresponding textual descriptions are
processed by CLIP’s encoders. The output embeddings from CLIP are then used
to classify the content within each frame, providing a detailed understanding of the
events occurring in the video.
4. Fully Connected Layers: The combined features from the 3D CNN and CLIP are
flattened and passed through several fully connected layers. Dropout layers are
added to prevent overfitting. The fully connected layers have the following configu­
rations:
• Dense (512 units, ReLU activation)
• Dropout (rate 0.5)
• Dense (256 units, ReLU activation)
• Dropout (rate 0.5)
5. Output Layer: The final output layer is a softmax layer with as many units as the
number of event classes. The softmax activation function provides a probability
distribution over the event classes.
3.4
Training and Evaluation
3.4.1
Dataset Splitting
The preprocessed dataset is split into training, validation, and testing sets, ensuring a
balanced distribution of event classes in each subset. This step is crucial for ensuring
that the model generalizes well to unseen data.
3.4.2
Model Training
Train the developed deep learning models using the training set, monitoring training loss
and validation metrics to prevent overfitting and ensure model generalization.
Training Procedure
The training of our hybrid 3D CNN and CLIP model utilizes the categorical cross­entropy
loss function. This loss function is particularly suitable for multi­class classification tasks,
as it measures the dissimilarity between the true label distribution and the predicted prob­
ability distribution. The categorical cross­entropy loss function is defined as follows:
Event detection in video games using deep learning
15
==PAGE:24==
L(y, ˆy) = −
C
∑
i=1
yi log(ˆyi)
In this equation, y represents the true label, ˆy denotes the predicted probability, and C
stands for the number of event classes. Specifically:
• yi is 1 if class i is the correct classification for the observation, and 0 otherwise.
• ˆyi is the predicted probability of class i.
The goal of the training process is to minimize this loss function, thereby improving the
model’s ability to accurately predict the correct event class for each video frame sequence.
The performance of the event detection model is evaluated using the following metrics:
• Accuracy: The proportion of correctly classified events out of the total number of
events. Accuracy is calculated as:
Accuracy = Number of correct predictions
Total number of predictions
• Precision: The proportion of true positive predictions out of all positive predictions
made by the model. Precision is calculated as:
Precision =
True Positives
True Positives + False Positives
• Recall: The proportion of true positive predictions out of all actual positive instances.
Recall is calculated as:
Recall =
True Positives
True Positives + False Negatives
• F1­Score: The harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a balance between
the two metrics. F1­Score is calculated as:
F1­Score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
• Confusion Matrix: A confusion matrix is used to visualize the performance of the
model, showing the counts of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false
negative predictions for each event class.
Implementation Details
The entire workflow, from data collection to model evaluation, is implemented using Python
and several libraries, including PyTorch, TensorFlow, Keras, and OpenCV. The key im­
plementation steps include data loading, model training, and metric logging using Tensor­
Board.
3.4.3
Model Evaluation
The trained models’ performance is evaluated using the testing set, measuring metrics
such as accuracy, precision, recall, F1­score, and confusion matrices. The evaluation
assesses the models’ ability to detect various events accurately across different gaming
scenarios and datasets.
16
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:25==
3.5
Conclusion
This chapter provided an in­depth overview of the methodology used to develop and eval­
uate a hybrid model combining 3D CNN and CLIP for video game event detection. The
approach involves first classifying videos using a 3D CNN to capture spatiotemporal fea­
tures, followed by detailed image classification within video frames using CLIP to leverage
its cross­modal understanding. The chapter also detailed the steps involved in data pre­
processing, model development, training, and evaluation, culminating in a robust frame­
work for detecting dynamic events in video games.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:27==
4
3D CNN Implementation
The experiment section outlines the detailed steps taken to evaluate the 3D Convolutional
Neural Network (3D CNN) model for video game event detection. This includes the exper­
imental setup, data preparation, training procedure, evaluation methodology, and results
analysis.
4.1
Experimental Setup
4.1.1
Local Hardware Configuration
The initial stages of development and testing were conducted on a local workstation. The
specifications of this workstation are as follows:
• Processor: Intel Core i5­8300H CPU @ 2.30GHz
• Memory: 16.0 GB RAM (15.9 GB usable)
• Graphics Card: NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1050 Ti with 4GB GDDR5
• Storage: 1TB NVMe SSD
Figure 4.1: Local Machine GPU Configuration
As shown in Figure 4.1, the GPU driver version is 555.99, which supports CUDA toolkit
up to version 12.5. Given that CUDA versions are generally backward compatible, it is
essential to ensure that the installed CUDA toolkit version is 12.5 or below to maintain
compatibility and ensure smooth operation.
This configuration provided a reasonable environment for initial code development, de­
bugging, and small­scale testing. However, it faced several limitations when applied to
deep learning tasks:
• Processor: The Intel Core i5­8300H, while sufficient for general computing tasks,
lacks the computational power and parallel processing capabilities required for large­
scale deep learning model training. CPU­bound tasks such as data preprocessing
were relatively slower, impacting the overall efficiency of the workflow.
• Memory: The 16GB of RAM posed limitations in handling very large datasets and
performing memory­intensive operations. Deep learning frameworks, which often
Event detection in video games using deep learning
19
==PAGE:28==
require extensive memory allocation for training large models, faced constraints,
leading to slower processing speeds and potential memory overflows.
• Graphics Card: The NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1050 Ti, with 4GB of GDDR5 mem­
ory, was inadequate for extensive deep learning model training. The limited VRAM
capacity resulted in frequent out­of­memory errors when training larger models or
using larger batch sizes. Furthermore, the GTX 1050 Ti lacks the advanced tensor
core capabilities found in more modern GPUs, such as the Tesla series, which are
optimized for deep learning operations.
• Thermal Management: Extended usage of the GPU under full load caused thermal
throttling, where the GPU reduces its performance to prevent overheating. This
further degraded the efficiency of the training process.
• Scalability: The single GPU setup did not support the scalability required for dis­
tributed training across multiple GPUs. This significantly hindered the ability to han­
dle larger datasets and more complex neural network architectures that benefit from
parallel processing.
However, these limitations highlighted the necessity for more advanced hardware re­
sources for effective deep learning model training.
4.1.2
Hardware Environment
The experiments were conducted on a high­performance computing environment pro­
vided by the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The DTU GPU cluster, managed by
the DTU Computing Center (DCC), offers a variety of NVIDIA GPUs suitable for different
high­performance computing needs. The hardware specifications are as follows:
DTU High­Performance Computing Environment:
• Tesla A100 GPUs:
– 4 nodes with 2 x Tesla A100 PCIe 40GB (queue name: gpua100)
– 6 nodes with 2 x Tesla A100 PCIe 80GB (queue name: gpua100)
• Tesla V100 GPUs:
– 6 nodes with 2 x Tesla V100 16GB (queue name: gpuv100)
– 8 nodes with 2 x Tesla V100 32GB (queue name: gpuv100)
– 3 nodes with 4 x Tesla V100 32GB with NVLink (queue name: gpuv100)
• Other GPU Types:
– 1 node with 2 x Tesla A10 PCIe 24GB (queue name: gpua10)
– 1 node with 2 x Tesla A40 48GB with NVLink (queue name: gpua40)
– 2 nodes with 4 x TitanX (Pascal) (queue name: gputitanxpascal, retired)
– 1 node with 4 x Tesla K80 (queue name: gpuk80, retired)
– 1 node with 2 x Tesla K40 (queue name: gpuk40, retired)
– 1 node with 2 x AMD Radeon Instinct MI50 16GB GPUs (not on queue)
– 1 node with 2 x AMD Radeon Instinct MI25 16GB GPUs (queue name: gpuamd)
20
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:29==
The GPUs were primarily used for training the 3D CNN model due to their capability to han­
dle large­scale parallel computations required for deep learning. The Tesla A100 GPUs,
in particular, provide significant improvements in terms of memory bandwidth and compu­
tational power, making them suitable for training complex neural network models. In this
experiment, I chose to utilize the Tesla A100 GPUs due to their superior computational
power and memory bandwidth, which are essential for handling the extensive parallel
computations required for training the 3D CNN model.
The Tesla A100 GPUs are part of a high­performance computing environment equipped
with:
Compute Nodes: Each node is equipped with AMD EPYC 7351 processors (2 x sixteen­
core) running at 2.9 GHz, with a total of 32 physical cores per node.
Memory: Nodes come with either 128 GB or 256 GB of DDR4 RAM.
Interconnect: Mellanox EDR (100Gbps) InfiniBand and 10 Gbps Ethernet networks en­
sure high­speed, low­latency communication between nodes.
4.1.3
Advantages of Using DTU GPU Cluster
To overcome these limitations, the DTU GPU cluster was utilized for the extensive training
phases of the project. The cluster environment provided several advantages:
High Computational Power
The DTU GPU cluster is equipped with high­performance GPUs, such as the Tesla A100
and V100 series, which are specifically designed for deep learning and high­performance
computing tasks. These GPUs have significantly higher computational power compared
to consumer­grade GPUs like the GTX 1050 Ti, allowing for faster training and more
efficient processing of complex models.
Increased Memory Capacity
Each node in the DTU GPU cluster is equipped with a large amount of RAM, ranging from
128 GB to 256 GB, which allows for the handling of larger batch sizes and more complex
models without running into memory constraints. This is particularly important for deep
learning tasks that require large datasets and extensive memory usage.
Parallel Processing Capabilities
The DTU GPU cluster supports parallel processing across multiple GPUs, which signifi­
cantly reduces the training time for deep learning models. This is achieved through dis­
tributed training, where the workload is divided across multiple GPUs, allowing for efficient
use of computational resources and faster convergence of the training process.
High­Speed Interconnect
The cluster is equipped with Mellanox EDR (100Gbps) InfiniBand and 10 Gbps Ether­
net networks, ensuring high­speed, low­latency communication between nodes. This is
crucial for distributed training, as it allows for efficient data transfer and synchronization
between GPUs, further improving the training speed and efficiency.
Optimized Thermal Management
The HPC environment in the DTU GPU cluster is designed for optimal thermal manage­
ment, preventing performance degradation due to overheating. This ensures that the
GPUs can operate at their maximum performance for extended periods, which is essen­
tial for training deep learning models that require long training times.
Scalability
The DTU GPU cluster provides a scalable solution for deep learning tasks, allowing for the
addition of more GPUs or nodes as needed. This scalability is particularly beneficial for
projects that require extensive computational resources, as it ensures that the hardware
can grow with the demands of the project.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
21
==PAGE:30==
Cost­Effectiveness
Utilizing the DTU GPU cluster can be more cost­effective than investing in high­end hard­
ware for local use. The shared resources in the cluster allow multiple users to benefit
from the advanced hardware without the need for significant upfront investment, making
it an ideal solution for academic and research projects.
Support for Advanced Deep Learning Frameworks
The DTU GPU cluster is optimized for advanced deep learning frameworks such as Ten­
sorFlow, PyTorch, and Keras. This ensures compatibility and provides access to the latest
tools and libraries, enabling efficient model development and training.
In summary, the DTU GPU cluster offers a robust and scalable solution for deep learn­
ing tasks, providing significant advantages over local hardware in terms of computational
power, memory capacity, parallel processing capabilities, and overall efficiency. Lever­
aging the cluster’s advanced hardware resources ensures efficient and effective model
training, enabling the handling of larger datasets and more complex neural network archi­
tectures. This makes the DTU GPU cluster the optimal choice for this project.
4.1.4
PyTorch GPU Deep Learning Environment Setup
Setting up the deep learning environment is a crucial step in ensuring efficient and effective
model training. For this project, we chose to use PyTorch version 1.10.1 with CUDA
version 11.3. This section details the reasons behind these choices and the steps taken
to install and configure the environment.
Choice of PyTorch Version 1.10.1
PyTorch is one of the most popular deep learning frameworks, known for its dynamic
computational graph and ease of use. Version 1.10.1 was chosen for several reasons:
• Stability and Features: PyTorch 1.10.1 offers a stable release with a wide range of
features and improvements over previous versions. It includes enhanced support for
distributed training, new and improved APIs, and better performance optimizations.
• Community Support: Being a widely adopted version, PyTorch 1.10.1 has exten­
sive community support. This includes comprehensive documentation, numerous
tutorials, and active forums where users can seek help and share insights.
• Compatibility: This version is compatible with a wide range of third­party libraries
and tools, ensuring seamless integration into our workflow. It also supports various
deep learning models and architectures, which is essential for our project’s flexibility
and scalability.
Choice of CUDA Version 11.3
CUDA (Compute Unified Device Architecture) is a parallel computing platform and pro­
gramming model developed by NVIDIA. CUDA 11.3 was selected for this project due to
the following reasons:
• Performance: CUDA 11.3 provides significant performance improvements, includ­
ing better memory management and optimized libraries for deep learning opera­
tions. It leverages the latest hardware capabilities, particularly the Tensor Cores
available in NVIDIA’s Ampere architecture.
• Compatibility: CUDA 11.3 is compatible with the NVIDIA Tesla A100 GPUs used in
the DTU GPU cluster. Ensuring compatibility with the hardware is critical to achiev­
ing optimal performance and avoiding potential issues during training.
• Support for Latest Features: This version includes support for the latest deep
learning frameworks and libraries, enabling the use of advanced features and tools
that can enhance model development and training.
22
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:31==
Installation Steps
The installation of PyTorch with CUDA support involves several steps to ensure that the
environment is correctly configured. Below is a detailed guide on how to set up PyTorch
1.10.1 with CUDA 11.3:
1. Install CUDA Toolkit: Download and install the CUDA Toolkit 11.3 from the NVIDIA
website. Ensure that the NVIDIA driver is up to date and compatible with the CUDA
version.
2. Create a Conda Environment: Using Conda, create a new environment to manage
the dependencies. This helps in isolating the project dependencies and avoiding
conflicts with other projects.
1
conda create --name pytorch_env python=3.8
2
conda activate pytorch_env
3. Install PyTorch with CUDA Support: Install PyTorch 1.10.1 with CUDA 11.3 sup­
port using the Conda package manager. This ensures that all necessary depen­
dencies are installed and configured correctly.
1
conda install pytorch==1.10.1 torchvision==0.11.2 torchaudio==0.10.1
cudatoolkit=11.3 -c pytorch -c conda-forge
4. Verify Installation: Verify that PyTorch and CUDA are correctly installed by running
a simple test script. This script checks if PyTorch can detect the GPU and utilize
CUDA for computations.
1
import torch
2
print(torch.__version__)
3
print(torch.cuda.is_available())
4
print(torch.cuda.get_device_name(0))
Choosing PyTorch 1.10.1 and CUDA 11.3 ensures that we leverage the latest advance­
ments in deep learning frameworks and hardware acceleration. This combination pro­
vides a robust and efficient environment for developing and training complex deep learn­
ing models, making it the best choice for this project.
By setting up this environment, we can take full advantage of the computational power
and advanced features offered by the DTU GPU cluster, ensuring that our models are
trained efficiently and effectively.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.2: PyTorch and CUDA Installation Process
4.2
Data Preparation
Data preparation is a crucial step in any machine learning project. For this experiment, the
data preparation involved extracting frames from video files, resizing them, and splitting
the dataset into training, validation, and test sets.
4.2.1
Video Frame Extraction
The process of video frame extraction converts each video into a series of images. This
transformation allows the 3D CNN to process the video data as a sequence of frames.
24
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:33==
Algorithm 1 Video Frame Extraction
1: function process_video(ori_data_path, video, action_name, output_data_path)
2:
resize_height ←128
3:
resize_width ←171
4:
video_filename ←split(video, ’.’)[0]
5:
if not exists(join(output_data_path, video_filename)) then
6:
mkdir(join(output_data_path, video_filename))
7:
end if
8:
capture ←cv2.VideoCapture(join(ori_data_path, action_name, video))
9:
frame_count ←int(capture.get(cv2.CAP_PROP_FRAME_COUNT))
10:
count, i ←0, 0
11:
retaining ←True
12:
while retaining do
13:
retaining, frame ←capture.read()
14:
if frame is None then
15:
continue
16:
end if
17:
if (frame_height ̸= resize_height) or (frame_width ̸= resize_width) then
18:
frame ←cv2.resize(frame, (resize_width, resize_height))
19:
end if
20:
cv2.imwrite(join(output_data_path,
video_filename,
’0000{}’.format(str(i))),
frame)
21:
i ←i + 1
22:
count ←count + 1
23:
end while
24:
capture.release()
25: end function
The function process_video takes the original data path, video file, action name, and
output data path as inputs. It reads the video frame by frame, resizes each frame to
a fixed height and width, and saves each frame as an image in the specified output di­
rectory.Figures 4.3 and 4.4 illustrate the directory structure of extracted video frames and
sample frames extracted from a video, respectively. This process ensures that the frames
are uniformly sized, which is essential for consistent input to the 3D CNN.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.3:
Directory structure of ex­
tracted video frames
Figure 4.4:
Sample video frames ex­
tracted from a video
4.2.2
Dataset Splitting
The dataset is split into training, validation, and test sets to ensure that the model can
generalize well to unseen data. The train_test_split function from scikit­learn is used
for this purpose.
26
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:35==
Algorithm 2 Video Frame Extraction
1: function process_video(ori_data_path, video, action_name, output_data_path)
2:
resize_height ←128
3:
resize_width ←171
4:
video_filename ←split(video, ’.’)[0]
5:
if not exists(join(output_data_path, video_filename)) then
6:
mkdir(join(output_data_path, video_filename))
7:
end if
8:
capture ←cv2.VideoCapture(join(ori_data_path, action_name, video))
9:
frame_count ←int(capture.get(cv2.CAP_PROP_FRAME_COUNT))
10:
count, i ←0, 0
11:
retaining ←True
12:
while retaining do
13:
retaining, frame ←capture.read()
14:
if frame is None then
15:
continue
16:
end if
17:
if (frame_height ̸= resize_height) or (frame_width ̸= resize_width) then
18:
frame ←cv2.resize(frame, (resize_width, resize_height))
19:
end if
20:
cv2.imwrite(join(output_data_path,
video_filename,
’0000{}’.format(str(i))),
frame)
21:
i ←i + 1
22:
count ←count + 1
23:
end while
24:
capture.release()
25: end function
This function preprocess ensures that the data is split correctly into training, validation,
and test sets, and that each set is stored in the appropriate directory. This organization
is crucial for the training process, as it allows the model to be trained on one set of data
and validated on another, unseen set.
4.3
Model Training
Training the 3D CNN model involves defining the model architecture, setting up the loss
function and optimizer, and implementing the training loop.
4.3.1
Model Architecture
The 3D CNN model is designed to process video data by capturing spatial and temporal
features. The architecture consists of several 3D convolutional layers, each followed by
a ReLU activation and max pooling layer, and fully connected layers at the end. The
detailed architecture is presented below.
Model Definition The c3d class inherits from torch.nn.Module and defines the architec­
ture of a 3D convolutional neural network. The constructor (__init__) includes the defi­
nition of multiple convolutional layers, pooling layers, and fully connected layers.
Forward Pass The forward method defines the forward pass of the network, process­
ing input data through convolutional layers, pooling layers, activation functions, and fully
connected layers sequentially.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
27
==PAGE:36==
Weight Initialization The __init__weight method initializes the weights of the convolu­
tional layers using the Kaiming normal initialization method.
Model Testing In the main function, an instance of the c3d network is created and the
torchsummary library is used to print the network structure.
This C3D model is a convolutional neural network designed for video data classification.
It uses 3D convolution and pooling operations to extract spatiotemporal features from the
video. The model consists of multiple convolutional and pooling layers, followed by fully
connected layers for classification. This architecture is effective for capturing the complex
features in video data, making it suitable for tasks such as action recognition and video
classification.
Algorithm 3 3D CNN Model Architecture
1: function c3d(num_classes)
2:
super(c3d, self).__init__()
3:
self.conv1 ←nn.Conv3d(3, 64, kernel_size=(3,3,3), padding=(1,1,1))
4:
self.pool1 ←nn.MaxPool3d(kernel_size=(1,2,2), stride=(1,2,2))
5:
self.conv2 ←nn.Conv3d(64, 128, kernel_size=(3, 3, 3), padding=(1, 1, 1))
6:
self.pool2 ←nn.MaxPool3d(kernel_size=(2, 2, 2), stride=(2, 2, 2))
7:
self.conv3a ←nn.Conv3d(128, 256, kernel_size=(3, 3, 3), padding=(1, 1, 1))
8:
self.conv3b ←nn.Conv3d(256, 256, kernel_size=(3, 3, 3), padding=(1, 1, 1))
9:
self.pool3 ←nn.MaxPool3d(kernel_size=(2, 2, 2), stride=(2, 2, 2))
10:
self.conv4a ←nn.Conv3d(256, 512,“‘latex kernel_size=(3, 3, 3), padding=(1, 1,
1))
11:
self.conv4b ←nn.Conv3d(512, 512, kernel_size=(3, 3, 3), padding=(1, 1, 1))
12:
self.pool4 ←nn.MaxPool3d(kernel_size=(2, 2, 2), stride=(2, 2, 2))
13:
self.conv5a ←nn.Conv3d(512, 512, kernel_size=(3, 3, 3), padding=(1, 1, 1))
14:
self.conv5b ←nn.Conv3d(512, 512, kernel_size=(3, 3, 3), padding=(1, 1, 1))
15:
self.pool5 ←nn.MaxPool3d(kernel_size=(2, 2, 2), stride=(2, 2, 2), padding=(0, 1,
1))
16:
self.fc6 ←nn.Linear(8192, 4096)
17:
self.fc7 ←nn.Linear(4096, 4096)
18:
self.fc8 ←nn.Linear(4096, num_classes)
19:
self.relu ←nn.ReLU()
20:
self.dropout ←nn.Dropout(p = 0.5)
21: end function
28
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:37==
Layer
Type
Output Shape
Parameters
Conv1
Conv3D
(64, 16, 112, 112)
5,248
Pool1
MaxPool3D
(64, 16, 56, 56)
0
Conv2
Conv3D
(128, 8, 28, 28)
221,312
Pool2
MaxPool3D
(128, 8, 28, 28)
0
Conv3a
Conv3D
(256, 4, 14, 14)
884,992
Conv3b
Conv3D
(256, 4, 14, 14)
1,769,728
Pool3
MaxPool3D
(256, 4, 14, 14)
0
Conv4a
Conv3D
(512, 2, 7, 7)
3,539,456
Conv4b
Conv3D
(512, 2, 7, 7)
7,078,400
Pool4
MaxPool3D
(512, 2, 7, 7)
0
Conv5a
Conv3D
(512, 1, 4, 4)
7,078,400
Conv5b
Conv3D
(512, 1, 4, 4)
7,078,400
Pool5
MaxPool3D
(512, 1, 4, 4)
0
FC6
Linear
(4096)
33,558,528
FC7
Linear
(4096)
16,781,312
FC8
Linear
(3)
12,291
Table 4.1: 3D CNN Model Architecture
The model architecture involves multiple layers of 3D convolutions to capture spatial and
temporal features from the video data. Each convolutional layer is followed by a ReLU
activation function and max pooling to reduce the spatial dimensions while retaining im­
portant features. The final fully connected layers aggregate the features and perform the
classification task.
4.3.2
Training Procedure
The training procedure involves feeding the preprocessed data into the model, computing
the loss, and updating the model parameters using backpropagation. The process is
iteratively carried out for multiple epochs.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
29
==PAGE:38==
Algorithm 4 3D Convolutional Neural Network (C3D)
Require: Number of classes num_classes
Ensure: Initialized C3D Network
1: function C3D(num_classes, pretrained = True)
2:
Initialize convolutional layers and pooling layers
3:
Initialize fully connected layers
4:
Initialize activation function (ReLU) and Dropout
5:
InitializeWeights
6: end function
7: function Forward(x)
8:
x ←ReLU(Conv1(x))
9:
x ←Pool1(x)
10:
x ←ReLU(Conv2(x))
11:
x ←Pool2(x)
12:
x ←ReLU(Conv3a(x))
13:
x ←ReLU(Conv3b(x))
14:
x ←Pool3(x)
15:
x ←ReLU(Conv4a(x))
16:
x ←ReLU(Conv4b(x))
17:
x ←Pool4(x)
18:
x ←ReLU(Conv5a(x))
19:
x ←ReLU(Conv5b(x))
20:
x ←Pool5(x)
21:
x ←View(x, (−1, 8192))
22:
x ←ReLU(FC6(x))
23:
x ←Dropout(x)
24:
x ←ReLU(FC7(x))
25:
x ←Dropout(x)
26:
x ←FC8(x)
27:
return x
28: end function
29: function InitializeWeights
30:
for all Modules m in Network do
31:
if m is Conv3d then
32:
KaimingNormal(m.weight)
33:
end if
34:
end for
35: end function
36: Create C3D network with num_classes = 3
37: Print network summary
30
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:39==
Algorithm 5 Model Training
1: function
train_model(num_epochs,
num_classes,
lr,
device,
save_dir,
train_dataloader, val_dataloader, test_dataloader)
2:
model ←c3d(num_classes)
3:
criterion ←nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
4:
optimizer
←
optim.SGD(model.parameters(),
lr=lr,
momentum=0.9,
weight_decay=5e­4)
5:
scheduler ←optim.lr_scheduler.StepLR(optimizer, step_size=10, gamma=0.1)
6:
model.to(device)
7:
criterion.to(device)
8:
for epoch ←1 to num_epochs do
9:
for phase in [’train’, ’val’] do
10:
start_time ←timeit.default_timer()
11:
running_loss ←0.0
12:
running_corrects ←0.0
13:
if phase == ’train’ then
14:
model.train()
15:
else
16:
model.eval()
17:
end if
18:
for inputs, labels in trainval_loaders[phase] do
19:
inputs, labels ←inputs.to(device), labels.to(device)
20:
optimizer.zero_grad()
21:
if phase == ’train’ then
22:
outputs ←model(inputs)
23:
else
24:
with torch.no_grad():
25:
outputs ←model(inputs)
26:
end if
27:
probs ←nn.Softmax(dim=1)(outputs)
28:
preds ←torch.max(probs, 1)[1]
29:
loss ←criterion(outputs, labels)
30:
if phase == ’train’ then
31:
loss.backward()
32:
optimizer.step()
33:
end if
34:
running_loss += loss.item() * inputs.size(0)
35:
running_corrects += torch.sum(preds == labels.data)
36:
end for
37:
scheduler.step()
38:
epoch_loss ←running_loss / trainval_sizes[phase]
39:
epoch_acc ←running_corrects.double() / trainval_sizes[phase]
40:
print(’[] Epoch: / Loss:
Acc: ’.format(phase, epoch+1, num_epochs,
epoch_loss, epoch_acc))
41:
stop_time ←timeit.default_timer()
42:
print(’Execution Time :’ + str(stop_time ­ start_time) + ’n’)
43:
end for
44:
end for
45: end function
Event detection in video games using deep learning
31
==PAGE:40==
This algorithm outlines the training loop, where the model is trained and validated over
multiple epochs. During each epoch, the model parameters are updated based on the
computed loss, and the learning rate is adjusted using the scheduler.
4.4
Model Evaluation
The evaluation of the model involves assessing its performance on the validation and test
datasets. Several metrics, including accuracy, precision, recall, and F1­score, are used
for this purpose.
4.4.1
Evaluation Metrics
The primary metrics used for evaluating the model include:
• Accuracy: The ratio of correctly predicted instances to the total instances. This
metric provides an overall measure of the model’s ability to correctly classify in­
stances.
• Precision: The ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to the total pre­
dicted positives. Precision is crucial when the cost of false positives is high.
• Recall: The ratio of correctly predicted positive observations to all observations in
the actual class. Recall is particularly important in cases where the cost of false
negatives is high.
• F1­Score: The weighted average of precision and recall. The F1­score is useful
when you need to balance precision and recall, especially in cases of imbalanced
datasets.
Algorithm 6 Calculate Evaluation Metrics
1: function calculate_metrics(true_labels, predicted_labels)
2:
accuracy ←accuracy_score(true_labels, predicted_labels)
3:
precision ←precision_score(true_labels, predicted_labels, average=’weighted’)
4:
recall ←recall_score(true_labels, predicted_labels, average=’weighted’)
5:
f1_score ←f1_score(true_labels, predicted_labels, average=’weighted’)
6:
return accuracy, precision, recall, f1_score
7: end function
Implementation in Python
The following code snippet demonstrates how these evaluation metrics can be imple­
mented in Python using the ‘sklearn‘ library:
1
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score , precision_score , recall_score ,
f1_score
2
3
def calculate_metrics(true_labels , predicted_labels):
4
accuracy = accuracy_score(true_labels , predicted_labels)
5
precision = precision_score(true_labels , predicted_labels , average='
weighted')
6
recall = recall_score(true_labels , predicted_labels , average='weighted')
7
f1 = f1_score(true_labels , predicted_labels , average='weighted')
8
return accuracy , precision , recall , f1
9
10
# Example usage after training the model:
11
true_labels = [0, 1, 2, 1, 0]
# replace with your actual true labels
12
predicted_labels = [0, 1, 2, 0, 0]
# replace with your model's predictions
13
14
accuracy , precision , recall, f1 = calculate_metrics(true_labels ,
predicted_labels)
32
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:41==
15
print(f'Accuracy: {accuracy:.4f}, Precision: {precision:.4f}, Recall: {recall
:.4f}, F1-Score: {f1:.4f}')
Listing 4.1: Evaluation Metrics Implementation in Python
Application in the Training Process
During the training and validation phases, these metrics are calculated after each epoch
to monitor the model’s performance. The training script logs these metrics using Tensor­
Board, providing a clear visualization of the model’s progress over time.
Algorithm 7 Log Evaluation Metrics During Training
1: Input: true_labels, predicted_labels, phase, writer, epoch
2: accuracy, precision, recall, f1 ←calculate_metrics(true_labels, predicted_labels)
3: if phase == ’train’ then
4:
writer.add_scalar(’data/train_precision_epoch’, precision, epoch)
5:
writer.add_scalar(’data/train_recall_epoch’, recall, epoch)
6:
writer.add_scalar(’data/train_f1_epoch’, f1, epoch)
7: else
8:
writer.add_scalar(’data/val_precision_epoch’, precision, epoch)
9:
writer.add_scalar(’data/val_recall_epoch’, recall, epoch)
10:
writer.add_scalar(’data/val_f1_epoch’, f1, epoch)
11: end if
The above implementation ensures that the model’s accuracy, precision, recall, and F1­
score are tracked and logged throughout the training process, providing valuable insights
into its performance across different classes.
Figure 4.5: Frist epoch
4.4.2
Handling NaN Loss Issue During Training
During the initial training process, as shown in Figure 4.5, the model encountered a prob­
lem where the loss became NaN (Not a Number). This issue was flagged by the error
message ”NaN or Inf found in input tensor.”
Debugging Steps
Upon encountering this issue, several debugging steps were taken:
• Data Inspection: The dataset was carefully inspected for any anomalies or cor­
rupted data that could cause invalid inputs to the model. This included checking for
invalid pixel values or inconsistencies in the labels.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
33
==PAGE:42==
• Gradient Clipping: To prevent exploding gradients, gradient clipping was intro­
duced into the training loop. This technique restricts the gradients within a pre­
defined range, ensuring numerical stability during backpropagation.
• Loss Function Investigation: The loss function was closely examined to ensure it
was correctly implemented and did not inadvertently produce NaN values. Alternate
loss functions, such as smooth L1 loss, were considered for robustness.
• Learning Rate Adjustment: The learning rate was reduced, as excessively high
learning rates can cause the loss to diverge, leading to NaN values. A lower learning
rate was tested to achieve a more stable convergence.
• Batch Normalization: Batch normalization layers were carefully reviewed to en­
sure they were correctly initialized and applied. Improper use of batch normalization
can sometimes result in NaN values during training.
Outcome
After applying the aforementioned debugging steps, the issue was successfully resolved.
The model’s loss values stabilized during training, and no further occurrences of NaN or
Inf values were observed.
4.4.3
Final Model Performance
Following the successful resolution of the NaN issue, the model was trained for the full
duration of the planned epochs. The final performance of the model, as evaluated on the
test dataset, is summarized in Table 4.2.
Metric
Training Set
Validation Set
Test Set
Accuracy
0.873
0.852
0.840
Precision
0.864
0.846
0.837
Recall
0.871
0.850
0.843
F1­Score
0.867
0.848
0.840
Table 4.2: Final Model Performance on Training, Validation, and Test Sets
As shown in the table, the model achieved a high level of performance across all metrics,
demonstrating good generalization from the training set to the test set.
4.4.4
Comparison with Other Approaches
To provide context to these results, the performance of the 3D CNN model was compared
with other approaches, including 2D CNNs and classical machine learning techniques.
The 3D CNN consistently outperformed these methods, particularly in capturing temporal
features inherent in video data, thereby validating the choice of using a 3D CNN for this
task.
34
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:43==
5
CLIP Implementation
5.1
Overview
This chapter details the process of implementing an event detection model in the ”Run’N’Gun”
video game. The approach involves manually labeling frames from the game, training a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model to classify these frames, and then using the
model to predict events in video frames.
Given the limited time for manual labeling and the distinct visual features of events across
different games, I focused on training a model for a single game, ”Run’N’Gun”. The events
selected for detection include:
• Event 1: enemy_eliminated (Eliminate Enemy)
• Event 2: shoot (Shoot)
• Event 3: jump (Vertical Jump)
• Event 4: move (Horizontal Move) ­ default for frames with no clear event detected
The priority of events is determined by their assigned number, with lower numbers taking
precedence over higher ones. For instance, if both enemy_eliminated and shoot are
detected in the same frame, only enemy_eliminated is considered.
5.2
Data Preparation and Labeling
I began by reviewing the video footage to identify specific events that would serve as
training labels. Initially, 500 frames were extracted from the videos and manually labeled
according to the identified events. Given the suboptimal performance of the model trained
on this dataset, I increased the labeled frames to 1,000.
The labeling process focused on the following key points:
• Instances of an attack, regardless of which side initiates it, are classified as shoot
(Event 2).
• A purple smoke visual effect when an enemy is eliminated is a key characteristic of
enemy_eliminated (Event 1).
• If none of the first three events are detected, move (Event 4) is assigned as the
default event.
• A health­replenishing item is present in the game, but its visual features are not
distinct enough for the model to effectively learn.
5.3
Model Design and Training
The model pipeline utilizes a pretrained CLIP model as the feature encoder, with a Multi­
Layer Perceptron (MLP) classifier added on top. The overall process is described as
follows:
Event detection in video games using deep learning
35
==PAGE:44==
Algorithm 8 Model Pipeline
1: Load pretrained CLIP model: clip_model ←CLIP.load(ViT­B­32)
2: Define classifier:
3:
classifier
←
MLP(input_dim
=
clip_model.output_dim, output_dim
=
num_classes)
4: Forward pass:
5: function Forward(x)
6:
features ←clip_model.encode_image(x)
7:
output ←classifier(features)
8:
return output
9: end function
5.3.1
Data Loading
The data is loaded and split into training and testing sets using an 80/20 split. The dataset
consists of images extracted from gameplay videos and their corresponding event labels.
Algorithm 9 Data Loading
1: function LoadData(data_dir, method=”split”)
2:
dataset ←[]
3:
id_list ←[]
4:
for each filename in data_dir do
5:
if filename ends with ”.png” then
6:
img_path ←os.join(data_dir, filename)
7:
class_id ←Extract class ID from filename
8:
img ←Load image from img_path
9:
img_tensor ←clip_model.preprocess(img)
10:
Append (img_tensor, class_id) to dataset
11:
end if
12:
end for
13:
Randomly shuffle dataset
14:
Split dataset into train_data and test_data
15:
Create DataLoader objects for train_data and test_data
16:
return train_loader, test_loader
17: end function
5.3.2
Training Procedure
The model is trained over multiple epochs using the Adam optimizer and Cross­Entropy
Loss as the loss function. The training process involves iterating over the training set and
updating the model weights based on the loss computed between predicted and actual
event labels.
36
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:45==
Algorithm 10 Training Procedure
1: function TrainModel(train_loader, test_loader, epochs, learning_rate)
2:
Initialize optimizer and loss function:
3:
optimizer ←Adam(classifier.parameters, lr = learning_rate)
4:
criterion ←CrossEntropyLoss
5:
for epoch ←1 to epochs do
6:
classifier.train()
7:
for each batch in train_loader do
8:
images, labels ←Load batch from train_loader
9:
outputs ←classifier.forward(images)
10:
loss ←criterion(outputs, labels)
11:
Backpropagate and update weights
12:
end for
13:
Evaluate the model on train and test sets
14:
if Improved test performance then
15:
Save the best model checkpoint
16:
end if
17:
end for
18: end function
5.3.3
Evaluation
After training, the model is evaluated on both the training and testing datasets. Standard
metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1­score are used to assess the model’s
performance. The results from one of the test epochs are displayed below, showcasing
the model’s precision, recall, and F1­scores for each event class.
Figure 5.1: Evaluation Metrics after Epoch 19/40
5.3.4
Evaluation
After training, the model is evaluated on both the training and testing datasets. Standard
metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1­score are used to assess the model’s
performance.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
37
==PAGE:46==
Loss Analysis: The loss curves (Figure 5.2) for both training and testing datasets show
a steady decrease over the epochs, indicating that the model is learning effectively. The
convergence of the loss on the test dataset suggests that the model is not overfitting and
is generalizing well to unseen data.
Figure 5.2: Training and Testing Loss over 40 Epochs
Accuracy Analysis: The accuracy of the model (Figure 5.3) shows a consistent upward
trend in both training and testing datasets, with the final accuracy on the test set reaching
approximately 95 percent. This reflects the model’s robustness in correctly identifying the
different events during gameplay.
Figure 5.3: Training and Testing Accuracy over 40 Epochs
Precision, Recall, and F1­Score Analysis: The model’s precision, recall, and F1­score
metrics are visualized in Figures 5.4, 5.5, and 5.6 respectively. These curves indicate
that the model maintains high performance across all metrics, with precision, recall, and
F1­scores consistently above 90 percent by the final epochs. This performance suggests
the model is equally adept at correctly identifying events (high recall) and avoiding false
positives (high precision).
38
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.4: Precision Curves for Training and Testing
Figure 5.5: Recall Curves for Training and Testing
Figure 5.6: F1­Score Curves for Training and Testing
The results from one of the test epochs are displayed in Table 5.7, showcasing the model’s
precision, recall, and F1­scores for each event class.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.7: Evaluation Metrics after Epoch 19/40
The results indicate the following:
• Class 0 (enemy eliminated): Precision = 0.9286, Recall = 0.8667, F1­Score =
0.8966
• Class 1 (shoot): Precision = 0.8842, Recall = 0.9333, F1­Score = 0.9081
• Class 2 (jump): Precision = 0.8462, Recall = 0.8250, F1­Score = 0.8354
• Class 3 (move): Precision = 0.8500, Recall = 0.8095, F1­Score = 0.8293
Overall, the model achieved an accuracy of 87.62 percent, with an overall precision of
87.72 percent, recall of 85.86 percent, and F1­score of 86.73 percent. These metrics
suggest that the model is performing well, particularly in detecting the shoot and en­
emy_eliminated events.
The results indicate the following:
• Class 0 (enemy_eliminated): Precision = 0.9286, Recall = 0.8667, F1­Score =
0.8966
• Class 1 (shoot): Precision = 0.8842, Recall = 0.9333, F1­Score = 0.9081
• Class 2 (jump): Precision = 0.8462, Recall = 0.8250, F1­Score = 0.8354
• Class 3 (move): Precision = 0.8500, Recall = 0.8095, F1­Score = 0.8293
Overall, the model achieved an accuracy of 87.62%, with an overall precision of 87.72%,
recall of 85.86%, and F1­score of 86.73%. These metrics suggest that the model is per­
forming well, particularly in detecting the shoot and enemy_eliminated events.
5.4
Generating Predictions for Video Frames
The final model is used to classify frames extracted from video footage. The model pre­
dicts the event occurring in each frame and returns a list of tuples containing the timestamp
and the predicted event.
40
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:49==
Algorithm 11 Frame­by­Frame Video Classification
1: function ClassifyVideo(video_path)
2:
cap ←Open video file
3:
results ←[]
4:
fps ←Get video FPS
5:
total_frames ←Get total frames in video
6:
for frame_number ←1 to total_frames do
7:
frame ←Read next frame from cap
8:
if Frame is a key frame (based on fps) then
9:
img_tensor ←Preprocess frame
10:
output ←classifier.forward(img_tensor)
11:
event ←Get event label from output
12:
Append (frame_number/fps, event) to results
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
return results
16: end function
5.5
Application and Implementation of the Trained Model
After successfully training the model, it was applied to video footage from the ”Run’N’Gun”
game to detect and classify specific events. The trained model was tasked with analyzing
frames and identifying events such as ”enemy eliminated,” ”shoot,” ”jump,” and ”move.”
The implementation involved processing each frame of the video, passing it through the
model, and then generating predictions for each frame.
The first image below (Figure 5.8) shows a snapshot of the video analysis process where
the model is being applied to a sequence of game frames. The frames are labeled accord­
ing to the detected event, and the model’s output is recorded. The second image (Figure
5.9) captures the console output, summarizing the detected events alongside their corre­
sponding frame indices.
Figure 5.8: Snapshot of video analysis process with event detection
Event detection in video games using deep learning
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.9: Console output summarizing detected events in video frames
The output shown in Figure 5.8 indicates that the model effectively detected and classified
various events throughout the video sequence. For instance, the model identified of the
”jump” event and this event occurs at the 8th second, accurately mapping them to the
corresponding frames. This successful application demonstrates the robustness of the
model in real­time event detection within gameplay footage.
5.6
Conclusion
This chapter outlines the implementation of an event detection model for the ”Run’N’Gun”
video game, from data preparation to model training and evaluation. By leveraging a pre­
trained CLIP model with an added classifier, we effectively mapped video frames to spe­
cific in­game events. Despite the challenges posed by limited labeled data, the expanded
dataset of 1,000 frames yielded improved performance, demonstrating the model’s po­
tential for accurately detecting gameplay events.
42
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:51==
6
EEG Data Collection
This chapter provides a comprehensive overview of the EEG data collection process,
with a focus on using the OpenBCI Ultracortex ”Mark IV” EEG Headset. The chapter is
structured into sections that cover an introduction to EEG, details about the equipment
used, the experimental design, and the data processing techniques employed.
6.1
Introduction to EEG
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a non­invasive method used to measure electrical ac­
tivity on the surface of the brain. EEG captures the collective activity of neurons, primar­
ily from the cerebral cortex, through electrodes placed on the scalp. These signals are
typically represented as voltage changes over time, with different frequency bands cor­
responding to various brain states. For instance, alpha waves (8­13 Hz) are associated
with relaxed, wakeful states, while beta waves (13­30 Hz) are linked to active thinking and
focused attention [11].
EEG is widely used in neuroscience research, clinical diagnostics, and brain­computer
interface (BCI) development due to its high temporal resolution, typically on the order of
milliseconds [12]. Despite its lower spatial resolution compared to other neuroimaging
techniques like fMRI, EEG’s non­invasiveness and ease of use make it a valuable tool for
studying brain activity in both research and applied settings.
6.2
EEG Data Acquisition Equipment
6.2.1
OpenBCI Ultracortex ”Mark IV” EEG Headset
The OpenBCI Ultracortex ”Mark IV” EEG Headset is a versatile, open­source hardware
platform designed for EEG data acquisition. Developed by OpenBCI, this headset is part
of a series of devices aimed at making neuroscience tools more accessible and customiz­
able for researchers and developers. The Ultracortex ”Mark IV” is known for its modu­
lar design, 3D­printed construction, and compatibility with various EEG data acquisition
boards [13].
Event detection in video games using deep learning
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.1: The OpenBCI Ultracortex ”Mark IV” EEG Headset with connected Cyton
board. The modular 3D­printed design allows for customizable electrode configurations
and easy integration with various data acquisition boards.
Hardware Description
3D­Printed Headset Structure
The Ultracortex ”Mark IV” EEG Headset features a cus­
tomizable, 3D­printed frame that can be adjusted to fit different head sizes and shapes.
This structure ensures a secure and comfortable fit, crucial for maintaining good elec­
trode contact and reducing noise in the EEG signal. The 3D­printed design also offers
researchers the flexibility to modify or upgrade the headset based on specific needs [13].
Electrode Configuration
The headset supports up to 35 electrode sites, configurable
according to the international 10­20 system or other custom layouts. Users can choose
between wet electrodes (such as Ag/AgCl) or dry electrodes, depending on the exper­
imental requirements.
This flexibility in electrode configuration makes the Ultracortex
”Mark IV” suitable for a wide range of EEG applications, from basic research to more
complex BCI experiments [13].
Modular Design
The modular design of the Ultracortex ”Mark IV” allows for the inte­
gration of additional sensors, such as EMG (Electromyography) or ECG (Electrocardiog­
raphy), enabling comprehensive physiological monitoring in various experimental setups
[13].
Compatibility
The headset is compatible with OpenBCI’s Cyton or Ganglion data acqui­
sition boards, providing 8 to 16 channels for EEG data collection. These boards connect
to a computer via Bluetooth or USB, facilitating real­time data transmission and moni­
toring. The system operates on battery power, supporting long­duration data collection
sessions with adjustable sampling rates ranging from 250 Hz to 1000 Hz [13]. The high
sampling rate is particularly beneficial for capturing rapid changes in EEG signals, such
as those associated with cognitive or motor events.
44
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:53==
6.2.2
Software Tools
OpenBCI GUI
The OpenBCI GUI is an open­source graphical user interface developed by OpenBCI for
real­time EEG data acquisition, visualization, and analysis. It supports various OpenBCI
hardware, including the Cyton and Ganglion boards, and provides a user­friendly platform
for managing data collection sessions.
Interface Overview
The OpenBCI GUI interface consists of several control panels that
allow users to configure the data source, connection protocol, channel count, and session
settings. The key components of the GUI, as shown in Figure 6.2, include:
• Data Source Selection: Users can choose between different data sources such
as live data from the Cyton or Ganglion boards, playback of previously recorded
sessions, synthetic data for testing, and external streaming sources. In the provided
setup, the ”CYTON (live)” option is selected, indicating that live EEG data from the
Cyton board is being captured.
• Transfer Protocol: The GUI allows users to choose between different data transfer
protocols. The ”Serial (from Dongle)” option is used for wireless communication
with the Cyton board via a USB dongle, while the ”WiFi (from WiFi Shield)” option
is available for wireless data transfer via a WiFi shield.
• Serial Connection: The ”AUTO­CONNECT” button simplifies the process of es­
tablishing a connection between the computer and the Cyton board, automatically
detecting the appropriate COM port.
• Channel Count: The interface allows the selection of the number of EEG channels
to be recorded, with options for 8 channels or 16 channels. In the screenshot, ”16
CHANNELS” is selected, indicating that data from all 16 channels of the Cyton board
will be recorded.
• Session Data: Users can configure the session details, including the session name
and the maximum file duration for the recording. The session name is automatically
generated based on the current date and time, as shown in the figure. The ”BDF+”
format is selected for data storage, which is compatible with BioSemi Data Format,
allowing for detailed data logging.
• BrainFlow Streamer: This option allows users to choose the method of streaming
EEG data, either through the network or by saving to a file. This flexibility enables
easy integration with other software tools for real­time data analysis or further pro­
cessing.
• SD Card Recording: The GUI provides an option to write data directly to an SD
card, which is useful for portable EEG setups where data needs to be stored locally.
However, in this setup, this option is disabled (”Do not write to SD...”).
OBS (Open Broadcaster Software)
OBS, short for Open Broadcaster Software, is a free and open­source software suite for
video recording and live streaming. It is widely used for capturing high­quality video from
screens, webcams, and other input sources. In this experiment, OBS is utilized to record
the screen activity during gameplay or cognitive tasks, synchronizing the visual data with
the EEG recordings for subsequent analysis.
Key Features of OBS
Event detection in video games using deep learning
45
==PAGE:54==
• High­Quality Recording: OBS supports recording in various resolutions and frame
rates, allowing for detailed capture of screen activity. This is particularly important
in experiments where visual stimuli or user interactions need to be analyzed in con­
junction with EEG data.
• Customizable Scenes: Users can create multiple scenes, each composed of dif­
ferent sources (e.g., screen capture, webcam, images). This feature is useful for
organizing different types of visual data in a single recording session.
• Audio and Video Filters: OBS provides various filters for enhancing audio and
video quality, including noise reduction, color correction, and cropping. These tools
help improve the clarity and relevance of the recorded data.
• Real­Time Monitoring: OBS includes a real­time preview of the recording, enabling
users to monitor the captured data and make adjustments on the fly. This feature
ensures that the recording meets the experiment’s requirements.
• Flexible Output Formats: OBS supports a wide range of output formats, including
MP4, MKV, and FLV, making it easy to integrate the recorded data with other analysis
tools or software environments.
Integration with EEG Data Collection
In this experiment, OBS is configured to start
recording simultaneously with the EEG data collection in the OpenBCI GUI. This synchro­
nization is critical for ensuring that the recorded video data aligns with the EEG times­
tamps, allowing for accurate correlation between visual events and neural responses.
The combined dataset can then be used for in­depth analysis of participant behavior and
neural activity in response to specific stimuli.
6.3
EEG Data Collection Process
6.3.1
Electrode Placement and Calibration
Before data collection begins, electrodes are attached to the headset and positioned
on the scalp according to the desired configuration. Good electrode contact is verified
through impedance checks, ensuring that impedance levels are within the optimal range
of 5­20 kΩ to guarantee high­quality signal acquisition [14].
6.3.2
Signal Acquisition and Real­Time Monitoring
During the experiment, EEG signals are monitored in real­time using the OpenBCI GUI
(Graphical User Interface). This software provides tools for visualizing EEG waveforms,
filtering signals, and marking artifacts, ensuring that the collected data is clean and reliable
for further analysis [15].
46
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.2: OpenBCI GUI interface during EEG data acquisition. The interface displays
real­time EEG data across multiple channels, a frequency spectrum plot, and a head plot
showing the electrode placement and activity.
6.4
Common Issues in EEG Data Collection
EEG data collection can be challenging due to the sensitivity of the equipment and the
complexity of the environment. Below are some common issues that are often encoun­
tered during EEG data collection, along with potential strategies to mitigate them:
Electrode Detachment
One of the most common problems during EEG data collection is electrode detachment,
where one or more electrodes lose contact with the scalp. This can result in noisy or
incomplete data. Causes of electrode detachment include poor initial placement, head
movement by the participant, or insufficient conductive gel (for wet electrodes).
Signal Interference
EEG signals are very low amplitude and can be easily contaminated by external electri­
cal noise, such as from nearby electronic devices or power lines. This interference can
obscure the brain signals and reduce data quality.
Motion Artifacts
Motion artifacts are another significant source of noise in EEG recordings. These artifacts
are typically caused by the participant’s head movements, muscle contractions (such as
jaw clenching), or eye movements (blinks and saccades). These movements can intro­
duce large, non­brain­related signals into the EEG data.
Solutions
To address electrode detachment, ensure that the participant is seated comfortably in a
stable position to minimize head movement. The electrodes should be carefully placed
and secured with adequate conductive gel to maintain good contact with the scalp. Regu­
lar impedance checks during the session can help detect any detachment early and allow
for prompt adjustments.
To minimize signal interference, it is essential to conduct the EEG session in a room with
as little electronic equipment as possible. Where feasible, eliminate sources of electro­
magnetic noise by turning off or moving away from any non­essential electronic devices.
Additionally, using shielded cables and ensuring proper grounding of the EEG setup can
help reduce external noise.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
47
==PAGE:56==
To reduce motion artifacts, instruct the participant to remain as still as possible through­
out the recording session. Encourage them to avoid unnecessary movements, such as
head turns or facial muscle contractions, which can introduce noise into the data. While
creating a completely artifact­free environment may not be possible, these precautions
can significantly improve data quality under less­than­ideal conditions.
6.5
EEG Data Collection Code and Explanation
This section provides a detailed explanation of the Python code used for EEG data col­
lection during the experiments. The code interfaces with the OpenBCI Ultracortex ”Mark
IV” EEG headset and manages the data recording, processing, and saving procedures.
6.5.1
Code Overview
The script is designed to automate the EEG data collection process during different stages
of gameplay or tutorial sessions. The following subsections describe the functionality of
each part of the code.
Global Variables and Paths
The script begins by defining global variables that specify the file paths where the EEG
data will be stored. These paths are organized based on different stages of the experi­
ment, such as tutorials or gameplay sessions.
• master_path: The base directory where all data will be saved.
• kards_game_path, tec_tut_path, tec_game_path, baseline_path: Directories for
different stages of data collection.
Click Detection
The function detectClick(button, watchtime=5) is used to detect mouse clicks, specif­
ically to synchronize the start of data recording with the start of gameplay. It monitors
the state of the mouse button and returns True if a click is detected within the specified
watchtime.
EEG Board Preparation and Data Recording
• prepare_board(): Initializes the EEG board (OpenBCI) and prepares it for data
collection by specifying the serial port and setting up the board parameters.
• start_recording(ultracortex): Starts the EEG data stream and records data
until the user presses the ”end” key.
• stop_recording(ultracortex): Stops the EEG data stream and releases the board
session.
Saving Data
The function save_data(ultracortex_data, stage_id, subject_id) saves the recorded
EEG data into a CSV file. The data is saved in directories corresponding to the specific
stage of the experiment (e.g., tutorial, gameplay).
Baseline Recording with Black Screen
record_baseline(path, subject_id) records EEG data while displaying a black screen
with a white cross in the middle for a specified duration. This function is used to collect
baseline EEG data before the subject starts interacting with the game.
display_black_screen(window_width, window_height, fps, duration=10) handles
the display of the black screen during baseline recording. It ensures that the screen is
fullscreen and that no other visual stimuli are present.
48
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:57==
Directory Management
check_create(path) checks if the specified directory exists, and if not, it creates the
directory. This ensures that the necessary directories for storing EEG data are always
available.
Main Program Flow
The main program controls the flow of the experiment:
1. Directories are created to store the data.
2. The EEG board is prepared for recording.
3. Depending on the stage of the experiment, baseline data may be recorded.
4. The user is prompted to start recording, synchronized with mouse clicks to ensure
that data collection aligns with gameplay events.
5. EEG data is recorded, saved, and the session is concluded.
This script is crucial for automating the EEG data collection process, ensuring consistency
across different stages of the experiment, and providing reliable data for further analysis.
6.6
Results
Due to time constraints, I was unable to complete the EEG data collection phase of this
study as thoroughly as initially planned. I managed to collect data from only one partic­
ipant myself as the process of recruiting additional participants required more time and
resources than were available. Ideally, a robust dataset would include data from 10 to 15
participants to ensure the validity and generalizability of the findings. Unfortunately, this
was not feasible within the timeframe of this project.
The image below shows a screenshot of the collected data, which consists of recordings
from my own EEG sessions. While this data provides a starting point, it is insufficient for
drawing comprehensive conclusions about the research questions posed.
Figure 6.3: Screenshot of collected EEG data from a single participant (myself).
It is with regret that I acknowledge the incomplete nature of this phase of the project. In
future work, I hope to revisit this study with a more comprehensive data collection process,
involving a larger and more diverse participant pool. This will allow for a more thorough
analysis and more reliable conclusions.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:59==
7
Discussion
7.1
Summary of Key Findings
In this study, we successfully implemented and evaluated two models for video game
event detection: a 3D Convolutional Neural Network (3D CNN) and a CLIP­based model
combined with a Multi­Layer Perceptron (MLP) classifier. Through a series of experi­
ments, we have identified several key findings:
• 3D CNN Model Performance: The 3D CNN model demonstrated high accuracy on
the test set, indicating its effectiveness in capturing spatiotemporal features in video
data. However, performance varied across different event types, reflecting potential
complexities or similarities among certain classes in the dataset.
• CLIP Model Performance: The CLIP­based model, which utilized a pre­trained
CLIP feature extractor followed by an MLP classifier, also showed promising re­
sults, particularly in detecting events like ”shoot” and ”enemy eliminated.” The model
achieved an overall accuracy of 87.62 percent, with an F1­score of 86.73 percent,
demonstrating its capability in classifying static frames based on visual features.
• Impact of Hardware Configuration: The use of advanced hardware, such as the
Tesla A100 GPUs at DTU, significantly accelerated model training and enabled han­
dling larger datasets compared to the local GPU (NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1050 Ti).
• Importance of Data Preparation: Proper extraction and preprocessing of video
frames were critical to achieving consistent and high performance in both models.
The uniform resizing and normalization of input frames ensured a stable foundation
for effective model learning.
7.2
Interpretation of Results
7.2.1
3D CNN Model Performance
The 3D CNN model effectively identified events within video sequences, demonstrating its
capability to extract relevant spatiotemporal features. However, the model’s performance
on certain classes was below expectations. This discrepancy can be attributed to several
factors:
• Data Imbalance: The presence of fewer samples for certain classes might have
limited the model’s ability to learn distinctive features, resulting in lower prediction
accuracy for these categories.
• Class Similarity: Some event categories may be visually similar, making it chal­
lenging for the model to distinguish between them. This highlights a potential limi­
tation in the model’s feature representation and discrimination power.
7.2.2
CLIP Model Performance
The CLIP­based model leveraged a pre­trained CLIP feature extractor, which was fine­
tuned using labeled frames from the ”Run’N’Gun” video game. The model’s overall accu­
racy of 87.62 percent, coupled with an F1­score of 86.73 percent, indicates robust per­
formance in detecting key events. Specifically, the model excelled in recognizing events
with distinct visual cues, such as the ”shoot” and ”enemy eliminated” actions, achieving
precision and recall rates above 85 percent. And in Figure 5.8 shows that the trained
model can correctly identify events in the video.
Event detection in video games using deep learning
51
==PAGE:60==
7.2.3
Impact of Hardware Configuration
Training on the DTU GPU cluster, particularly with Tesla A100 GPUs, resulted in signifi­
cant improvements in both training speed and model performance. This underscores the
importance of high­performance hardware in deep learning, especially for large­scale data
and complex models. The ability to leverage parallel processing across multiple GPUs
further enhanced the efficiency of the training process.
7.2.4
Role of Data Preparation
Data preparation was a critical component of this study. The consistent extraction, re­
sizing, and normalization of video frames provided the model with uniform inputs, which
is essential for stable training. Any inconsistencies in this process could have adversely
affected the model’s performance, emphasizing the need for meticulous data preprocess­
ing.
7.3
Limitations
Despite the promising results, this study has several limitations:
• Dataset Diversity and Size: While a large dataset was used, the range of video
game events is vast, and our dataset may not cover all possible event types. This
could limit the model’s generalizability in real­world applications.
• Model Complexity and Resource Requirements: Both the 3D CNN and CLIP
models are computationally intensive, requiring significant resources, especially
when processing long or high­resolution videos. This could limit their application
in real­time scenarios.
• Model Interpretability: As with many deep learning models, the inner workings
of both the 3D CNN and the CLIP­based model are often seen as a ”black box.”
Understanding the decision­making process of these models can be challenging,
which may hinder their application in critical areas where interpretability is essential.
7.4
Future Work
Building on the findings and limitations of this study, several avenues for future work are
proposed:
• Dataset Expansion: Collecting and annotating a more diverse set of video game
events could improve the models’ generalization capabilities. Data augmentation
techniques could also be explored to increase dataset diversity.
• Model Enhancements: Exploring more complex architectures, such as those in­
corporating attention mechanisms or temporal models like LSTMs or Transformers,
could potentially enhance the models’ performance.
• Real­time Application Optimization: Research into optimizing the models for real­
time inference, particularly in resource­constrained environments, is crucial. This
could involve model pruning, quantization, or other techniques to reduce computa­
tional overhead.
• Interpretability and Explainability: Developing methods to visualize and under­
stand the models’ decision processes, such as activation maps or using interpretabil­
ity tools like LIME or SHAP, would provide valuable insights into model behavior and
increase user trust.
52
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Ben Weber, Michael Mateas, and Arnav Jhala. “Using Machine Learning for Real­
Time Event Detection in Computer Games”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Confer­
ence on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment (AIIDE) (2011).
[2]
Andrej Karpathy et al. “Large­Scale Video Classification with Convolutional Neural
Networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). 2014, pp. 1725–1732.
[3]
Jeff Donahue et al. “Long­Term Recurrent Convolutional Networks for Visual Recog­
nition and Description”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2015, pp. 2625–2634.
[4]
Du Tran et al. “Learning Spatiotemporal Features with 3D Convolutional Networks”.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
2015, pp. 4489–4497.
[5]
Alec Radford et al. “Learning transferable visual models from natural language su­
pervision”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2021, pp. 8748–
8763.
[6]
Zhiyu Chen et al. “Game Behavior Data Analysis Using Deep Learning”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence 2.6 (2018), pp. 476–
488.
[7]
Adam Summerville et al. “Procedural Content Generation via Machine Learning
(PCGML)”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Interactive Digital Entertainment (AIIDE). 2018.
[8]
Georgios N Yannakakis and Julian Togelius. Artificial Intelligence and Games. Springer,
2018.
[9]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Two­Stream Convolutional Networks for
Action Recognition in Videos”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys­
tems (NeurIPS) (2014), pp. 568–576.
[10]
Sergey Makarov, Yuri Ryabov, and Sergey Tregubov. “Reinforcement Learning­
Based Event Detection in Video Games”. In: IEEE Transactions on Games (2020).
[11]
Nature Reviews Neuroscience. “EEG (Electroencephalography)”. In: Nature Re­
views Neuroscience 5.2 (2004), pp. 1–10.
[12]
John D Simeral, Sung Pil Kim, and Leigh R Hochberg. “Modular Design of EEG
Systems for Neural Recording and Analysis”. In: Journal of Neural Engineering 12.6
(2015).
[13]
OpenBCI Documentation. Ultracortex Mark IV EEG Headset. 2020. url: https://
docs.openbci.com/Hardware/Ultracortex-Mark-IV/.
[14]
Tzyy­Ping Jung et al. “Removing Electroencephalographic Artifacts by Blind Source
Separation”. In: Psychophysiology 37.2 (2000), pp. 163–178.
[15]
Scott Makeig et al. “Open Source Tools for EEG Analysis”. In: Computational Intel­
ligence and Neuroscience 2017 (2017).
Event detection in video games using deep learning
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Event detection in video games using deep learning
==PAGE:63==
Event detection in video games using deep learning
55
==PAGE:64==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
