==PAGE:1==
Development and validation of a
novel non-invasive collagen type I
biomarker for the evaluation of
extracellular matrix remodeling in
kidney disease
Student
Christoforos Anagnostopoulos(s222978)
MSc in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
University Supervisor
Rune Busk Damgaard, PhD, Associate Professor
External Supervisors
Federica Genovese, PhD, Director of Cardiovascular and Renal Disease, Nordic
Bioscience
Emily Martin, Research Fellow, Nordic Bioscience
August 30, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master thesis represents the final project to achieve a Master’s degree in
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering from the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU). This master thesis was carried out in the Cardiovascular and Renal Depart-
ment of Nordic Bioscience. This work was conducted from March to August 2024
and it was a workload that corresponded to 35 ECTS points.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my deepest appreciation to my supervisor Federica Gen-
ovese ,the Director of Cardiovascular and Renal Department of Nordic Bioscience
for the opportunity that she provided me to explore such an innovative project for
my master’s thesis. Her guidance was invaluable in resolving challenges that arose,
consistently motivating me to develop my decision-making and scientific skills during
our weekly meetings.
Additionally, this endeavor would not have been possible without Emily Martin,
Research Fellow in CVR group. I am deeply grateful for her unwavering support,
guidance, and commitment to achieving the best possible outcomes. Her contribu-
tions in addressing challenges and her expertise have been invaluable throughout the
project. She is an exceptional person and researcher, and I feel fortunate to have
had the opportunity to collaborate and share scientific ideas with her. Furthermore,
I would like to thank to all members of CVR group for their willingness to help me
and for creating a friendly environment that made me feel welcome from day one.
Of course, I would like to express my gratitude to Rune Busk Damgaard, As-
sociate Professor at DTU for accepting to be my external supervisor. Although we
didn’t have the opportunity to discuss my project in depth, I had the great oppor-
tunity to spend a week with he and his team during the Assay Technology DTU
course in June 2023. Rune introduced me to the field of assay development and that
experience played a key role in my research journey. And here we are!
Last but not least, I can’t forget my mentor Thanos Arvanitidis for his invaluable
guidance and advice’s through the year and all my family members for their endless
support and encouragement all the time.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Renal fibrosis is a progressive condition of the extracellular matrix (ECM) where the
kidney tissue undergoes abnormal scarring and thickening, due to the accumulation
and overproduction of ECM proteins such as collagens.
Renal fibrosis is one of
the critical hallmarks of progression to chronic kidney diseases (CKD), which if
untreated can progress to end stage renal disease, a severe condition which can be life
threatening without kidney transplant or hemodialysis. Currently, the most widely
used diagnostic tools are traditional markers, that are not optimal for assessing
fibrosis, and renal biopsies are painful and can pose risks such as bleeding, infection
and damage to nearby organs.
Collagens constitute the 30% of all tissues and have a key role in elasticity,
support and stability. Collagens are the main ECM proteins and an imbalance in
degradation and formation of collagens can trigger excessive deposition of fibrous
tissue. A collagen type-I biomarker was designed from a study presenting that a
specific fragment of the alpha-1 chain was highly associated with CKD in urine.
A competitive ELISA immunoassay for the detection of the fragment of COL1A1
in urine was successfully developed, technically evaluated and assessed in two dif-
ferent cohorts.
The primary findings in the IgA Nephropathy cohort suggested
that the biomarker was able to differentiate between healthy individuals and indi-
viduals with IgA Nephropathy. Additionally, two different preclinical models (dia-
betic rats) were tested in order to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of two different
treatments including-renin-angiotenisin aldosterone system inhibitors and sodium-
glucose contransporter 2 inhibitors. No significant differences were obtained between
the pre-treatment and post-treatment weeks, in COL1A1 levels, except Dapagliflozin
which demonstrate to decrease COL1A1 levels within 3 weeks. Lastly, the COL1A1
biomarker exhibited an interference with salt, which raises questions on the reliabil-
ity of the biomarker. The study has shown promise in producing urinary collagen
type I biomarkers for CKD which could provide an alternative method for measuring
collagen turnover in CKD individuals.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
ACEi
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
ADAMs
A disintegrin and metalloproteinases
ADAMTs
A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin-like motifs
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
ARBs
Angiotensin receptor blockers
AUC
Area under the curve
BEST
Biomarkers Endpoints and other Tools
BLAST
Basic Alignment Search Tool
BM
Basement membrane
BSA
Bovine serum albumin
CDR
Complementary determine region
CKD
Chronic Kidney Disease
CLIA
Chemiluminescent immunoassay
CVD
Cardiovascular disease
ECM
Extracellular matrix
eGFR
Estimated glomerular filtration rate
ELISA
Enzyme-linked-immunosorbent assay
ESRD
End-stage renal disease
GBM
Glomerular Basement Membrane
IgAN
Immunoglobulin A nephropathy
IM
Interstitial matrix
KLH
Keyhole limpet hemocyanin
Continued on next page
iv
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 0
(Continued)
LLOQ
Lower limit of quantification
LoB
Limit of Blank
mAb
Monoclonal Antibody
MMPs
Matrix metalloproteinases
MRAs
Mineralcorticoid receptor antagonists
MRD
Minimum Required Dilution
MS
Mass spectrometry
OD
Optical Density
PTMs
Post translational modifications
RLU
Relative light units
ROC
Receiver operating curve
RAAS
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System
SGLT-2
Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2
TGF-1
Transforming growth factor beta 1
TIMPs
Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs)
TMB
tetramethylbenzinidine
TN
True negative
TP
True positive
uACR
Urinary albumin-creatinine ratio
uAER
Urinary albumin excretion rate
ULOQ
Upper limit of quantification
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Abbreviations
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Kidney structure and function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Extracellular Matrix (ECM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
The ECM in the healthy kidney . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Collagens: The Main Structural Components of the ECM. . .
3
1.2.3
Matrix-acting enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.4
The ECM of the kidney
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Chronic Kidney Disease and Kidney Fibrosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.1
How the ECM is altered in kidney fibrosis. . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3.2
Current Treatments for CKD Management.
. . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Current state of play in the biomarker field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.5
The Nordic Protein FingerPrint Technology and neo-epitopes. . . . .
14
1.6
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.6.1
Competitive ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Hypothesis and aim of the project
17
2.1
Hypothesis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Aim of the project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Materials and Methods
19
3.1
The development steps of an assay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Identification of target sequence. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Generating Monoclonal Antibodies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.3
Purification of monoclonal antibodies with ¨AKTA.
. . . . . .
22
3.1.4
HRP labeling of the monoclonal antibodies.
. . . . . . . . . .
23
vi
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 0
3.1.5
The early development phase of the assay
. . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.6
Checkerboards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.7
Native Reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.8
Setting the best conditions of the assay before the technical
validation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.9
Checking Antibody Specificity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Technical Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.1
Linearity and Minimum Required Dilution . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2
Intra-Inter assay reproducibility. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.3
Limit of Blank (LOB)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.4
Lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.5
Upper limit of quantification (ULOQ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Biological Relevance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.1
IgA Nephropathy cohort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.2
Diabetic Kidney Disease rats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Troubleshooting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.1
Salt Interference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results
37
4.1
Checkerboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Native Reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
The final settings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Specificity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4.1
Antibody specificity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4.2
Unspecific binding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Linearity and Minimum Required Dilution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.6
Intra-Inter assay variation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.7
Limit of Blank (LOB)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.8
Lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.9
Upper limit of quantification (ULOQ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.10 Preliminary Biological Relevance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.10.1 IgA Nephropathy cohort. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.10.2 RAAS and SGLT2 inhibitors in diabetic kidney disease rats. .
56
4.11 Salt Interference. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Discussion
63
5.1
Assay Optimization.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
vii
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 0
5.2
Preliminary Biological Relevance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.2.1
IgA Nephropathy cohort. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.2.2
RAAS and SGLT2 inhibitors in diabetic kidney disease rats. .
66
5.2.3
The use COL1A1 in preclinical models versus human diseases.
66
5.3
Troubleshooting.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.4
Approaches and challenges to minimize unspecific bindings.
. . . . .
69
6
Future Research and Limitations
70
7
Conclusion
71
8
Appendices
89
8.1
Assay Buffers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
8.2
How to run COL1A1 assay.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
viii
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Kidney structure and function
The kidneys are paired, bean shaped and positioned behind the retroperitoneum in
the posterior part of the abdomen on each side of the vertebral column. It is well
known that each kidney has a complex structure composed of three histologically dis-
tinct compartments: glomeruli, tubulo-interstitium and vasculature [1]. Nephrons
are the functional units of the kidney. Each kidney, contains approximately one mil-
lion nephrons, which are responsible for urine filtration and formation. Every day,
the renal system filters about 200 liters of fluid, which allows toxins, metabolic waste
products and excess ions to be excreted, while keeping essential plasma proteins in
the blood [2].
The kidney has two main regions: the cortex, in the outer region and the medulla,
in the inner region (see figure 1.1). The cortex is primarily composed of the glomeru-
lus, proximal tubule and distal tubule whilst the medulla contains the loop of Henle
and collecting duct [3]. The initial filtering unit of the nephrons consists of cap-
illaries within the glomerulus, enclosed within the two-layer epithelium called the
Bowman’s capsule (see 1.1). The glomerular structure serves as the primary site for
blood filtration, representing the vascular component of the nephron and is supplied
by the abdominal aorta and renal arteries. The loop of Henle extends into the renal
medulla and its main function is to enhance the reabsorption and secretion of urine
components, before passing to the distal tubule. The Bowman’s capsule links the
glomerulus to the proximal tubule, facilitating filtrate for urine production through
the loop of Henle. Then, the urine is transported through the distal tubule and into
the collecting duct before passing through the bladder and exiting the body via the
urethra [4],[5].
The primary function of the kidney involves the maintenance and regulation of
1
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
electrolytes and body fluids, the synthesis of hormones, as part of its endocrine
functions, and the regulation of blood pressure and blood pH. Additionally, the kid-
neys are also responsible for excreting metabolic waste and maintaining extracellular
fluid volume. Their endocrine functions include the production of erythropoietin, a
hormone that stimulates the production of red blood cells [2],[6]. Therefore, proper
function of the kidneys, underpinned by the organ structure, is critical to body
homeostasis.
Figure 1.1: The kidney structure. Each kidney consists of an outer renal cortex and
an inner medulla. Nephrons are located between these regions. The glomerulus and
tubules have crucial roles in the kidney’s filtration process.
Made using biorender.com
1.2
The Extracellular Matrix (ECM)
1.2.1
The ECM in the healthy kidney
The extracellular matrix (ECM) consists of mainly two compartments, the intersti-
tial matrix (IM) and the basement membrane (BM), where the BM sits on top of
the IM (see figure 1.2). Each layer differs in function and composition [7]. The IM
composes a porous three-dimensional network, facilitating the movement of stromal
2
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
cells and providing tensile support to the BM. The IM has a key role in the struc-
tural integrity of tissues and organs but also regulates specific cell processes such
as differentiation and migration [8]. The main proteins found in the IM are colla-
gen type-I, III, V, fibronectin and elastin [9],[10]. Conversely, the BM has a more
dense structure and lies between the epithelial cell layer and IM. The BM regulates
several biological processes, including the development, proliferation and differen-
tiation of cells through integrins and non-integrin receptors [11],[12]. Furthermore,
the BM consists predominantly of collagen type-IV, laminins, nidogen and perlecan.
Each component of the BM structure presents a key role in maintaining structural
integrity.
For instance, collagen type-IV and laminins interlink via nidogen and
perlecan to form a supramolecular network to help stabilise the BM [9]. The BM
also enhances cell polarity and allows for diffusion and transport of nutrients and
signalling molecules [13].
Figure 1.2: The main compartments of the ECM. The basement membrane (BM)
sits atop the interstitial membrane (IM). Figure from Pompili et al. [9]
1.2.2
Collagens: The Main Structural Components of the
ECM.
The ECM is often described as the environment in which cells and biomolecules
interact. The primary role of ECM proteins is to maintain the tissue homeostasis,
by providing a scaffold-like microenvironment for cells to function within. Omics
studies have identified over 200 human genes that are highly associated with the
matrisome, however, the total number of ECM proteins is unknown [14].
The
main macromolecules forming the ECM are: fibrillar collagens, elastins, laminins,
filament-forming collagens, glycoproteins and proteoglycans. For the purpose of this
3
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
project, fibrillar collagens are the primary focus [15],[10].
Collagens are the main structural proteins in the ECM and the highest in abun-
dance. Collagens are classified into fibrillar and non-fibrillar forms and self-assemble
into networks to form the major ECM structure [16]. Although the collagen family
consists of 28 collagens, only six are fibrillar collagens: Type-I, II, III, V, XI, and
XVIII [17], [10],[18]. Type I collagen forms the foundation for the mechanical prop-
erties of many tissues and constitutes approximately 80% of collagen fibrils in all
human tissues [19].
How are fibrillar collagens synthesized? The process of collagen type-I fibrilloge-
nesis is complex and starts with the transcription of COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes
in the cell nucleus, which are then translated into preprocollagen in the rough en-
doplasmic reticulum [20]. After several post translational modifications (PTMs),
including the hydroxylation of proline and lysine residues, which have an essential
role in the stability of collagen, a three polypeptide helix (α1,α1,α2) winds together
from the C-terminus. The triple helical procollagen is exported from the cell (usu-
ally fibroblasts) before extracellular processing [21],[22]. The procollagen undergoes
cleavage by specific enzymes, known as collagen peptidases which cleave both the
amino (N-terminal) and carboxyl (C-terminal) propeptides, converting procollagen
to tropocollagen (mature collagen). Tropocollagens, which can rarely exist as ho-
motrimers (composed of three identical α1-chains) or commonly as heterotrimers
(composed of different α-chains), subsequently assemble into larger collagen fibril
structures [23]. This assembly is facilitated by covalent cross-linking between lysine
and hydroxylysine residues, which enhances the tensile strength and the stability of
the fibril [17],[24].
4
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1
Figure 1.3: Collagen synthesis. From 1 to 5, the collagen type-I protein is pro-
cessed intracellularly and then extracellularly to form multimeric crosslinked fibrils.
Intracellular processing includes polypeptide synthesis and post-translational modi-
fications before export of the multimer out of the cell. The functional collagen fiber
is processed at the extracellular level through the cleavage of the propeptides. The
figure is taken from Rugierro et al [25]
1.2.3
Matrix-acting enzymes
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are the primary matrix-degrading enzymes, play-
ing a central role in ECM homeostasis and remodelling.
Other matrix enzymes
include a disintegrin and metalloproteinases (ADAMs), a disintegrin and metallo-
proteinase with thrombospondin-like motifs (ADAMTs) and cathepsins [26]. All of
them have multiple roles in ECM remodelling, however in this section only MMPs
will be reviewed due to their favourable role on collagens.
MMPs are the main
ECM enzymes in collagen degradation and they are related to various diseases such
as chronic kidney disease [27]. MMPs are enzymes classified as endopeptidases and
their activity is regulated by the presence of Ca2+ and Zn2+ ions. There are 23
human MMPs and at least 10 (MMP-1, -2, -3, -9, -13, -14, -24, -25, -27 and -28)
are expressed in the kidney [28],[29]. Initially, MMPs were hypothesized to be anti-
fibrotic due to their prevalent function in ECM degradation, however, the literature
indicates that MMPs have a more intricate role in fibrosis. For example, numerous
studies have shown that upregulation of MMP-2, -7, -9 as well as downregulation of
5
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
MMP-1 are associated with renal disorders [28],[30],[31].
Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) inhibit the proteolytic activity
of MMPs, therefore a balance between MMP and TIMP activity is essential for
ECM homeostasis [32]. Among the 4 TIMPs that have been identified, three of
them, TIMP-1, -2, -3 are expressed in the kidney [32]. Whilst the primary role
of TIMPs is to selectively inhibit several MMPs, they also contribute to biological
processes such as cytokine production, inflammation, cell migration, proliferation
and apoptosis. Many of these biological processes have been linked to tissue damage.
Consequently, MMP and TIMP activity should be highly regulated to ensure ECM
homeostasis [32],[33].
1.2.4
The ECM of the kidney
As mentioned in the Kidney structure and function section, the kidney has a complex
structure comprising of glomeruli, tubulointerstitium, and vasculature, which each
possess different ECM niches [34].
The glomerular messangial ECM, primarily contains collagen type IV, collagen
type V, fibronectin, laminins and heparan sulfate proteoglycans [35]. Two autoim-
mune diseases, namely Goodpasture’s syndrome and Alport syndrome, are caused
by mutations in genes encoding type IV collagen where genetic mutations in iso-
forms of collagen IV (COL4A3, COL4A4, and COL4A5) and laminin (LAMB2) can
cause significant barrier dysfunction and ultimately lead to renal failure [36][37].
Additionally, the tubulointerstitial ECM consists of different collagen types (I,
III, IV, V, VI, VII and VIII), glycosaminoglycans (e.g. hyaluronan), polysaccharides,
and glycoproteins (e.g. fibronectin, versican, biglycan, decorin) [38]. Mutations in
COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes are related to Osteogenesis Imperfecta and Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome, both severe connective tissue disorders, causing chronic pain and
osteoarticular malformations [39]. Complications in these genes are also associated
with vascular events (i.e cerebral aneurysm) which can lead in polycystic kidney
disease [40]. Hence, this demonstrates the importance of normal collagen production
and structure in organ function.
Finally, in the vasculature, endothelial cells and mural cells acts as a blood barrier
and they play a key role in maintaining vascular homeostasis. The vasculature is
multilayered, where the intima consists of the subendothelial BM and IM, and the
media is composed of smooth muscle cells and predominantly elastic fibers, while
the adventitia contains an interstitial type of ECM that is rich in multiple collagen
types [41],[34].
6
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1
1.3
Chronic Kidney Disease and Kidney Fibrosis
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is one of the most pressing medical issues today with
high levels of morbidity and mortality. Recent studies have reported a concerning
increase in patients affected by CKD, partly due to the unavailability of effective
treatments for patients. CKD is thought to affect approximately 10% of the global
population accounting for approximately one million deaths each year [42]. The
Global Burden of Disease CKD Collaboration, estimates that of the 9.1% of the
global population with any-stage CKD, 5% of individuals have CKD stage 1-2,
3.9% are in stage 3, 0.16% have stage 4 , while the remaining 0.07% is listed in end
stage, stage 5 [43]. In most cases, individuals with CKD eventually progress to end-
stage renal disease (ESRD) or undergo dialysis or kidney transplantation. By 2030,
the number of patients receiving renal replacement therapy is expected to exceed
5 million, causing a large personal and financial burden. There is further concern
if we consider that CKD is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease
(CVD), which has high mortality rates [43],[44]. Thus, CKD represents a global
health burden, necessitating more research to address the clinical complexities of
the disease.
There are two key markers for the diagnosis and prognosis of CKD: estimated
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and urinary albumin-creatinine ratio (uACR).
The GFR measures the rate of filtered fluid through glomeruli per unit of time
(ml/min), which is difficult to measure precisely, hence the estimated version is
more commonly used. The uACR is a ratio of albumin and creatinine which should
not and should be found in the urine, respectively. For example, an individual with
an eGFR <60ml/min/1.73m2 and/or a uACR ≥30mg/g could have kidney disease
or dysfunction (see Figure 1.4).
7
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Figure 1.4: The association of eGFR and uACR in measuring kidney disease risk.
Green, low risk of disease progression; yellow, moderately increased risk of disease
progression; orange, high risk of disease progression; red, very high risk of disease
progression. CKD, chronic kidney disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration
rate. Figure is from Choi et al. [45].
1.3.1
How the ECM is altered in kidney fibrosis.
The main biological mechanisms leading to kidney dysfunction and failure is fibrosis,
which is characterized by the disordered and uncontrolled accumulation of ECM pro-
teins, particularly collagens. Kidney fibrosis has multiple manifestations, including
glomerulosclerosis, tubule atrophy, interstitial inflammation and fibrogenesis [46].
When the kidneys are injured, fibroblasts are activated, secreting inflammatory me-
diators and synthesizing ECM proteins through a mechanism observed in wound
healing [47]. Alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and transforming growth factor-
β1 are key regulators of fibroblast activation to myofibroblasts [48]. TGF-βs are
activated by macrophages and fibroblasts, the central cellular effectors of fibrotic
responses, and may also act by promoting a fibrogenic phenotype in immune and
vascular cells [49]. Collagen type-I, found in the IM of the kidney, is heavily im-
plicated in kidney fibrosis. Several studies show that the upregulation of collagen
type-I is often considered an early event in renal fibrosis [38]. As a major com-
ponent of fibrotic tissues, collagen type-I increases the stiffness of the renal tissue
through its overexpression [50] (see Figure 1.5). Additionally, other ECM proteins
8
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1
are affected in fibrosis, such as the upregulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 observed in
ESKD and diabetic kidney diseases, leading to degradation of basement membrane
proteins such as collagen type-IV and laminin [30]. Hence, changes in the ECM
microenvironment can lead to manifestations of renal diseases.
Figure 1.5: In the healthy kidney, ECM proteins are well balanced and contribute to
a proper function of kidney. In a fibrotic kidney, an excessive accumulation of ECM
proteins, particularly fibrillar collagens, is observed in each compartment of the
kidney’s nephron. This overproduction of collagens leads to scarring and stiffening
the kidney tissue [51]
.
1.3.2
Current Treatments for CKD Management.
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitors are classified in three main
categories, angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARBs) (e.g. losartan), angiotensin con-
verting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (e.g. ramipril) and direct renin inhibitors [52]. The
application of RAAS inhibitors is often prescribed for patients with mild to moder-
ate CKD, as it reduces blood pressure, decreases proteinuria and slows the decline of
eGFR [53]. there are some studies showing that RAAS inhibitors delay the progres-
9
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1
sion to advanced CKD, although this has not been fully accepted yet [54]. Besides
the RAAS inhibitors, another common class of treatment for CKD management,
is the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA) (i.e eplerenone and spirono-
lactone) which act on the same hormonal system [55]. MRAs inhibit the action of
aldosterone, a principal mineralcorticoid hormone produced in the adrenal cortex
and whose main role is to regulate blood pressure, potassium balance and extracel-
lular fluid volume at the mineralocorticoid receptor [56]. Although MRAs are well
established for their benefits in heart failure patients, their beneficial role in CKD is
under investigation and not yet widely accepted. On the other hand, sodium-glucose
cotransporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors (e.g. canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin)
are FDA approved treatments often prescribed for patients with diabetes mellitus,
but new evidence provides positive results for the use of SGLT2 inhibitors in pa-
tients with heart failure, stage 4 CKD and chronic glomerulonephritis [57] . SGLT-2
inhibitors suppress the SGLT-2 protein located in the proximal tubules of kidneys,
which is primarily for glucose reabsorption via the cotransport of glucose to sodium
[58].
1.4
Current state of play in the biomarker field
Prior to exploring the analysis and investigation of biomarkers for CKD, as well as
the attributes that define an optimal biomarker, it is important to define the term
’biomarker’.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), a biomarker
is defined as ’any substance, structure or process that is measurable in the body
and can influence or can predict the incidence of a biological outcome or a disease’
[59]. Furthermore, a biomarker can be categorized based on its use according to the
Biomarkers Endpoints and other Tools (BEST) criteria .
Biomarker Categories
Biomarker
Definition
Diagnostic
Detects or confirms the presence of a disease or condition
of interest or to identify individuals with a subtype of the
disease.
Continued on next page
10
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 1
Biomarker Categories (Continued)
Prognostic
Identifies the probability of a clinical event, disease recur-
rence or progression in patients with specific a disease or
medical condition of interest.
Predictive
Identifies individuals who are more likely to experience a
favorable or unfavorable effect from exposure to a medical
product.
Monitoring
A biomarker measured repeatedly for assessing status of a
disease or medical condition or for evidence of exposure to
(or effect of) a medical product.
Risk
Indicates the potential for a developing a disease in an
individual who does not currently have clinically apparent
disease.
Pharmacodynamic
Indicates biological activity of a medical product or envi-
ronmental agent without drawing major conclusions about
efficacy, disease outcome or necessarily linking this activity
to an established mechanism of action.
Safety
Indicates the likelihood, presence, or extent of toxicity as an
adverse effect when measured before or after an intervention.
Therefore, a biomarker is a physical measurement that is clinically associated
with a physiological or pathological process and that has putative diagnostic and/or
prognostic utility [60]. But what are the characteristics of an ideal biomarker? [61]
1. To be non-invasive, easily-measurable and rapid.
2. To be measurable in immediate sources, such as serum, plasma or urine.
3. To separate two populations effectively (e.g. diseased and non-diseased).
4. To have high disease specificity and not be affected by different comorbidities.
5. To show a rapid change in levels to reflect disease progression or a treatment.
6. To potentially reflect the pathophysiological pathways and mechanisms driving
the disease [61].
11
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 1
However, it is important to note, that most biomarkers are not able to meet the
criteria for an ideal biomarker. For example, a biomarker will likely measure two
populations with overlap, resulting in a certain amount of false positive and false
negative results.
The sensitivity and specificity of a biomarker rely on the true
positive (TP) and true negative (TN) values [62] . In addition, biomarkers are also
valuable in drug discovery and development where they can be used as endpoints for
screening compounds, to measure the efficacy of a drug, and for pharmacodynamic
and dose-response studies[63].
In CKD, the clinically used biomarkers are eGFR and uACR. GFR is the gold
standard used to diagnose CKD and predict risk of ESRD development, however
the eGFR is more commonly used due to ease of measurement. Moreover, eGFR is
also used clinically to adjust dosing of medications in individuals with renal diseases
[64].
The uACR contains two measurements, albuminuria and proteinuria, that
individually signify damage to renal tissue and dysfunctional glomerular filtration
[65].
Although these biomarkers are widely used, there are studies highlighting
their disadvantages. For instance, the accuracy of eGFR can vary among different
laboratories due to inadequate standardization [66]. Moreover, these markers can
be influenced by various non-kidney related factors such diet, exercise, and muscle
mass, and by the time detectable functional changes occur, significant structural
changes may have already developed [67]. Similarly, albuminuria has been shown
that it might be unreliable, as it is affected by exercise, posture, hydration level and
muscle mass [68],[69], [70].
To date, the best tool available to clinicians for addressing the extent of kidney
fibrosis is using a kidney biopsy. Although it is considered a safe procedure, compli-
cations such as bleeding and the formation of an artetio-venous fistula are associated
[71][72]. Additionally, the invasiveness and high costs makes kidney biopsies bur-
densome for patients and health services, allowing opportunities for developing cost
effective and non-invasive biomarkers to quantify fibrosis. Ideally, these biomarkers
would target peptides or proteins involved in pathophysiological pathways under-
pinning fibrosis and thus correlate with the severity and progression of fibrosis [73].
Catanese et al. [71] compares conventional CKD management with the potential
of non-invasive biomarkers (see Figure 1.6). In conventional disease management,
eGFR and albuminuria are mainly used to identify CKD at advanced stages, even
though the majority of the nephrons have undergone pathological molecular changes
and are irreversibly damaged. Alternatively, non-invasive biomarkers have the po-
tential to detect molecular changes in earlier stages, to possibly predict patient
responses to treatment and to tailor treatment options. Therefore, this study high-
12
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 1
lights the need for developing new non-invasive biomarkers to improve CKD man-
agement. Recent studies indicate the potential for collagen type I alpha-1 chain
biomarkers in investigating the extent of kidney fibrosis in early CKD stages [74].
As COL1A1 is the main protein found in the IM, it could provide a comprehensive
insight on the fibrotic state of renal tissue [74].
Figure 1.6: The figure compares conventional CKD management with the potential
of non-invasive biomarkers. Non invasive biomarkers have the potential to diagnose
CKD in early stages, predict therapeutic responses thereby improving personalized
treatments. Figure from Catanese et al.,[71]
13
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 1
1.5
The Nordic Protein FingerPrint Technology
and neo-epitopes.
The Protein FingerPrint Technology has been successfully developed over the last 30
years by Nordic Bioscience. They have made strides in quantifying ECM turnover
using non-invasive biomarkers in disease indications with underlying fibrosis [75].
This method specifically targets peptide fragments, known as neo-epitopes, that
are formed as a result of PTMs, that can occur during the dysregulated remodel-
ing of the ECM in disease[38]. This dysregulation causes changes in the formation
and degradation of ECM proteins, resulting in the creation and release of unique
peptides. The main advantage of the FingerPrint technology is the precision and
the sensitivity that it offers when neo-epitopes are measured compared to the mea-
surement of the whole/intact protein. Neo-epitopes could provide a more clinically
relevant biomarker because they are more likely to be organ- or disease-specific [76].
However, it is important to note that, tissue-specific markers derived from collagen
are difficult to achieve considering the systemic abundance of collagen throughout
the body.
Figure 1.7: Protein FingerPrint Technology. Neo-epitope of collagen type-1 gener-
ated by different post-translational modifications (PTMs).
created in biorender.com
The FingerPrint technology uses highly-specific monoclonal antibodies in an im-
munoassay format, aiming to specifically target these neo-epitope sequences. Thus,
it provides accurate an opportunity for non-invasive biomarkers that can be detected
in biological fluids (serum, plasma, urine), reflecting collagen remodeling (formation
or degradation) as well as the progression of disease.
14
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 1
1.6
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
1.6.1
Competitive ELISA
An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is an immunological assay widely
used in research, diagnostics and clinical applications. The methodology relies on
the interaction between the target protein/antigen (analyte of interest) versus the
antibody. ELISA techniques are classified into several types including direct, in-
direct, sandwich and competitive ELISA. These types vary in terms of antigens,
antibody, substrates and experimental conditions [77]. For this study, competitive
ELISA will be further discussed as it is the most common form of ELISA used in
the FingerPrint technology.
Competitive ELISA is highly sensitive technique that enables the detection of
low concentrations of analyte. A schematic illustration of the competitive ELISA
is illustrated in Figure 1.8. First, the biotinylated synthetic peptide is coated into
the 96-well streptavidin plate.
After, the horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled
monoclonal antibody (mAb) and the samples containing the analyte are added,
and incubated under certain conditions and time. During the incubation, the mAb
will bind either the native material (sample) containing the specific peptide or the
biotinylated synthetic peptide. Hence, it is the native material competing with the
bound synthetic peptide to bind the mAb.
Figure 1.8: Colorimetric competitive ELISA. The biotinylated synthetic peptide is
coated to the base of the well before samples are added to compete for the binding
of the antibody (Ab).
,
created using biorender.com
15
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 1
The most common substrate used in ELISA is TMB (3,3´,5,5´-tetramentylbenzidine).
TMB is a chromogenic substrate for horseradish peroxidase (HRP) that turns the
colourless ELISA plate to blue, as a result of HRP-induced oxidation of TMB. The
reaction continues for a predefined time until it is stopped by the addition of sul-
furic acid, resulting in a change of the color from blue to yellow. The amount of
the mAb bound to the target analyte is measured as absorbance using the optical
density (OD) [78]. The intensity of the color is associated to an OD value, which
is inversely proportional to the quantity of the analyte present in the sample. The
absence or the low intensity of yellow color indicates that the mAb is bound to
the sample. Conversely, a high intensity of yellow color suggests that the mAb is
primarily bound to the synthetic biotinylated peptide, and hence, the concentration
of analyte in the sample is low[79].
Chemiluminescent substrates can also be used to quantify analyte in samples
in ELISA immunoassays, also known as chemiluminescent immunoassays (CLIA).
CLIA offers high sensitivity and can detect even lower levels of analyte compared to
TMB-based ELISAs. The primary chemiluminescence substrates include luminol,
alkaline phosphate, peroxidase and acridinium ester compounds. HRP catalyses lu-
minol oxidation in the presence of hydrogen peroxide H2O2 and the emitted light
can be quantified as relative light units (RLU) (425nm) [80]. Both CLIA and col-
orimetric ELISA using TMB have their benefits and challenges. For example, CLIA
can be more expensive and have increased sample variability but with high sensitiv-
ity, while colorimetric ELISA is cost effective and well-established but it might lack
sensitivity for specific applications.
16
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2
Hypothesis and aim of the project
2.1
Hypothesis.
The hypothesis for this project was obtained from a study published by Good et al.
[81], where they identified urinary peptides captured by capillary electrophoresis cou-
pled to mass spectrometry (MS) that were associated to CKD progression, thereby
identifying a pool of potentially relevant biomarkers. More precisely, the authors
identified a significant amount of fragments derived from the collagen 1 alpha-1 chain
(126 fragments) and correlated each peptide to CKD variables, including eGFR. The
fragments identified were positively correlated with eGFR decline, suggesting their
attenuated urinary excretion in patients with CKD [81].
Prior to the beginning of my project, the Antibody Research Unit at Nordic
Bioscience, raised two specific monoclonal antibodies targeting a specific neo-epitope
of the collagen type 1 alpha-1 chain, for the purpose of developing a competitive
ELISA assay.
2.2
Aim of the project.
The purpose of this project is to develop and validate an assay for a novel collagen
type I biomarker. The project will focus on the development and establishment of
all the required conditions for a competitive ELISA. The primary role of the project
would be to detect this specific fragment in biological fluids such as urine, serum or
plasma.
Objectives:
1. Optimize assay conditions, including antibody selection, buffers and concen-
trations of the reagents.
17
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2
2. Establish a standard curve and determine the limit of blank (LOB), lower limit
of quantification (LLOQ) and upper limit of quantification (ULOQ).
3. Perform some technical evaluation experiments to ensure the assay’s linearity,
dilution recovery, precision and robustness.
4. Investigate the biological relevance of the novel biomarker by testing samples
from individuals with chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Expected Outcomes:
The goal of the project is to obtain a technically evalu-
ated assay that demonstrates specificity and sensitivity. Then, by testing biological
relevance, we aim to understand the relationship of this collagen type 1- alpha 1 de-
rived biomarker with CKD. To accomplish this, it is critical for all the requirements
in assay development to be successfully fulfilled.
18
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3
Materials and Methods
3.1
The development steps of an assay.
Figure 3.1: Assay Development Flowchart, created using Canvas.
The key steps in developing an ELISA-based biomarker assay is shown in 3.1. Briefly,
the initial step involves the identification of a neo-epitope candidate often found
at the cleavage site of a peptide of interest. Then, monoclonal antibodies (mAb)
that specifically target the chosen sequence are generated in mice, and the most
19
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
suitable clone is chosen for the development of the assay. The supernatant from the
antibody producing hybridoma is collected and the mAb is purified using affinity
chromatography. Then, the purified mAbs are labelled with HRP to allow for direct
antibody recognition by the substrate.
Next, multiple assay parameters are considered to achieve high biomarker sen-
sitivity and specificity, including but not limited to, buffer stringency, incubation
time, incubation temperature, and coater-to-antibody ratio. When the assay condi-
tions are established, an early prototype assay which includes 50 kits of the ELISA
assay is produced and a robust technical validation of the assay is performed. The
technical validation includes the limit of blank (LOB), minimum required dilution
(MRD) and linearity, inter-assay and intra-assay variation, lower limit of quantifi-
cation (LLOQ) and upper limit of quantification (ULOQ). Ultimately, biological
relevance testing is conducted using urine samples from both animals and humans
to confirm that the chosen biomarker shows expected changes in diseased samples.
If the biomarker assay successfully meets these criteria then the next kit production
is upscaled to 200 kits for use in the measurement of large studies (or cohorts).
Finally, if the assay continues to shows significant biological relevance in different
studies, it can be transferred to the production site of Nordic Bioscience for final
optimization and later commercialization.
The first 2 steps in Figure 3.1 were completed before the beginning of my Master’s
thesis.
3.1.1
Identification of target sequence.
Prior to the start of the project, a target sequence was identified at Mosaiques
Diagnostics (Hannover, Germany) through capillary electrophoresis coupled to MS.
The specific fragment identified is derived from the cleavage of the collagen type-I
alpha-1 chain at amino acid position 231. The targeted fragment was identified as a
peptide of interest due to a strong association to a decline in eGFR in human urine
samples with a CKD diagnosis by Good et al. [81]. The 10 amino acid sequence
from the cleavage site (231-240) was analyzed using the protein Basic Alignment
Search Tool (BLAST) to determine if the specific sequence has any similarity or
potential cross-reactivity to relevant proteins such as other ECM proteins.
The
human protein sequence for COL1A1 was found to be conserved in mouse, rat and
bovine (see Figure 3.2). The target sequence was not found in any other collagen
ECM protein, indicating no risk for cross-reactivity. The peptide of interest is hereon
referred to as COL1A1.
20
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3
Figure 3.2: The COL1A1 sequence is homologous in human, rat, mouse and bovine.
For mAb production and development of the ELISA assay, a series of synthetic
peptides related to the target peptide were produced externally (GenScript, USA)
(see Table 3.1). The immunogenic peptide was used for raising the mAb in mice and
is coupled with a linker (-GGC) to a immunogenic carrier protein -KLH (Keyhole
limpet hemocyanin) [82]. The coating peptide is conjugated to biotin where the
biotin binds to the strepdavidin at the base of the well leaving the target peptide
open to Ab binding. The standard peptide used for producing a standard curve was
30 amino acids (aa) long to increase specificity of the mAb to the target sequence.
However, only the first 10aa of the standard peptide is designed to be recognized by
the mAb, where experimentally a length of 6 to 9aa is likely to be recognized [83].
The elongated and truncated peptide have been designed by adding or removing
one amino acid from the cleavage site to test for specificity of the mAb to the target
site.
Target peptide
.DDGEAGKPGR
Immunogenic peptide
DDGEAGKPGR-GGC-KLH
Coating peptide
DDGEAGKPGR-K-Biotin
Standard peptide (30aa)
DDGEAGKPGRPGERGPPGPQGARGLPGTAG
Elongated peptide
GDDGEAGKPGR
Truncated Peptide
DGEAGKPGR
Table 3.1: COL1A1 related peptides. A 10aa sequence was identified (target pep-
tide) and formed the basis for developing various peptides needed for antibody
production and assay development. The other peptides included to the program
are an immunogenic peptide, a coating peptide, a standard peptide, an elongated
peptide and a truncated peptide. The cleavage site is indicated by a dot in the
target peptide (.)
3.1.2
Generating Monoclonal Antibodies.
The Antibody Research Unit of Nordic Bioscience is responsible for the production
of mAbs based on the biomarker program designed internally.
The mAbs were
developed prior to this project by using the immunogenic peptide (see Figure 3.3),
which was injected subcutaneously into five 6-7-week-old Balb/C female mice every
21
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
three weeks until stable serum antibody (Ab) levels were reached. The mouse of
highest serum Ab levels were chosen for fusion. Gefter et al.[84] describe how the
selected mouse was euthanized and spleen cells isolated to be fused with SP2/0
myeloma cells, resulting in immortalized hybridoma cell lines that produce mAbs.
The resultant hybridoma cells were screened and positive clones were picked out for
primary characterization. The clones showing peptide inhibition with the standard
peptide were chosen for subcloning using the limited dilution method to promote the
monoclonal growth [85]. These cells are then screened to ensure that they contain
truly monoclonal cells and expanded before the supernatant is collected and purified
in the purification stage.
Figure 3.3: Mice were immunized with a synthetic immunogenic peptide correspond-
ing to the target sequence (DDGEAGKPGR-GGC-KLH). Ab-producing spleen cells
were harvested and fused with cultured myeloma cells generating hybridomas. Hy-
bridoma cells were then screened and the positive cells producing the specific mAbs
were subcloned and expanded.
3.1.3
Purification of monoclonal antibodies with ¨AKTA.
Two different mAbs, 2E4-1H4-1E5 and 12C4-1E4-1B4, targeting the COL1A1
sequence were purified from supernatant using affinity chromatography on the ¨AKTA
22
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3
Start system. ¨AKTA is an advanced pump with several real time measuring devices
showing the status of the purification using Unicorn Software. To begin with, a 1
mL HiTrap protein G column (LOT 10342025) was attached to the system tightly to
avoid any leaks. Next, the flow rate was checked by measuring the volume collected
over 10 minutes and the column was rinsed with washing buffer (20mM phosphate
buffer, pH 7.0). Then, 200 mL of Ab-containing supernatant was passed through
the column at the calculated flow rate, allowing the Ab to bind inside the column.
Washing buffer was used to wash out the unbound material from the column. The
next phase was to elute the mAb from the column using an elution buffer (0.1 M
Glycine, pH 2.7) and collect several eluted fractions into seven tubes containing 100
µL of neutralization buffer (1.0 M Tris-HCl, pH 9.0). The role of the neutralization
buffer is to maintain the pH of each fraction to around 7. The fraction containing
the Ab is identified based on increases in the UV signal and chromatography peaks.
Following the purification step, the concentrations of the mAb-containing fractions
were measured using a Nanodrop 1000 (Thermo Scientific) and pooled if necessary.
The purified antibody is then desalted using a Zeba Spin Desalting Column (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, LOT YB350071) with PBS buffer to remove salts and other small
molecules. Desalting of the mAb was achieved by centrifuging antibody inside the
Zeba spin column 3 times for 2 minutes with PBS and a further 4 times again for
2 minutes without buffer to remove the antibody from the column. Finally, the
Nanodrop 1000 (Thermo Scientific) was used to measure the final concentration of
the desalted mAb at 280 nm. The purified mAbs were stored at -80 degrees and
they are ready for HRP-labeling.
3.1.4
HRP labeling of the monoclonal antibodies.
This procedure aims to label purified mAb with HRP for use in various ELISA
applications. The HRP labeling was performed using the Peroxidase Labeling Kit
from Roche, following the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche Protocol, Cat.No.
11829696001).
Before labeling, the concentration of the mAb clones need to be adjusted to 4 mg/ml
(3.8-4.2 mg/ml). If the mAb concentration is lower than 4 mg/ml, when measured
on the Nanodrop, it needs to be up-concentrated with an ultrafiltration tube. Con-
versely, if the concentration is higher than 4 mg/ml, it must be diluted with 1 M
sodium carbonate/hydrogen carbonate-buffer (pH 9.4). After confirming the mAb
concentration, 300 µL of the mAb was mixed well with 100 µL of peroxidase, be-
fore incubation starts at 4◦C for 20 h. During the conjugation reaction of Ab to
peroxidase, it is important that the pH between 9.8 and 10.8 therefore, the pH of
23
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
the mAb was checked before the addition of peroxidase. After, the reaction was
stopped with 40 µL of 2M Triethanolamine Buffer (pH 8.0) and 50 µL of sodium
borohydride, and mixed well, before incubating for 30 min between 2-8◦C. Next,
25 µL of triethanolamine was added and then incubated again for 2 hours at 4◦C.
Lastly, 10 µL of glycine solution was added to the incubation solution before the
solution was injected into a dialysis chamber (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was
then incubated and stirred in dialysis buffer at 4◦C. The solution was allowed to
dialyse over two days with three changes of dialysis buffer (pH 6.5) in this incubation
time. Finally, the mAb was removed from the dialysis chamber and the concentra-
tion was measured using the Nanodrop and a stabilizing agent that includes bovine
serum albumin (BSA) and Kathon CG (a antimicrobial agent) was added to the
solution in the same volume of the dialyzed solution (520 µL). The labeled Ab was
stored at -80◦C until use in assay development. The aforementioned purification
and HRP-labelling process was completed for both COL1A1 clones: 2E4-1H4-1E5
and 12C4-1E4-1B4.
3.1.5
The early development phase of the assay
The goal of the early development phase is to consider all the significant parameters
and create the best conditions for an ELISA assay. The ratio of the concentrations
of the coating peptide to Ab are important considerations for a robust ELISA assay.
Furthermore, incubation times and incubation temperatures can significantly affect
the assay as well as what sample matrix is used (i.e. serum, plasma, urine, etc.).
The table 3.2 details the ELISA conditions tested in the assay early development
phase.
24
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3
Table 3.2: The ELISA assay conditions tested in the development phase.
PARAMETER
CONDITION
Buffer
50 mM PBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L, pH 7.4
50 mM PBS-BTB, 4g NaCl/L, pH 7.4
25 mM PBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L, pH 7.4
25 mM PBS-BTB, 4g NaCl/L, pH 7.4
50 mM TBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L, pH 8
50 mM TBS-BTB, 4g NaCl/L, pH 8
25 mM TBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L, pH 8
25 mM TBS-BTB, 4g NaCl/L, pH 8
Incubation times
1 h, 20 h
Incubation Temperature
37°C, 4°C
Sample Matrix
Human urine
Human serum
Human plasma EDTA
3.1.6
Checkerboards
The checkerboard method aims to determine the optimal ratio of coater and Ab
concentrations, as well as the appropriate incubation times and buffers. Here, we
want the Ab:coater ratio to provide high assay sensitivity, which we measure using
B/B0 (ratio of sample optical density (OD) over a blank OD), thus a low B/B0 is
optimal. The B/B0 represents the amount of the antigen/analyte that is bound to
the mAb [86]. The ratio of Ab:coater is really important for the assay sensitivity,
and can be easily influenced by the incubation temperature, incubation time, the
stringency of the buffer [87]. The following figure 3.4 outlines the idea behind a
checkerboard, including a 2-fold dilution series of coater peptide and antibody along
opposing sides of an ELISA plate.
More precisely, in a preplate the coater was
diluted in assay buffer to the following concentrations 20, 10, 5, 2.5, 1.25 and 0.625
ng/ml. Then, 100 ul of the coater dilutions were plated into each well of the 96-well
plate in columns and incubated for 30 min at room temperature (20◦C), ensuring
that the biotinylated peptide (coater) binds the streptavidin-coated plate. The plate
was washed 5-times with washing buffer. For the mAbs, the starting concentration
began with 100 ng/ml and was diluted 2-fold in incubation buffer down to 12.5
25
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
ng/ml in a preplate. In this checkerboard, the left side contained the first Ab clone
(ending in 1E5), where in the top half of the plate 20 µL of incubation buffer was
added, while 20 µL of human serum was added to the bottom half.
The same
procedure was applied for the other Ab clone (ending in 1B4).
Each mAb was
loaded onto the plate in rows as illustrated in figure 3.4. The plate is incubated
again for 1 h at 37◦C to allow interaction between the coater and the Ab. Hence,
the checkerboard contains a matrix of different Ab:Coater ratios across the ELISA
plate with and without native sample. After the incubation, the ELISA plate was
washed as before, and 100 µL of TMB was added in each well and incubated for 15
min in darkness. Finally, stop solution (H2SO4) was added, and the plate was read
at 650-450 nm using a SpectraMax ELISA plate reader. The first checkerboard was
tested in 50 mM PBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L, pH 7.4 (+5% LiqII) buffer and at 37◦C for
1 h. Throughout the assay development, several buffers were used for checkerboards
and different starting concentrations both for antibody and coater, to find the most
optimal assay parameters (see Figure 3.4).
Figure 3.4: Layout of a checkerboard used during the assay development stage.
Multiple buffers have been tested using checkerboards.
26
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3
3.1.7
Native Reactivity
The purpose of the native reactivity test is to determine the extent of reactivity
of the Ab with the biological sample containing the target peptide. In short, the
native reactivity test follows the standard procedure for performing an ELISA and is
completed by testing different matrices samples. A competitive colorimetric ELISA
was developed for the detection of COL1A1 in urine matrix.
A 96-well streptavidin-coated plate is coated with 100 µL/well of 5 ng/mL bi-
otinylated peptide dissolved in coating buffer (25 mM TBS-BTB, 8 g/L NaCl, pH
7.4) and incubated for 30 min at 20°C while shaken at 300 rpm. After that, the
plate goes through a washing cycle (5 times) in washing buffer (25 mM Tris, 50
mM NaCl, pH 7.2), followed by the addition 20 µL of 1000 ng/ml of the 30AA
standard peptide, applied in a 2-fold serial dilution (12-point standard curve), and
20 µL of samples to the appropriate wells in duplicate. Immediately following, 100
µL/well of 33.3 ng/ml of mAb (12C4-1E4-1B4) diluted in incubation buffer (25mM
TBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L, pH 7.4 + 5% Liq-II) was added to each well and the plate is
incubated for 1 h at 37◦C with shaking at 300 rpm. Subsequently another washing
cycle is performed followed by the addition of 100 µL/well of tetramethylbenzini-
dine (TMB) substrate and the plate is then incubated in dark for 15 minutes and
shaken at 300 rpm. Finally stopping solution (0.1% H2SO4, Merck) is added and
the plate is analyzed in the ELISA reader at 450 nm with 650 nm as the reference
(see appendices 8.2). All sequences can be found in section 3.1.1 (Identification of
target sequence).
Then, the reactivity of the Ab with native sample was investigated during the
development phase, where different matrices were tested, specifically human urine,
human serum and human plasma from healthy donors.
Figure 3.5 outlines the
ELISA plate layout used and the different matrices tested. The columns 1-4 contain
16 points of standard curve, with standard A containing 3000 ng/ml of standard
peptide, while the rest of the plate contains different samples. The native reac-
tivity test uses the Ab:Coater ratio determined from the checkerboard experiment.
Therefore, in the native reactivity test, various reagent concentrations, assay buffers,
incubation times and incubation temperatures can be further tested.
27
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Figure 3.5: Plate layout for native reactivity test. Wells in columns 1-4 contain
the standard curve, which includes 16 points. Standard A is 3000 ng/ml in 200
ul of incubation buffer, with 2-fold dilution series continuing until the 15th point.
The 16th point contains only buffer (blank). Columns 5-6 contain serum samples,
columns 7-8 for urine samples and columns 9-10 for plasma EDTA samples. All
samples are in double determination. This specific layout can be used for various
assay conditions and ratios.
Furthermore, a standard curve describes the quantitative relationship between
the concentration of the target analyte to be measured and the corresponding mea-
sured signal [88]. This standard curve is based on a 2-fold serial dilution of known
concentrations of my standard peptide (30aa). Initially, the standard curve included
16 points in the first experiments, later subsequently decreased to 12 points. A 4-
parametric logistic regression model is used for plotting the standard curve[89]. The
4-parameter logistic (4PL) equation is given by:
y = D +
A −D
1 +
  X
C
B
where:
• y is the absorbance of measured analyte,
• X is the concentration of the analyte,
• A is the curve Top (maximum OD),
• D is the curve Bottom (background OD),
• C is the IC50 (half maximal inhibitory concentration),
• B is the slope factor or Hill slope, which controls the steepness of the curve.
28
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3
3.1.8
Setting the best conditions of the assay before the
technical validation.
The methods to determine the best conditions for COL1A1 rely on the checker-
board and native reactivity tests previously described. Using these methods, several
Ab:Coater ratios from checkerboards and different assay conditions (incubation time
and temperature) were tested to obtain a good standard curve (OD close to 2) as
well as assay reactivity to biological samples. The ELISA procedure for the novel
COL1A1 assay (explained in native reactivity section 3.1.7) is used for the technical
validation of the assay and testing of its biological relevance.
3.1.9
Checking Antibody Specificity
After the conditions had been set for the assay, the specificity of the antibody to the
target peptide was re-checked by testing the Ab’s binding to different peptides: the
standard peptide, the elongated peptide(GDDGEAGKPGR), the truncated peptide
( DGEAGKPGR), a non-sense coating peptide and a non-sense standard peptide.
Non-sense peptides refer to peptides with different amino acid sequences that are
not expected to bind to the mAb. To do this, a 2-fold serial dilution was prepared
from 1000 ng/ml for each peptide (see figure 3.6). A specific mAb should only bind
to the target sequence and not recognize other peptides.
Figure 3.6: ELISA plate design for checking antibody specificity. NBH-103 corre-
sponds to a different peptide of COL1A1 and hence the Ab should not bind. The
-/2- indicates a 2-fold dilution.
Additionally, we assessed if there was any unspecific binding of the antibody to
29
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
the streptavidin-coated plate by running a standard ELISA procedure (previously
described in section 3.1.7) with two standard curves and a duplicated set of native
samples, but leaving half of the plate uncoated to establish any potential unspecific
binding.
3.2
Technical Validation
The technical validation was performed prior to the investigation of biological rel-
evance.
Different technical validation experiments were conducted to assess the
sample linearity, robustness and precision of the assay.
All the experiments for
the assay validation were performed under strict research standard operating pro-
cedures, defined by Nordic Bioscience. For the technical validation, a production
of 50 ELISA kits matching the conditions set in the assay development phase were
produced, termed an Early Prototype Assay. Each kit contains all kit reagents,
including a standard curve, coater, Ab, buffers and quality control samples.
Figure 3.7: Technical Validation Flowchart.
3.2.1
Linearity and Minimum Required Dilution
A dilution recovery test is conducted to examine assay linearity and the minimum
required dilution (MRD) of samples. The objective of this experiment was to in-
vestigate how well the samples follow the standard curve when diluted 2-fold and
determine any matrix effect in urine samples. The four urine samples used exceeded
the IC50 to facilitate the evaluation of multiple dilution steps. The experiment was
30
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3
conducted by creating a 2-fold serial dilution until 1:128 dilution in assay buffer to
observe the linearity (see table 3.3). The test was replicated in three separate runs
performed on three different days. An acceptable dilution recovery of the diluted
sample is within 100±20% of the original undiluted sample. For this experiment
both CLIA and TMB substrates were tested. The described experiment was con-
ducted in accordance with the competitive ELISA procedure described in section
3.1.7. The formula for calculating the dilution recovery is:
Dilution Recovery (%) = 100 × Diluted sample concentration × Dilution Factor
Undiluted sample concentration
1-2
3-4
5-6
7-8
9-10
11-12
A
STD A
STD I
Undiluted sample 1
Undiluted sample 2
Undiluted sample 3
Undiluted sample 4
B
STD B
STD J
1:2 dilution
1:2 dilution
1:2 dilution
1:2 dilution
C
STD C
STD K
1:4 dilution
1:4 dilution
1:4 dilution
1:4 dilution
D
STD D
STD L
1:8 dilution
1:8 dilution
1:8 dilution
1:8 dilution
E
STD E
CO1
1:16 dilution
1:16 dilution
1:16 dilution
1:16 dilution
F
STD F
CO2
1:32 dilution
1:32 dilution
1:32 dilution
1:32 dilution
G
STD G
1:64 dilution
1:64 dilution
1:64 dilution
1:64 dilution
H
STD H
1:128 dilution
1:128 dilution
1:128 dilution
1:128 dilution
Table 3.3: Minimum Required Dilution plate layout. The undiluted urine samples
were diluted 2-fold down to 1:128 dilution.
3.2.2
Intra-Inter assay reproducibility.
The precision and reproducibility of the assay was assessed by calculating intra- and
inter-assay variations. The concentration of different urine samples was measured
repeatedly both in double determination and in 10 individual runs to measure intra-
and inter-variation, respectively. The samples used were 8 urine samples and 2 qual-
ity controls (QCs) spanning the theoretical measurement range. The 10 individuals
runs were completed over three days with at least 30 min between each run, to
test precision and minimize systematic errors. The experiment was run as per the
competitive ELISA procedure described in section 3.1.7. The intra- and inter-.assay
variation was presented as the coefficient of variation (CV%) within the plate and
between the plates, respectively. The acceptance criteria are ≤10% and ≤15%,
respectively [90]. The CV% is calculated as follows:
CV% = 100 ×
SD
Mean Concentration
31
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
3.2.3
Limit of Blank (LOB)
The Limit of Blank (LOB) is determined by analyzing 60 replicates of incubation
buffer only that contains no analyte. The LOB used the same competitive ELISA
procedure described in section 3.1.7. LOB is defined by measuring replicates of a
blank sample and calculating the mean result and the standard deviation (SD).
Table 3.4: Plate layout for limit of blank (LOB) testing. Blank indicates the wells
with incubation buffer.
1-2
3-4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
A
STD A
STD I
Blank 1
Blank 9
Blank 17
Blank 25
Blank 33
Blank 41
Blank 49
Blank 57
B
STD B
STD J
Blank 2
Blank 10
Blank 18
Blank 26
Blank 34
Blank 42
Blank 50
Blank 58
C
STD C
STD K
Blank 3
Blank 11
Blank 19
Blank 27
Blank 35
Blank 43
Blank 51
Blank 59
D
STD D
STD L
Blank 4
Blank 12
Blank 20
Blank 28
Blank 36
Blank 44
Blank 52
Blank 60
E
STD E
Control 1
Blank 5
Blank 13
Blank 21
Blank 29
Blank 37
Blank 45
Blank 53
-
F
STD F
Control 2
Blank 6
Blank 14
Blank 22
Blank 30
Blank 38
Blank 46
Blank 54
-
G
STD G
-
Blank 7
Blank 15
Blank 23
Blank 31
Blank 39
Blank 47
Blank 55
-
H
STD H
-
Blank 8
Blank 16
Blank 24
Blank 32
Blank 40
Blank 48
Blank 56
-
3.2.4
Lower limit of quantification (LLOQ)
The LLOQ is the lowest analyte concentration that can be quantified with accuracy
and precision [91]. Four different urine samples in the lower range (IC20) of the stan-
dard curve were selected of which two should be below the IC20. Three replicates
of each urine sample (in duplicate) were run in 5 independent experiments with a
maximum of 2 runs per day. LLOQ establishment used the competitive ELISA pro-
cedure described in section 3.1.7.The CV% was calculated for each sample and fitted
to a regression model where the CV% criterion of 20% determined the LLOQ. The
LLOQ is the lowest concentration of the measurement range and can be equivalent
or higher than the LOB but not below it.
3.2.5
Upper limit of quantification (ULOQ)
Finally, it is important to fully define the measurment range of the assay by deter-
mining the ULOQ. The ULOQ was defined from the intra-inter assay test, where
the highest point of the standard curve to pass the CV% criteria of 20% and relative
error (100 ± 20%) was accepted as the ULOQ [92]. Usually the highest standard
point (Standard A) is accepted as the ULOQ but if the assay’s highest standard
point does not meet the acceptance criteria, the second-highest point is used.
32
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3
3.3
Biological Relevance
To evaluate whether COL1A1 had any biological relevance, two different cohorts
were used including a human cohort with IgA nephropathy and an animal study
with induced diabetes and treatment.
3.3.1
IgA Nephropathy cohort
COL1A1 was tested in urine samples from patients with IgA Nephropathy (IgAN)
(n=58) and compared to a healthy urine panel (n=16). Immunoglobulin A (IgA)
nephropathy is a form of glomerulonephritis, caused by the deposition of IgA in the
GBM, leading to renal failure [93]. The mean age of the participants was 44.3 years
(± 13.2 years, ranging from 22 to 79 years). The eGFR of the participants ranged
from 6 to 130 mL/min/1.73 m2 with a mean of 50.6 mL/min/1.73 m2, therefore
classifying them as CKD patients. Additionally, 67% of the study are male and 33%
are female.
3.3.2
Diabetic Kidney Disease rats
The second study that COL1A1 was tested in involves urine samples from control
rats, diabetic rats, and diabetic rats treated with either RAAS)inhibitors (in vivo
model 1) or SGLT2 inhibitors (in vivo model 2).
The first in vivo model includes three groups. The first group is healthy con-
trol group with 8 rats (n=7). The second group includes rats with Streptozotocin
(STZ)-induced type 1 diabetes (n=7) and the third group includes rats with STZ-
induced diabetes type 1 and at 5 weeks starting RAAS inhibitor treatment. The
RAAS inhibitor treatment was administered for 2 weeks. This group has subgroups
according to the medication each with different rats. The medications were ramipril
(n=6), losartan (n=5) , spironolactone (n=7) and eplerenone (n=8).
Urine was
collected at week 5 and week 7 ( figure 3.8).
33
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3
Figure 3.8: The design of the in vivo model 1 using RAAS inhibitors. Urine was
collected at the pre-treatment period (week 5) and at post-treatment (week 7).
STZ,Streptozotocin. Made using biorender.com
The second in vivo model is similar to the first model and includes three groups
of rats. The first group is healthy control group, (n=6), the second group includes
healthy rats (n=6) treated with dapagliflozin, the third group includes rats with
STZ-induced type 1 diabetes followed for 6 weeks (n=6). The last group consists of
rats also induced with STZ-type 1 diabetes and followed for 3 weeks before SGLT-2
inhibitor treatment. The rats are separated in subgroups based on the treatment,
i) diabetes + dapagliflozin (n=8), diabetes + dapagliflozin + losartan (n=7) and
diabetes + losartan (n=7). Urine was collected in week 3 and week 6 for the second
in vivo model (figure 3.9).
34
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3
Figure 3.9: The design of the in vivo model 2 using SGLT-2 inhibitors.
Urine
was collected at the pre-treatment period (week 3) and at post-treatment (week 6).
STZ,Streptozotocin.
Made using biorender.com
3.4
Troubleshooting
3.4.1
Salt Interference
Research studies suggests that changes in ionic concentrations can modify antigen-
Ab affinity [94]. Urine contains more than 1,500 proteins, the majority of which are
inorganic ions K+, Na+, Cl−, Ca2+ and organic molecules such as creatinine, urea and
uric acid [95]. All these substances can effect the efficacy of the binding between
mAb and peptide. In addition, urine sodium fluctuates between healthy and diseased
patients, especially in patients with CKD [96]. To rule out salt interference with
the Ab in the COL1A1 assay, salt interference was measured using spiked urine
samples.
A urine sample was selected and spiked with 20% NaCl to create five
different concentrations of urine with NaCl: 0 mmol, 200 mmol , 400 mmol, 600
mmol, 800 mmol. This salt panel was tested using the COL1A1 ELISA outlined in
section 3.1.7 to examine sodium interference in urine samples.
35
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3
3.5
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using Graphpad Prism 10 (Graphpad Soft-
ware, INC) and Python (Jupiter Notebook) to analyze biological relevance results.
COL1A1 measurements above the ULOQ or below the LLOQ were defaulted to the
technical ULOQ and LLOQ concentrations, respectively. Additionally, samples with
a CV% above 25% were excluded from the analysis due to sample availability. The
statistical significance level are presented with asterisks in the graphs as follows:
* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001; **** p < 0.0001; ns = non-significant.
The IgA Nephropathy study was compared with the healthy control panel using
Mann-Whitney U-tests and the specificity and sensitivity of COL1A1 in this cohort
was evaluated with receiver-operating curve (ROC) (sensitivity vs 1 - specificity)
analysis in MedCalc (statistical software). A perfect sensitivity and specificity of
COL1A1 would be shown by an area under the curve (AUC) of 1.0, while an AUC
≤0.5, means that the differentiation is random and consequently would indicate
the insufficiency of the biomarker to separate the disease and healthy control groups
[97]. A Spearman correlation analysis was used to quantify the correlation between
patient eGFR and COL1A1 levels. Finally, one-way ANOVA (Analysis of Variance)
analysis was conducted in the animal diabetic kidney disease cohort to compare the
means of COL1A1 (ng/ml) across all groups in order to determine whether there
is statistical significance.
All COL1A1 biomarker concentrations were corrected
for urinary creatinine (uCr) (mg/ml) to normalize the urine concentration, which
fluctuates constantly. Therefore, biomarker values are presented as COL1A1/uCr
(ng/mg) in the clinical and preclinial studies.
36
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Checkerboard
The first checkerboard was conducted in serum to determine the Ab:Coater ratio
that yields an OD of approximately 2. Two different mAb clones targeting the same
COL1A1 fragment were tested in the set-up of the plate and method previously
described in section 3.1.6.
As seen in Figure 4.1, the clone 1E5 with a ratio of
Ab:Coater of 100 ng/ml:20 ng/ml presented an OD 2.22. Low concentrations of
Ab:coater displayed low OD values, suggesting insufficient bindings with the coater
under the conditions testing for the 1E5 clone. On the other hand, the 1B4 clone
also presented OD values close to 2, with lower Ab and coater concentrations com-
pared to 1E5 clone, for example, Ab:coater 25 ng/ml:20 ng/ml and Ab:coater 50
ng/ml:10 ng/ml. The lower concentrations for 1B4 provided early indication that
the sensitivity of the 1B4 clone may be higher than the 1E5 clone. In the bottom
half of the ELISA plate, it can be observed that only low levels of the native sample
(serum) is bound to the mAbs because the OD values are similar to the upper half
of the plate which only contains buffer. If the mAb was reacting well with serum,
we would expect to observe a much lower OD in the wells with serum compared to
buffer. Consequently, the 1B4 clone was selected to be further investigated, as the
target OD of 2 was achieved at lower concentrations of Ab and coater.
37
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.1: Checkerboard results using two different clones of Abs 2E4-1H4-1E5
and 12C4-1E4-1B4 in 50 mM PBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L. The upper half of the plate
had incubation buffer as ’sample’ and the bottom half had healthy human serum.
Both clones were diluted with in same Ab:coater ratio concentrations steps (2-fold
dilution). The desired OD values should be close to 2. The Ab incubation in this
trial was 1 hour at 37◦C. Both clones show a very low reactivity with human serum.
Moreover, the 1B4 clone was tested in a new checkerboard as seen in figure
4.2. The purpose of the new checkerboard was to investigate different Ab:coater
ratios that could be evaluated in the native reactivity trials. Both buffers used,
25mM TBS-BTB 8g NaCl and 50 mM TBS-BTB 8g NaCl, demonstrated OD values
of 2. Furthermore, it can be observed that with relatively low concentrations of
mAb:coater 50ng/ml:5 ng/ml and 20 ng/ml:25 ng/ml (left side of the table), the
1B4 clone consistently showed OD values of 2.
These ratios were selected and
carried into the next phase of assay development to evaluate native reactivity. It is
important to mention that, throughout the checkerboard trials, the 1B4 clone was
tested using various conditions and evaluated with different matrices. This section
presents only the checkerboards with a key role for the assay development.
38
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.2: New checkerboard with the selected 1B4 clone. The figure illustrates
a simple checkerboard only with buffer in multiple ratios. The buffers were 25mM
TBS-BTB 8g NaCl and 50 mM TBS-BTB 8g NaCl. The Ab incubation time was 1
hour at 37◦C.
4.2
Native Reactivity
The aim of the native reactivity experiment was to evaluate whether or not the
mAb can bind to different matrices (serum, plasma, urine).
An ELISA method
was conducted as described in 3.1.7. The figure 4.3 shows how the three different
matrices perform and how they are distributed along the standard curve.
The
native reactivity trial in figure 4.3 is a result of a ratio Ab:coater 5 ng/ml:50 ng/ml
in 25mM TBS-BTB 8g NaCl/L, pH 7.4, which were conditions taken from the
previous checkerboard (see 4.2). The serum (green dots) and plasma (yellow dots)
samples lie in the higher part of the standard curve (blue line), indicating these
samples have very low concentrations of the target analyte (shown by high OD
values). This demonstrates that the mAb cannot detect the target analyte in these
matrices. On the other hand, the urine (red dots) samples are spread better along
the measurement range of the standard curve, demonstrating that urine samples had
a better reactivity with 1B4 clone. A 16-point standard curve was used throughout
all the native reactivity trials. Whilst testing the native reactivity, different ratios
of Ab:coater were trialled in an attempt to increase the sensitivity of the mAb to
serum and plasma samples, but without success.
39
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.3: Native reactivity with different matrices (serum, plasma EDTA and
urine).
The conditions used in this trial were 25mM TBS-BTB 8g NaCl/L, pH
7.4, Ab incubation time of 1 hr and incubation temperature of 37◦C. The coater
concentration was 5 ng/ml and the Ab concentration was 50 ng/ml. Urine samples
(red dots) span between the IC20-IC50, while the plasma and serum samples lie at
the top of the standard curve. The standard curve consists of 16 points with initial
concentration set at 3000 ng/ml.
Additionally, during the native reactivity trials, various buffers were tested.
Buffers with higher salt concentrations are more stringent in facilitating the in-
teraction of mAb with coater. As seen, in figure 4.4, 8 serum samples were tested in
buffers of differing molarity concentrations (25 mM and 50 mM) and differing salt
concentrations (4g and 8g). The ultimate goal was to optimize the assay conditions
in order to detect any response to the native peptide in serum. Despite the different
buffers and Ab and coater concentrations used, the B/B0 ratio of all serum samples
was close to 1 (0.88-1), suggesting the absence of the antigen in serum samples.
This demonstrated a negligible to very low sample competition for the binding sites
of the 1B4 clone. Moreover, different Ab incubation times and temperatures were
tested. A similar procedure was conducted in urine matrix. Based on the primary
reactivity obtained in urine samples (see figure 4.3), our purpose was to evaluate
the reactivity of 8 urine samples in different buffers. Figure 4.5 demonstrates the
40
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4
competition for the binding sites of the 1B4 clone between synthetic peptide and
native sample, which is indicated by lower B/B0 values (0.5-0.8). Urine samples in
buffer 25 mM TBS-BTB 8 g NaCl/L presented the best B/B0 among the others, in
terms of competition (B/B0). From here, we set the final conditions for the COL1A1
assay for use in urine and they are presented in the next section (4.3).
Figure 4.4: Serum reactivity with the 1B4 Ab in different buffers. The B/B0 rep-
resents a ratio of how much of the Ab is reacting with the native sample, where a
value of 1.0 indicates no reactivity.
41
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
50 mM PBS-BTB 8 g NaCl/L
50 mM PBS-BTB 4 g NaCl/L
25 mM PBS-BTB 8 g NaCl/L
25 mM TBS-BTB
4g NaCL/L
25 mM TBS-BTB 8 g NaCl/L
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
URINE
B/B0
Figure 4.5: Urine reactivity in different buffers. The B/B0 represents a ratio of how
much of the Ab is reacting with the native sample, where most of urine samples are
spanning between 0.5-0.8 (B/B0), suggesting a reactivity with mAb 1B4.
42
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4
4.3
The final settings.
The final settings for the COL1A1 were determined using the checkerboard and
native reactivity experiments. An OD close to 2, a promising reactivity with urine
and a good standard curve with slope 0.98-1.07 (see figure 4.6) were established.
These settings will be used for the technical validation and biological relevance
testing.
Table 4.1: The final settings for the COL1A1 assay.
Coating Buffer
25mM TBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L, pH 7.4
Incubation Buffer
25mM TBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L, pH 7.4 + 5% Liq-II
Ab incubation time
1hr
Ab incubation temper-
ature
37°C
mAb concentration
33.3 ng/ml
Coater concentration
5 ng/ml
Figure 4.6: The standard curve for the colorimetric competitive COL1A1 ELISA
with the final settings. The points on the graph represent a 2-fold serial dilution of
the standard peptide with starting concentration 1000 ng/ml.
43
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
4.4
Specificity
4.4.1
Antibody specificity
The purpose of this experiment was to assess the antibody specificity towards the
target neo-epitope from COL1A1, in the final conditions of the assay. Therefore, the
antibody specificity was investigated using a range of synthetic peptides: a standard,
elongated and truncated peptide, a non-sense standard peptide, and a non-sense
coater. The background signal was tested using a non-sense coating peptide which
is a peptide with from a collagen with no sequence similarity (LTGSPGSPGP-K-
Biotin). The figure 4.7 demonstrates that the mAb has a high specificity towards
the target standard sequence shown by the decrease in OD with increasing peptide
concentration. There was no reactivity observed with the truncated or elongated
peptides suggesting that the Ab is even specific to the target amino acid. As ex-
pected, there is no reactivity of Ab with the non-sense peptide or coater.
Figure 4.7:
Assay specificity.
Inhibition curves for the standard peptide
(DDGEAGKPGR), elongated peptide (GDDGEAGKPGR), truncated peptide
(DGEAGKPGR), a non-sense coater and a non-sense peptide. The data are pre-
sented as absorbance (nm) as a function of peptide concentration (ng/ml).
4.4.2
Unspecific binding
Any unspecific binding of the Ab or sample to the streptavidin coated plate was
examined. Figure 4.8 shows eight urine samples with coater (blue bars) and the
same samples without coater (orange bars).The urine samples with the coater show
44
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4
a strong signal, indicating that the coater can bind the mAb, while the same urine
sample without coater show no considerable signal in any of the samples, suggesting
that the Ab is not binding non-specifically to any contents of the well. Therefore,
it can be concluded that no unspecific bindings were observed.
Figure 4.8: Unspecific binding was tested in urine. Eight urine samples were
tested with and without coater.
4.5
Linearity and Minimum Required Dilution.
The aim of investigating the linearity is to ensure that the endogenous analyte can be
measured when diluted showing accuracy in the quantification of the analyte, while
also measuring any matrix effect through several dilutions. Figure 4.9 demonstrates
the linearity of four samples to the standard curve when using TMB substrate,
shown by the samples lying parallel to the standard curve from dilution 1:0 until
1:8, suggesting that the endogenous analyte in the urine samples can be accurately
detected by the mAb even when diluted. At the same time,the same samples were
tested with CLIA substrate to try to increase sensitivity to the Ab.
CLIA also
showed a good dilution linearity from undiluted (1:0) to 1:4 dilution for all four
samples.
Both graphs show that the urine samples can be accurately measured
using different dilutions shown by the decrease parallel to the standard curve.
45
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
peptide concentration (ng/ml)
% of background absorbance (TMB)
std peptide
Urine 1
Urine 2
Urine 3
Urine 4
1:2
1:0
1:4
1:8
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
peptide concentration (ng/ml)
% of background absorbance (CLIA)
std peptide
Urine 1
Urine 2
Urine 3
Urine 4
1:0
1:2
1:4
1:8
Figure 4.9: Linearity.
The figure presents the linearity of four urine samples,
starting from undiluted to 1:8 dilution. The same urine samples were used both with
TMB (left figure) and CLIA (right figure). The data is presented as the percentage
(%) of background absorbance (buffer only), as a function of peptide concentration
(ng/ml) in the log(10) scale.
After investigating linearity, the minimum required dilution (MRD) was deter-
mined for the urine matrix and was calculated based on the dilution recovery from
the concentration of the undiluted samples. Tables 4.2 and 4.3 show the percentage
dilution recovery of the assay both with TMB and CLIA from undiluted samples to
a 1:8 dilution. The acceptance criteria of the recovery percentage (REC%) should
be 100%±20 for at least 75% of the samples. The MRD was determined to be 1:2
dilution for urine matrix when using TMB substrate because the samples passed the
REC% criteria (see table4.2). In section 3.2.1 the REC% is defined by the formula.
Table 4.2: Percentage dilution recovery for the COLA1 assay using human urine
samples and TMB as the substrate. Samples were measured from undiluted to 1:8
dilution. The MRD was determined to be 1:2 as all four samples were between the
accepted range.
TMB
Urine 1
Urine 2
Urine 3
Urine 4
Undiluted
100%
100%
100%
100%
Dilution 1:2
83%
83.8%
81%
120.2%
Dilution 1:4
115.8%
116.3%
95.6%
66.6%
Dilution 1:8
80%
127.8%
94.8%
135.4%
46
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4
Table 4.3: Percentage dilution recovery for the COLA1 assay using human urine
samples and with CLIA as the substrate. Samples were measured from undiluted
to 1:8 dilution.
CLIA
Urine 1
Urine 2
Urine 3
Urine 4
Undiluted
100%
100%
100%
100%
Dilution 1:2
101,7%
105.6%
76.1%
93.8%
Dilution 1:4
104.6%
127.1%
88.3%
110.9%
Dilution 1:8
268.9%
138.9%
138.6%
106.4%
When using CLIA in the assay, there was an accepted MRD of 1:2 due to a REC%
within the acceptance criteria shown in 4.3. However, the CV% was investigated
further and compared with the TMB assay. It can be seen from Figure 4.10, that
the CV% between the same urine samples was much higher in the CLIA experiment.
Therefore, we decided that the TMB substrate could be more robust for continuation
of the technical evaluation. The rest of the technical validation experiments and
biological relevance were conducted using TMB substrate and with an MRD of 1:2,
meaning all samples are diluted by a factor of 2.
Figure 4.10: Comparison of TMB and CLIA between four urine sample that ranged
from undiluted to 1:128 dilution. A CV% below 25% indicates the acceptance thresh-
old. Results are analysed using the Mann-Whitney test. (p=0.0022)
47
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
4.6
Intra-Inter assay variation.
The intra-inter variations were tested using 10 individual runs of the same plate set
up. The CV% is accepted if it is below 10% when comparing samples in duplicate
using the 10 runs and below 15% when comparing samples between the plates in
10 runs. The intra-assay variation CV % was 6.97% and inter-assay variation CV%
was 11.6%. The inter-intra experiment was conducted with dilution factor 1:2 based
on the MRD (defined in previous section).
Table 4.4: Intra-inter assay variations. Eight urine samples and two quality
controls (CO1 and CO2) were used. The concentrations of these samples, spanned
the theoretical measurement range (IC20-IC80).
The mean CV% of intra-assay
variation was 6.97% and for inter-assay variation was 11.6%.
Intra assay variation
Inter assay variation
CO1
7.0
8.5
CO2
5.5
6.4
Sample 1
9.5
9.0
Sample 2
5.7
11.0
Sample 3
6.8
9.3
Sample 4
6.9
13.6
Sample 5
9.8
13.4
Sample 6
4.2
9.5
Sample 7
8.8
10.8
Sample 8
5.5
24.5
48
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4
The standard curve was cut to 12 points from 16 points because the last 4 points
was negligible to the form of the curve. The intra-inter experiments showed a strong
level of reproducibility of the IC25, IC50, IC75 values shown by low CV% values
(see Figure 4.11). The average value of IC50 was 54.2 ng/ml and the slope was 1.078
(see Figure 4.11).
Figure 4.11: Standard curve robustness. Data from the 10 individual runs of the
intra-inter assay experiment.
4.7
Limit of Blank (LOB)
The purpose of the LOB is to identify the analytical signal that can be expected
from a sample without any analyte (blank) [91]. The LOB was calculated by the
average of 60 samples of blank (incubation buffer) plus three standard deviations.
The LOB was determined as 1.82 ng/ml.
4.8
Lower limit of quantification (LLOQ)
The LLOQ was quantified using four urine samples, the first two required a con-
centration above the IC20, while the other two samples needed to be below IC20
(see figure 4.12). The low concentration samples were required to test the absolute
limit of the lowest detection. The graph shows an increasing CV% with decreasing
49
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4
sample concentrations, as we would expect at the lower levels of quantification. The
point where the regression curve intersects the orange criteria line (CV of 20%) on
the graph determines the LLOQ of the assay. Therefore, the LLOQ was determined
as 4.08 ng/ml.
Figure 4.12: The LLOQ of the COL1A1 assay was determined as 4.08 ng/ml using
a regression model of the CV% of very low concentration samples.
Where the
regression curve intersects the orange target line of 20% CV% is the LLOQ.
4.9
Upper limit of quantification (ULOQ)
The ULOQ was determined as the highest standard curve point across the inter-
intra runs, with a CV% ≤25% and a REC% of 100 ± 20%. As seen in Table 4.5,
the standard A (starting concentration of standard curve) had a CV% of 23.1%
and REC% of 100 ± 3.9%, across all 10 independent runs. Hence, the standard A
value was determined as the ULOQ of COL1A1 assay (1000 ng/ml) . The ULOQ
experiment was conducted using the MRD (1:2) defined in section 4.7.
Calibrator
Conc. (ng/ml)
Mean recorded conc. (ng/ml)
SD (ng/ml)
CV%
REC%
STDA
1000
1039.02
240.32
23.1
3.9
STDB
500
513.05
14.83
2.9
2.6
STDC
250
256.5
20.23
7.9
2.6
Table 4.5: Concentration (ng/ml) of the first three standard curve points. Standard
A was determined as the ULOQ of the assay.
50
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4
4.10
Preliminary Biological Relevance.
The COL1A1 competitive ELISA assay was developed and internally validated ac-
cording to quality guidelines used in the R&D department of Nordic Bioscience.
This included establishing parameters of specificity, robustness, accuracy, precision,
linearity, and actual LOB, LLOQ, ULOQ. Therefore, COL1A1 could be preliminary
evaluated in one clinical cohort and one pre-clinical cohort to determine its biological
relevance. All COL1A1 biomarker concentrations of clinical and preclinical samples
were normalized for urinary creatinine (uCr).
4.10.1
IgA Nephropathy cohort.
To investigate whether the COL1A1 assay showed biological relevance, a IgA Nephropa-
thy (IgAN) cohort was tested. The IgAN study included urine samples from IgAN
patients (n=58) and healthy controls (n=16). The levels of COL1A1 were signif-
icantly lower in patients with IgAN compared to healthy controls (p=0.001). To
note, 3 samples out of the 58 IgAN samples were excluded from the analysis, due to
having a CV% higher than 25%.
51
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4
Healthy (n=16)
IgAN (n=55)
0
10
20
30
40
COL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
✱✱
p=0.0012
Figure 4.13: COL1A1 biomarker levels of IgA Nephropathy patients com-
pared to controls. COL1A1 was decreased in patients with IgA Nephropathy.
Mann-Whitney test, ** p= 0.0012
Additionally, to assess the diagnostic performance of COL1A1 a ROC analysis
was performed. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) quantifies the discrimina-
tion of IgAN patients with healthy controls. The AUC was 0.76, sensitivity 83.64%,
specificity 68.75% and the associated criterion (cut-off point) according to this anal-
ysis was 16.062 ng/ml. The COL1A1 biomarker could be used as diagnostic tool
because it demonstrates the ability to identify true positive individuals (Patients
with IgA Nephropathy), meaning it can detect 83.64% of individuals with IgAN
and distinguish them from the healthy individuals (True Negative) with a speci-
ficity of 68.75%.
52
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.14: ROC curve analysis. The COL1A1 biomarker was able to separate
IgAN patients and healthy controls to some extent in this cohort. The AUC was
0.76 (p < 0.001).
The criterion (cutoff) value for this cohort was chosen, and
corresponded to a COL1A1 concentration of 16.062 ng/ml with a sensitivity of
83.64% and a specificity of 68.75%
53
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4
According to their eGFR levels, IgAN patients were classified into CKD stages.
The Figure 4.15 shows the concentration of COL1A1 in IgAN patients with dif-
ferent CKD stages. All CKD groups presented a significant difference in COL1A1
levels compared CKD 1, which is an early stage of CKD. Additionally, there was
a downward trend in COL1A1 biomarker levels with increasing CKD stage and
CKD severity which is further associated with a decline in eGFR. However, one-way
ANOVA analysis did not show statistical difference between CKD stages. Hence,
this downward ”trend” was further explored with a Spearman analysis. The aim of
this analysis was to evaluate if there is any direct correlation between eGFR and
COL1A1 levels. In figure 4.16, the correlation coefficient (r=0.87) indicates a strong
positive correlation between eGFR levels and COL1A1 biomarker levels (p ¡ 0.0001).
Consequently, it can be concluded that when the eGFR levels decrease (pathological
kidney) the levels of COL1A1 also decrease.
CKD 1 
CKD 2
CKD 3A
CKD 3B
CKD 4
CKD 5
0
20
40
60
COL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
✱
✱✱✱
✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
✱✱
CKD 1 (n=6)
CKD 2 (n=12)
CKD 3A (n=10)
CKD 3B (n=7)
CKD 4 (n=13)
CKD 5 (n=2)
Figure 4.15: One way Anova analysis. A multi comparison analysis was performed
for COL1A1 results from patients with IgAN (n=50). A statistical significance is
obtained with patients in CKD 2 , CKD 3A , CKD 3B , CKD 4 , CKD 5 compared
to CKD 1 , which is an early stage of the disease. CKD 1 vs CKD 2 ,* (p= 0.0328);
CKD 1 vs CKD 3A, ***(p=0.0002); CKD1 vs CKD 3B, *** (p= 0.0002); CKD 1
vs CKD 4, **** (p<0.0001); CKD 1 vs CKD 5, **(p=0.0012) . Three samples were
excluded from the One Way Anova analysis due to absence of eGFR data.
54
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.16:
Spearman analysis.
A positive correlation between eGFR and
COL1A1 levels is observed (r=0.87).
The r value indicates that there is a very
strong relationship between eGFR and COL1A1. The p-value indicates the result
is statistically significant.
Finally, a Spearman correlation was performed using the IgAN patient data,
including eGFR, COL1A1, urine creatinine, age and sex (see figure 4.17).
The
heatmap confirmed a positive correlation of eGFR with COL1A1 levels (r=0.87), as
expected. A weak to moderate negative correlation was obtained between COL1A1
and age, demonstrating that as individuals get older the values of COL1A1 de-
cline (r=-0.36). Additionally, a strong negative correlation between urine creatinine
(mg/mL) and eGFR is observed (r=-0.96), suggesting that an impaired kidney func-
tion (low eGFR) excrete more urine creatinine, which is supported in multiple studies
[98],[99] . Moreover, there is a negative correlation between eGFR and age (-0.37),
indicating a decline in eGFR as age increases. Finally, the correlations between sex
with the other variables were low, demonstrating a minimal effect of sex in these
variables.
55
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.17: Spearman correlation Heatmap with all variables (COL1A1, eGFR,
uCR , sex and age). A correlation of 1 indicates a perfect positive correlation while
a correlation coefficient of -1 indicates a perfect negative correlation.
4.10.2
RAAS and SGLT2 inhibitors in diabetic kidney dis-
ease rats.
Two in vivo models were measured to assess any potential treatment affect of the
COL1A1 biomarker. Shortly, diabetic kidney disease was modelled in rats which
then underwent treatment with RAAS and SGLT2 inhibitors. Urine samples were
taken before and after treatment. Urine samples with a CV% above 25% were ex-
cluded from the analysis and all biomarker concentrations were adjusted for uCr
levels. The main purpose of this study was to understand how the induced diabetes
alters the level of the biomarker in a preclinical model. As seen in figure 4.18, STZ-
induced rats from both models demonstrate a significance increase of the COL1A1
biomarker levels before treatment compared to the controls. The left figure illus-
trates the increase in the COL1A1 levels in 25 STZ-induced diabetic rats after 5
weeks (p=0.046). Similarly, the second in vivo model shows a significant increase in
56
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 4
COL1A1 levels in 3 weeks compared to control rats (p=0.0016).
healthy (n=6)
diabetic rats (n=25)
0
50
100
150
COL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
✱
WEEK 5
p=0.046
control (n=11)
diabetic rats (n=24)
0
50
100
150
COL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
✱✱
WEEK 3
p=0.0016
Figure 4.18: Mann-Whitney U-test analysis was conducted to compare diabetic rats
with the healthy controls at week 5 and 3 (before treatment). 8 urine samples from
model 1 and 4 samples from model 2 were excluded due to having a CV% higher
than 25%.
Furthermore, to investigate whether the two treatments (RAAS and SGLT-2
inhibitors) had an effect on the biomarker levels, we compared the levels of COL1A1
at week 5 and week 7 (2 weeks of treatment with RAAS inhibitors) and at week 3 and
week 6 (3 weeks treatment with SGLT-2 inhibitors) directly. Although we observed a
slight decrease in COL1A1 from pre-treatment to post-treatment in most treatment
groups, this was not statistically demonstrated when using Mann-Whitney analysis
(figure 4.19 and 4.20), except for treatment with the SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin,
which presented a decline of COL1A1 in the diabetic rats at week 6 (4.20).
57
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 4
week 5  
week 7
1
10
100
1000
ramipril
logCOL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
ns
p=0.11
week 5  
week 7
1
10
100
1000
losartan
logCOL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
ns
p=0.25
week 5
week 7
1
10
100
1000
spironolactone
logCOL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
ns
p=0.07
week 5  
week 7 
1
10
100
1000
eplerenone
logCOL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
ns
p=0.38
Figure 4.19: Mann-Whitney U-test analysis was conducted to compare different
treatments at week 5 and week 7. None of the rats with RAAS inhibitor treatment
exhibited significant difference (ns) pre- and post-treatment. COL1A1 (ng/ml) is
expressed in logarithmic scale.
58
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 4
week 3
week 6
1
10
100
1000
control+dapagliflozin
logCOL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
ns
p=0.55
week 3
week 6
1
10
100
1000
diabetes+dapagliflozin
logCOL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
✱✱
p=0.0081
week 3
week 6
1
10
100
1000
diabetes+dapagliflozin+losartan
logCOL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
ns
p>0.99
week 3
week 6
1
10
100
1000
diabetes+losartan
logCOL1A1/uCR (ng/mg)
ns
p=0.3
Figure 4.20: Mann-Whitney U-test analysis was conducted to compare different
treatments at week 3 and week 6. Diabetic rats treated with dapagliflozin (SGLT2
inhibitor) demonstrated a decrease in COL1A1 after 3 weeks of treatment (**
p=0.0081), while the remaining treatment groups did not show any response in
COL1A1 levels. COL1A1 is expressed in logarithmic scale.
4.11
Salt Interference.
The next step of our assay development was to investigate and evaluate the salt
interference with the Ab (clone 1B4). A small panel of spiked urine sample with
different concentrations of salt (0 mM, 200 mM, 400 mM, 600 mM, 800 mM) was
tested.
As seen in figure 4.21, by increasing the salt concentration of a urine sample,
the OD decreased, indicating that the salt is causing changes in the ionic strength
and the physical properties of the mAb might be influenced. The mAb 1B4 was
tested in the assay parameters: 20 hr at 4◦C, and 1 hr at 37◦C. Both experiments
demonstrated salt interference, shown by the increasing concentration of COL1A1
with increased salt levels.
59
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.21: Standard curves for the 1B4 clone under different assay conditions.
The data is presented as absorbance versus peptide concentration (ng/ml). The
table represents the biomarker concentration at various salt concentrations with 20
hr and 1 hr incubation time at different temperature which are also plotted on the
graph. The concentrations used in 20 hr incubation were 5 ng/ml coater and 25
ng/ml mAb. The concentrations used in 1hr incubation were 5 ng/ml coater and
33.33 ng/ml mAb.
Then, we tested the other clone 1E5 with the same urine samples with different
salt concentrations, which also showed salt interference between the mAb and the
additional salt in the urine sample (see figure 4.22).
60
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.22: Standard curve for the 1E5 clone at 20 hr incubation time and 4◦C.
The y-axis presents the absorbance and the x-axis shows the peptide concentration
(ng/ml). The increasing salt concentrations are scattered in a part of the measure-
ment range of the standard curve. Concentrations used 10 ng/ml coater and 50
ng/ml mAb.
Finally, figure 4.23 shows the interfering effect of added salt on the COL1A1
recovery % in urine for both clones. With increasing concentrations of NaCl, the
COL1A1 recovery falls out the acceptance criteria of 100±20% and therefore there is
a greater interfering effect. An accurate and consistent biomarker should fall within
the recovery range, ensuring that the biomarker results are reliable. Moreover, we
can observe in concentrations between 400 to 800 mmol both mAbs (1B4 and 1E5)
reach a plateau in the recovery range.
61
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 4
0
200
400
600
800
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
NaCl (mmol/L)
COL1A1 Recovery (%)
1B4 (20hrs/4°C)
1B4 (1hr/37°C)
0
200
400
600
800
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
NaCl (mmol/L)
COL1A1 Recovery (%)
1E5 (20hrs/4°C)
A
B
Figure 4.23: COL1A1 recovery related to matrix salt concentration using
both clones with different incubation time and incubation temperature.
The figure represents the interfering effect of salt (NaCl) on COL1A1 concentrations.
A) The blue line illustrates the recovery of COL1A1 in different salt concentration
of clone 1B4 with assay conditions of 20 hrs at 4◦C. The green line indicates the
recovery of COL1A1 of clone 1B4 with assay conditions 1 hr at 37 ◦C. B) The black
line illustrates the recovery of COL1A1 in different salt concentrations of clone 1E5
with assay conditions 20 hrs at 4◦C.
62
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Assay Optimization.
The present study describes the development and validation of a novel competitive
ELISA assay for the detection of a peptide fragment of the collagen type I alpha-1
chain. A successfully developed assay should meet all the acceptable criteria and
undergo technical validation to ensure specificity, accuracy, precision and robustness
[100]. This section presents the analysis of the results along with the decisions made
during this phase.
Prior to technical validation, the best Ab clone was selected to be further devel-
oped. The best clone was determined using the checkerboard method by optimizing
the optimal Ab concentration with coater (peptide) concentration. The 1B4 clone
seemed to be more specific and sensitive, according to early performance evaluation
under various assay conditions. During the development phase, optimal Ab:Coater
concentration was established, as well as incubation time and incubation tempera-
ture (see table 4.3). Among all the matrices tested, the urine matrix demonstrated
the only Ab reactivity to the sample using the final settings which have been selected.
In early experiments, using urine presented encouraging results due to samples be-
ing spread between IC20 and IC50. Unwanted interactions between mAb and native
sample were reduced by using buffers with high salt concentrations [101]. Favorable
conditions were associated with 25 mM TBS-BTB, 8g NaCl/L, pH 8 buffer which
demonstrated a low CV% in urine samples and a good level of Ab reactivity with
urine samples.
The mAb specificity towards the neo-epitope (DDGEAGKPGR) from COL1A1
was assessed against different synthetic peptides, including the truncated (DGEAGKPGR)
and the elongated (GDDGEAGKPGR). The mAb displayed a high specificity to-
wards both the target peptide and the specific amino acids at the N-terminus of the
63
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 5
peptide (see Figure 4.7).
Linearity was observed in urine samples both in TMB and CLIA trials. The
MRD for urine was established to be 1:2 (Table 4.2), showing that the biomarker
remains detectable even after removing the matrix effect. The CLIA method was in-
troduced in order to increase the sensitivity and enhance the detection of biomarker
concentrations, however, high CV% values between the samples led us to not con-
tinue with CLIA (see Figure 4.10).
The intra-inter assay aimed to assess precision. The intra-assay measures the
variability of the replicate samples within the same plate (repeatability), while the
inter-assay variation measures the variability among replicate samples across dif-
ferent ELISA plates (reproducibility). Both intra and inter variations were in the
accepted CV% range. The acceptance criteria specifies that intra-assay variation
should be less than 10% and inter-assay variation should be below 15% [102] [103].
The robustness of the standard curve and the ULOQ were established during the
intra-inter assay variation, with the ULOQ found to be at 1000 ng/ml. Finally,
the accuracy and precision was defined by measuring the LLOQ because the LLOQ
value plays a significant role in assay’s sensitivity [104].
The LLOQ reveals the
lowest point of the calibration curve, which can be considered reliable and accurate
and was established at 4.08 ng/ml. The COL1A1 assay was characterized as being a
technically robust and sensitive assay, with a slope close to 1 and the measurement
range from 4.08 ng/ml to 1000 ng/ml. Finally, all validation experiments described
in this section achieved the criteria set by Nordic Bioscience for continuing with
testing biological relevance.
5.2
Preliminary Biological Relevance.
5.2.1
IgA Nephropathy cohort.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic value of the COL1A1 biomarker
in patients with IgA Nephropathy. Immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy is a preva-
lent form of glomerulonephritis, and is caused by the deposition of IgA in the GBM,
leading to renal failure [105]. Using COL1A1, we observed decreased urine levels
of COL1A1 in individuals with IgAN compared to healthy controls. This outcome
aligns with the hypothesis of Good et al. [81] and Rossing et al. [93], who reported
that many of the collagen type I fragments were reduced in CKD patients when an-
alyzed using a high resolution capillary electrophoresis coupled with MS. This could
potentially be explained by the decreased activity of collagenases in CKD patients,
64
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 5
especially in diabetic nephropathy patients. Moreover, the authors hypothesize that
reduced activity of MMPs might lead to the accumulation of proteins and collagens
in the ECM, which is typical of the fibrotic kidney [93]. The decreased number of
MMPs could be due to the increased synthesis of protease inhibitors. Interestingly,
Krag et al. [106] investigated a transgenic mouse model with renal over-expression
of TGF-β1 and observed increased levels of COL1A1 protein and TIMP-1. More
precisely, the increased levels of collagen and TIMP-1 were observed in the glomeruli
and interstitial areas of mouse kidney [106]. Therefore, based on the previously de-
scribed findings, high levels of TIMP-1 could account for the the decrease of urinary
collagen type I peptides observed in CKD patients.
Notably, Mavrogeorgis and his team in a recent study [107], demonstrates the
imminent role of COL1A1 in kidney fibrosis.
From a human Urinary Proteome
Database of 5000 urinary peptidomic datasets (both healthy individuals and CKD
patients), they detected 707 COL1A1 peptides from 100 participants and those
with unique sequences derived from different PTMs were investigated. Nearly 94%
of these peptides originated from the mature COL1A1 protein, supporting their
hypothesis that these are degradation fragments of mature collagen type I a1 chain
[107]. However, a Western Blot analysis could be used to give a more comprehensive
overview in understanding the PTMs (events of cleavage) that lead to the formation
of the targeted degradation fragment (peptide) of COL1A1 (231DDGEAGKPGR240)
in this project. Moreover, Mavrogeorgis et al. [107] also reports 10 COL1A1 peptides
with a positive correlation with eGFR, indicating that higher levels of these peptides
are associated with better kidney function.
Interestingly, one of these peptides
(NGDDGEAGKPGRpGERGPpGPQG) [107] includes the 10 amino acid sequence
of our COL1A1 biomarker (231DDGEAGKPGR240).
The ROC curve analysis was performed to assess the sensitivity (True Positive
Rate) and specificity (False Positive Rate) of COL1A1 biomarker [108]. Each point
on the ROC indicates a sensitivity/specificity pair corresponding to a particular
threshold. An AUC can distinguish patients with IgAN nephropathy and healthy
patients. The COL1A1 biomarker showed a promising statistically significant level
and AUC value of 0.76, indicating that the biomarker could distinguish most patients
in this cohort. The optimal cut-off value was found to be at 16.062 ng/ml. The cut-
off value is not only important due to the maximal sensitivity and specificity obtained
in the biomarker, but also due to it’s ability to obtain a suitable compromise between
them. To our knowledge, a diagnostic biomarker should be correctly classify patients
according to true positive (TP) and true negative (TN) value .
Finally, a Spearman analysis in IgAN cohort demonstrated a very strong pos-
65
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5
itive correlation between eGFR and COL1A1 biomarker levels (see Figure 4.16).
Our findings align with the hypothesis and conclusions drawn by Good et al. [81]
and Mavrogeorgis et al. [107], demonstrating that collagen-derived biomarkers are
reduced in the urine of CKD patients and a positive correlation with eGFR is ob-
served. This positive correlation could suggest that COL1A1 biomarker can reflect
the kidney function in terms of eGFR levels (healthy or diseased kidney). COL1A1
biomarker demonstrated a very strong correlation with eGFR levels , suggesting it’s
ability to reflect kidney function while also implying alterations in collagen type I.
5.2.2
RAAS and SGLT2 inhibitors in diabetic kidney dis-
ease rats.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of different medica-
tions and monitor changes in the COL1A1 levels in rats with diabetic kidney disease.
Biomarker research needs to develop novel markers that can provide insights into
disease activity and response to various treatments. Recent studies have shown that
RAAS and SGLT-2 inhibitors impact many cellular processes (inflammation, hy-
poxia, oxidative stress) which all are related with renal fibrosis [109]. The results
from the two in vivo models do not provide any significance difference in COL1A1
biomarker levels from pre-treatment to post-treatment, except the group with dia-
betic rats treated with dapagliflozin. Several published studies are demonstrating
the consistent benefits of dapagliflozin in the kidney, regardless of whether the pa-
tients have type 2 diabetes or not. Moreover, results from different studies provide
evidence that the co-administration of dapagliflozin with losartan is beneficial for
CKD individuals as it slows the progression of the disease [110] ,[111] , however in
our results this was not observed (see graph diabetes+dapagliflozin+losartan 4.20).
McEwan et al. recently showed that patients at high risk of CKD progression in to
final CKD stages, experienced a delay of progression by 6.6 years when treated with
dapagliflozin [112]. Recent research suggests that SGLT-2 inhibitors can suppress
the TGF-β1 signalling pathway and glomerular fibrosis has been associated with el-
evated levels of TGF-β1 [113], therefore, potentially explaining the decreased levels
of COL1A1 in diabetic rats treated with dapagliflozin after 3 weeks.
5.2.3
The use COL1A1 in preclinical models versus human
diseases.
It is important to assess the use of the COL1A1 biomarker in animal models com-
pared to human studies to help with the translation from preclinical to clinical
66
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 5
studies. Although some of the preclinical models share anatomical and physiologi-
cal similarities with humans, it can be difficult to bridge the results between animal
and human studies [114]. In our studies, we observe that the biomarker change from
control to kidney disease is different in diabetic rats compared to IgA Nephropathy
individuals. In the IgAN cohort, the COL1A1 biomarker decreases compared to the
healthy controls, whereas, in rats, the biomarker increases against controls. The
observed difference could be due to the differences in rates of disease progression,
where rats are quickly induced as diabetic using STZ, while in humans the pro-
gression of the disease is slower and often related to a combination of comorbidities
[115]. Therefore, the quick onset of disease in rats could justify the higher levels of
biomarker through the increased collagen turnover, however, in humans the turnover
is slower and hence the biomarker is reduced. Additionally, at present, the animal
models that are used for CKD research are not reflective of clinical kidney disease
in older patients and there is no perfect animal for human disease which could also
reflect the differences observed [116].
5.3
Troubleshooting.
Before we proceed with the evaluation of biological relevance of the COL1A1 biomarker
in larger cohorts, it was necessary to check if there was any salt interference in the
assay due to fluctuating levels found in urine. During this experiment, both clones
(1B4 and 1E5) were assessed and both clones showed salt interference. Therefore,
we could hypothesis that 1B4 clone with the conditions outlined in Table 4.3 could
interfere the binding with the native sample when NaCl in urine samples increases.
This interference could be due to salt affecting the Ab structure or it’s binding
affinity.
The newly found salt interference with the COL1A1 Ab lead us to reconsider the
positive results of the IgA Nephropathy (see figure4.13). To our knowledge, urine
salt levels fluctuate between healthy and diseased patients, suggesting a higher urine
salt content in control individuals compared to kidney disease individuals [96]. By
increasing the salt concentration, the ionic strength of the solution (pH and salt)
could affect the binding affinity between mAb and peptide. Hence, changes in elec-
trostatic interactions can affect the aggregation state of the mAb by changing the
conformation state of the Fab (Fragment antigen binding domains) and Fc (Frag-
ment crystallizable) regions of the Ab [117]. However, the current study does not
include any studies on the kinetics of the mAb nor explores relationship between
the affinity of the mAb with the peptide or salt.
67
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5
Consequently, it would be interesting to understand the common sodium excre-
tion levels both in healthy and diseased patients. Kang et al. demonstrates that
in a cohort of CKD patients (n=1937), in which 24-hour urinary sodium excretion
was measured, the median 24h urinary sodium excretion was 151.0 mEq/day [118].
Additionally, Jaques et al. conducted a study involving 16 healthy volunteers ran-
domly divided in three salt intake groups. After 7 days, they measured sodium
excretion and found it to be 10 mmol/day for the low salt group, 87 mmol/day for
the normal salt group and 258 mmol/day for the high salt group [119]. Both studies
outline the sodium urinary excretion to not exceed the 250 mmol/day. Therefore,
renal function has a key role in sodium excretion in urine so it would be valuable to
investigate what happens to the mAb between 0 mM - 200 mM ( see figure 4.21).
68
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 5
5.4
Approaches and challenges to minimize un-
specific bindings.
Urinary biomarkers in certain circumstances can outperform serum. Urine can re-
flect changes in the body over time faster than serum making a reliable source of
early biomarkers [120],[121]. However, urine has not a stable environment and tends
to affect the sensitivity and specificity of ELISA immunoassays as it can be easily
influenced by urinary ions. In ELISA assays, the mAb is the integral part of the im-
munoassay and the assays sensitivity, specificity and accuracy are highly correlated
to it [122]. Liu et al. developed a high salt tolerant mAb able to detect a small
molecule in sheep urine directly with ELISA which could tolerate up to 5 M NaCl so-
lution. The researchers used the ImMunoGeneTics information system to optimize
the complementary determing region (CDR) of their clone. The process involved al-
tering the DNA sequence encoding the CDR and substitutions or rearrangements of
specific amino acids. Then, the desired genetic sequence of the mAb was expressed
in mammalian cells and they produced a highly salt tolerant engineered clone [123].
The known critical amino acid residues within the CDRs of the mAb were analyzed
to see if they are susceptible to salt reactivity. Moreover, computational methods,
such as molecular docking and homology modeling can evaluate and predict salt re-
activity with desired mAbs by simulating interactions with positive salt ions [123].
Finally, the described engineered mAb demonstrated a high specificity among 15
structural analogs, and its precision and accuracy were successfully evaluated. This
method could be suitable to predict not only salt reactivity but simulate protein-
protein interactions (interactions with albumin) with mAbs developed to be used in
serum biomarkers.
Another approach outlined in several studies is desalting and dialysis of urine
samples. Unfortunately, several available ELISA kits on the market demonstrated a
disappointing performance during technical validation [124]. Furthermore, a study
presented a urinary aldosterone CLIA assay showing salt interference in a similar salt
panel used for COL1A1 assay. Although the urine samples were hydrolyzed in 0.2 M
HCl and subsequently neutralized with a specific buffer (Liason Aldo Neutralization
Buffer), this dialysis methods did not appear to outperform the desalting method
[94].
69
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Future Research and Limitations
Future research could be conducted to re-evaluate the assay conditions, such as, to
use high molarity buffers which can retain the ionic abilities of the antibody. An
alternative approach could be to reduce the concentration of coater and increase
the mAb concentration, aiming to force the mAb to bind with the native sample,
by reducing the binding sites on the synthetic peptide. In addition, it would be
interesting to use AlphaFold to visualize the 3D structure of the mAb and with
Chimera and PyMOL to analyze potential interactions with the antigen as well
as with inorganic salts. The technical evaluation of the biomarker needs further
exploration to confirm stability of the assay, including performing freeze-thaw and kit
stress tests. Furthermore, cleavage experiments could be implemented to investigate
which enzymes are responsible for the cleavage site of the COL1A1 fragment. In
order to confirm the presence and distribution of the COL1A1 fragment in the
kidney, immunohistochemical staining of kidney tissue could be performed. Lastly,
the main limitation of this study was the limited urine volume of both clinical and
preclinical samples. Therefore, the results reflect the outcome of a single run of the
biological relevance experiment in both cohorts.
70
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
Fibrosis, resulting from dysregulated ECM, is a major health concern that imposes
burdens on affected individuals and healthcare system worldwide. The complexity
of its pathogenesis, combined with its diverse aetiology and different clinical man-
ifestations, points out the urgent need for the development of effective diagnostic
and monitoring non-invasive biomarkers. These tools are crucial for an early de-
tection and intervention to slow or prevent the progression of kidney fibrosis. The
gold standard for diagnosing renal fibrosis is through invasive biopsies, which can be
painful for patients. The use of collagen-derived biomarkers could be a valuable aid
in early detection of fibrosis and disease monitoring, as collagens have been shown
to be indicative markers of kidney fibrosis. Approximately 9-13% of the global pop-
ulation is affected by CKD and a high number of patients having ESRD requiring
dialysis or kidney transplantation.
During this project, a competitive colorimetric ELISA was successfully developed
for the detection of COL1A1 fragments in urine. Throughout the validation phase,
the biomarker was successfully validated, demonstrating robustness, specificity and
accuracy. Moreover, COL1A1 was assessed in two different clinical cohorts, IgAN
patients and rats with diabetic kidney disease. Although COL1A1 was able to distin-
guish healthy controls with diseased patients, presenting the diagnostic potential of
the biomarker, and the correlation between eGFR and COL1A1 was aligned with the
original scientists’ hypotheses regarding these collagen fragments in CKD patients,
the results of salt interference limited our expectations and lead us to reconsider
the findings. Moreover, the rat study demonstrated an increase in the biomarker
compared to controls but no treatment effect of the biomarker.
Finally, the ultimate goal of the thesis was to develop an ELISA immunoassay,
validate it and then evaluate it in different cohorts. While our findings indicate that
COL1A1 biomarker might be hampered by salt interference, the field of collagen
71
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 7
type I biomarkers remains promising and requires further investigation.
72
==PAGE:82==
References
[1]
Zaher A. Radi. “Kidney Pathophysiology, Toxicology, and Drug-Induced In-
jury in Drug Development”. In: International Journal of Toxicology 38.3
(Mar. 2019), pp. 215–227. issn: 1092-874X. doi: 10.1177/1091581819831701.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1091581819831701.
[2]
Ikenna Ogobuiro and Fabio Tuma. Physiology, Renal. Updated 2023 Jul 24.
Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK538339/.
StatPearls Publishing, 2023.
[3]
Miriam A. Wallace. “Anatomy and Physiology of the Kidney”. In: AORN
Journal 68.5 (Nov. 1998), pp. 799–820. issn: 1878-0369. doi: 10 . 1016 /
s0001-2092(06)62377-6. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0001-
2092(06)62377-6.
[4]
Orson W. Moe, Gerhard H. Giebisch, and Donald W. Seldin. “Logic of the
Kidney”. In: Genetic Diseases of the Kidney. Elsevier, 2009, pp. 39–73. isbn:
9780124498518. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-449851-8.00003-6. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-449851-8.00003-6.
[5]
Qais Al-Awqati and Jonathan Barasch. “Structure and Function of the Kid-
neys”. In: Goldman’s Cecil Medicine: Twenty Fourth Edition. 24th ed. Vol. 1.
Elsevier, 2012.
[6]
Ivan V. Murray and Michael A. Paolini. Histology, Kidney and Glomerulus.
Updated 2023 Apr 17. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK554544/. StatPearls Publishing, 2023.
[7]
Beatrice Yue. “Biology of the Extracellular Matrix: An Overview”. In: Jour-
nal of Glaucoma 23 (2014), S20–S23. issn: 1057-0829. doi: 10.1097/ijg.
0000000000000108. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/IJG.0000000000000108.
[8]
Juliane Winkler et al. “Concepts of extracellular matrix remodelling in tu-
mour progression and metastasis”. In: Nature Communications 11.1 (Oct.
2020). issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-18794-x. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-18794-x.
73
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 7
[9]
Simona Pompili et al. “The Charming World of the Extracellular Matrix:
A Dynamic and Protective Network of the Intestinal Wall”. In: Frontiers in
Medicine 8 (Apr. 2021). issn: 2296-858X. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.610189.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2021.610189.
[10]
Kevin Dzobo and Collet Dandara. “The Extracellular Matrix: Its Composi-
tion, Function, Remodeling, and Role in Tumorigenesis”. In: Biomimetics 8.2
(Apr. 2023), p. 146. issn: 2313-7673. doi: 10.3390/biomimetics8020146.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/biomimetics8020146.
[11]
Jenny Kruegel and Nicolai Miosge. “Basement membrane components are
key players in specialized extracellular matrices”. In: Cellular and Molecular
Life Sciences 67.17 (Apr. 2010), pp. 2879–2895. issn: 1420-9071. doi: 10.
1007/s00018-010-0367-x. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00018-
010-0367-x.
[12]
Anna C. Erickson and John R. Couchman. “Still More Complexity in Mam-
malian Basement Membranes”. In: Journal of Histochemistry amp; Cyto-
chemistry 48.10 (Oct. 2000), pp. 1291–1306. issn: 1551-5044. doi: 10.1177/
002215540004801001. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/002215540004801001.
[13]
Valentina Poltavets et al. “The Role of the Extracellular Matrix and Its
Molecular and Cellular Regulators in Cancer Cell Plasticity”. In: Frontiers in
Oncology 8 (Oct. 2018). issn: 2234-943X. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2018.00431.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2018.00431.
[14]
R. O. Hynes and A. Naba. “Overview of the Matrisome–An Inventory of
Extracellular Matrix Constituents and Functions”. In: Cold Spring Harbor
Perspectives in Biology 4.1 (Sept. 2011), a004903–a004903. issn: 1943-0264.
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a004903. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/
cshperspect.a004903.
[15]
Christian Frantz, Kathleen M. Stewart, and Valerie M. Weaver. “The extra-
cellular matrix at a glance”. In: Journal of Cell Science 123.24 (Dec. 2010),
pp. 4195–4200. issn: 0021-9533. doi: 10.1242/jcs.023820. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1242/jcs.023820.
[16]
Patricia Rousselle, Marine Montmasson, and C´ecile Garnier. “Extracellular
matrix contribution to skin wound re-epithelialization”. In: Matrix Biology
75–76 (Jan. 2019), pp. 12–26. issn: 0945-053X. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.
2018.01.002. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2018.01.002.
74
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 7
[17]
Janna K. Mouw, Guanqing Ou, and Valerie M. Weaver. “Extracellular matrix
assembly: a multiscale deconstruction”. In: Nature Reviews Molecular Cell
Biology 15.12 (Nov. 2014), pp. 771–785. issn: 1471-0080. doi: 10.1038/
nrm3902. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrm3902.
[18]
Michael J. Mienaltowski et al. “Basic Structure, Physiology, and Biochem-
istry of Connective Tissues and Extracellular Matrix Collagens”. In: Progress
in Heritable Soft Connective Tissue Diseases. Springer International Publish-
ing, 2021, pp. 5–43. isbn: 9783030806149. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-80614-
9_2. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_2.
[19]
Igor Tvaroˇska. “Glycosylation Modulates the Structure and Functions of Col-
lagen: A Review”. In: Molecules 29.7 (Mar. 2024), p. 1417. issn: 1420-3049.
doi: 10.3390/molecules29071417. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
molecules29071417.
[20]
David F. Holmes et al. “Collagen Fibril Assembly and Function”. In: Extra-
cellular Matrix and Egg Coats. Elsevier, 2018, pp. 107–142. doi: 10.1016/
bs.ctdb.2018.02.004. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/bs.ctdb.
2018.02.004.
[21]
Jie Li and Robert S Kirsner. “Wound Healing”. In: Surgery of the Skin.
Elsevier, 2005, pp. 97–115. isbn: 9780323027526. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-
323-02752-6.50012-2. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-
02752-6.50012-2.
[22]
K Gelse. “Collagens—structure, function, and biosynthesis”. In: Advanced
Drug Delivery Reviews 55.12 (Nov. 2003), pp. 1531–1546. issn: 0169-409X.
doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2003.08.002. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.addr.2003.08.002.
[23]
Bruce M. Carlson. “Tissues”. In: The Human Body. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 27–63.
isbn: 9780128042540. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-804254-0.00002-8. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804254-0.00002-8.
[24]
Tatsuo USHIKI. “Collagen Fibers, Reticular Fibers and Elastic Fibers. A
Comprehensive Understanding from a Morphological Viewpoint.” In: Archives
of Histology and Cytology 65.2 (2002), pp. 109–126. issn: 1349-1717. doi:
10.1679/aohc.65.109. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1679/aohc.65.109.
[25]
Lourdes Alcaide-Ruggiero et al. “Main and Minor Types of Collagens in the
Articular Cartilage: The Role of Collagens in Repair Tissue Evaluation in
Chondral Defects”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22.24
75
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 7
(Dec. 2021), p. 13329. issn: 1422-0067. doi: 10.3390/ijms222413329. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijms222413329.
[26]
S. Georges et al. “Proteases and bone remodelling”. In: Cytokine amp; Growth
Factor Reviews 20.1 (Feb. 2009), pp. 29–41. issn: 1359-6101. doi: 10.1016/
j.cytogfr.2008.11.005. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cytogfr.
2008.11.005.
[27]
Agata Jab lo´nska-Trypu´c, Marzena Matejczyk, and Stanis law Rosochacki.
“Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), the main extracellular matrix (ECM)
enzymes in collagen degradation, as a target for anticancer drugs”. In: Journal
of Enzyme Inhibition and Medicinal Chemistry 31.sup1 (Mar. 2016), pp. 177–
183. issn: 1475-6374. doi: 10.3109/14756366.2016.1161620. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3109/14756366.2016.1161620.
[28]
Roderick J. Tan and Youhua Liu. “Matrix metalloproteinases in kidney home-
ostasis and diseases”. In: American Journal of Physiology-Renal Physiology
302.11 (June 2012), F1351–F1361. issn: 1522-1466. doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.
00037.2012. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00037.2012.
[29]
J. M. Catania, G. Chen, and A. R. Parrish. “Role of matrix metallopro-
teinases in renal pathophysiologies”. In: American Journal of Physiology-
Renal Physiology 292.3 (Mar. 2007), F905–F911. issn: 1522-1466. doi: 10.
1152 / ajprenal . 00421 . 2006. url: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1152 /
ajprenal.00421.2006.
[30]
Hong Zhao. “Matrix metalloproteinases contribute to kidney fibrosis in chronic
kidney diseases”. In: World Journal of Nephrology 2.3 (2013), p. 84. issn:
2220-6124. doi: 10.5527/wjn.v2.i3.84. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
5527/wjn.v2.i3.84.
[31]
Oskar Zakiyanov et al. “Matrix Metalloproteinases in Renal Diseases: A Crit-
ical Appraisal”. In: Kidney and Blood Pressure Research 44.3 (2019), pp. 298–
330. issn: 1423-0143. doi: 10.1159/000499876. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1159/000499876.
[32]
Nuria Garcia-Fernandez et al. “Matrix Metalloproteinases in Diabetic Kidney
Disease”. In: Journal of Clinical Medicine 9.2 (Feb. 2020), p. 472. issn: 2077-
0383. doi: 10.3390/jcm9020472. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
jcm9020472.
76
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 7
[33]
H NAGASE, R VISSE, and G MURPHY. “Structure and function of ma-
trix metalloproteinases and TIMPs”. In: Cardiovascular Research 69.3 (Feb.
2006), pp. 562–573. issn: 0008-6363. doi: 10.1016/j.cardiores.2005.12.
002. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cardiores.2005.12.002.
[34]
Roman David B¨ulow and Peter Boor. “Extracellular Matrix in Kidney Fi-
brosis: More Than Just a Scaffold”. In: Journal of Histochemistry amp; Cy-
tochemistry 67.9 (May 2019), pp. 643–661. issn: 1551-5044. doi: 10.1369/
0022155419849388. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1369/0022155419849388.
[35]
Evelyne Fischer et al. “Abnormal expression of glomerular basement mem-
brane laminins in membranous glomerulonephritis”. In: Nephrology Dialy-
sis Transplantation 15.12 (Dec. 2000), pp. 1956–1964. issn: 0931-0509. doi:
10.1093/ndt/15.12.1956. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ndt/15.
12.1956.
[36]
Rachel Lennon et al. “Global Analysis Reveals the Complexity of the Human
Glomerular Extracellular Matrix”. In: Journal of the American Society of
Nephrology 25.5 (May 2014), pp. 939–951. issn: 1046-6673. doi: 10.1681/
asn.2013030233. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2013030233.
[37]
Christine Chew and Rachel Lennon. “Basement Membrane Defects in Genetic
Kidney Diseases”. In: Frontiers in Pediatrics 6 (Jan. 2018). issn: 2296-2360.
doi: 10.3389/fped.2018.00011. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/
fped.2018.00011.
[38]
Federica Genovese et al. “The extracellular matrix in the kidney: a source
of novel non-invasive biomarkers of kidney fibrosis?” In: Fibrogenesis amp;
Tissue Repair 7.1 (Mar. 2014). issn: 1755-1536. doi: 10.1186/1755-1536-
7-4. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1755-1536-7-4.
[39]
Maria Gnoli et al. “COL1-Related Disorders: Case Report and Review of
Overlapping Syndromes”. In: Frontiers in Genetics 12 (May 2021). issn:
1664-8021. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.640558. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.3389/fgene.2021.640558.
[40]
Ryojun Takeda et al. “Clinical and molecular features of patients with ¡scp¿COL1¡/scp¿-
related disorders: Implications for the wider spectrum and the risk of vascular
complications”. In: American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A 188.9 (July
2022), pp. 2560–2575. issn: 1552-4833. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62887. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62887.
77
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 7
[41]
Christian G.M. van Dijk et al. “Extracellular Matrix Analysis of Human
Renal Arteries in Both Quiescent and Active Vascular State”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Molecular Sciences 21.11 (May 2020), p. 3905. issn: 1422-
0067. doi: 10.3390/ijms21113905. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
ijms21113905.
[42]
Boris Bikbov et al. “Global, regional, and national burden of chronic kidney
disease, 1990–2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2017”. In: The Lancet 395.10225 (Feb. 2020), pp. 709–733. issn: 0140-
6736. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30045-3. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30045-3.
[43]
William G. Couser et al. “The contribution of chronic kidney disease to the
global burden of major noncommunicable diseases”. In: Kidney International
80.12 (Dec. 2011), pp. 1258–1270. issn: 0085-2538. doi: 10.1038/ki.2011.
368. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ki.2011.368.
[44]
Joachim Jankowski et al. “Cardiovascular Disease in Chronic Kidney Dis-
ease: Pathophysiological Insights and Therapeutic Options”. In: Circula-
tion 143.11 (Mar. 2021), pp. 1157–1172. issn: 1524-4539. doi: 10.1161/
circulationaha . 120 . 050686. url: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1161 /
CIRCULATIONAHA.120.050686.
[45]
Yuni Choi et al. “Progression of Chronic Kidney Disease Risk Categories and
Risk of Cardiovascular Disease and Total Mortality: Coronary Artery Risk
Development in Young Adults Cohort”. In: Journal of the American Heart
Association 11.21 (Nov. 2022). issn: 2047-9980. doi: 10.1161/jaha.122.
026685. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.122.026685.
[46]
Don C. Rockey, P. Darwin Bell, and Joseph A. Hill. “Fibrosis — A Common
Pathway to Organ Injury and Failure”. In: New England Journal of Medicine
372.12 (Mar. 2015). Ed. by Dan L. Longo, pp. 1138–1149. issn: 1533-4406.
doi: 10 . 1056 / nejmra1300575. url: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1056 /
NEJMra1300575.
[47]
Rongshuang Huang, Ping Fu, and Liang Ma. “Kidney fibrosis: from mecha-
nisms to therapeutic medicines”. In: Signal Transduction and Targeted Ther-
apy 8.1 (Mar. 2023). issn: 2059-3635. doi: 10.1038/s41392-023-01379-7.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023-01379-7.
[48]
Noriyuki Yamashita and Rafael Kramann. “Mechanisms of kidney fibrosis
and routes towards therapy”. In: Trends in Endocrinology amp; Metabolism
78
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 7
35.1 (Jan. 2024), pp. 31–48. issn: 1043-2760. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2023.
09.001. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2023.09.001.
[49]
Nikolaos G. Frangogiannis. “Transforming growth factor– in tissue fibrosis”.
In: Journal of Experimental Medicine 217.3 (Feb. 2020). issn: 1540-9538.
doi: 10.1084/jem.20190103. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1084/jem.
20190103.
[50]
Yi Long et al. “Mechanical communication in fibrosis progression”. In: Trends
in Cell Biology 32.1 (Jan. 2022), pp. 70–90. issn: 0962-8924. doi: 10.1016/
j.tcb.2021.10.002. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2021.10.
002.
[51]
Kristin P. Kim, Caitlin E. Williams, and Christopher A. Lemmon. “Cell–Matrix
Interactions in Renal Fibrosis”. In: Kidney and Dialysis 2.4 (Dec. 2022),
pp. 607–624. issn: 2673-8236. doi: 10 . 3390 / kidneydial2040055. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/kidneydial2040055.
[52]
Terry KW Ma et al. “Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system blockade for
cardiovascular diseases: current status”. In: British Journal of Pharmacology
160.6 (June 2010), pp. 1273–1292. issn: 1476-5381. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-
5381 . 2010 . 00750 . x. url: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1476 -
5381.2010.00750.x.
[53]
Sunil Bhandari et al. “Renin–Angiotensin System Inhibition in Advanced
Chronic Kidney Disease”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 387.22 (Dec.
2022), pp. 2021–2032. issn: 1533-4406. doi: 10.1056/nejmoa2210639. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2210639.
[54]
Osamu Yamazaki and Shigeru Shibata. “Another evidence that supports the
continued use of RAS inhibitors in end-stage kidney diseases”. In: Hyperten-
sion Research 47.7 (Apr. 2024), pp. 1984–1986. issn: 1348-4214. doi: 10.
1038/s41440-024-01695-7. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41440-
024-01695-7.
[55]
Cosimo Cosimato, Thomas Agoritsas, and Thomas A. Mavrakanas. “Min-
eralocorticoid receptor antagonists in patients with chronic kidney disease”.
In: Pharmacology amp; Therapeutics 219 (Mar. 2021), p. 107701. issn: 0163-
7258. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2020.107701. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2020.107701.
79
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 7
[56]
Juan Simon Rico-Mesa et al. “Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists: a
Comprehensive Review of Finerenone”. In: Current Cardiology Reports 22.11
(Sept. 2020). issn: 1534-3170. doi: 10.1007/s11886-020-01399-7. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11886-020-01399-7.
[57]
Kevin Yau et al. “Prescribing SGLT2 Inhibitors in Patients With CKD: Ex-
panding Indications and Practical Considerations”. In: Kidney International
Reports 7.7 (July 2022), pp. 1463–1476. issn: 2468-0249. doi: 10.1016/j.
ekir.2022.04.094. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ekir.2022.04.
094.
[58]
Anoushka Krishnan et al. “Sodium Glucose Cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) In-
hibitors and CKD: Are You a”. In: Kidney Medicine 5.4 (Apr. 2023), p. 100608.
issn: 2590-0595. doi: 10.1016/j.xkme.2023.100608. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.xkme.2023.100608.
[59]
Kyle Strimbu and Jorge A Tavel. “What are biomarkers?” In: Current Opin-
ion in HIV and AIDS 5.6 (Nov. 2010), pp. 463–466. issn: 1746-630X. doi:
10.1097/coh.0b013e32833ed177. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
COH.0b013e32833ed177.
[60]
Robert M Califf. “Biomarker definitions and their applications”. In: Exper-
imental Biology and Medicine 243.3 (Feb. 2018), pp. 213–221. issn: 1535-
3699. doi: 10.1177/1535370217750088. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1177/1535370217750088.
[61]
Ali Bodaghi, Nadia Fattahi, and Ali Ramazani. “Biomarkers: Promising and
valuable tools towards diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of Covid-19 and
other diseases”. In: Heliyon 9.2 (Feb. 2023), e13323. issn: 2405-8440. doi:
10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e13323. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
heliyon.2023.e13323.
[62]
Monty Montano. “Blood biomarkers: overview of existing serum test strate-
gies for disease severity, risk for progression, therapeutic benchmark tar-
gets”. In: Translational Biology in Medicine. Elsevier, 2014, pp. 35–62. isbn:
9781907568428. doi: 10.1533/9781908818652.35. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1533/9781908818652.35.
[63]
Jeffrey K. Aronson and Robin E. Ferner. “Biomarkers—A General Review”.
In: Current Protocols in Pharmacology 76.1 (Mar. 2017). issn: 1934-8290.
doi: 10.1002/cpph.19. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cpph.19.
80
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 7
[64]
Leslie A. Obert et al. “A Review of Specific Biomarkers of Chronic Renal In-
jury and Their Potential Application in Nonclinical Safety Assessment Stud-
ies”. In: Toxicologic Pathology 49.5 (Feb. 2021), pp. 996–1023. issn: 1533-
1601. doi: 10.1177/0192623320985045. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1177/0192623320985045.
[65]
Ian Wu and Chirag R. Parikh. “Screening for Kidney Diseases: Older Mea-
sures versus Novel Biomarkers”. In: Clinical Journal of the American Society
of Nephrology 3.6 (Nov. 2008), pp. 1895–1901. issn: 1555-9041. doi: 10.
2215/cjn.02030408. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.2215/CJN.02030408.
[66]
Joshua Becker and Eli Friedman. “Renal Function Status”. In: American
Journal of Roentgenology 200.4 (Apr. 2013), pp. 827–829. issn: 1546-3141.
doi: 10.2214/ajr.12.9872. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.2214/AJR.12.
9872.
[67]
Alessandra Cala[Combining Acute Accent]bria Baxmann et al. “Influence of
Muscle Mass and Physical Activity on Serum and Urinary Creatinine and
Serum Cystatin C”. In: Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrol-
ogy 3.2 (Mar. 2008), pp. 348–354. issn: 1555-9041. doi: 10 . 2215 / cjn .
02870707. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.2215/CJN.02870707.
[68]
Giuseppe D??Amico and Claudio Bazzi. “Urinary protein and enzyme ex-
cretion as markers of tubular damage”. In: Current Opinion in Nephrol-
ogy and Hypertension 12.6 (Nov. 2003), pp. 639–643. issn: 1062-4821. doi:
10.1097/00041552- 200311000- 00011. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1097/00041552-200311000-00011.
[69]
Alessandro Antonelli et al. “The Predictive Role of Biomarkers for the De-
tection of Acute Kidney Injury After Partial or Radical Nephrectomy: A
Systematic Review of the Literature”. In: European Urology Focus 6.2 (Mar.
2020), pp. 344–353. issn: 2405-4569. doi: 10.1016/j.euf.2018.09.020.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.euf.2018.09.020.
[70]
Joshua I Barzilay, Youssef M. K. Farag, and Jeffrey Durthaler. “Albuminuria:
An Underappreciated Risk Factor for Cardiovascular Disease”. In: Journal
of the American Heart Association 13.2 (Jan. 2024). issn: 2047-9980. doi:
10.1161/jaha.123.030131. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.
123.030131.
[71]
Lorenzo Catanese et al. “Non-Invasive Biomarkers for Diagnosis, Risk Pre-
diction, and Therapy Guidance of Glomerular Kidney Diseases: A Compre-
hensive Review”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 25.6 (Mar.
81
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 7
2024), p. 3519. issn: 1422-0067. doi: 10.3390/ijms25063519. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijms25063519.
[72]
Simeone Andrulli et al. “The risks associated with percutaneous native kidney
biopsies: a prospective study”. In: Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation 38.3
(May 2022), pp. 655–663. issn: 1460-2385. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfac177. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfac177.
[73]
Morten A. Karsdal et al. “Collagen biology and non-invasive biomarkers of
liver fibrosis”. In: Liver International 40.4 (Feb. 2020), pp. 736–750. issn:
1478-3231. doi: 10.1111/liv.14390. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
liv.14390.
[74]
Daniel Guldager Kring Rasmussen et al. “Collagen turnover profiles in chronic
kidney disease”. In: Scientific Reports 9.1 (Nov. 2019). issn: 2045-2322. doi:
10.1038/s41598- 019- 51905- 3. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-019-51905-3.
[75]
M.A. Karsdal, E. Delvin, and C. Christiansen. “Protein fingerprints — Re-
lying on and understanding the information of serological protein measure-
ments”. In: Clinical Biochemistry 44.16 (Nov. 2011), pp. 1278–1279. issn:
0009-9120. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . clinbiochem . 2011 . 08 . 1135. url: http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2011.08.1135.
[76]
Matilde Cescon et al. “Collagen VI at a glance”. In: Journal of Cell Science
(Jan. 2015). issn: 0021-9533. doi: 10.1242/jcs.169748. url: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1242/jcs.169748.
[77]
Hovhannes Hayrapetyan et al. “Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay: Types
and Applications”. In: ELISA. Springer US, 2023, pp. 1–17. isbn: 9781071629031.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2903-1_1. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-0716-2903-1_1.
[78]
Pablo Fanjul-Bolado, Mar´ıa Bego˜na Gonz´alez-Garc´ıa, and Agust´ın Costa-
Garc´ıa. “Amperometric detection in TMB/HRP-based assays”. In: Analytical
and Bioanalytical Chemistry 382.2 (May 2005), pp. 297–302. issn: 1618-2650.
doi: 10.1007/s00216-005-3084-9. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00216-005-3084-9.
[79]
Thomas O. Kohl and Carl A. Ascoli. “Direct Competitive Enzyme-Linked Im-
munosorbent Assay (ELISA)”. In: Cold Spring Harbor Protocols 2017.7 (July
2017), pdb.prot093740. issn: 1559-6095. doi: 10.1101/pdb.prot093740.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/pdb.prot093740.
82
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 7
[80]
Chen WANG et al. “Chemiluminescent Immunoassay and its Applications”.
In: Chinese Journal of Analytical Chemistry 40.1 (Jan. 2012), pp. 3–10. issn:
1872-2040. doi: 10.1016/s1872-2040(11)60518-5. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S1872-2040(11)60518-5.
[81]
David M. Good et al. “Naturally Occurring Human Urinary Peptides for
Use in Diagnosis of Chronic Kidney Disease”. In: Molecular amp; Cellular
Proteomics 9.11 (Nov. 2010), pp. 2424–2437. issn: 1535-9476. doi: 10.1074/
mcp.m110.001917. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M110.001917.
[82]
Anna-Stina H¨oglund and Lars-G¨oran Josefsson. “An Antigen in Plant Vas-
cular Tissue Cross-Reacts with Antibodies Towards KLH, Keyhole Limpet
Hemocyanin”. In: Department of Plant Biology, Swedish University of Agri-
cultural Sciences (2024).
[83]
Lisa Berglund et al. “The epitope space of the human proteome”. In: Protein
Science 17.4 (Apr. 2008), pp. 606–613. issn: 1469-896X. doi: 10.1110/ps.
073347208. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1110/ps.073347208.
[84]
Malcolm L. Gefter, David H. Margulies, and Matthew D. Scharff. “A simple
method for polyethylene glycol-promoted hybridization of mouse myeloma
cells”. In: Somatic Cell Genetics 3.2 (Mar. 1977), pp. 231–236. issn: 1572-
9931. doi: 10.1007/bf01551818. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF01551818.
[85]
Waliza Ansar and Shyamasree Ghosh. “Monoclonal Antibodies: A Tool in
Clinical Research”. In: Indian Journal of Clinical Medicine 4 (Jan. 2013),
IJCM.S11968. issn: 1179-9161. doi: 10.4137/ijcm.s11968. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.4137/IJCM.S11968.
[86]
Yuan Liu et al. “Construction and characterization of a class-specific single-
chain variable fragment against pyrethroid metabolites”. In: Applied Microbi-
ology and Biotechnology 104.17 (July 2020), pp. 7345–7354. issn: 1432-0614.
doi: 10.1007/s00253-020-10728-3. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00253-020-10728-3.
[87]
Tony Badrick, Greg Ward, and Peter Hickman. “The effect of the immunoas-
say curve fitting routine on bias in troponin”. In: Clinical Chemistry and Lab-
oratory Medicine (CCLM) 61.2 (Oct. 2022), pp. 188–195. issn: 1437-4331.
doi: 10.1515/cclm-2022-0657. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/cclm-
2022-0657.
83
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 7
[88]
John W. A. Findlay and Robert F. Dillard. “Appropriate calibration curve
fitting in ligand binding assays”. In: The AAPS Journal 9.2 (June 2007),
E260–E267. issn: 1550-7416. doi: 10.1208/aapsj0902029. url: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1208/aapsj0902029.
[89]
Stephanie A. Nummer et al. “Updating the ELISA standard curve fitting
process to reduce uncertainty in estimated microcystin concentrations”. In:
MethodsX 5 (2018), pp. 304–311. issn: 2215-0161. doi: 10.1016/j.mex.
2018.03.011. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mex.2018.03.011.
[90]
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Bioanalytical
Method Validation. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulator
Guidances/ucm070107.pdf. Accessed: 2024-08-08. 2018.
[91]
David A. Armbruster and Terry Pry. “Limit of Blank, Limit of Detection and
Limit of Quantitation”. In: Clinical Biochemistry Reviews 29.Suppl 1 (2008),
S49–S52.
[92]
Sarah Janssen. “Introduction to qualification and validation of an immunoas-
say”. In: Pharmaceutical Statistics (Feb. 2024). issn: 1539-1612. doi: 10.
1002/pst.2370. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pst.2370.
[93]
Kasper Rossing et al. “Urinary Proteomics in Diabetes and CKD”. In: Jour-
nal of the American Society of Nephrology 19.7 (July 2008), pp. 1283–1290.
issn: 1046-6673. doi: 10.1681/asn.2007091025. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1681/ASN.2007091025.
[94]
Marta Luc´ıa Aldea et al. “Sodium interference in the determination of urinary
aldosterone”. In: Clinical Biochemistry 49.3 (Feb. 2016), pp. 295–297. issn:
0009-9120. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2015.11.004. url: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2015.11.004.
[95]
Raina N. Fichorova et al. “Biological and Technical Variables Affecting Im-
munoassay Recovery of Cytokines from Human Serum and Simulated Vagi-
nal Fluid: A Multicenter Study”. In: Analytical Chemistry 80.12 (May 2008),
pp. 4741–4751. issn: 1520-6882. doi: 10.1021/ac702628q. url: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1021/ac702628q.
[96]
Hoseok Koo et al. “The ratio of urinary sodium and potassium and chronic
kidney disease progression: Results from the KoreaN Cohort Study for Out-
comes in Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease (KNOW-CKD)”. In: Medicine
97.44 (Nov. 2018), e12820. issn: 1536-5964. doi: 10.1097/md.0000000000012820.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000012820.
84
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 7
[97]
Medcalc Software Ltd. ROC Curves. Accessed December 21, 2023. 2019. url:
https://www.medcalc.org/manual/roc-curves.php.
[98]
Lucia Di Micco et al. “Urine Creatinine Excretion and Clinical Outcomes in
CKD”. In: Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 8.11 (Nov.
2013), pp. 1877–1883. issn: 1555-9041. doi: 10.2215/cjn.01350213. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2215/CJN.01350213.
[99]
Elena Tynkevich et al. “Urinary creatinine excretion, measured glomerular
filtration rate and CKD outcomes”. In: Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation
30.8 (Mar. 2015), pp. 1386–1394. issn: 1460-2385. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfv047.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfv047.
[100]
Ulf Andreasson et al. “A Practical Guide to Immunoassay Method Valida-
tion”. In: Frontiers in Neurology 6 (Aug. 2015). issn: 1664-2295. doi: 10.
3389/fneur.2015.00179. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fneur.
2015.00179.
[101]
D. Roberts et al. “Specific Ion and Buffer Effects on Protein–Protein Inter-
actions of a Monoclonal Antibody”. In: Molecular Pharmaceutics 12.1 (Dec.
2014), pp. 179–193. issn: 1543-8392. doi: 10.1021/mp500533c. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1021/mp500533c.
[102]
EMEA. Validation of Analytical Procedures: Text and Methodology Q2(R1).
London, England: E.M.A. (EMEA), 2005, pp. 1–13.
[103]
Rajna Minic and Irena Zivkovic. “Optimization, Validation and Standardiza-
tion of ELISA”. In: Norovirus. IntechOpen, Sept. 2021. isbn: 9781839689451.
doi: 10.5772/intechopen.94338. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/
intechopen.94338.
[104]
Sandeep K. Vashist and John H.T. Luong. “Bioanalytical Requirements and
Regulatory Guidelines for Immunoassays”. In: Handbook of Immunoassay
Technologies. Elsevier, 2018, pp. 81–95. isbn: 9780128117620. doi: 10.1016/
b978-0-12-811762-0.00004-9. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-12-811762-0.00004-9.
[105]
Jennifer C. Rodrigues, Mark Haas, and Heather N. Reich. “IgA Nephropa-
thy”. In: Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 12.4 (Feb.
2017), pp. 677–686. issn: 1555-905X. doi: 10.2215/cjn.07420716. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2215/CJN.07420716.
85
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 7
[106]
S. Krag, J. R. Nyengaard, and L. Wogensen. “Combined effects of moderately
elevated blood glucose and locally produced TGF- 1 on glomerular morphol-
ogy and renal collagen production”. In: Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation
22.9 (June 2007), pp. 2485–2496. issn: 1460-2385. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfm229.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfm229.
[107]
Emmanouil Mavrogeorgis et al. “Collagen-Derived Peptides in CKD: A Link
to Fibrosis”. In: Toxins 14.1 (Dec. 2021), p. 10. issn: 2072-6651. doi: 10.
3390/toxins14010010. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/toxins14010010.
[108]
Patricia A English et al. “A Case for the Use of Receiver Operating Charac-
teristic Analysis of Potential Clinical Efficacy Biomarkers in Advanced Renal
Cell Carcinoma”. In: Future Oncology 12.2 (Dec. 2015), pp. 175–182. issn:
1744-8301. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.290. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.2217/
fon.15.290.
[109]
Baris Afsar and Rengin Elsurer Afsar. “Sodium–glucose cotransporter in-
hibitors and kidney fibrosis: review of the current evidence and related mech-
anisms”. In: Pharmacological Reports 75.1 (Dec. 2022), pp. 44–68. issn: 2299-
5684. doi: 10.1007/s43440-022-00442-4. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s43440-022-00442-4.
[110]
Glenn M. Chertow et al. “Effects of Dapagliflozin in Chronic Kidney Disease,
With and Without Other Cardiovascular Medications: DAPA-CKD Trial”.
In: Journal of the American Heart Association 12.9 (May 2023). issn: 2047-
9980. doi: 10.1161/jaha.122.028739. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1161/JAHA.122.028739.
[111]
Mingwang Jiang et al. “Dapagliflozin attenuates renal fibrosis by suppressing
angiotensin II/TGF signaling in diabetic mice”. In: Journal of Diabetes and
its Complications 38.2 (Feb. 2024), p. 108687. issn: 1056-8727. doi: 10.
1016/j.jdiacomp.2024.108687. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jdiacomp.2024.108687.
[112]
Phil McEwan et al. “The long-term effects of dapagliflozin in chronic kidney
disease: a time-to-event analysis”. In: Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation
(May 2024). issn: 1460-2385. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfae106. url: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfae106.
[113]
Xin Xu et al. “Transforming growth factor- in stem cells and tissue home-
ostasis”. In: Bone Research 6.1 (Jan. 2018). issn: 2095-6231. doi: 10.1038/
s41413-017-0005-4. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41413-017-
0005-4.
86
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 7
[114]
Alexandra Wendler and Martin Wehling. “The translatability of animal mod-
els for clinical development: biomarkers and disease models”. In: Current
Opinion in Pharmacology 10.5 (Oct. 2010), pp. 601–606. issn: 1471-4892.
doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2010.05.009. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.coph.2010.05.009.
[115]
Meghan E. Clements et al. “Increased Cellular Senescence and Vascular Rar-
efaction Exacerbate the Progression of Kidney Fibrosis in Aged Mice Follow-
ing Transient Ischemic Injury”. In: PLoS ONE 8.8 (Aug. 2013). Ed. by Jean-
Claude Dussaule, e70464. issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0070464. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0070464.
[116]
Jianqing Liang and Youhua Liu. “Animal Models of Kidney Disease: Chal-
lenges and Perspectives”. In: Kidney360 4.10 (Oct. 2023), pp. 1479–1493.
issn: 2641-7650. doi: 10.34067/kid.0000000000000227. url: http://dx.
doi.org/10.34067/KID.0000000000000227.
[117]
Mark L. Chiu et al. “Antibody Structure and Function: The Basis for En-
gineering Therapeutics”. In: Antibodies 8.4 (Dec. 2019), p. 55. issn: 2073-
4468. doi: 10.3390/antib8040055. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
antib8040055.
[118]
Shuguang Huang, Tianhua Wang, and Min Yang. “The Evaluation of Statis-
tical Methods for Estimating the Lower Limit of Detection”. In: ASSAY and
Drug Development Technologies 11.1 (Feb. 2013), pp. 35–43. issn: 1557-8127.
doi: 10.1089/adt.2011.438. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/adt.
2011.438.
[119]
David A. Jaques et al. “Variability of 24-Hour Sodium Urinary Excretion
in Young Healthy Males Based on Consecutive Urine Collections: Impact
on Categorization of Salt Intake”. In: Journal of Renal Nutrition 33.3 (May
2023), pp. 450–455. issn: 1051-2276. doi: 10.1053/j.jrn.2022.12.010.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.jrn.2022.12.010.
[120]
YouHe Gao. “Urine—an untapped goldmine for biomarker discovery?” In:
Science China Life Sciences 56.12 (Nov. 2013), pp. 1145–1146. issn: 1869-
1889. doi: 10.1007/s11427-013-4574-1. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s11427-013-4574-1.
[121]
Cheng Xue et al. “Urine biomarkers can outperform serum biomarkers in
certain diseases”. In: URINE 5 (2023), pp. 57–64. issn: 2590-2806. doi: 10.
1016/j.urine.2023.10.001. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
urine.2023.10.001.
87
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 7
[122]
Biyun Cao et al. “Development of a highly sensitive and specific enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the detection of phenylethanolamine
A in tissue and feed samples and confirmed by liquid chromatography tan-
dem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS)”. In: Talanta 115 (Oct. 2013), pp. 624–
630. issn: 0039-9140. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2013.06.026. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2013.06.026.
[123]
Minggang Liu et al. “A highly salt-tolerant monoclonal antibody-based enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay for the rapid detection of phenylethanolamine A
in urine”. In: Food and Agricultural Immunology 33.1 (July 2022), pp. 575–
587. issn: 1465-3443. doi: 10.1080/09540105.2022.2084043. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1080/09540105.2022.2084043.
[124]
Despina Chatziharalambous et al. “Analytical Performance of ELISA Assays
in Urine: One More Bottleneck towards Biomarker Validation and Clinical
Implementation”. In: PLOS ONE 11.2 (Feb. 2016). Ed. by Georgios Gakis,
e0149471. issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149471. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0149471.
88
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 8
Appendices
8.1
Assay Buffers
Figure 8.1: 25 mM TBS-BTB,(2,4,8)g salt,pH 8 (± LiqII)
Figure 8.2: 50mM TBS-BTB,(2,4,8)g salt,pH 8 (± LiqII)
89
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 8
8.2
How to run COL1A1 assay.
Standard dilution (11+0 standard curve of 30 a.a std.peptide with 2-fold dilution) 
Std A 
1000  
ng/ml 
Ready to use. 
Std B 
500   
ng/ml 
100ul A+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std C 
250 
ng/ml 
100ul B+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std D 
125 
ng/ml 
100ul C+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std E 
62.5 
ng/ml 
100ul D+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std F 
31.25 
ng/ml 
100ul E+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std G 
15.625 
ng/ml 
100ul F+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std H 
7.812 
ng/ml 
100ul G+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std I 
3.906 
ng/ml 
100ul H+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std J  
1.953 
ng/ml 
100ul I+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std K 
0.977 
ng/ml 
100ul K+ 100 ul incubation buffer 
Std L 
0 
ng/ml 
100 ul incubation buffer(blank) 
 
 
Important note(s): 
• 
The substrate is TMB. 
• 
All samples  are  thoroughly mixed before plating them out. 
 
 
 
Procedure 
1. Equilibrate all buffers and reagents  to room temperature. 
2. Coat streptavidin plates with coater peptide 100 ul/well of 5ng/ml for 30 min in coating buffer 
at 18-20°C  on a microtiter plate mixing apparatus (shaking at 300 rpm). 
3. Wash 5 x in washing buffer. 
4. Place urine samples on the pre-plate according the setup after spin down and mixing with 
pipette. 
5. Dilute the mAb in the incubation buffer. 
6. Add 20 µl/well of standard/sample/controls  from the pre-plate and 100 µl/well of Ab-buffer of 
33.33 ng/ml mAb (1B4) mix and incubate 1 hr at 37°C, on a microtiter plate mixing apparatus 
(shaking at 300 rpm). 
7. Wash 5x washing buffer  
8. Add 100 ul TMB and incubate 15 min in darkness on a microtiter plate mixing apparatus 
(shaking at 300 rpm). 
9. Add 100 ul stopping solution 
10. Read at 650-450 nm ELISA reader. 
90
