==PAGE:1==
Comparative Analysis of THz-PMT
Detectors in Imaging Systems for
Semiconductor and 2D Material
Characterization
Figure 1: Multiple wafer pieces scanned by a PMT
Technical University of Denmark
Master’s Thesis Project
Supervisors:
Student:
Peter Uhd Jepsen, DTU Electro
Mihai Vlad Ursta Anghel (s180840)
Simon Jappe Lange, DTU Electro
Matej Sebek, DTU Electro
Tobias Olaf Buchmann, DTU Electro
Submitted 30/08 2024
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Preface
i
2
Acknowledgements
ii
3
Abstract
1
4
Introduction
2
4.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
4.2
Interesting Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
4.3
Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
5
Theory
4
5.1
The Photomultiplier Tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
5.1.1
Metasurfaces and the Terahertz-Photomultiplier Tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5.2
The Fowler-Nordheim Emission Model (Cold Field Emission) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5.2.1
Alternative Emission Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.3
Terahertz generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6
Methods
9
6.1
The Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6.1.1
Types of Scans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.2
Overview of PMTs (+ calibration curves)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
6.2.1
Calibration Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
6.3
Experimental Challenges and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.3.1
Direct reflection vs. Double Transmission Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.3.2
Image Artefacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.3.3
Going from Graphite Scans to Wafer Scans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.4
Samples investigated in the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1
==PAGE:3==
7
Imaging with the Photomultiplier Tubes
20
7.1
Graphite Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7.2
Wafer Samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7.2.1
The SN617 Wafer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7.2.2
The Graphene Wafer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.2.3
The Multi-wafer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8
Noise Analysis of the PMTs
29
8.1
Sources and timescales of Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8.2
The CY0307 PMT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8.3
The CY0252 PMT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9
Discussion and Comparison of Results
37
10 Conclusion
40
2
==PAGE:4==
1
|
Preface
This master’s thesis was completed in collaboration with the department of electrical and photonics engineering
at DTU Electro for the completion of a MS.c Eng degree in Engineering Physics.
Signature
Mihai Vlad Ursta Anghel s180840
i
==PAGE:5==
2
|
Acknowledgements
This master’s thesis project is the conclusion of a long journey at DTU and the thesis a commemoration of
all the effort put into the pursuit of an academic dream, and not only that. The trodden path is covered with
footprints bearing memory of moments of joy and frustration, success and failure, growth and development.
Filled with twists and turns and ever-changing dreams, this journey would not have been possible to accomplish
without support from others and this section is reserved to celebrate those key people.
Throughout the bachelor and the master degree I have been fortunate to make a great deal of wonderful friends
which has made the years at DTU most amazing. Especially, the Nanodudes group has source of great company
and support, at parties and in classes. and inventing and using our own SI units internally in the group will
never grow old.
I would also like to thank my supervisors for the master’s thesis, Simon Jappe Lange and Peter Uhd Jepsen,
along with Tobias Olaf Buchmann and Matej Sebek. Every meeting and discussion has been a great inspiration
and has always left me motivated for progressing on all the projects I have done in the department. I don’t
think I would have had the chance to try to build a makeshift cloud chamber out of some plastic cups and
random stuff at other research groups
A special thanks also goes out to some of the PhDs and the Post docs at the student rooms in 343 at DTU.
William, Oliver, Lorenza, Shreesha, it has always been nice to drop by for a quick chat and conversations about
the life in academia. Especially thanks to Alexander who has on many occasions helped me with figuring out
equipment and measurements in the THz lab.
I would also like to extend my thanks to the PULS group at Rühr-Üniversität Bochum, namely Clara Saraceno,
Tim Vogel and Samira Mansourzadeh for having me over to perform measurements in their highly advanced
(and super cool) laser lab. It was an inspiring trip and I learned a lot.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family for the continuous support in every endeavor I engage in. I would never
have made it this far without you.
ii
==PAGE:6==
3
|
Abstract
The design of a novel terahertz detector by implementing a metasurface consisting of an array of terahertz-
resonant antennas onto the front of a photomultiplier tube. In recent years metasurface-enhanced photomulti-
plier tube, referred to as a terahertz photomultiplier tube, has demonstrated exceptional detection properties
due to its highly non-linear response to electric fields and been show to be applicable in various contexts. This
projects investigates the applicability of such a terahertz multiplier tube in the context of contactless surface
conductivity measurements, specifically for electronics or semiconductor industry.
The investigation features a series of experiments in which the terahertz photomultiplier tube is used to image
the surfaces of various samples through a reflection setup and subsequently the noise sources intrinsic to the
imaging setup are investigated for two different terahertz photomultiplier tubes.
In the experimental work of this thesis it is demonstrated that the photomultiplier tube is capable of detecting
fine variations in graphite thickness and topological variations across paper. The reproducibility of certain
features on graphene is also demonstrated through repeated scans despite of present noise sources in the
imaging system
It is concluded that the terahertz photomultiplier tube shows promising results for detecting fine variations
across samples with various levels of conductivity, however, a model that can accurately convert measured
signals to relevant physical properties for the samples under investigation is still needed before industrial
applications can be considered.
1
==PAGE:7==
4
|
Introduction
4.1
Motivation
The Terahertz (THz) gap is a specific frequency band between micrometer and infrared light within the
electromagnetic spectrum in which existing technology for light generation and detection is limited. This
gap has been the subject for a lot of research in the last few decades, due to the fact that THz radiation
can penetrate optically opaque materials in the visible spectrum and is non-ionising, which is important for
biological applications. With these properties, THz radiation applications have successfully been implemented
for detecting thin layers of coating in the maritime industry [1] among other applications. THz light is also
becoming an increasingly important part of the electronic device industry in the form of contactless conductivity
measurements on thin film samples or doped wafers. The standard method to measure the conductivity across
wafer and thin film samples has for a long time been the four-point probe measurement, however, this method
risks damaging the sample either through the mechanical pressure applied to the sample during contact with
the needle probe or through unwanted carrier injection from the current run through the probes [2]. These
problems have largely been solved in the past decade through the development of microscopic probe needles,
however, the use of light for contactless measurements has also been adopted by the industry.
One interesting device that has been developed in the pursuit of bridging the THz gap are the Terahertz-sensitive
photomultiplier tubes (THz-PMT) [3] developed by the Ultrafast Infrared and Terahertz Science group at
the department of electrical and photonics engineering at DTU in collaboration with Hamamatsu Photonics.
Photomultiplier tubes are optical detectors capable of detecting weak optical signals, down to single photons
via the photoelectric effect. The photoelectric effect is material dependent, and light within the visible or UV
range is often required to achive photoelectric emission [4]. By mounting a metasurface consisting of an array
of antennas on the front of the PMT and designing the antennas to be resonant to wavelengths in the THz
range, the PMT can be adapted to detect incident THz light with a confirmed, highly-nonlinear response [3].
This is the innovative idea that has successfully helped with implementing PMTs in THz-related applications
and research and will also be the main topic of investigation for this thesis.
4.2
Interesting Results
In recent years, the development of the THz-sensitive PMT has shown promising results. In [3], Lange,
Buchmann, Jepsen and Sebek along with researchers from Hamamatsu Photonics demonstrate the core
properties of the THz-PMT. In the study, they experimentally show the large electric field enhancement
occurring at the tips of the metasurface of the THz-PMTs and the highly non-linear field-assisted electron
emission in accordance with Fowler-Nordheim model, two key properties of the metasurface design and the
THz-PMT. The metasurface design of the THz-PMTs used in the study consists of a grid of periodically
arranged Double Split-Ring Resonator (DSRR) antennas. A SEM image of such an antenna can be seen
on figure 4.1. In the study, two metasurfaces are designed and implemented in PMTs, one for each of two
resonance frequencies. The first resonance frequency is 0.5 THz and the other is at 40 THz, effectively in the
mid-infrared range. It is shown that both antennas have a strong response to light of frequency that match the
metasurface resonances and that this technology could be applied in THz- and infrared measurement contexts.
2
==PAGE:8==
Figure 4.1: SEM Images of different antenna designs for the THz-PMT metasurface. The SEM image has
been acquired by the author in a special course.
With these discoveries it is apparent that the THz-PMT has great potential. Considering the non-linear response
of the THz-PMT to incident light and the use of THz light in contactless conductivity measurements raises
an interesting question: Can the THz-PMT can be implemented in an experimental setup used to perform
contactless conductivity measurements on wafer samples? This will be the main focus of this master’s thesis.
4.3
Project Goals
The goal of this project is to experimentally investigate the applicability of THz-PMTs for contactless
conductivity measurements of wafer samples. The main research question of the project can be formulated as:
• Can the THz-PMT be implemented as a reliable detector for contactless surface conductivity measure-
ments for use in electronics/semiconductor industry?
The is question contains a few key words. The intention of investigating the application of the THz-PMT as
a device for contactless conductivity measurements is considered in the context of applications in industry.
The word ’reliable’ refers to the measurements of the THz-PMT being reproducible and showing the same
trends for repeated, identical measurements to to be clearly distinguishable from background and noise signals.
In order answer the question thoroughly, the following sub-questions will be investigated in the following
sections of the report.
• What are the core properties in THz-PMTs that can be used in contactless surface conductivity measure-
ments?
• How does one test the properties of an unknown device?
• What types of samples can be characterized by the THz-PMTs?
• How reliable are images generated by the THz-PMTs?
• What are the limiting factors of the THz-PMT-based imaging system?
The approach for this investigation is given in the following series of steps. First, relevant literature is
investigated and presented in order to better determine the experimental steps for accurately testing the relevant
properties of the THz-PMT. Second, an experimental setup is assembled with the THz-PMT and testing is
initiated with samples containing known designs. Third, wafer samples from the cleanroom at DTU are
investigated. Finally, the noise properties of the PMTs are investigated with the intention of finding the smallest
resolvable variation in conductivity that the THz-PMTs can detect.
3
==PAGE:9==
5
|
Theory
This chapter contains relevant theory for working with the THz-PMT. The chapter begins with an introduction
to the PMT where the typical design and key properties are presented. The novel idea that converts the PMT to
THz-PMT is presented along with the emission model describing the metasurfaces. An alternative emission
model is also presented, followed by a brief overview of THz generation methods, where the one used in the
project is presented.
5.1
The Photomultiplier Tube
The photomultiplier tube is a technology invaluable to detection of optical fields. Leveraging on the external
photoelectric effect, PMTs are capable of detecting light sources with intensities as low as single photons [5].
A schematic of the PMT can be seen on figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: A schematic of the PMT. The PMT consists of a faceplate which allows light to enter the vacuum
chamber from the front. Behind the faceplate is the photocathode which by absorption of light allows for
electrons to escape the photocathode. The electrons are accelerated by the focusing cathode such that it
generates secondary electrons on the subsequent array of dynodes. At the last dynode the electrons are
converted to an signal which is transmitted by the stem pin. The schematic is taken from [5].
The principle of operation for the PMT is as follows: A photon enters the PMT through the faceplate is
absorbed by an electron from the photocathode. If the energy of the electron is sufficiently high this enables the
electron to overcome a cathode-dependent potential barrier and escape into the vacuum of the PMT chamber.
The focusing electrode accelerates the electron and focuses it onto the first dynode of the electron multiplier
array. The collision between the accelerated electron and the dynode results in emission of secondary electron
from the dynode and this is repeated for each subsequent collision between electrons and dynodes in the array,
thus multiplying the number of free electrons in the PMT chamber. Because of the electron multiplication
the array of dynodes is also referred to as an electron multiplier. Upon reaching the anode at the end of the
dynode array, the electrons are converted into a signal which leaves the PMT through the stem pins [5]. The
4
==PAGE:10==
cathode-dependent potential barrier is referred to as the vacuum level barrier and it depends on the cathode
material or coating the cathode with additional materials, typically alkalides. The electron dynodes can also be
coated with similar materials to facilitate the electron multiplication [4].
The process an electron undergoes from photoelectric emission from the photocathode to signal conversion at
the anode is a probablistic process consisting of a series of probabilities occurring at each step. The quantum
efficiency, η(ν), is a quantity used to indicate how efficient the conversion is from incident light to electrons
emitted from the photocathode into the vacuum. Formally, it describes the ratio between the number of incident
photons and number of electrons escaping the photocathode through the photoelectric effect:
η(λ) = (1−R)Pe(λ)
k
·

1
1+1/kL

·Ps,
(5.1)
where:
• R is the reflection coefficient of the photocathode material.
• k is the absorption coefficient of photons for the photocathode material.
• Pe(λ) is the probability of the photon-absorbing electron to be excited to a higher energy level than the
work function of the material.
• L is the mean free path of the electrons in the photocathode material.
• Ps is the probability that an electron reaching the photocathode surface is emitted into vacuum.
Many of the coefficients can be improved by the choice of photocathode material composition [5].
The electron multiplication occurring at the dynodes is facilitated by a high voltage, V, applied across the
PMT itself. The high voltage is referred to as gain voltage and reaches values of 1500V or higher in typical
applications. The respective change in voltage between dynodes is the interstage voltage, denoted by E. The
amplification of primary electrons can be described by the use of two parameters, gain µ and secondary
electron ratio δ. The latter depends on the interstage voltage between dynodes:
δ = a0Ek,
(5.2)
with a0 being a constant and k being a coefficient depending on the material and shape of the dynodes. The
gain is the product of secondary electron rations for all the dynodes in the electron multiplier array. For n
dynodes the gain can be expressed as:
µ = α ·δ1 ·δ2 ·...·δn.
(5.3)
Here α is the collection efficiency, which is the fraction of emitted electrons from the photocathode that reaches
the first dynode in the electron multiplier system.
If the voltage between the photocathode and the first dynode is the same as all the interstage voltages between
successive dynodes and the anode, and if all the dynodes in the array have the same design as the photocathode,
then we have V = Ekn and the equation can be rewritten as:
µ = α(δ)n = α ·an
0Ekn = A0Vkn,
A0 = α ·( a0
n+1)n.
(5.4)
The reason for the factor of n+1 in the denominator of coefficient A0 is due to the accelerating voltage between
the nth dynode and the anode in the PMT.
5
==PAGE:11==
5.1.1
Metasurfaces and the Terahertz-Photomultiplier Tube
An optical metasurface consists of 2D surface with customized sub-wavelength microstructures, referred to as
meta-atoms, where the primary optical properties originate from the design of the metasurface itself and not
necessarily the materials used to fabricate it. The 3D equivalent to a metasurface is called a metamaterial [6].
Interesting examples of metasurfaces include the Huygens’ metasurfaces and Moiré metasurfaces. The former
allows for controlled refraction of light beams by introducing local phase delays at different parts of the incident
light beam through a small stack of metasurface sheets with varying gap sizes [7]. The latter denotes the
collection metasurfaces produced by stacking individual metasurface layers from which interesting properties
can be acquired by introducing a small rotation between the layers. An example of a property which can
be derived from metasurface layer twisting is optical chirality. For these type of Moiré metamaterials a
polarization-dependent transmission coefficient is introduced in the material for circularly polarized light due
to the metasurface twisting. The transmission coefficient for each type of circular polarization can be tweaked
by rotating the metasurface layers with respect to one another [8].
Recent developments to PMT technology consist of replacing the standard photocathode with an optical
metasurface-based metasurface engineered to be highly resonant to light of specific wavelengths, specifically
terahertz light in reference [3]. This extends the applicability of the PMT to other frequency ranges, thus
circumventing the limitations of the photoelectric effect and traditional photocathode design. A novel design for
a new THz detector with a potential for numerous applications is acquired by tuning the resonance frequencies
of the metasurface to THz frequencies [3]. The THz-PMT is presented in figure 5.2:
Figure 5.2: Placeholder Figure for the design of PMTs is taken from [3]. a) shows a schematic of the THz-PMT.
b) shows a picture of the THz-PMT.
The design of the THz-PMT is almost identical to a traditional PMT with the exception of the photocathode.
For a THz-PMT the photocathode consists of a metasurface constructed from a periodic array of microantennas
that are resonant to THz light. Electric field enhancement occurs at the antennas due to high confinement of
the electric field at emission tips on the antenna. In contrary to standard PMTs, the mechanism for electron
emission from a THz-PMT is not the photoelectric effect. The strong electric field strength at the metasurface
antennas lowers the vacuum potential barrier which - for strong enough electric fields - permits electrons to
tunnel out of the antennas and into the vacuum. The emitted electrons are subsequently guided through the rest
of the THz-PMT similarly to how they are in a traditional PMT [3]. The field-assisted emission process is
described in further detail in the following sections. Several antenna designs for the emitting metasurfaces have
been demonstrated to provide functional THz-PMTs. In [9], Lange, Jepsen et all. demonstrate field-assisted
electron emission for THz-PMTs with dipole antenna metasurfaces, while reference [3] employs metasurfaces
with Double-Split-Resonator-Rings (DSRR) Antennas. An overview of the PMTs used in this project and their
metasurface designs is given in section 6.2.
5.2
The Fowler-Nordheim Emission Model (Cold Field Emission)
In 1928, R. H. Fowler and Dr. L. Nordheim presented a model for electric field-induced electron emission [10]
by considering electron tunneling for a triangle potential barrier5.3a, which has lead to the naming the model:
the Fowler-Nordheim model after the authors. The model has since then been studied extensively, which has
lead to different versions of the model. A characteristic of these types of models is that the electron emission
process is largely dominated by the incident field. Additionally, the Fermi-Dirac distribution used to model
6
==PAGE:12==
the electrons in gold can at room temperature be approximated by T = 0, which is why this emission process
is also known as cold field emission [9]. An updated version of the model, which also accounts for the field
enhancement factor, will be used for the THz-PMTs in this project and can be found in eq. 5.5.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: a) The Fowler-Nordheim Potential Barrier and b) The image effect that an electron experiences
after having tunneled out of the gold antenna. Figures are re-used from bachelor’s thesis [11]
J(ETHz) = aFN
(βETHz)2
Φ
exp
−bFNΦ3/2
βETHz

,
(5.5)
where J(ETHz) is the current density expected to tunnel through the potential barrier for an incident terahertz
field strength ETHz. β is the field enhancement factor at the antenna tips, Φ is the work function of the metasur-
face antenna metal. aFN and bFN are constants of the model with aFN =
q3
(16π2¯h) ≈1.5415·10−6A·eV·V−2
and bFN = 4
√
(2mc)
3q¯h
≈6.83089·109V·eV3/2 ·m−1 [3]. When referring to the Fowler-Nordheim model we
will refer to the updated one in equation 5.5 for the rest to this thesis.
The red curve in figure 5.3a shows the triangular potential barrier for which the Fowler-Nordheim model
predicts the electron emission. Here the definition of the work function is also illustrated; it is the energy
difference between the Fermi level in the metal and the vacuum level. For photoelectric emission it is this
energy difference that the electrons need to overcome by absorbing a photon, however, when the presence of a
strong enough electric field bends down the potential barrier which allows for electron emission.
5.2.1
Alternative Emission Models
Other emission models have been developed over time to improve the original Fowler-Nordheim model or to
adapt it to different phenomena. An example of such a model is the Schottky-Nordheim model. It implements
a correction to the Fowler-Nordheim model by considering the image effect that the electron experiences after
tunneling out from the gold antenna. Accounting for this effect results in the Schottky barrier model and yields
a potential barrier in the form of the blue curve in the same figure. The image effect is illustrated in figure 5.3b.
Accounting for the image effect in the model shows that the work function of the emitting material tends to
be lower. The potential barrier also becomes slightly more rounded compared to the triangular barrier. New
bound electron states are also permitted outside of the gold antennas, but close to the antenna surface. The
disadvantages of this model is that the extra correction term introduces additional analytical and computational
complexities to problems that are not necessarily easy to solve. For the range of electric fields strengths at
which the THz-PMTs will be operated in this project, the difference in potential barrier widths between the
Fowler-Nordheim and the Schottky-Nordheim models is negligible [9]. Thus the Fowler-Nordheim model will
be used in the analysis for simplicity.
7
==PAGE:13==
5.3
Terahertz generation
The THz-PMTs require a THz source in order to be operable. THz radiation applicable for PMTs can be
generated different ways. In [12], Reimann et al. demonstrate that ultrafast THz transients can be generated
through difference-frequency by passing a 793 nm ultrafast pump pulse through a thin (30µm) GeSe crystal
at a 44 phasematching angle. The resulting THz transient is reported to have a width of 60 fs. They also
show that by increasing the thickness of the GeSe crystal to 100µm some tunability is possible by varying
the phasematching angle. In [13], Chang et al. show that THz transients can be generated through optical
rectification by pumping an ultrafast 110 fs pulse with a central wavelength of 1064 nm through a GaP crystal.
In comparison to THz generation with the GeSe crystal, the optical rectification process with the GaP crystal is
co-linear. Furthermore, GaP acts as a waveguide for the generated THz which allows for slight focusing of the
beam. By using different GaP crystals with different cross-sectional areas, Chang et al. show that it is possible
to tune the central frequency of the generated THz light between ≈0.4−0.8THz.
Another option for THz generation is through optical rectification by using a MgO-doped LiNbO3 (sLN)
crystal. This is demonstrated in reference [14] by Yah and Hebling et al. Here they use an 800 nm pump pulse,
resulting in THz pulses with a central frequency of 0.5 THz. However, this method differs from the previous
two by the phase-matching condition in sLN. Phase-matching can only achieved by pulse front tilting, where
different parts of the generated THz pulse front are delayed in time relative to one another, resulting in a tilted
pulse.
THz conversion can even be achieved through third-harmonic conversion. In [15], Arshad et al. show that light
with a frequency of 0.5 THz can at intensities of 100kV/cm generate light at 1.5 THz when in contact with
graphite on paper. Their samples were prepared by using Faber-Castel pencils to coat paper with an even layer.
This method naturally requires THz light in the first place, but can provide an advantageous method to further
fine-tune THz pulses.
8
==PAGE:14==
6
|
Methods
This chapter begins with a presentation of the experimental setup used for data acquisition and investigation
of the THz-PMTs. The subsequent section of this chapter features an overview of the main experimental
challenges that have occurred while performing experiments along with the approach used to solve them.
Afterwards, an overview of the samples that have been investigated with the imaging setup. Lastly, the approach
to investigating the noise properties of the PMTs will be presented.
6.1
The Experimental Setup
Figure 6.1: The experimental setup used for investigating the PMTs
The THz-PMT measurements are based on reflections of ultrafast THz pulses from the sample under investiga-
tion. This requires a terahertz source to begin with. The ultrafast THz pulses are generated from an 800 nm
pulsed laser via optical rectification in a LiNbO3 crystal identical to the approach used in [16]. The LiNbO3
crystal is arranged such as to allow for tilted pulse front THz generation. [17]. The THz beam then passes
a pair of linear polarizers, where the first polarizer is fixed. The second polarizer is mounted on a rotational
Thorlabs stage, which can be remotely controlled with a computer. This allows for automatic controlling of the
9
==PAGE:15==
electric field strength at the PMT during measurements by changing the relative angle between the rotated
polarizer and the fixed polarizer.
From the polarizers, the THz pulses are directed into the imaging setup, which begins with a high-resistivity
(HR) silicon wafer beam splitter. The reflected part of the beam is lead into a 2” off-axis parabolic mirror
(OAP) with a 4 inch focal length, which focuses the beam into a powermeter.
The transmitted part of the beam is lead into a 2” OAP mirror with a 2 inch focal length that focuses the beam
onto the sample under investigation. The non-transmitted part of the beam from the sample is lead back into
the beam splitter. Here the reflected part of the beam is lead into a 2” OAP mirror with a 3 inch focal length
and is focused onto the metasurface of the THz-PMT and electron emission is induced. The emitted electrons
are amplified by a gain factor due to the internal dynode system in the PMT and the resulting current trace is
recorded and displayed by the oscilloscope. Selected values are automatically extracted from the oscilloscope
by a script running on a connected PC. This allows for experiments in which specific variables can be varied
controllably. The oscilloscope trigger is set to a photodiode placed behind the LiNbO3 crystal, such that
oscilloscope trace acquisition is triggered whenever a THz pulse is generated.
6.1.1
Types of Scans
The computer-connected Thorlabs stages and the oscilloscope allow for automation of many measurements.
These form the primary tools through which the THz-PMT and the samples of interest are investigated. The
experimental setup contains a total of 5 computer-controlled stages with the following naming conventions:
• The x-,y-,z-stages moving the sample holder along three mutually orthogonal axes (see figure 6.11b)
• The R2-stage responsible for rotating the second polarizer of the polarizer pair
• The R3-stage responsible for rotating the THz-PMT.
The stages allow for performing the measurements described in the following sections.
Fowler-Nordheim (FN) Scans
In these scans position of the sample and the orientation of the THz-PMT are fixed. The scan is performed
recording the corresponding oscilloscope output for a series of R2-stage positions, thus corresponding to a
series of electric field strength. The R2-stage is programmed such that for each specified R2 value, the stage
orients the polarizer with an angle θ such that:
R2 = Emax cosθ
Emax
= cosθ
(6.1)
This allows for measurements to be performed in units of normalized electric field strength. Retrieving the
absolute field strength values requires calibration of the THz-PMTs, which is presented in section 6.2. An
example of an FN curve can be seen in figure 6.2.
Examples of FN-curves for different voltages can be seen in figure 6.2. The larger the gain voltages the
faster the rises. At higher field strengths, the peak-to-peak values recorded by the oscilloscope are subject to
saturation effects as seen on the green curves. The plots in the figure are featured in the results section.
On-axis Scans (Z-Scans)
When performing on-axis scans, the oscilloscope signal strength is recorded for a sequence of z-stage positions.
All other stage parameters are kept constant. An example of a curve generated by a z-sweep can be seen in
figure 6.3.
10
==PAGE:16==
Figure 6.2: Examples of FN curves at different gain voltages. Higher gain voltage results in faster signal
increase. At higher field strengths, saturation effects begin to occur as seen for the green curve. The red line
is a reference point for the same signal output and at which points on the FN curve this corresponds to for
different gain voltages. This is relevant in the results section.
Figure 6.3: An example of a z-sweep. The curve exhibits symmetry which can be related to the symmetry of a
Gaussian beam in the vicinity of its beam waist.
The plot features a mainly concave curve with a few jagged points attributed to noise. The curve has a
symmetric tendency which can be explained by comparing the curve to a general plot for the beam waist of
a Gaussian beam. The beam waist of a Gaussian beam is the section of a Gaussian beam where the beam
cross-sectional area is the smallest and conversely, where the beam intensity is highest. Moving along from
the beam in either direction from the beam waist results in an increase of the cross-sectional beam area, and
thus in a decrease in electric field intensity and strength. This, combined with the non-linear response of the
Fowler-Nordheim model, is what determines the symmetric behaviour and slope of the z-sweeps. A model that
relates the slope of the z-sweeps to the gaussian beam profile is not within the scope of the project, but would
provide an interesting result for the THz-PMTs.
2D Scans
2D scans are the method in which images of sample surfaces are generated. The 2D scans are performed in a
raster over a selected area on a given surface sample. The selected surface area of a sample is imparted in a
grid of rectangular or square segments called pixels by choosing a set step size along each axis. When the 2D
scan is begun, a reflection measurement is performed at the initial pixel in the scan after which the sample
11
==PAGE:17==
holder is moved in the direction of the first axis of movement to the next pixel and a reflection measurement is
performed. After the first row has been fully scanned, the sample holder is moved along the second axis of
movement and moved to the first square along the first axis of movement. The orientation of the sample is
always such that horizontal and vertical axes of an image correspond to the movement of the x- and y-stage.
While performing 2D scans the other stage parameters are kept constant. The 2D scans are typically performed
in the following manner: After the THz-PMT is placed at the focal point of the PMT-mirror and the alignment
of the PMT has been optimized, the sample holder along with the sample is mounted onto the 3D-stage and
moved into focus. A z-scan is performed to find the position of the sample where the signal is at maximum.
This is typically done at a central position on the sample, but may vary from sample to sample. Only after the
position of the sample has been optimized with respect to the focus, the 2D scan can be initiated.
When imaging with the setup, special care must always be taken as to not allow too large a current into the
channel of the oscilloscope as the equipment otherwise can suffer damage. Because of this, every 2D scan of a
sample is initiated by bringing the sample into proper focus via z-scans at low powers. Then the beam power
is increased in step via the polarizers, where for each step, the recorded signal is investigated over the entire
sample until optimal parameters are found.
6.2
Overview of PMTs (+ calibration curves)
Three different THz-PMT designs were used throughout the experimental work for this project. Each design
comes with its own strengths and weaknesses and this section contains an overview of each PMT. A summary
of the designs features of the PMTs can be found in table 6.1.
PMT serial number
Metasurface Design
Metasurface Material
and Coatings
Sensitivity
CX9236
DSRR
Graphene and Caesium
High
CY0307
Bowtie
Graphene and Caesium
Very High
CY0252
No design.
Graphene covered substrate
Graphene
Low
Table 6.1: Overview of the design features of the PMTs used in the project.
The serial number of the three THz-PMTs used for the project are CX9263, CY0307, and CY0252. The first
two of the THz-PMTs are similar in that their metasurface designs consist of an array of gold antennas coated
with caesium and graphene. They main difference between the metasurfaces is the shape of the gold antennas.
CX9236 contain antennas in the form of DSRR antennas as can be seen on figure 6.4a, while the CY0307 PMT
contains antennas in the form of bow-ties which can be seen on figure 6.4b. The CY0252 antenna differs from
the other designs in that it does not have a metasurface in the form of an array of antennas. Instead the surface
consists of a substrate coated in graphene, from which electrons are emitted.
6.2.1
Calibration Curves
The implementation of the polarizer pair in the experimental setup allows for easier control of the electric
field strength and simpler measurements of the THz-PMT responses. The consequence of this is the need
for a calibration curve for each THz-PMT in order to convert the normalized field strength into an absolute
field strength. The main idea behind the calibration curve is that each THz-PMT is expected to have the same
behaviour for a given field strength and gain voltage. It is worth to note that since electron emission from the
metasurface materials is a statistical process, this naturally induces variations in the THz-PMT output which
means that accurate recordings of calibration curves or conversions via already measured calibration curves is
not an entirely accurate process. This will be discussed further during in the discussion section, after the noise
measurements have been performed. The calibration curves for the THz-PMTs have not been measured as part
12
==PAGE:18==
(a) A SEM image of the DSRR antenna structure. The SEM
image was recorded by author of this thesis in a previous
special course project
(b) Low resolution SEM image of a bow-tie antenna used in
a PMT. Image taken from [18]
of this project, but have been provided by Tobias Buchmann. The calibration curves for the THz-PMTs can all
be seen in figure ??.
The CY0252 and the CY9236 PMTs have calibration curves for the peak-to-peak and integrated area values
from the oscilloscope all recorded at 1500 V gain voltage. The CY0307 PMT features several calibration
curves which only consists of integrated area values, though the curves have been recorded for a series of gain
voltage values: 1500V, 1000V, 2x 600V, 500 V and 350 V. The reason for two curves at 600V gain voltage is
due to the implementation of Si wafers in the beam path to attenuate the electric field strength as an additional
method of lowering the electric field strength. This allows to for scanning of the highly sensitive over several
magnitudes of electric field strength without heavily saturating the recorded oscilloscope signal nor risk of
damaging the oscilloscope.
The calibration curves are given in terms of two different oscilloscope outputs, the peak-to-peak voltages
and the integrated area. The former records the difference between the highest and the lowest values in a
trace, while the latter records the area below the trace. One may wonder which of the recorded values when
performing measurements with the PMT. In THz-PMT literature [3] it is customary to use the integrated area
of the trace which further can be used to find the number of emitted electrons. The integrated area curve is
especially preferable to use at higher field strengths where the peak-to-peak curve tends to saturate. If one
considers the calibration curves at lower electric field strength values, eg. 10-13 kV/cm, one may notice
that the peak-to-peak rises more quickly than the integrated area curve. Here it is more beneficial to use
the peak-to-peak value since it offers a more noticeable signal at the electric field strengths compared to the
integrated area curve.
6.3
Experimental Challenges and Methods
The main idea behind using the THz-PMTs for imaging is that the non-linear response of the THz-PMTs to the
incident electric fields would be capable to capture small variations in surface conductivity or topology of a
given sample under investigation. The variations in surface conductivity and topology are locally expected to
have different reflectivity coefficient which can be detected by the non-linear response of the THz-PMT The
type of the measurement may vary, depending on the reflectivity of the given sample.
6.3.1
Direct reflection vs. Double Transmission Measurements
Figure 6.6 illustrates a sample (light blue) with a large variation of surface conductivity. If the surface
conductivity of the sample is sufficiently lower than that of its background (dark grey), then the beam
13
==PAGE:19==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 6.5: The calibration curves for the three THz-PMTs used in the project. The red curves represent the
peak-to-peak values on the oscilloscope, while the blue curves represent the integrated area beneath the trace.
Fig. 6.5a and 6.5b show the calibration curves for the : CX9236 PMT with linear and logarithmic vertical
axes, respectively. Fig 6.5c and 6.5d: CY0307 with linear and logarithmic axes, respectively. Fig 6.5e shows
the calibration curves for different gain voltages for the CY0307 PMT is a screenshot from borrowed code
from Tobias. Figures 6.5a and 6.5c show the same tendency. Both curves have similar behaviour up until
higher field values, where the red curve begins to saturate. This trend has been observed to commonly occur
for THz-PMTs.
14
==PAGE:20==
Figure 6.6: Interaction between the beam and the surface
component that is reflected from the background would be comparably larger than the beam component that
is reflected directly from the sample surface. Due to the non-linear response of the PMT, the signal output
of a sufficiently larger beam component would overshadow the contribution to the signal from other beam
components. Here the signal output would carry information from the sample due to transmission losses,
but carry also noise from the background. We refer to this type of measurement as a double-transmission
measurement.
If the surface conductivity of the sample considerably larger than that of the background, such that the beam
component reflected from the sample surface is sufficiently larger than the component reflected from the
background, then the contribution from the background is not significant to the recorded values. This type of
measurement will be denoted as a direct reflection measurement.
6.3.2
Image Artefacts
During the development and optimization of the imaging system, certain 2D scans yielded quite different
results compared to what was expected. These scans provided opportunities for understanding the setup better.
In this section, different types of artefacts will be presented along with the suspected cause behind them.
The first artefact to consider is one that originated from using a metallic holder for a sample with a lesser
surface conductivity. Figure 6.7 illustrates one such artefact. Here the scanned sample is a High-Resistivity
(HR) phosphor-doped silicon wafer mounted onto a Thorlabs Metal holder using double-sided sticky tape. The
Thorlabs metal can be seen on figure 6.8. The holder consists of a metallic frame in which a 2 inch optic can be
fastened with a screw. For certain experiments a 2 inch aluminum disc was used as can be seen on the image.
6.3.3
Going from Graphite Scans to Wafer Scans
The commencement of the 2D scans of wafer samples lead to a transitory period of a couple of weeks in the
design of the experimental setup. The transition from graphite sample to full-size wafer scans were marked by
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 6.7
Figure 6.8
16
==PAGE:22==
a number of characteristics:
• The area of imaging is typically larger.
• The duration of each 2D scan is longer.
• More precise alignment in sample holder and optical components is required.
For the 2D scans to cover a significant portion of the wafer areas, the size of the scanned areas were increased,
typically from 20x20 mm on graphite samples to 45x45 mm on wafer samples while keeping step sizes
constant. Each pixel has a constant scan duration of 3s, which for the total scan time implies a quadratic
dependency of side length for a square image with the same step size along both axes.
Certain changes also had to be made to the experimental setup to accommodate for two of the above factors.
The larger imaging area requires that the sample and optical components are more precisely aligned, specifically
that the sample does not have a too large tilt compared to the focal plane.
6.4
Samples investigated in the project
With the experimental setup being assembled and the optical components aligned, the next step of the project
was to commence with testing the imaging properties of the THz-PMTs. Since the imaging properties of the
THz-PMTs are unknown the first step would be to use samples of known design. A simple idea would be to
try scanning samples with different graphite markings and attempt see to what extent the markings could be
visualized with the imaging setup. Graphite has a strong absorption to frequencies close to THz [19] and is
easy to acquire, which lead to the fabrication of the graphite samples.
Two graphite were scanned during the experimental project work, the double triangle sample and the 2-mm
line sample. The former can be seen on figure 6.9a. The sample features two triangles drawn on a piece of
paper, the upper one with pencil and the lower one with a red ink pen. The pencil used for the upper triangle is
the same pencil as the one used for the 2-mm line sample. Opposite vertices of the triangles are connected by
pencil lines except for the vertical segment leading from the center of the triangle to the bottom vertex. The
horizontal and vertical width of the figure is 1 cm.
By also drawing one of the triangles using a red ink pen instead of graphite and subsequently compare the
response of the two materials, the effect of graphite on the recorded signal might be more discernible from the
effect the change in topology.
In an attempt to account for the effect the ridges have on a piece of paper, another sample was made. This
sample was created by placing a different piece of paper under the double-triangle sample, when the triangles
were drawn. The pressure from the pen and pencil applied to the papers also created ridges in the paper beneath
without leaving graphite nor red ink on the sample. This sample is called the triangle imprint sample
The other graphite sample that has been scanned during the experimental investigation in this project is the
2mm-line sample, which consists of six lines drawn with 2 mm (+-0.5 mm) spacing. Each line is drawn with
an increasing number of strokes. Going from left to right the number of strokes per line are respectively, 1, 2,
5, 5, 10 and 20. The two 5-stroke lines were drawn differently. For the first line from left to right, the line was
drawn with alternating up- and down- strokes, while for the latter it was consequently up-strokes. For the latter
lines in the series, not all strokes overlap perfectly, and the line-to-line distance is a bit less that 2 mm. Two
upside-down L’s were drawn below the 2-mm lines, one with graphite and one with green ink, however they
were omitted from the scan area in order to minimize the duration of the scans.
The wafer is a High-resistivity (HR) silicon wafer which is doped with phosphorus.
Another interesting wafer sample that has been investigated with the imaging system is the graphene wafer
sample. It consists of a HR Si wafer on which graphene has been deposited through CVD.
17
==PAGE:23==
(a) The Double Triangle sample
(b) The Triangle Imprint Sample
(a) The 2-mm Line Sample
(b) The MultiWafer Sample
18
==PAGE:24==
(a) The SN617 Wafer
(b) The Graphene Wafer Sample
19
==PAGE:25==
7
|
Imaging with the Photomultiplier Tubes
In this chapter the images generated by 2D scans with the THz-PMTs are presented. The first section contains
the results from investigating the graphite samples while the second section contains the results of the wafer
samples.
7.1
Graphite Samples
The first sample on which 2D scans with the PMT were performed was the 2-mm-line sample presented in
figure 7.1. The sample was fixed to an aluminum disc by using double-sided sticky tape. This was necessary in
order to acquire a signal because the direct reflection from the surface of the paper sample was weak to be
detected by the CX9236 THz-PMT. Thus, by using the aluminum disc, the scan could instead be performed
as a double-transmission measurement. Figures 7.1a and 7.1b show the images with a linear and logarithmic
scaling on the color bar, respectively. Both images feature dark, vertical lines at the horizontal edges of the
scan which is suspected to be caused by the double-sided sticky tape with which the sample is fixed to the
aluminum disc. The step size is 0.5 mm in both x and y directions.
Figure 7.1c shows a histogram of individual pixel peak-to-peak values from the 2D scan figure 7.1a with the
dark edges removed by zooming. The inset expands the part of the histogram containing the highest peaks
and shows several segments of the histogram and what each segment represents. The cluster of pixels with
lowest peak-to-peak values correspond to the graphite lines due to large attenuation of the double-transmitted
beam, while the immediate large peak corresponds to the background response of the paper. On the full-scale
figure, the pixels with the highest peak-to-peak values correspond to the bright lines between the dark lines.
The method through which these segments were characterized is the following: An arbitrary threshold was
introduced for the for the pixel values in the 2D scan and all pixels with a peak-to-peak value above the
threshold were set to an artificially large value (0.5 V) and the 2D scan dataset plotted again. The image was
then compared to the previous image and the remaining features were noted down. The threshold was then
lowered further and the process iterated. Thus it was possible to estimate approximately in which ranges
of peak-to-peak value each type of feature (graphite lines, background and bright lines) belongs. There is a
considerable overlap between the graphite line values and background signal due to the numbers above the
lines. One could consider cropping the top part of the image out and repeating the analysis, though then the
sample size of the background signal would decrease significantly.
Figure 7.2 shows the variation of the peak-to-peak signal along selected lines in the image. Figure 7.2a shows
the variation across three horizontal lines for the full dataset of the 2D image in figure 7.1a. The dark lines on
the scan can be discerned as the valleys in the scan while the bright lines occur as peaks. An estimate for the
background signal can also be made by comparing with the 2D scan and finding the relevant range. Figures
7.2b and 7.2c show the peak-to-peak signal variation along vertical lines aligned with the graphite lines. The
former shows the variation across the entire 2D scan, while the latter only shows the range representing the
graphite lines. The average values can be seen in table 7.1. The graphite lines have a width of 2-3 pixels in the
2D scan in figure 7.1a and an average of their values across the width has been made when generating the data
for figure 7.2c. In the figure, the continuous lines represent the varying peak-to-peak value across the graphite
line, while the dashed lines indicates the average value for their respective graphite line. The 1, 2 and first 5
20
==PAGE:26==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.1: a: The 2-mm graphite line sample mounted onto the 2-inch Thorlabs holder. b: One of the first
scans of the sample. Initially, the scan step size was set to 1 mm (roughly the beam diameter), however the
resolution on the image is too poor. c) and d) show a scan of the same sample at 6x larger resolution (0.5 mm
step size in both directions) where both the lines, but also some of the numbers are discernible. Note that due
to the configuration of the stages, the image is inverted on the x-axis. Also: Do add axes on the sample image
to compare with the scan directions.
stroke lines have a large signal variation across the graphite lines and one can argue that the average value
cannot be used properly as a descriptor, however, the remaining lines do not deviate much from the average.
An interesting observation is that the average value (and all lines except the blue) are arranged in an ascending
order of strokes used to draw the line when going down vertically on the plot. This the observed tendency is
that a larger number of strokes used for a line correlates to a lower signal on the image, thus larger absorption
by graphite, which is what was expected. The graphite lines corresponding to a higher number of strokes
also appear have a less varying signal across the length of the line, suggesting that the graphite deposition or
indentation of the paper is more homogeneous. This cannot be concluded, however, since the pressure applied
when drawing the lines is not guaranteed to be constant.
Line stroke number
1
2
5
5 (Second Line)
10
20
Average Recorded Signal
(Peak-to-Peak) [mV]
16.6
11.5
12.9
5.9
2.2
1.5
Table 7.1: The average recorded oscilloscope signals across the lines of the 2-mm line sample
In the spacing between the graphite lines, the recorded signal is curiously much larger than the background
signal. The suspected reason for this is that small indentations and ridges in the paper caused by the applied
pressure when drawing the lines. Another question that arises is whether the dark lines in the image are caused
21
==PAGE:27==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.2
22
==PAGE:28==
by absorption losses caused by the graphite or due to topological changes in the paper. This hypothesis would
require further testing through a new sample, which lead to the creation of the double-triangle sample, was
presented in figure 6.9a. The 2D scans of the sample were performed similarly to those of the 2-mm-line
sample by mounting the double-triangle sample to an aluminum disc and can be seen on figure ??.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figures 7.3a and 7.3b show the 2D scan of the double-triangle sample with linear and logarithmic scaling
on the colour map, respectively. The upper triangle drawn with pencil is clearly distinguishable from the
background, while the lower triangle comprised of red pen ink appears not so clear. Based on this observation
it seems that graphite has a larger absorption coefficient in the THz range, however, it cannot be concluded that
the difference in signal between the signal values recorded from the graphite and red ink lines in the image is
solely attributed to the difference in the absorption coefficients of both materials, since other factors might
affect the signal difference, such as the topological variation over the sample lines. The pixels around the right
pencil line appear brighter than the rest of the background of the sample similarly to the bright lines in the
2mm-line sample.
The ability of the PMT to detect variations in the topology of the paper was tested by scanning the triangle
imprint sample presented in figure 6.9b. Scanning this sample similarly to the previous graphite samples
yielded the images seen in figure ??. A set of brighter lines can be observed on the image generated from
the 2D scan, two of which intersect and resemble the right side of the drawn triangle from figure 7.3a. The
lines yield a larger signal value compared to the background, which is in contrast to the graphite lines on the
previous samples, where the signal is typically lower. In the vicinity of the indentation lines, the signal is also
generally larger compared to the background, specifically between the indentation lines, suggesting that the
paper is not only deformed at the point of contact between the pencil and the paper, but also in the near vicinity
23
==PAGE:29==
of the contact point. A hypothesis could be that the range of deformation from the contact point between pencil
and paper depends on the applied pressure and scales with the amount of strokes used to draw the graphite
lines. This would explain that there is no bright line between the 1- and 2-stroke lines.
7.2
Wafer Samples
The role of the graphite samples in this project was to facilitate testing the imaging setup with known designs
and provide an understanding for how the images generated from 2D scans depend on variations in conductivity.
The next step of the project is to begin investigating semiconductor samples with the PMT imaging system
to see if the PMT is to be able to visualize fine variations in surface conductivity on wafers due to its highly
non-linear response in order to answer the main research question of this report. Four different wafers have
been acquired for imaging in the project. 3 of the wafers consist of high-resistivity (HR) silicon with different
charge carrier dopant densities and a HR Si wafer on which graphene has been deposited through chemical
vapor deposition (CVD).
7.2.1
The SN617 Wafer
The series of wafer sample 2D scans began with the SN617 wafer of which a 2D scan is features in figures
7.4a and 7.4b
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.4
24
==PAGE:30==
In order to minimize the amount of variables affecting the scans it was decided to progress with the scans
without using aluminum discs to mount samples on and instead perform direct reflection measurements on
the wafers. However, as mentioned in the methods section, the holder itself appears on the image due to the
difference in surface conductivity between the holder and the surface of the sample. There is also a gradient
present increasing from the bottom of the image towards the top which indicates that the sample is not properly
aligned to account for the larger scan area. By zooming in on a central part of the it is possible to avoid the
holder artefacts to investigate the sample as can be seen on figure 7.4c, however the gradient due to imperfect
alignment is still present. Despite the gradient, one can observe larger fluctuations on the pixel values on figure
7.4c, however, it cannot be concluded whether the fluctuations are due to noise present in the imaging system
or actually fine variations in wafer conductivity. Since the doped wafers typically are fabricated by using the
Czochralski method, which is known to yield very uniform doping profiles of wafers, one would mainly expect
the cause of fluctuations in the image to be noise sources. Figure 7.4d shows the variation of the recorded
signal across select lines on image 7.4a, which is marked by arrows. The horizontal lines show a mostly
horizontally flat behaviour with the exception of two large peaks at the borders of the image. The peaks are
likely explained by the holder artefact in the image. The vertical lines show a clear increasing tendency along
the positive y-axis which further confirms the imperfect alignment of the wafer. The signal values recorded for
the scan in 7.4a are quite low which was a consequence due errors in the sample alignment and limitations
of the setup (as presented in the methods section). After improving the setup updating the setup it became
possible to perform larger area scans.
7.2.2
The Graphene Wafer
The next wafer sample that was investigated was the graphene wafer sample, of which two separate scans can
be seen in figures 7.5a and 7.5b. In order to investigate the reproducibility of the PMT imaging measurements,
the sample holder was dismounted and mounted back onto the 3D stage to account for possible between the
two scans.
Certain interesting features can be observed on figure 7.5a which are marked with white markers and by
comparing with 7.5b one can see two of the features reproduced. Each figure features a dark band where the
recorded signal from the pixels is weaker, however the band occurs at different areas of each scan. It is located
on the top of figure 7.5a and in the middle of figure 7.5b. Since the scans were performed close to each other
in time, this suggests that the origin of the dark bands is not a property of the graphene wafer sample, but
rather due to noise sources. The resolution of the scans was increased by setting the step size in each direction
of the scan to 0.25 mm, resulting in an increase in scan duration for both scans. The duration of each scan
was ≈21 hrs and in that time window it is possible for small fluctuations in the ambient lab environment,
such as temperature or air humidity, to have occurred. The absorption rate of THz in water combined with the
non-linear sensitivity of the PMT would make images very susceptible to such fluctuations. Unfortunately,
values for the temperature and humidity were not recorded for the duration of the scan. The same images are
shown with a logarithmic scaling on figures 7.5c and 7.5d. Another noticeable feature of the scans is that the
sample holder is not visible on the image, which suggests that the surface conductivity of the graphene wafer
is much larger than the SN617 wafer.
7.2.3
The Multi-wafer
The multi wafer sample consists of an array of strips from all wafer samples acquired for the project, arranged
in a ladder-like structure on a HR Si wafer by using double-sided sticky tape. Since it cannot not be concluded
yet whether the variations detected in figure 7.4c are due to variations in the surface conductivity or noise
sources affecting the imaging system, one idea was to compare multiple doped wafers in the same image which
lead to the fabrication of the multiwafer sample. Unfortunately, due to the sample holder artefact, which was
also present in figure 7.4a, the scan was required to be made on a limited area equivalent to the interior gap of
the holder. The image from the 2D scan can be seen in figure 7.6a.
Only three of the strips are visible on the image with the last of the strips being barely visible and the space
between each strip features a low background signal. There are some variations in the signal across each strip,
25
==PAGE:31==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 7.5: 2D scans of the graphene-coated HR Si wafer. Left and right figures show two different scans of
the graphene wafer
but most noticeably, the left edges of each strip contains a slightly larger signal. The 2D scan is investigated
further by once again plotting the variation of the signal across certain lines in figure 7.6b indicated by colored
arrows on figure 7.6a. The signal variation is tracked along three vertical lines, one for each strip at the same
26
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.6: a) A scan of the multiwafer sample b) the variation of the recorded signals along select lines along
and across the wafer strips
relative position relative to the strip, and two horizontal lines, one in the middle of the image and one at the
bottom of the image. For a uniform doping profile for each wafer strip one would expect the signal to remain
constant along the strips with some fluctuations from noise. This is almost the case for the vertical lines
corresponding to the red, purple and orange lines on figure 7.6b. The purple line has a constant trend across
the length of the strip, while the red and the orange curves show a decreasing trend with distance. A possible
explanation for this could be that the wafer strips are not fixed perfectly horizontal and that this therefore is a
misalignment gradient. Alternatively, the conductivity across the wafer strips could vary such that the recorded
signal decays linearly, however, due to the nature of the fixation of the strips it is suspected to be the former.
Considering the horizontal variation of the recorded signal indicated by the green and blue curves, one notices
repeated plateaus corresponding to the signal from the wafer strips. Each plateau exhibits a linearly decreasing
trend with increasing distance. Two hypotheses can explain this behaviour. The initial large signal for each
plateau could be caused by a slight tilt of the wafer strip. In this case one would expect a monotonous decrease
in the signal across the wafer strip for a completely flat sample, however, each plateau from the green curve
features a small valley which might imply that there are variations in the sample thickness for the wafer strips.
The latter is the second hypothesis for these observations. Similar plateaus are not visible on the blue curve. It
27
==PAGE:33==
is also possible that the brighter areas on the strips could be caused by a local sample defect caused by the
wafer cleaving process.
28
==PAGE:34==
8
|
Noise Analysis of the PMTs
This chapter is dedicated to investigating the noise characteristics of the PMTs and of the imaging setup
in which they are used. The chapter begins with an overview of the different sources of noise that have
been observed or are suspected to affect the quality of images and scans performed with the imaging setup.
An overview of the experiments performed to characterize the noise of the PMTs will then be given. The
chapter will then proceed with an analysis of the noise measurements for the PMTs CY0307 and CY0252.
Unfortunately, it took a few attempts to accurately perform the noise experiments and it was not possible to
rigorously perform the noise experiments for the CX9236 PMT due to time constraints. The sample size for
the CX9236 PMT is too low to infer any noise properties with credibility.
8.1
Sources and timescales of Noise
When measurements are performed with the imaging setup, the output recorded by the oscilloscope often
fluctuates within a certain interval. It is for this reason that for each measurement in a 2D scan, the recorded
value is an average of 512 different pulses. Several factors can be attributed to the fluctuations in the output of
the PMT.
Firstly, the electron emission is a statistical process where fluctuations in the number of emitted electrons at
a given incident field strength is expected to be present. Secondly, not all pulses emitted from the laser are
identical. The shape, i.e. peak power and pulse width can vary slightly from pulse to pulse, which would also
lead to a variation in the PMT output. These fluctuations occur on a relatively short time scale, i.e. on the order
of nanoseconds. Referring to the dark areas on the graphene wafer scans in figures 7.5a and 7.5b, there is also
reason to expect fluctuations on larger time-scales in the form of fluctuations in temperature and air humidity.
Small losses introduced by environmental factors would result in a large change on the images due to the
nonlinear response of the PMTs. Figure 8.1 shows a schematic of the different noise sources. Not all noise
sources are necessarily non-linear in nature, however, since most noise sources affect the incident field strength
on the PMT metasurface, the result would yield a non-linear change in the PMT imaging system due to the
non-linearity of the emission model. Furthermore, if the PMT is operated at an electric field strength close
to saturation, space charge effects and electron-electron interactions can affect the emission process and the
electron trajectories through the PMT. Additionally, it was observed for the Caesium coated PMT metasurfaces
that when the lights in the lab were turned on, this added a measurable contribution to the recorded signals. If
the light source is incoherent this would register on the imaging system as noise. It can be argued that changes
to humidity in the lab would affect the beam power, since it only is the absorption coefficient of the air that
increased due to the increased amount of water. However, this would still appear as a non-linear change on the
imaging system due to the electron emission process.
Characterizing each individual noise source with the PMT would be very difficult since the noise sources are
not independent. Each noise source that affects the electric field strength yields a non-linear response on the
oscilloscope output. The best approach would be to try to minimize each noise source separately and then treat
the detected noise as one single noise source intrinsic to the specific experimental setup. Large variations in
scans due to environmental parameters can be avoided by shortening the duration of scans. Therefore the noise
measurements were done in the following was: A PMT was inserted into the PMT-holder and aligned into
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 8.1
focus in the imaging setup. Then 2000 single-shot traces were recorded with the sample being an aluminum
disc coated with gold through CVD. The recorded traces were done at 1500 V gain voltage for the CY0307
PMT and the CY0252 PMT. Then two additional series of traces were recorded for the CY0307 PMT at 1200
V and 900 V gain voltage to see how the noise varies with gain voltage. Each these series of traces will be
referred to as gain series for the CY0307 PMT. Every time the gain voltage was lowered for the CY0307 PMT,
the electric field strength was correspondingly increased such as to yield the same signal response on the PMT.
The results of the noise analysis are presented in the following sections.
8.2
The CY0307 PMT
Following the process described in the methodology section, 2000 traces have been recorded for the CY0307
PMT at the gain voltages 1500V, 1200V and 900V while compensating with the applied electric field such that
the signal on the oscilloscope is kept constant. The traces can be seen plotted in figure ??.
The figure features three plots, each showing a gain series of 2000 traces recorded at 1500 V (fig.8.4a), 1200
V (fig.8.4b) and 900 V (fig.8.4c). The blue, dotted lines in each gain series indicate the largest peak value
and lowest peak value of traces in the respective series. The difference between the largest and lowest peak
value is the range of peak values, which is the magnitude of noise for the respective gain series at its gain
voltage. In descending order of gain voltage, the range of peak values are: 0.45 V, 0.38 V and 0.23 V. Since the
signal is kept constant at around 600 mV whenever the gain voltage is lowered, this implies that the electric
field strength at the metasurface is increased. Thus the magnitude of noise in peak value of traces decrease
with increasing electric field. An interesting observation can be made when comparing the traces from the
gain series in figures 8.4a and 8.4b which were recorded using the same trigger and time window for the
oscilloscope. The traces in figure 8.4b are delayed in time to the traces in 8.4a by ≈2ns due to the gain voltage
being lowered. Unfortunately, the traces in 8.4b were cropped in the data acquisition, which is the reason for
changing the time scale on the oscilloscope on figure 8.4c. Another observation that can be made is that the
recorded traces become broader in time with decreasing gain. Specifically, in figure 8.4c. An explanation
for this may be found by comparing with figure 8.2, which shows the FN curve for each gain series. The
blue, orange and green curves correspond the gain voltages 1500V, 1200V and 900V, respectively. The red
curve shows the signal level that was kept constant across measurements. The intersection between the red
curve and the FN curves show at what part of the FN curves the noise measurements are performed and what
behaviour to expect. For the green curve, the intersection point is right before the slope of the FN curve begins
to decrease, which is the beginning of saturation.
In order to investigate how the noise data can be treated, the peak values for each gain series are plotted as
histograms in figure 8.3. The counts of the histograms are normalized such that the area of all the bins is equal
30
==PAGE:36==
to 1. A normalized Gaussian distribution is plotted on the histograms from the standard deviation and average
values calculated for the histograms. The histograms for the 1200V and 900 V gain series, in figures 8.3b
and 8.3c, follow the behaviour of the Gaussian curve quite well. The histogram for the 1500V gain series in
figure 8.3a mostly follows the same trend, though it deviates slightly due to a few large peaks in the histogram.
This might be an artefact due to overbinning, i.e. separating the data in too large a number of bins, which
introduces such artefacts and makes the data more susceptible to noise. This could also explain the drop in
the histogram in figure 8.3b. All of the histograms appear to have a small tail to the left, though it seems
that the noise measurements can be treated as having Gaussian distribution. The standard deviation for each
distribution is calculated to estimate the uncertainty of each single-shot trace from the distribution, which is
the noise of each measurement and can be compared with previous scan results. The standard deviation values
are in descending order of gain voltage: σ1500V = 0.064V,σ1200V = 0.051V,σ900V = 0.031V. The tendency is
that noise decreases with gain which is equivalent to it increasing electric field strength.
Figure 8.2
(a) σ1500V = 0.064 V
(b) σ1200V = 0.051V
(c) σ900V = 0.031V
Figure 8.3
31
==PAGE:37==
(a)
(b)
(c)
32
==PAGE:38==
Figure 8.4: The recorded series of traces with PMT CY0307 at gain voltages: a) 1500V, b) 1200V, c) 900 V
By plotting the peak voltage value for each oscilloscope trace in order of acquisition of trace, it is possible to
see how the peak values fluctuate in time. This can be seen on figure ??. While recording the pulses for the
noise measurement, a THz Power meter was also recording the variation in laser beam power, however, both
measurements occur on different time scales which can make it difficult to compare them directly. The THz
camera records a value for the average power every 0.2 seconds, while each trace has a duration of tens of
nanoseconds. Furthermore, the processing time for each trace is around 3s until it is saved by the oscilloscope
and another trace recorded. However, a qualitative comparison should be possible, since the power meter
begins and ends recording within a few seconds of each series of traces.
The power of the laser beam was also recorded during the measurements by using a THz power meter connected
to a lock-in amplifier. The power meter recorded the power of the beam every 0.2 s and the recording of the
beam power was started manually after the noise measurements were started. Unfortunately, the traces were
not recorded with respect to time, but only in sequence and each trace required a processing time of ≈3s to be
recorded and saved by the oscilloscope, before the next trace was acquired.
Additionally, part of the laser power measurements for the 1500V gain series was corrupted and most of the
values were lost. It is therefore difficult to precisely relate the traces to the variations in the recorded beam
power. However, since both measurements were performed in approximately the same time window of ≈30
min, one can plot the recorded pulse peaks in order of acquisition in the same plot as the laser beam power,
where the first axis of for each dataset (time for the beam power measurements and trace number for the pulse
peaks) is scaled to the same length. Then one can visually inspect for similar behaviour across datasets. These
plots can be seen in figure ??. Figures 8.5a, 8.5b, 8.5c correspond to the data for the 1500V, 1200V and 900V
gain series, respectively. The first of the figures only contains the evolution of the pulse peaks due to the lost
laser power data. For the other two figures, red and orange arrows have been used to annotate points in the
data which seem to exhibit some correlation and seem to not exhibit correlation, respectively. For figure 8.5b
a red bracket is also used to indicate a larger time interval with seemingly little correlation between laser
power behaviour and pulse peak behaviour. It appears that both figures contain points where correlation is
apparent and where correlation is not apparent. One can suspect that the variations in pulse peak power affect
the recorded signal by the oscilloscope to an observable degree and that there also are other factors affecting
noise of the single-shot trace acquisitions. However, nothing can be concluded based on the observations
above if one considers the ratio of traces acquired to the repetition rate of the laser. In the time window of
one measurement made with the power beam, 200 pulses interact with the metasurface and generate a signal.
Therefore, the power meter measurement must be statistic of the average pulse power for the 200 pulses. The
processing time of the oscilloscope allows for the acquisition of only one single-shot trace approximately every
3 seconds, which means that for every single shot trace, 15 power meter measurements are performed. Even if
one were to determine to which power meter measurement the acquired single-shot trace belongs, it would
still be equivalent to attempt to determine the average pulse power of 200 pulses with only 1 measurement.
Given the size of noise measurements used for the plots, it is likely to happen at select points, which is most
likely what is observed. This justifies treating the collective behaviour of the noise sources as one single source
intrinsic to the imaging system for now until a better approach for noise characterization can be found.
33
==PAGE:39==
(a)
(b)
(c)
34
==PAGE:40==
Figure 8.5: Variations in pulse peak power plotted with laser power measurement for: a) 1500V, b) 1200V, c)
900 V
8.3
The CY0252 PMT
The noise properties of the CY0252 PMT have also been investigated in a similar procedure as with the
CY0307 PMT, however, due to time constraints only one series of traces was recorded at a gain voltage of 1500
V. The field strength was set such that the peak to peak values lie around 600 mV. Figures 8.6, 8.7, 8.8 show a
plot of the traces recorded for the series, a histogram over the pulse peak values and the evolution of pulse
peak values plotted with the recorded beam power in time. The range of fluctuations for the trace pulse peaks
is 0.382V and it can be seen that the time window for the traces is much larger than for the measurements
performed for the CY0307 PMT. As a consequence, the required duration to record the traces was ≈1.5 hrs.
The histogram of the pulse peaks shows gaussian behaviour when compared to the gaussian fit, however it is
not apparent if the distribution also contains a left skew. The standard deviation of the distribution of pulse
peaks is 0.047 V which is lower than the standard deviation of 0.064V for the 1500V of the CY0307 PMT.
The difference in values cannot be used to compare the PMTs, however, since the electric field strengths at
which the measurements were performed, are not necessarily the same for both PMTs. By considering the time
evolution of pulse peaks and the power meter measurements, one notices that the power meter measurement
shows an oscillation on a larger time scale in addition to the fast variations observed in the previous power
meter measurement plots. The oscillation could be due to variations in the lab environment, which is also
expected to appear on larger time scales, though this is just a hypothesis. However, one might expect that
measurements and 2D scans lasting longer that 30 min are also affected by such larger time scale oscillations.
Figure 8.6
35
==PAGE:41==
Figure 8.7: σ1500V = 0.047V
Figure 8.8
36
==PAGE:42==
9
| Discussion and Comparison of Re-
sults
The main goal of this master’s thesis was to investigate the possibility of utilizing the THz-PMT for contactless
surface conductivity measurements in the electronics or semiconductor industry. Specifically, the main research
question was formulated as:
• Can the THz-PMT be implemented as a reliable detector for contactless surface conductivity measure-
ments for use in electronics/semiconductor industry?
With the following sub-questions to aid the experimental investigation:
• What are the core properties in THz-PMTs that can be used in contactless surface conductivity measure-
ments?
• How does one test the properties of an unknown device?
• What types of samples can be characterized by the THz-PMTs?
• How reliable are images generated by the THz-PMTs?
• What are the limiting factors of the THz-PMT-based imaging system?
These questions can now be answered by considering the presented theory and the experimental results that
have been acquired in the project. The main idea was to leverage the highly non-linear response of the PMT to
detect finer variations of conductivity across samples, and in the first part of the experiments, the THz-PMT
was implemented in the imaging setup and used to investigate different types of samples. The approach to
test the unknown properties of a device was to begin with scanning known samples. Graphite is known to
strongly interact with and absorb THz light and is easy to acquire, which lead to testing with sample consisting
of different pencil drawings. The main results from the graphite sample scans are that the THz-PMT can both
detect fine variations in graphite thickness, but also topological variations on paper. The 2-mm line sample
shows that the average signal recorded for each line is arranged after the number of strokes used to fabricate the
line with the exception of one of the 5-stroke lines. The average values are presented again here in table 9.1.
We see that for the parameters in the scan, the variations across the lines are on the order of single mV despite
that the signals recorded at other parts of the sample are of the order of 100s of mV. Unfortunately, the noise
properties of the CX9236 PMT used to image the 2-mm line sample were not recorded. Under the assumption
Line stroke number
1
2
5
5 (Second Line)
10
20
Average Recorded Signal
(Peak-to-Peak) [mV]
16.6
11.5
12.9
5.9
2.2
1.5
Table 9.1: The average recorded oscilloscope signals across the lines of the 2-mm line sample
37
==PAGE:43==
that the noise properties are similar for the CX9236 PMT and the CY0307 PMT at 1500 V are similar, one can
investigate whether signal variations across the graphite lines are larger than the estimated noise level of the
PMTs. The assumption is based on the fact that the metasurface of both PMTs consist of gold antennas coated
in graphene and caesium and only differ in shape. With this assumption it seems that the noise of the PMTs,
σ1500V = 64mV, is larger than the interval spanning the values from table 9.1. However, one must account for
the fact that the noise values are estimates based on data from a sample population of 2000 single-shot pulses.
Each data point used to calculate the averages in the table values is itself an average of 512 non-consecutive
pulses recorded over an interval of ≈3 s. By using uncertainty propagation theory presented in [20], one
can calculate the estimated uncertainty for an average of 512 single-shot pulses from the sample distribution
investigated in the noise analysis chapter. The estimated uncertainty of 512 single-shot pulses is:
σ512Avg =
1
512
q ∑σ2
1500V

=
1
512
√
512·0.064V = 0.064V
√
512
= 2.8mV
(9.1)
The estimated uncertainty a THz-PMT measurement consisting of an average of 512 pulses is 2.8 mV. Most of
the recorded values from table 9.1 differ by more than the uncertainty with the exception of the difference
between 10- and 20-stroke. Thus it can be concluded that the PMT can detect variations equivalent to the
difference between lines made with 1-, 2-, 5- and 10- strokes. A great result would have been to convert the
graphite stroke values to graphite thicknesses, but this would have required more time and the use of additional
tools.
The question of which types of samples can be scanned by the PMT is interesting to answer. The 2D scans that
have been made have been made on samples that had a high reflectivity, such as graphene, and samples with
lower reflectivity, such as the graphite samples. The latter was facilitated by placing an aluminum disc behind
the sample in order to perform double-transmission measurements. One can consider one more type of samples
that have been investigated, which are samples consisting of several layers, where the reflected fraction of the
THz pulse from each layer has a similar field strength when factoring in absorption and transmission losses.
This would especially be interesting for very thin layers such that the multiple reflected pulses appear in the
same trace. In such cases one might be able to utilize the THz-PMT for thickness measurements of different
layers, similar to the approach in [1]. However, it is not guaranteed that information between different layers
could be resolved independently, depending on the conductivity value and thicknesses of layers. In conclusion
one would be able to measure samples with both high and low reflectivity values by adjusting the measurement
method. Challenges in imaging might occur for samples with several layers that might give rise to different
peaks in the same trace such that individual peaks would be difficult to resolve.
The reliability of the PMT system consists of two factors, both related to the noise sources present in the
imaging system. The first factor that would be important for claiming high reliability for the imaging system is
that scans and results show a high degree of reproducability. For 2D scans this would require that features
visible on a scan of a sample can be reproduced in different scans. This has to some degree been demonstrated
for the THz-PMT in the scans of the graphene wafers. Two distinct features were reproduced despite large
noise sources occurring in both scans. Another criteria for high reliability would be having a large signal to
noise ratio (SNR) for the imaging device. An SNR estimate has not strictly been calculated for the PMTs due
to the time constraints of the project. This would also be an interesting goal to continue with in future work.
The main limiting factors of imaging with the PMT are related to the noise sources. Any factor increasing the
duration of scans, increase the likelihood for larger-term noise sources to affect scans, specifically changes to
humidity since the probing light is in the THz band. This includes the long processing time of the oscilloscope,
performing 2D scans with too large resolutions or scanning over too larger areas on the sample. Another
limiting factor is how the PMT detects electric fields. Only the electric field strength and polarization are
important to the field emission process and additional phase information is lost which could carry information
of different layers, thicknesses, materials and so on. This prevents us from being able to derive spectral
information of the detected light since there is no recorded pulse to Fourier transform. Improvements could
include replacing the oscilloscope with equipment dedicated to detect fast transients such as a boxcar averager.
How does all above describe the applicability of the PMT as a detector to be used for contactless surface
conductivity measurements? The PMT has demonstrated being able to measure a variety of samples and yield
38
==PAGE:44==
reproducible results. It has been able to reliably image features in different samples when comparing with
detected noise sources present in the system under the assumption that the intrinsic noises of the PMTs are not
too different. Unfortunately, the entire analysis in this thesis has been based on voltages recorded from traces
by the oscilloscope. The voltages would need to be converted into a physical property of interest appertaining
to the sample in order to be used for industrial purposes. For this, a model would have to be derived, and an
idea that had occurred during the project is as follows: One could consider the signal variation across an image
as a variation of reflection coefficient for an incident THz pulse. Using the Fresnel reflection coefficients at
normal incidence could relate these values to relative refractive indices. The main challenge that must then
be overcome is the conversion from value of refractive indices to conductivity values, which would depend
on the specific sample. Thus, the THz-PMT shows promising results for applicability in the electronics or
semiconductor industry, although more work would be required before so.
39
==PAGE:45==
10
|
Conclusion
The main goal of this master’s thesis is to investigate the applicability of the novel THz-PMT in the electronics or
semiconductor industry as a reliable contactless surface conductivity detector. Through a series of experiments
the main goal of this thesis has successfully been accomplished. It has been concluded that the THz-PMT
shows promising results for imaging via reflection measurements of samples with various levels of conductivity
and with scans of the same sample yielding reproducible features despite the presence of noise sources intrinsic
to the imaging setup and the highly-nonlinear detection process. It has been demonstrated that the THz-PMT
is capable of detecting variations in graphite and changes to the topology of paper in the form of indentation
lines caused by the applied pressure of the pencil at the point of contact. The noise of the single-shot trace
acquisitions with the PMT has been estimated and has successfully been converted to be applicable to 2D scans
where the recorded values are averages of a series of pulses. There is still need for a model to accurately convert
detected values to relevant physical values of interest in the examined samples which is a topic for future work.
In conclusion, the THz-PMT could be applied as a detector for contactless conductivity measurements with
additional research given the results acquired in this project.
40
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1] Johan Østergaard Knarreborg, Jonathan Hjortshøj-Nielsen, Bjørn Hübschmann Mølvig, Thorsten Bæk,
Peter Uhd Jepsen, and Simon Jappe Lange. Measuring maritime paint thickness under water using thz
cross-correlation spectroscopy. Applied Sciences, 12(23), 2022.
[2] Jerzy Krupka. Contactless methods of conductivity and sheet resistance measurement for semiconductors,
conductors and superconductors. Measurement Science and Technology, 24(6):062001, apr 2013.
[3] Simon J. Lange, Tobias O. Buchmann, Matej Sebek, Malte L. Welsch, Edmund J. R. Kelleher, Naoya
Kawai, Hisanari Takahashi, Kota Katsuyama, and Peter U. Jepsen. Lightwave-driven long-wavelength
photomultipliers. Laser & Photonics Reviews, 18(1):2300417, 2024.
[4] Sergey V. Polyakov. Chapter 3 - photomultiplier tubes. In Alan Migdall, Sergey V. Polyakov, Jingyun Fan,
and Joshua C. Bienfang, editors, Single-Photon Generation and Detection, volume 45 of Experimental
Methods in the Physical Sciences, pages 69–82. Academic Press, 2013.
[5] Hamamatsu Photonics K.K. Photomultiplier Tubes: Basics and Applications. Hamamatsu Photonics
K.K., Hamamatsu City, Japan, 4th edition, 2017. Accessed: 2024-08-29.
[6] Zilong Wu and Yuebing Zheng. Moiré metamaterials and metasurfaces. Advanced Optical Materials,
6(3):1701057, 2018.
[7] Carl Pfeiffer, Naresh K. Emani, Amr M. Shaltout, Alexandra Boltasseva, Vladimir M. Shalaev, and
Anthony Grbic. Efficient light bending with isotropic metamaterial huygens’ surfaces. Nano Letters,
14(5):2491–2497, 2014. PMID: 24689341.
[8] Guangwei Hu, Mingsong Wang, Yarden Mazor, Cheng-Wei Qiu, and Andrea Alù. Tailoring light with
layered and moiré metasurfaces. Trends in Chemistry, 3(5):342–358, 2021. © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.
[9] Simon Lehnskov Lange, Narwan Kabir Noori, Thea Maria Bjørk Kristensen, Kitty Steenberg, and
Peter Uhd Jepsen. Ultrafast THz-driven electron emission from metal metasurfaces. Journal of Applied
Physics, 128(7):070901, 08 2020.
[10] Ralph Howard Fowler and L. Nordheim. Electron emission in intense electric fields. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character,
119(781):173–181, 1928.
[11] Mathilde Guldbæk Arentsen, Nicholas Alan Hill, and Mihai Vlad Ursta Anghel. Analytical, numerical,
and experimental investigation of ultrafast electron field emission from a metamaterial placed in a vacuum
electronics system. 2021.
[12] K. Reimann, R. P. Smith, A. M. Weiner, T. Elsaesser, and M. Woerner. Direct field-resolved detection of
terahertz transients with amplitudes of megavolts per centimeter. Opt. Lett., 28(6):471–473, Mar 2003.
41
==PAGE:47==
[13] Guoqing Chang, Charles J. Divin, Jun Yang, Malakeh A Musheinish, Steven L. Williamson, Almantas
Galvanauskas, and Theodore B. Norris. Gap waveguide emitters for high power broadband thz generation
pumped by yb-doped fiber lasers. Opt. Express, 15(25):16308–16315, Dec 2007.
[14] K.-L. Yeh, M. C. Hoffmann, J. Hebling, and Keith A. Nelson. Generation of 10J ultrashort terahertz
pulses by optical rectification. Applied Physics Letters, 90(17):171121, 04 2007.
[15] Atiqa Arshad, Hatice Nur Koyun, Ruslan Salikhov, Michael Gensch, Igor Ilyakov, Alexey Ponomaryov,
Gulloo Lal Prajapati, Thales V. A. G. de Oliveira, Kalliopi Mavridou, Jürgen Lindner, Jan-Christoph
Deinert, Cumhur Gökhan Ünlü, and Sergey Kovalev. Terahertz harmonic generation from graphite pencil
drawings. Advanced Photonics Research, 4(7):2300088, 2023.
[16] Simon Jappe Lange, Matthias C. Hoffmann, and Peter Uhd Jepsen. Lightwave-driven electron emission
for polarity-sensitive terahertz beam profiling. APL Photonics, 8(1):016105, 01 2023.
[17] János Hebling, Gábor Almási, Ida Z. Kozma, and Jürgen Kuhl. Velocity matching by pulse front tilting
for large-area thz-pulse generation. Opt. Express, 10(21):1161–1166, Oct 2002.
[18] Tobias O. Buchmann, Simon L. Lange, Matej Sebek, and Peter Uhd Jepsen. Thz-driven electron emission
from metallic surfaces. In 2023 48th International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz
Waves (IRMMW-THz), pages 1–2, 2023.
[19] Aleksandra B. Djuriši´c and E. Herbert Li. Optical properties of graphite. Journal of Applied Physics,
85(10):7404–7410, 05 1999.
[20] John R. Taylor. An Introduction to Error Analysis: The Study of Uncertainties in Physical Measurements.
University Science Books, 2 sub edition, 1996.
42
