==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Multi-objective optimization for 
hybrid sizing and objective function 
development
Lillian Elizabeth Peterson
DTU Wind-M-
September 
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-08
September 202
E&T6 5
EduFation Master of 6FienFe
-Xan 3aEOR 0XrFLa /eRn
-XOLan $ntRny 4XLFN
0LNNeO )rLLs0¡OOer
'78 :ind 	 (nergy 6ystems
Katherine Dykes
$(*,5 ,nsights
5emarNs
TKis reSort is suEmitted as Sartial 
fulfillment of tKe reTuirements for 
graduation in tKe aEoYe eduFation at tKe 
TeFKniFal UniYersity of DenmarN
7echnical 8niversity of 'enmarN 
DeSartment of Wind and Energy 6ystems 
)rederiNsEorgYeM 
000 5osNilde
'enmarN
ZZZZLnddtXdN
$uthor
/LOOLan EOL]aEetK 3etersRn
7itle
0XOtLREMeFtLYe RStLmL]atLRn IRr KyErLd sL]Lng 
and REMeFtLYe IXnFtLRn deYeORSment
DTU Wind 	 Energy 6ystems is a deSartment of 
tKe TeFKniFal UniYersity of DenmarN ZitK a uniTue 
integration of researFK eduFation innoYation and 
SuEliFSriYate seFtor Fonsulting in tKe field of Zind 
energy 2ur aFtiYities deYeloS neZ oSSortunities 
and teFKnology for tKe gloEal and DanisK 
e[Sloitation of Zind energy 5esearFK foFuses on 
Ney teFKniFal-sFientifiF fields ZKiFK are Fentral for 
tKe deYeloSment innoYation and use of Zind 
energy and SroYides tKe Easis for adYanFed 
eduFation at tKe eduFation
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract
3
Nomenclature
4
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Electricity Pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Functionality of HyDesign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Comparison to Other Optimization Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Concept of CEO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Algorithm for HPP Sizing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methodology
14
3.1
COVE Objective Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
CEO Objective Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Generation Mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.2
Displacement Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.3
CO2 Emissions Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.4
Objective Function Modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Multi-Objective Sizing Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Multi-Objective EMS Problem Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.1
Linearization and Simpliﬁcation of CEO Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.2
Explanation of lb
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.3
Explanation of ⇤. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.4
Explanation of Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.5
Additional Battery Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4.6
Normalization of Parameters for EMS Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
HyDesign Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Limitations of EGO algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7
Limitations of CPLEX Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Application
26
4.1
Case Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.1
Setup of EMS Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.2
Setup of Sizing Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Results
30
5.1
EMS Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.1
Battery behavior at ⇤= 0.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.2
Battery behavior at ⇤= 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.3
Trade-oﬀs Between Lifetime Performance Metrics for Tested Surrogate Models . . .
39
5.2
Sizing Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion
43
1
==PAGE:4==
7
Conclusion
44
List of Figures
i
List of Tables
i
References
i
A Generation and Price Data
vi
B Displacement Order
vi
C Emissions Factors
vii
D Reference CEO for HPP Sizing
vii
E Reference COVE for HPP Sizing
viii
F Design Variables Bounds
viii
F.1
Prated: Rated Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
F.2
NWT: Number of Wind Turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
F.3
hc: Clearance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
F.4
sp: Speciﬁc Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
F.5
⇢w: Wind Installation Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
F.6
BP and BEh: Battery Power and Battery Energy Hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
F.7
Cbfl: Battery Fluctuations Penalty Factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
G Wind Farm Parameters
x
H Battery Parameters
xii
I
Financial and Economic Inputs
xiii
Page 2
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project introduces and develops Carbon Emissions Oﬀset, or CEO, as an objective function for hybrid
power plant (HPP) design and operation optimization. CEO is modeled and implemented in HyDesign, a
hybrid power plant optimization tool.
The HPP sizing optimization in HyDesign is retroﬁtted so that CEO and Cost of Valued Energy (COVE)
are jointly optimized. In addition, the energy management system (EMS) optimization is modiﬁed to
allow for multi-objective optimization of emissions oﬀsets and revenue, where the CEO objective function
is adapted into various surrogate models made applicable to linear programming. Trade-oﬀs between the
objectives are analyzed for a hypothetical yet realistic hybrid power plant, comprised of an oﬀshore wind
farm and lithium ion battery, that services western Denmark. Despite diﬀerences in battery behavior
for tested HPP designs under 3 CEO surrogate models, overall trade-oﬀs between revenue and lifetime
emissions oﬀsets are similar. Sizing optimization results also suggest similar trade-oﬀpatterns between
COVE and CEO, for a wind farm that assumes diﬀerent turbine sizes.
Further research could consider broader applications of CEO, e.g.
to energy equity research or other
optimization problem scenarios. The CEO objective function as presented here can be further developed
to model more complex market structures and electricity trading schemes.
Page 3
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Constraints:
∆B(t) change in battery power over time
⌘charge charge eﬃciency of the battery [-]
⌘discharge discharge eﬃciency of the battery [-]
✓(t)
distance of Pr(t) to peak price [e/MWh]
AWF
wind farm lease area size [km2]
BE
battery energy capacity [MWh]
ESoC(t) Battery state of charge time series [MWh]
G
grid connection capacity [MW]
lb
battery penalty
Pr,peak peak electricity price [e/MWh]
WMW,lower wind farm lower capacity limit [MW]
WMW,upper wind farm upper capacity limit [MW]
Decision Variables:
⇤
EMS optimization weighting parameter
⇢W
wind installation density [MW/km2]
B(t)
battery power time series [MW]
BP
battery power capacity [MW]
BEh
battery energy hours [h]
Cbfl
battery ﬂuctuation penalty factor[-]
hc
height clearance of rotor tip to the ground
[m]
NWT
number of wind turbines [-]
Pcurt(t) power curtailment time series [MW]
Prated rated power of wind turbine [MW]
sp
speciﬁc power [W/m2]
Miscellaneous:
ESOCdeg(t) battery state of charge time series, ac-
counting for degredation [MWh]
EI(x) Expected Improvement function
fsm1(t) piecewise linear function time series for
CEOsm1(x)
fsm2(t) piecewise linear function time series for
CEOsm2(x)
HHPPdeg(t) hybrid power plant generation time se-
ries, accounting for degredation [MW]
HHPP(t) hybrid power plant generation time se-
ries [MW]
I(y)
Heaviside step function
Q(x)
Quantile Function, evaluated at probability
q
S(t)
solar generation time series [MW]
SoH(t) Battery state of health time series
W(t) wind generation time series [MW]
Objectives:
CEO(x) Carbon Emissions Oﬀset
CEOsm1(X) Carbon Emissions Oﬀset surrogate
model 1
CEOsm1(X) Carbon Emissions Oﬀset surrogate
model 2
CEOsm2(X) Carbon Emissions Oﬀset surrogate
model 2
COVE(x) Cost of Valued Energy
R(X) + lb(X) Revenue and penalty
Parameters:
λ
sizing optimization weighting parameter
Asm1(t) time series of summed generation, after
which emissions oﬀsets are 0 according to
displacement order [MWh]
Asm2(t) time series of all summed grid generation
[MWh]
BEdepth sets battery energy minimum level
CEObc base case value of CEO for HPP lifetime,
used for normalization [gCO2eq]
Page 4
==PAGE:7==
CEOHPP lifetime CEO of the hybrid power plant
[gCO2eq]
COVEbc base case COVE for HPP lifetime, used
for normalization [-]
COVEHPP lifetime COVE of the hybrid power
plant [-]
EF(n) emissions factor, dependent on generation
type n [gCO2eq/MWh]
EFsm1(t) emissions factor time series for CEOsm1
[gCO2eq/MWh]
EFsm2(t) emissions factor time series for CEOsm2
[gCO2eq/MWh]
H(n,t) oﬀset generation, dependent on generation
type n and time t [MWh]
Hk,t
generation that is already oﬀset from gen-
eration type k at time step t, MWh
Pr(t) electricity price time series [e/MWh]
Rbc
base case value of revenue for HPP lifetime,
used for normalization [e]
RHPP lifetime revenue of the hybrid power plant
[e]
Sets:
B
set of batches b for which EMS optimization
is performed
D
set of generation types n displaced before
maximum oﬀsets are reached, according to
CEOsm1(x)
K
set of previously accounted for generation
types k in CEO(x) equation
N
set of market-dependent generation types n
T
set of time steps t within evaluation period
X
set of design variables in EMS optimization
x
set of design variables in sizing optimization
1
Introduction
Renewable energy power plants are becoming increasingly popular sources of electricity generation. This
is especially due to worldwide climate concern, a rising international demand for energy independence,
and the dramatic reduction of energy costs from renewables such as solar and wind in recent years [1][2].
While the integration of these technologies into large transmission systems is increasingly viable, there are
drawbacks to individual wind or solar plants that prevent full system dependence on renewables.
Both technologies rely on intermittent sources of energy, meaning that electricity can only be supplied to
the grid when the wind blows or the sun shines. Not only does this lead to stochasticity in power systems,
but it also means that electricity production from renewable sources cannot reliably balance consumption
from a given load. As a result, these renewables can introduce grid instability and cannot suﬃciently
provide ancillary services to the grid.
Hybrid power plants (HPPs) are comprised of multiple forms of electricity generation that exist behind a
single grid connection point, and may also include energy storage systems [3]. HPPs may combine wind
and solar generation with battery storage so that excess energy production can charge the battery when
demand is low, and energy can be discharged when demand is high. HPP technology allows for large-scale
renewables deployment without compromising grid stability, and is on the frontier of clean energy solutions.
The aim of this thesis is to develop a novel objective function, Carbon Emissions Oﬀset (CEO), and to
apply CEO to hybrid power plant sizing and battery operation optimizations in a multi-objective setting.
In this context, the objective function (also called objective) is a function to be maximized or minimized
by a solver in order to yield an optimal solution.
Page 5
==PAGE:8==
Trade-oﬀs are explored between CEO and Cost of Valued Energy (COVE) for HPP design, as well as
between CEO and revenue for HPP operation. Pseudo-realistic, state-of-the-art case studies are employed,
from which critical analysis and meaningful results can be derived. An existing open-source, Python-based,
DTU-owned HPP design optimization tool called HyDesign was partially developed for this research and
used to model all results. The main contributions of this research are deﬁned as follows:
• Carbon Emissions Oﬀset (CEO) objective function development, including formulation of assump-
tions, mathematical modeling, veriﬁcation, and performance testing in multi-objective optimization
scenarios
• Demonstration of the trade-oﬀs between CEO and COVE in a HPP sizing optimization problem for
small, medium, and large turbine scenarios for a pseudo-realistic wind and battery HPP
• Demonstration of the trade-oﬀs between CEO and revenue in an Energy Management System (EMS)
optimization problem, embedded in an HPP sizing optimization problem
• Expansion of HyDesign capabilities, speciﬁcally integration of 2 new objective functions (COVE and
CEO) for the HPP sizing optimization; integration of CEO as an objective function for the EMS
optimization; updates to the cost model and reference parameters to account for oﬀshore wind as an
HPP component; bug ﬁxes
1.1
Motivation
Renewable energy economic indicators are well accounted for in available HPP design optimization soft-
ware and in literature. This is evident by the existing objective functions in HyDesign: Net Present Value
(NPV), Internal Rate of Return (IRR), and Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE). The same is not true of
sustainability indicators. More speciﬁcally, the contribution of hybrid power plants to direct emissions
reductions over their lifetimes, with consideration of geographical and market conditions unique to the
plant, is not well incorporated into a single objective function. Not only is such an objective function not
identiﬁed in existing research, but one has not been developed for, implemented in, or tested by a hybrid
power plant design optimization tool. By modeling an objective function that captures the environmental
beneﬁts of renewable development in a novel way, this research ﬁlls a gap in the existing literature.
Furthermore, the trade-oﬀs between sustainable progress and economic viability have not yet been thor-
oughly explored with respect to hybrid power plant design and battery operation. The work of this thesis
recognizes the importance of both project cost and global emissions reductions in HPP design, as well as
the importance of revenue generation and global emissions reductions in HPP operation. Critical inves-
tigation of the relationship between economic and sustainability goals is a valuable contribution of and
motivating factor to this research.
Exploring these trade-oﬀs for a project based on real-world, real-time conditions is additionally valuable,
as it can indicate the sustainability potential and economic circumstances that state-of-the-art projects
are subject to. It was therefore prioritized in this research to carefully choose inputs that most accurately
reﬂect realistic projects. Project costs, market conditions, and emissions estimates are modeled with the
same care. These measures help to ensure that results better reﬂect the ﬁnances and emissions-oﬀsetting
capabilities of upcoming development.
Given this context, the following questions deﬁne and motivate this research:
• How can the implementation of CEO and COVE as objective functions add value to hybrid power
plant sizing optimization?
Page 6
==PAGE:9==
• How does a hybrid power plant design respond when optimized with respect to COVE and CEO?
• How can an EMS scheduler be motivated to optimally oﬀset emissions and produce revenue?
• What trade-oﬀs are observed between COVE and CEO for a realistic HPP model?
2
Literature Review
Optimization applied to energy systems analysis is a relatively new ﬁeld. Its novelty is reﬂected in the
availability of relevant research through time. Figure 1 shows the frequency at which various objective
functions relevant to HPP design have been mentioned in literature. The data is based on the quantity of
articles returned by searches on Google Scholar per year between 2009 and 2023. It was required by the
search parameters that the word "optimization" exist in the article, and that the exact phrase correspond-
ing to the objective function (e.g. "Cost of Valued Energy") be mentioned in that lookup result. The
results here are therefore a rough estimate of the true frequency of these objective functions in optimization
literature, and are plotted to illustrate general trends.
The increasing popularity of optimization in research is shown by the increasing frequency of search results
that mention these objectives. Net Present Value (NPV), Internal Rate of Return (IRR), and Levelized
Cost of Energy (LCOE) are available objectives for optimization in HyDesign, independent of this research.
Annual Energy Production (AEP) is not included in HyDesign but is depicted here to show its popularity
as an objective function, particularly with respect to wind farm design.
Cost of Valued Energy (COVE) is a newer objective, ﬁrst mentioned in literature in 2015. Both COVE
and Levelized Avoided Cost of Energy (LACE) are mentioned fewer times in literature than the other
identiﬁed objectives, e.g. 3-16 times per year after their initial development. Through this work, an under-
researched objective (COVE) will be applied to hybrid power plant optimization and tested; additionally,
a new objective (CEO) will be introduced to literature.
Figure 1: Frequency of Relevant Objective Functions in Literature returned by Google Scholar searches,
2009-2023
Page 7
==PAGE:10==
2.1
Electricity Pricing
In some regions, e.g. for most US transmission system operators (TSOs), electricity from renewable gen-
erators is priced in a long term contract, or Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) [4] [5]. These contracts
are signed between a developer and a utility company, i.e. the buyer and seller of power, for a given price
per MWh. The PPA price can either be ﬁxed for the lifetime of a project or can vary according to a set
rate [5]. This method of pricing is preferable for developers as the price of energy is known, therefore it is
easier to estimate revenue over the lifetime of a plant.
In other regions e.g. for many EU and Indian TSOs, electricity from renewables is bought and sold on
a market, alongside electricity from conventional generation sources. The Day-Ahead (spot) market and
intraday market work together to match electricity supply and demand. This power system balancing is
critical and must be near-perfect to maintain a stable grid, i.e. with minimal ﬂuctuations in frequency.
Primary scheduling occurs in the Day-Ahead market, where electricity suppliers submit a bid that includes
a quantity of power production in MWh and the marginal price of electricity. A certain quantity of demand
is also scheduled, and a market-clearing price is determined by the intersection of supply and demand.
Despite variation in marginal bid prices, all electricity in a given time interval for a given electricity market
is sold at the same price [6] [7]. These intervals typically range between 15 and 60 minutes depending on
the market.
Day-Ahead electricity prices therefore vary and are subject to change based on the scheduled generation
mix. Electricity from generators with the lowest bid prices is scheduled ﬁrst. More expensive generation
sources are scheduled afterwards and are therefore less likely to be sold on the market. Renewable sources
such as wind and solar typically have very low marginal prices, and are thus scheduled before other gen-
eration types. If, for example, high wind conditions are predicted, then a large quantity of energy will be
scheduled for a very low price, resulting in a lower market clearing price. When less energy is scheduled
at a low marginal price, the ﬁnal market clearing price is much higher. This relationship is illustrated
in Figure 4, where the market clearing price and market clearing quantity are represented by MCP and
MCQ, respectively. Here, electricity demand (represented by the blue line) is assumed to be inelastic. Al-
though this is a simpliﬁcation, electricity demand is typically less elastic than demand in other markets [8].
If energy from intermittent renewables ﬂoods the market when load is low, then electricity prices will sig-
niﬁcantly decrease. Without coupling to storage, intermittent renewables are scheduled based on weather
forecasts instead of market conditions. This is not ideal from the seller's perspective. In order to maximize
power plant proﬁtability, renewable energy could be sold to the market when prices are high and stored in
a battery otherwise. The seller would thus control electricity dispatch and would have more control over
revenue. HPPs are an attractive option to developers for this reason.
The Day-Ahead market operates the day before electricity is expected to be produced. Because supply
and demand might change within a day's time, the intraday market follows the Day-Ahead market and
manages power system balancing up to 5-minutes before scheduled production. This market is especially
important with wind and solar power on the market, as their generation introduces a stochastic element
to the market. Since weather forecasts are not always accurate, more or less renewable generation may
be available than what is scheduled the day before.
This research will only consider behavior of the
Day-Ahead market, however it is important to note coordination between the Day-Ahead and intraday.
Page 8
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2: Supply and Demand in the Day-Ahead Market
2.2
Functionality of HyDesign
HyDesign exists as an open-source tool for hybrid power plant design optimization. Within HyDesign
is a nested optimization. The energy management system (EMS) optimizes HPP operation in an inner
loop, and the wind, solar, and battery capacities are optimized in an outer sizing loop. HyDesign applies
the parallel Eﬃcient Global Optimization (EGO) algorithm to the hybrid sizing problem, which analyzes
the objective function as an unknown or ’black box’ with a surrogate model and can reduce computation
time for complex optimizations [9]. A complete extended design structure matrix (XDSM) for HyDesign
is included in Figure 3 [3].
For a given iteration of the HPP optimization, HyDesign ﬁrst models the wind power plant. Wind speed is
interpolated based on the input data and according to the hub height of the wind farm design. A surrogate
model is applied to account for wake eﬀects in the wind farm. From this step, a wind generation time
series for the HPP lifetime is modeled.
Solar generation is modeled next. Weather data for global horizontal irradiance (GHI), direct normal
irradiance (DNI) and diﬀuse horizontal irradiance (DHI) are provided as input time series accounting for
the lifetime of the HPP. Design variables solar capacity SMW, azimuth angle ✓azim, tilt angle ✓tilt and
PV inverter AC/DC ratio rAD are adjusted as the algorithm searches for an optimal solution. A solar
generation time series is yielded from this step. Although this is recognized as a capability of HyDesign, a
solar component is not included in the case study presented here and therefore not further acknowledged
in this research.
The wind and solar generation time series are summed to provide an initial guess for HPP generation.
This data is supplied to the EMS optimization, along with an electricity price time series. Battery power
capacity BP, battery energy hours BEh and a battery ﬂuctuations penalty factor Cbfl are design variables
for the EMS optimization, which yields an optimal solution within each iteration of the sizing optimization.
The EMS outputs a state of charge time series for the battery, after which a degradation model is applied.
The state of charge time series is then modiﬁed to account for long-term degradation of the battery. Power
generation curtailment is also outputted from the EMS optimization as a time series.
Page 9
==PAGE:12==
Figure 3: XDSM diagram of existing HyDesign methodology [3]
Now, the HPP generation time series can be calculated based on modeled wind generation, solar generation,
battery power and curtailment. HPP generation is used along with capital and operational expenditure
estimates and the electricity price time series to calculate ﬁnancial metrics. Normalized net present value
(NPV/CAPEX), internal rate of return (IRR), or levelized cost of energy (LCOE) are outputted, any of
which can be used as the objective function for the outer sizing optimization. Annual energy production
(AEP), grid utilization factor (GUF) and AEP curtailment (AEPcurt) are also calculated [3].
2.2.1
Comparison to Other Optimization Tools
HyDesign is unique among open source tools, as it sizes utility-scale, grid-constrained HPPs, incorporates
a detailed energy management system, accounts for component degradation, and models wind, solar and
battery performance and costs in high resolution [3]. HyDesign can be compared to other optimization
tools used for similar research, such as the Hybrid Optimization of Multiple Energy Resources (HOMER)
model originally developed by NREL. HOMER began as a free, downloadable software; it is now privatized
[10], however a legacy version is still freely available [11].
HOMER solves for the optimal (least cost) HPP design to meet energy and thermal demands [12]. Like
HyDesign, HOMER incorporates an energy management system and can calculate the battery state of
charge. HOMER can model more potential components of an HPP than can HyDesign, such as biomass,
run-of-river hydropower, diesel engines, fuel cells, and cogeneration, in addition to wind, PV and battery.
HyDesign, however, includes more objective function choices. Both the for-purchase HOMER Pro and free
HOMER Legacy can only evaluate projects based on lifetime plant costs, yielding cost of energy (CoE) as
an output [13] [11]. While CoE is a standard evaluation metric, it has been criticized in recent literature as
an oversimpliﬁed and inadequate objective in the context of a time-variable, market-based pricing scheme
[14].
Page 10
==PAGE:13==
HOMER is widely referenced in literature. For example, Bahramara et al. in 2016 presented HOMER
Legacy as one of the most powerful available tools for HPP sizing [15]. Lipu et al. in 2017, Aditya et al. in
2021, and Bedadi et al. 2021 employed HOMER to model the cost of energy (CoE) for HPP case studies
in Bangladesh [16], Indonesia [17], and Rwanda [18], respectively.
Another open source tool is the Hybrid Optimization Performance Platform, or HOPP, developed by
NREL in 2019 [19]. HOPP optimizes the size and layout of combined wind, solar, and storage HPPs,
modeling systems at the component level to achieve results [20]. Available literature demonstrates the use
of NPV and AEP as objectives within HOPP, however a 2021 proof of concept paper notes the potential
addition of capacity factor, payback time, and carbon payback time as additional objectives [21]. Unlike
HyDesign, HOPP considers the impact of shadow ﬂickering from wind turbines on solar performance, a
challenge that is unique to combined wind and solar HPPs. HOPP and HyDesign are similarly advanced
HPP optimization platforms that address many of the same needs, however have diﬀerent objective func-
tion options and modeling capabilities.
The existence of hybrid power plant optimziation tools such as HOMER and HOPP show greater inter-
est in research that advances HPP optimization strategies and objective functions, providing additional
motivation to this work.
2.3
Concept of CEO
Carbon Emissions Oﬀset (CEO) measures avoided CO2 emissions as a consequence of HPP generation,
and is based on time-variable market conditions. Fundamental to CEO is the idea of the merit order eﬀect
in electricity markets. As discussed in subsection 2.1, the cheapest quantities of electricity are ranked with
the highest priority for scheduling on the Day-Ahead market. Provided this logic, increased electricity
generation at a low marginal price would displace electricity generation from a more expensive supply,
pushing the pricier supply to the right of the demand curve. Given that renewables such as wind and solar
typically have much lower marginal prices than coal, gas and oil, there is potential to displace high-emitting
generation in any given timestep of the Day-Ahead market. The total amount of this displaced pollution
over a given time, i.e. carbon that would have been emitted to balance the electricity market without the
availability of HPP generation, comprises the CEO. This objective therefore measures societal beneﬁt of
the project as opposed to its ﬁnancial viability.
While available literature references similar objectives, CEO appears to be novel. Due to its dependence on
time-variable generation, CEO diﬀers from commonly used emissions objectives that are based on life-cycle
analysis. Terlouw et al., for example, optimize hybrid power plant design by minimizing greenhouse gas
emissions [22]. Using a life-cycle analysis approach, they model the operations and installation emissions
of the HPP itself. These life-cycle emissions objectives are applied to energy generators, such as in the case
of Terlouw et al., and to practices that consume energy, as shown in research from Yang et al. [23] [22].
Although Hameed et al. do consider the impacts of changing market conditions on emissions, they do not
model oﬀsets from the most expensive marginal producer(s) [24]. They estimate the total emissions from
energy production within an entire grid system, whereas CEO quantiﬁes oﬀsets caused by an additional
generator.
Dellnitz et al. develop an objective that is more similar to CEO for a German case study [25]. Their multi-
objective optimization minimizes both energy costs and CO2 emissions that would result from machine
activity in a metalworking factory. Their study therefore considers energy consumption and not production.
Dellnitz et al. estimate avoided emissions by adjusting machine states based on time-variable market
Page 11
==PAGE:14==
Figure 4: Impact of hybrid power plant generation (blue) on day-ahead market clearing price (MCP) and
quantity (MCQ), compared to original (purple)
conditions [25]. Their research has the same underlying principle of CEO, but with a diﬀerent application
and therefore diverging methodology.
Farah et al.
in 2024 co-optimized cost and CO2 emissions for
hydrogen production, using grid-wide CO2 intensity as a data input. While Farah et al. do consider price
ﬂuctuations on the Day-Ahead market, their methodology diﬀers from CEO and does not account for
displacement order, therefore returning a lower-resolution estimate of oﬀset emissions.
Based on this literature review, it is presumed that the CEO objective has not been previously developed.
Therefore, all mathematical models of CEO are introduced in the methodology, since these models are
original to this research and not found in reviewed literature.
2.4
Algorithm for HPP Sizing
A version of the parallel Eﬃcient Global Optimization (EGO) algorithm is used for all HPP sizing opti-
mizations in HyDesign [3]. EGO is a type of Bayesian optimization that mimics the true objective function
using a trainable Kriging model [26]. The Bayesian optimization is a derivative-free approach [26]. It is
ideal for non-convex problems and in cases where evaluation of the objective function is computationally
expensive [27]. In a Bayesian optimization, the objective function is concealed by a "black box" and
estimated by training the Kriging model with strategic function evaluations [27]. Here, a Kriging Partial
Least Squares kernel function (KPLSK) is employed [28].
When an optimization problem is speciﬁed in HyDesign, user-deﬁned bounds are placed on design variables
so that they can only vary within speciﬁed ranges. These bounds determine the extent of the search space.
The vector x, equal in length to the number of design variables, represents a point that can be evaluated
in the bounds of the search space. Many evenly distributed x points are initially generated using Latin
Hypercube Sampling (LHS). These points comprise an initial population that are sampled for subsequent
evaluation.
Because evaluation of the objective function is expensive, the sample of points x in the search space must
be chosen carefully. In order to yield a sample that best represents the search space, an acquisition function
Page 12
==PAGE:15==
is employed. The acquisition function helps to choose the best sample in the design space that can be
used for model training. This can involve both exploration and exploitation, where the function attempts
to ﬁnd points that tell as much as possible about the design space and simultaneously use known data to
intelligently search the space [27].
The acquisition function used in HyDesign is an expectation of improvement (EI), as documented in
Equation 1. In this case, the expected improvement only accounts for exploration of the search space [3];
exploitation or reﬁnement of the search is performed in a later step. The EI is calculated for 104 points
per parallel process, for the entire population of points [3].
EIx = EI(max(xopt −xx, 0))
(1)
EIx represents the expected improvement of a given point in the design space. xx is a single point in
the LHS-generated population. xopt yields the minimum objective function value of all initially evaluated
points. The number of points in the initial sample is equal to the user-deﬁned design of experiments
(DOE) number, nDOE.
The points in the design space that correspond to the largest expected improvements are grouped into clus-
ters. This is done using Elkan’s K-means clustering algorithm, where the number of clusters is user-deﬁned
[3]. The point with the largest expected improvement in the cluster is chosen to evaluate the objective
function; therefore, the number of clusters is equal to the number of evaluation points per iteration. In
the reﬁnement step, the value of parameter ✏determines whether selected sample points are perturbed to
explore the local area or the extrema of the design space [3]. The Kriging model is trained by the chosen
points at the beginning of every new iteration, and as a result, the Kriging mean and variance functions
can better mimic the real objective function.
The Kriging model is a type of surrogate model that predicts values at unknown points by assembling
a linear combination of values at known points [3] [29]. The Kriging model can only be used under the
assumption of stationarity within the search space [29]. With every parallel evaluation, the Kriging model
is updated. An initial Kriging model that is trained using objective function evaluations is shown in Fig-
ure 5. An observation point x in this example has 1 dimension, but in a HyDesign sizing problem can be
up to 12-dimensional.
Figure 5: Training a Kriging model with observation points x
In summary, the parallel EGO algorithm puts a black box over the objective function and trains a Kriging
Page 13
==PAGE:16==
model to mimic it by evaluating the objective function at strategically chosen points. Points in the search
space with the greatest expected improvement become candidates for evaluation, and are used to train the
model. Implementing EI is useful because it is computationally inexpensive to calculate. After suﬃcient
iterations, the Kriging model closely represents the original objective function, and its global minimum can
be converged upon. This method is useful because it reduces computation time and avoids unnecessary
evaluation of the search space.
3
Methodology
In this section, the development of CEO and COVE are detailed. Critically, the optimization problems
are mathematically described for both the sizing and EMS optimizations. Hydesign development and
algorithm limitations are also discussed.
It is important to note general nomenclature rules that are followed in the methodology section. Here,
any time series of example variable z is represented as z(t), and individual values in the time series are
referenced as zt. This is a small distinction, is useful for understanding the mathematical model presented.
If an equation is presented that applies to all values in a time series, yet is calculated element by element,
item zt will be speciﬁed for all values of t.
3.1
COVE Objective Development
COVE can be mathematically modeled as follows. This equation was developed in prior research, and
adapted here to reﬂect the appropriate nomenclature and inputs [14]:
COV E(x) =
P costs
R
Pr(t) · HHPP(t) dt
(2)
Where set of design variables x depends on the optimization problem and inﬂuences the HPP generation
time series.
3.2
CEO Objective Development
As discussed in subsection 2.3, CEO has not been developed in available literature, therefore the following
objective function formulation and model assumptions are original to this research. CEO is developed
with knowledge from the western Danish electricity market, DK1, however the fundamental concepts and
assumptions here can be applied to other cases.
3.2.1
Generation Mix
A historic hourly generation mix time series is used as an input for the CEO objective. It is assumed that
1 whole year of historic data is suﬃcient to predict the generation mix over the HPP lifetime. For each
case study, generation data corresponding to the unique bidding zone was incorporated into HyDesign.
This data could then be extrapolated to estimate the generation mix over the lifetime of the HPP. More
about the source of generation and price data is provided in Appendix A.
CEO is modeled assuming that when the HPP is generating electricity for a given market, it is always
oﬀsetting potential generation from a more expensive supplier, meaning that supplier will halt otherwise
scheduled operation. Therefore, import or export of electricity from outside markets is disregarded in this
analysis, and no distinction is made between heat and electricity production. With these assumptions,
Page 14
==PAGE:17==
turning on the HPP means turning oﬀmore expensive electricity generation from alternative sources.
The quantity of HPP generation will always equal the quantity of oﬀset generation, due to the assumed
inelasticity of market demand and subsequent resistance of the market clearing quantity (MCQ) to change.
3.2.2
Displacement Order
It was also important to model the most expensive marginal producer, in order to understand which
generation type(s) would be turned oﬀdue to HPP production at each time step. Although generation
mix, price data, and supply-demand curves are available for many markets, actual generation type corre-
sponding to marginal prices is less often public information. Therefore, certain assumptions were made
to estimate the reverse merit order, i.e. the displacement order. This order is the priority ranking of
alternative generation types to be oﬀset.
First, it was investigated whether the most expensive marginal producer could be equated to the most
polluting producer. If this assumption held true, then the replacement order would be determined by
emissions factors of each source. To test this theory, Day-Ahead price data was compared to CO2 emissions
data from the actual generation mix for all hours in 2023 in the DK1 bidding zone. CO2 emissions were
calculated by multiplying the volume of each generation type (e.g. 100MWh of coal) by the corresponding
emissions factor, for each hour of data. The results are shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Hourly Day-Ahead prices compared to grid emissions, Western Denmark (DK1), 2019
The data shows a weak positive correlation between hourly Day-Ahead price and emissions, with an r value
of 0.547. It was therefore deemed inadequate to assume that the most polluting source can be equated
to the most expensive in order to determine the displacement order, as this assumption is not suﬃciently
backed by data. This conclusion is further echoed in literature. Farah et al. found a weaker correlation
between price and emissions of r = 0.17 for DK1 from 2018 - 2021 [30]. Dellnitz et al. further argue that
daily carbon emissions ﬂuctuations do not necessarily match energy price ﬂuctuations, even though this is
a common model assumption [25].
Page 15
==PAGE:18==
As a result, it was assumed that the displacement order for a particular region is time-invariable. This way,
knowledge of the generation mix and the assumed constant displacement order was enough information
to determine which source is oﬀset by HPP generation at a given time step. In the DK1 case study, the
displacement order was determined based on active generation types in 2019 and their approximate order
of marginal cost [31] [32] [33]. From most expensive to least expensive, the displacement order is as follows:
oil, gas, biomass, coal, waste, hydro, wind, solar, other renewables. From this logic, if oil is scheduled
on the market for any given time step, it is always the ﬁrst source to be oﬀset due to HPP generation.
Explanation of the displacement order choice is included in Appendix B.
It was additionally assumed that the HPP is small enough so that the market does not react to HPP
generation throughout its lifetime. If the HPP was instead inﬁnitely large and oﬀset all other electricity
generation, then generation from more expensive alternate suppliers would never be scheduled. Revenue
from electricity production would also be critically low, as the market clearing price would be set by
the marginal price of HPP generation. As a result, other suppliers could alter their bidding strategy,
shifting market conditions. By assuming a small HPP, the constant displacement order and turn-on-HPP,
turn-oﬀ-alternate-generation assumptions remain reasonable.
3.2.3
CO2 Emissions Factors
Emissions factors for each generation type are also required as inputs. Direct emissions factors are sourced,
as opposed to lifetime emissions factors. This is because HPP generation does not oﬀset emissions from
plant installation or fuel transportation, only the direct burning of fuels from alternative generation types.
The hybrid power plant itself is assumed to directly emit 0 gCO2eq/kWh. The same assumption is applied
to all renewable generation delivered to the grid by alternative producers, including biomass and waste.
Therefore, if only wind, solar and/or biomass generation fulﬁlls load demand for a given time step, then
any HPP generation will not contribute to the CEO for that increment.
For simplicity, constant emissions factors are assumed for each generation type in a bidding zone, across
the lifetime of the CEO. This is a generalization, as the emissions per kWh of production from a certain
energy source can change over time based on the management of that power plant. For instance, future
use of more eﬀective carbon capture membranes on smokestacks at a coal ﬁred power plant can lower the
average emissions released from coal burning in a particular zone. This time-variability is not accounted
for in the present model. However, to enhance accuracy, emissions factors estimates are estimated based
on knowledge of the particular bidding zone [34].
The CEO objective caters to users who want to measure the societal beneﬁt of HPPs. Therefore, existing
emissions factors standards are adhered to, following EU guidelines and provisions when applicable. As a
result, CEO is determined with the same emissions factors inputs as referenced by planning authorities and
other reputable groups. More information regarding emissions factors estimates is available in Appendix C.
3.2.4
Objective Function Modeling
Based on the listed assumptions, the CEO objective function can be modeled below as follows:
CEO =
T
X
t=0
N
X
n=1
EF n · min
 
Hn,t, Ht
HPP −
n−1
X
k=1
Hk,t
!
· I
 
Ht
HPP −
n−1
X
k=1
Hk,t
!
(3)
where
I(y) =
(
0
if y < 0
1
if y ≥0
(4)
Page 16
==PAGE:19==
Equation 3 describes the CEO objective function, for which an emissions factor EF n is multiplied by a
generation amount, depending on whether some of all of that alternate generation type is oﬀset by the
HPP. This is calculated for all generation types n, for all hourly time steps t of the Day-Ahead market.
The appropriate amount of generation with which to multiply by EF n is determined using a minimum
function. The minimum is chosen between the total generation for the nth interval, vs. the HPP gen-
eration Ht
HPP that remains after all n-1 intervals have been accounted for. Here, the k index is used to
track all alternate generation types that have already been included in the oﬀset summation. Choosing
the minimum between these terms ensures that only the portion of Ht
HPP that oﬀsets the nth interval is
accounted for.
Next, Equation 3 is multiplied by I(y), which represents the Heaviside step equation and is deﬁned in
Equation 4. It essentially activates or deactivates the term, multiplying the generation and emissions
factor values by 1 or 0 depending on whether a valid interval is being evaluated. This way, oﬀsets from
the nth interval are only considered if remaining Ht
HPP has not yet been accounted for in that time step;
otherwise, I(y) returns 0.
Here, T represents the total number of time intervals for which CEO is calculated. Input data for the case
studies considered here use 1-hour data, therefore T=8760 would yield or CEO for 1 year of HPP gener-
ation. Because CEO is an accumulation of carbon emissions over the speciﬁed time period, a year-long
CEO result would be much smaller than the CEO calculated over a HPP lifetime, CEOHPP.
HPP generation (HHPP) is dependent on a set of design variables x in the EMS optimization, speciﬁed in
Equation 12. W(t) and S(t), the wind and solar power time series, are inputs to the EMS optimization.
After an optimal solution for battery charge/discharge and curtailment have been determined by the
EMS, these time series can be included in the HPP generation model, HHPP(t), that is fed to the sizing
optimization.
HHPP(t) = W(t) + S(t) + B(t) + Pcurt(t)
(5)
CEO is not dependent on electricity price data. Time-variable price is taken as an input in HyDesign and
is considered only if all or part of the objective function is a ﬁnancial metric, e.g. revenue or COVE. The
CEO calculation is dependent on generation mix, displacement order, and emissions factor data. The risk
of conﬂated results is therefore reduced as CEO is not dependent on price.
3.3
Multi-Objective Sizing Problem Formulation
The following formulations optimize for CEO and COVE in both the inner (EMS optimization) loop and
outer (hybrid sizing) loop. CEO is implausible to use in a single-objective setting and therefore must be
showcased as a multi-objective problem. Maximizing for only CEO would theoretically yield an inﬁnitely
large HPP, as a larger plant corresponds to more oﬀsets. Because the problem formulation listed below
includes constraints on wind capacity (Equation 8 and wind farm area (Equation 9), maximizing for only
CEO would provide a corner solution where WMW is at a maximum and wind farm capacity equals AWF.
If only CEO is optimized in the sizing loop, results are expected to yield a very low Cbfl that rapidly
discharges the battery whenever emitting generation can be displaced, with disregard to subsequent (and
costly) damage to the battery. This means that maximum CEO equates to inﬁnite batteries being used
over the lifetime of the plant.
Maximizing an HPP only for CEO would not necessarily deliver critical results, due to the disregard of
ﬁnancial considerations in the CEO equation. The Pareto set generated between CEO and a ﬁnancial
Page 17
==PAGE:20==
objective, however, can provide critical insight into the trade-oﬀs between emissions oﬀsets and economic
success of a project. This is where CEO is most useful, and therefore how optimization with respect to
CEO is performed in this research.
The HPP sizing optimization with respect to CEO and COVE can be mathematically modeled as follows:
minimize
x
λCOV E(x)
COV Ebc
−(1 −λ) CEO(x)
CEObc
(6)
x = {hc, sp, Prated, NWT, ⇢W, BP, BEh, Cbfl, ⇤}
(7)
s. t.
WMW,lower NWT · Prated WMW,upper
(8)
NWT · Prated
⇢W
AWF
(9)
The variables in Equation 7 include wind, solar, and battery design metrics that can be adjusted within
user-deﬁned ranges as the algorithm searches for the optimal HPP size. The upper and lower boundaries
of each range resemble feasible limits and are unique to each case study. These variables could also be
turned oﬀ, i.e. ﬁxed to 1 value in the optimization problem, and therefore treated as an input rather
than an adjustable value. Fixing a design variable is the most sensible choice if its value is known and
unchangeable for a particular site; it additionally saves computation time. The chosen design variable
ranges for all reported optimizations and evaluations are provided along with the corresponding results in
section 5.
Also note that the design variables BEh and BP, or battery energy hours [h] and battery power [MW], are
related by the following equation for battery energy [MWh]:
BE = BP · Beh
(10)
CEObc refers to the base case value of CEO(x), calculated for the lifetime of the hybrid power plant. It is
used to normalize the value of CEOHPP in the sizing loop so that the term is suitable for a multi-objective
optimization. CEObc is calculated assuming a 990MW wind farm with 15MW turbines, i.e. no overplant-
ing, and with no solar farm or battery. Therefore, values of CEOHPP/CEObc greater than 1 indicate
improvement from the base case. The exact design of the base case can be found in Table 2.
The same logic is applied to COV EHPP, which is normalized by COV Ebc. COV EHPP/COV Ebc = 1
corresponds to the value obtained when costs of a 990MW wind farm are assessed. These normalization
parameters were chosen this way to ensure consistency, i.e. they are calculated from the same base case.
This method also allows for normalization consistency between the sizing and EMS optimizations, as is
discussed further in the next section.
Site-speciﬁc limits on the minimum and maximum allowed wind capacity are modeled in Equation 8.
Equation 9 dictates that the wind farm in the ﬁnal solution cannot exceed the size of the designated
lease area.
The latter two constraints are expressed using relevant design variables.
Also note that
COV EHPP/COV Ebc is minimized, while CEOHPP/CEObc is maximized and therefore modeled as a
negative.
Page 18
==PAGE:21==
3.4
Multi-Objective EMS Problem Formulation
The HPP operation (EMS) optimization is mathematically expressed below for both revenue R(x) and
CEO(x):
minimize
X
−⇤CEOsm(X)
CEOb
bc
−(1 −⇤)
✓R(X) + lb(X)
Rb
bc
◆
(11)
X = {B(t), Pcurt(t)}
(12)
R(X) =
X
t
P t
r · Ht
HPP
(13)
lb(X) = Cbfl ·
X
t
(|∆Bt| · ✓t)
(14)
s. t.
Ht
HPP G 8t
(15)
Et+1
SoC =
(
Et
SoC −⌘chargeBt∆t
ifBt 0 8t
Et
SoC −Bt∆t/⌘discharge
ifBt > 0 8t
(16)
Et
SoC ≥BE · (1 −BEdepth) 8t
(17)
Et
SoC BE 8t
(18)
Bt BP 8t
(19)
Bt ≥−BP 8t
(20)
In HyDesign, the EMS multi-objective function Equation 11 is evaluated on a shorter period than is the
sizing multi-objective function, Equation 6. The period is set to 48 hours for the tested cases. Each 48-
hour section of data is considered a batch, and 1 CPLEX optimization is completed per batch. The total
number of batches is dependent on the length of input data, which is 1 year for the tested cases; that 1 year
of data is stacked n times for n years of the HPP lifetime. Completing multiple CPLEX optimizations
within each sizing iteration is not extremely computationally expensive, as the EMS optimizations are
solved linearly.
Revenue is an objective for the EMS optimization, instead of a more complex objective such as COVE.
This is partly because the EMS evaluates battery operation on a shorter time scale, for which COVE is
unsuitable as it considers lifetime costs. The EMS optimization is also performed before all more com-
plicated ﬁnance calculations, meaning that the EMS objectives cannot account for inﬂation or depreciation.
Revenue is calculated by ﬁrst multiplying electricity price and HPP generation for each time step of a
given batch, which yields an hourly time series of revenue values, R(t, X). This time series is summed
to yield R(X), as illustrated in Equation 13. Revenue is dependent on EMS design variables B(t) and
Pcurt(t) as these are included in the HPP generation calculation, see Equation 5.
3.4.1
Linearization and Simpliﬁcation of CEO Model
The CEO model assumptions are simpliﬁed for the EMS optimization due to restricted capability of the
CPLEX algorithm, as discussed in subsection 3.7. In order to better understand the impacts of diﬀerent
model implementations, 3 surrogate models are tested for the EMS optimization.
Page 19
==PAGE:22==
Both surrogate models are comprised of 8760 linear piecewise functions, 1 for each hour of the year, where
the value of CEOt is a function of Ht
HPP. Because the grid generation mix changes for every hour, the
piecewise function changes as well. The piecewise functions of the ﬁrst two surrogate models are speciﬁed
using 2 breakpoints: 1 at the origin (0,0), and 1 corresponding to a weighted mean emissions factor.
For CEOsm1(x), this mean emissions factor is calculated based on the amount of D generation types in the
displacement order after which all generation types have 0 direct emissions. This way, the 1st surrogate
model estimates emissions oﬀsets up until only renewables would be displaced. In the DK1 case study,
the displacement order begins with oil, gas, biomass, and coal, after which only non-emitting sources are
accounted for; therefore D = 4 in the tested case. While this model does not exactly match CEO(x)
as described in Equation 3, it is a close approximation that slightly overestimates the oﬀset value. The
sum of oil, gas, biomass, and coal generation is the x-coordinate of the piecewise function breakpoint for
CEOt
sm1(x) and is represented as At
sm1 in Figure 7.
EF t
sm1 =
PD
n=1 EF nHn,t
PD
n=1 Hn,t
(21)
f t
sm1(x) =
8
>
<
>
:
0
if x 0
EF t
sm1 · Ht
HPP
if 0 < x < At
sm1
EF t
sm1 · PD
n=1 Hn,t
if x ≥At
sm1
CEOsm1(x) =
X
t
X
t
f t
sm1(Ht
HPP)
(22)
A second CEO surrogate model, or CEOsm2(x), is speciﬁed using 2 breakpoints: 1 at the origin, and
1 corresponding to the weighted mean emissions factor for all generation at that time step. Here, the
x-coordinate of the 2nd break point is the total generation sold on the Day-Ahead market, denoted by
At
sm2 for time step t. This version of the surrogate is less accurate and more signiﬁcantly underestimates
CEO(x), however was tested to better understand the implications of various model simpliﬁcations in the
EMS. It is also interesting to see how the EMS responds when emission oﬀsets are possible for a larger
generation volume, whereas potential oﬀsets are more quickly maximized in the CEOsm1(x) model.
EF t
sm2 =
PN
n=1 Hn,t · EF n
P
n Hn,t
(23)
f t
sm2(x) =
8
>
<
>
:
0
if x 0
EF t
sm2 · Ht
HPP
if 0 < x < At
sm2
EF t
sm2 · P
n Hn,t
if x ≥At
sm2
CEOsm2(x) =
X
t
f t
sm2(Ht
HPP)
(24)
By implementing either piecewise surrogate model, the EMS also becomes less sensitive to the displace-
ment order. A switch in the order between oil and gas would not aﬀect CEOsm1, and a complete change
in the order would not aﬀect CEOsm2.
Ideally, piecewise linear functions with more break points would have been used, where all generation types
on the market and the corresponding cumulative CEO would be individually represented. Such a model
would be a linear realization of Equation 3, and would provide more accurate results than CEOsm(x), but
was not implementable in the EMS due to solver capabilities.
Page 20
==PAGE:23==
Figure 7 illustrates the diﬀerence between the two piecewise surrogate models and original CEO model,
linearized. The piecewise linear function extends as far as the total Day-Ahead market generation for that
time step.
Figure 7: Comparison of the piece wise linear functions calculated for linearized CEO (Equation 3) and
the linearized CEO surrogate model (Equation 24) for time step t
A third surrogate model is applied to the EMS that does not maximize directly for CEO, but instead
simpliﬁes the problem and considers total grid emissions. A piecewise function is not applied to represent
CEO in CEOsm3(x), therefore saving computation time but not actually measuring potential oﬀsets in
the EMS optimization. This approach is ﬂawed in that the EMS is not made aware if/when all emissions
on the grid are already accounted for, however is a much faster and simpler method.
CEOsm3(x) =
X
t
Ht
HPP
X
n
Hn,t · EF n
(25)
3.4.2
Explanation of lb
The battery ﬂuctuations penalty lb is added to the minimized objective function in Equation 11. This
can also be thought of as a value subtracted from CEO and revenue, which are ideally maximized. The
penalty size is partially controlled by the outer loop, as the battery ﬂuctuations penalty factor Cbfl is a
design variable in the sizing optimization. lb is calculated by multiplying Cbfl by the summed products
of |∆Bt|, the absolute battery power ﬂuctuations at time t, and ✓t. The variable ✓t essentially represents
the diﬀerence between the batch peak price, Ppeak, and the electricity price for a given time step, Pr,t. All
values within ✓(t) are non-negative, as any electricity prices higher than Ppeak don’t have meaning in this
context. The time series of price diﬀerences Ppeak - Pr(t) is smoothed to yield ✓(t):
Page 21
==PAGE:24==
✓t =
(
max
- 1
2(Ppeak −P t
r) + 1
2(Ppeak −P t+1
r
), 0
.
8 t = 1 : (T −1)
max(Ppeak −P t
r, 0)
8 t = T
(26)
The multiplication of ✓t and |∆Bt| in Equation 14 means that battery power ﬂuctuations are less penalized
when the electricity price is higher.
1 value of Ppeak exists per evaluated batch. Ppeak is calculated based on the following equation:
Ppeak = Qq(Pr(t))
(27)
The quantile function Q is applied to the batch electricity price time series, to yield the electricity price
for which q% of values in the time series fall below. This research assumes a q of 90, therefore Ppeak is the
90th quantile value of Pr(t).
Due to the penalty term lb, the EMS optimization will always be dependent on electricity price unless Cbfl
= 0. Therefore, the EMS might operate to provide the maximum CEOHPP when ⇤= 1. This is a ﬂaw in
the design of the EMS, and its implications are further discussed in the results section.
3.4.3
Explanation of ⇤
⇤is a weighing parameter for the EMS multi-objective optimization. It is also a design variable in the
sizing optimization. This way, the outer hybrid sizing optimization determines the optimal balance of
emissions oﬀsetting and revenue considerations for the EMS. Any ⇤value between 0 and 1, however, can
be manually chosen to evaluate a given hybrid power plant design.
3.4.4
Explanation of Constraints
Equation 15 dictates that EMS-optimized HPP generation does not exceed the grid connection capacity
at any given time step, and is modeled after existing HyDesign literature [3]. The equation describing the
battery energy level, ESoC, at time step t + 1 is a piece wise function based on ESoC at time step t, the
battery charge (⌘charge) or discharge (⌘discharge) eﬃciency, the size of the time step ∆t, and the battery
power at time step t. Multiplying ∆t (equal to 1 hour in all test cases) by Bt yields an energy value in Mwh.
In the ﬁrst case, battery power is negative or equal to 0, i.e. the battery is being charged by wind and/or
solar generation. Here, multiplying by ⌘charge provides the eﬀective battery energy. Therefore, Et+1
SoC is
calculated by subtracting the eﬀective battery energy at t from the battery energy level at t.
The second case is applicable when Bt is positive, i.e. electricity from the battery is discharged to the grid.
In this case, the eﬀective battery energy is calculated from dividing battery energy by discharge eﬃciency.
Division is used instead of multiplication because Bt must be lower than the eﬀective battery energy at
t, assuming ⌘discharge is less than 1; in other words, less energy will be ultimately discharged than there
is energy in the battery, due to eﬃciency losses. The battery power time series and battery energy level
time series are related, as B(t) is the derivative of ESoC(t).
When considering Equation 16, it is important to note that both Et=0
SoC and Et=T
SoC must equal 50% of the
rated battery energy, BE. This is a disadvantage of the model and consequence of batch optimization. For
this reason, the behavior of ESoC(t) is inﬂuenced by another constraint, which grows in prominence if the
Page 22
==PAGE:25==
batches become smaller. This caveat can help explain otherwise unexpected behavior of the battery.
Equation 17 requires that the battery energy level is larger than some minimum value. The minimum is
determined by (1 - BEdepth), where BEdepth is set to 0.9 for all tested cases. The minimum value is also
based on the rated battery energy, BE, which is a design variable in the sizing optimization. Equation 18
requires that the battery energy level never exceed the rated battery energy. Equation 19 and Equation 20
ensure that the battery power time series never exceeds battery power capacity, i.e. the slope of ESoC(t)
is not too steep.
A complete table of input battery parameters is provided in Appendix H.
3.4.5
Additional Battery Models
The EMS optimization is idealized, meaning that it does not account for degradation. This degradation
is instead factored in through separate models. The 1 year of optimized data resulting from the EMS is
stacked and repeated to match the lifetime of the HPP. Then, a battery degradation model is applied to
the ideal state of charge time series ESoC(t) to yield a battery state of health time series, SoH(t), that
is used to determine how often batteries are replaced. The battery degradation model is solved using a
rainﬂow counting algorithm. An EMS long-term model is applied directly after the battery degradation
model, taking the degraded wind, degraded solar, ideal state of charge, and state of health time series.
The EMS long term model calculates the ﬁnal state of charge and hybrid power plant generation time
series, ESoC,deg(t) and HHPP,deg(t) using a rule-based EMS, and not an optimization. The degradation and
long term models were not changed through this research, and their speciﬁcs can be found in the original
HyDesign literature [3].
3.4.6
Normalization of Parameters for EMS Optimization
Similarly to the sizing optimization, it is important to appropriately normalize terms in the EMS opti-
mization. This ensures consistency between the inner and outer optimization loops, as well as making it
more likely that ⇤takes the desired meaning within the optimization and is not colluded by the respective
value scales of revenue and CEO. The revenue and CEO normalization terms Rb
bc and CEOb
bc are diﬀerent
for each batch optimization and indexed as such. Using a unique normalization term per batch ensures
consistency between the EMS and sizing optimizations, and gives meaning to the normalization.
The batch-dependent normalization terms are independent of ⇤and pre-calculated from the base case,
where the battery is not in operation. Therefore, the generation time series is equal to W(t). Here, S(t)
is 0, given that the test cases assume no solar generation. The penalty is 0 in the base case, as |∆Bt| is 0
at every time step. Assuming there is no battery and that electricity from wind is supplied directly to the
grid, the base case shown in Table 2 was evaluated. A time series of the emissions oﬀsets, CEObc(t), and
revenue, R(t) at each hour were yielded. CEOb
bc, or the base case CEO, represents the sum of all hourly
oﬀsets within a given batch. The same logic is applied to extract the base case, batch-summed revenue
Rb
bc, from the time series of hourly revenues Rbc(t).
3.5
HyDesign Development
In order to implement CEO and COVE as objective functions in the sizing optimization, several of the
HyDesign input data ﬁles and source code ﬁles were modiﬁed. The existing code that describes ﬁnancial
objectives was updated to include the CEO and COVE objective functions. Parameters introduced as a
Page 23
==PAGE:26==
result of CEO implementation (e.g. emissions factors and displacement order) were speciﬁed in the ap-
propriate input data ﬁles and made callable for the CEO objective function calculation. Implementation
of COVE required no new data inputs, as the revenue and cost calculations were already performed in
HyDesign with input generation, electricity price, and expenditures data.
Figure 8 shows the inputs and outputs for a CEO sizing optimization problem within HyDesign. Although
CEO would typically be used in a multi-objective problem to yield meaningful results, it is shown here in
a single-objective context to emphasize the HyDesign functionality that is relevant to CEO. This diagram
can be compared to the HyDesign XDSM in Figure 3.
HPP sizing
WT selection 
& WPP sizing
PV sizing & 
design
W !
"! !
#"# & &'("#
)$%& !
EMS
Batt deg
*(+ !
+'((,*+, !
H ,, !
'.(,)
disp. order
&'("#
EMS long 
term
'-&$ !
+'(( !
CEO
S !
CEO/CEObc
output
optimization
obj function
input
Model
Figure 8: HPP sizing optimization process diagram with normalized CEO as objective function
Note that some details such as inputs of, outputs of, and processes within sub-models are not explicitly
shown in Figure 8 as they are deemed less relevant to the unique narrative of that objective function
implementation. Figure 3 should be referred to for the original sizing optimization process ﬂow in full
resolution, excluding new development from this research.
The new DK1 test case was also implemented in HyDesign as a potential test site. This required addition
of DK1-speciﬁc time series for e.g. alternative generation and electricity price in callable formats. An
input parameter ﬁle speciﬁc to DK1 was also added, including emissions factor and replacement order
data that changes for diﬀerent regions. Note that for the DK1 case, the PV sizing and design block in
Figure 8 is eﬀectively skipped due to the lack of solar for this particular design. As a result the solar
generation time series is a vector of zeroes for DK1 optimizations, and HHPP(t) = W(t).
Page 24
==PAGE:27==
Code modiﬁcations were also made to model larger turbines. Because extracted wind speed data from
ERA5 only accounts for wind speeds up to 200 meters in elevation, the unmodiﬁed code would return
NaNs if asked to perform an interpolation based on a hub height greater than 200 meters. Therefore, the
weather code was modiﬁed to allow for extrapolation of the wind speed data to heights above the provided
200 meter bound. As a result, simulations with hub heights greater than 200 meters have been evaluated
based on extrapolated data in this research. Although this seems like an extreme height, it is realistic
given that very large turbines are considered for the turbine design in the sizing optimization.
The HyDesign cost model was also adjusted for this research. The model did not previously include the
cost of the wind farm lease area, which was added as a parameter that was not dependent on HPP size.
The model previously expected soft costs and land costs to be shared for the entire HPP. These are now
calculated separately, as diﬀerent estimates were found for the battery and wind soft costs, and the oﬀ-
shore wind farm is assumed to not require land purchase (only oﬀshore lease area purchase). Therefore,
the only remaining shared costs are for the grid connection of the HPP. The model now also accounts for
decommissioning costs, however these are assumed to be part of the initial CAPEX, as the model cannot
account for additional end-of-life costs.
One of the main limitations of the cost model is that it can only scale components on a per-MW basis.
This is logical for a tool that adjusts the HPP size to ﬁnd an optimal solution, however can lead to some
cost inaccuracies for components that are not strictly HPP size dependent. For example, the HVDC export
cable cost is heavily impacted by cable length, which is a function of the distance between the oﬀshore
wind farm and connection point. This distance factor is therefore not well modeled.
Finally, the energy management system model was modiﬁed to include several CEO surrogate models as
part of the objective function. The weight of CEO vs. revenue in the EMS objective function is speciﬁed
by the parameter ⇤. The value of ⇤is either explicitly stated as a user-deﬁned design parameter, or solved
for as a design variable in the sizing optimization. If left as a design variable, the sizing optimization
will decide the optimal balance between CEO and revenue optimization for the EMS. EMS modiﬁcations
also included allowing for asymmetrical charging and discharging eﬃciencies, which was not previously
implemented in the code.
3.6
Limitations of EGO algorithm
Parallel EGO cannot handle constraints on the objective function. Therefore, sizing constraints regard-
ing HPP generation, wind farm capacity, and areal limitations are instead modeled via design variable
bounds. In previous HyDesign research, these bounds have been manipulated to indirectly account for
any constraints.
Unfortunately, the DK1 case is additionally constrained by wind farm capacity and area. Deﬁnition of the
feasible range with this method is therefore not straightforward. This is due to the relationship between
NWT and ⇢W in the areal constraint (Equation 9). The bounds for NWT and ⇢W are set with respect to
the constraints, but cannot enforce the allowed ratio between these variables. As a result, the optimal
solution could combine a high number of wind turbines with a low wind farm density. In other words,
the feasible range of NWT is dependent on the solution for ⇢W, and vice versa. This makes it potentially
diﬃcult to reach a feasible optimal solution without ﬁxing either NWT or ⇢W.
To account for this limitation of the algorithm, pseudo-constraints were instead added to the objective
function calculations themselves. Using if statements, CEO would grow larger and COVE would become
smaller if these constraints were not met by the design. Steep changes in either value were avoided so
Page 25
==PAGE:28==
that the surrogate could be trained on a smooth surface, therefore any result that exceeded constraints
would be modiﬁed by the ratio of exceedance, to the power of 5 (to dramatize the exceedance). This is a
roundabout way to implement a constraint and adds computation time, however proved eﬀective.
Another limit of Parallel EGO when applied to this research is that it is designed for single-objective
optimizations, unlike Expected Hypervolume Improvement.
Therefore, each weighted combination of
COVE and CEO must be run with EGO as a single-objective optimization, then all simulations can be
combined to visualize a Pareto front. This is a very time-consuming approach, however is justiﬁable as
implementing a new algorithm into HyDesign would be more time-intensive and is outside of the scope of
this thesis.
3.7
Limitations of CPLEX Algorithm
A linearized version of CEO(x) was ﬁrst implemented in CPLEX, however this led to convergence issues
for the EMS optimization at high values of ⇤and low values of Cbfl. Evidently, if multiple breakpoints
were calculated from generation mix data for every time step, some batch optimizations would converge
quickly and others would repeatedly become stuck, running indeﬁnitely. Therefore, although a more ac-
curate linearized CEO model was mathematically possible to implement in the EMS, it was perhaps too
complex to yield the necessary results. Using instead a weighted average emissions factor to generate 1
unique break point per time step allowed a simpler (yet less accurate) model for the EMS. This model
additionally saved computation time, providing another advantage as the EMS optimization is run many
times within each single evaluation of a hybrid power plant. Further simpliﬁed CEO surrogate models
were tested in the EMS optimization, along with this model, as shown in Figure 7.
Another limitation of CPLEX is the linearization component. Non-linear problems that cannot easily
be made linear are unavailable to implement in CPLEX, possibly limiting the capability of the EMS to
optimize based on interesting objective functions. But for an embedded optimization such as that of the
EMS, computation time is crucial to consider, and the speed of CPLEX is a strong advantage.
4
Application
The following section details the realistic hybrid power plant that is evaluated and optimized for this
research. In addition, the experimental plan for results generation is explained.
4.1
Case Study
In order to make test scenarios as realistic as possible, the modeled HPP is based on a planned oﬀshore
wind farm oﬀthe coast of Denmark, that could theoretically be paired with a battery storage system. The
wind farm, Kriegers Flak II, is planned for commissioning in 2030 [35]. Estimated costs, carbon emissions
inputs, reference turbine parameters, and economic data were all sourced to best reﬂect Kriegers Flak II
and realistic conditions for an HPP.
A region within the EU was chosen to study because of high data accessibility (due to EU transparency
regulations), high data quality and completeness, and utilization of a price-based electricity market for
renewables sales. The new test cases intake market price time series and aggregate generation time series
through the ENTSO-E transparency platform [31]. Input weather data is taken from the ERA5 data
platform [36].
Page 26
==PAGE:29==
Inputs for the cases include the chosen bidding zone and year, latitude and longitude of chosen site,
hourly weather data for wind and/or solar conditions, hourly Day-Ahead market prices, hourly generation
mix, expected displacement order, and direct emissions factors for each alternative generation source. An
overview of the hypothetical HPP is described by the parameters in Table 1.
Table 1: Parameters applicable to all 3 case studies.
country
zone
G [MW]
type
latitude
longitude
year
comments
Denmark
DK1
1000
wind,
battery
55.1407
12.7621
2019
Site of Kriegers Flak II, a
planned oﬀshore wind farm
The grid connection capacity G that is provided for the Kriegers Flak II project is equal to 1000 MW
[37]. This value is used to constrain hybrid power plant generation in the EMS optimization. A project of
this size was deemed reasonable for connection into DK1, which was served by a total installed capacity
of 9914 MW in 2019 [31].
Input weather, price, and generation, and grid capacity data from 2019 are used as inputs to the test
cases. The most recent whole year of available data was chosen, excluding 2020 and 2021. The COVID-19
pandemic and invasion of Ukraine irregularly impacted electricity prices and generation sources [38] [39],
therefore these years of data we not considered representative of future conditions.
Figure 9: Map of the Kriegers Flak II oﬀshore wind farm planning area [40]
In all cases researched here, HPP lifetime is assumed to be 25 years, however available data is 1 year
in length. Therefore, it is assumed that 2019 weather, price, and emissions factor data are suitable for
Page 27
==PAGE:30==
modeling for 25 years of HPP operation, and the input time series is simply repeated 25 times to calculate
a cumulative CEOHPP. Repeating input data to ﬁll a lifetime time series is reﬂected in existing HyDesign
literature [3].
Kriegers Flak II is comprised of two sites, a Northern (in Danish, Nord) and Southern (in Danish, Syd).
The two sites are shown separately on the map in Figure 9, however are considered 1 site in HyDesign. It
is reasonable that these sites could contribute to the same HPP, as preliminary studies discuss the grid
connection capacity and minimum wind farm capacity for Kriegers Flak II Nord and Syd as a combined
value. The sites are modeled as 1 conglomerate, e.g. the total number of turbines and average turbine
density for the two sites is solved for in HyDesign. It is assumed that the weather data for a point in the
Northern site is suitable to model the weather for the entire Kriegers Flak II project.
4.2
Experimental Setup
The experiment and corresponding results are split into 2 sections. First, behavior of the energy manage-
ment system is analyzed under diﬀerent surrogate model implementations of CEO. This is to understand
how battery operation changes with respect to CEO optimization. Next, multi-objective optimizations
are performed for variations of the test case, and the optimal trade-oﬀs between COVE and CEO are
presented through Pareto fronts.
4.2.1
Setup of EMS Optimizations
In this research, the battery of the HPP is operated to maximize both emissions oﬀsets and revenue. It is
important to evaluate the behavior of the EMS in order to understand the greater impact of operating a
battery based on emissions oﬀsets, as this is a novel contribution of the research.
Table 2 includes all HPP designs that were used for the EMS analysis.
Table 2: Designs chosen for EMS Evaluation
Prated[MW]
NWT[−]
hc [m]
sp [ W
m2]
⇢w [MW
km2 ]
BP [MW]
BEh [h]
Cbfl [-]
⇤[-]
base case
15
66
30
332
5.66
0
0
0
0-1
Cbfl=0
15
66
30
332
5.66
600
4
0
0-1
Cbfl=10
15
66
30
332
5.66
600
4
10
0-1
To do so, the trade-oﬀs between EMS and revenue for 3 HPP designs are compared, and relevant battery
behavior is further analyzed using input data and modeled output time series. Diﬀerences in results are
critically analyzed between the implementation of CEOsm1(x) and CEOsm2(x) in the EMS. This section
will yield insight regarding the impact of EMS optimization strategies on the business case and potential
carbon oﬀsets of the entire system.
4.2.2
Setup of Sizing Optimizations
The sizing optimizations are performed to show the trade-oﬀs between COVE and CEO objectives in the
ﬁnal HPP design. Here, carefully chosen design variable ranges are applied to 3 cases, each with diﬀerent
set wind turbine design assumptions.
All cases correspond to the Kriegers Flak II wind farm. The turbine capacity, speciﬁc power, and clear-
ance are ﬁxed, matching existing 15MW, 22MW, and 27MW models. The minimum allowed wind farm
Page 28
==PAGE:31==
capacity is 990MW, and the maximum (with overplanting) is 2100. These bounds were chosen based on
preliminary studies of Kriegers Flak II, which stated that the northern and southern sites would provide
a minimum of approximately 1000MW to the grid, with overplanting allowed. Justiﬁcations for design
variable bounds is provided in Appendix F.
Table 3: Feasible ranges speciﬁed for each design variable in sizing optimizations
Prated [MW]
NWT [-]
hc [m]
sp [ W
m2]
⇢w [MW
km2 ]
BP [MW]
BEh [h]
Cbfl [-]
⇤
15
66-140
30
332
5.7-12
0-600
0-4
0-30
0-1
22
45-95
20
291
27
37-78
65
336
After the multi-objective optimizations are performed, details of optimal designs across λ values are further
discussed, and ﬁnal designs are compared.
In addition, the weights of ⇤and λ are compared for each multi-objective optimization. Each instance of
the sizing optimization, weighted by λ, converges on an EMS weighting parameter ⇤. This comparison
will provide better insight into how these parameters are related to one another.
The following table shows the inputs that were used for all multi-objective optimizations.
Table 4: Optimization inputs
NBmax
Maximum number of batteries
10
NDOE
Number of initial model evaluations (design of experiments)
40
Nprocs
Number of parallel processors
32
Nclusters
Number of clusters
32
Npred
Number of surrogate predictions
30,000
Nseed
Number of random starts (seeds)
3
Nminiter
Minimum convergence iterations
3
Nmaxiter
Maximum iterations
20
✏tol
Tolerance
1 · 10−6
NDOE was chosen based on a rule of thumb that the number of initial model evaluations should be 5 to 10
times larger than the number of design variables. Given that the design space for each optimization was
5-dimensional, an NDOE of 25 to 50 would be reasonable. 40 was chosen as a balance between computation
time and suﬃcient initial search of the space. The number of surrogate predictions is high, to the order of
104, because the expected improvement of the surrogate model is calculated very quickly. Therefore the
surrogate design space can be evaluated many times within each iteration, without signiﬁcantly increasing
computation time.
The multi-objective optimizations are performed using Sophia, a supercomputer that allowed for multiple
seeds to be run, for a high resolution of λ values in the sizing optimization.
Each multi-objective optimization yields a Pareto front that was derived from 153 optimal solutions.
51 values of λ are tested, varying from 0 to 1 by 0.02. For each λ, 3 seeds are run to better ensure
reproducibility of the results and discovery of the true optimal solution. Between 51 λ values, 3 seeds and
3 multi-objective optimizations, 459 optimal solutions were reached to comprise the sizing results of this
research.
Page 29
==PAGE:32==
5
Results
The following results begin with the EMS optimization, focusing on battery behavior for a sample 48-hour
evaluation period for the chosen designs. Then, implications of the battery behavior over the lifetime of
the HPP are observed with respect to trade-oﬀs between revenue and CEO. Finally, results from the sizing
optimization are presented.
5.1
EMS Optimization
The following subsections analyze the impact of optimizing for CEO within the EMS. First, performance
metrics for the HPP based on a 48-hour evaluation period (or, 1 batch optimization) are presented for the
3 tested CEO models: CEOsm1, CEOsm2, and CEOsm3. Trade-oﬀs between Rb and CEOb, or the revenue
and CEO returns for this particular batch optimization, are presented in Pareto fronts for each of the 3
model implementations.
Figure 10: CEOsm1(x)
Figure 11: CEOsm2(x)
Figure 12: CEOsm3(x)
Figure 13: EMS Pareto Fronts for Sampled 48-Hour Evaluation Period (mid-July)
This particular batch was chosen to closely analyze battery behavior as it is a period with more diﬀerences
between designs, compared to other periods evaluated by the EMS over the course of a year. Therefore, it
is easier to glean from this evaluation period how certain designs can outperform others, when the overall
HPP lifetime performance is later considered.
Page 30
==PAGE:33==
Note that, although CEO is accounted for by the EMS using various surrogate models, the ﬁnal CEO
contribution after the EMS schedule is optimized is calculated according to Equation 3, for all results.
15 values of ⇤are tested between 0 and 1, with a resolution of 0.1 for ⇤= 0-0.9; a resolution of 0.02 for ⇤
= 0.9-0.98; and a resolution of 0.01 for ⇤= 0.98-1. More tests were performed at higher ⇤values to more
clearly show battery behavior around points of interest.
Interestingly, for almost all ⇤across all surrogate models, the Cbfl = 10 case returns a higher CEOHPP
than the base case.
The Cbfl = 10 case also yields the highest CEOHPP value across models, when
CEOsm2(x) is applied.
From a revenue perspective, inclusion of a penalty factor has negative consequences. When the penalty is
applied, extreme battery ﬂuctuations that respond quickly to electricity price ﬂuctuations are no longer
rewarded by the objective function. Therefore, the optimal Cbfl-inclusive solution considers not just rev-
enue, but also battery longevity. For these reasons, the Cbfl = 10 design does not reach as high of revenue
as the Cbfl = 0 design, even when ⇤is low and revenue has a higher weight in the objective function term.
The next step was to better understand battery behavior for the chosen evaluation period. This is done
by looking at data inputs and EMS outputs for CEOsm1(x), CEOsm2(x), and CEOsm3(x). Two ⇤cases
are particularly studied: when ⇤=0.9, and when ⇤= 1. The impact of a Cbfl equal to 10 can only be
understood in the context of ⇤< 1, as the penalty term otherwise becomes zero according to Equation 11.
Therefore, when ⇤= 0.9 the negative impact of electricity price is studied on the ﬁnal CEOb results, as
well as the positive impact of Cbfl = 10. When ⇤= 1, the design with a battery is compared to the design
without a battery.
5.1.1
Battery behavior at ⇤= 0.9
First, EMS results are considered for each surrogate model at ⇤= 0.9, for which the include Cbfl design
yields the highest CEOHPP. In Figure 14, the price and emissions signals guiding revenue and CEO op-
timizations are depicted, along with the actual emissions oﬀset from both HPP designs at each time step.
The oﬀsets are shown with respect to the total grid emissions line. If the area underneath the emissions
curve is completely shaded, then maximum possible CEO gain was achieved for that time step; i.e., all
grid coal, oil, and gas were oﬀset.
In the plots underneath input signals are output time series from the EMS, including the battery state of
charge and power. The input wind time data, and resulting HPP generation series are also shown. Finally,
the point A after which oﬀsets do not improve with more HPP generation is also included for each time
step. CEOsm1(x) has a much lower A than does CEOsm2, according to Figure 7. P varies through time
because there is a new piecewise function for surrogate models 1 and 2 for every time step; this concept,
however, is not applicable to the 3rd surrogate model and therefore not presented. Curtailment is factored
into HPP generation, but was not plotted here as it was 0 for all time steps of the given evaluation period.
When CEOsm1(x) is applied at ⇤= 0.9, the Cbfl = 0 design appears to be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the
price signal. When price peaks, the battery state of charge responds more quickly, and the Cbfl = 0 case
yields a higher CEOt. When price dips, the Cbfl = 10 design is slower to respond to the price signal and
therefore yields higher emissions oﬀsets for those time steps. It is not especially obvious that the EMS
scheduler is responding to the emissions signal, despite the high value of ⇤, except for when At falls below
the wind generation time series.
Page 31
==PAGE:34==
Figure 14: 48-hour emissions oﬀset time series compared to EMS outputs for both the Cbfl = 0 and
Cbfl = 10 designs, ⇤= 0.9, for CEOsm1(x)
Because CEOsm1 stipulates that emissions oﬀsets do not improve after oil, coal, and gas are accounted
for, A(t) is relatively low. It is clear from the Cbfl = 10 design, and even more clear from the Cbfl = 0
design that the battery works to keep HHPP(t) constant when the A(t) falls below the wind generation
time series. This occurrence is also what drives more rapid charging of the battery for both designs.
Page 32
==PAGE:35==
Figure 15: 48-hour emissions oﬀset time series compared to EMS outputs for both the Cbfl = 0 and
Cbfl = 10 designs, ⇤= 0.9, for CEOsm2(x)
The main takeaway from Figure 14 is that the Cbfl = 0 EMS is heavily driven by price, even at high ⇤
values, causing it to miss out on CEOHPP gains that the slower Cbfl design will end up taking advantage
of. Figure 14 also shows the sensitivity of the HPP design to the position of the x-coordinate of the break
point, and the tendency of HHPP(t) to ﬂatten out in response to a lack of emissions oﬀsets at that time
Page 33
==PAGE:36==
step. This ﬂattening trend drives steep battery charging or discharging when CEOsm1(x) is implemented
at high ⇤values.
When ⇤=0.9 and CEO is calculated according to CEOsm2(x), results are similar but clearly less impacted
by a low break point. The resulting battery behavior is more responsive to price and less responsive to
A(t), because A(t) exceeds HHPP(t) more often when the 2nd surrogate model is applied in Figure 15.
Now, peaks in emissions oﬀsets correspond more strongly to price peaks, than was observed in Figure 14.
This is because the battery sees potential CEOHPP gain during a greater number of time steps, i.e. A(t)
dips underneath HHPP(t) less frequently.
In Figure 15, the Cbfl = 10 design again replies to the price more slowly than the Cbfl = 0 design. By
doing so, the Cbfl-inclusive design outperforms CEOt when electricity price is low. Also in Figure 15,
A(t) falls below the wind generation time series for a much shorter time period, and the ﬂatline of HPP
generation is no longer observed. The result of this change, however, seems to be that the Cbfl = 0 design
responds even more extremely to the price signal. With a higher A(t), the battery opts to charge between
hours 4775 - 4780, instead of contributing to emissions oﬀsets (as the lagging Cbfl design does) or ﬂatlining
(as the designs in Figure 14 do).
The main takeaway from Figure 15 is that the position of the modeled break point clearly impacts results,
however does not necessarily improve responsiveness of the EMS to high grid emissions. Raising A(t) via
surrogate models 1 and 2 makes the battery less likely to ﬂatline and more likely to respond to price.
A diﬀerent trend is observed for Figure 16. Here, the battery is motivated to maximize the product of HPP
generation and grid emissions, meaning that the EMS schedule is motivated to respond to high emissions
oﬀsets. Using CEOsm3(x), both battery designs Cbfl = 0 and Cbfl = 10 respond to the emissions curve,
providing HPP generation that maximally oﬀsets grid emissions when grid emissions spike. The Cbfl = 0
design appears more price-dependent, choosing not to supply generation to the grid at all at certain price
dips. The Cbfl = 10 design especially performs well, again by responding more slowly to input signals and
overall oﬀsetting more emissions. Here, the existence of the ﬂuctuations factor helps the EMS to yield a
higher CEO, as is also reﬂected in Figure 12.
Note that the time series A(t) is not plotted for Figure 16. This CEO model implementation is not de-
pendent on a series of linear piecewise functions, but instead the emissions signal directly.
From Figure 16, it appears that the Cbfl = 0 design prefers to provide no electricity to the grid when
electricity price is low and emissions oﬀset potential is low, then provides a lot of electricity to the grid
when emissions oﬀset potential is high, and especially so when high prices are also observed. The sharp
HHPP(t) peaks in the Cbfl = 0 plot show that the HPP generation spikes quickly, then ﬂatlines according
to both the price and emissions signals.
The sharpness and frequency of these peaks is reduced in the Cbfl = 10 plot, yet there are larger contribu-
tions to CEOHPP when Cbfl = 10. This suggests that by using CEOsm3, emission spikes are more swiftly
responded to by the battery, yet some periods with lower yet non-zero emissions are overlooked unless a
ﬂuctuations penalty factor is added. It appears that the Cbfl = 0 battery is almost over-stimulated under
CEOsm3(x) conditions when grid emissions peak, and therefore wastes some potential emissions oﬀset that
are captured by the lagging Cbfl = 10 battery.
Page 34
==PAGE:37==
Figure 16: 48-hour emissions oﬀset time series compared to EMS outputs for both the Cbfl = 0 and
Cbfl = 10 designs, ⇤= 0.9, for CEOsm2(x)
Page 35
==PAGE:38==
5.1.2
Battery behavior at ⇤= 1
Figure 17 compares battery inclusive vs. non-inclusive designs when CEOsm1 is applied and ⇤= 1. Here,
base case emissions oﬀsets CEObc(t) are displayed, so that additional oﬀsets accredited to EMS scheduling
become more obvious. The price signal is no longer included in the plot, as electricity price does not factor
into the EMS objective function when ⇤= 1.
When ⇤= 1, CEOHPP is the same for the Cbfl = 10 and Cbfl = 0 designs, therefore their modeled outputs
are both represented by the ’Battery’ case in Figure 17.
Figure 17: Relevant data inputs and EMS modeled outputs for CEOsm1(x), when ⇤= 1
As was observed for the ⇤= 0.9 case in Figure 14, HPP generation prefers to ﬂatline and charge the
battery when A(t) falls below wind generation. This conﬁrms that the EMS adjusts battery behavior
accordingly when more oﬀsets are not available, in the case that ⇤=1 and CEOsm1(x) are applied. The
design with a battery then outperforms the design without a battery by discharging additional electricity
at time steps where maximum emissions are not reached using only wind generation. For this evaluation
period, the battery-inclusive designs are capable of outperforming the base case by executing this strategy.
Better CEOb performance compared to the base case is also reﬂected in Figure 10.
Page 36
==PAGE:39==
Figure 18: Relevant data inputs and EMS modeled outputs for CEOsm2(x), when ⇤= 1
Figure 18 shows signiﬁcantly diﬀerent battery behavior than did Figure 15, suggesting that the price sig-
nal did have a tangible impact on battery behavior, even at a ⇤value as high as 0.9. When the ⇤= 1,
the battery-inclusive HPP yields a slightly higher CEO due to the spike in generation around hour 4762.
The battery state of charge recovers afterwards to 50% by charging with energy that would not otherwise
contribute to CEOb.
The battery therefore slightly outperforms the non-battery case for this evaluation period, as is also
reﬂected in Figure 11. However, when a battery design with Cbfl = 10 is optimized at a high but not 1 ⇤
value, the battery is more active and the overall CEOb return is even higher.
Page 37
==PAGE:40==
Figure 19: Relevant data inputs and EMS modeled outputs for CEOsm3(x), when ⇤= 1
When CEOsm3(x) is applied to a CEO-only optimization strategy in Figure 19, the battery behavior is
similarly erratic to that of the Cbfl = 0 design in Figure 16. Here, spikes in price are again followed by
rapid discharging of the battery and sharp changes in battery power. It appears that CEOsm3 encourages
the battery to quickly discharge power only when emissions are high, even though grid emissions are non-
zero for the entire evaluation period. The HPP is successful in delivering just enough power to oﬀset all
emitting generation at speciﬁc time steps when emissions are high; but this does not necessarily translate
to a higher overall CEOb. In fact, according to Figure 20c, the non-penalized battery (which is always
the state of the battery when ⇤= 1) cannot yield a better CEOb than the base case, when CEOsm3(x) is
assumed.
The high gains in CEOb available for this evaluation period are seen when the Cbfl = 10 is tested at high
⇤values approaching 1. This is also evident from a visual comparison between Figure 16 and Figure 19:
the Cbfl = 10 design at ⇤= 1 is associated with the largest oﬀsets (or biggest area under the emissions
curve) of all tested cases for CEOsm3(x).
Page 38
==PAGE:41==
5.1.3
Trade-oﬀs Between Lifetime Performance Metrics for Tested Surrogate Models
The Pareto fronts describing multi-objective trade-oﬀs between CEOHPP and RHPP are presented in Fig-
ure 20a, Figure 20b, and Figure 20c for the EMS optimization, using CEOsm1 and CEOsm2 respectively.
Unlike the previously shown Pareto fronts, these results are based on many batch optimizations that are
performed per 48-hour period for the entirety of year-long input data. The year-long results are then
repeated and stacked to represent the 25-year lifetime HPP performance metrics.
Dominated points are shown alongside the Pareto fronts using a circle marker, and are lighter but still
color-coordinated with the corresponding Pareto front. The shape of the overall Pareto fronts, encompass-
ing all tested designs, are also provided for each of the 3 surrogate models.
Note that CEOHPP is normalized by CEObc so that results can be understood in the context of a wind-only
power plant.
(a) CEOsm1(x)
(b) CEOsm2(x)
(c) CEOsm3(x)
Figure 20: EMS Pareto Fronts for Various Battery Designs, using diﬀerent surrogate models to represent
CEO
As expected, evaluations of the base case consistently return the same CEOHPP and revenue, independent
of ⇤, since no battery is optimized in this case. For all surrogate models, the battery-inclusive designs
comprise all Pareto-eﬃcient EMS schedules. This suggests that the EMS can successfully identify better
operation schedules in terms of CEOHPP and RHPP yield.
Page 39
==PAGE:42==
The 3 Pareto fronts for each of the 3 surrogate model implementations show diﬀerent HPP performance
results, however follow the same basic trends. In all cases, an evaluation of the Cbfl = 10 design yields
the highest CEOHPP, and the Cbfl = 0 design yields the highest RHPP. All surrogate models give similar
maximum CEOHPP values, around 1% better than the base case; as well as similar maximum RHPP
values, around 7% better than the base case revenue.
Based on the results from Figure 20a, Figure 20b, and Figure 20c, CEOsm2(x) was retained for use in
the sizing optimization. Although CEOsm3(x) provides the highest CEO for the lowest revenue losses,
it was deemed interesting to test a piecewise linear function surrogate model in the sizing optimization,
which is more true to the CEO objective function itself. Between CEOsm1 and CEOsm2(x), the ﬁrst
surrogate model returns slightly worse maximum CEOHPP, and therefore was not tested in the HPP
design optimization stage.
5.2
Sizing Optimization
Applying CEOsm2(x) in the EMS optimization and Equation 3 in the sizing optimization, resulting trade-
oﬀs between COVE and CEO for HPP designs are displayed in Figure 21. Only Pareto-optimal points are
shown on this plot, and results are color-coordinated based on the assumed wind turbine size.
Figure 21: Pareto Fronts for 15MW, 22MW, and 27MW multi-objective test cases
Figure 21 suggests that wind farm costs are lowest for a hybrid power plant using 15MW turbines, and that
the base cost increases as turbine size increases. Interestingly, the highest CEOHPP return is associated
with the 22MW turbine wind farm, which can provide up to a 30% larger CEOHPP than the base case
design. Although larger wind turbines are typically touted for being cost eﬃcient and performing better,
these results suggest otherwise in terms of COVE and CEO returns: the 27MW case returns the least
eﬃcient Pareto set in Figure 21.
Sudden jumps in COVE values across the Pareto front suggest that a battery is incorporated into the
design due to rising weight of CEO(x) in the objective function. Inclusion of a battery is not preferred
Page 40
==PAGE:43==
due to the high associated costs in a COVE-only optimization, however the largest battery possible is
preferred from a non-cost, emissions oﬀset perspective.
Figure 22: Relationship between λ and ⇤for 15MW, 22MW, and 27MW multi-objective test cases
In addition to considering these trade-oﬀs, the relationship between the sizing optimization weighting
parameter λ and critical design variables was further analyzed. Notably, λ and ⇤are compared for all
Pareto-eﬃcient designs in Figure 22, to better understand the relationship between the weighting param-
eters in the EMS and sizing optimizations. Because ⇤is a design variable in the sizing optimization, the
ideal EMS strategy is chosen as a part of the HPP design.
Figure 22 suggests a clear pattern: high ⇤values are almost always favored by optimal HPP design so-
lutions. While some lower ⇤values are converged upon when COVE is optimized for, almost all designs
have a ⇤value greater than 0.6. Interestingly, the majority of Pareto-eﬃcient designs exist when both λ
and ⇤are above 0.6, and an even denser amount exist between ⇤of 0.8 and 1.0. The 22MW design, which
yielded high COV EHPP but also the best CEOHPP, unsurprisingly converges upon a high ⇤for almost
all of its Pareto eﬃcient solutions.
To tell a more complete story, Figure 23 compares the sizing optimization weighted parameter to other
design variable solutions, as well as the total number of batteries used over the HPP lifetime for all optimal
solutions presented in Figure 21.
Page 41
==PAGE:44==
(a) Optimal Number of Wind Turbines, Nwt
(b) Optimal wind farm density, ⇢w, in MW/km2
(c) Optimal battery power capacity, BP , in MW
(d) Optimal battery energy hours, BEh, in hours
(e) Optimal battery ﬂuctuations penalty factor,
Cbfl
(f) Optimal number of batteries used over HPP life-
time
Figure 23: Comparison of Pareto-eﬃcient design metrics across weights of COV E and CEO in multi-
objective sizing optimization, for cases with 3 turbine sizes
Figure 23a compares the optimal number of wind turbines across COVE and CEO weights. Here, the min-
imum number of turbines is preferred by the COV E-only optimization, where the maximum number of
turbines is preferred by the CEO-only optimization, based on the unique ranges provided for each turbine
size case in Table 3. The optimal number of turbines rises slowly in each case when COVE dominates the
objective function, then quickly increases as CEO becomes more prominent. These results suggest that
Page 42
==PAGE:45==
overplanting is favored by the CEO-dominated solutions but not by the COVE-dominated solutions.
The optimal wind farm density shown in Figure 23b also rises as CEO is prioritized over COVE, consistent
with the results in Figure 23a.
The optimal battery capacity and battery energy hours are shown in Figure 23c and Figure 23d, where
there is a clear jump the maximum energy and power capacity when λ is above 0.6. This gap in the results
suggests that marginal cost increases in the battery based on a larger size were preferred over smaller bat-
teries at high λ values. In other words, the beneﬁts of having high storage capacity to maximize emissions
oﬀset were recognized in many optimal solutions. Interestingly, the energy capacity is at a maximum for all
battery-inclusive designs. This suggests that high energy capacity came at lower marginal costs according
to the input cost assumptions; additionally, high battery energy capacity is critical for maximum CEO
oﬀsets.
The ideal number of batteries is most often 2, however there are also many 0-battery designs at low COVE
values. It is interesting that in some higher λ scenarios, a no-battery case would still be converged upon,
which points to the signiﬁcant cost consequences of incorporating a storage system.
The overall optimal Cbfl is not clear from Figure 23e, however battery ﬂuctuations are low or non-existent
for most COVE-dominated cases. A Cbfl of 5-10 is common for higher λ values, which aligns with the
EMS optimization ﬁndings: inclusion of Cbfl often helped the linear program ﬁnd a better EMS schedule
in terms of CEO.
6
Discussion
The results show diﬀerent battery behavior for the sampled evaluation period depending on the model
implementation of CEO in the EMS. For all surrogate model implementations, the Cbfl=10 design yielded
in the highest CEOHPP, as well as the highest CEOb for surrogate models 2 and 3 in the analyzed batch
optimization. The results uncover valuable information regarding trade-oﬀs between CEO and revenue in
the EMS optimization, as well as trade-oﬀs between CEO and COVE in the HPP sizing optimization.
According to the results, adding a battery ﬂuctuations penalty factor helped increase CEOHPP yield. This
suggests that the ﬂuctuations penalty factor provided an unexpected advantage to the linear program, that
was not accounted for in the ⇤=1 scenarios. This could in part be due to diﬃculties of the linear solver
in ﬁnding a global optimum when Cbfl is not included. Although a global optimum should always be
attainable given convex constraints, available literature points out that this is not necessarily the case
in practice, and that linear programming methods such as simplex can face challenges related to speciﬁc
degeneracy [41]. Therefore, it’s possible that the solver can become stuck in non-global minima, especially
in a very complex problem for which many piecewise functions are applied. Despite these potential dif-
ﬁculties of the solver, testing of the Cbfl=10 design proves that the EMS can be conditioned to provide
a higher CEOHPP output, and trade-oﬀs between revenue and CEO within the EMS optimization are
better understood as a product of this research.
The sizing optimization results suggest that both CEO and COVE objectives are best understood and
interpreted in a multi-objective optimization scenario. Intuitively, a CEO-based design would be inﬁnitely
large to ensure maximal oﬀsets, and a COVE-based design would be small and battery-free to avoid costs.
Therefore, the real value of these objectives is best realized when explored in tandem. Operating the EMS
as a multi-objective optimization problem is additionally a novel approach. Revenue and emissions oﬀsets
Page 43
==PAGE:46==
may be positively correlated in the DK1 case, yet still face distinct trade-oﬀs.
It is also important to recognize the impact of CEO assumptions on optimization results. It is possible that
performance metrics are producing an inaccurate estimate of potential CEO gain for a hybrid power plant,
given simplifying assumptions such as the lack of export/import from other countries. In reality, some
power generated on the western Danish grid is exported to nearby countries such as Germany, meaning
that potential oﬀsets could be under-accounted for in the model [42]. On the other hand, the model could
overestimate contributions to CEO from coal production. In reality, turning oﬀelectricity generation in
combined heat and power (CHP) plants would signiﬁcantly reduce the eﬃciency of necessary heat produc-
tion, meaning that modeled CEO gains might not equate to real-world carbon reduction given the applied
model simpliﬁcations.
For these reasons, this research is most valuable for its introduction of CEO as an initial model that can
be successfully applied to HPP optimization problems. The shape of the resulting Pareto fronts, as well
as insight regarding the behavior of CEO as an objective function, is therefore useful. From this research
the implications of a COVE vs. CEO problem, as well as a revenue vs. CEO problem, can be better
understood as applied to sizing and EMS optimizations, respectively. Higher ﬁdelity versions of the initial
CEO model, as well as more robust surrogate models, applied to diﬀerent algorithms and optimization
methods and with other assumptions, are encouraged for future research based on the ﬁndings here.
7
Conclusion
Findings from this research can be directly applied to hybrid power plant design and battery operation
optimization pursuits. Because this research is based on the proposed Kriegers Flak II wind farm, ﬁndings
and general takeaways could shed light on Kriegers Flak II development and the real-life trade-oﬀs that
decision makers face. This could also be true of other wind farms within the suite of Danish oﬀshore
projects, which are expected to have a total capacity of 6 GW [37].
Due to the implementation of CEO and COVE in HyDesign, future users of the tool can answer questions
similar to those addressed in this research, for case studies with diﬀerent geography and plant design
qualities. HyDesign is an open-source tool, meaning that optimization with respect to CEO and COVE
will be a public capability.
This research introduces a novel objective function, CEO, to optimization literature. The development of
CEO as a mathematical model and tested objective in HyDesign provides a foundation for future use and
application. This research aims to establish CEO as a valid and practical objective function for hybrid
power plant optimization research, with recognition that there is room for improvement of the model.
In a broader context, the development of CEO in this research can help to answer questions regarding
energy equity and energy justice. CEO can inform researchers, urban planners, government interests,
and developers about the social beneﬁt of projects, by quantifying the positive impact of hybrid power
plants on a region. In this research, the studied region is the western Danish bidding zone (DK1), and
oﬀsets are recorded with respect to all generation types in the region sold on the Day-Ahead electricity
market. This scale of analysis, however, is not a requirement of CEO; the studied region can be larger
or smaller, and the oﬀsets of one or many speciﬁed generation units can be recorded. For instance, CEO
could be a cumulative representation of the emissions oﬀset from a speciﬁc coal-ﬁred plant or oil reﬁn-
ery, which disproportionately pollutes a community or endangered species habitat. Decision-makers can
calculate the daily, weekly, monthly, annual, and/or lifetime avoided emissions (i.e. carbon oﬀsets) that
Page 44
==PAGE:47==
would directly result from a new hybrid power plant. In other words, by evaluating an HPP design with
CEO, critical stakeholders can estimate the direct impacts of clean energy projects on speciﬁc communities.
While the name "Carbon Emissions Oﬀset" implies that only CO2 is measured, the model can be easily
applied to other polluters such as SOx and NOx, as long as the respective emissions factors are known for
a speciﬁc generating unit or unit(s). This can answer questions about the direct impact of clean energy
projects on other types of emissions that are harmful to human health and the environment.
The implementation of COVE and CEO into HyDesign, and especially the development of CEO as an
objective function, have numerous applications to optimization research and other ﬁelds. Further research
and development of CEO could expand its utility across disciplines, revealing additional applications of
the objective function across geographic regions and problem scopes.
Page 45
==PAGE:48==
List of Figures
1
Frequency of Relevant Objective Functions in Literature returned by Google Scholar searches,
2009-2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Supply and Demand in the Day-Ahead Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
XDSM diagram of existing HyDesign methodology [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Impact of hybrid power plant generation (blue) on day-ahead market clearing price (MCP)
and quantity (MCQ), compared to original (purple) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Training a Kriging model with observation points x . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6
Hourly Day-Ahead prices compared to grid emissions, Western Denmark (DK1), 2019 . . .
15
7
Comparison of the piece wise linear functions calculated for linearized CEO (Equation 3)
and the linearized CEO surrogate model (Equation 24) for time step t . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
8
HPP sizing optimization process diagram with normalized CEO as objective function
. . .
24
9
Map of the Kriegers Flak II oﬀshore wind farm planning area [40] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
10
CEOsm1(x)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
11
CEOsm2(x)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
12
CEOsm3(x)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
13
EMS Pareto Fronts for Sampled 48-Hour Evaluation Period (mid-July)
. . . . . . . . . . .
30
14
48-hour emissions oﬀset time series compared to EMS outputs for both the Cbfl = 0 and
Cbfl = 10 designs, ⇤= 0.9, for CEOsm1(x) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
15
48-hour emissions oﬀset time series compared to EMS outputs for both the Cbfl = 0 and
Cbfl = 10 designs, ⇤= 0.9, for CEOsm2(x) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
16
48-hour emissions oﬀset time series compared to EMS outputs for both the Cbfl = 0 and
Cbfl = 10 designs, ⇤= 0.9, for CEOsm2(x) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
17
Relevant data inputs and EMS modeled outputs for CEOsm1(x), when ⇤= 1 . . . . . . . .
36
18
Relevant data inputs and EMS modeled outputs for CEOsm2(x), when ⇤= 1 . . . . . . . .
37
19
Relevant data inputs and EMS modeled outputs for CEOsm3(x), when ⇤= 1 . . . . . . . .
38
20
EMS Pareto Fronts for Various Battery Designs, using diﬀerent surrogate models to repre-
sent CEO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
21
Pareto Fronts for 15MW, 22MW, and 27MW multi-objective test cases . . . . . . . . . . .
40
22
Relationship between λ and ⇤for 15MW, 22MW, and 27MW multi-objective test cases . .
41
23
Comparison of Pareto-eﬃcient design metrics across weights of COV E and CEO in multi-
objective sizing optimization, for cases with 3 turbine sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
List of Tables
1
Parameters applicable to all 3 case studies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2
Designs chosen for EMS Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Feasible ranges speciﬁed for each design variable in sizing optimizations . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Optimization inputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Emissions factors used for DK1, displayed by displacement order from left (ﬁrst) to right
(last). All values in units gCO2eq/MWh
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
6
DK1 cost parameters for 20MW reference turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
7
Wind turbine parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
8
DK1 cost parameters for battery energy storage system (BESS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xii
9
EMS and degradation parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
Page i
==PAGE:49==
References
[1] J. Knott, “Solar energy â the cheapest form of energy and its implications for the future,” 2024.
Accessed: 2024-09-05.
[2] F. J. M. M. Nijsse, J.-F. Mercure, N. Ameli, F. Larosa, S. Kothari, J. Rickman, P. Vercoulen, and
H. Pollitt, “The momentum of the solar energy transition,” Nature Communications, vol. 14, 2023.
Accessed: 2024-09-05.
[3] J. P. Murcia Leon, H. Habbou, M. Friis-Møller, M. Gupta, R. Zhu, and K. Das, “HyDesign: a tool
for sizing optimization of grid-connected hybrid power plants including wind, solar photovoltaic, and
lithium-ion batteries,” Wind Energy Science, vol. 9, pp. 759–776, 4 2024.
[4] I. for Human Rights and Business, “What are renewable power purchasing agreements?,” 2023. Ac-
cessed: 2024-09-08.
[5] W. Kempton, L. Peterson, A. Bosteels, and K. Ohleth, “Oﬀshore wind procurement options for
delaware,” 2022. Accessed: 2024-09-08.
[6] EPEX SPOT, “Day-ahead and intraday: The backbone of the european spot market,” 2024.
[7] Indian Energy Exchange, “Day-ahead market 15 minute contract speciﬁcations,” 2024.
[8] Z. Csereklyei, “Price and income elasticities of residential and industrial electricity demand in the
european union,” Energy Policy, vol. 137, p. 111079, 2020.
[9] C. Weihs, S. Herbrandt, N. Bauer, K. Friedrichs, and D. Horn, “Eﬃcient Global Optimization: Mo-
tivation, Variations, and Applications,”
[10] HOMER Energy by UL, “Homer energy,” 2024.
[11] National Renewable Energy Laboratory, “Getting started guide for homer version 2.68,” 2011.
[12] National Renewable Energy Laboratory, “Pv faqs: How long do pv systems last?,” 2004. NREL/BR-
520-35406.
[13] A. O. Rousis, D. Tzelepis, I. Konstantelos, C. Booth, and G. Strbac, “Design of a hybrid ac/dc
microgrid using homer pro: Case study on an islanded residential application,” Inventions, vol. 3, 9
2018.
[14] J. Simpson, E. Loth, and K. Dykes, “Cost of Valued Energy for design of renewable energy systems,”
Renewable Energy, vol. 153, pp. 290–300, 6 2020.
[15] S. Bahramara, M. P. Moghaddam, and M. R. Haghifam, “Optimal planning of hybrid renewable
energy systems using HOMER: A review,” 2016.
[16] M. S. Hossain Lipu, M. G. Haﬁz, M. S. Ullah, A. Hossain, and F. Y. Munia, “Design optimization and
sensitivity analysis of hybrid renewable energy systems: A case of Saint Martin Island in Bangladesh,”
International Journal of Renewable Energy Research, vol. 7, no. 2, 2017.
[17] I. A. Aditya, S. Aisyah, and A. A. Simaremare, “Optimal sizing and sensitivity analysis of Hybrid
Renewable Energy Systems: A case of Ur island in Indonesia,” IOP Conference Series: Materials
Science and Engineering, vol. 1098, no. 4, 2021.
Page ii
==PAGE:50==
[18] L. A. Bedadi and M. G. GebreMichael, “Design and optimization of oﬀ-grid hybrid renewable power
plant with storage system for rural area in Rwanda,” IET Renewable Power Generation, vol. 15,
no. 15, 2021.
[19] C. E. Tripp, D. Guittet, A. Barker, J. King, and B. Hamilton, “Hybrid optimization and performance
platform (hopp).” [Computer Software] https://doi.org/10.11578/dc.20210326.1, nov 2019.
[20] D. Guittet, P. Stanley, B. Hamilton, J. King, and A. Barker, “Hopp – hybrid optimization and
performance platform,” 2021.
[21] C. Tripp, D. Guittet, J. King, and A. Barker, “A Simpliﬁed, Eﬃcient Approach to Hybrid Wind and
Solar Plant Site Optimization,”
[22] T. Terlouw, P. Gabrielli, T. AlSkaif, C. Bauer, R. McKenna, and M. Mazzotti, “Optimal economic
and environmental design of multi-energy systems,” Applied Energy, vol. 347, 2023.
[23] Y. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. Yuan, J. Sun, Z. Che, Z. Qiu, T. Du, H. Na, and Shuai Che, “Muti-objective
optimization on energy consumption, CO2 emission and production cost for iron and steel industry,”
Journal of Environmental Management, vol. 347, 2023.
[24] G. Hameed, P. N. S. Nair, R. R. Tan, D. C. Foo, and M. Short, “A novel mathematical model to
incorporate carbon trading and other emission reduction techniques within energy planning models,”
Sustainable Production and Consumption, vol. 40, 2023.
[25] A. Dellnitz, D. Braschczok, J. Ostmeyer, M. Hilbert, and A. Kleine, “Energy costs vs. carbon dioxide
emissions in short-term production planning: A business case study,” Journal of Business Economics,
vol. 90, pp. 1383–1407, 11 2020.
[26] S. Documentation, “Eﬃcient global optimization (ego),” 2024.
[27] MacCormac, “Bayesian optimization,” 2022.
[28] S. Documentation, “Kplsk â surrogate modeling toolbox,” 2023. Accessed: 2024-09-08.
[29] ritvikmath, “The kriging model: Data science concepts,” 2020. Accessed: 2024-07-03.
[30] S. Farah, N. Bokde, and G. B. Andresen, “Cost and CO2 emissions co-optimisation of green hydrogen
production in a grid-connected renewable energy system,” 4 2024.
[31] ENTSO-E, “Entso-e transparency platform.” https://transparency.entsoe.eu/, 2024.
[32] K. Ganz, L. Wasmeier, T. Kern, and S. von Roon, “Merit order shifts and their impact on the
electricity price,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-07-07.
[33] S. Ropenus and H. Klinge Jacobsen, “A snapshot of the danish energy transition: Objectives, markets,
grid, support schemes and acceptance,” 2015.
[34] Electricity Maps, “Eu emission factors,” 2024.
[35] Regeringen, Socialistisk Folkeparti, Liberal Alliance, Det Konservative Folkeparti, Enhedslisten,
Radikale Venstre, Dansk Folkeparti, and Alternativet, “Tillægsaftale om udbudsrammer for 6 gw
havvind og energiø bornholm,” 2023. Accessed: 2024-07-15.
[36] Copernicus Climate Change Service, “Ecmwf reanalysis v5 (era5),” 2024. Accessed: 2024-09-05.
Page iii
==PAGE:51==
[37] Energistyrelsen, “Udkast til afgraensning af miljøvurdering af plan for kattegat ii og kriegers ﬂak ii
nord og syd,” 2024.
[38] F. Ferriani and A. Gazzani, “The impact of the war in ukraine on energy prices: Consequences for
ﬁrmsâ ﬁnancial performance,” International Economics, vol. 174, pp. 221–230, 2023.
[39] P. Cihan, “Impact of the covid-19 lockdowns on electricity and natural gas consumption in the diﬀerent
industrial zones and forecasting consumption amounts: Turkey case study,” International Journal of
Electrical Power and Energy Systems, vol. 134, 2022.
[40] The Danish Energy Agency, “Kriegers ﬂak ii oﬀshore wind farm,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-07-29.
[41] H. Im and H. Wolkowicz, “Revisiting degeneracy, strict feasibility, stability, in linear programming,”
2023. Accessed: 2024-09-08.
[42] Electricity Maps.
[43] J. Pecinovsky and F. Boerman, “entsoe-py.”
[44] European Union, “REGULATION (EU) 2018/2066,” 2018. See Section 5, Article 38, p. L 334/22.
[45] H. Harwatt, J. Sabaté, G. Eshel, S. Soret, and W. J. Ripple, “Substituting beans for beef as a
contribution toward u.s. climate change targets,” Environmental Research Letters, vol. 13, no. 3,
p. 034015, 2018.
[46] Partnership for Policy Integrity, “Scientist letter on eu forest biomass,” 2018.
[47] D. E. Agency, “Technology data for generation of electricity and district heating,” 2024. Accessed:
2024-09-05.
[48] E. Gaertner, J. Rinker, L. Sethuraman, F. Zahle, B. Anderson, G. Barter, N. Abbas, F. Meng,
P. Bortolotti, W. Skrzypinski, G. Scott, R. Feil, H. Bredmose, K. Dykes, M. Shields, C. Allen, and
A. Viselli, “Deﬁnition of the iea 15-megawatt oﬀshore reference wind,” tech. rep., National Renewable
Energy Laboratory, 2020. Accessed: 2024-07-03.
[49] reNEWS, “Mingyang launches 22mw oﬀshore wind turbine,” 2023. Accessed: 2024-07-11.
[50] Ørsted, “Underlag för avgränsningssamråd: inför ansökan om tillstånd att uppföra och driva vind-
kraftparken skåne havsvindpark,” 2021. Accessed: 2024-07-11.
[51] Energinet, “Geophysical and geological survey report for kriegers ﬂak II north and south,” 2024.
Accessed: 2024-07-15.
[52] M. Maisch, “Europe’s largest battery storage project secures approval,” Apr. 2024. Accessed: 2024-
07-15.
[53] GIGA Storage, “Green turtle project,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-07-15.
[54] D. E. Agency, “Technology data for energy storage,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-09-05.
[55] Eurostat, “Agricultural land prices and rents - statistics,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-07-15.
[56] Conrad Energy, “Conrad energy: Battery energy storage system: Long term income for landlords,”
2023. Accessed: 2024-07-25.
Page iv
==PAGE:52==
[57] Banjo Creek Solar, LLC, “Attachment h: Decommissioning plan,” 2023. Accessed: 2024-07-25.
[58] D. Harper, “Central bank of denmark urges caution over economic future,” Sept. 2023. Accessed:
2024-07-15.
[59] Statista, “Inﬂation rate in denmark from 1987 to 2029,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-07-15.
[60] BDO Denmark, “Payment of corporate income tax in denmark,” tech. rep., 2024. Accessed: 2024-07-
15.
Page v
==PAGE:53==
A
Generation and Price Data
Data regarding the generation per production type and electricity price in western Denmark, 2019 was
sourced from the ENTSO-E transparency platform [31]. Data was accessed using the ENTSO-E Applica-
tion Programming Interface (API), and processed with the help of a Python client [43].
Data was retrieved from the transparency platform for all hours of the year according to UTC, therefore
shifted by one hour according to the time zone Denmark is within, UTC+1. Attention to the time zone
and standardization to UTC was necessary to ensure that price and grid generation data aligned with
weather data. Therefore, time series presented in this report are according to UTC and not local time of
the bidding zone.
For some cases tested previously with HyDesign, input price data was retrieved from the Balmorel model,
a future investment scenarios simulation tool that predicts future prices for a given year. While that was
an option for this research, using a modeled future price series was deemed unnecessary within the context
of the main purpose and contributions. Instead, historic price data was matched to historic weather data.
The discrepancy between old prices and those to be applied to Kriegers Flak II wind generation were
deemed negligible. This is a simpliﬁcation, but not a critical one as the main purpose of this research is
to better understand CEO as an objective function for hybrid power plant research.
B
Displacement Order
The displacement order, or reverse merit order, indicates the order in which alternative generation emis-
sions will be oﬀset as a result of HPP generation. This order is assumed to be unchanging for the lifetime
of the HPP and is used as a parameter input for the CEO calculation. It was diﬃcult to ﬁnd a reliable data
source for the displacement order, as speciﬁc supply and demand bids are unavailable on EU Day-Ahead
markets. The market clearing price and generation by type data are available, however the marginal prices
for each generation type are not.
Therefore, available literature on modern European merit orders was used as a basis for the displacement
order in DK1. A paper from the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) reports the 2015 reverse merit
order for Nordic countries as the following: oil, gas, biomass, coal, nuclear, hydro, wind [33]. The displace-
ment order used in this research is similar to the reversed Nordic merit order, however including some
diﬀerent elements; DK1 does not get power from nuclear, but does generate electricity from waste and solar.
It was assumed that solar has a very low marginal cost, which has been discussed in other literature [2]
[1]. This logic was also applied to the unspeciﬁed "other renewables" included in the data [31].
An energy research institute in Munich published the merit order of thermal power plants in Germany in
2018 [32]. They indicate the displacement order to be: oil, gas, coal, lignite, nuclear, waste. Even though
Germany has a slightly diﬀerent energy mix than Denmark, it was useful to see that oil was generally
more expensive than gas. The energy center further points out that gas became much more expensive in
2021 due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine and subsequent energy crisis. It is assumed that this more
recent shift in the typical merit order is temporary and less likely to be representative of long-term future
events. Therefore, oil is displaced before gas in the model order.
Based on the presented literature, the displacement order corresponding to 2019 DK1 data is assumed to
be as follows: oil, gas, biomass, coal, waste, hydro, wind, solar, other renewables.
Page vi
==PAGE:54==
C
Emissions Factors
Direct emissions factors were sourced from the Electricity Maps database, which provides real-time and
historic carbon intensity data for distinct electricity markets around the world, including DK1 [42]. The
Electricity Maps github page describes in detail the methodology used to derive direct emissions factors that
are used for these calculations [34]. These factors are sourced from ENTSO-E and EU emissions trading
scheme (EU-ETS) 2021 data.
It is assumed that emissions factors did not vary signiﬁcantly between
2019 and 2021, therefore this data can be used for the DK1 study case. The Electricity Maps approach
requires matching generation data to reported emissions from speciﬁc power plants, then calculating and
summing emissions factors for all power plants in a country. The resulting emissions factors encompass
entire countries and therefore no distinction is made between, for example, DK1 and DK2.
Table 5: Emissions factors used for DK1, displayed by displacement order from left (ﬁrst) to right (last).
All values in units gCO2eq/MWh
oil
gas
biomass
coal
waste
hydro
wind
solar
other renewable
1193417.46
336971.986
0
845533.209
0
0
0
0
0
Table 5 displays the emissions factors calculated for Denmark in 2021 [34]. It is assumed that biomass
and waste have the same direct emissions factor.
The Electricity Maps data illustrate the variation in emissions factors for diﬀerent power plants. The
interquartile range for coal across European countries was larger than that for gas and oil. This supports
the claim that emissions factors should be tailored to the relevant country or market as much as possible; a
general emissions factor for a source is not necessarily representative of its emissions in another geographic
location. Average European emissions factors were reported as 1041, 420, and 881 gCO2eq/kWh for coal,
gas and oil respectively. Danish power plants report much lower emissions factors for coal and gas, and
higher factors for oil [34]. Because of this variability, it is important for new test cases to reﬂect emissions
factors estimates in their speciﬁc country or region.
As emphasized above, CEO model assumptions are designed to align with the values expected by public
planning authorities and other governmental groups. However, there is a greater argument over whether
these standards best match real numbers. Most notably, direct emissions from biomass are assumed to
be 0 per EU regulation [44], however this claim is dependent on biomass being sourced sustainably. Some
sources argue that electricity generation from biomass can yield positive emissions that should not be dis-
counted, due to the lower carbon density of forest farms and the lower eﬃciency of wood combustion and
processing compared to coal [45]. A 2018 open letter from 80 scientists directly refutes the EU provision,
stating that the provision has led to a hike in unsustainable biomass burning for electricity [46].
EU standards were still cited for this research and considered the best available option, as they provide
a common reference point for various stakeholders groups. Opposing sources are only discussed here to
emphasize the sensitivity of these factors and to bring awareness to the existing debate regarding their
reﬂection of real circumstances.
D
Reference CEO for HPP Sizing
The normalization value of CEO for the sizing loop is based on the lifetime cumulative CEO calculation for
the base case. This is the same base case that is referenced for the COVE sizing, CEO EMS, and revenue
Page vii
==PAGE:55==
EMS normalization parameters. CEObc (CEO base case, lifetime) was calculated as 31761331402906.609
gCO2,eq/MWh. This is a ﬁnal calculation of CEO according to Equation 3 of the base case value, meaning
that it is based on a degraded generation time sereis and not the idealized series seen by the EMS.
CEObc normalizes the objective function so that it can be made comparable to other objectives in a multi-
objective setting; it also makes the output value easier to understand, as it exists on a more familiar scale
than does CEO (left alone reaches the order of 1 · 1014).
E
Reference COVE for HPP Sizing
Similarly to CEO, it was important to normalize COVE for the HPP sizing optimization so that it was
on the correct scale for multi-objective optimization. It was at ﬁrst considered to normalize CEO and
COVE based on their theoretical maximums, however a maximum would be diﬃcult to pinpoint for a cost
metric. Therefore, COVE was normalized with respect to the lifetime COVE associated with the base case.
The ﬁnal value of the normalization parameter COV Ebc is 1.281, meaning that all designs are ranked
against a case for which the costs are 1.281x greater than revenue.
F
Design Variables Bounds
The table in Table 3 speciﬁes input limits for each design variable in optimizations and evaluations per-
formed for this research. Bounds were chosen based on the feasible range for design variables, which is
dependent on the conditions of the case study and justiﬁed in the subsections below. As discussed in
subsection 3.6, the limitations of the EGO algorithm required that constraints be enforced via design
variable bounds. The dependence of wind farm area AWF on NWT and ⇢W means that a certain ratio of
these variables must be maintained in the optimal solution. Some values within the NWT range are invalid
for certain ⇢W, and vice versa. Values in Table 3 are presented regardless of this caveat, and measures as
detailed in the methodology are taken to ensure that the ﬁnal optimal solution respects this ratio.
If a single number is reported in Table 3, then the optimization was performed assuming a ﬁxed parameter
instead of an adjustable design variable for that particular input. Note that all sizing design variables are
ﬁxed for evaluations, where only the EMS optimization is performed.
The point in the design space chosen for evaluation represents the optimal conditions for the corresponding
objective. This point was determined via single-objective optimization. It is used for subsequent evaluation
to verify that the objective was properly integrated into HyDesign, and to perform sensitivity analyses.
F.1
Prated: Rated Power
Prated is measured in MW and is varied for 3 optimizations cases, therefore treated as a ﬁxed variable
within each optimization. It was considered interesting to test whether Prated would vary amongst Pareto-
optimal solutions in a multi-objective optimization for COVE and CEO. The chosen small (15 MW) and
large (27 MW) cases reﬂect turbine size scenarios suggested in the Krigers Flak II preliminary studies
[37]. A medium (22 MW) case was also established in the interest of testing a middle ground, as the gap
between 15 and 27 MW is large.
Page viii
==PAGE:56==
Prated was ﬁxed for several test cases due to the real world implications of this variable. A developer or
HPP designer can choose the ideal turbine model based only on what is available on the market. If no
turbine manufacturers have produced a 26 MW model, then a developer cannot assume a Prated of 26 MW
for their project. Therefore, varying Prated between 15 and 27 MW for the optimization may result in
a poorer representation of the true design choices available for an HPP designer; whereas the chosen 15
MW, 22 MW, and 27 MW cases are mirrored by existing turbines or planned designs.
The reference turbine in HyDesign was also updated from a 5 MW model to a 20 MW model, so as
to improve the accuracy of cost estimates. The 20 MW turbine was assumed suitable as it is used as
a reference point for 2030 cost estimates by the Danish Energy Agency [47]. More information on the
reference turbine updates can be found in Appendix G.
F.2
NWT: Number of Wind Turbines
The feasible number of wind turbines varies for each given Prated and is based on wind capacity constraints.
Pre-feasibility studies state that the Krigers Flak II Nord and Syd wind projects will have a combined
capacity of at least 1000 MW, with overplanting allowed up to 1770 MW at the Northern (Nord) site and
up to 1680 MW at the Southern (Syd) site [37]. Although this allows for a total capacity of 3450 MW, a
maximum capacity of 2100 MW was instead tested in this research, due to high wind farm density concerns.
The minimum number of turbines is approximately equal to 1000 MW divided by Prated, with some error
due to rounding. Similarly, the maximum number of turbines was reached dividing 2100 by Prated for each
case.
F.3
hc: Clearance
Clearance (measured in m) is ﬁxed for each test case and based on existing turbine speciﬁcations. This
both simpliﬁes the optimization problem and makes the results realistic, assuming that turbines could be
chosen by the developer from a catalog in the case of Kriegers Flak II. The IEA 15 MW reference turbine
has a clearance of 30 meters [48]; the 22 MW Minyang model was reported as having an even lower 20
meter clearance [49]; and the clearance for an Ørsted 27 MW model is 65 meters [50].
hc = 1
2(D −hh)
(28)
The clearance hc is equal to half the rotor diameter D minus the hub height hh, as shown in Equation 28.
Therefore, searching for an optimal hc also involves optimizing for both of these turbine design parameters.
F.4
sp: Speciﬁc Power
The speciﬁc power, reported in W/m2, is a ratio between a turbine’s capacity and its swept area. Therefore,
this variable intrinsically holds information about the rotor diameter and rated power of the turbine. The
speciﬁc power must be within 200 - 360 W/m2. These are the only feasible values given a lookup table
that is integrated into HyDesign [3].
sp = 4prated
⇡D2
(29)
The speciﬁc power is ﬁxed for each case study as this is a turbine-speciﬁc parameter, and it is assumed that
speciﬁc turbine models are used for each study. For the 15 MW case, the IEA 15 MW reference turbine
is used, with a diameter of 240 meters. The Minyang 22 MW turbine with an assumed diameter of 310
Page ix
==PAGE:57==
meters is a reference point for the mid-size turbine case (according to online sources, the turbine will be
"at least" 310 meters) [49]. The suggested Ørsted 27 MW model would have a rotor diameter of 320 m [50].
The IEA 15 MW and Ørsted 27 MW turbines have similar speciﬁc powers of 332 and 336, respectively.
The Mingyang turbine has a lower speciﬁc power of 291.
F.5
⇢w: Wind Installation Density
The minimum bound of ⇢W [MW/km2] was set with respect to the available area for the oﬀshore wind
farm. Development is constrained by the available lease spaces, which are 99 km2 and 76 km2 for the Nord
and Syd sites, respectively [51]. The Nord and Syd sites are assumed to have equal installation densities.
If the wind farm capacity is equal to the minimum of 1000 MW, then the wind farm density will be 1000
MW / (99 + 76) km2 or approximately 5.7 MW/km2. ⇢W can extend to 12 MW/km2, corresponding
to a maximum capacity of 2100 MW. This is less than the 3450 MW suggested maximum capacity in a
Kriegers Flak II preliminary study [37], however it is chosen due to the limits of the lookup table used in
HyDesign. An overplant of over 100% is additionally very large, therefore this limitation on the design
space is not considered to limit the capability of the model to simulate a realistic scenario.
F.6
BP and BEh: Battery Power and Battery Energy Hours
The maximum bound of 600 MW for BP was chosen based on a feasible Battery Energy Storage System
(BESS) capacity, per 2024 standards. The GIGA Green Turtle is proclaimed to be the largest European
battery storage project (as of April 2024) [52] [53]. Dutch company Giga Storage plans to commission a
600 MW BESS in Belgium in 2028 [53]. The battery will have an energy rating of 2,400 MWh, meaning
that the corresponding BEh value is 4 hours, or 2,400 MWh divided by 600 MW [52]. Because this is the
largest project found in literature, variable bounds for this research extend up to the Green Turtle BP and
BEh.
F.7
Cbfl: Battery Fluctuations Penalty Factor
The Cbfl manages how quickly the battery can ramp to charge or discharge. This penalty factor controls
battery degradation [3]. If Cbfl is low, the battery will ramp more quickly as there is a lower penalty on
this ramping. The bounds 0-30 are used in previous HyDesign literature and are therefore expected to
best represent the feasible range of this variable [3].
The beneﬁt of a low Cbfl is that the battery can more quickly respond to price changes on the market,
i.e. it can begin to discharge more electricity soon after the price increases. A low Cbfl, however, has long
term consequences as high ﬂuctuations lead to lower battery state of health and more rapid degradation
[3]. The factor therefore represents an important economic trade-oﬀthat is important to battery operation
and overall HPP design. The Cbfl is a design variable for both the HPP sizing and EMS optimizations.
G
Wind Farm Parameters
The Kriegers Flak II pre-feasibility plans consider 15 MW turbine and 27 MW turbine scenarios for the
wind farm. It was important that the reference turbine capacity in HyDesign be within this range, to
avoid unnecessary and extreme extrapolation of costs via the NREL cost and scaling model [3].
Page x
==PAGE:58==
The reference used for this research is a 20 MW turbine. This reference stems from a Danish Energy
Agency technology data catalogue, where the 20 MW model is reported as the expected oﬀshore wind
standard in 2030 in a Danish context [47]. The turbine is expected to have a 155 meter hub height and
270 meter rotor diameter, per Danish Energy Agency estimates. The modeled wind turbine eﬃciency is
95% based on the expected forced outages for the wind farm [47]. All per-MW turbine cost estimates are
based on the 20 MW turbine and on 2030 conditions, matching the expected year that the Kriegers Flak
II project will begin generating electricity.
Table 6 includes the turbine costs, civil works costs, ﬁxed annual O&M costs, and variable O&M costs of
a 20 MW turbine estimated to be on the Danish market in 2030. All of these estimates stem directly from
the data sheet prepared in conjunction with the Danish Energy Agency technology catalogue [47]. The
wind civil works cost is comprised of installation, project development, array cable, foundation, and grid
connection costs.
Table 6: DK1 cost parameters for 20MW reference turbine
turbine
e/MW
670,000
civil works
e/MW
1,130,000
ﬁxed O&M
e/MW/yr
39,000
variable O&M
e/MWh
3.89
nature-inclusive design cost
e
6,695,328
In Denmark, oﬀshore wind project bidders undergo a tendering process that is administered by the Danish
government. The agreement states that the government will not provide a support model for the oﬀshore
wind farms, and will instead require a yearly concession payment that the winning bidder must pay for
the right to use Danish ocean space [35]. The payment amount is not speciﬁed, and are to be determined
in cooperation with the tender; however, according to the tendering agreement for an energy island to
service Bornholm, the winning bidder will be chosen based on either the lowest cost of energy or the
highest concession payment [35]. The concession payment is not accounted for in the cost model and is
instead considered an operational expenditure that the user can calculate based on the economic viability
of the project (i.e., the user would likely chose a concession payment amount based on the NPV and IRR
calculated here).
The tender agreement also mentioned that two of the tendered parks (including Hesselø, Kriegers Flak II,
Kattegat II, and Nordsøen I) are required to have a nature-inclusive design, where the project positively
impacts biodiversity and/or the marine environment. It is assumed in this research that Kriegers Flak II
will require a nature-inclusive design. The associated cost is 50 million Danish kroner, or e6,695,328 [35].
This is added to the cost model as a ﬁxed cost that is not dependent on the ﬁnal size of the HPP.
Remaining wind turbine parameters that are used as HyDesign inputs are speciﬁed in Table 7. These
match inputs in the HyDesign reference paper [3].
Table 7: Wind turbine parameters
Wind turbine eﬃciency, ⌘W
-
1
Annual wind degradation
%
1
Wind degradation time span
years
[0, 25]
Share between wind turbine degradation types
-
0.5
Page xi
==PAGE:59==
H
Battery Parameters
Battery costs are sourced from the Danish Energy Agency energy storage technology data sheet, last
updated in September 2023 and in conjunction with their energy storage technology catalogue [54]. The
agency references a utility-scale Samsumg lithium-ion NMC battery, rated at 21MW/7MWh per unit and
expected to be an industry standard in 2030 [54]. The cost estimates are therefore based on a 3C battery,
however the optimized HPP design may include a battery with a lower or higher C-rating, since BEh can
vary between 0 and 4.
The data sheet provides battery energy cost, battery power cost, and other project cost estimates. "Soft
costs" are presumed to include installation, commissioning, grid connection, balance of plant equipment
supply, contracting, contingency, and control system expenses. The ﬁxed O&M cost is listed as 570 EU-
R/MW/year, and the variable O&M cost is 1.91 EUR/MWh [54].
Land costs were calculated separately between the battery and the wind farm. This is because oﬀshore
wind energy areas are leased much diﬀerently than land is bought for development. Battery land costs
were estimated as e19,841 per hectare, or e1,984,100/km2. This is based on the average price of arable
land in Denmark in 2022 [55]. The expected amount of land required is based on the assumption that 100
MW of battery capacity requires 4 acres of land [56]. This equates to 0.00016 MW/km2, based on the
conversion rate 1 km2 = 247.105 acres.
Decommissioning costs for the BESS are assumed to be 0. This is based on a 2023 decommissioning plan
report that discusses the wide variability of BESS decommissioning costs, e.g. from $25 - $75 per kWh [57].
This is unsurprising due to the nascency of the BESS industry. The report also mentions that batteries
are viable for reuse at the end of the HPP lifetime, therefore decommissioning could involve proﬁt from
resale of the batteries. Resale value is estimated here as $20 per kWh. It is a reasonable assumption that
BESS decommissioning costs could be canceled out by resale of batteries.
Table 8: DK1 cost parameters for battery energy storage system (BESS)
battery power
e/MW
170,000
battery energy
e/MWh
70,000
soft costs
e/MWh
90,000
ﬁxed O&M
e/MW/year
570
variable O&M
e/MWh/year
1.91
land
e/MW
321
The battery costs provided here are normalized to a per MW or per MWh basis so that costs can be
extrapolated based on the ﬁnal design size.
The battery depth of discharge, price reduction per year, and minimum energy storage capacity in Table 9
are originally sourced from standard manufacturer speciﬁcations and consistent with parameters assumed
in other HyDesign literature [3]. LoCmin is the minimum energy storage capacity; when the battery health
reaches the threshold (1 - LoCmin), the battery is replaced [3]. The battery charge and discharge eﬃciencies
are similar to those previously assumed in HyDesign literature, however updated in accordance with the
Danish Energy Agency energy storage data sheet with respect to 2030 projections [54].
Page xii
==PAGE:60==
Table 9: EMS and degradation parameters
Battery depth of discharge, BEdepth
-
0.9
Battery charge eﬃciency, ⌘charge
-
0.985
Battery discharge eﬃciency, ⌘discharge
-
0.975
Battery price reduction per year, fB
-
0.1
Minimum energy storage capacity, 1 −LoCmin
-
0.7
I
Financial and Economic Inputs
The inﬂation rate is assumed to be 2% throughout the HPP lifetime. This value is equal to the inﬂation
goal of the European Central Bank as of 2023 [58], as well as the predicted inﬂation rate for Denmark
from 2025 to 2029 [59]. Depreciation is anticipated to be linear throughout the lifetime of the HPP.
The corporate tax rate in Denmark is 22%, which is used as an input [60]. The weighted average cost of
capital (WACC) for wind and battery are assumed to be 5.2% and 8.0%, respectively, matching a case
study in previous HyDesign research [3]. It makes sense that batteries have a higher WACC than wind, as
utility-scale battery energy storage systems have less global precedence and therefore could be perceived
as higher risk by investors or the bank.
Page xiii
