==PAGE:1==
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation
method based on the consistency between
CryoSat­2 and ICESat­2 retrievals
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Microwaves and Remote Sensing
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency be­
tween CryoSat­2 and ICESat­2 retrievals
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Artemis Vrettou
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Theresa Heindl, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Microwaves and Remote Sensing, Ørsteds Pl.,
Building 348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for six months as a collaboration between the Department
of Microwaves and Remote Sensing, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, and
the Satellites and the Arctic group of the National Climate Research Center (NCKF) at
the Danish Meteorological Institue (DMI) in fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Artemis Vrettou ­ s222726
Signature
Date
ii
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this study the calculation of the sea ice thickness is being investigated. Its calculation is
based on Archimedes’ principle of hydrostatic equilibrium. In order to make this calculation
four parameters are needed. The ice freeboard, the ice density, the snow depth and the
snow density. There are a lot of different datasets describing this parameters, which leads
to a lot of different estimations of sea ice thickness.
The variables used here are the retrieved freeboards from two satellite missions each
carrying a radar (CryoSat­2) and a laser (ICESAT­2) altimeter respectively in combination
with six different auxiliary parameters in order to derive the sea ice thickness using the
hydrostatic equilibrium equation. The auxiliary parameters are a constant value of 915
kg/m3 for sea ice density, and a spatial and temporal variable value of the density, which
is based on the multi­year sea ice fraction and the densities attributed to each sea ice
type.
A snow layer lies on top of the sea ice and it is taken into consideration in these calcula­
tions. The depth of it is derived from climatological data, modified so that the depth on top
of first­year sea ice is half of the depth over multi­year ice. The second dataset used is
snow depth from the Lagrangian Model LG, which varies in space and time. Finally, the
snow density used is variable in time but constant in space and the second snow density
dataset comes also from the Lagrangian Model LG.
The question that normally rises since there are so many datasets and combinations of
them, is if there is one combination of data that can be used for both radar and laser
altimeter freeboard measurements, that maximizes their correlation throughout the Arctic
region for each winter month in the period of January 2019 to April 2021. It is found that
this combination is the one using modified Warren climatology as snow depth, Lagrangian
model snow density and a constant value of 915 kg/m3 as sea ice density.
The validity of the snow depth is challenged using data from in situ measurements of two
campaigns, Operation Ice­Bridge and MOSAiC. The snow depth is also calculated using
the two freeboards and the Lagrangian model snow density, since this is the one that has
been proven to derive more consistent results. This snow depth is also validated against
in­situ data. The validation is pointing towards positive weak correlation.
These results are made under the assumptions that the radar scattering horizon is on
the snow­ice interface, the radar signal is attenuated in the snow layer and the laser
scatter from the air­snow interface. The radar penetration factor is calculated using the
two freeboards and the Lagrangian model snow depth. It shows great spatial variability,
with its values being close to one especially towards the center of the arctic, but it doesn’t
show that much of a temporal variability.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Tusind tak to my supervisors, Hoyeon and Rasmus, for discussing and sharing their
knowledge on the field of sea ice to me. A thousand thanks to my friends that taught
me how to be alive and the best version of myself everyday, even when the sun hadn’t
shined for a month. Chilia efharisto to my family for always being by my side.
Data
Autonomous sea ice measurements (SNOW) from 07­10­2019 to 03­08­2020 were ob­
tained from https://www.meereisportal.de (grant: REKLIM­2013­04).
iv
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Theory
6
3.1
Sea Ice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Auxiliary Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Sea Ice Thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.5
Sensitivity Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Data
22
4.1
Freeboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Snow Depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Snow Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.4
Sea Ice Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.5
Validation Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Methods
36
5.1
Pre­Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.2
Sea Ice Thickness Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
Snow Depth Estimation based on the two freeboards . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Results
39
6.1
Sea ice freeboard
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.2
Sea Ice Thickness Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.3
Snow Depth and Radar Penetration Factor Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.4
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7
Discussion
50
8
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
54
A Figures
59
B Abbreviations
65
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The key assumption that is investigated in this study is that if the sea ice thickness es­
timations from two independent satellite missions (CryoSat­2 and ICESAT­2) agree, it
strengthens the scientific validity of the selected combination of auxiliary data and param­
eterizations, accordingly, providing confidence in the accuracy of the results.
The estimation of sea ice thickness is a challenging task of great importance. Sea ice is
an important part of the climate system affecting radiative, heat and gas and momentum
fluxes and participating in number of feedback mechanisms (e.g. albedo feedback and
lapse rate feedback). Global warming has direct consequences for the sea ice extent,
thickness, snow cover, drift speed etc. and sea ice is therefore a climate change indicator
[1], [2].
Arctic sea ice extends through the whole of the Arctic region, which makes it difficult to
measure its thickness directly in situ. It is also present all year long, but covers the arctic
ocean partly during the summer. In order to be able to measure it satellite remote sensing
and in particular satellite altimetry measurements can be used so as to retrieve the sea
ice freeboard [3], [4].
The freeboard is defined as the part of the sea ice that exists outside of the ocean. On
top of the freeboard lies a snow layer. The freeboard is turned into thickness using the
hydrostatic equation based on Archimedes’ principle. This requires knowledge not only
of the freeboard, but the snow depth, snow density and sea ice density [3], [5].
So far there have been many products of sea ice thickness derived this way, but there is
no set combination of all the variables between radar and laser altimetry that can estimate
sea ice thickness consistently [6]. This estimation also builds upon various assumptions
regarding to the snow­ice interface, radar/laser penetration and scattering in the snow, as
well as snow inflicted radar signal attenuation [7].
For instance both the Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI) [8] and the National Snow and Ice
Data Center (NSIDC) have come up with their own thickness estimates [9], but use differ­
ent approaches and auxiliary data to do so, which result in differences between the final
products. The thickness dataset from AWI use a snow depth of merged climatological
data with daily radiometric remote sensing measurements, while the NSIDC product uses
modify climatology.
On the other hand sea ice thickness estimation from ICESat­2 freeboards from the NSIDC,
may use products that will not be studied here, such as the NASA Eulerian Snow On Sea
Ice Model (NESOSIM) v1.0 [4], but also the SnowModel LG snow depth and the modified
Warren climatology that is studied here. and validates it against CryoSat­2 and ICESAT
ice thickness datasets [9].
This study tries to bridge this difference, by figuring out a combination that provides the
most consistent sea ice thickness estimates between the two major satellite altimeters of
CryoSat­2 and ICESat­2 missions. By consistent, in this case means that both sea ice
thicknesses agree in each gridcell of the data.
Snow depth is usually gotten from climatological data [10], or modified climatology [11].
Depending on the sea ice type there are studies that differentiate the snow depth on
top of it based both on remote sensing measurements and climatology [12]. This is also
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
1
==PAGE:10==
tested here, along with a new approach on the snow depth, the Lagrangian snow evolution
system for snow depth distribution on sea ice [13], [14]. Finally, it is also studied how the
snow depth can be derived from differencing the two freeboards and potentially using it
in order to calculate the sea ice thickness [6].
Other parameters that are discussed here are the snow and sea ice density. The snow
density is usually assumed to be a constant [12], [15], to come from climatological data
[3], [10], or modified climatological snow density with lower bulk density in the fall is used
in come cases as well [16]. Some recent studies suggest a snow density product that
evolves in time [17], [18]. This will be tested here, along with the Lagrangian snow density
evolution [13], [14].
Finally, sea ice density is also a parameter that differs from study to study. Some studies
assume a constant number of it [4], [12] and this case will also be tested here. Other stud­
ies are taking into consideration the sea ice type, resulting in a set of densities depending
on it [3]. A similar approach is taken here, but it is in combination with the multi­year ice
fraction in order to account for ambiguous sea ice types as well.
Along with the hydrostatic equilibrium state that is assumed, there are a number of more
assumptions made. ICESat­2 measurements are assumed to represent the total free­
board of the sea ice, meaning the sea ice freeboard and the snow layer on top of it [4],
[12]. The CryoSat­2 signal is expected to penetrate the snow layer and return measure­
ments made from the snow­ice interface of the sea ice, measuring the sea ice freeboard
instead [19].
The latter assumption about the scattering surface of the radar signal is challenged and
investigated in this study. This is because of the potential change in the scattering horizon
because of the snow layer and the change in the light speed because of the different
medium [19], [16].
The research questions that are answered here are:
• What is the fit and uniformity between CryoSat­2 and ICESat­2 measurements and
auxiliary data?
• What is the ’best’ combination of auxiliary data in order to retrieve a consistent sea
ice thickness?
• How can the auxiliary parameters be optimized for use for the sea ice thickness
estimation?
• Are the assumptions made valid?
• Can sea ice thickness be estimated consistently using satellite altimetry?
2
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
Sea ice affects the regional climate and weather conditions, from changing the wind di­
rection due to the freeboard and the ridges that can be created, to the ocean circulation
due to the thermohaline and its extent [1]. Changes in its extent affect the albedo, while
changes in its volume affect the heat budget, as well as the temperature and the salinity
of the region [20]. It has been found that the change in sea ice thickness is responsible
for 80% of the decrease in the sea ice volume [21]. There is a quantifiable decline in sea
ice thickness during spring time, that can be explained by the thinning of multi­year ice.
This decline in multi­year ice has led in the loss of almost 30% of sea all of winter sea ice
volume [22].
Sea ice thickness derived from ICESat­2 (IS­2) measurements for the first winter of the
mission and combined with snow depth products such as NEOSIM and W99 show a vari­
ability from 1m up to 4m, also depending on the freeboard estimates and the topography.
As expected the freeboards are lower when there is first year sea ice, resulting in smaller
thicknesses. [4].
Freeboards also show a monotonous increase from October to April , just like the snow
depth does. Moreover there is a clear bimodal distribution of the sea ice thickness when
it comes to MYI and FYI, but it evens out throughout the growth season, due to the FYI
being able to grow faster through winter, since it lacks in insulation properties [23], [4]. On
the other hand, MYI thickness growth within a winter period is attributed to the rafting and
ridging of it, as well as basal thermodynamic growth [7].
Freeboard is not the only parameter that affects the sea ice thickness, as the sea ice
density and consecutively sea ice type is one of them as well. First­year ice (FYI) has a
different density than multi­year ice (MYI), due to brine drainage and air pockets in the
second type [1]. When computing the sea ice thickness it is common to use either one
value for all the sea ice or a density based on the MY sea ice fraction. It has been shown
that using a constant value for the sea ice density underestimates the sea ice thickness
especially for the MYI [7].
In the case of radar altimetry and specifically CS­2, it has been found that the scattering
horizon is deep within the snow volume, but still, not exactly at the snow­ice boundary.
Moreover, it has been found that the depth of this horizon is dependent on the sea­ice
type, penetrating all the way to the snow­ice boundary for first year ice, and most of the
snow depth over multi­year ice [16].
FYI has a larger density than MYI, because of the characteristics described above. But
the more ice density there is, the more the floe sinks. This extends the radar ( and laser)
range to the freeboard, and can potentially change the scattering surface. The opposite
happens for MYI that has smaller densities. This calls for a buoyancy correction on the
ice flow. At the same time though, MYI tends to have a deeper snow layer than FYI due
to the years of accumulation on top of it. Deeper snow extends the radar range, as it
suppresses the snow­ice interface, but also the attenuation of the signal in the snow, so it
has to be accounted for. These two states create opposite conditions and the correction
for the buoyancy effect tends to balance the effect of the radar signal attenuation in the
snow layer [24], [25].
CS­2 data averaged throughout the winter periods of 2010­2014, also show the seasonal
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
3
==PAGE:12==
growth of FYI both in extend and volume and also point out the reduction of the MYI
volume, even though it still gets thicker, due to converging, and outflow in certain regions,
which diminishes its extend [7]. In recent years there is a change in the sea ice type
covering the arctic ocean. It is mostly first year ice that is inherently thinner than multi­
year ice. This means that it tends to have a higher backscatter than thicker sea ice, also
because of its surface roughness. This leads to first­year ice being oversampled when it
comes to radar altimetry [25].
One other parameter that needs to be taken into consideration when calculating the sea
ice thickness this way is the snow depth. So far, the product used when deriving sea ice
thickness is climatology [10], known as Warren climatology (W99) or modified climatology
(mW99) [11]. The first one, is not sufficient for the sea ice thickness estimation, due to the
cryosphere changing and must be modified in order to present a more realistic snow layer
on top of different sea ice types [20], [7]. W99 is based on 37 years of data from 1954 to
1991 in situ measurements, so it does not necessarily represent the true conditions for
the recent years. Overall there has been great loss of the snow layer, because of the loss
of multi year ice [11].
In recent years, there have been more snow depth products introduced, that can poten­
tially be used in estimating the sea ice thickness. They come from models, such as the
SnowModel­LG, which represents a Lagrangian snow evolution system which uses the
energy and mass balance equation along with the temperature evolution and forcings from
the ERA5 model that have been calibrated (the precipitation) using in­situ data (Operation
Ice­Bridge ­ OIB) [13], [14], or they can be a fusion of climatology and daily radiometric
data [8]. In the first case, there is a good representation of the seasonal cycle of the snow
depth, as expected from the climatology [10], but it does provide with smaller magnitudes
of it [14].
Another way to retrieve the snow depth is through the same altimetry measurements
used to calculate the sea ice thickness. Assuming that the scattering horizon of CryoSat­
2 is the snow­ice interface and that the ICESat­2 signal is reflected from the snow­air
interface, then the snow depth can be derived by subtracting the two freeboards taking
into consideration the snow refractive index. It has been found that snow depth calculated
this way makes up for almost half of the total freeboard [6].
There have also been studies, suggesting that the snow depth problem can be bypassed
by combining the mechanical process of retrieving the sea ice thickness with the thermo­
dynamic processes of calculating it. That way there is a simultaneous estimation of both,
without having to rely on the snow depth information or correcting the freeboard for the
scattering horizon [19].
Finally, there are studies suggesting the use of dual frequency radar altimetry in order to
derive snow depth. Different wave frequencies, have different penetration depths in the
snow pack, leading to different scattering horizons. The two different derived freeboards
can be subtracted and provide with snow depth, but this operation is sensitive to ice type
and the retracking algorithms used [24].
The density of the snow layer varies depending on the season or the type of ice. It tends
to be denser and thicker on MYI than on FYI [1]. Snow begins to get more dense as
soon as it starts to accumulate on sea ice. This process reduces its porosity and at the
same time a process of metamorphism is triggered which modifies the snow grains. More
compact, warmer and metamorphosed snow tends to be denser [1].
A simple and not spatially variable snow density representation has been introduced that
4
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:13==
is evolving in time in order to capture the seasonal variability, which is based on the clima­
tology [17]. Towards the melting season snow densities show very large values (up to 500
kg/m3). There is also a clear upward trend within the accumulation season [10] , with the
snow density increasing up to an extra 100 kg/m3 within the same season, having small
seasonal variations [10], [14]. The seasonal variations are evident and consistent both in
the climatology and the SnowModel­LG mentioned above, but they do show differences
spatially [14].
So far, there haven’t been many studies that compare different combinations of the pa­
rameters mentioned above for both radar and laser altimeters. There have been individual
studies looking into different parameters used to estimate the sea ice thickness using the
laser freeboard and then validating against CryoSat­2 sea ice thickness. They show a
variable but consistent bias between the two products, a correlation between them that
drops throughout the winter season (October to April) and a standard deviation that grows.
[4].
It is clear that the sea ice thickness estimation is a complex problem with a lot of ambigu­
ities caused from the different parameters used in its estimation. Not only that, but there
are a plethora of ways to estimate it, depending on the different combinations of auxiliary
data, which span from climatology, to observation driven dataset and models, as well as
two different types of altimetry that are mentioned above and assessed later.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
5
==PAGE:14==
3
Theory
This study is focused on the satellite remote sensing of sea ice in order to derive its
thickness. In this section some sea ice physics and terminology basics used in its remote
sensing are presented, as well as satellite altimetry principals, which is the technique that
is used here.
3.1
Sea Ice
Sea ice is a global warming indicator, as climate models use as input its thermal and
optical properties, so it is of great importance to be able to measure them correctly. It also
influences the ocean and atmosphere large­scale circulation all the way to mid­latitudes.
It acts as a blanket on top of the arctic ocean as it is the medium through which the cold at­
mosphere interacts with the underlying warm ocean, as it reduces the ocean­atmosphere
heat exchange.
There are two interesting thermodynamic processes taking place there, one being the heat
exchange between the two media, and the other one is the latent heat that is released or
needed when the water is made into ice or melts respectively.
This heat of fusion is one of the highest of all substances, which means that when the
ice freezes and melts there is a huge amount of heat exchange between the ocean and
the atmosphere, which affects both weather systems in the area, as well as the regional
climate [1].
Sea ice is characterized by a plethora of properties. Its extent, drift and thickness can be
thoroughly studied, as well as its volume and type. The sea ice mass balance defines
the difference between the sea ice production and the sum of the ablation and the mass
export.
Sea ice concentration is defined as the fractional coverage of an enclosed area, referring
to the ratio of sea ice to water. Sea ice extent is the area covered by sea ice above a
certain level of concentration threshold (usually, 15%). Arctic sea ice extent has greatly
diminished in the last few years.
Sea ice type is mostly defined based on its age. The two major sea ice type categories
are first year ice (FYI), usually of a thickness up to 2m, it is seasonal and removed during
summer, it has a smoother surface and a higher density. It is relatively flat and more
saline.
The other major sea ice type category is multi year ice (MYI), which can be more than
2m in thickness and it has survived at least one year’s melt. It is characterized by ridged
surfaces, it is more crevassed and rifted. It is also less saline as brine is drained and
air­pockets form on it.
Finally, the sea ice drift refers to its deformation, as it can converge by rafting and ridging
creating local increases in the mass. It can also diverge, which leads to thinner ice and
open water leads between. This process increases the heat flux, as well as the salt flux,
which changes the local ocean circulation and increases biological activity [26].
6
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:15==
3.2
Altimetry
Sea ice thickness varies spatially and it is difficult to use in situ techniques ( e.g. moored,
or submarine upward looking sonars) to derive useful information. A way to bypass this
difficulty is the use of satellite altimetry either radar or laser. There are both advantages
and disadvantages to both options.
Firstly, satellite altimetry provides with a very good spatial and temporal coverage. Al­
timeters essentially measure the (radar/total) freeboard of the sea ice. This is the amount
of sea ice that exists outside of the ocean. It accounts of 11% of all the sea ice. Knowing
the freeboard and using the hydrostatic equation, the thickness of the sea ice at the point
of the measurement can be derived.
Their working principle is pretty simple. The instruments send the pulse and receive it
back, measuring the time it took to make this journey. Then, they turn the time into range,
correcting in for propagation errors due to the troposphere and the ionosphere. The satel­
lite’s altitude is then subtracted of this range in order to calculate the height of each point
in reference to the Earth’s ellipsoid.
What is left is basically a sum of the geoid (or the mean sea surface corrected for the solid
earth and the ocean tides, as well as some other temporal signals and the mean dynamic
topography) and the amount of the sea ice that is found outside of the water, which is
basically its freeboard. This principle is visualised in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Satellite altimetry working principal. Everything that needs to be considered
when retrieving the range [27].
There are two main differences and subsequent assumptions that should be made de­
pending on the altimetry type. Laser altimetry uses a signal which is assumed that it is
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
7
==PAGE:16==
reflected on top of the snow layer which lies on top of the sea ice, retrieving the total
freeboard. Referencing Figure 3.2, the total freeboard would have to be:
htot = hs + hi
(3.1)
Where, hs refers to the snow depth and hi is the sea ice freeboard.
In the case of radar altimetry, freeboard derivation is more tricky, since depending on
the radar frequency, the signal can penetrate the snow layer in different depths and can
be reflected either from the inside of the snow pack, or the snow­ice boundary. For this
project it is assumed that the signal is returned from the snow­ice boundary, but signal
attenuation through the snow layer is also taken into account. Also, as seen in Figure 3.2
then:
hi ≃hr + ∆hatt
(3.2)
Figure 3.2: Schematic of the sea ice above and in the ocean showing the relationships
between the different types of freeboards and its thickness [22].
3.2.1
Radar Altimetry
In this section some principles of radar altimetry will be presented. For this purpose,
the data that are used in this study from CryoSat­2 are shown and referenced. More
specifically, CryoSat­2 carries SIRAL ­ SAR Interferometric Radar Altimeter, that operates
in Ku­band.
SIRAL is comprised by two antennas forming an interferometer in the cross­track direction
of a basiline of 1.2 m. It operated in a high pulse repetition frequency (PRF), in order to
have coherent along track sampling. It ensures pulse bursts of only 50 µs.
SIRAL has three operational modes, from which two are used for the sea ice data. The
first one is the Low Resolution Mode (LRM), where a single receive channel and a low
PRF are used, for ice­sheet interiors or open oceans. It is useful over surfaces where
topography is homogeneous, for at least as large as the antenna footprint, which is about
15 km. The altimeter echoes have a predictable shape and the mean surface level can
be derived easily from an appropriate model.
8
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:17==
The second operation mode is Synthetic Aperture Radar mode. It uses a single channel,
but a high PRF. It is deployed in closed burst timing in order to assure a high along­track
resolution. The PRF is chosen so that there is no aliasing in the processing of the data.
The resolution is enhanced by using the Doppler properties of the echoes, which leads
to decompose the main beam to 64 narrower synthetic beams. This allow for the along
track direction to gain a resolution of 250m. This is very helpful over sea ice.
The third and final operation mode is the SAR Interferometric mode (SARIn), which goal
is to provide with elevation estimates, wherever the topography is variable. It is mainly
used over ice sheet margins, that are characterised by large surface slopes. Both receive
channels are used, as well as a high PRF, in order to gain a high across track resolution
this time. This is how height is obtained from range measurements. This 3D determination
of the echo, improves its localization, its across track angle can be determined [28].
Figure 3.3: a) & b) Conventional radar altimeter illumination geometry, footprint, and
waveform ­ impulse response ­ respectively. c) & d) Delay/Doppler altimeter illumination
geometry, footprint and waveform respectively.
Figure 3.3 shows the footprints and the waveforms of a conventional (left) and a Doppler
(right) radar altimeter. The waveforms that are used to derive the data from this study
resemble the ones one the right, since they are obtained during the SAR and SARIn
modes of SIRAL. More specifically one waveform can be seen in Figures 3.4, 3.5 next to
where it is located in space.
Comparing the waveform and the ground track it can be safely assumed that the first part
is actually the ocean, while when the waveform starts to spike it could be an indicator of
sea ice. More power is being returned, so this can mean possibly a volume scatterer and
not a specular one. But there are metrics and conditions that should be met in order to
do proper surface distinction between ocean and sea ice that are discussed later.
3.2.2
Laser Altimetry
In this section some principles of laser altimetry will be presented. For this purpose, the
data that are used in this study from ICESat­2 are shown and referenced. More specif­
ically, ICESat­2 carries ATLAS ­ Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System, which
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.4: Radar waveform without any correc­
tions in SARM on the 6th of December of 2023.
The power is in normalised counts.
Figure 3.5: The ground track of the
waveform shown in the right figure.
The orbit is ascending.
emits green light in the wavelength of 532 nm.
It is a high repetition rate (10 kHz) micro­pulse laser with sufficient energy that makes it
possible to split the beam into six subsequent beams though a diffractive optical element
(DOE). The original beam is split into a 3X2 configuration. Each set of beams is 3 km
apart, while each beam of the set is 90 m apart from each other. The footprint of each
beam is 15 m.
This approach points to dense across­track sampling to resolve surface slopes on an orbit
basis, the high repetition rate ensures dense along track sampling, which is almost 0.7 m.
The beams have different energies (strong/weak) in order to tell between different types
of surfaces. This configuration results in improved elevation estimates and improved lead
detection for sea ice freeboards.
ATLAS carries two lasers, a primary and a backup. First it goes though a mirror, which
directs it to a polarizing beam combiner (PBC). This is to make sure that both the primary
and the backup laser beams head towards the same path. A second function is to direct
part of the beam to the laser sampling assembly (LSA) in order to record the time of its
departure, so that when the photon returns its travel time is successfully recorded. This
happens because the LSA ensures that the laser’s wavelength (transmitted and received)
is the exact wavelength of 532.272 nm.
Then the beam continues to the beam expander (BE), where using mirrors it is shaped
and it is bigger than when it started. This makes sure that the photons diverge less in
their path going back and forth to the Earth’s surface. This beam goes through the beam
steering mechanism (BSM), which directs it towards the ground. It is also connected to the
telescope receiver, so that it automatically points the laser, where the telescope is pointed,
being able to do slight adjustments to achieve that. Finally, the beam goes through the
DOE and it is split in six.
Since the instrument operated in the optical spectrum and has so many photons at all
times, there is also a lot of noise that gets picked up, as well as a lot of photons that
are ’lost’ on the way to the surface, due to meteorological conditions, more specifically
extensive cloud coverage. But, except for that case, the basic product that is provided is
a data cloud of global geolocated photon data, which is then being processed as it will be
10
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:19==
discussed later in order to obtain the arctic sea ice freeboard.
3.2.3
Freeboard
Freeboard, is the part of the ice floe that is above the water. Depending on the adjective
that accompanies it means different things, for reference there is Figure 3.6, which is
complimentary to Figure 3.2 above. First, there is total freeboard, which is defined as the
height of the air­snow interface above the local sea level. Especially in the arctic, there is
the sea ice floe, which comprises of a layer of ice and a layer of snow on top of the ice,
as symbolically seen in 3.7.
Then, there is the sea ice, or ice, freeboard which refers to only the part of ice that is
above the sea level. Finally, there is the radar freeboard, which refers to the freeboard
which is calculated using radar signals. It differs from the ice freeboard because of the
radar signal scattering and attenuation through the snow layer 3.8. It is assumed though,
that when the snow is cold and dry, the scattering surface coincides with the snow­ice
interface, which makes the radar freeboard identical (!?) to the sea ice freeboard.
Figure 3.6: A virtual guide to the different types of freeboards that will be discussed.
CryoSat­2
Freeboard is retrieved by differentiating between the ocean leads and the ice floes within
the satellite’s track. For CryoSat­2, the sea ice freeboard is obtained, under the assump­
tion that Ku­band frequency can penetrate cold and dry snow, and thus radar range is
negligible. This, though will be doubted in this study. The radar freeboard is obtained by
subtracting the instantaneous sea surface height from the sea ice elevation [8].
The surface type classification is done based on 4 waveform parameters. The radar back­
scattering coefficient, the pulse peakiness, the leading edge width and the leading edge
quality. The radar back­scattering coefficient describes the reflectivity of the surface and
is strongly related to the maximum power of the waveform. The waveform is the signal
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
11
==PAGE:20==
received back from the altimeter. The radar back­scattering coefficient is obtained through
the radar equation 3.3, 3.4.
The pulse peakiness is a measure used to assess the sharpness and intensity of the radar
return signal. It is defined as the ratio of the peak power of the radar return signal to the
mean power of the signal. It quantifies how concentrated the returned energy is in the
peak compared to the overall signal 3.5. Pulse peakiness is higher for leads, because
they tend to have a smoother surface, and reflect more signal than sea ice.
The leading­edge width is defined as the width in range bins along the power rise to the
first maximum between 5% and 95% of the first­maximum peak power while using a ten­
time oversampled waveform [8]. And finally the leading edge quality 3.6 is used to assess
if the leading edge is impacted by noise or other artefacts. Depending on the values of
these parameters the signal is classified as ocean lead, or sea ice, depending also on the
different modes of the instrument[8].
Pr =
PtGtGrλ2σ
(4π)3R2
t R2rLs
(3.3)
σ0 = σ
A
(3.4)
PP =
Nwf
∑
i=1
max(WF)
WFi
Nwf
(3.5)
LEQ =
∑FMI
i=2 (WFi −WFi−1)
WFFMI
(3.6)
After the surfaces are classified into ocean leads and sea ice, the surface elevation is cal­
culated from the radar waveform using a retracker algorithm. In this case, the ’Threshold
First Maximum Retracker Algorithm (TFMRA)’ is used. This retracker estimates the range
by computing the time where the power of the smooth leading edge is at 50% of the peak
power value. This time is then converted to range and corrected for the ionosphere and
the troposphere, as well as sea level changes due to tides and atmospheric pressure [8].
After that, the instantaneous sea surface height is retrieved by eliminating major sea
level changes caused by the geoid and mean dynamic topography, by subtracting the
DTU21MSS. It is smoothly interpolated between elevation tie points in leads and extrapo­
lation to the full trajectory and finally uncertainty is computed, and the sea level anomalies
are computed based on the total number and distance to the next sea surface height tie
point [8]. This is the process done in order to retrieve the radar freeboard, as seen in
Section 4.1.
ICESat­2
On the other hand, when it comes to ICESat­2 the total freeboard is retrieved. This hap­
pens because most of the photons are reflected from the air­snow interface, since ice
absorbs green light only weekly, but ice grains in snow and bubbles in ice scatter light
strongly. There is quite some process in retrieving it, containing multiple IS­2 data prod­
ucts and it is described hereafter.
Once again the freeboard is made by differentiating between the ocean leads and the ice
floes. The process starts from creating the ATL07, which is the sea ice and sea surface
height product. It contains this information for segments along track determined by a dis­
tance over which almost 150 photons are accumulated. These estimates are referenced
12
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:21==
to the mean sea surface. They type of surface is determined by a classification algorithm,
after the case of the data being contaminated by clouds has been filtered out and the
background photon rate has also been taken into consideration.
A plethora of geophysical corrections is also applied to the data, mostly about the solid
earth tides, ocean loading etc. Afterwards, the along­track estimates of sea surface height
of ATL07 are used to create a local sea surface to be used as reference for the freeboard.
Freeboard estimates are provided within 10 km segments, with the number of freeboard
varying in each swath. This product then is gridded in space and it is what eventually is
being used for this study.
The algorithm that finds and classifies between the two surfaces (ocean and sea ice), as
mentioned before, requires input from ATL03 which is the global geolocated photons, in
order to mask the background photons, ATL09, which is about the atmosphere and time­
varying fields. Firstly, a two step procedure is used to differentiate between sea and ice
in ATL03 and then they are labeled based on the photon and background rates [29], [30].
The distinction between the surfaces can be seen in Figure 3.7
Figure 3.7: This figure is taken from the atl20 atbd [30] and it shows data from the instru­
ment used to prove the scientific concept (MABEL). Surface height retrieval using 100
photon aggregates. (a) Photon cloud from a 6.5 km segment of MABEL acquisitions. The
flat surface represents the sea surface and it is easily distinguishable compared to the
peaks. (b) half­width of Gaussian from retrieval process. (c) Retrieved height. (d) Height
distributions and modeled returns (red) (at locations A, B, and C in (c)).
Freeboard Corrections
Generally the total freeboard can be written as:
Ftot = Fi + hs
(3.7)
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
13
==PAGE:22==
But, the sea ice freeboard can be further broken down to:
Fi = Fr + (Fatt −Fscat)
(3.8)
Where, Fatt refers to the correction that needs to be done on the ice freeboard due to
the attenuation of the radar signal in the snow layer and Fscat refers to the correction that
needs to be done to the displacement of the ice freeboard scattering horizon. [19]. This
is presented schematically in Figure 3.8, which is the continuation of the two Figures 3.6
and 3.2.
These two terms can be further broken down using a radar penetration factor f 3.9, 3.10,
which is the depth of the radar scattering horizon relative to the snow depth [16]. It is
assumed, though that the scattering horizon for this study is the snow­ice interface, so
this term is 1. Their combined effect is shown in equation 3.11
Fatt = (ηs −1)fhs
(3.9)
Fscat = (1 −f)hs
(3.10)
Fcomb = (fηs −1)hs
(3.11)
Generally, it is assumed that the radar signal from SIRAL is scatter from the snow­ice
interface and the radar freeboard is only getting corrected for the attenuation of the signal
in the snow layer. This can lead to retrieving bigger freeboards than the actual ones,
which leads to obtaining larger thicknesses.
Figure 3.8: Plot of the freeboards and the correction factors inspired by [19].
3.3
Auxiliary Parameters
As mentioned a lot of times before and seen in the equations above, the knowledge of
auxiliary data is needed in order to derive the sea ice thickness. More specifically, the
snow depth, sea ice density and the snow density.
3.3.1
Snow Layer
Precipitation in the Arctic comes mostly in the form of snow. This snow sits on top of the
sea ice forming a layer, which has some very important properties. It acts as an insulator
14
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:23==
for the sea ice, its depth and density vary whether it is packed, or if it sits on top of older
layers of snow of multi year ice.
When it comes to measuring the depth of this layer, there are various ways it can be done.
It can be measured manually using snow stakes. In fact this is how the climatology that
exists today has been derived [10]. In situ snow measurements by snow radars can be
done, snow buoys can be used or even ultrasonic and acoustic sensors. Snow depth can
also be measured using remote sensing using passive microwave radiometers.
Snow depth also affects radar altimetry, because depending on the frequency the altimeter
is operating in, it is assumed that the signal can penetrate up to a certain snow depth. Not
only that, but it also attenuates this signal, because the scattering medium changes.
It has been shown, that when it comes to Ku­band frequencies (12­18 GHz), the penetra­
tion depth can vary with different snow grain radii. As the radii become smaller the signal
can penetrate more snow. At the same time, it is very difficult to penetrate wet snow at
this frequency. The more the water content the less the signal penetrates in the snow. All
this are shown in Figure 3.9 below.
Figure 3.9: On the right: Variation of penetration depth with volumetric concentration
percentage. Constant snow density is assumed. On the left: Calculated microwave pen­
etration depth for constant snow density and temperature with different snow grain radii
(r). [1]
Unfortunately, it is very difficult to know the exact snow conditions throughout the entire
arctic for every measurement so there are a lot of limitations when it comes to knowing
its depth and density.
When it comes to radar altimetry, the signal received by the altimeter contains information
from scattering both from the snow­air interface and the snow­ice interface. Generally, it
is assumed that the majority of the received signal comes from the snow­ice interface for
nadir looking radars.
Naturally, this means that since the signal is changing its means of transport, its speed
changes as well. Since it is going through the snow, it travels slower, which means that
it takes a longer time to travel back to the satellite, increasing the range between the ice
floe and the satellite.
The snow layer on top of the sea ice depresses it further into the ocean, affecting its buoy­
ancy. At the same time though, a larger snow layer means a bigger signal attenuation.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
15
==PAGE:24==
This poses a problem when trying to calculate the sea ice thickness using the hydrostatic
equilibrium equation. It is needed that there are corrections for both these phenomena.
More on that on section 3.5
Other than that, there are more things that should be considered when thinking of the
snow layer on top of the sea ice and how it affects the sea ice thickness estimation. For
instance, sea ice surface roughness plays a role in signal volume scattering and can
possibly lead to a change in the radar scattering horizon. [31].
3.3.2
Sea Ice Density
The density of the sea ice influences its buoyancy, strength and interaction with the ocean
and atmosphere, and it is also an indicator of the age of the ice. It typically ranges from 870
kg/m3 to 920 kg/m3 and this value depends on the age, the salinity and its temperature.
During winter time, when it forms, ice has higher concentration in seawater. If it survives
one summer melt it is called multi­year ice, and slowly brine drains from it back into the
see, leaving behind air pockets. This means that MYI has lower densities than FYI.
When retrieving the sea ice thickness assuming hydrostatic equilibrium there have been
many suggestions on which values should be used. There are studies using the constant
value of 915kg/m3, and this will also be tested later on here, as well as assigning one value
for MYI (882kg/m3) and another one for FYI 916.7kg/m3[32]. These values come from
historical data, collected from in situ measurements, in the case of the constant density
[33]. The varying density based on an airborne Sever expedition data [34].
There are a couple of ways to measure sea ice density. It can be measured in situ, during
arctic scientific expeditions using different techniques, such as the mass/volume tech­
nique, the displacement technique etc, but it can also be measured though the freeboard
and the sea ice thickness when hydrostatic equilibrium has been assumed.
In addition, the sea ice type can be measured through passive microwave satellite remote
sensing. FYI with high salinity has a great brightness temperature than MYI with low
salinity, which is a characteristic that defines the two ice types. Combining this technique
with the known densities for the different sea ice types there is a better understanding of
the spatial and temporal coverage of the sea ice density throughout the arctic.
3.4
Sea Ice Thickness
Sea Ice Thickness is determined by two major processes, the thermodynamic and the
mechanical. The first one is responsible for mass changes at the upper and lower bound­
ary of the ice, while the second one is responsible for the formation of leads and pressure
ridges, due to making the ice move in a non­uniform way [35].
There are plenty of ways to derive sea ice thickness. One of them is using the hydrostatic
equilibrium equation. In order to do so, information about the sea ice freeboard, snow
depth and the densities of snow and ice are needed to make this calculation. The sea ice
thickness is then computed as seen below.
H =
ρw
ρw −ρi
(Fr + hs(ηs −1)) +
ρs
ρw −ρi
hs
(3.12)
H =
ρw
ρw −ρi
Fi +
ρs
ρw −ρi
hs
(3.13)
H =
ρw
ρw −ρi
Ftot −ρw −ρs
ρw −ρi
hs
(3.14)
16
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:25==
The term hs(ηs −1)) is a correction for the radar freeboard (Fr) term because of the radar
signal propagation inside the snow and its scattering horizon being slightly shifted above
from hi. Later in this report is referred to as: Fsnow [16], [19].
3.5
Sensitivity Studies
Sensitivity studies provide with a better understanding of the parameters behavior and
what to expect from the data. Sea ice thickness is studied with regards to a reference
state of the sea ice and its response to changes in the parameters used in its calculation
with the hydrostatic equilibrium equation within a realistic range. The reference state is
shown in Table 3.1.
H (m)
R/I/T Fr (m)
hs (m)
ρs(kg/m3)
ρi(kg/m3)
2
0.2 / 0.2 / 0.3
0.1
320
915
0.1 ­ 0.3
0 ­ 0.5
300 ­ 350
882 ­ 917
Table 3.1: Reference state of sea ice for the sensitivity studies.
H refers to the sea ice thickness, R/ I/ T Fr is radar, sea ice and total freeboard, depending
if the type of sensor is radar or laser respectively, hs is the snow depth, ρs and ρi are the
snow and sea ice density respectively. The ranges that will put the functions to test are
shown in the third line of the table.
The calculations are made based on Equations 3.12, 3.13 3.14 for the radar (the first two)
and the laser sensors respectively. Figure 3.10 shows the result from the sensitivity tests.
Each time one parameter changes ­ denoted on the x­axis, while the rest of them remain
the same. The subplots show results from both sensors responding to the changes.
It has been chosen that the radar freeboard is 0.2m, as well as the sea ice freeboard, the
snow depth 0.1m and the total freeboard 0.3m. The radar freeboard is assumed to be the
sea ice freeboard and adding the snow depth to that results in the total freeboard, which
is what the laser altimeter measures.
It can be seen in Figure 3.10 that for the radar sensor the sea ice thickness that has
been corrected for the attenuation of the signal in the snow layer is always larger than the
thickness calculated with the sea ice or total freeboard. Indeed, calculating the sea ice
thickness as mentioned above, the sea ice thickness for the radar sensor correcting for
the snow attenuation is 2.4m, not correcting for it (sea­ice freeboard) coincides with the
one for the laser sensor at 2.1m.
It is interesting to study how correcting for the attenuation in the snow layer results in
larger estimates in sea ice thickness, since it enlarges the freeboard, as is being done
in Equation 3.12 affects the results. More specifically, it is the correction suggested in
Equations 3.9, 3.10, assuming a scattering horizon on the snow­ice interface with f = 1.
Moreover, it is interesting to see how it compares to the correction when calculating sea
ice thickness due to buoyancy and how their combined effect influences the results.
An interesting result is that the sea ice thickness of the laser sensor is diminishing when
the snow depth is becoming larger. This makes sense based on the equation used to
derive this result, but doesn’t necessarily make physical sense, since from experience
more snow means older, more thicker ice. The problem is, that for this model of the sea
ice thickness estimation, the thermodynamic process that build the wake of the sea ice
inside the sea are not taken into consideration.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.10: Sea ice thickness response to changes of the different parameters.
Finally, there is a steeper change of the sea ice thickness with larger sea ice density
values. Larger sea ice density values refer mostly to first­year ice, which is still saline,
while smaller values refer to multi­year ice from which salt has drained and has more
air pockets instead. MYI is generally thicker than FYI, but this plot shows a tendency of
underestimation and respective overestimation of the sea ice thickness depending on its
density.
Finally, in the Appendix 3 tables can be found that summarize the amount of change in the
sea ice thickness A.1, when modifying the parameters used in the hydrostatic equation,
if one of them is changed, while the rest of them remain constant. The reference state
remains the same as shown in Table 3.1. A summary of the individual changes and what
happens to the sea ice thickness when the other parameters remain the same can be
seen in Figures 3.11 and 3.12 for radar and laser altimeters respectively.
The changes were made within realistic boundaries, that is why there is no adding in the
sea ice density, only removing, in order to simulate something more like multi year ice.
In both cases the sea ice density is the one parameter that affects the sea ice thickness
estimation the most. Then goes the freeboard estimation and finally the snow depth and
snow density. This simulation is only based in mechanics and no thermodynamics have
been taken into consideration so some results could be misleading.
Overall, in both cases, the largest influence is because of the sea ice density, then comes
the freeboard and finally the snow depth and snow density. Snow density influences
more the calculation of sea ice thickness using the hydrostatic equation in the case of
radar altimeters, than in the case of laser altimeters. The opposite is happening for the
case of snow depth, as it also was expected from Figure 3.10.
Above, it is mentioned that the radar scattering horizon is assumed to coincide with the
18
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.11: Changes in the parameters of the hydrostatic equation and how much these
changes affect the sea ice thickness, when everything else is constant. This is the case
for the radar freeboard and equation 3.12
sea ice freeboard plane, which means that the main scattering horizon is at the snow­
ice interface. That is not usually the case, as the radar signal is being attenuated in the
snow layer, due to the change in the means of propagation and it is subjected to volume
scattering which changes the scattering horizon. This also is based on the fact that snow
is dry and cold, which is not always the case, especially during that beginning of melt
season.
This means that the sea ice thickness should be corrected for the extra time it takes the
signal to travel through the snow layer. This is already being done in Equation 3.12,
which is the one used to calculate the sea ice thickness, when dealing with the freeboard
measured from a radar altimeter. But, the difference in the radar scattering horizon is not
taken into consideration.
At the same time, the snow layer on top of the sea ice affects the buoyancy of the floe.
More snow means that the floe sinks deeper into the water, but due to the situation men­
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.12: Changes in the parameters of the hydrostatic equation and how much these
changes affect the sea ice thickness, when everything else is constant. This is the case
for the laser freeboard and equation 3.14
tioned above it also means that it is attenuated more, the scattering horizon changes yet
again, and the freeboard measured could be larger than the true one.
This means that the correction due to the attenuation of the signal inside the snow layer
is larger. Assuming an instantaneous change in the snow depth h′
s = hs + ∆h, but the
sea ice freeboard and the ice thickness remain the same, then the correction due to the
snow attenuation should be equal and opposite to the correction due to buoyancy.
Taking the reference state into consideration the for­mentioned corrections are calculated.
The radar freeboard is 0.2 m and the instantaneous change in the snow depth varies from
0­0.4 m. The two corrections are given by equations 3.15 and 3.16 respectively. The
combined effect can be seen in Figure 3.13
20
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:29==
fatt = fsea ice + (ηs −1)hs
(3.15)
fbuoy = fsea ice −ρs
ρw
hs
(3.16)
Figure 3.13: Signal attenuation and buoyancy correction on the sea ice freeboard.
As it can be seen in Figure 3.13 they almost even out each other. The signal attenuation
correction has a positive impact on the sea ice freeboard, making it larger than it really
is with bigger values of snow depth, but this also means that the floe is pushed in the
ocean, and this correction makes the freeboard sink into the sea, as it can be seen. Their
combined effect tends to make the sea ice freeboard smaller, the more snow there is, by
6cm/m of snow. Previous studies [24], [36], have shown that the signal attenuation has a
larger effect than the buoyancy, but the difference is that in these studies more parameters
have been taken into consideration, such as emissivity and salinity, which are left out in
this one.
This is the result when it is assumed that the radar scattering horizon is at the snow­ice
interface and that the radar freeboard coincides with the sea ice freeboard. This also
means that the radar penetration factor is equal to 1. This is the case of the orange line
in the plot. But what if the radar penetration factor is taken into consideration? Could this
give an even better result when it comes to evening out the two effects caused by the
added snow on the ice floe? How much would this factor need to be and what does it
signify?
In that case, then it would be that (fηs −1)hs = −ρs
ρw hs. The f for which this equality is
achievable is equal to 1.045, as seen by the green line. Only then, can the radar freeboard
be assumed to be equal to the sea ice freeboard. But, it must be noted that this is the case
of a reference density of 320kg/m3. This experiment was done for densities of 310kg/m3
and 330kg/m3, but the radar penetration factor remained the same. Nonetheless, this is a
very simple 1D model, and in reality things are much different and variable both in space
and time.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
21
==PAGE:30==
4
Data
In this section, the data used for this project are being presented, as well as some of the
pre­processing steps that were needed in order to get them in the final form in which they
were used. Some of the missions designed to measure sea ice properties from orbit are
CryoSat, CryoSat­2, ICESat, ICESat­2 and more. This ensures the spatial and temporal
coverage of all the Arctic (and Antarctic). This study focuses on CryoSat­2 and ICESat­2
missions.
The data used span from 2019 to 2021 for the months of January, February, March, April,
October, November and December. The year 2021 goes up to April, because there are
no data about the Lagrangian Model of Snow Distributions in the Arctic (4.2.2).Moreover,
the regions of the Canadian archipelago and Baffin Bay have been discarded as some of
the auxilliary data messed with the results in general, providing foul estimates (4.2.1).
4.1
Freeboard
Two datasets of freeboard are used for this project. One dataset is based on the radar
altimenter SIRAL on CryoSat­2 and the other one is based on the laser altimeter ATLAS
on ICESat­2. The two datasets are already gridded. For the first one radar and sea ice
freeboard are provided, while the second one provides with total freeboard.
4.1.1
CryoSat­2
The CryoSat­2 mission satellite carries SIRAL, a radar altimeter, has an orbit period of 100
minutes, an inclination of 92deg and a footprint of 2.15 km2 (depending on the operation
mode of the instrument) making it possible to cover the arctic region efficiently [28].
CryoSat­2 (CS2) freeboard data are from Alfred Wegener Institut (AWI). In order to retrieve
the radar and sea ice freeboard, a primary altimeter dataset used is the CryoSat­2 Level­
1B baseline­E data from ESA. This data contains the geolocated echo waveforms, range
corrections and flags of the radar altimeter on CS2, SIRAL.
The freeboard is retrieved with regards to the local mean sea surface height. The mean
sea surface used to compare the local mean sea surface from the leads with the ’actual’
mean sea surface is DTU21MSS model. DTU21MSS is a gridded mean sea surface
product, made from multi­sensor satellite altimetry data.
The process of calculating the freeboard is as follows. First, the primary altimetry data
are going through a Pre­Processor that selects the subsets along the orbit of the satellite,
where the parameters will be retrieved. Waveform classifiers are also computed and
saved for later use.
The second step is using the information from the pre­processing step (sea ice segments
and geophysical parameters derived from the waveform), in order to first estimate the sea
ice freeboard and consequently the sea ice thickness.
In this step the surface type is classified, using sea ice concentration information. Three
types of surface are recognised. The ice surface used for freeboard and thickness re­
trieval, leads between ice floes, that are used for sea surface height estimation and mixed
or unknown surfaces, that are discarded.
Then there is range retracking, when sea surface height estimation is also being done.
This process involves subtracting DTU21MSS from the leads heights in order to calculate
22
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:31==
the sea level anomalies (SLA), interpolating between the tie points in leads and extrap­
olating to the full trajectory and finally, computing the uncertainty and filtering the SLA
based on the total number of observations and their distance to the sea surface height
(SSH) tie points.
AWI provides with radar freeboard estimates and sea ice freeboard. The first one is ob­
tained by subtracting the instantaneous sea surface height from the sea ice elevation (4.1,
4.2). It is obtained, as discussed in the Theory Section by converting the two­way travel
time of the altimeter’s signal into range and then subtracting the satellite’s altitude. The
sea ice freeboard is obtained after the geometric correction because of the attenuation of
the signal inside the snow pack is done. For the purposes of this study the radar freeboard
is used.
elevsea ice = r −alt
(4.1)
rfrb = elevsea ice −ssh
(4.2)
It is assumed that the influence of cold and dry snow on Ku­band radar backscatter and
radar rang is negligible. But, it is recognised that the snow on top of sea ice slows down
the radar signal. This is taken into consideration when calculating the freeboard (4.3),
which basically contains a geometric correction based on this change of means (4.4).
Fi = Fr + ∆rsnow, where
(4.3)
∆rsnow = Fatt = ( c
cs
−1)hs
(4.4)
cs = c(1 + 0.51ρs)−1.5
(4.5)
In the above equations, Fi refers to the sea ice freeboard, Fr refers to the radar freeboard,
∆rsnow refers to the geometric correction because of the slower wave propagation in the
snow layer, hs refers to the thickness of the snow layer, c is the speed of light in vacuum
and cs is the speed of light in the snow. Finally, ρs refers to the snow density.
It is clear that in order to get the sea ice freeboard from the radar freeboard two auxiliary
datasets must be used, the first one being the snow depth and the second one being the
snow density. The snow density is based on Equation 4.11 of Section 4.3.
The snow depth used here is derived by a more complicated process. Two different
datasets are used to create the snow depth. One of them is based on climatological
data, specifically it is the Warren climatology mentioned in 4.2 and it is merged with daily
snow depth data over first year ice from AMSR2.
The daily AMSR2 snow depth data are first averaged monthly, because W99 has a monthly
resolution. After processing them, to remove negative snow depths a weight factor is im­
plemented in order to smooth out the data spatially. W99 climatology is modified over first
year ice as mentioned in 4.2.1 and this is also the case with these data.
The whole process mentioned above is done daily generating the ”Level­2” data. These
data are then mapped into spatio­temporal grids with the ”Level­3” processor, spanning
throughout the whole arctic for a whole month. The process flow can be seen in detail in
Figure A.4
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: Radar and Sea Ice Freeboard respectively, for February 2020 from the AWI
data.
This product is available for the months of January, February, March, April, October,
November and December. The data are gridded based on the Equal­Area Scalable Earth
Grid version 2 (EASE2­Grid) with a resolution of 25km and they are gap­free. The data
that are used is the radar freeboard Fr, which is then regridded on the Polar Stereographic
Projection of the NSIDC, with a resolution of 25 km X 25 km, which will be uniformly used
by all the datasets in order to derive the final results.
Finally, some things that need to be taken into consideration are the facts that the sea ice
towards the center of the Arctic is sampled more than the one at the southern sea limit.
Accordingly, temporal coverage varies within the gridcells and depends on their location.
This influences the amount of data in each gridcell. There are metrics provided with the
data about it, but they are not taken into consideration in this study.
4.1.2
ICESat­2
ICESat­2 mission, similarly to CryoSat­2, it has an inclination of 92deg, but it orbits at a
lower altitude, making it have a high repetition frequency of 91 days and an orbit period of
91 minutes, while its footprint is only 13 m [37]. Their major difference is that this carries
ATLAS a laser altimeter.
The ICESat­2 product used here is the ATL20, which is daily and monthly gridded total
freeboard data from the NSIDC. This product is based on the ATL10, which provides with
sea ice freeboard estimates from ice and sea surface height segments. The data are
mapped using the SSM/I Polar Stereographic Projection, with a resolution of 25 km X 25
km.
The beams used to derive ATL20 are the strong beams of ATLAS (1, 3, 5). The monthly
estimates of the sea ice freeboard height, its uncertainty and the length of the segment in
each grid cell are the information contained in this product.
It is important to take a step back in the ATL10 data and describe how the sea ice free­
board is calculated. Ice freeboard retrieval is limited to the regions where there is a clear
24
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:33==
classification between the two surfaces (ocean, sea ice).
First an along track length is calculated for each beam in order to create a segment. The
segments of all the beams are then put together in order to create a single reference
surface. There is the sea ice and the sea surface. The freeboard Ftot is then calculated
from the individual height segments, using the sea surface segments as reference.
Ftot = elevsea ice −href
(4.6)
σ2
f = σ2
ice +
σ2
ref
N
+ σ2
g + σ2
α + σ2
T + σ2
d
(4.7)
σ2
ref = σ2
lead + σ2
g + σ2
α + σ2
T + σ2
d
(4.8)
Figure 4.2: Total Freeboard from the ATL20 data of NSIDC ICESat­2.
Equations 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8 show how the freeboard is estimated and the errors that are
taken into consideration when calculating its uncertainty. σ2
ice is the expected variance of
the ice surface based on 150 photons. σ2
lead is the variance of the sea surface measure­
ment, σ2
g are the local residuals of the geoid, σ2
α are the local residuals of the atmospheric
loading, σ2
T are the local tidal errors and finally, σ2
d are the local residuals of the dynamic
ocean topography.
The classification between the two surfaces comes from the ATL07 product. Specifically,
it is responsible for finding the surfaces in photon distributions and discriminating between
open sea and ice. This is done by using two more ICESat­2 products, ATL03 and ATL09
which are the global geolocated photons and the atmosphere information respectively.
Combining them with external information about the time­static field of mean sea surface,
which is a blend of DTU13MSS and CryoSat­2 data, the two different surface types are
determined and subtracted they result to the total freeboard. After ATL10, the freeboard
is gridded as mentioned above to create the ATL20 product.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
25
==PAGE:34==
It is worth mentioning for discussion purposes later, that the green photons are weakly
absorbed by ice, but it is scattered strongly by ice grains and bubbles in the snow. Most
photons exit the surface of the snow immediately, but some may delay, which can lead
to assume that the surface is lower than it is in reality. This error is small in fine­grained
snow, but larger when snow grain is subjected to seasonal variations, like near the coastal
areas.
4.2
Snow Depth
There are two snow depth estimate datasets used for this project. One of them comes
purely from climatology, and the other one is a model them comes from both climatology
and bias correction from in situ measurements.
4.2.1
Warren Climatology
The first dataset that was explored and used is based on the climatology model sug­
gested in [10]. The climatology is based of 37 years of data from 1954 to 1991, from
measurements made from 37 Soviet drifting station on multi year sea ice. The stations
had lifetimes of 1­7 years and there was at least one operating at all times.
The measurements were made daily at fixed stakes at a weather station and then once,
or three times per month at 10 m intervals on a line beginning 500 m away from the station
and then extending for 500 m or 1000 m more.
There were usually two stations operating each year, so there are insufficient data regard­
ing the spatial distribution of inter­annual variations of the snow depth. In order to surpass
this issue a two­dimensional quadratic function is fitted to the data for each month. It’s
coefficients can be found in Table 4.1.
hs = H0 + Ax + By + Cxy + Dx2 + Ey2
(4.9)
x and y are measured in degrees of arc with origin at the North Pole, positive x­axis along
0°N, positive y­axis along 90°E.
Month
H0
A
B
C
D
E
AUG
4.64
0.3100
­0.6350
­0.0655
0.0059
­0.0005
SEP
15.81
0.2119
­1.0292
­0.0868
­0.0177
­0.0723
OCT
22.66
0.3594
­1.3483
­0.1063
0.0051
­0.0577
NOV
25.57
0.1496
­1.4643
­0.1409
­0.0079
­0.0258
DEC
26.67
­0.1876
­1.4229
­0.1413
­0.0316
­0.0029
JAN
28.01
0.1270
­1.1833
­0.1164
­0.0051
0.0243
FEB
30.28
0.1056
­0.5908
­0.0263
­0.0049
0.0044
MAR
33.89
0.5486
­0.1996
0.0280
0.0216
­0.0176
APR
36.80
0.4046
­0.4005
0.0256
0.0024
­0.0641
MAY
36.93
0.0214
­1.1795
­0.1076
­0.0244
­0.0142
JUN
36.59
0.7021
­1.4819
­0.1195
­0.0009
­0.0603
JUL
11.02
0.3008
­1.2591
­0.0811
­0.0043
­0.0959
Table 4.1: Coefficients of the two dimensional quadratic fit of snow depth to the climato­
logical data.
The W99 climatology is computed for the months of October to April. It is modified based
on the sea ice fraction to fit with in situ measurements of snow depth on top of first year
26
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:35==
ice. Specifically is has been found that the snow depth on top of first year ice is half of the
one on top of multi year ice [11].
The sea ice fraction is calculated with regards to the daily sea ice type product from OSI­
SAF. The process of calculating it is as follows. The daily measurements provide with 5
different classes of surfaces. These classes are Ocean, Land, First Year Ice, Multi Year
Ice and Ambiguous Ice.
Multi year ice is assigned the number one, first year ice is assigned the number 0 and
ambiguous ice is assigned the number 0.5. Land and ocean are discarded. Then, the
data are averaged and rounded monthly for the months between October and April for
the years that this study is done (2019­2021).
These data are then regridded in order to match the SSM/I Polar Stereographic Projection,
with a resolution of 25 km X 25 km, which is the uniform EPSG used for this study. Finally
the modified snow depth is calculated based on the following Equation (4.10).
hsmod = fmyi ∗hs + (1 −fmyi) ∗0.5 ∗hs
(4.10)
where hsmod refers to the modified W99 climatology, fmyi, refers to the multi year sea ice
fraction and H is the W99 climatology.
Figure 4.3: Modified W99 Climatology snow depth for the year 2020.
Figure 4.3 shows the snow depth for the year 2020 based on the modified Warren 99
climatology described above. There might be some gaps in the figure, because the cli­
matology is derived using the latitudes of the observations from the AWI CS­2 data for
each month.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
27
==PAGE:36==
4.2.2
Snow Model LG ­ Snow depth
A Lagrangian model is a dynamic model representation where the grid cells are tracked
spatially and temporally. The Lagrangian Snow Evolution model has a resolution of 25
km X 25 km and it reproduces the snow depth and density from the 1st of August 1980 to
the 30th of July 2021 for every 3 hours.
The model is forced using two reanalysis, resulting in to two different products. It either
uses NASA’s Modern Era Retrospective­Analysis for Research ans Applications­Version
2 (MERRA­2), or the European Center for Medium­Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF)
ReAnalysis­5th Generation (ERA5) atmospheric reanalysis. These are used together with
NSIDC’s sea ice parcel concentration and trajectory datasets.
In this project the model that uses the ERA5 forcings is being used. It has been shown that
the summer melt period is 50% longer using these forcings. Almost all of the processes
happening on sea ice have been taken into account in its making, from rainfall, to snow
melt and energy and mass transfers within the snow­pack [13].
Snow depth is not calculated directly, rather the snow water equivalent (SWE), which is
the snow depth multiplied by the ration of snow density to water density. This means that
the snow density derived from this model influences the snow depth calculations, as it is
needed for the SWE to be turned into snow depth [13].
This snow depth representation suggests that it declines over time. It has been compared
and corrected by a bias using Operation Ice­Bridge in situ data, in order to represent better
the reality. It has a good ability of capturing spatial and seasonal variability and sensitivity
to the reanalysis forcings [14]. Figure 4.4 shows the snow depth evolution throughout
2020 with ERA5 forcings.
Figure 4.4: Snow depth estimates in 2020 based on the Lagrangian snow model.
It can be already seen that there are distinct differences with the snow depth that is derived
28
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:37==
from the combination of climatology and sea ice type. The LG model is more continuous
and generally predicts lower values in the beginning of the accumulation season (October­
December). Besides that, there is also the similarity that the snow depth is the largest over
the regions that are dominated by multi­year ice.
The feedbacks between snow density and itself and snow depth, suggest that younger and
thinner snow has different properties than older, deeper snow, such as higher densities
for the latter one and the fact that it is more resistant when it comes to wind [13].
In order to use these data, they are averaged monthly, since this is the resolution of the
freeboard data and then they are regridded to the SSM/I Polar Stereographic Projection,
with a resolution of 25 km X 25 km. Their original gridding is that of the EASE projection
[13].
4.3
Snow Density
A constant value that changes depending on the month and a dataset are used for the
snow density in this study.
4.3.1
Time evolving snow density
It has been proposed that the snow density can be regarded as a function of time [17].
The accumulation season begins in October, and that is when the time counter starts in
Equation 4.11. The trend is calculated by W99, as a winter (October–April) densification
rate using the average densification rate of snow over the Arctic Ocean. The starting
density (offset) was taken as the spatial average of the W99 October density field over
the Arctic region.
ρsnow = 6.50t + 274.51[kg/m3]
(4.11)
The snow density values for each month can be found in Table 4.2
Month
OCT
NOV
DEC
JAN
FEB
MAR
APR
Density [kg/m3]
274.51
281.01
287.51
294.01
300.51
307.01
313.51
Table 4.2: Snow Densities based on the equation 4.11
4.3.2
Snow Model LG ­ Snow density
The snow model LG that provides with the snow density is already described above in
4.2.2. Again the model that uses the ERA5 atmospheric reanalysis forcings is used and
the snow density evolves both in space and time. Its values can be seen for the year 2020
in Figure 4.5
The density in the model is a function of time, temperature, overburden, wind speed and
snow density itself. Snow density is increased when precipitation freezes in the snow
pack. The density of the new snow depends on the air temperature, the water vapor
pressure and the wind speed. This is near the surface of the snow layer. In a snow pack
that has multiple layers, the shear strength of the snow’s surface is defined by the its
density. The snow density ranges between 150 and 450 kg/m3 during winter time [13].
It can be seen that the snow density values vary from month to month. The snow tends
to be more dense early in the accumulation period (October ­ December) especially over
multi­year ice. These are also the coldest months, so the snow will be more dry as well,
which is fitting with the assumption that the radar signal is uninfluenced by cold and dry
snow.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.5: Snow density estimates in 2020 based on the Lagrangian snow model
4.4
Sea Ice Density
Two different products are used for the sea ice density. First, a constant density is as­
sumed. The second dataset is based on the sea ice type, which is gotten by the sea ice
fraction as described in 4.2.1.
4.4.1
Constant Sea Ice Density
The constant sea ice density used for calculating the sea ice thickness is 915 kg/m3.
Many studies ([38], [33], [4]), suggest its use. This number is closer to the density of
the first year ice, since it indicates a more dense kind of ice, which still has brine in it.
Also, multi year ice in the arctic is being replaced by first year ice rapidly, so this choice
is reasonable.
4.4.2
Sea Ice Density based on Sea Ice Type
Sea ice density based on sea ice type works is calculated through the multi­year sea ice
fraction which is described in subsection 4.2.1. The multi­year sea ice fraction is then
multiplied by 882 kg/m3 for multi­year ice and 916.7 kg/m3 as shown in Equation 4.12
[34]. The spatial distribution of the sea ice density can be shown in Figure 4.6.
ρice = fmyi ∗882 + (1 −fmyi) ∗916.7[kg/m3]
(4.12)
4.5
Validation Data
It is crucial to be aware of what is actually true on Earth in order to assess whether the as­
sumptions and calculations done are valid. This is why various in situ validation datasets
are used from different campaigns and institutes. The validation is done on snow depth
and freeboard whenever and wherever they are available.
30
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.6: Sea ice density for the year 2020, based on the multi­year sea ice fraction, of
the sea ice type from OSISAF.
More specifically, the total freeboard of ICESat­2 is validated using Operation Ice­Bridge
data for April 2019 and the snow depth is validated using both Operation Ice­Bridge data
and Snow­Buoy data from AWI. OIB data go back in time, before the time frame of this
study, but there are still some data for the year 2019. Specifically, the measurements
begin in 2009 and end in 2019.
All the measurements, throughout all the years are made for the months of March and
April. The snow depth will be used to validate the modified W99 and LM snow depth
datasets. The data from April 2019 will be used to validate the snow depth estimated
form the two freeboards. Figures 4.8 and 4.9 show the flight paths of the mission for
every year for the months of March and April respectively.
Figure 4.10 show the paths of three of the snow buoys from AWI used for the validation
of the snow depth. The snow buoys have been selected so that they are active and
operational during the time period of this study, so from January 2019 to April 2021. Buoys
that show extreme values have been eliminated and the data from the rest of the buoys
have been averaged daily and gone through a Gaussian filter for outlier detection.
4.5.1
ESA CCI SIT RRDP ­ Operation IceBridge (OIB)
Operation IceBridge is an airborne mission by NASA tasked with providing with more
detailed and better understanding of the Polar Ice. It utilizes a research aircraft which
carries a plethora of instruments that are crucial the mission achieves its goals.
Its science goals are to document volume changes and the spatial and interannual changes
in the mean sea ice thickness during the period between ICESat and ICESat­2 missions,
document glacier and ice­shelf thickness, bathymetry, snow accumulation rate variability
and other geophysical properties and finally, improve sea ice thickness retrieval algo­
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
31
==PAGE:40==
rithms.
In order to do so, various instruments are mounted on top of it, such as two radar depth
sounder, lase altimeter, an accumulation radar, a snow radar, a Ku­band altimeter, as well
as a gravimeter, a magnetometer and a digital mapping system imager as shown in Figure
4.7.
Figure 4.7: OIB research aircraft and the instruments it carries.
Figure 4.8:
OIB flight paths for the
month of March and the years stated in
the plot.
Figure 4.9:
OIB flight paths for the
month of APRIL and the years stated in
the plot.
The data used here specifically, are taken from the project ESA­CCI SIT RRDP. They are
kindly shared for this report by Henriette Skourup [39]. For this project the OIB dataset is
gridded in the Equal­Area Scalable Earth Grid in version 2 (EASE2), so they are regridded
in the Polar Stereographic Projection in order to be compared. The data are averaged in
25 km x 25 km gridcells of the EASE2 and then regridded as described in the methods
5.1.1 section.
32
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:41==
Freeboard
The freeboard is retrieved using a combination of the laser altimeter and the airborne
topographic imager (ATM) CAMBOT system on board, which is responsible for lead de­
tection. The altimeter measures the surface elevation to the ellipsoid. From that the in­
stantaneous sea surface height (ssh) is subtracted in order to retrieve the total freeboard.
The instantaneous ssh is a result of the geoid height, the mean sea surface, the tides
and the atmospheric pressure. These are all correction applied to the surface elevation
to the ellipsoid. At the same time, the local sea surface height is determined at each point
along the flight track and combining these two. To do that a lead classification algorithm,
which distinguished between open water, nilas and grease ice and non­snow covered ice
is used. Combining all this information, the freeboard is derived [40].
Snow Depth
The snow depth is retrieved using a snow radar. The way it works is that the retrieval
algorithm detects the snow­air and snow­ice interfaces in the radar time domain. It then
determines the depth of the snow pack by multiplying with the speed of light in the snow
[41]. This technique has been used up to 2015. After 2015, a waveform fitting procedure
is used instead [40]. Finally, the measurements are made in 4 places in a square around
the snow radar. This four measurements are averaged in order to obtain one value for
the snow depth and then these values are averaged daily, in order to at least match the
temporal resolution of the LG snow model.
4.5.2
Snow Buoys ­ MOSAiC Expedition
The MOSAiC expedition came to close the gap of knowledge when it comes to the role of
snow and sea ice. MOSAiC is short for Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study
of Arctic Climate. It is a year round expedition of the RV Polarstern drifting with the sea
ice from September 2019 to October 2020 across the Central Arctic. [42]
The snow buoys are part of the distributed network of the expedition. It is a network set
up to monitor all sorts of physical quantities, from atmospheric surface fluxes, to salinity
and ocean flux, as well as mass balances, and snow within 50 km from the Polarstern.
Snow buoys measure relative changes in snow depth, which means that they measure a
change in height relative to the original ice surface. This means that they are impacted by
the freeboard height [43]. The data that are used here are the raw data, used without any
prior processing and it is assumed that they describe the whole of the snow depth layer
at all times.
Snow Buoy Description
The snow buoys used for this expedition are developed by AWI and MetOcean Telematics.
They are 2.55m tall buoys that have two parts. The lower part is the main body, has a
height of 0.8m and a 0.25m diameter and carries the electronics and the batteries. The
upper part is a mast of 1.75m height, which carried a frame with four ultra­sonic sensors
1.5m above the main body. On top of it there is the temperature sensor the Iridium and
GPS­antennas. A surface temperature sensor and a barometer are in the main body.
Their setup can be seen in Figure 4.11
The ultra­sonic sensors are the instruments that measure the distance to the surface every
hour. There are four of them for redundancy purposes, but also they can give information
about small scale snow variability. The sensors use a narrow beam for surface detection,
which results to an area of 0.3m maximum in diameter underneath the sensor [43].
In the validation process the mean value from these four sensors is used and it is also
averaged daily in order to match the temporal resolution of the LG snow model. Plus,
since the OSI­SAF data are daily, it will also match the mW99 climatology temporally for
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.10: The path of the snow buoys in time, and the corresponding snow depth they
register. The size of the points gets larger with time, in order to show where they started
from and where they ended. Daily measurements are plotted.
the specific day, since it depends on the sea ice type. It still will not match the temporal
resolution of the snow depth derived from the freeboards, because it is monthly. Finally,
since these data are not gridded, the process of matching them correctly to the datasets
that need to be validated is described as such:
1. The data from all the buoys are loaded into a data frame and the mean value from
the 4 instruments is calculated.
2. The year, month and day of the buoy data is being isolated, as it will be used to
match to the correct data of the LG­model, the freeboard derived snow depth and
the mW99 in the time dimension.
3. A loop is formed, where it goes over each entry of the snow buoy data frame locates
the date, uses it to find the corresponding date in the LG snow model, then uses it
to find the corresponding date in the OSI­SAF product in order to derive the mW99
for the specific day and locates the date (using only the month and the year) for the
freeboard derived snow depth.
4. After it has located the correct time, it isolates the coordinates and uses the kd­tree
method to extrapolate between the coordinates of the buoy and the coordinates
and values of the other snow depth products (they come in a grid) and find the best
matching value for the coordinates given of the snow buoy.
5. It then saves the derived value in a new entry in the same line of the buoy data
frame. This way it is ensured that everything matches up correctly.
34
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.11: The snow buoy setup on top of sea ice. [43]
Figure 4.12: Snow buoy measurements, averaged daily and fitted with a Gaussian filter
plotted against the three snow depth data sets (the third one will be discussed in the
results).
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
35
==PAGE:44==
5
Methods
In this chapter, the data pre­processing and the methods used for estimating the sea ice
thickness are presented.
5.1
Pre­Processing
5.1.1
Re­Gridding
The datasets discussed in Chapter 4 often came in different grids and EPSG. The gridding
and EPSG chosen for this project is the NSIDC’s Polar Stereographic projection and grid,
which is the original grid of the ATL20 ICESat­2 data.
In order to make get every dataset in the same grid the pyresample library was used, with
a script provided by Hoyeon Shi. In principal, a radius of influence and a parameter that
influences the weighting of the function of the averaging are defined.
Then, the longitudes and latitudes of the source and target grids are defined and plugged
into the function. The target grid is an auxiliary dataset that is provided by NSIDC and
has arrays of the latitude or longitude, in degrees, at grid cell centers for the 25km grids
for the Northern hemisphere [44].
The source grid depends on the dataset and its longitude and latitudes, as well as its
EPSG. The resampling is done with the kd_tree module and more specifically, the resam­
ple_gauss function. It resamples the observations using a gaussian weighted neighbour
approach [45].
5.2
Sea Ice Thickness Estimation
Sea ice thickness is estimated using the hydrostatic equation. Depending on the sensor
(radar or lidar) there are two different expressions in retrieving it. Both of them are shown
in 3.4. Equation 3.12 is used for the CryoSat­2 data from AWI and equation 3.14 is used
for the ICESat­2 data from NSIDC. The refractive index is calculated as shown in equation
5.2.
These two equations are used together with the auxiliary data shown in Table 5.1 in order
to create different estimates of the sea ice thickness, based on every possible combination
of them. The main combinations that will be tested are the ones on the first two lines of
the Table.
Snow Depth
Snow Density
Sea Ice Density
mW99
Mallett
915 (kg/m3)
LG­SnowModel
LG­SnowModel
SID based on SIF
Table 5.1: Table of auxiliary data used to calculate sea ice thickness. There are 8 main
combinations that will be tested. (First two lines).
They provide with 23 = 8 combinations for each sensor. The results are then compared
combination by combination for each sensor and then the combinations in between them.
The correlation coefficient and the the RMSE are calculated in order to see which com­
bination provides the most consistent results between the two sensors. Then there is a
suggestion on the best combination overall to estimate the sea ice thickness.
36
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:45==
The correlation coefficient is given by calculating the correlation matrix and then extracting
the correlation coefficient from it, with built­in functions of the numpy module in Python.
The data are normalised before calculating the correlation coefficient. The correlation
coefficient used here is the Pearson correlation coefficient which assumes a Gaussian
distribution of the data. The root mean square error is directly calculated from the titular
built­in function in Python, which calculates the difference between the thicknesses from
IS­2 and CS­2, gridcell by gridcell, squares it, adds it up, normalizes it and the result is
the root of this number.
As of now each combination is assigned a number and can be seen in the list here and
they are summarised in Figure 5.1
• Combination 1: mW99 + Mallett + 915
• Combination 2: mW99 + Mallett + SID(SIF)
• Combination 3: mW99 + LG­SnowModel + 915
• Combination 4: mW99 + LG­SnowModel + SID(SIF)
• Combination 5: LG­SnowModel + Mallett + 915
• Combination 6: LG­SnowModel + Mallet + SID(SIF)
• Combination 7: LG­SnowModel + LG­SnowModel + 915
• Combination 8: LG­SnowModel + LG­SnowModel + SID(SIF)
Figure 5.1: Schematic representation of all the datasets used in order to derive the sea
ice thickness.
5.3
Snow Depth Estimation based on the two freeboards
The laser altimeter beam backscatters from the top of the snow pack on sea ice. On the
other hand the radar signal is assumed to backscatter from the snow­ice interface inside
the snow pack. Having these two assumptions in mind as well as taking into consideration
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
37
==PAGE:46==
the refractive index of snow, then the snow depth can be estimated as shown in Equation
5.1 [6]
hs = fIS2
tot −fCS2
sea ice
ηs
(5.1)
ηs = (1 + 0.51 ∗ρs)1.5
(5.2)
Equation 5.1 doesn’t take into consideration the radar penetration factor. This equation is
derived in reference to the snow­ice interface and basically refers to the sea ice freeboard.
So, in order to correctly derive it the steps below should be considered:
hs = htot −fsea ice, htot = fIS2
tot
(5.3)
fsea ice = hCS2
sea ice + (fηs −1)hs, hCS2
sea ice = fCS2
sea ice
(5.4)
hs = fIS2
tot −fCS2
sea ice
fηs
(5.5)
The refractive index of snow is based on its density as shown in Equation 5.2. It is snow
density dependent, which means that as it was discussed previously in 4.3 there are two
different estimates of it for each month, one that is constant spatially (based on the 4.3.1)
and one that changes spatially as described in 4.3.2.
In equation 3.12 it is assumed that the freeboard represents the snow­ice interface height
from the sea level. So, the radar freeboard has been corrected only for the attenuation of
the signal propagation when it enters into a new medium and not for a possible change
in the scattering horizon, as discussed below.
This correction constitutes from two separate corrections, one is caused by the wave
propagation speed in the snow (fc) and the other one is about the scattering horizon from
the ice surface (fp).
fc = (ηs −1)fhs
(5.6)
fp = (1 −f)hs
(5.7)
fsnow = (fηs −1)hs
(5.8)
The above equations are suggested in [19]. In other studies the factor f is calculated using
operation ice bridge (OIB) data. These aren’t available at the time frame that is being
investigated here, but instead, the f will be calculated, as shown in 5.11 and suggested in
[16].
The OIB data provide with total (laser) freeboard. This freeboard is turned into radar using
Equation 5.10, where the second term comes from correcting the total freeboard for the
snow depth and the attenuation of the signal in the snow depth.
d = hs + (1 −cs
c )hs = 1.2hs
(5.9)
fIS2
sea ice = fIS2
tot −1.2hs
(5.10)
f = d −(fCS2
sea ice −fIS2
sea ice)
d
(5.11)
38
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:47==
6
Results
6.1
Sea ice freeboard
ICESAT­2 data are total freeboard data, while CryoSat­2 data are radar freeboard data.
For the time span that this study is made these data are turned into sea ice freeboard in
order to check their uniformity. In order to do so, they have to be corrected for the snow
layer.
Figure 6.1 shows the sea ice freeboard scatter plot for the two missions corrected either
for the mW99 climatology (blue), or the LG model snow depth (green). The snow depth is
removed from the total freeboard, while for the radar freeboard it is multiplied by a factor
that accounts for the radar attenuation. This factor contains the snow density and for this
purpose the LG model snow density has been used.
Generally, it can be seen that the results are not uniform. There is a temporality in the
data meaning that the correlation between the two sea ice freeboards at the beginning of
the winter season (Oct­Nov­Dec) is bigger using the SnowModel LG snow depth. But this
changes in the next months and as the summer season comes with the correlation being
larger between the sea ice freeboards using the mW99 snow depth data. Moreover, this
correlation drops each year.
It can also be seen that the sea ice freeboard derived from the radar measurements is
always larger than the one derived from the laser measurements. As discussed earlier in
the data section, the total freeboard from the IS2 can be underestimated, especially near
coastal areas, so this can also be a reason. Moreover, there isn’t uniformity throughout
time as well, since within the same row (representing the same month) the fit changes
between the sea ice freeboards.
Figures A.2 and A.3 in the appendix show the spatial distribution of the differences be­
tween the two freeboards for the mW99 snow depth and the LG model snow depth re­
spectively. From these figures, the mW99 has the least spatial variability with the sea ice
freeboard from the radar being larger than the one from the laser for every month and
almost everywhere in the arctic.
6.2
Sea Ice Thickness Estimation
The sea ice thickness is estimated for every month, for each combination, for both altime­
ters. Two metrics are used in order to evaluate the consistency between CS2 and IS2,
the correlation coefficient (ρ) and the root­mean squared error (RMSE). The results are
presented in Figures 6.2 and 6.3.
Based on the correlation coefficient there seems to be one combination that provides the
most consistent result each month and that is Combination 3 (mW99 ­ LG snow density ­
constant ice density of 915 kg/m3), with the exception of December and November 2020.
On the other hand the RMSE as a metric does not provide with one combination that is
suitable for making the sea ice thickness estimation consistent. It agrees with the corre­
lation metric in December and November 2020 in the combination that is the most con­
sistent (Combination 7). And it always points to combinations where the sea ice density
is constant (915kg/m3).
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.4 is divided into 3 plots. The first plot shows the difference of the mean sea ice
thickness calculated for CS2 and IS2 for each combination. The second and third show
the mean sea ice thicknesses for IS2 and CS2 respectively for each of the 8 combinations.
A seasonality in the sea ice thickness is evident in the plots, as well as a reduction in the
thickness as the years pass. There are two clear clusters of combinations, the C1­C4
cluster and the C5­C8 cluster. What differentiates them mostly is the snow depth product
used for the sea ice thickness derivation. First cluster represents mW99 snow depth,
while the other cluster is made using the LG snow model depth.
Another interesting result is that the second cluster of combinations calculates a snow
thickness difference larger than 0, which means that IS2 based calculated sea ice thick­
ness is more than the one calculated by CS2 and vice­versa. Finally, the C1­C4 cluster
suggests a greater gradient/ reduction throughout the time series than the C5­C8 cluster.
6.3
Snow Depth and Radar Penetration Factor Estimation
The snow depth is estimated using equation 5.1 and the parameters of the most consistent
combination, which means that the snow density used is the one from the LG snow model.
As the equation and the assumptions made so far, they dictate that the scattering surface
of the radar signal is considered to be the snow­ice interface. The results plotted in space
and time can be seen in Figure 6.5. This result is further discussed in the validation
section.
The f factor is then calculated from equation 5.11. In theory and previous papers this
factor is calculated using in­situ OIB data. Instead now, it is calculated using the free­
boards from the satellites and the snow depth from the LG snow model depth. The LG
snow model depth is being used, as the most state of the art product, variable in space
and time and its precipitation forcings have been calibrated using OIB data.
The results can be seen in Figure6.6. There are gaps in the data where the f factor is
more than 1 or less than 0. It can be seen that it has great spatial variability with it being
larger towards the center of the arctic and growing with the winter months. In April, the
f­values in the center of the arctic are even larger than what they were in the beginning of
the winter season in October, which is the opposite of what would be expected.
6.4
Validation
6.4.1
Snow Depth ­ OIB
Figures 6.8 and 6.9 show the comparison between the modified warren climatology 99
snow depth and the LG model snow depth for the months of March and April respectively
with the operation ice bridge data.
Both months show two clear clusters for the mw99 climatology snow depth and OIB snow
depth. This can be attributed to the two different ice types, since mw99 is based on the
multi­year sea ice fraction. So this would mean that the larger values refer to MYI, while
the smaller values refer to FYI. Also, they are inevitably in a different temporal scale, since
mw99 is monthly, while OIB snow depth are daily.
On the other hand, there is a better distribution of the LG model snow depth with the OIB
snow depth data, especially for the month of March. As mentioned before, OIB data have
been used to correct for a bias in the precipitation input for the LG model and it can be
seen here, as there is a more uniform fit.
The data for the month of April are not gathered around the 1:1 as much as the ones for
40
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:49==
the month of March. LG model tends to predict larger values for the month of April than
the ones measured from OIB data. April is the margin between the summer and winter
period and even though snow is accumulating throughout the winter period, it might be
the case that it has started melting.
For one month, April of 2019 there are both OIB data and the laser freeboard data from
IS­2. Their scatter plot can be seen in Figure 6.10. A line has been fitted, in order to
assess their consistency. It can be seen that that on the track of the OIB for April 2019,
the total freeboard measured from IS­2 is more than half of the OIB total freeboard and
there is a bias of 0.26m between the two instruments. The correlation between them is
0.69, suggesting they are strongly correlated.
For the same month snow depth data from OIB also exist. As it can be seen in Figure 6.11
the snow depth that is derived from the freeboards for the same month and year is plotted
against them. There is an evident underestimation of the snow depth compared to in situ
data. This underestimation can be attributed to the fact that the radar penetration factor f
is assumed to be equal to 1, meaning that the scattering surface for the radar altimeter is
assumed to be the snow­ice interface.
fCS2
sea ice is abusively considered to coincide with the radar freeboard, which can lead to this
misunderstanding. Allora, the radar penetration factor and the fact that the altimeter can
penetrate all the way through the snow depth layer should be revised and corrected in the
future.
On the other hand, if the snow depth is corrected by the radar penetration factor calculated
based on the sensitivity study, then it does not make the result better. As it can be seen in
Figure 6.12 the slope becomes 0.24 from 0.25 and not much is changing. In both cases
the correlation between the two datasets is 0.34, having a weak to moderate correlation.
It should be noted, that the data have been regridded into the same grid, but have a
different temporal resolution, since the IS­2 data are monthly, while the OIB data are
acquired multiple times within the span of some days. OIB tracks may not even coincide
with IS­2 tracks for the same day, in order to have a measurement above the same place
for both instruments.
6.4.2
MOSAiC SB
The best fit between the datasets and the MOSAiC buoys seems to be between the mW99
dataset and them. In all three cases buoy 2019S87 has higher values than those of the
datasets so it could be a regional case. Also the buoy data, except for daily averaging,
they haven’t been pre­processed, neither spatially, nor temporally, so multiple values of
them could fall in only one of the gridcells of the datasets, that’s why there can be seen
some horizontal line action in the plots as well, especially in the mW99 one.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.1: Uniformity of the sea ice freeboard retrieved from the two satellites.
42
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.2: The plot shows the mean sea ice thickness for each instrument. Yellow rep­
resents CS2 and blue represents IS2. The text on the CS2 nodes shows the best combi­
nation and the test on the IS2 nodes represents the correlation.
Figure 6.3: The plot shows the mean sea ice thickness for each instrument. Yellow rep­
resents CS2 and blue represents IS2. The text on the CS2 nodes shows the best combi­
nation and the test on the IS2 nodes represents the RMSE.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.4: Top: Mean sea ice thickness differences for each of the 8 combinations be­
tween IS2 and CS2. Middle: Mean sea ice thickness from IS2 total freeboard measure­
ments, for all 8 combinations. Bottom: Mean sea ice thickness from CS2 radar freeboard
measurements for all 8 combinations.
44
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.5: Temporal evolution of the spatial distribution of the snow depth calculated from
the two freeboards.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.6: Radar penetration factor estimation spatial distribution.
46
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.7: The snow depth from the freeboards against the modified warren climatology
and the lagrangian snow depth for every month of this study.
Figure 6.8: Scatter plot of the MW99 climatology snow depth and LG model snow depth
with the OIB snow depth data for the month of March and the years stated in the plot
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.9: Scatter plot of the MW99 climatology snow depth and LG model snow depth
with the OIB snow depth data for the month of April and the years stated in the plot.
Figure 6.10: Total freeboard data from OIB
plotted against total freeboard data from
ICESat­2 for April 2019.
Figure 6.11: Snow depth from OIB for April
2019 plotted against the snow depth derived
from the freeboards.
48
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.12: Snow depth data from OIB plotted against snow depth calculated from the
two freeboards and corrected for the theoretical radar penetration factor f calculated in
the theory section, for April 2019.
Figure 6.13: Scatter plots of the snow depth datasets used and investigated agais the
data from the snow buoys of MOSAiC expedition.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
49
==PAGE:58==
7
Discussion
The results from this study have been very interesting. Starting by checking the uniformity
of the two different freeboards by making them both into sea ice freeboard. Putting them
into the same plane so that they can be compared using the equations mentioned above
it can be seen that they don’t really agree.
The LG model snow depth seems to retrieve better fits between the two sea ice free­
boards, from January through April, while looking at their spatial distribution the mW99
climatology is the one that is always overestimating the sea ice freeboard for the radar,
especially over MYI. But, this provides a better correlation between the two freeboards
for the months of October through December, where the sea ice freeboard seems to be
underestimated for the radar using the LG model snow depth.
Continuing with the combination that ensures consistency in sea ice thickness estima­
tion between the measurements from CryoSat­2 and ICESAT­2. The metric that can be
taken into consideration to make this choice is the correlation between the sea ice thick­
ness products from the two satellites, since between that and the RMSE it is the only
one showing consistency and having one combination occurring throughout most of the
months.
Combination 3 is a very interesting result. Its snow depth is directly taken from climatology,
but it is mixed with monthly observations of the sea ice type in the area, which is combining
pre­existing knowledge with current conditions. Modifying the climatology acknowledges
the fact that different sea ice types exist and have different characteristics, one of them
being the amount of snow on top of them.
One the other hand, the sea ice density itself used in the combination is a constant number
in space and time. Sea ice thickness calculation as seen from the sensitivity studies earlier
on, is the most sensitive to the sea ice density values, so one would expect that a more
refined sea ice density would mean better results. But a more refined sea ice density,
could lead to more spatial variability.
Since sea ice density is the one parameter that influences the most the sea ice thickness
estimation, it would mean that there is not a good correlation between the calculations in
the individual gridcells, that can further mess up with choosing a combination based on
the correlation coefficient. Actually the best combinations from both criteria are the ones
where the sea ice density is constant.
That being said, the snow density of the third combination is the LG snow model provided
snow density. Snow density is the factor that influences the sea ice thickness calculations
the least. This can mean that the spatial variability does not really matter, or in this case
it is not enough to change the consistency of the results.
One the other hand, a snow density that is only variable in time and not in space given the
above argument could be more fitting of a parameter in calculating the sea ice thickness.
As seen in Figure 4.5, the LG snow model also contains the information of sea ice type,
as snow accumulated on top of multi­year sea ice is more compact and denser than that
on top of FYI, something that can be seen more clearly in the winter months.
The sea ice type is directly linked with all the variables and the most refined the predictions
are about it it seems to provide better results when used on the parameters that have the
50
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:59==
least influence on the sea ice thickness estimation, according to the sensitivity studies
earlier. In these studies the spatial variability has been neglected and it seems that it is
rather important and studies like that should be made for the whole of arctic and not just
simple 1­D models.
Two more comments that can be made on this result is first of all that the maximization
of the correlation refers to the Pearson correlation. Pearson correlation works best when
the data have a Gaussian distribution. This is not the case here, since they have more of
a bimodal distribution because of the FYI and MYI differentiation A.6.
The final comment is that the correlation coefficient is calculated only between the same
combination for the radar and the laser freeboards each time. A different combination for
each of them can possibly reach a better maximum of correlation. That can mean that it
isn’t necessary that they both are using combination 3, but one of them is, while the other
one isn’t. This can be further investigated.
Next, there is the snow depth estimation from the two freeboards, is also done for the
snow density provided by the LG­snow model. Its values are within expected boundaries
and as expected the snow depth over MYI has larger depths than snow over FYI, even in
the months like 03/2021 and 04/2019 when it also has its smallest values.
Only one month was able to get validated using in situ data and that month is April of
2019. The results are shown in Figure 6.11 and 6.12. Both plots are very similar the only
difference is that on the second plot the snow depth has been corrected by a theoretical
radar penetration factor, calculated in the sensitivity studies.
A lot of things can be to blame for the fact that the freeboard derived snow depth is severely
underestimated against the in situ measurements. First of all, when it comes to the OIB
measurements, they are averaged daily, while the snow depth from the freeboards is a
monthly product and that could possibly influence the results.
Next, this validation is done for the month of April which is on the brink of summer time
and that can mean that the snow on top of the ice could have started melting and become
wetter than before. This influences the radar signal and its scattering horizon, something
that can potentially return a larger radar freeboard, so when it is time to calculate the snow
depth it is eventually smaller that expected.
Finally, there is an attempt to correct the snow depth for the radar penetration factor calcu­
lated in the sensitivity studies, but this doesn’t really make things better. This is probably
the case because this factor is calculated specifically for a constant snow density of 320
kg/m3, whereas, as discussed above, there is spatial variability in the densities of the
snow, which is not accounted for in this case.
Similarly, when validating against the snow depth derived from the snow buoys of the MO­
SAiC expedition there are both temporal and spatial variabilities, since the snow buoys
have been averaged daily and their positions have been used to extrapolate the snow
depth from the grid, which can lead to different point having the same value on the grid
because they fall into the same grid­cell, something that can be seen here from the hori­
zontal lines.
Finally, when the snow depth from the freeboards is plotted against the modified Warren
climatology and the LG snow depth for the months of the study as seen in Figure 6.7, it
has a good fit correlation with both the datasets. It looks like it has a better fit with the
mW99 than with the LG snow depth, as it seems to be underestimating the snow depth
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
51
==PAGE:60==
against the LG model. This is something that is also seen with the OIB data and it makes
sense, since the LG model has been corrected for a bias by them.
Finally, the radar penetration factor f is calculated and shown for every month in this
study, as shown in Figure 6.6. Its values vary a lot spatially and as discussed in can be
attributed to the fact that the snow depth used to calculate it is the LG snow model depth,
that is spatially and temporally variable. Having a variable f­factor can potentially enhance
the sea ice thickness as well as the snow depth estimations and it is valuable to study it
more in the future.
52
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:61==
8
Conclusion
Overall, this study has resulted in interesting findings. Have they made the pre­existing
knowledge on the topic of sea ice thickness estimation clearer? That remains for the
reader to decide. The author’s opinion is that yes, they have, but there are still things that
can be studied to achieve better uniformity and fit in the results. In conclusion here are
the main outcomes of this study.
The freeboard retrievals from the two satellites, when transformed in the same plane are
still not entirely uniform. They are both compared as sea ice freeboard and it is expected
that the results would be similar. The LG model snow depth provides a better fit between
the two sensors for the months of January thorugh April, but the mW99 climatology snow
depth provides better spatial uniformity and fit for the months October to December.
Two metrics are used in order to find the ’best’ combination of auxiliary data in order
to retrieve sea ice thickness. The correlation between the calculations and the RMSE.
The latter one does not provide with a specific answer, while the first one points to one
combination. This combination is the modified Warren climatology snow depth, the LG
model snow density and the constant sea ice density of 915kg/m3.
Through validating the data it can be seen that the LG model snow depth is closer to
reality than the mW99. The precipitation forcings have been corrected by a bias using
in situ data, so that can be a good practice when creating and using using snow depth
models to estimate the sea ice thickness.
Snow depth can also be calculated using the total freeboard and the sea ice freeboard
from ICESat­2 and CryoSat­2 respectively. This creates one more snow depth product,
which validated against in situ data shows positive weak correlation.
Throughout this whole study the radar freeboard is assumed to be the sea ice freeboard,
since one of the most crucial assumptions made is that the radar signal is (mostly) re­
flected from the snow­ice interface. This assumption is challenged and a radar penetra­
tion factor is calculated in order to test its validity. Turns out, it is needed to reconsider
since the radar penetration factor seems to vary spatially and it is close to 1 but not always.
And finally, as asked in the introduction of this report: Can sea ice thickness be success­
fully estimated using satellite altimetry? Sea ice thickness can definitely be estimated, but
there should be criteria set and fulfilled in order to assess if it is successful. If these criteria
is finding the combination to achieve the consistency between CryoSat­2 and ICESat­2
retrievals, then yes, it is also successful.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
53
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
“Introduction”. In: Sea Ice. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2023. Chap. 1, pp. 1–28. ISBN:
9781119828242. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119828242.ch1. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781119828242.ch1. URL: https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781119828242.ch1.
[2]
N. Kurtz et al. “Observations of recent Arctic sea ice volume loss and its impact on
ocean­atmosphere energy exchange and ice production”. In: Journal of Geophysi­
cal Research (Oceans) 116 (Apr. 2011). DOI: 10.1029/2010JC006235.
[3]
Seymour Laxon, Neil Peacock, and Doug Smith. “High interannual variability of sea
ice thickness in the Arctic region”. In: Nature (2003). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature02050.
[4]
Alek A. Petty et al. “Winter Arctic Sea Ice Thickness From ICESat­2 Freeboards”.
In: Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 125 (5 May 2020). DOI: 10.1029/
2019JC015764.
[5]
R. Kwok and G. F. Cunningham. “ICESat over Arctic sea ice: Estimation of snow
depth and ice thickness”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 113.C8
(2008). DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1029 / 2008JC004753. eprint: https : / / agupubs .
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2008JC004753. URL: https://agupubs.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2008JC004753.
[6]
R. Kwok et al. “Arctic Snow Depth and Sea Ice Thickness From ICESat­2 and
CryoSat­2 Freeboards: A First Examination”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research:
Oceans 125.3 (2020). e2019JC016008 2019JC016008, e2019JC016008. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1029/2019JC016008. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1029/2019JC016008. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1029/2019JC016008.
[7]
R. Kwok and Cunningham G. F. “Variablity of Arctic sea ice thickness and volume
from CryoSat­2”. In: Philosophical transactions. Series A, Mathematical, physical,
and engineering sciences (2015). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2014.0157.
[8]
Alfred Wegener, Stefan Hendricks, and Stephan Paul. Product User Guide & Al­
gorithm Specification AWI CryoSat­2 Sea Ice Thickness (version 2.6) Issued by.
2023.
[9]
A. A. Petty et al. ICESat­2 L4 Monthly Gridded Sea Ice Thickness, Version 3. 2023.
DOI: 10 . 5067 / ZCSU8Y5U1BQW. URL: https : / /nsidc . org/ data /IS2SITMOGR4 /
versions/3.
[10]
Stephen G. Warren et al. “Snow Depth on Arctic Sea Ice”. In: Journal of Climate 12
(1999), pp. 1814–1829. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6522406.
[11]
Nathan T. Kurtz and Sinead L. Farrell. “Large­scale surveys of snow depth on Arctic
sea ice from Operation IceBridge”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 38.20 (2011).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1029/2011GL049216. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2011GL049216. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1029/2011GL049216.
[12]
Nathan Kurtz et al. “Estimation of sea ice thickness distributions through the combi­
nation of SD and satellite laser altimetry data”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research
(Oceans) 114 (Oct. 2009). DOI: 10.1029/2009JC005292.
[13]
Glen E. Liston et al. “A Lagrangian Snow­Evolution System for Sea­Ice Applica­
tions (SnowModel­LG): Part I—Model Description”. In: Journal of Geophysical Re­
search: Oceans 125.10 (2020). e2019JC015913 2019JC015913, e2019JC015913.
54
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:63==
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JC015913. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2019JC015913. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1029/2019JC015913.
[14]
Julienne Stroeve et al. “A Lagrangian Snow Evolution System for Sea Ice Applica­
tions (SnowModel­LG): Part II—Analyses”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research:
Oceans 125.10 (2020). e2019JC015900 2019JC015900, e2019JC015900. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JC015900. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2019JC015900. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1029/2019JC015900.
[15]
Jong­Min Kim et al. “Differences Between ICESat and CryoSat­2 Sea Ice Thick­
nesses Over the Arctic: Consequences for Analyzing the Ice Volume Trend”. In:
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 125.22 (2020). e2020JD033103
2020JD033103, e2020JD033103. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1029/2020JD033103.
eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2020JD033103.
URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2020JD033103.
[16]
Thomas W. K. Armitage and Andy L. Ridout. “Arctic sea ice freeboard from Al­
tiKa and comparison with CryoSat­2 and Operation IceBridge”. In: Geophysical
Research Letters 42.16 (2015), pp. 6724–6731. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
2015GL064823. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
2015GL064823. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
2015GL064823.
[17]
Robbie D.C. Mallett et al. “Brief communication: Conventional assumptions involv­
ing the speed of radar waves in snow introduce systematic underestimates to sea
ice thickness and seasonal growth rate estimates”. In: Cryosphere 14 (1 Jan. 2020),
pp. 251–260. ISSN: 19940424. DOI: 10.5194/tc-14-251-2020.
[18]
Alfred Wegener, Stefan Hendricks, and Stephan Paul. Product User Guide & Al­
gorithm Specification AWI CryoSat­2 Sea Ice Thickness (version 2.6) Issued by.
2023.
[19]
Hoyeon Shi et al. “Simultaneous estimation of wintertime sea ice thickness and
snow depth from space­borne freeboard measurements”. In: Cryosphere 14 (11
Nov. 2020), pp. 3761–3783. ISSN: 19940424. DOI: 10.5194/tc-14-3761-2020.
[20]
Seymour W. Laxon et al. “CryoSat­2 estimates of Arctic sea ice thickness and vol­
ume”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 40.4 (2013), pp. 732–737. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1002/grl.50193. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
10.1002/grl.50193. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
grl.50193.
[21]
Yinghui Liu et al. “Multidecadal Arctic sea ice thickness and volume derived from ice
age”. In: The Cryosphere 14 (4 Apr. 2020), pp. 1325–1345. ISSN: 1994­0424. DOI:
10.5194/tc-14-1325-2020. URL: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/14/1325/2020/.
[22]
Sahra Kacimi and Ron Kwok. “Arctic Snow Depth, Ice Thickness, and Volume From
ICESat­2 and CryoSat­2: 2018–2021”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 49.5 (2022).
e2021GL097448 2021GL097448, e2021GL097448. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1029/
2021GL097448. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/
2021GL097448. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/
2021GL097448.
[23]
Alek A. Petty et al. “Warm Arctic, Increased Winter Sea Ice Growth?” In: Geophys­
ical Research Letters 45.23 (2018), pp. 12, 922–12, 930. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1029/2018GL079223. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
1029/2018GL079223. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/
2018GL079223.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
55
==PAGE:64==
[24]
Rasmus T. Tonboe et al. “Simulated Ka­and Ku­band radar altimeter height and
freeboard estimation on snow­covered Arctic sea ice”. In: Cryosphere 15 (4 Apr.
2021), pp. 1811–1822. ISSN: 19940424. DOI: 10.5194/tc-15-1811-2021.
[25]
Rasmus Tage Tonboe, Leif Toudal Pedersen, and Christian Haas. “Simulation of
the CryoSat­2 satellite radar altimeter sea ice thickness retrieval uncertainty”. In:
Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing 36 (2010), pp. 55–67. URL: https : / / api .
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:53643237.
[26]
Notes by Henriette Skourup, uploaded on DTU Learn. Cryosphere course notes
W2023.
[27]
Isaac Abazu, Ami Hassan Md Din, and Kamaludin Omar. “Mean dynamic topog­
raphy over Peninsular Malaysian seas using multimission satellite altimetry”. In:
Journal of Applied Remote Sensing 11 (May 2017). DOI: 10.1117/1.JRS.11.026017.
[28]
URL: https://www.eoportal.org/satellite-missions/cryosat-2#summary.
[29]
A. A. Petty et al. ATLAS/ICESat­2 L3B Daily and Monthly Gridded Sea Ice Free­
board, Version 4. 2023. DOI: 10.5067/ATLAS/ATL20.004. URL: https://nsidc.org/
data/ATL20/versions/4.
[30]
CESat­2 Science Team. Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document (ATBD) For Sea
Ice Products (ATL07/ATL10/ATL20/ATL21). Technical Report Version 006. Release
006. Boulder, Colorado, USA: National Snow and Ice Data Center, 2023. URL: https:
//nsidc.org/sites/default/files/documents/technical-reference/icesat2_atl07_atl10_
atl20_atl21_atbd_v006.pdf.
[31]
Rasmus Tonboe, Søren Andersen, and Leif Pedersen. “Simulation of the Ku­Band
Radar Altimeter Sea Ice Effective Scattering Surface”. In: Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters, IEEE 3 (May 2006), pp. 237–240. DOI: 10.1109/LGRS.2005.862276.
[32]
Qing Ji et al. “Arctic sea ice density observation and its impact on sea ice thickness
retrieval from CryoSat–2”. In: Cold Regions Science and Technology 181 (2021),
p. 103177. ISSN: 0165­232X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coldregions.2020.
103177. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165232X20304249.
[33]
Peter Wadhams et al. “Relationship between sea ice freeboard and draft in the Arctic
Basin, and implications for ice thickness monitoring”. In: Journal of Geophysical
Research: Oceans 97.C12 (1992), pp. 20325–20334.
[34]
V. Alexandrov et al. “The relation between sea ice thickness and freeboard in the
Arctic”. In: Cryosphere 4 (3 2010), pp. 373–380. ISSN: 19940416. DOI: 10.5194/tc-
4-373-2010.
[35]
Richard Hindmarsh. “J.L. Bamber and A.J. Payne, eds., 2004. Mass balance of
the cryosphere: observations and modelling of contemporary and future changes,
Foreword by John Houghton. Cambridge, etc., Cambridge University.” In: Journal
of Glaciology 51.172 (2005), pp. 103–104. DOI: 10.3189/S0022143000215153.
[36]
Rasmus Tage Tonboe, Leif Toudal Pedersen, and Christian Haas. “Simulation of
the CryoSat­2 satellite radar altimeter sea ice thickness retrieval uncertainty”. In:
Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing 36 (2010), pp. 55–67. URL: https : / / api .
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:53643237.
[37]
URL: https://www.eoportal.org/satellite-missions/icesat-2#mission-capabilities.
[38]
N. T. Kurtz, N. Galin, and M. Studinger. “An improved CryoSat­2 sea ice freeboard
retrieval algorithm through the use of waveform fitting”. In: Cryosphere 8 (4 July
2014), pp. 1217–1237. DOI: 10.5194/tc-8-1217-2014.
[39]
Renée Mie Fredensborg Hansen. “CRYO2ICE radar/laser freeboards, snow depth
on sea ice and comparison against auxiliary data during winter season 2020­2021”.
In: (June 2023). DOI: 10.11583/DTU.21369129.v1. URL: https://data.dtu.dk/
56
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:65==
articles/dataset/CRYO2ICE_radar_laser_freeboards_snow_depth_on_sea_ice_and_
comparison_against_auxiliary_data_during_winter_season_2020-2021/21369129.
[40]
Operation IceBridge sea ice freeboard, snow depth and thickness product manual
2019.
[41]
Operation IceBridge sea ice freeboard, snow depth and thickness data products
manual, version 2 processing.
[42]
Marcel Nicolaus et al. Snow height and air temperature on sea ice from Snow Buoy
measurements. dataset publication series. Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Cen­
tre for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, 2017. DOI: 10.1594/PANGAEA.
875638. URL: https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.875638.
[43]
Nicolaus M et al. “Snow Depth and Air Temperature Seasonality on Sea Ice Derived
From Snow Buoy Measurements.” In: Frontiers (2021). DOI: doi:10.3389/fmars.2021.
655446.
[44]
URL: https : / / nsidc . org / data / user - resources / help - center / guide - nsidcs - polar -
stereographic-projection.
[45]
David Hoese et al. Pyresample Documentation. Version 1.16.0. 2020. URL: https:
//pytroll.github.io/pyresample/.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:67==
A
Figures
Figure A.1: Tables listing changes in the different parameters that are put in the hydrostatic
equations and their influence on how the sea ice thickness changes. Freeboard and snow
depth change always by 10%, snow density by 5% and sea ice density by 1%.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.2: Sea ice freeboard difference between the radar derived sea ice freeboard and
the laser derived sea ice freeboard using the modified Warren 99 climatology snow depth
and the LG snow model snow density.
60
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.3: Sea ice freeboard difference between the radar derived sea ice freeboard
and the laser derived sea ice freeboard using the LG model snow depth and the LG snow
model snow density.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
61
==PAGE:70==
L0
Sensor
Raw Data
L1A
L0 data with
ancillary data
L1B
Calibrated L1A
data at full
sensor resolution
L1P
Processed
L1B data, eg.
remapping
of coverage
L2i
L2 data with
flags and
auxiliary data
L2
Geophysical
variables at the
same resolution
and location as
L1B/L1P data
L2P
Post Pro­
cessed L2i data
L3C
Observations
combined
from a single
instrument into a
space time grid
L3
L2 data mapped
on space­
time grid
L3S
Observations
combined
from multiple
instruments into
a space­time grid
L4
Data sets
created from
the analysis of
lower­level data
that result in
gridded, gap­
free products
Level­1
Pre­Processor
Level­2
Processor
Level­2
Pre­Processor
Level­3
Processor
Figure A.4: Processing flow of all the levels of AWI data.
62
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:71==
ATL03/ATL09
Within regional
and seasonal
bounds?
Coarse/Fine
Surface Finding
Within regional
and seasonal
bounds?
Surface Clas­
sification
ATL07
Geophysical
Corrections
Meteorological
Analysis
Yes
Yes
Beam
1
Beam
2
Beam
3
Beam
4
Beam
5
Beam
6
Select sea sur­
face segments
Determine
freeboard
segment (extent)
Compute
freeboard and
freeboard stats
ATL10
Figure A.5: Processing flow of ATLAS data used to derive ATL20.
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.6: Sea Ice Thickness histograms for both ICESat­2 and CryoSat­2 using com­
bination 3. Their distribution is clearly not Gaussian, especially for CryoSat­2, which also
show the sensitivity and the prevailance of FYI in the radar measurements.
64
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
==PAGE:73==
B
Abbreviations
ATLAS
Advanced Topographic Altimeter System
ATM
Airborne Topographic Imager
AWI
Alfred Wegener Institute
CAMBOT
Continuous Airborne Mapping by Optical Translator
CS2
CryoSat­2
DTU
Danish Technical University
ESA
European Space Agency
ESA­CCI SIT RRDP
ESA Climate Change Initiative Sea Ice Thickness Round Robin Data Package
EASE Grid
Equal­Area Scalable Earth
FYI
First Year Ice
IS­2
ICESat­2
LG­Snow Model
Lagrangian Snow Model
MOSAiC
Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate
MSS
Mean Sea Surface
mW99
modified Warren 99
MYI
Multi Year Ice
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NSIDC
National Snow and Ice Data Center
OIB
Operation Ice Bridge
OSI­SAF
Ocean and Sea Ice Satellite Application Facility
SID
Sea Ice Density
SIF
Sea Ice Freeboard
SIT
Sea Ice Thickness
Optimization of sea ice thickness estimation method based on the consistency between CryoSat­2 and
ICESat­2 retrievals
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Pl., Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
