==PAGE:1==
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered
by artificial intelligence
Master Thesis
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Peter Vilmos Malak
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering , Ørsteds Plads,
Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Electrical and Pho-
tonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Autonomous Systems, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of 3D simulation, drone
controlling and machine vision (object detection).
Peter Vilmos Malak - s223264
Signature
Date
ii
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Wildfires have significantly increased both in scale and frequency due to the climate change
and human error. Their environmental and economical impacts such as air pollution,
rising CO2 emissions, and heightened financial costs affect society all around the globe.
Additionally, this natural phenomenon could result in loss of human lives, wildlife reduction,
and property damage to consider. These fires can quickly escalate beyond control due to
their unpredictable rapid expansion, thus it is crucial to detect, locate and suppress them
in their early stages.
This is the very aim of my thesis. The research project was inspired by the XPRIZE Wildfire
Competition. Therefore, it focuses on providing a practical and effective solution for the
aforementioned problem with the possible combination of the capabilities of state-of-the-art
AI powered image processing with the versatile and relatively affordable drone technology.
The thesis explores the feasibility of testing and validating the fire detection system in a
proper 3D simulation environment. Additionally, it investigates the potential for improving
the system by integrating it with drone technology within the simulation. The ultimate goal
of the project is to deliver an operational drone software in the loop (SITL) simulation, with
the integration of an AI-powered fire detection system.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Peter Vilmos Malak, MSc Autonomous Systems, DTU
Author of this thesis.
Matteo Fumagalli, Associate Professor, DTU
I would like to express my gratitude to Matteo Fumagalli for the support and guidance he
provided me throughout this project.
Petra Kaszas
Special thanks to Petra Kaszas for proofreading my work.
iv
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
3
3
Wildfire detection with AI model
5
3.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Object detection model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Results and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Simulation setup
21
4.1
Unreal Engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Airsim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
PX4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Drone configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5
Software in the loop deployment
37
5.1
Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.2
Offboard controlling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
State machine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.4
Evaluation of the simulation pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6
Conclusion
51
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Bibliography
53
A Appendix
55
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Forests are providing essential resources for people wordwide, they are vital for the
lives that we have on this planet. They work like the lung of the planet, purify the air
by absorbing Carbon Dioxide (CO2) and producing oxygen (O2). Wild forests are the
homes for enormous number of animal species and have several other vital biological and
economical effect for the whole world. All in all, their protection is top priority for mankind.
On of the biggest threat for wildlands and forests are wildfires. Wildfires are common
natural uncontrolled disasters that have occurred frequently throughout the past. Several
countries record long history with strong and destructive wildfires, especially United States,
Australia, Brazil, and Canada. [1] These phenomena are becoming more frequent around
the globe due to various factors, including extremely dry conditions caused by the climate
change and human error. The rise in wildfires results in greater emissions of CO2 and
other toxic gases, which contribute to global warming. This, in turn, creates more extreme
dry areas, increasing the risk and frequency of new fires. Furthermore, these fires are
destroying millions of acres of land year by year, causing inestimable losses in human
lives and they can damage communication and transportation lines, water supply, power
and gas services. Moreover, they represents serious threat to agricultural activities and
crop productivity by drying out the soul and burning the crops near the affected area.
Consequently, the prevention, early detection, and suppression of wildfires remains crucial
tasks.
In order to successfully fight wildfires, a deeper understanding of this topic is particularly
essential. Significant damage and losses could have been prevented simply by increasing
awareness. Human activities are considered as primary cause of these fires. From 1992
to 2015 humans were responsible for the 85% of the wildfires in the United States, while
only 15% had natural reasons like lightning.[2] The other extremely important aspect that
influences the formation of a wildfire is time, in other words: how rapid a fire response
method is. This includes the following three time periods:
• the time period between the actual ignition and the detection of the fire
• the time period between the detection and the fire alert towards the firefighter depart-
ments
• the time period while the fighters are starting the suppressing
Consequently, detecting fires at their early stages is highly valuable, often fundamental
to ensure that the fire remains manageable. Most of the damages and losses could be
avoided just by having the ability of early detecting, as it provides official authorities with
the prompt information needed to take action.
To have the aforementioned capability, the traditional approaches of wildfire detecting and
monitoring are required to be improved. Search for the fires from look out towers, using
planes or helicopters are expensive, risky and slow. Additionally, these methods demand
a significant amount of human intervention and man-hours. Over the years, numerous
advanced techniques have been proposed to help identifying wildfires at their early stages.
The most contemporary methods employed today involve watchtowers equipped with
sensor like cameras and thermal imaging devices, along with the use of satellite technology.
Although these techniques are far better then the traditional ones, they are facing several
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
1
==PAGE:10==
limitations like the limited range of view for a watchtower or the high costs and the lack of
flexibility of the satellites.
In recent time, the involvement of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) become a highly
promising possible solution in wildfire detection. UAVs offer numerous advantages such
as speed, low cost, or minimal need for human intervention. they canbe equipped with
various sensors including cameras or IR sensors, GPS, and radio. Visual sensors can
be combined with deep learning-based computer vision techniques. Over the past few
years, numerous deep learning-based algorithms for fire and smoke detection have been
developed, achieving remarkable results. The majority of these detection algorithms utilize
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) like different versions of YOLO, R-CNN or U-Net
[1]. By integrating these technologies, this system can deliver impressive results and offer
a new and effective solution for detecting wildfires in their early stages.
This thesis emphasizes the technical aspects of the ideas discussed earlier. The project
investigates the technical feasibility of the concepts described above and includes an
implementation of a Software In The Loop (SITL) simulation in the specified area. The
simulation utilizes Unreal Engine 5 along with Airsim, a plugin developed by Microsoft for
drone support within Unreal Engine. PX4 flight controller operates in SITL mode. Creating
a simulation like this makes it possible to realistically test a wide range of scenarios,
including varying weather conditions, vehicle behaviors, sensor performance, and different
terrain types, all without incurring costs, endangering human lives, or causing any damage.
The PX4 SITL offers a cost-free and safe environment for this type of testing. Furthermore,
the transition from simulation to real-world application is straightforward, requiring only
minimal adjustments. This approach not only saves resources but also enhances the
reliability and safety of the technology before it is implemented in real world.
The primary objectives of this project is to develop a fully autonomous drone SITL simula-
tion system with the capability of operating without human intervention. It should equipped
with the integrated AI powered fire detection system that functions independently of ex-
ternal assistance or pre-existing information. The setup should contain the necessary
communication network as well.
2
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
Starting with fire detection with AI powered models, the article[3] explores the application
of deep learning models, such as CNNs and YOLO, for accurate fire detection in images
and video streams. It addresses challenges like distinguishing fire from similar objects
and performing reliably under various lighting conditions. The paper stresses the need for
diverse datasets to improve model robustness and highlights the potential for real-time
detection, crucial for wildfire monitoring and emergency response.
This research paper is highly relevant to my project, as it validates the use of AI powered
fire detection in UAV systems, emphasizing how deep learning can enhance accuracy and
speed in detecting fires autonomously.
Staying on topic, [4] presents an approach to improve wildfire image segmentation by
specifically targeting the edges of fire regions. Traditional segmentation methods often
struggle with the variable intensity and texture of fire, leading to less accurate boundary
detection. This paper addresses this issue by introducing a specialized edge detection
algorithm that refines and clarifies fire boundaries. By integrating this edge-focused
technique into existing frameworks, the method improving segmentation accuracy and
robustness. The findings are of this paper is slightly out of the range the current objectives
of my project, but fire segmentation techniques could be extremely useful as my model is
further developed in the future.
The project that has several similar parts to my thesis is detailed in [5]. The paper in-
troduces an advanced cyber-physical system designed to enhance both the detection
and management of wildfires. This system integrates various technological components,
including real-time sensors, communication networks, and data analytics platforms, to
provide a comprehensive approach to wildfire management. By leveraging these technolo-
gies, the system aims to detect wildfires at an early stage, improve situational awareness,
and facilitate more effective response strategies. The proposed solution addresses key
challenges in wildfire management, such as rapid detection and coordination of firefighting
efforts, making it a valuable contribution to improving wildfire response capabilities. Al-
though this project is beyond the scope of my work, the parts related to fire searching and
detection are very interesting and useful.
The [1] paper provides a comprehensive examination of the current state of wildfire
detection using UAVs in combination with deep learning methods. It explores the various
algorithms and models employed for real-time detection of fire and smoke, emphasizing
the effectiveness of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and object detection techniques.
The review highlights how UAVs can be deployed in remote or difficult-to-reach areas,
using computer vision algorithms to autonomously scan large terrains for early signs of
wildfire. Moreover, the paper discusses the challenges involved in these systems, including
the need for better datasets, the handling of environmental factors such as smoke and
terrain, and the importance of optimizing both hardware and software for field deployment.
Ultimately, the authors conclude that the integration of UAVs with advanced deep learning
algorithms, such as those based on CNNs and YOLO, is essential for improving early
detection systems, which directly supports the framework and approach of this project.
In summary, the reviewed literature and existing methodologies provide a solid founda-
tion and mindset for understanding the current advancements and challenges in wildfire
detection and management. While I found valuable information on fire detection using
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
3
==PAGE:12==
AI models, a comprehensive project integrating AI object detection with high-fidelity SITL
simulations is absent. This fact gives me more motivation to develop a new approach that
could establish a valuable platform for future advancements.
4
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:13==
3
Wildfire detection with AI model
The most essential component in developing an autonomous early-stage wildfire detection
system is the fire detection itself. As one of the project’s primary goals is to eliminate
human intervention from the process, it is important to establish a relieble method for fire
detection which is not based on human senses such as sight or smell. Considering the
capabilities of the current state-of-the-art technologies available nowadays, the logical
solution to this problem is to integrate artificial intelligence into the project.
It is important to clarify at this point, that this project aims to examine the feasibility of
developing an early-stage, AI-powered wildfire detection system using UAV technology.
While one of the project’s objectives is to examine the deployment of a Software In The Loop
drone simulation, it does not strive to achieve the best performance in real time detection or
in AI model accuracy. Instead, the project concentrates to integrate various technologies
(drone, AI object detection, simulation, controlling tasks), and understanding how they can
enhance each other. The emphasis is on the collaboration of these technologies rather
than on optimizing the performance of each individual component. Therefore, there may
be alternative solutions that perform slightly better in specific aspects.
The most effective methods for fire detection are visual sensing (camera images), infrared
sensors (thermal camera images) and smoke detectors. Although, the most common
fire detection devices are smoke sensors and carbon-monoxide detectors, air quality
monitoring is not suitable in this case. They are ineffective over long distances, especially
in outdoor areas. Even if they can sense something , then cannot provide any information
about the exact position of the fire. However, infrared sensors are capable for accurately
detect the position of the fires. Nowadays, there are thermal cameras on the market that
can see up to several kilometers away under under suitable environment circumstances
(topography). A major advantage of thermal cameras is their ability to see through smoke.
Therefore, at short range, when a fire is relatively close and the flames are obscured by the
smoke on a standard camera image, the fire nest can still be detected on a thermal image.
Finally, visual sensing offers an extensive detection range, dependent on the camera lens
and the height of the camera position, making drones particularly advantageous for this
purpose. Another benefit is that hills and other landforms mean less of an issue compared
to thermal cameras, as from a long distance smoke columns will be visible first not the
fires. However, a disadvantage compared to thermal imaging is that in close-up scenarios
where smoke covers everything, these cameras become essentially ineffective.
After thorough consideration, I decided to work with camera images. This solution offers
several advantages: a longer detection range, which is more critical for early warning
systems than precise locations, and easier usage due to the availability of more datasets
and related research. It is important to note that this choice does not impact the overall
system pipeline. My goal is to design the project in such a way that training the artificial
intelligence model on either standard camera images or thermal camera images will not
require structural changes and the transition can be done with minimal effort.
Given this decision and all the information discussed above, fire detection from an AI
perspective can be simply considered as an object detection problem. Fire and smoke are
the desired ”objects” that the model is supposed to recognise on an image. To effectively
develop a AI unit capable of addressing this issue, the following steps are necessary:
• Step 1. Dataset selection and preparation
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
5
==PAGE:14==
• Step 2. AI Model selection
• Step 3. Model training
• Step 4. Model evaluation
The subsequent sections will provide a detailed explanation of these steps.
3.1
Dataset
3.1.1
Dataset selection
The first and arguably the most important step in training an object detection model is to
find the most appropriate dataset for the specific use case. It has the biggest influence
on the outcome. In selecting a dataset for this project, the fist decision was whether to
use synthetic (simulated) images or actual, real images. Each option has its advantages
and disadvantages. An AI model trained on real images obviously will perform well in the
real world scenarios and will detect the fires with high probability in physical environment,
which is, at the end of the day, the desired final outcome. However, the objective of this
thesis is to create a SITL simulation, test the fire detection and execute the drone control
tasks in a fully virtual environment. In this case, and object detection model trained on
synthetic, virtual data will probably provide better results in this context.
Ultimately, I decided to use the virtually generated data to help create a reliable SITL
simulation pipeline. As mentioned a few sections before, this project focuses on creating a
complex method by integrating various technologies. Parallel to this, significant emphasis
is placed on ensuring the project is scalable and improvable. In this case that means that
by simply selecting a new dataset containing only real images, the same model with the
same parameters can be retrained. Thus, the same pipeline can be seamlessly applied to
a real-world system without any necessary changes.
Acquiring a synthetic dataset can be done in two ways: either creating a new one or
adopting an existing one. Creating a dataset is quite difficult and time-consuming task.
It involves setting up a realistic environment, such as a forest in this case, in a simulator
(Unreal Engine) and generating various types of fires and smoke. Subsequently, a large
number of images need to be captured from these setups, from various distances and
angles, and under various lighting conditions. To achieve decent results after training the
AI model, hundreds, if not thousands, of images are required.
Once the images are captured, one of the most monotonous and time-consuming part
begins that is labeling the images. This involves creating ground truth images, where the
fires and smoke are marked with frames. These indicate to the model what parts of an
image are either fire or smoke, or neither of them. This manual labeling process requires
a lot of time and cannot be made automatic.
Fortunately, after research work, a proper dataset was discovered on Roboflow.com [6].
The dataset, referred as Synthetic fire-smoke Computer Vision Project [7] is created by
researchers at Yunnan University in China. It contains 3974 images with fire and smoke
annotation boxes. It is freely available and the research team has provided the data in
different annotation formats for different target detection algorithms like COCO, Darknet,
YOLOv6, YOLOv7 and YOLOv8.
3.1.2
Dataset details
To create the Synthetic fire-smoke Computer Vision Project, the researchers used Unreal
Engine 5 to build diverse forest scenes and achieve realistic simulation of wild fires. Unreal
Engine is a game engine primarily used for creating photorealistic environments and
6
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:15==
simulations. It is capable of replicating real-world forest terrain, weather, time, lighting,
textures, and other details with high fidelity. It can also simulate multi-scale forest fires
in different periods, which is ideal for generating the synthetic datasets. The dataset
consists eight scenes with different terrain, three type of weather conditions: sunny, foggy
and rainy-snowy. Additionally, the images are captured in three different times of day:
day, evening, and night. These configurations are designed to simulate diverse visibility
conditions as realistically as possible.
An advantageous part of the dataset is that the developers captured the images (videos)
from aerial perspective, similar to a flying drone or plane. This makes the images fully
suitable for this project. Although the project specifications will be detailed later in Chapter
4, it is worth noting that this project also utilizes Unreal Engine, which will enhance the
performance of the model.
Eights multi-scale forest environments were built with unique terrain and vegetation types.
These scenarios were designed to provide a comprehensive range of conditions for fire
detection model testing. They consists forests, bushy areas, hills, rocks and water surfaces
as well, both lakes and sea. An example from each environment can be seen in Figure 3.3
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
7
==PAGE:16==
Hills with bushy areas
Hills with forest
Flat terrain with bushy areas
Rocks with forest and lake
Hills with pine forest
Sea coast
Flat terrain with pine forest
Snowy forest
Figure 3.1: The eight forest environments simulated to create the dataset
8
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:17==
Moreover, as mentioned before, the dataset contains not only sunny weather scenes, but
also rainy, foggy and snowy conditions. Figure fig. 3.2. shows these different circum-
stances.
Sunny
Foggy
Snowy
Figure 3.2: Simulated weather conditions
Wild fire images have been taken at different points of the day: day, evening and night.
These can be seen on Figure . This is essential to train the model to handle more
challenging scenarios. Various lighting conditions improve the model’s performance.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
9
==PAGE:18==
Hills with bushy areas
Hills with forest
Flat terrain with bushy areas
Rocks with forest and lake
Hills with pine forest
Sea coast
Figure 3.3: The eight forest environments simulated to create the dataset
The complete dataset contains a total of 3974 images, as it was mentioned before, from
these 3292 have sunny weather, 312 feature snowy and 370 have foggy conditions. The
number of fire objects on the images are varies, the developers set up three scenarios:
no object, single object and multiple objects. This variety is intended to provide diverse
information for object detection model training.
3.2
Object detection model
Before we delving deeper, it is important to clarify that this project does not aim to achieve
the best available or latest object detection model performance. Instead, the focus is on
10
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:19==
integrating a stable version of a state-of-the-art object detection technique. Therefore, the
emphasis was on choosing a well-supported, and thoroughly documented model that has
proven its effectiveness in similar use cases.
Since the given problem is an object detection problem, there are a few key features that
can guide the selection to choose the appropriate model:
• Real time performance (speed)
• Accuracy and precision
• Ease of implementation
• Detection capabilities (robustness)
In this project, the real-time performance is probably the most important criteria. It is
crucial for the model to deliver reliable results during real-time operation. Obviously,
the accuracy of the model is also essential, the model must detect fire and smoke with
high precision.It should be capable of handling various types of fires that will differ in
size, distance, or visibility, thus the model should be robust enough to solve all of these
challenges. Additionally, the ease of integrating the model into the simulation project
and its computational requirements for potential future physical deployment are important
considerations.
After considering all the guidelines, YOLOv7 was chosen as the most ideal model for this
task. YOLO (You Only Look Once) is the most popular object detection model. The name
refers to the single-stage (or single-shot) detection architecture. Unlike Region-Based
Convolutional Neural Networks (R-CNN) and its variants (such as Faster R-CNN or Mask
R-CNN), which are two-stage detectors, YOLO models perform detection in a single stage.
This significantly reduces the inference time. The structure is optimized to provide a
balance performance between calculation speed and accuracy. While it may not reach
the same accuracy as some two-stage detectors, it offers sufficient precision for practical
applications, especially when real-time processing is required. Figure fig. 3.4 shows that
YOLOv7 outperforms other object detectors such as YOLOR, YOLOX, Scaled-YOLOv4,
YOLOv5, and many others in speed and accuracy. Without utilizing any other datasets or
pre-trained weights the model was trained on the MS COCO (Microsoft Common Objects
in Context [8]) that is a large-scale object detection, segmentation, key-point detection,
and captioning dataset. The dataset consists of 328k images. The model was trained from
scratch without utilizing any other datasets or pre-trained weights.
Figure 3.4: Compare YOLOv7 to other object detection models [9]
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
11
==PAGE:20==
YOLOv7 [10], released by WongKinYiu and Alexey Bochkovskiy in 2023 , and it is the 7th
version of the YOLO family [11], incorporating the latest advancements in deep learning
and object detection. The model is intended to simultaneously separate (predict) multiple
bounding boxes and their class probabilities. During test time, it examines the whole
input image (unlike the R-CNN models) making its predictions to be informed by the
global context of the image. As mentioned earlier, YOLO models are based on a single-
shot detector (SSD). SSD is a type of object detection algorithm designed for real-time
applications and it will be detailed later.
At a high level, the operation of YOLO model is relatively simple and straightforward,
see Figure 3.5. First the input image is resized (in this case to 640x640 pixels). Then
the model devides the incoming image into numerous grids. Then the model itself is
run which contains the convolutional neural network and calculates the probability of an
object inside that specific grid cell. This part is detailed in the following sections. After
that, the algorithm groups nearby boxes with high-value probability as a single object. As
a final step, post-processing method called non-max suppression (NMS) is applied on
the resulting detections to filter them according to their confidence level, predictions with
low-value probability are discarded.
Figure 3.5: Image processing with YOLO
12
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:21==
This project is not intended to provide an in-depth comprehensive and detailed description
of how YOLOv7 is built and how it works, but a high-level presentation of the model is
essential in order to present the advantages and disadvantages and to understand the
entire structure.
As it was mentioned above, YOLO is based on a single-stage detector. Due to this, in
general, YOLO network consists three main components that can be seen in Figure 3.6:
• Backbone: A convolutional neural network that accumulates and produces visual
features with different shapes and sizes. In other words, it featurizes the image
frames. Usually models like ResNet and VGG are used as feature extractors.
• Neck: A set of neural network layers that combines and mixes features and char-
acteristics to pass it along to the head for prediction. Here the Feature Pyramid
Network (FPN) is used to create feature pyramids that make it easier for models to
generalise well about scaling of objects. With different sizes and scales, it helps to
find the same thing.
• Head: Takes in features from the neck and performs classification along regression
to predict the locations and classes of objects. Outputs four values: x, y coordinates,
width and height.
Although fully understanding the architecture of the YOLOv7 model in not the primary
focus of the thesis, a few notable contributions ([12], [9]) to the field of computer vision
research are mentioned in the following sections. These features have been incorporated
into YOLOv7.
Figure 3.6: High level YOLO architecture
3.3
Training
For training, YOLOv7 requires data in special format called the YOLOv7 PyTorch TXT that
includes the following components:
1. data.yaml:
This is the config file. It contains configuration values such as the total number and names
of classes that are in the dataset. This case these are fire and smoke. Moreover, this
is the file which informs the model where the specific image folders can be located for
training, validating and testing. (Figure 3.7.)
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.7: data.yaml file for training YOLOv7
2. TXT files:
All the labeled images that are used for training have their own TXT file. This file contains
the coordinates of the bounding boxes that were created during the labeling process. The
format is specified, each row represents one bounding box and includes 5 numbers:
class_id x_center y_center width_box height_box
where fields are space delimited, and the coordinates are normalized from zero to one.
Each bounding box indicates an object that we want our model to learn to detect. Lines
starting with class_id 0 are for fire objects, class_id 1 represents smoke. Figure 3.8. shows
the txt file of an image from the training dataset.
Figure 3.8: txt file for each training image
3. Images
The actual training images. Each image is paired with the corresponding txt file, mentioned
before, which provides the model with readable information about the bounding boxes.
Extracting the information from the TXT files and displaying the bounding boxes, the
training images appear as shown in Figure 3.9.
14
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.9: Annotated training images
The dataset consists 3974 annotated images. The annotated dataset was split into three
parts in Roboflow: 70% for training (2782 images), 20% for validation (795 images), and
10% for testing (397 images).
For the training, Python programming language and the PyTorch framework were uti-
lized. The model’s training and testing were conducted in the cloud-based Google Colab
environment, that provides access to the NVIDIA A100 SXM4 40 GB GPU. Due to the
relatively small dataset used in the project a transfer learning approach was used means
that instead of training the YOLOv7 model from scratch, the training process was initiated
using pre-trained weights got from previous training on the COCO dataset.
The final step before the training starts is to set the arguments and hyperparameters that is
required for training [13][14]. Since this thesis’s objectives not aims to completely optimize
the performance of the object detection model, the default hyperparameters were used.
The most important of these are displayed in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Training parameter configuration
Hyperparameters
Values
Image size
640 x 640
Epoch
100
Batch size
32
Optimizer
SGD
Learning rate
0.01
Momentum
0.937
Weight decay
0.0005
The model was trained for 100 epochs. The reason of this decision is the resource
constraints of Google Colab and the time-intensive nature of the process. Although the
number of the epoch were quite low, it still proved to be more than sufficient to produce
adequate results detailed in the next section.
3.4
Results and evaluation
During the training and validation process, YOLOv7 generated three types of loss function
graphs for evaluation (Figure 3.10.):
• Objectness loss: The objectness loss score is calculated using Binary Cross En-
tropy Loss between the predicted objectness probability and the Complete Intersec-
tion over Union (CIoU, takes into account overlap area, distance between center
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
15
==PAGE:24==
points and aspect ratio) with the matched target as ground truth [15]. If there are no
matches, this is 0. In other words, the objectness score is a measure of confidence
that a particular region in an image contains an object not just background. Each
bounding box prediction has an associated objectness score.
• Box loss: It measures how well the predicted bounding box fits the ground truth
bounding box. It is defined as mean(1 - CIoU) for all selected anchor box candi-
dates.
• Classification loss: Using Binary Cross Entropy Loss between the predicted class
probabilities for each anchor box and a one-hot encoded vector of the true class
of the matched target. Thus, it measures how well the model classifies the object
within the selected anchor box.
Figure 3.10: Results
As it can be seen in Figure 3.10, all the loss functions showed the expected decreasing
trend and convergence, with one exception. The validation objectness loss displayed
a slight increase during the validation, indicating that the model is starting to overfit or
at least struggling with certain nuances in the validation set that were either absent or
underrepresented in the training set. To better understand the underlying cause of this
behavior, a more detailed analysis of the confusion matrix is be beneficial (Figure A.1.).
On one hand, checking the diagonal elements the 0.92 and 0.86 values for fire and smoke
true positive predictions are completely exceeded expectations, most of the time the
model classifies the fire and smoke classes correctly, the model has a high degree of
accuracy in these cases. On the other hand, looking the background false negatives, it
reveals that sometimes the model classifies fire and smoke classes into background. To
be more precise, predicting smoke as background has almost double the chance (0.13)
then predicting fire (0.08). This totally make sense, and probably this is the explanation
of the aforementioned overfitting problem. The model performs really well when it needs
to separate fire from the others, but struggles to differentiate between smoke and the
background. This behaviour of the model likely originates from some inaccuracies in
the dataset labeling, but it was not considered a significant issue, since the performance
shown by the model was convincing and more than enough for deploying this project.
16
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.11: Confusion matrix with 0 representing fire and 1 representing smoke
To evaluate the performance of the trained model based on numbers, accuracy metrics
named Precision, Recall and mean average precision (mAP), calculated at the intersection
over union (IoU) threshold of 0.5 were used, see Table 3.2. The model achieved more
than sufficient values for bounding box prediction with 82.6% Precision, 81.8 % Recall and
mAP@.5 84.1%. Considering the relatively small dataset, the model outperformed the
expectations with less than 3 hours of training. The average inference time of the model
per test image is 22.5 ms given the available resources (NVIDIA A100). This outstanding
result makes it possible for the model to operate around 45 FPS.
Table 3.2
Metrics
Fire
Smoke
All
Precision (%)
87.1
80.2
83.6
Recall (%)
82.1
79.9
81.0
mAP@.5 (%)
87.5
84.2
85.8
mAP@.5:.95 (%)
43.5
50.9
47.2
Training time (h)
2.875
Average detection speed (ms)
22.5
The previously discussed features and behaviours of the model can be observed from
different perspectives as well. Precision - Confidence, Recall - Confidence, Precision -
Recall and F1 Score graphs were generated too during the training. These graphs can be
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
17
==PAGE:26==
seen on Figure 3.12.
• Precision - Confidence refers to how the confidence threshold affects precision. As
confidence increases, the model becomes more selective, which increases precision
but simultaneously reduce the number of true positives detected.
• Recall - Confidence refers to how the confidence threshold affects recall. As
confidence increases, recall drop because the model miss some objects that it
is less confident about.
• Precision - Recall plots precision vs recall. The curve bows towards the top rights
corner indicating high precision and recall across various thresholds. The area under
the curve (AUC) is quite large.
• F1 Score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall
Precision - Confidence curve
Recall - Confidence curve
Precision - Recall curve
F1 score curve
Figure 3.12: Evaluation graphs from the training
Beyond evaluating the model’s accuracy through numerical metrics, the visual detection
results on images from the test dataset are displayed on Figures figs. 3.13 to 3.18 3.13.,
3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 3.17,3.18.to provide a better insight of the model actually performance.
It can be observed that the YOLOv7 model successfully predicted the location of both
fires and smokes and fitted the bounding boxes correctly. Regardless of the different
circumstances like different light conditions (day, night), single or multiple targets or target
at different distances, the model demonstrated reliable operation.
18
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:27==
With this, a dependable, well performing fire and smoke detection model is acquired and
ready for practical deployment in the project.
Figure 3.13: Detection results - evening, long range, small fire
Figure 3.14: Detection results - daytime, long range
Figure 3.15: Detection results - daytime, multiple fires and smoke
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.16: Detection results - daytime, long range, multiple fire and smoke
Figure 3.17: Detection results - daytime, long range, multiple small fires
Figure 3.18: evening, fire and smoke
20
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:29==
4
Simulation setup
After the AI powered fire detection model is trained and ready to use, the next step is to
create an environment. This environment needs to meet several prerequisites in order to
successfully build up the whole desired fire detection simulation in it. These necessary
requirements are the following:
• Open source Since the whole project is about a development process, it is the No.
1 priority for the chosen simulator to be an open sourced platform
• Photo-realistic simulation environment In order to detect simulated fire, we need
to create it. Thus we need a photo-realistic environment that has the ability to do
that, also capable for creating different kind of natural landscapes relatively easy like
forests and hills. Also we need this simulator to have a reliable physics engine that
provides the necessary physical calculations, realistic drone movements and sensor
data
• Drone support The chosen simulator needs to be capable for managing drones.
Either by default or through a plugin, it has to have the ability for drone developement.
Having an own, non realistic software development kit is not enough, the simulator
needs to support a popular flight controller. In this way the developed project will be
compatible for further testing (Hardware in the loop - HITL)
• Communication protocol support Since the fire detection project examines the
possibilities for the least human intervention, communication with the drone will be
a critical factor. To control the the drone automatically, a proper communication
infrastructure is required to constantly monitor the nearby areas by sensors, send
these sensor data for process, process this data and make decisions accordingly,
and finally send these decisions back in a form of control commands.
These are the main cornerstones along which the research process to find the most suitable
simulation environment for this project started.
The requirement that the simulator needs to be open sourced reduced the possibilities. All
the slightly popular drone simulator platforms like DLR Simulator, FPV.SkyDive or FPV
FreeRider fall out. Due to my previous academic and working experience the ideal would
have been to find a simulator that supports PX4 flight controller [16] and related to this,
Robotic Operating System (ROS) is the most popular solution that fulfills the communication
tasks.
Usually for robotic or drone simulations, especially using PX4 and ROS, Gazebo [17] is the
most popular choice to use. Gazebo has all the support for PX4 software in the loop (SITL)
and hardware in the loop (HITL) simulations supplimenting these with ROS support as
well. Its documentation and online support is infinite, many different types of projects were
made in it. Most of the cases Gazebo is the proper choice for drone project development,
but this project differs. Fire simulation, as it was mentioned earlier, needs photo-realistic
environment, since the AI fire detection model is trained in real or synthetic but similar to
real images, thus in order to use this model in the simulator it is necessary to provide the
most realistic input (images) for it. And that is where Gazebo gazebo falls through the
sieve, it has a very poor display. For other tasks it would not be an issue but in this case
this aspect is crucial.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
21
==PAGE:30==
According to my research and experiences, without the need for completeness, only
three widely used simulators are capable of photo realistic design. These are Unity [18],
Unreal Engine [19]and NVIDEA Isaac Sim [20]. All of them have a plugin framework
responsible for simulation of drone (vehicles) dynamics and they have PX4 integration as
well. Isaac Sim’s plugin called Pegasus Simulator [21] (Figure 4.1.(b)) which is quite a
new development, as Isaac Sim as well. It does not have the documentation and online
support that is necessary for this thesis project.
(a) Unity - Airsim
(b) Isaac Sim - Pegasus Simulator
Figure 4.1: Potential simulator platforms
Unreal Engine also has a framework which makes it capable for drone simulation, it is
called AirSim developed by Microsoft. AirSim also has a release for Unity, but it is only
experimental (Figure 4.1. (a)). AirSim provides all the necessary features mentioned above,
that was believed to be essential throughout the project. Thus, the final configuration
turned out to be:
• AirSim drone simulator,
• build on Unreal Engine 5.2 game engine,
• PX4 flight controller integration and
• ROS/ROS2 support
4.1
Unreal Engine
Unreal Engine [19] is a state-of-the-art 3D computer graphics game engine and creation
tool developed by Epic Games. Since the initial launch in 1998, Unreal Engine evolved
into one of the most powerful and popular engines in the industry, widely used for game
and software development and virtual production.
One of the most important key feature of Unreal Engine is its high-fidelity graphics. It
includes advanced features like ray tracing and lightning system. the engine has the
ability to render high-quality graphics in real-time and enables the developers to create
photo-realistic environments. This feature in essential in my thesis to properly simulate
more difficult natural phenomenons like fire and forests.
Unreal engine is written in C++ and provides full access to the complete source code
which make it possible for developers for modify or extend the engines capabilities to meet
their specific requirements. Moreover, Epic Games provides a visual scripting platform
called the Blueprints, which enables development without writing a single line of code.
This feature encourages non-programmers to take part in the community of collaboration
and innovation.
22
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:31==
Unreal Engine 5 is the latest release of the engine with several new features. In this
project Unreal Engine 5.2 serves as the foundation for running the Airsim plugin allowing
developers to interact with drones and other vehicles within the Unreal Engine environment.
4.2
Airsim
AirSim [22] is an open-source, high-fidelity visual and physical simulator developed by
Microsoft. It aims to narrow down the gap between the simulated world and reality.
Primarily, it is designed for robotic and autonomous systems, especially for drones, cars,
and other vehicles, built on Unreal Engine (there is an experimental release available for
Unity as well). The platform strives to make a positive impact on the development and
testing process of various data-driven artificial intelligence methods such as reinforcement
learning or deep learning. To support drone development projects, it offers software-in-
the-loop (SITL) simulation with popular flight controllers like PX4 and ArduPilot, as well as
hardware-in-the-loop simulation with PX4 for physically and visually realistic simulations.
According to the official documentation, Microsoft Research ended the release of new
updates of Airsim in July of 2022, because the project has served its original purposes.
Currently they are focusing thereir efforts on a new product, Microsoft Project AirSim, to
meet the growing needs of the aerospace industry. This product was promised to be
released at the end of the year 2023, but unfortunately there is delay in the process so the
product is not available yet. At the same time, Codex Laboratories LLC [23] took over the
project as a waypoint to building a new and better simulation platform, called Colosseum
[24]. It is build on the Airsim repository and provide several new features to help test new
ideas around aerial AI development and simulation. This project uses Colosseum.
Figure 4.2: A snapshot from Airsim
The simulator is built with modular design that prioritizes extensibility. The main architecture
is illustrated in Figure consists of the environmental model, vehicle model, physics engine,
sensor models, rendering interface, public API layer and an interface layer for vehicle
firmware.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
23
==PAGE:32==
An autonomous aerial vehicle typically includes a flight controller, in our case PX4, which
takes desired states (like pitch, roll, and yaw) and sensor data to estimate the current state
and compute actuator signals to achieve the desired outcome. The simulator provides
sensor data (camera, GPS, IMU ect.) from the virtual world, and the flight controller
sends actuator signals (motor voltage) to the vehicle model, which calculates forces and
torques, to update the vehicle’s kinematic state (position, orientation, linear velocity, linear
acceleration, angular velocity and angular acceleration).
The desired state input to the flight controller can be configured manually, by a human
operator using a remote controller or - and that is more relevant in our project - by a
companion computer in autonomous mode. The companion computer is an external unit
that sets the desired state and handles complex tasks like trajectory planning and SLAM,
interacting with the simulator via APIs that ensure seamless transitions between simulated
and real-world environments.
Developed as an Unreal Engine plugin, AirSim utilizes advanced rendering and collision
detection technologies to create detailed and realistic simulations, making it easier to
develop and test algorithms in virtual environments before deploying them to real-world
vehicles.
The following sections aim to demonstrate that Airsim is a well-developed, reliable sim-
ulation software that rests on strong mathematical and physical principles. Therefore,
it has the full potential to serve as a platform for high-fidelity, photorealistic drone SITL
simulations.
Figure 4.3: Airsim architecture from the official documentation
4.2.1
Drone model
Airsim allows defining a drone as a rigid body with a desired number of actuators that
produce the forces and the torques. The vehicle model incorporates parameters like mass,
inertia, and coefficients for linear and angular drag, friction, and restitution, which is used
by the physics engine to calculate rigid body dynamics. As a mathematical abstraction,
the drone is modelled as a collection of K vertices positioned at r1, ..., r2 with normals
24
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:33==
n1, ..., nk. Each of them have one vehicle-specific control input u1, ..., uk, that controls the
rotational speed of each propeller. These will be calculated by the PX4 flight controller
(next section). Figure 4.4. shows the Airsim model of a quadrotor.
The forces and torques are assumed to align with the direction of the normals and they
are calculated as follows:
Fi = CT ρω2
maxD4ui
and
τi = 1
2πCpowρω2
maxD5ui
(4.1)
where:
• CT : thrust coefficient (based on the physical characteristics of the propeller)
• Cpow : power coefficient (based on the physical characteristics of the propeller)
• ρ : air density
• D : propeller’s diameter
• ωmax : max angular velocity [rpm]
Figure 4.4: Quadrotor abstraction model in Airsim
The developers selected the Parrot AR (Figure 5.5.) as the default rigid drone body in
AirSim. Since the thesis is primarily focused on building a functional SITL simulation
pipeline, the specific drone model is not a priority until real-world testing begins. Therefore,
no changes were applied in this regard, the project was carried out using the default drone.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.5: Airsim built in drone: actual (left) and the simulated (right)
4.2.2
Environment
There are several physical factors that the drone is effected by. Airsim simulates gravity, air
pressure and magnetic field. The first two of these are more relevant for this project. During
the simulation of these phenomena, the focus was on producing a model that minimizes
computational expense while maintaining sufficient accuracy for real-time operation.
Gravity, unlike many other simulation platforms, is not simulated as a constant number.
Instead, a more accurate model is used. Formally, the gravitational acceleration g at a
specific height h is estimated using the binominal theorem on Newton’s law of gravity and
ignoring the higher-order terms:
g = g0 ·
R2
e
(Re + h)2 ≈g0 ·

1 −2 h
Re

(4.2)
Air pressure and altitude have a complex relationship because the Earth’s atmosphere
consists of several distinct layers, each with unique characteristics. Airsim tries to be as
accurate as possible, therefore the simulated atmosphere is split up to 3 regions: in the
range of 0-51 km the air pressure is approximated by the 1976 U.S. Standard Atmosphere
model ([25], 1.16, 1.17), from 51 km to 86 km an other model ([25], [26], Table 4) is used.
Beyond 86km the air density is calculated as:
ρ =
P
R · T
(4.3)
where:
• P : standard pressure
• R : specific gas constant
• T : standard temperature
The default environment provided by Airsim for development is called Blocks. As the name
suggests, it features a simple, minimal area with various shapes like boxes and cones. The
majority of the development process took place within this environment. One of the biggest
advantage of Airsim is its integration with Unreal Engine’s marketplace where various
pre-made environments can be downloaded. These custom environments, available both
for free and for purchase can be integrated into the Airsim project. Unfortunately, the
integration process is less convenient for Linux based projects, but it is still possible. Since
this thesis project required a proper landscape with trees, mountains, and varied terrain, a
26
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:35==
suitable free environment was used, as shown in Figure 4.6. Fire and smoke object were
integrated from an external asset library.
Figure 4.6: Environments for development: default (left) and custom (right)
4.2.3
Sensors
Airsim provides built in sensor models for barometer, gyroscope and accelerometer, GPS,
magnetometer, distance sensor, LIDAR and camera. All the sensors are implemented
as a C++ library. When configuring a drone for simulation, the required sensors must be
to be specified in the configuration file allowing the simulation to utilize the capabilities
provided by them.
The barometer uses the ground truth pressure calculated by the previously presented
method (Section 4.2.2). To make this quantity more realistic, Gaussian Markov process was
applied. Finally the pressure is converted to altitude value which is crucial for controlling
the drone in this project.
The Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) is crucial in controlling the drone. Its primary compo-
nents, the gyroscope and accelerometer are also modeled realistically. Gyroscope takes
the true angular velocity of the drone then adds normally distributed white noise and bias
drift. Similarly, the accelerometer applies the same process to the linear acceleration,
accounting for gravitational effect.
The GPS also attempts to replicate the behavior of a real-world GPS system by introducing
imperfections like latency (∼200ms) for data receiving and slower update rates (∼50 Hz)
for sending data. Moreover, error estimate decay rates (both for horizontal and vertical) to
simulate the improvement of the GPS position estimate over time. This meant to represent
the process of acquiring more satellite data, leading to accuracy increasing.
Extracting images from the simulated environment is one of the most essential part of this
project. Camera model API is giving the opportunity for developers to capture images
during simulations. These models can be mounted on the multicopter and can provide
several image types such as depth or segmentation. However, this project only uses the
default image type. The images can be converted into a required format and used for
various of vision tasks. The simulator also has a gimbal model, which allows stabilization
stabilization for pitch, roll or yaw for any camera.
4.3
PX4
PX4 is a popular open-source flight control software (autopilot) primarily designed for un-
manned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and other unmanned vehicles including fixed-wing aircrafts,
VTOLs, and ground vehicles. It provides a versatile toolkit for developers to collaborate
and innovate and create customized solution for both research and commercial drone
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
27
==PAGE:36==
applications. The controller is the brain of the drone, it is responsible for anything regarding
with the drone such as navigation, movement control and sensor data integration. Although
a deep understanding of PX4 is not necessary in this thesis, an understanding of the basic
operation and connections on a high level is essential for a successful development. The
following sections helps to give a comprehensive overview of the architecture and operation
of PX4.
Autonomous operation is one of the main objective of this thesis, therefore human conven-
tion is not allowed during flight. That means decisions should be made by the drone and
that requires a computer onboard. Figure 4.7. shows a typical PX4 system architecture
with the flight controller and the companion computer. The main communication routes
are also displayed on the image.
Figure 4.7: PX4 system architecture with flight controller and the companion computer [16]
The flight controller (e.g. Pixhawk) operates the PX4 software, while the companion
computer handles calculations and decision-making tasks, such as in the case of wildfire
detection, using data gathered from the camera or other sensors. The recommended OS
for the companion computer in Linux because of the bigger developer community. As it will
be detailed in the upcoming section 4.3.3. this project does not include cloud integration
and the Ground Control Station (QGroundControl [27]) is used only for development
purposes.
4.3.1
Flight stack architecture
PX4 incorporates two main parts: a general robotics layer called the middleware that
manages internal and external communications as well as hardware integration and
the flight stack (flight control) that is responsible for estimation and flight control. The
high-level software architecture of PX4 is displayed on Figure 4.8., the top part contains
the main blocks of the middleware and the lower section represents the flight stack.
The most important communication connections between boxes are also shown. The
28
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:37==
modules communicate via publish-subscribe message bus called uORB. This system is
fully parallelized and enables asynchronous behavior, therefore updates occur instantly
when new data is available.
Figure 4.8: High level PX4 software architecture [16]
The middleware mainly comprises device drivers for embedded sensors, external communi-
cation (e.g., with companion computers, GCS), and the uORB publish-subscribe message
bus. Moreover, it has a simulation layer that enables PX4 flight code to operate on a
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
29
==PAGE:38==
desktop operating system, allowing control of a simulated vehicle in a virtual environment.
This feature makes SITL simulation possible that was utilized to carry out this thesis.
Taking a closer look at the flight control part, the full pipeline contains the sensors inputs,
RC (or other external) input, the estimator, the autonomous flight control (navigator) and
controller (position and attitude) and finally a mixer down to the actuator control. On a high
level the process is the following:
• The estimator calculates the vehicle state (position, velocity, attitude) based on the
combination of the available sensor inputs
• The controller then takes the this estimated state (process variable) as an input and
compares it with the desired state (coming from the remote control or the companion
computer). The goal is to adjust the process variable so that it aligns with the desired
state.
• Eventually, the mixer takes the force commands and converts them into specific
motor commands
4.3.2
Controller
The controller is one of the most important part of PX4. Understanding the fundamental
operation of the control process is essential, as this is the only way to send the proper
drone movement commands during the development of the project. The standard cascade
control architecture of PX4 is shown in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Standard cascade control architecture [16]
The outer loop, position controller takes position setpoint (Xsp) as an input and generates
a velocity setpoint (Vsp). Velocity setpont then is taken by the velocity controller and
acceleration setpoint (Asp) is produced. This acceleration along with the desired yaw angle
is converted into the desired attitude in quaternion format (qsp). This angle setpoint is
then passed to the angle control that commands angular rate. The mixer receives these
commands along with the thrust (δTsp) and mixes these values to get an actual motor
command(Tsp).
As it is displayed in Figure 4.8 the estimated values come from EKF2 (Extended Kalman
Filter) algorithm. This method process sensor measurements and provide an estimate of
several states such as position or velocity among others.
The EKF operates in different modes, utilizing various combinations of sensor measure-
ments. The minimum data set that is required for calculating estimates includes IMU data,
30
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:39==
a source of yaw and a source of height data. Consequently, the drone must be equipped
with the following sensors to provide this information.
• IMU
• Magnetometer (yaw)
• Barometer (height)
Additional sensors and their data can be used to estimate further states.
For the purposes of this project, it is important to emphasize the structure and operational
relationship of the position and velocity controllers. Velocity controller is a PID controller
commands an acceleration vector to stabilise velocity. The position controller is a simple
P controller that commands velocity vector to stabilize position. The commanded velocity
is saturated to ensure it stays within specified limits.
Figure 4.10: Multicopter position (left) and velocity (right) controller [16]
The combined position and velocity controller diagram can be seen in Figure 4.11. De-
pending on the chosen mode, feedforward control can be applied, thus velocity input can
be passed directly to the lower-lever control loop (velocity control) without relying on the
higher-level controller (position control). This approach is highly effective in scenarios
where precise velocity targets are needed but maintaining or reaching certain positions
are not necessary. In the project both control techniques were deploy.
Figure 4.11: Combined position and velocity controller [16]
All the parameters of the whole control system can be tuned manually in case of an actual
physical test, this thesis uses the default parameters for simulation.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
31
==PAGE:40==
4.3.3
Simulation setup
As it was mentioned previously, PX4 software has a simulation layer that enables flight
code to run on a desktop OS. Thus, it becomes able to control virtual drones within Airsim.
PX4 supports Software In the Loop (SITL) simulation, where the flight stack runs on the
same computer as the simulator. This feature makes it possible to build up a fully virtual,
high-fidelity and photorealistic early fire detection pipeline using PX4. After setting up PX4,
the following command will build and start PX4 firmware in SITL mode in Airsim:
make px4_sitl none_iris
Airsim uses the MAVLink API to interference and communicate with PX4. This API specifies
a set of MAVLink messagesthat provide sensor data from virtual environment to PX4 and
send back motor and actuator values from the flight code that is used to control the drone
in the simulation.
The entire SITL simulation structure can be seen in Figure 4.12. PX4 uses UDP ports for
MAVLink communication with other units the ground control station (QGC), the simulator
and the Offboard API (ROS2). By default, these ports are:
• QGroundStation listens to PX4’s remote UDP port: 14550.
• ROS2 (external developer API) listens to PX4’s remote UDP port: 14540
• PX4 connects to the simulator’s local TCP port: 4560
Although the system is typically designed for distributed deployment, all components of
this project are running locally on the same PC, using the localhost interface (127.0.0.1).
Despite the local setup, the network port configuration remains consistent with the standard
remote deployment.
PX4 on SITL
API/Offboard
QGroundControl/
Other GCS
Simulator
Joystick/
Gamepad
mavlinkmain.cpp
ports
14540 - 14549
port 14580
port 14550
port 18570
random port
TCP 4560
simulatormavlink.cpp
MAVLink
Communication
Figure 4.12: Just a normal figure
QGroundCOntrol plays a minor role in this project, only during the development phase.
However, its significance will increase as the project progresses further since among
32
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:41==
others it can be used for real-time monitoring, parameter tuning and telemetry logging for
later analysis.
4.3.4
Offboard Control mode
To successfully develop an autonomous early fire detection system the most important
criteria is that human intervention is not permitted during the intended operation.This
means the drone operates without manual control, the UAV autonomously senses the
environment around itself, makes decisions based on sensor data using the on board
small processor (companion computer) and performs actions accordingly. Communication
with the ground station can occur via radio or Wi-Fi (less likely available), depending on
the available options in the specific area.
In order to reach PX4 from the companion computer and create a communication channel
through which interaction with PX4’s uORB messages is possible, ROS 2 Humble were
utilized. ROS 2 is the newest version of ROS (Robot Operating System), a general robotics
library designed to work with the PX4 Autopilot for developing advanced drone applications.
PX4 and ROS 2 communicate through the PX4-ROS 2 bridge that works as an interface
connecting PX4 uORB messages with ROS 2 DDS messages. PX4 uses a middleware
called uXRCE-DDS to enable uORB messages to be published and subscribed to on
a companion computer as if they were ROS 2 topics. This provides a reliable and fast
transition between PX4 and ROS 2 topics and simplify the process for developers to access
vehicles information and send command from ROS 2 nodes.
The uXRCE-DDS middleware includes two parts: a client running on PX4 and an agent
running on the companion computer with bi-directional data flow between them. The agent
enables for the client to publish and subscribe to topics in the global DDS data space. The
uXRCE-DDS structure can be seen in Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: PX4-ROS 2 bridge [16]
The setup of the bridge is straightforward. The client is included in the PX4 firmware
and generated at build time by default along with a specific subset of uORB messages
that is exposed through the client. This set of uORB messages definitions got exported
to PX4/px4_msgs. The agent can be installed in a standalone mode on the companion
computer from source. Normally, both of them are needed to be started, the client starts
with the PX4 SITL, once it is running, the agent can be started with:
MicroXRCEAgent udp4 -p 8888
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
33
==PAGE:42==
ROS 2 applications must be built within a workspace that contains the same message
definitions used to generate the uXRCE-DDS client module in the PX4 firmware. Therefore,
PX4/px4_msgs along with px4_ros_com were cloned into the new workplace and then
colcon was used for building. To separate the thesis project from everything else, a
new ROS 2 package was also created as the home of the project. The primary Python
script developed for the thesis is located within the folder of this package.
4.4
Drone configuration
All of the above was necessary in order to create an operational platform with a suitable
communication network for the development process. The last step before starting the
actual offboard control application is to set up the drone and other parameters that are
crucial for a successful PX4 SITL simulation.
The configuration file in Airsim is a JSON file contains all the necessary definitions, such
as the drone type, the sensor types and parameters, as well as environment variables.
First, SimMode must be set to Multirotor. This determines the drone simulation (there is
car simulation as well in Airsim). Next, SteppableClock was selected as the ClockType,
this synchronizes PX4 and the simulator so they essentially use the same clock time. The
simulation offers more customization options, including camera views, weather conditions
etc., but for this project, this level of detail is enough.
1
{
2
"SettingsVersion": 1.2,
3
"SimMode": "Multirotor",
4
"ClockType": "SteppableClock",
Next step is configuring the vehicle for use. specifically a PX4 multicopter that commu-
nicates via the UDP and TCP ports like mentioned before. With SteppableClock and
LockStep enabled, AirSim no longer uses a realtime clock. Instead, it advances the clock
in step which each sensor update sent to PX4. Thus, PX4 senses time as progressing
smoothly, regardless of how long it actually takes AirSim to calculate the update loop.
1
"Vehicles": {
2
"PX4": {
3
"VehicleType": "PX4Multirotor",
4
"UseSerial": false,
5
"LockStep": true,
6
"UseTcp": true,
7
"TcpPort": 4560,
8
"ControlPortLocal": 14540,
9
"ControlPortRemote": 14580,
After the vehicle is defined, the next step is configuring the sensors mounted on the drone.
As mentioned before the drone is equipped with five sensors:
• Barometer (for height measurements)
• GPS (for global drone position)
• IMU (accelerometer, gyroscope)
• Magnetometer (for orientation)
34
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:43==
• Camera (for machine vision)
The basics sensors that are required for the estimations are set to their default parameters,
but any adjustments can be easily applied if necessary for a more accurate simulation.
1
"Sensors":{
2
"Barometer":{
3
"SensorType": 1,
4
"Enabled": true,
5
"PressureFactorSigma": 0.0001825
6
},
7
"Gps": {
8
"SensorType": 3,
9
"Enabled": true,
10
"GlobalOriginLatitude": 47.641468,
11
"GlobalOriginLongitude": -122.140165,
12
"GlobalOriginAltitude": 200
13
},
14
"Imu": {
15
"SensorType": 2,
16
"Enabled" : true,
17
},
18
"Magnetometer": {
19
"SensorType": 4,
20
"Enabled": true
21
}
22
},
However the camera configuration is different from the previous sensors. First it needs to
be set up the parameters. CaptureSettings section is responsible for the camera settings:
ImageType 0 refers to ”Scene” that is the RGB type image, the width and height values
defines a HD resolution, and finally the FOV_degrees set the field of view. The camera
position and orientation with respect to the drone’s local frame can also be adjust and
finally a Gimbal can be added to the camera for stabilization in certain angles.
1
"Cameras": {
2
"front_center_custom": {
3
"CaptureSettings": [
4
{
5
"PublishToRos": 1,
6
"ImageType": 0,
7
"Width": 1280,
8
"Height": 720,
9
"FOV_Degrees": 45
10
}
11
],
12
"X": 0.5, "Y": 0.0, "Z": 0.1,
13
"Pitch": 0, "Roll": 0, "Yaw": 0,
14
"Gimbal": {
15
"Stabilization": 1,
16
"Pitch": 0,
17
"Roll": 0
18
}
19
},
However, as Figure 4.7. showed earlier, the camera is directly connected with the com-
panion computer where the images are processed and information (e.g. fire and smoke
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
35
==PAGE:44==
positions) are extracted from them to make decisions accordingly and send commands
later for PX4. Moreover, the PX4_msgs does not contain any messages that is capable
for carrying information from an image. Therefore, to be able to reach the virtual camera
image from ROS 2, Airsim’s built in feature called the ROS Wrapper was used. This is
what PublishToRos refers to.
Airsim’s ROS Wrapper is basically a tool for creating a ROS node called airsim_node,
which is a wrapper over the Airsim’s multirotor C++ licrary. When it is launched, it creates
the node and several publishers and subscribers among which the following is the most
important for the project:
/airsim_node/PX4/front_center_custom/Scene
This publisher sends the virtually captured images to this topic using the ROS standard
sensor_msgs/Image.msg message type that contains the uncompressed image as a matrix.
With subscribing to this topic, camera images from the virtual environment become available
from ROS 2 application.
The final step in the configuration file is to initialize more parameters like disabling re-
mote control for offboard mode, setting GPS origins, adjusting parameters for smoother
manual/offboard mode transition and more.
1
"Parameters": {
2
"NAV_RCL_ACT": 0,
3
"NAV_DLL_ACT": 0,
4
"COM_OBL_ACT": 1,
5
"LPE_LAT": 47.641468,
6
"LPE_LON": -122.140165
7
}
With this setup, the drone is fully equipped to carry out the fire detection and path planning
tasks, meeting the expectations established for the project.
36
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:45==
5
Software in the loop deployment
Once all systems are fully operational, PX4, Airsim and ROS 2 are properly configured and
they have a seamless communication network between them, the development process
can be started. A dedicated ROS 2 package was created within a ROS 2 workspace to
host the scripts of the application. This package serves as the core of the development
containing all the necessary files for the fire detection operation drone demo. Creating
this ROS 2 framework is an essential initial step, providing a foundation for building and
testing the code.
Since the SITL setup process requires the launch of multiple independent components
every time, a tmux [28] bash script was created to improve efficiency and ease of use. The
start_simulation.sh file launch the following elements in one window but in separate
tabs:
• Start PX4 in SITL mode:
make px4_sitl none_iris
• Start uXRCE Agent for the PX4 - Ros 2 bridge:
MicroXRCEAgent udp4 -p 8888
• Start QGroundControl ground station:
./QGroundControl.AppImage
• Launch the airsim_node from Airsim/ros2 folder (after sourcing ROS 2 and the
work space):
ros2 launch airsim_node.launch.py
• Launch the development script (after sourcing ROS 2 and the ROS 2 work space):
python3 offboard_pipeline_test.py
Along with this, Unreal Engine 5 also needs to be run, with the proper environment in in it.
As the ultimate goal is to develop a fully autonomous early warning wildfire detection system,
it is important to clarify the desired features required for the drone and the anticipated
outcomes of the project. This will help at the evaluation phase whether the project meets
with the operational needs or not. The drone should achieve the following objectives:
1. Completely autonomous operation: no human intervention is allowed throughout the
flight
2. Effective fire and smoke detection: high resolution imaging and integration of the
YOLOv7 model
3. Real-time data transmission: capability to send analysed information about detected
fire to PX4 for immediate response
4. Functional pipeline: the drone should take off, locate the fire without any prior
information, and fly directly above the identified fire
5. Sending the GPS coordinates: the ultimate goal, sending the longitude and latitude
values of the fire’s location
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
37
==PAGE:46==
The final objective was determined based on the information gathered from the airborne
fire service of the United States and Australia. Since my system is designed from the
start to areas where ground-based firefighting is either impossible or highly impractical,
like huge forest or other uninhabited areas, aerial suppression becomes the only viable
option. Therefore, I reached out to the National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) [29] that
coordinates the national mobilization of resources for wildland fires throughout the United
States and the New South Wales Rural Fire Service (NSW RFS) [30] firefighting agency
of the Government of New South Wales, Australia. I presented my thesis idea to them
and asked for their advice about what type of early warning information would be most
useful for aerial firefighters. Both agencies independently provided the same response:
approximate GPS coordinates are required to guide aerial firefighting resources to the
area. Once the planes are in the specific area, all aerial fire suppression operations are
carried out via VFR (Visual Flight Rules),meaning the actual firefighting is performed based
on visual observation.
5.1
Initialization
The development script called offboard_pipeline_test.py begins by importing the nec-
essary libraries required for of ROS 2 operation, YOLO model integration, image processing
and other general libraries. To keep all the installations in one place and separate them
from other projects, a virtual python environment was used.
By OffboardControl class, a node is created controlling the drone in offboard mode and
hadles all the communication between PX4, Airsim and ROS 2.
In the __init__ initialization function first the Quality of Service (QoS) profile needs to be
configured for reliable data transmission. ROS 2 nodes should subscribe topics published
by PX4 using the ROS 2 predefined QoS sensor data.
1
# Configure QoS profile for publishing and subscribing
2
qos_profile = QoSProfile(
3
reliability=ReliabilityPolicy.BEST_EFFORT ,
4
durability=DurabilityPolicy.TRANSIENT_LOCAL ,
5
history=HistoryPolicy.KEEP_LAST ,
6
depth=1
7
)
Listing 5.1: QoS profile configuration
Next, the publishers are created. These publishers are pushing information on the topics
that was created by PX4 through the uXRCE-DDS bridge, the name fmu stands for Flight
Management Unit. All of them are responsible for enabling the drone’s operation in offboard
mode, therefore their functionality will be explained in the following Section 5.2.
1
# Create publishers
2
self.offboard_control_mode_publisher = self.create_publisher(
3
OffboardControlMode , '/fmu/in/offboard_control_mode', qos_profile)
4
self.trajectory_setpoint_publisher = self.create_publisher(
5
TrajectorySetpoint , '/fmu/in/trajectory_setpoint', qos_profile)
6
self.vehicle_command_publisher = self.create_publisher(
7
VehicleCommand , '/fmu/in/vehicle_command', qos_profile)
Listing 5.2: Necessary publishers for the application
Similarly, subscribers were made to receive data from the environment. There are three
particularly interesting sensor inputs:
38
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:47==
• GPS data for obtaining the fire location data
• Image from camera facing forward
• Image from camera facing downward
It can be observed that the GPS data can be reached through a topic published by PX4
(fmu), while camera images are coming from the airsim_node.
1
# Create subscribers
2
self.vehicle_gps_position_subscriber = self.create_subscription(
3
SensorGps , '/fmu/out/vehicle_gps_position', self.
vehicle_gps_position_callback , qos_profile)
4
self.image_subscriber = self.create_subscription(
5
Image, 'airsim_node/PX4/front_center_custom/Scene', self.image_callback ,
10)
6
self.downward_camera_subscriber = self.create_subscription(
7
Image, 'airsim_node/PX4/bottom_center_custom/Scene', self.
downward_camera_callback , 10)
Listing 5.3: Necessary subscribers for the application
To handle the incoming data callback functions were applied. These functions are auto-
matically called whenever new data is received from their respective topics. Note that
self.vehicle_gps_position variable is initialized as a standard SensorGps uORB mes-
sage.
1
# Callback functions
2
def vehicle_gps_position_callback(self, vehicle_gps_position):
3
self.vehicle_gps_position = vehicle_gps_position
4
5
def image_callback(self, msg):
6
self.latest_msg = msg
7
8
def downward_camera_callback(self, msg):
9
self.latest_downward_msg = msg
Listing 5.4: Callback functions for the subscribers
To detect fire and smoke in images captured by the cameras, the trained YOLOv7 model
must be integrated into the project. The following three lines are responsible for selecting
GPU for running YOLOv7 model, then loading the model weights file (best_weights.pt)
from a given path and finally self.names retrieves the class names (fire and smoke) from
the model.
1
# Loading YOLOv7
2
self.device = select_device('')
3
self.model = attempt_load('/.../yolov7/runs/train/exp/weights/best_weights.pt'
, map_location=self.device)
4
self.names = self.model.module.names if hasattr(self.model, 'module') else
self.model.names
Listing 5.5: Loading YOLOv7
The rest of the initialization function is dedicated to setting up various parameters that are
used throughout the project. Following this, several helper functions are defined to support
different tasks in the project. The most significant among these is the process_image()
function.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
39
==PAGE:48==
The process_image() function is developed to handle and process any images captured
by one of the two cameras on the drone. It is responsible the fire and smoke detection on
the input images. Highlighting the most important parts, the function works as follows
1. Camera selection: At a certain time the system only has one active camera. This
is stored in the self.current_camera variable. According to its value ("front" or
"downward") the active camera is selected as the source of the input. The image
is converted then to a suitable format using CVBridge that facilitates conversion
between ROS image messages and OpenCV image formats.
1
self.br = CvBridge()
2
self.current_frame = self.br.imgmsg_to_cv2(self.latest_msg)
Listing 5.6: Camera selection
2. Image preparation: All the necessary modifications are applied to ready the image
for input into YOLOv7. The image is converted to RGB (from OpenCV’s BGR),
then resized to 640x640 pixels, then transposed from Height-Width-Channel(HWC)
format to Channel-Height-Width (CHW) format, then converted to a contiguous
NumPy array, then converted to a PyTorch tensor and finally the pixel values are
normalized. Additional dimension was added to the image (1, Channel, Height,
Width) and then it is ready for the detection.
1
# Prepare image for detection
2
img = cv2.resize(current_frame_rgb , (640, 640))
# resize to YOLOv7
input size
3
img = img.transpose(2, 0, 1)
# HWC to CHW
4
img = np.ascontiguousarray(img) # cont numpy
5
img = torch.from_numpy(img).to(self.device) # to torch tensor
6
img = img.float()
# convert to float
7
img /= 255.0
# normalize to 0-1
8
if img.ndimension() == 3:
9
img = img.unsqueeze(0)
# add dimension
Listing 5.7: Image preparation
3. Object detection: Feeding the model with the preprocessed image to obtain pre-
dictions. Afterwards, the predictions are filtered using non-maximum suppression
(NMS) to get only the most confident detections.
1
# Perform detection
2
pred = self.model(img)[0]
3
pred = non_max_suppression(pred, 0.25, 0.45, classes=None, agnostic=
False)
#thresh , IoU
Listing 5.8: Object detection
4. Processing detections: Detections consists bounding box coordinates, confidence
score and class label. Bounding boxes are resized to original image size. The
function analyzes each detection and if it meets the previously defined confidence
threshold (0.5, adjustable), it updates the highest confidence detection.
40
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:49==
1
det[:, :4] = scale_coords(img.shape[2:], det[:, :4], self.
current_frame.shape).round()
#resize
2
# Loop through detections and find fire and smoke with highest
confidence
3
for *xyxy, conf, cls in det:
4
if int(cls) == 0 and conf > highest_confidence_fire:
# class 0
is fire
5
highest_confidence_fire = conf
6
fire_detection = (xyxy, conf, cls)
7
elif int(cls) == 1 and conf > highest_confidence_smoke:
# class
1 is smoke
8
highest_confidence_smoke = conf
9
smoke_detection = (xyxy, conf, cls)
Listing 5.9: Processing detections
5. Offset calculation: The offset values between the detected object’s bounding box
and the image center is calculated. The function prioritizes smoke detections over
fire detections.
1
# Calculate the center of the bounding box
2
bbox_center_x = (xyxy[0] + xyxy[2]) / 2
3
bbox_center_y = (xyxy[1] + xyxy[3]) / 2
4
# Calculate the horizontal and vertical offsets from the image center
5
offset_x = bbox_center_x - image_center_x
6
offset_y = bbox_center_y - image_center_y
7
8
# Decide which detection to prioritize for movement (smoke preferred)
9
if smoke_detection:
10
best_detection = smoke_detection
11
elif fire_detection:
12
best_detection = fire_detection
13
else:
14
best_detection = None
Listing 5.10: Offset calculation
6. Display and return: The processed image, that includes thebounding boxes is dis-
played in a new window. The function returns the offsets in the x and y directions,
as well as the confidence score.
1
cv2.imshow("camera", self.current_frame)
2
cv2.waitKey(1)
3
4
return offset_x , offset_y , conf
Listing 5.11: Display and return
process_image() function is used several times during the project.
5.2
Offboard controlling
Offboard Control mode enables fully autonomous drone flight from takeoff to landing. The
vehicle obeys position, velocity or acceleration setpoints provided by a computer that is
external to the flight stack.
PX4 must get contant proof that the external source is healthy and operating well. When
using ROS2 that can be achieved by providing a constant stream of OffboardControlMode
message. In addition to handling the heartbeat functionality, OffboardControlMode has
two other essential tasks:
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
41
==PAGE:50==
• Manages the level within the PX4 control architecture where offboard setpoints must
be injected, while deactivating any bypassed controllers.
• Controls which position or velocity estimates are required for the specific mode and
selects the corresponding setpoint to be used
The technical implementation of the offboard mode heartbeat function is as follows:
1
def publish_offboard_control_heartbeat_signal(self, type: str):
2
"""Publish the offboard control mode."""
3
msg = OffboardControlMode()
4
if (type == "position"):
# Position control mode
5
msg.position = True
6
msg.velocity = False
7
elif (type == "velocity"):
# Velocity control mode
8
msg.position = False
9
msg.velocity = True
10
msg.acceleration = False
11
msg.attitude = False
12
msg.body_rate = False
13
msg.thrust_and_torque = False
14
msg.direct_actuator = False
15
msg.timestamp = int(self.get_clock().now().nanoseconds / 1000)
16
self.offboard_control_mode_publisher.publish(msg)
Listing 5.12: Offboard mode heartbeat function
The fields are coded in a hierarchical order with position taking precedence over velocity
an the subsequent fields. The first level with non-zero True value determines the required
valid estimate for offboard mode, thus dictates which setpoint message should be applied.
Finally the OffboardControlMode() message is published to the previously mentioned
/fmu/in/offboard_control_mode PX4 topic.
Simultaneously, the actual setpoint (whether position or velocity) is provided by pub-
lishing data to the specific setpoint uORB topics, such as the TrajectorySetpoint.
TrajectorySetpoint contains, among other fields, the position [m], velocity [m/s] and
acceleration [m/s2] setpoints. Only one of these can be active at a time (non-NaN), all
the others should be NaN. All values interpreted in NED (North, East, Down) coordinates
system. Eventually, the TrajectorySetpoint() message is published to the previously
mentioned /fmu/in/trajectory_setpoint PX4 topic.
1
def publish_position_setpoint(self, lat, lon, alt, yaw):
2
"""Publish the trajectory setpoint using GPS coordinates."""
3
msg = TrajectorySetpoint()
4
msg.position = [lat, lon, alt]
5
msg.velocity = [math.nan, math.nan, math.nan]
6
msg.yaw = yaw
7
msg.timestamp = int(self.get_clock().now().nanoseconds / 1000)
8
self.trajectory_setpoint_publisher.publish(msg)
Listing 5.13: Publishing position setpoints
Similarly, the velocity setpoint is published, with the key difference being that NED frame
to the body frame transformation is applied.
42
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:51==
1
def publish_velocity_setpoint(self, vx, vy, vz, yaw):
2
"""Publish the velocity setpoint."""
3
# Transform the body frame velocity to NED frame
4
ned_vx, ned_vy = self.transform_body_to_ned(vx, vy, yaw)
5
msg = TrajectorySetpoint()
6
msg.velocity = [ned_vx , ned_vy , vz]
7
msg.position = [math.nan, math.nan, math.nan]
8
msg.yaw = yaw
9
msg.timestamp = int(self.get_clock().now().nanoseconds / 1000)
10
self.trajectory_setpoint_publisher.publish(msg)
Listing 5.14: Publishing velocity setpoints
Another critical aspect of offboard flight is to send specific commands to the vehicle,
such as takeoff, landing, arming, disarming, or switching from manual to offboard control
mode. This is achieved through the publisch_vehicle_command() functions that defines
a VehicleCommand() message, configures the parameters to meet the requirements of
the current command and then publishes the message to the /fmu/in/vehicle_command
PX4 topic.
1
def publish_vehicle_command(self, command , **params) -> None:
2
"""Publish a vehicle command."""
3
msg = VehicleCommand()
4
msg.command = command
5
msg.param1 = params.get("param1", 0.0)
6
msg.param2 = params.get("param2", 0.0)
7
msg.target_system = 1
8
msg.target_component = 1
9
msg.source_system = 1
10
msg.source_component = 1
11
msg.from_external = True
12
msg.timestamp = int(self.get_clock().now().nanoseconds / 1000)
13
self.vehicle_command_publisher.publish(msg)
Listing 5.15: Publishing vehicle commands
5.3
State machine
The actual drone flight can be modeled effectively as a state machine. According to the
objectives of the thesis, the drone must be capable of performing the following tasks:
1. Take off: Autonomously take off
2. Search for fire: Capability for exploring its surroundings in all directions.
3. Fire detection: Detect and locate fire within the camera’s field of view.
4. Fly to the fire: Move towards the detected fire
5. Fly over the fire: Position itself above the fire for better view and precise GPS
coordinates
6. Send warning: Send message with the current GPS coordinates
Based on the criteria outlined, the state machine diagram has been created to model the
drone’s flight operations. In the upcoming sections, all the states will be presented along
with a brief description of their function and role.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
43
==PAGE:52==
5.3.1
TAKE OFF
The TAKE_OFF handles the drone’s autonomous takeoff process. Enables offboard control
mode and transitions to the next state ones the desired altitude is reached. It includes the
following steps:
• Engage offboard control mode: Continuously publish position setpoints with the
desired altitude. Once the stream is sent more than 1 second (10 cycles, since the
timer callback works on 10 Hz), offboard mode is activated. Once the drone is armed,
it starts to elevate.
• Rising to target altitude: Once the drone reached the target altitude (with a defined
0.5 meter margin) calculated from the GPS altitude, it transitions the drone to the
FIRE_SEARCHING state
1
# Enable offboard mode
2
if self.offboard_setpoint_counter == 10:
3
self.engage_offboard_mode()
4
self.arm()
5
...
6
# Publishing position setpoints
7
self.publish_position_setpoint(0.0, 0.0, self.takeoff_height , 0.0)
Listing 5.16: Code snippets from handle_takeoff() function
Figure 5.1: Images from the drone before takeoff (left) and after it reached the desired
altitude (right)
5.3.2
FIRE SEARCHING
The FIRE_SEARCHING state manages the fire and smoke detections. In thsi state the front
camera is switched on and the drone performs a search pattern by turning a certain amount
time to time and periodically processes camera images to detect fire. If the drone detects
fire with sufficient confidence over multiple frames, it transitions to the next state. The
following steps are included:
• Camera: Front camera is switched on and the captured images are periodically
processed by the process_image function, discussed earlier. The function returns
with x and y offset between the detected bounding box and the image center. Further
decisions are made based on these data.
• Perform searching process: The drone rotating by 20 degrees each time to ensure
thorough coverage of all the directions and maximize the chance of detecting a fire. If
fire is detected with a high enough confidence level over several frames, the rotation
stops and the function transitions the drone to the FIRE_DETECTED state
44
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:53==
1
# Process image, by default the front camera image
2
offset_x , offset_y , confidence = self.process_image()
3
...
4
# Searching process
5
if elapsed_time >= self.search_duration:
6
self.current_yaw += self.turn_angle_rad # 20 deg
7
self.search_start_time = None
# Reset search start time
8
self.publish_position_setpoint(0.0,
9
0.0,
10
self.takeoff_height ,
11
self.current_yaw)
Listing 5.17: Code snippets from handle_fire_searching() function
Figure 5.2: Images from the drone before takeoff (left) and after it reached the desired
altitude (right)
5.3.3
FIRE DETECTED
The FIRE_SEARCHING state begins to operate when fire or smoke was detected. It is
a relatively short state, the main task it is reponsible for to ensure that the detected
item remains visible for a sufficient duration to confirm its presence. If confirmed, the
drone transitions to the next state however if the fire is lost, the drone returns to the
FIRE_SEARCHING state. It consists the following steps:
• Confirm detection: The elapsed time is measured while the image processor contin-
ues to detect a target. The elapsed time is reset when detection lost. If the elapsed
time is longer than a certain threshold then the detection is stable and reliable, the
functions transitions the drone to the CENTER_ON_FIRE state.
• Return to search phase: If the fire is no longer detected within a certain threshold,
the drone transitions back to the FIRE_SEARCHING state to resume scanning the area.
This allowing the drone to recover from temporary losses of detection and continue
the mission.
1
if self.current_confidence is not None:
2
if elapsed_time >= self.fire_detection_duration:
3
self.state = "CENTER_ON_FIRE"
4
else:
5
self.no_detection_counter += 1
6
if self.no_detection_counter >= self.no_detection_threshold:
7
self.state = "FIRE_SEARCHING"
8
self.no_detection_counter = 0
Listing 5.18: Code snippets from handle_fire_searching() function
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
45
==PAGE:54==
5.3.4
CENTER ON FIRE
The CENTER_ON_FIRE state is responsible for adjusting the drones orientation to face
towards the detected fire. Once the fire is centered, the drone transitions to the next state.
The process is implemented as follows:
• Adjust yaw: After obtaining offset and confidence information from image processing,
if the fire is detected off-center (meaning out of a certain range), the drone adjusts its
yaw in small increments to bring the fire within the defined range. Once the centering
is sufficient, the drone moves to the next state called MOVE_TOWARDS_FIRE.
1
if abs(offset_x) <= self.center_tolerance:
2
# No adjustment needed
3
yaw_adjustment = 0
4
else:
5
# Calculate yaw adjustment based on the offset direction
6
yaw_adjustment = np.deg2rad(1) if offset > 0 else np.deg2rad(-1)
7
self.current_yaw += yaw_adjustment
8
self.publish_position_setpoint(0.0,
9
0.0,
10
self.takeoff_height ,
11
self.current_yaw)
Listing 5.19: Code snippets from handle_center_on_fire() function
Figure 5.3: Front camera images before (left) and after the fire centered (right)
5.3.5
MOVE TOWARDS FIRE
In MOVE_TOWARD_FIRE state the drone moves towards the detected fire. During the flight
the drone adjust its yaw value to if the fire is out of center and adjust the altitude to
maintain an optimal and safe height. If the fire lost from the front camera, it switches to
the downward-facing camera to continue tracking.
• Move towards fire: The drone switches to velocity control mode and publish velocity
setpoints for the controller to move forward. With this the drone starts to approach the
fire. In the meantime the yaw value is adjusted with the previous method according
to the information gaining from the front camera image
• Height adjustment: Height adjustment feature make the drone capable to increase
its altitude to maintain a safe distance from the fire (or smoke column)
• Camera switch: If the fire is lost from the front camera image for too long, the drone
switches to the downward-facing camera until detection appears on the image. When
fire is detected it transitions to the ENTER_ON_FIRE_FROM_DOWNWARD state.
46
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:55==
1
# Increase height if the fire/smoke is the upper half of the forward
camera image
2
if offset_y < 200:
3
vertical_velocity = -5.0 # m/s
4
else:
5
vertical_velocity = 0.0
6
# Move forward with a fixed velocity (meter/second)
7
forward_velocity = 10.0
8
self.control_mode = "velocity"
9
self.publish_velocity_setpoint(forward_velocity ,
10
0.0,
11
vertical_velocity ,
12
self.current_yaw)
Listing 5.20: Code snippets from handle_move_towards_fire() function
Figure 5.4: The steps of moving towards fire
5.3.6
CENTER ON FIRE FROM DOWNWARD
In the CENTER_ON_FIRE_FROM_DOWNWARD state the drone uses the downward-facing camera
to center itself above the detected fire or smoke. When the stable position is reached
accurate GPS coordinates can be print out as a warning.
• Centering fire: The drone adjusts its forward velocity based on the fire’s offset in the
downward-facing camera. After detecting fire for a sufficient time period the drone
fine-tunes its position using the same technique as before but both y and y direction.
• Send GPS date: Once the position is stabilized, the drone hovers and sends the
current GPS coordinates. Currently this is implemented by printing it out to the
console. At this point an IR sensor could also be applied to send images from the
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
47
==PAGE:56==
fire nest and help mapping the fire situation, but unfortunately it is not possible to
simulate a thermal camera in Airsim.
1
# Check if the offset is within the tolerance range
2
if abs(self.current_offset_y) <= self.center_tolerance:
3
# No adjustment needed
4
forward_velocity = 0.0
5
self.control_mode = "velocity"
6
self.publish_velocity_setpoint(forward_velocity , 0.0, 0.0, self.
current_yaw)
7
#self.state = "Return"
8
else:
9
# Calculate forward_velocity adjustment based on the offset direction
10
forward_velocity = -2 if self.current_offset_y > 0 else 2
11
self.control_mode = "velocity"
12
self.publish_velocity_setpoint(forward_velocity , 0.0, 0.0, self.
current_yaw)
Listing 5.21: Code snippets from handle_center_on_fire_from_downward() function
Figure 5.5: Downward-facing camera images before (left) and after the fire centered (right)
5.3.7
RETURN
In the RETURN state, the drone switches back to position control mode, returning to the
takeoff location and landing.
5.4
Evaluation of the simulation pipeline
Evaluating a SITL simulation, that was originally considered as a research project rather
than a fully developed, all-encompassing product, is hard.However, through the develop-
ment process, several statements can be taken.
The project has successfully delivered a functional SITL simulation that meets all the
primary objectives outlined at the beginning, allowing capability for autonomous operation.
Splitting the project into two main parts, the first involves YOLOv7, which has already been
evaluated separately.
The model was successfully integrated into the project, seamlessly connected with Airsim,
PX4, and ROS 2, enabling these systems to work together. Overall, the YOLOv7 model
performed efficiently. After setting up several range tests, the model consistently and
accurately detected test fires at distances up to 1.5 - 2 km, which is an impressive result.
Though, this performance is highly influenced by the light conditions, the terrain, and the
input image resolution. But this performance is remarkable providing a solid foundation for
possible future advancements.
48
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:57==
A notable weakness of the model was that during the development false positive detections
were produced, regardless of the distance of the target fire. This presented a technical
challenge that required addressing to ensure reliable drone operation. Although These
issues were successfully handled in the code, this problem must be solved, probably with
retraining the YOLO model with an improved dataset.
Based on the development experience, prioritizing smoke detections over fire detections
proved to be a more efficient idea. Several tests demonstrated that detecting smoke is
generally more efficient because smoke columns always rise high into the sky while the
fire nests can be covered by trees or even the terrain features like hills. The project detects
both fire and smoke but prioritizes smoke due to this reason.
Similarly to the previous reason,choosing a standard camera over a thermal camera for
the main sensor was a good decision. Thermal cameras are highly effective when the
drone is close to the fire already, as they can see through smoke and provide a clearer
view of the fire’s spread. However, this project focused on the long range detection, rather
than the short range, precise detection. Ideally, a combination of both types of cameras
would provide the optimal solution to make decisions based on the information getting from
them. Additionally, as it was mentioned previously, Airsim is not capable to sufficiently
model a thermal camera right now.
In summary, the developed simulation pipeline results in a highly functional, accurate, and
high-fidelity simulation. It successfully integrates an AI-powered object detection model and
makes effective decisions. The setup contains a fully operational PX4 SITL configuration
with the necessary communication network. It has a modular structure therefore scaling
and improving specific blocks (like the YOLOv7 or fire detection logic) is possible.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion
Reflecting on the initial objectives outlined at the beginning of this project, two primary
objectives were defined: to develop a fully autonomous drone SITL simulation system that
is capable of operating without human intervention, and to integrate an AI powered fire
detection system that handles decision making independently from any external source
and make the drone capable to recognise fire and send early warning. Both objectives
have been successfully achieved.
The first part of the project focused on finding and training an AI powered object detection
model that is capable of reliably detecting fire and smoke. YOLOv7 was trained on a
virtual fire and smoke dataset and achieved impressive results in locating fires in virtual
environment. While the model’s performance met the project’s requirements, there is
potential for further improvement. Additionally, if the project will be tested in the real world
in the future, the model would need to be retrained on a more diverse dataset for better
performance in real world conditions.
The integration of PX4, AirSim, and ROS2 has been successfully executed, creating a
functional simulation environment. The PX4 SITL environment provides the flight control
units and simulation capabilities, while Airsim offers a high fidelity, photorealistic, virtual
environment for modeling not only fire and smoke but also complex terrains. ROS2
provides seamless communication between the different components of the system. The
output is a robust pipeline with the ability to support complex autonomous operations.
The PX4 SITL simulation system has been designed to operate autonomously, requiring no
human intervention. The decision making is managed entirely by the companion computer,
enabling it to execute wildfire detection tasks. The simulation demonstrates the drone’s
ability to autonomously take off, search for fire, detect it, fly above the fire, and send GPS
coordinates to support further suppression actions.
In summary, the project has successfully met all the objectives by performing a fully
operational SITL simulation system with autonomous capabilities and an integrated AI-
powered fire detection system. The YOLOv7 model’s performance, while highly effective,
presents opportunities for future enhancements. The integration of PX4, AirSim, and
ROS2 has proven successful, establishing a robust and functional autonomous drone
system. This project not only achieved its goals but hopefully lays a strong foundation for
future developments and improvements in autonomous early warning wildfire detection
drone systems.
6.1
Future work
Several improvement ideas popped up during the development process. Integrating
obstacle avoidance would improve the navigation in complex environments. Retraining
the fire detection AI model with a more diverse dataset would result a more reliable
early warning system. Adding a thermal camera will improve fire detection, especially in
low-visibility conditions. Control and positioning system can be enhanced with additional
sensors (like distance sensor for height measurements) will cause more precise operations.
Integrating other drones to create a multi drone system can allow more effective fire
response strategies.
Finally, transitioning from SITL to HITL and then performing real-world tests can validate
the system’s performance.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Abdelmalek Bouguettaya et al. “A review on early wildfire detection from unmanned
aerial vehicles using deep learning-based computer vision algorithms”. In: Signal
Processing 190 (2022), p. 108309. ISSN: 0165-1684. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.sigpro.2021.108309. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0165168421003467.
[2]
Jennifer K. Balch et al. “Human-started wildfires expand the fire niche across the
United States”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114.11 (2017),
pp. 2946–2951. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1617394114. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/doi/
pdf/10.1073/pnas.1617394114. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
1617394114.
[3]
S Srividhya et al. “Fire Detection System using Deep Learning Techniques”. In:
2022 4th International Conference on Inventive Research in Computing Applications
(ICIRCA). 2022, pp. 721–726. DOI: 10.1109/ICIRCA54612.2022.9985499.
[4]
Guodong Wang et al. “Fire in Focus: Advancing Wildfire Image Segmentation by
Focusing on Fire Edges”. In: Forests (2024). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:267181855.
[5]
Pietro Battistoni et al. “A Cyber-Physical System for Wildfire Detection and Firefight-
ing”. In: Future Internet 15.7 (2023). ISSN: 1999-5903. DOI: 10.3390/fi15070237.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/15/7/237.
[6]
B. Dwyer, J. Nelson, T. Hansen, et al. Roboflow (Version 1.0) [Software]. https:
//roboflow.com. Computer Vision. 2024.
[7]
Yunnan University. synthetic fire-smoke Dataset. https://universe.roboflow.com/
yunnan-university/synthetic-fire-smoke. Open Source Dataset. visited on 2024-08-02.
Apr. 2023. URL: https://universe.roboflow.com/yunnan-university/synthetic-fire-smoke.
[8]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context”. In: CoRR
abs/1405.0312 (2014). arXiv: 1405.0312. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312.
[9]
Chien-Yao Wang, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao. “YOLOv7: Train-
able bag-of-freebies sets new state-of-the-art for real-time object detectors”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.02696 (2022).
[10]
WongKinYiu. YOLOv7: Real-Time Object Detection. https://github.com/WongKinYiu/
yolov7. Accessed: 2024-07-01. 2022.
[11]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection”.
In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
(2015), pp. 779–788. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:206594738.
[12]
Lei Zhao et al. “Fire-YOLO: A Small Target Object Detection Method for Fire Inspec-
tion”. In: Sustainability 14.9 (2022), p. 4930. DOI: 10.3390/su14094930.
[13]
Abhimanyu Singh and Manisha J Nene. Optimization of YOLOv7’s Hyperparameters
for Simultaneous Object Detection in Satellite Imagery. Feb. 2023.
[14]
Esra Yildirim, Umut Sefercik, and Taskin Kavzoglu. “Automated Vehicle Detection
and Instance Segmentation from High-Resolution UAV Imagery Using YOLOv7
Model”. In: 5th Intercontinental Geoinformation Days (2022).
[15]
Chris Hughes and Bernat Puig Camps. “YOLOv7: A Deep Dive into the Current
State-of-the-Art for Object Detection”. In: Towards Data Science (Nov. 2022). https:
//towardsdatascience.com/yolov7-a-deep-dive-into-the-current-state-of-the-art-for-
object-detection-53c660bcd72b.
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
53
==PAGE:62==
[16]
PX4 Autopilot. PX4 User Guide. Accessed: 2024-08-12. 2024. URL: https://docs.
px4.io/main/en/.
[17]
Open Robotics. Gazebo Documentation: Get Started. Accessed: 2024-08-12. 2024.
URL: https://gazebosim.org/docs/latest/getstarted/.
[18]
Unity Technologies. Unity. Game development platform. 2023. URL: https://unity.
com/.
[19]
Epic Games. Unreal Engine. Version 5.2. URL: https://www.unrealengine.com.
[20]
NVIDIA OMNIVERSE. Isaac Sim. Simulation development platform. 2023. URL:
https://docs.omniverse.nvidia.com/isaacsim/latest/index.html.
[21]
Marcelo Jacinto et al. “Pegasus Simulator: An Isaac Sim Framework for Multiple
Aerial Vehicles Simulation”. In: 2024 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (ICUAS). 2024, pp. 917–922. DOI: 10.1109/ICUAS60882.2024.10556959.
[22]
Shital Shah et al. “AirSim: High-Fidelity Visual and Physical Simulation for Au-
tonomous Vehicles”. In: Field and Service Robotics. 2017. eprint: arXiv:1705.05065.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.05065.
[23]
Codex Laboratories LLC. Codex Laboratories LLC. Accessed: 2024-08-12. 2021.
URL: https://www.codex-labs-llc.com/.
[24]
Codex Labs LLC. Colosseum GitHub Repository. Accessed: 2024-08-12. 2024. URL:
https://github.com/CodexLabsLLC/Colosseum.
[25]
Atoossa Bakhshaii and Edward A. Johnson. “Atmospheric Observation under Sam-
pling Problem: The Impact of Unresolved Micro-Scale Boundary Layer Eddies on
Climate Trends”. In: Open Journal of Statistics 7.6 (2017), pp. 1092–1110. DOI:
10.4236/ojs.2017.76077. URL: https://www.scirp.org/journal/paperinformation.aspx?
paperid=80494.
[26]
Robert A. Braeunig. Earth Atmosphere Model. http://www.braeunig.us/space/
atmmodel.htm.
[27]
Dronecode Foundation. QGroundControl. http://qgroundcontrol.com/. Accessed:
[Date Accessed].
[28]
Alexis Hildebrandt Nicholas Marriott. tmux: Terminal multiplexer. https://github.com/
tmux/tmux. 2007.
[29]
National Interagency Fire Center. National Interagency Fire Center. n.d. URL: https:
//www.usa.gov/agencies/national-interagency-fire-center.
[30]
New South Wales Rural Fire Service. NSW Rural Fire Service. n.d. URL: https:
//www.rfs.nsw.gov.au/.
54
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Detailed YOLOv7 architecture
Autonomous wildland fire detection powered by artificial intelligence
55
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
