==PAGE:1==
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Mea-
surements Using Computer Vision and Velocity
Detection
Masters Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Ve-
locity Detection
Masters Thesis
Submitted: August 19, 2024
By
Rógvi Ziskason
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Anker Engelunds Vej,
Building 301, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.energy.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This Master’s thesis has been prepared over a semester of 30 ECTS points at the Section for
Energy, Department of Energy Storage and Conversion, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. (Cand. Polyt)
Rógvi Ziskason - s193904
Signature
Date
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The advancement of materials science, particularly in electrochemical energy storage, demands
precise and efficient research tools. This thesis presents the design and development of a low-
cost autonomous viscometer, aimed at democratising access to advanced viscosity measurement
tools. The developed viscometer integrates accessible materials and open-source software to cre-
ate a modular solution that can be easily adapted to fit into different high throughput systems. The
entire cost of the module had to be within 3333 DKK (495 USD) and require a sample size of no
more than 2 millilitres. The methodology used here to measure the viscosity of electrolytes, was
the rolling ball viscometer. The viscometer was designed to operate autonomously, providing re-
liable and repeatable measurements without requiring continuous supervision. This is facilitated
through a Arduino based hardware setup combined with computer vision algorithms to measure
the velocity of the rolling ball. Getting a repeatable velocity measurement was deemed as the
most important success criteria as this is the first step towards accurate viscosity measurements
for the specific type of methodology. The measurement stability proved to have an average per-
centage deviation of 0.4 % across 10 different measurements, measured across difference rolling
distances. The final price of the module came out to be 1902 DKK (282 USD). Future work would
include calibrating the viscometer across different liquids to get an actual viscosity measurement.
As well as extending the device’s capabilities to include temperature control and enhanced sen-
sor technologies to improve accuracy and expand the range of testable fluids. This thesis not only
contributes a practical tool to the field of viscosity measurement but also sets a foundation for fu-
ture innovations in autonomous laboratory technologies and self driving laboratories. The broader
implications of this work are significant, with potential impacts on accelerating material discovery
and supporting the development of more efficient and affordable energy storage solutions.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would generally like to thank all my supervisors for their unyielding support. Their guidance has
been very helpful throughout the project period, all the input as well as the good discussions were
much appreciated. I want to give my main supervisor, Associate Professor Jin Hyun Chang, a
special thanks for guiding me through this project and ensuring that I made it to the end. His
critical glaze and understanding of the field of self driving labs has been a great asset. Thanks to
PhD student, Nis Fisker-Bødker, for his efforts on getting me started with developing the hardware
required for the project. Thanks to Postdoc Victor Gregorio, for lending his knowledge on elec-
trolytes and liquid handling, his advice has been greatly appreciated. Thanks to postdoc, Smobin
Vincent, for his guidance through the project scope and what to include. Thanks to Professor Tejs
Vegge, for creating a pleasant workspace as well as giving me the opportunity to participate in the
Accelerate Conference 2024 in Vancouver, it was the experience of a lifetime.
Ramona Mateiu and Karina Frederiksen have my deepest gratitude for always being there with a
helping hand. Their efforts in helping me with the logistical part of the project was much appreci-
ated.
Lastly, I would like to thank my fellow masters students and colleagues, Kshitij Gambhir and Louie
Lucas Bisgaard Nyeland, for providing me with amazing sparring sessions and critical feedback,
thanks for all the coffee brainstorming sessions which lead to some of the best findings in this
project.
A special thanks goes to my family and friends for helping me through this and keeping me moti-
vated. Thanks to my girlfriend Jessica, who has been my rock throughout this entire period, being
there for me during my ups and (break)downs, I could not have done this without her.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Viscosity & Electrolytes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
New Research in Electrolytes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Related Work
5
3.1
A Different Approach to Viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Theory
7
4.1
The Concept of Viscosity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.1.1
Flow Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1.2
Newtonian vs Non-Newtonian Fluids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Measuring viscosity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2.1
Theory Behind the Final Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Process & Iterations
13
5.1
Choosing a Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.2
Iterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6
Methodology
20
6.1
Final Setup Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.1.1
Ball & Angle Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.1.2
Choosing a CV Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2.1
Viscometer Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7
Hardware
29
7.1
Design Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8
Results & Discussion
34
8.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8.1.1
Hardware Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8.2
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
v
==PAGE:7==
9
Conclusion
38
9.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
10 Appendix
43
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
2.1
View of the components in a lithium-ion battery [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.1
Image of a höeppler viscometer [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.1
Graph showing the relationship between dynamic viscosity [cP] and temperature
[°C] of water. [12] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Laminar and turbulent flow [14]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Examples of gravimetric viscometers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.4
Viscometers using vibration or rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.5
Force diagram of the viscometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.6
Force diagram of the rolling ball viscometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.1
Image of the VROC technology developed by Rheosense [8] . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Image of the test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Changes to the equilibrium speed test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.4
Final setup for the viscometer module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.1
Measurement procedure flowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2
Ball detection using background subtraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.3
Ball detection using background subtraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.4
Angle detection through analysis contours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7.1
Electrical components of the final setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.2
Comparing the design changes of the main module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.3
Viscometer arm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.4
Image and drawing of the camera stand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
vii
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
5.1
Time measurements at various heights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
8.1
Table showing the data for different drops at a fixed angle of 70 degrees. The drops
were made at different heights as shown by the Dist column.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
This thesis covers a project focusing on hardware and software modules for an autonomous ma-
terials acceleration platform, which supports research in electrochemical energy conversion and
storage technologies. Specifically, the aim of this thesis was to design a viscosity measurement
module for electrolytes used in various electrochemical systems. The thesis project falls into the
field of Self Driving Labs (SDL), which is considered a global effort to accelerate the discovery of
new materials [1].
The motivation for this project comes from the increasing need for reliable energy storage technolo-
gies and the extensive research required to develop these technologies. Accelerating the pace of
materials discovery, especially in areas like power-to-X and batteries, has become a major priority.
Currently, the methods used for materials discovery in this field are slow, often taking decades to
yield results. This delay hinders the rapid development of green energy technologies, which are
essential for addressing climate change and transitioning to sustainable energy sources[1].
There are already several technologies available for measuring viscosity. The purpose of this
thesis project, is not just to create functioning modules that can accurately measure viscosity, but
to also develop affordable, open-source modules that can be integrated into a larger, automated
system. The project aims to improve upon existing measurement techniques and connect them
to a broader open-source platform, ensuring the results are reliable and repeatable. The module
should also have a certain degree of modularity, improving maintenance and longer operation time.
This is particularly important because most current solutions on the market are either expensive,
designed for manual use, or dependent on continuous fluid streams, making them unsuitable for
sample-based systems.
The project addresses the challenge of speeding up materials discovery by exploring new ap-
proaches that combine advanced measurement techniques with machine learning algorithms and
autonomous optimisation cycles. The module developed through this project could play a sig-
nificant role in advancing energy conversion and storage technologies. The impact of this work
extends beyond theory, with real-world application in the discovery of new materials. By accel-
erating material discovery in this area this project aims to contribute to the development of more
efficient and affordable energy storage solutions, ultimately supporting the creation of a more sus-
tainable and resilient energy infrastructure that benefits society as a whole.
The scope of the thesis project is as follows. The viscometer will only be able to handle newtonian
fluids, as non-newtonian fluids require many additional steps in order to measure the viscosity.
The fluids used for testing are water and grape seed oil, therefore the hardware choices do not
reflect any material considerations with regards to chemical resistance.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
1
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Viscosity & Electrolytes
This chapter provides background theory of the relevance of viscosity in electrolytes. Electrolytes
are a critical component in batteries, as they are the medium for the movement of ions between
the electrodes (anode and cathode) during charge and discharge cycles.
Figure 2.1: View of the components in a lithium-ion battery [2]
Electrolytes can be classified into three main types: liquid, solid and gel electrolytes, with the
liquid type being the most widely used. Liquid electrolytes offer great ionic conductivity and ease
of manufacturing, but suffer in terms of safety and energy density. Solid electrolytes, often made
of ceramics or polymers, offer improved safety and energy density at the cost of ionic conductivity.
Lastly, gel electrolytes are somewhat of a mix between the liquid and solid electrolytes, improving
safety while maintaining a decent ionic conductivity.
Electrolytes primarily provide batteries with the following three attributes:
• Ion conduction: As previously stated, the primary function of the electrolyte is to conduct ions
between the anode and cathode, which enable the electrochemical reaction to take place.
The efficiency of ion transport directly affects the overall performance of the battery, including
its power output and capacity.
• Electrochemical stability: The electrolyte must be chemically and electrochemically stable
within the operating voltage of the battery. Without this stability the battery would be vulner-
able to degradation and thus a decrease in longevity.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
2
==PAGE:12==
• Separator support: The electrolyte can also act as a support medium for the separator.
Most battery types have a porous membrane as the separator, here the electrolyte will wet
the membrane ensuring continuous ionic pathways as well as improved structural integrity.
It is quite obvious that electrolytes play a crucial role in batteries, and in order to find new possible
batteries, new electrolytes also need to be considered.
The product of this thesis project will mostly be implemented on liquid electrolytes as they are
reliant on viscosity. Note that a more in depth explanation of viscosity as a concept can be found
in section 4.1.
Viscosity is a fundamental property of fluids, describing their resistance to flow, as well as the
resistance encountered by objects flowing through the fluid. Ion transport through the fluid is also
affected by this resistance, meaning that the ion conductivity of the electrolyte is heavily affected by
the viscosity. A concept used in the study of electrolytes is ion mobility, which refers to the speed
of which ions move through a medium. Viscosity is inversely related to the ion mobility, meaning
that when the viscosity increases the ion mobility will decrease, and vice versa. For a detailed
mathematical relation between ion mobility and viscosity, refer to the Stokes-Einstein-Sutherland
equation of diffusion for spherical particles [3]. Furthermore, the viscosity of the electrolyte has
been linked directly to the bonding energy between molecules, as well as the structural integrity
of the battery through the wetting of the separator [4].
Needless to say, viscosity is a crucial factor when studying and synthesising electrolytes for bat-
teries. When implemented into a larger autonomous system, the viscosity measurement module
can offer a new parameter for optimisation. This parameter could then aid the optimisation to meet
the requirements set by the user, which in this case would be an electrochemist. An example of
this could be that the user would need a battery that can deliver a high power output, this would
require a high ion mobility and therefore a low viscosity. However this viscosity cannot be too low,
as that could lead to side reactions and degradation. [4].
2.2
New Research in Electrolytes
High entropy liquid electrolytes have shown great promise in lithium-ion batteries. Increasing the
entropy of the electrolyte impacts the thermodynamic and kinetic properties, this in turn decreases
the binding strength between the lithium ions and the solvents anions. In other words, increasing
the entropy of the electrolyte leads to higher ion mobility and therefore improved ion conductivity.
This entropy increase is achieved by mixing multiple salts into the liquid electrolyte. An experiment
involving an electrolyte, containing four different salts, showed enhanced cycling stability and rate
capability while still maintaining high ion conductivity [5]. The development of these electrolytes
requires complete control of its intrinsic properties, e.g. density and viscosity[6]. The study of
high entropy electrolytes could benefit from an autonomous system where the electrolytes are
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
3
==PAGE:13==
synthesised with precise control of the different parameters, such as viscosity.
Such a system is currently in development at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The
beer bot is a flow-through filling system with the purpose of autonomously mixing electrolytes. The
name beer bot comes from the fact that a beer cooler is used as the cooling element for the system.
The entire system consists of high precision pumps dispensing certain amounts of liquids into a
mixing chamber. After mixing the sample is transported, via pumps, to different measurement
modules e.g. electrochemical stability window. The developed viscosity measurement module in
this thesis project was designed to be implemented into the beer bot as one of these measurement
modules.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
4
==PAGE:14==
3
Related Work
All related work found for this thesis is highlighted in this chapter. These products or articles
provide additional motivation for the thesis, as the goal is to enhance the existing range of viscosity
measurement tools with the developed module.
The höeppler viscometer is probably the most widely used adaptation of the rolling ball principle.
It consists of a tube mounted inside a transparent container, which is filled with water for easy
temperature control. For a viscometer to qualify as a höeppler viscometer the inclanation angle of
the tube has to be exaclty 80 °[7].
Figure 3.1: Image of a höeppler viscometer [7]
When purchasing such a viscometer, multiple balls are included to increase the viscosity range,
these balls may vary in size, density and material. Rheosense is a company that produces vis-
cometers and rheometers, they specialise in small sample sizes and high accuracy instruments.
Rheosense has developed the Viscometer-Rheometer-On-a-Chip (VROC) technology, which can
measure viscosity of newtonian and non-newtonian fluids from a 15 micro litre sample [8]. They
also offer an automated high throughput viscosity system, that can analyse 96 samples in 24 hours
[9].
The company Anton Paar produces a plethora of laboratory instruments, including viscometers.
Lovis 2000 M/ME is their high accuracy viscometer which uses a sample size of 200 micro litres
[10]. The viscometer is a rolling ball microviscometer that can measure viscosity accurately for
newtonian and non-newtonian fluids. The viscometer offers sample recovery as well as flow-
through filling for large sample throughput. The viscometer can also be combined with other units
from Anton Paar, e.g. their density measurement module, to make a multi measurement system.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
5
==PAGE:15==
The viscometers presented above are some of the most widely adapted or the most accurate
and modular products on the market. These three are mentioned because none of them offer,
flow-through filling, high accuracy and reasonably low cost at the same time. Both the VROC and
the Lovis viscometers offer flow-through filling, sample recovery and small sample sizes, but in
order to implement them into a system one has to remain within their respective ecosystems. The
market shows a gap when it comes to open source viscometer solutions that can be used across
different platforms.
3.1
A Different Approach to Viscosity
The article ”Probing the Viscosity of Liquid Electrolytes for Lithium Batteries” utilises a new method
of finding the viscosity of fluids through simulations combined with experimental data [4]. This
method is called screened overlapping method (SOM) and it derives the viscosity from molecular
dynamics simulations. Being able to derive the viscosity of the electrolyte through simulations
before synthesising it may seem like the most superior method. Unfortunately this method only
compliments the experimental data, as it gives insights into which factors influence the viscosity
at a molecular level.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
6
==PAGE:16==
4
Theory
4.1
The Concept of Viscosity
Viscosity is a measure of a fluid’s resistance to deformation or flow. It describes the internal friction
between the molecules in the fluid. When a fluid is subjected to flow, the viscosity can be thought of
as the resistance between the layers of the fluid. This property is quite important for understanding
the behaviour of different fluids under various conditions and is widely applicable in fields such as
materials science and chemistry. In practical terms, viscosity determines how ”thick” or ”thin” a
fluid is. For example, honey has a high viscosity, meaning it flows slowly and resists motion,
while water on the other hand, has a low viscosity, allowing it to flow easily[11]. The physical
concept of viscosity can be expressed in two forms: dynamic viscosity and kinematic viscosity.
Dynamic viscosity is the direct measure of the friction between the molecules, and is also known
as the absolute viscosity. The unit of dynamic viscosity is Pascal-seconds (Pa·s) which is the
same as Newton-seconds per square meter. A commonly used unit for the dynamic viscosity is
the centepoise (cP), where 1 cP is equal to 0.001 Pa·s. Kinematic viscosity is the ratio of dynamic
viscosity to the fluid’s density. The unit of kinematic viscosity is stokes (St), where 1 St = 1 cm2
s .
Since the kinematic viscosity accounts for the density of the fluid, it is often used in methods where
the flow of the fluid is caused by gravity.
When a fluid is subjected to a shear stress, which is a force that acts parallel across the layers, the
resulting deformation is dependent on the fluid’s viscosity. The rate of this deformation is called
shear rate. The relationship between shear rate and shear stress is described by Newton’s law of
viscosity:
τ = η · ˙γ
(4.1)
Where τ is the shear stress, η is the dynamic viscosity and ˙γ is the shear rate. Not all fluids
experience a change in viscosity when there is a change in shear rate, this separate’s the fluids
into two classes: newtonian fluids and non-newtonian fluids, these classes will be further explained
later insection 4.1.2.
The viscosity of a fluid is also affected by temperature, and all fluids experience a change in
viscosity when there is a change in temperature. When there is an increase in temperature the,
kinetic energy of the molecules increases, which leads to a reduction of the resistance between
the molecules. In other words, temperature leads to a change in the density of the fluid [12], e.g.
honey gets ”thinner” higher temperatures. This fact leads to the following statement about fluids:
higher temperatures lead to lower viscosity of liquids, note that for gasses it would be the opposite
case.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
7
==PAGE:17==
Figure 4.1: Graph showing the relationship between dynamic viscosity [cP] and temperature [°C]
of water. [12]
4.1.1
Flow Types
The type of flow that a fluid exhibits is important for many measurement techniques, as they often
rely on the flow being easy to predict. In general, there are two types of flow: laminar flow and
turbulent flow[13]. In laminar flow, the layers present in the fluid move with minimal mixing in
between them, resulting in the fluid flowing smoothly. Turbulent flow is the opposite of laminar
flow, the layers move with a lot of mixing and the flow becomes chaotic. Laminar flow typically
occurs at high viscosities or low velocities, while turbulent flow occurs at low viscosities and higher
velocities. Examples of both laminar and turbulent flow through a circular tube are presented in
fig. 4.2
Figure 4.2: Laminar and turbulent flow [14].
In fluid mechanics, the Reynolds number (Re) is used to help predict the flow of a fluid. It is a
dimensionless quantity, that compares the inertial forces to the viscous forces in a flow. More
information on the Reynolds number can be found in [13].
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
8
==PAGE:18==
4.1.2
Newtonian vs Non-Newtonian Fluids
As mentioned previously, not all fluids experience changes in viscosity due to changes in shear
rate, these fluids are called newtonian fluids. For newtonian fluids the dynamic viscosity η is
constant, meaning that no matter how fast or with which force the fluid is stirred or disturbed,
its viscosity remains the same. For non-newtonian fluids the dynamic viscosity is not a constant
and the relationship between shear stress and shear rate is non-linear. This makes them signifi-
cantly more complex to handle and to measure the viscosity of, as they become thicker or thinner
depending on how they are handled.
4.2
Measuring viscosity
Viscosity of a liquid is usually measured by timing a fluid flowing through a cup or tube, measuring
the force required to move an object in the fluid or by dropping some object into the fluid. Capillary
viscometers and flow cups are all based on timing the fluids flow over a specific distance. Here the
flow of the fluid is usually generated by pressure or gravity, note that in gravimetric viscometers
the flow is solely generated by gravity. With that being said, gravimetric capillaries and flow cups
yield the kinematic viscosity of the fluid, due to their reliance on gravity. There are different types
of capillaries and cups for the gravimetric viscometers, this is to account for higher and lower
viscosities. e.g. with gravity being the only driving force a highly viscous slow flowing fluid would
struggle through some of these capillaries and cups, see fig. 4.3.
(a) Types of Gravimetric capillaries [15]
(b) Types of flow cups [15]
Figure 4.3: Examples of gravimetric viscometers
Other than gravity, the flow of a fluid can be generated by applying pressure through a motor,
weight or gas pressure. These methods derive the viscosity from the pressure applied to the fluid,
and they measure the dynamic viscosity of the fluid sample [15]. Note that this is mostly done in
capillaries and not often seen in flow cups.
As mentioned, the viscosity of a fluid can also be derived from the force needed to move an object
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
9
==PAGE:19==
in the fluid. This movement is usually rotation or oscillation. A rotational viscometer works by
lowering a measuring bob [15] into the fluid and rotating it at a fixed speed. The torque required
to move said bob is then measured and from it the viscosity of the fluid can be derived. A similar
method is to use something like a tuning fork and vibrate it at a specific frequency, and then
measure the power needed to maintain the oscillation. Both of these methods yield dynamic
viscosity.
(a) Rotational viscometer
(b) Tuning fork vibration
Figure 4.4: Viscometers using vibration or rotation
Lastly, viscosity can be measured by dropping an object into the fluid and timing the fall of the
object. These types of viscometers are typically called stokes viscometers, as they adhere to
Stokes’s law of drag force exerted on spherical objects falling with constant velocity. The equation
for this force is as follows:
Fd = 6πηrv
(4.2)
Where Fd is the drag force, r is the radius of the spherical particle and v is the velocity of the particle
relative to the fluid. Note that this equation is based on several assumptions:
• The Reynolds number of the sample fluid must be less than 1
• The object is assumed to be a perfect sphere
• The fluid is newtonian and incompressible
• The flow around the sphere is assumed to be steady and not changing with time
If the conditions do not meet these assumptions, Stokes’s law does not hold and some corrections
are necessary for accurate measurements.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
10
==PAGE:20==
4.2.1
Theory Behind the Final Methodology
The methodology used in this project is the rolling ball viscometer, which is one of said stokes
viscometers. This methodology applies Stokes’s law to derive the viscosity of the sample fluid. In
order to properly go through these principles, the falling ball viscometer is used as an example.
The method is based on a force equilibrium between the forces acting on a steel ball: drag force,
buoyancy force and gravitational pull. fig. 4.5 shows a force diagram of the setup, where Fg is the
gravitational force, Fb is the buoyancy force and Fd is the drag force.
Figure 4.5: Force diagram of the viscometer
Fd is obtained through the equation from above eq. (4.2), Fg is obtained through Newtons second
law: Fg = mb · g using the mass of the ball. Lastly, Fb is derived from Archimedes principle, using
the density of the fluid and volume of the displaced fluid: Fb = ρ f · g · Vd f. When the ball reaches
equilibrium speed, the sum of the forces will equal zero. It is at this point, that the dynamic viscosity
can be isolated:
Fb + Fd −Fg = 0
(4.3)
η =
−ρ f gVdf + mbg
6πrv
(4.4)
The ball has to reach its equilibrium speed in order for this equation to work. Resulting the ball
having a settling period when falling through the liquid, this means that the first part of the fall
cannot be used, due to the settling period.
The final methodology is the rolling ball viscometer, which is quite similar to the falling ball vis-
cometer. The major difference is the angle of the tube, which makes the ball roll instead of fall
straight down. The figure below shows the force diagram of the rolling ball setup.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
11
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.6: Force diagram of the rolling ball viscometer
The mathematical difference here, is that the gravitational force and buoyancy are now reduced
by a factor of sin θ:
η =
−ρ f gVf sin θ + mbg sin θ
6πrv
(4.5)
This expression can be further simplified to the following expression:
η =
2r2 (
ρb −ρ f
)
g sin θ
9v
(4.6)
This is the final expression for the viscosity derived from the rolling ball viscometer.
It is important to emphasise that this equation holds true if the liquid adheres perfectly to Stokes’s
law, which, in practice, it never does. It is therefore necessary to apply some sort of correction
to the value. Theoretically, the viscosity should be directly proportional to the fall time of the ball.
Because of this the industry standard seems to be calibrating the viscometer with a proportionality
constant K. This proportionality constant will change depending on the geometry of the setup,
what this means is that all of the geometry terms in equation 4.6 can be expressed through K:
η = K ·
(
ρb −ρ f
)
· t
(4.7)
The equation above 4.7 shows the viscosity derived through the use of the proportionality constant,
where t is the fall time of the ball. K is obtained experimentally by measuring the fall time of
different fluids with known viscosity’s and densities. The constant does not have any specific unit,
it represents all the geometrical terms of the equation. Therefore it is whatever unit that is required
for the viscosity to be expressed in its SI unit kg
m·s or Pa·s.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
12
==PAGE:22==
5
Process & Iterations
The following chapter dives into the process of choosing a viscosity measurement method. Where
the pros and cons of different methods will be briefly discussed, followed by why they weren’t
chosen for the final setup. The chapter will also go through the different iterations leading to the
final setup. The explanation of the final methodology is in 6
5.1
Choosing a Methodology
As mentioned earlier there are several ways of measuring the viscosity of liquids, ranging from
timing falling balls in the liquid to measuring the rotational forces applied to the liquid. All of these
methods vary in complexity and specific use cases, for example methods being better suited for
either newtonian fluids or non-newtonian fluids. When choosing a method, the following criteria
were considered.
• Simplicity
• Cost
• Accuracy
• Sample Size
• Modularity
The simplicity of the method and the related hardware was one the major factors, as the entire
setup was to be built by hand within the project timeframe. The cost of all the parts making up the
module had to be within the 3333 DKK budget, given by the supervisors.
If one were to talk about measuring tools in science, accuracy is one of, if not the, most widely
used comparison metrics. The focus area here was accuracy with low-viscosity fluids, as most
of the electrolytes being synthesised in the beer bot are water-based. The goal was to find an
acceptable balance between simplicity, cost and accuracy. A high accuracy often results in an
increase in cost and complexity, and vice versa. The sample size, for which the viscosity is to
measured of, had to be no more than 2 ml. This is due to the specific use case of the module,
which might include expensive electrolytes. Lastly, there was the modularity aspect of the chosen
method. For a method to be considered modular in this context, it should be easy to maintain and
have components that can be easily swapped out. The most important aspect of this modularity
is that the method allows for the module to be relatively easily implemented into a larger system.
With all the requirements set, a chosen method could be found for this project. Through preliminary
research, some methods were quickly eliminated, including gravimetric capillaries, viscosity cups,
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
13
==PAGE:23==
and tuning fork vibration viscometers. The decision was primarily based on factors such as cost,
modularity, and sample size. Gravimetric capillaries are mainly used as industry standards and
quality control, due to their simplicity and low cost. As mentioned in chapter 4 the viscosity cups
work in a very similar way to the gravimetric capillaries, therefore they have a very similar use
cases. According to research, gravimetric capillaries and viscosity cups are good for making
quick and simple measurements, but they struggle with accuracy and sample size[15]. The last
of the three methods is the tuning fork vibration viscometer, which uses oscillating tuning forks to
determine the viscosity. Tuning forks are lowered into the sample fluid and set to oscillate at a
constant displacement magnitude. The power required to vibrate the forks can then be correlated
to the viscosity of fluid. This method yields high accuracy, but at the cost of complexity, especially
when applied on small sample sizes.
Two of the most promising solutions were capillary tubes and stokes viscometers. Both of these
methods have the potential for high modularity, can be low cost, and are well documented as the
they are widely adapted in the industry. As mentioned earlier, there are multiple ways of pushing
fluid through the capillary tubes 4.2. Out of these methods, the most promising was utilising the
loss of pressure across a certain distance, inspired by some of the viscometers already present in
the industry fig. 5.1 [9].
Figure 5.1: Image of the VROC technology developed by Rheosense [8]
After further analysis it was decided that this method was too complicated and a not good fit for
the beer bot. There are two arguments behind this decision: finding a non invasive pressure
sensor that was within the budget and compatible with the arduino platform, proved to be quite
difficult. The other argument came from how the viscosity is derived, the product page for the
VROC technology provides an overview of this [8]. The VROC technology uses Hagen Poiseuilles
equation of laminar flow through a tube [16].
Q = (P2 −P1) πr4
8ηl
(5.1)
Where Q is the flow rate, P1 and P2 is the pressure at two points along the tube, r is the inside
radius of the tube, η is the dynamic viscosity and L is the length between the two pressure points.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
14
==PAGE:24==
The issue here is that the flow rate has to be known, and with how the beer bot system is set up,
this could be an issue. Therefore, the pressure loss across a capillary tube was removed from
consideration, which only left one option: the falling ball method.
5.2
Iterations
With the falling ball viscometer chosen as the method of measuring the viscosity of the electrolytes,
the hardware phase of the thesis could begin. As mentioned earlier the viscometer consists of a
ball being dropped into liquid whilst the duration of the fall is timed. The measurements were
very reliant on the ball falling in a straight line and the ball reaching its equilibrium speed (ve). As
mentioned in the theory chapter, the ball has an acceleration phase (settling period) at first and it
is only when ve is reached that the viscosity can be derived. Because of this the first step was to
find the required distance needed for the ball to reach ve. various steel balls and tubes of different
sizes were purchased in order to test the distance required before measuring the velocity. The
test setup was rather simple, it consisted of a tube inserted into a 3d printed holder, which also
housed two break beam sensors with a gap of 5 cm between them. The idea was that water would
be filled up to different heights of the tube, the ball would then be dropped and would fall a certain
distance before reaching the sensors. The sensors would detect the ball and measure the time it
took for the ball to fall 5 cm, which was the distance between the sensors, resulting in the velocity
of the ball. If the ball managed to reach ve the velocity measured between the sensors would be
the same for each drop, at that given height, but if it was not done settling the experiment would
yield different velocities.
Figure 5.2: Image of the test setup
The goal of this experiment was to show that the method could work at smaller heights, in order
to accommodate the small sample size, as a greater height would mean a very narrow tube and
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
15
==PAGE:25==
an even narrower ball. The velocities measured between the sensors were the same all the way
down to 10 cm, meaning that the ball was dropped at a height of 10 cm. The results from the
different drops are presented in the table below. All the drops presented below were performed
using a steel ball with a diameter of 12.7 mm and a tube with a diameter of 16 mm.
Height [cm]
Time of Drop 1 [ms]
Time of Drop 2 [ms]
Time of Drop 3 [ms]
45
107
109
109
40
107
109
108
35
108
107
110
30
107
108
109
25
107
109
109
20
109
108
108
15
109
110
109
10
113
114
113
Table 5.1: Time measurements at various heights
While observing all these drops it became clear that how the ball was dropped had a large impact
on the settling period, as the ball would sometimes wiggle or create air bubbles that could impede
the acceleration and therefore elongate the distance required for the settling period. This problem
lead to the ball sometimes reaching ve and sometimes not, depending on the “quality” of the drop.
Two countermeasures were deployed to solve this issue, the drop technique had to be improved
and the distance required for the settling period (settling distance) was increased. The drop tech-
nique now included magnets to drop the ball at specific heights and the ball was to be submerged
when dropping to prevent air bubbles. In the setup the bottom sensor was 2 cm above the bottom
of the tube, which meant that the settling distance was only 3 cm, recall that the gap between the
sensors was 5 cm. In order to increase the settling distance, the gap was reduced to 4 cm and
the sensors were moved 1 cm down, these changes resulted in a 2 cm increase in the settling
distance. Other changes included a more stable setup as well as holes so the sensor orientation
could be changed.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
16
==PAGE:26==
(a) 1st iteration of the test setup
(b) 2nd iteration of the test setup
Figure 5.3: Changes to the equilibrium speed test setup
With the second iteration in place the required height of the tube was pushed all the way down to
8 cm, which was low enough to be able to use a tube with the diameter of 4 mm to hold the sample
size.
With the height of the tube determined, the next step was to try to determine the viscosity of some
basic liquids using a larger tube for simplicity’s sake. Water was once again filled in the tube and
the ball was once again dropped multiple times. Using the aforementioned theory and equations
from eq. (4.4), should result in the viscosity of the liquid. It came as no surprise that just inputting
the numbers into the equation did not yield a viscosity. It was quickly concluded that there was a
need for some kind of constant based on the correlation between the velocity of the ball and the
viscosity of the fluid. As previously stated, the falling ball viscometer is a tried and tested method,
it was therefore decided to set aside working on the viscosity measurements with the larger tubes
and balls. Another argument for this would be the need for re-calibration when scaling down the
viscometer, even if a accurate measurement was achieved at that point in time. Instead, there
was a shift in direction as the autonomous aspect and the final version of the module became the
main focus area moving forward.
Scaling the entire setup down proved to be quite a challenge. Initially the idea was to take the
existing break beam sensor setup, and simply scale it down to the proper sample size. The first
problems came right away, with the smaller tube a new 3 mm ball was used, and the low weight of
this ball resulted in excessive wiggling due to the resistance of the water. This unstable trajectory
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
17
==PAGE:27==
of the ball lead to an increased settling distance and possibly inconsistent measurements. The
next logical step would be to do a few test runs with the smaller setup to ensure the quality of
measurements, but the second major problem was that the ball was too small to be detected by
the sensors. In short, the sensors had to be upgraded and the intense wiggling of the ball had to
be eliminated.
The rolling ball method was adapted instead to combatant the issues, recall that this is very similar
to a falling ball viscometer, with the only difference being the added inclination of the tube. This
would mean that the ball would be rolling down the side of the tube instead of falling straight
down. The idea was that this could solve the wiggling problem of the smaller ball, as the ball
would be forced to roll down the side of the tube. In order to implement this change, some sort
of sensor or ball detection method had to implemented. The question was if simply buying a
high accuracy break beam sensor would solve the problem or if a different route had to be taken.
Fork beam sensors have a fixed gap between them and a narrower beam, such a sensor could
possible be able to detect the ball, but these sensors can be quite expensive. Whilst looking at
different sensor options, an alternative route began to look rather promising which was the realm
of computer vision (CV). Using CV could not only solve the problem at hand, but also open up
for new future possibilities, such as tracking the ball throughout the entire drop. It was therefore
decided that a camera pointed at the tube would be the way moving forward. At this point the final
setup slowly started taking shape, and the general measurement flow was decided. The sample
fluid would be inserted into the top of the tube and drained via a pump at the bottom, and the
ball would be dropped by command using an electromagnet. Some other upgrades were added
as well: the entire tube was to be mounted on a stepper motor and magnets were added to the
tube holder. Mounting the tube on a stepper motor had two functions, first of which was to rotate
the tube so that the ball would roll back to the magnet. Having the tube on a rotating axis meant
that the tube could be placed at any angle, which added more flexibility to the module. Lastly the
magnets in the tube holder were added so the whole thing could be easily assembled or parts of
it replaced if needed. The figure below shows the assembled final setup.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
18
==PAGE:28==
(a) Front facing view of final setup
(b) Side view of the final setup
(c) Full side view with camera setup
Figure 5.4: Final setup for the viscometer module
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
19
==PAGE:29==
6
Methodology
6.1
Final Setup Methodology
When the design of the final setup was done, the flow of each measurement cycle also fell into
place. Each cycle would start with the sample fluid being pumped into the tube through a syringe,
note that the ball would already be inside the tube. The angle of the tube is of great importance,
therefore the tube had to be vertical at the start of each measurement. This “home” function was
done using the camera. With the tube being vertical the motor would rotate the tube so the ball
could roll down to the top of the tube. The electromagnet would then be turned on and the motor
would rotate the tube back to vertical. Before the ball could be dropped, the motor would rotate the
tube to the desired angle. At this point, the camera would start recording and the electromagnet
would be turned off, commencing the drop. After about 4 seconds the camera would stop recording
and the tube would rotate back to vertical. Lastly, the video would be analysed and the velocity of
the ball calculated. The figure below shows a flowchart of the described measurement flow.
Figure 6.1: Measurement procedure flowchart
6.1.1
Ball & Angle Detection
The last step towards being able to run the viscometer, was to implement some CV algorithm, so
the camera could detect the steel ball. The process of choosing this algorithm is explained below.
6.1.2
Choosing a CV Algorithm
There were many methods to choose from in the OpenCV python library [17], when it came to
tracking spheres or balls. The two most commonly used methods seemed to be background
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
20
==PAGE:30==
subtraction or Hough circles. Note that this information was primarily found by looking at other
OpenCV projects on GitHub and other forums [18] [19]. The Hough circles method relies on
detecting circles and is a specialised case of the Hough Transform, which is used to detect various
shapes like lines and circles [20]. The algorithm works by detecting the edge of an object, the ball in
this case, and mapping the edge points to predefined circle parameters to find potential circles [21].
In other words, it look at the circularity of the different objects, which are mapped due to the edge
detection. On the other hand, background subtraction utilises a reference frame and compares all
subsequent frames to the reference frame. Each frame is subtracted from the reference frame,
which results in all differences being detected. These differences (contours) are then highlighted,
where detected contours without circularity can be filtered out. Brief testing quickly revealed that
background subtraction was the most effective method for this task. This was perhaps due to how
small the ball was, as well as the fact that the water surrounding the ball would warp its image
making it appear less circular. The Hough circles algorithm seemed to need a greater contrast to
detect the edge points successfully. The figure below shows the results of the ball tracking using
background subtraction.
Figure 6.2: Ball detection using background subtraction
The background analysis was conducted on a recorded video, with several steps taken to en-
sure optimal results. First, a background subtractor was created using the Mixture of Gaussian 2
(MOG2) method[22], which distinguishes moving objects from the static background. Each frame
of the video was then processed with a foreground mask, where the mask was extracted and
blurred using Gaussian blur to reduce noise. Following this, a threshold was applied to the blurred
mask, converting it into a binary image where white pixels indicated potential moving objects. All
contours in the binary image were then analysed and flagged if they met specific circularity and
area criteria. These parameters were carefully tuned to filter out unwanted contours and perfectly
match the setup. The result is shown in the figure below, which illustrates how the algorithm
converts the original frame into a binary image and identifies the contours.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
21
==PAGE:31==
(a) Original frame
(b) Binary image
(c) Successfully detected ball
Figure 6.3: Ball detection using background subtraction
The algorithm was made more accurate by tuning certain parameters e.g. kernel size, threshold
values and circularity. It was of great importance that the ball would be detected on as many
frames as possible, in order to get the best result. Tuning the parameters to detect as many
contours as possible would result in many outliers being detected as contours. This was dealt
with by introducing a consistency parameter, resulting in contours present for less than 5 frames
being excluded. All of this parameter tuning took place to ensure that a proper start and end frame
could be detected, which was key to an accurate measurement. After this, it was simply a matter
of counting the number of frames where the ball was present and dividing it with the frames per
second of the camera, to get the fall time.
The last use of the camera was the aforementioned “home function” as well as angle detection.
At first, the idea was to detect the edges of the tube itself, draw them, and then compare them to
the vertical plane to get the angle. Detecting the edges of a transparent tube proved to be very
difficult, especially with a black background, therefore a different strategy was implemented. A
white square piece of tape was placed at the bottom of the tube holder and an image was taken
of the tube. This piece of tape could then be detected using contouring. The following steps were
taken to accurately detect the piece of tape. Firstly the image was converted to grayscale and a
binary threshold applied. Afterwards, a morphological operation was applied [23], which helped
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
22
==PAGE:32==
reduce any potential noise. Finally, the contours were filtered based on their size and geometry.
The detection steps are displayed in the figure below.
(a) Grayscale image
(b) Binary and morphological image
(c) Final image
Figure 6.4: Angle detection through analysis contours
The stepper motor used for this module, uses exactly 200 steps to do a full rotation. The amount
of steps needed to reach vertical could then be calculated using the ratio between number of
degrees in a circle and the number of steps:
360
200 = 1.8. Thus, the home function of the module
was accomplished. Each measurement cycle begins with this calculation in order to ensure that
the angle of the tube is known.
With all the hardware and measurement flows in place, the next phase was to work on the software
and setting up communication protocols. Note that Kshitij Gambhir made the groundwork for the
communication protocol used for this module.
6.2
Software
This section contains all the software developed in the project, including all the CV code and the
code for the viscometer controller.
6.2.1
Viscometer Controller
As previously stated, the user interface was to be Python, which required establishing a commu-
nication protocol using serial commands. Because of this, the controller has two sides to it: the
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
23
==PAGE:33==
Python side and the Arduino side. The python side of the controller is the user interface itself,
this is also where the measurement logic is. The Arduino side is written in C++ and includes all
the firmware used for specific hardware functions e.g. running the stepper motor. The firmware
consists of the three files, controls.h, comms.h and main.cpp, where controls.h handles all of the
pin and motor setup as well as the functions for the controls of the module. The comms.h file
handles all the communication between the Arduino and the computer, which includes storing
data coming from the computer, as well as sending responses back to the computer. Lastly, the
main.cpp is the main operations file, which initialises the main system and contains the main loop.
The main.cpp file acts as the central controller for the Arduino application. It integrates functions
from the comms.h file, which in turn integrates functions from controls.h. A larger walk through of
the code in these three files is presented below.
Arduino Firmware
The libraries used in the firmware are listed below, note that these are all imported in the controls.h
file
• Arduino.h: The core library for Arduino development, providing essential functions for the
board.
• Wire.h: This library facilitates communication over the I2C protocol, supporting interactions
with sensors and other peripherals.
• SparkFun_ProDriver_TC78H670FTG_Arduino_Library.h: Specific library provided by Spark-
Fun for controlling the TC78H670FTG stepper motor driver, simplifying the implementation
of motor control.
Controls
Key Functions
• relaySetup: Initialises digital pins connected to the relays for the pump and magnet as
outputs and sets them to their default state.
• motorSetup: Configures the stepper motor settings, specifically the step resolution.
• change_step_resolution: Allows changing the stepper motor’s step resolution dynamically
based on the input mode.
• stopRelay: Deactivates a specified relay by setting its control pin to a high state.
• runMagnet: Activates the electromagnet by setting the control pin to low.
• runPump: Controls the pump to run for a specified duration in seconds.
• runMotor: Drives the stepper motor a given number of steps in a specified direction.
As seen above each function is designed to perform a specific step of the hardware setup.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
24
==PAGE:34==
Comms
Key Variables
• buffSize: Defines the size of the buffer for incoming data.
• inputBuffer: Array to store the characters read from the serial.
• startMarker and endMarker: Characters that mark the beginning and end of a command
string.
• newDataFromPC: A boolean flag to indicate when new data has been completely received
and is ready to be processed.
Key Functions
• ToPC(): Sends a formatted message back to the PC, confirming receipt of the command
and processing status.
• parseData(): Extracts commands from the input buffer and executes corresponding actions.
Commands handled include operating a pump, controlling a magnet, running a motor, and
changing stepper resolution.
• getDataFromPC(): Continuously checks for data on the serial port, stores it in the buffer,
and processes it once a complete message is received.
The functions within comms.h work together to ensure robust and error-tolerant communication.
getDataFromPC() listens for incoming serial data, parseData() interprets the command, and
ToPC() sends a response back. These functions make up the communications protocol for the
module.
Main
Key Components
• setup(): Initialises the system at startup.
• loop(): Contains the main operational loop that executes repeatedly after setup.
Detailed Functions Description
• setup():
– Starts serial communication at 115200 baud rate to ensure high-speed data transmis-
sion.
– Sends an initialisation message to the PC, indicating that the Arduino is ready to receive
commands ”Init Visco disco”.
– Calls relaySetup() to configure the digital pins for relay control.
– Calls motorSetup() to prepare the stepper motor for operation.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
25
==PAGE:35==
– A confirmation message is sent after the pins and motor are set up ”Pins and motor
setup done”.
• loop():
– Continuously updates the curMillis variable with the current time since the Arduino
started running.
– Calls getDataFromPC() to check for and process incoming serial commands from the
PC.
This concludes the Arduino firmware, all of the code can be found in the appendix chapter 10.
Python Software
Moving on to the software used for running the viscometer and camera. In order to control the
viscometer through a Jupyter notebook, a viscometer class was made.
Overview of the Viscometer Class
The viscometer class in Python manages communication with the Arduino to operate the viscome-
ter system. It utilises the serial library to send commands to and receive responses from the
Arduino.
Class Initialisation
• The constructor (__init__) initializes the serial connection to the Arduino at a specified port
and baud rate, and ensures the Arduino is ready for operations.
Key Methods
• send_to_arduino(send_str): Sends a string to the Arduino, ensuring it is properly encoded.
• recv_from_arduino(timeout): Receives messages from the Arduino, implementing a time-
out to avoid indefinite waiting.
• wait_for_arduino(): Waits for a specific readiness message from the Arduino before pro-
ceeding.
• clear_serial_buffer(): Clears any data from the serial buffer to prevent old or corrupt data
from affecting operations.
• run_command(cmd_str): Sends a command to the Arduino and waits for a response, en-
suring communication integrity.
Operational Methods
• run_magnet(mode): Controls an electromagnet via the Arduino by sending a specific com-
mand.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
26
==PAGE:36==
• run_pump(duration): Operates a pump for a set duration, managing the timing via com-
mands to the Arduino.
• run_motor(steps, direction, mode): Directs the Arduino to drive a motor a specified num-
ber of steps in a given direction and, optionally, with a specific stepping resolution (mode).
Computer vision software
The provided Python code demonstrates the aforementioned ball detection and angle detection
methods using the openCV library
Key Functions
• calculate_angle_and_direction(p1, p2): Calculates the angle and direction between two
points with respect to the vertical axis, providing insights into object orientation.
• get_angle(): Captures a video frame, applies image processing to detect specific contours,
and calculates the necessary angle for vertical alignment.
• analyze_video(video_path): Analyzes a video file to detect and track a moving object
based on its circularity and area, calculating the time it takes for the object to move from
start to finish within the frame.
• video_recording(filename, duration_seconds, visco_bot): Captures video for a speci-
fied duration and saves it to a file, while providing hooks to perform actions via the visco_bot
object at specific frames.
Detailed Descriptions
• The calculate_angle_and_direction function uses trigonometric calculations to determine
the angle between two points, adjusting the calculation to provide the angle relative to the
vertical axis and determining the direction of adjustment needed.
• The get_angle function processes video from a file to detect contours that match expected
criteria, calculates the angle of these contours, and suggests rotational steps to align the
contour vertically. This function is particularly useful in applications requiring orientation
correction based on visual input.
• The analyse_video function uses background subtraction and contour detection to monitor
the movement of an object across frames, calculating its motion duration. It’s suited for
tasks where understanding the dynamics of moving objects within a video is crucial, such as
in sports analytics or motion studies.
• The video_recording function sets up a video capture device, records frames for a specified
duration, and saves the output to a video file. It integrates with a control system to trigger
actions, such as stopping a magnet, at designated times based on the frame count. This
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
27
==PAGE:37==
function is essential for experimental setups where synchronization of video capture with
physical events is necessary.
An example of how the viscometer would be used in a jupyter notebook cell of a seperate python
file is provided below and in the appendix chapter 10.
Example Code for Running a Measurement
1. Initialisation: Creates an instance of the viscometer class to communicate with the hardware
via a specified serial port.
2. Setup and Calibration: Determines the current angle of a tube and adjusts it to a vertical
orientation using stepper motors, based on the calculated steps and direction.
3. Preparation for Drop: Moves the tube to a predefined position, activates a magnet to hold
the object, and then repositions the tube for the drop.
4. Execution of Drop: Initiates video recording synchronised with the release of the object by
deactivating the magnet. The video captures the object’s fall for a specified duration.
5. Post-Drop Actions: Returns the tube to its initial position after the object is dropped.
6. Video Analysis: Analyses the recorded video to calculate the fall time of the object, using
image processing techniques to track the object’s movement.
Key Functions Used
• get_angle(): Captures video to detect the current orientation of the tube and calculates the
required adjustments for vertical alignment.
• run_motor(steps, direction, mode): Operates the stepper motor to rotate the tube accord-
ing to specified steps and direction.
• run_magnet(command): Controls an electromagnet to hold or release the object at the
beginning of the drop.
• video_recording(filename, duration_seconds, visco_bot): Records the experiment us-
ing a camera, capturing the motion of the object as it falls.
• analyse_video(video_path): Processes the captured video to measure the time duration
of the object’s fall and evaluate the dynamics of the drop.
That concludes the complete software and firmware walk-trough of all the code associated with
the viscometer.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
28
==PAGE:38==
7
Hardware
This thesis had a substantial amount of hardware involved, and quite a few hardware related
problems occurred along the way. The following chapter is fixated on the hardware of the project,
as well as the reasoning behind the design choices.
The hardware is divided into two parts: electronics and non-electronics. As previously mentioned,
the chosen platform for the electronics is the Arduino platform and the module is centered around
the Arduino Uno. The Arduino Uno is then supplemented with a bipolar stepper motor, a motor
driver, A 260 fps USB camera, a Electromagnet, two 5 V relays and a peristaltic pump. Note that
the two relays are for controlling the pump and electromagnet. Finally a 12V Power Supply Unit
(PSU) provided the power for the majority of the components. The figure below shows images of
all the electrical components, the electromagnet is out of view because it is placed in the front of
the setup 5.4a.
(a) View of the components
(b) 260 fps USB camera
Figure 7.1: Electrical components of the final setup
The price and the respective websites for all these components can be found in the bill of materials
in the appendix chapter 10
All the non-electronic parts consisted of screws, a circular spirit level and plastic parts. The plastic
parts were all designed and 3d printed during throughout the thesis time period, except for the feet
on the setup [24]. The parts were designed in cad using Onshape [25] and they were printed in
PLA primarily using the Ultimaker S3 and S5 3d printers [26]. All the parts were printed in a high
resolution with a layer height of no more than 0.3 mm. The infill of these parts varied depending
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
29
==PAGE:39==
on their purpose, if a part was to carry a lot of weight or be subject to a lot of movement, a higher
infill was used.
7.1
Design Choices
The parts present in the module are all custom made with modularity, functionality and aesthetics
in mind. Therefore multiple design choices were made throughout the project as well as across
the different iterations, some of these choices will be highlighted in this section. The entire module
is considered as three main parts.
• Main module: This consists of the mounting plate, front and back bases as well as the feet.
• Viscometer arm: This part is the arm that holds the tube and the electromagnet, one might
say that this is where all the interesting stuff happend.
• Camerastand: As one might guess, this part involves the camera stand for the USB camera.
The main module consists of 4 plug-in parts which all are screwed with M5 screws and nuts for a
secure fit. The idea here is that if there should be some addition to the viscometer in the future,
the following additional hardware can be implemented without reprinting the entire main module.
At the center of these 4 four parts is the mounting plate, which is the medium in which the other 3
parts are connected. Two of the major design choices in the main module were to print it in black
PLA and the specific width of the mounting plate. The color of the parts are important for the ball
detection because the CV algorithm relies on the light reflected on the ball, and this is highlighted
if the background is black. The width of the mounting plate is also tied to the CV code, but the
home function instead of the ball detection. As previously stated the angle of the tube is detected
through a white square piece of tape at the bottom of the tube. The width of the mounting plate
has to be wider than the length of the tube so that the white piece of tape is visible even when the
tube is horizontal.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
30
==PAGE:40==
(a) Main module without design changes
(b) Main module with changes
Figure 7.2: Comparing the design changes of the main module
Moving on to the Viscometer arm of the setup. The important aspects of the the arm are that
it is stable and robust enough to rotate multiple times without losing alignment. As mentioned,
different viscosity ranges could require different diameters of tube, therefore the arm was split into
parts which are held together by small magnets. this approach offers seamless replacement of
the viscometer arm parts, making it easy to add different configurations. When adding magnets
to 3d prints the simplest way is to glue the magnets into the holes, but this would mean a greater
amount of waste. Because the magnets would be almost impossible to get out, if the need for
that should arise. Another method for securing the magnets was used instead, which consists of
designing the magnet holes tight enough to hold the magnets in place. This takes some trial and
error, due to the error margins being very low, resulting in the magnets popping out all the time or
it being impossible to insert at all. When the final viscometer arm was printed, the magnets were
glued in place in order to ensure a good fit.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
31
==PAGE:41==
(a) Regular view
(b) Exploded view
Figure 7.3: Viscometer arm
The first iterations of the arm only had a single set of magnets holding the top or bottom arm on the
mounting hub. The fact that two disc magnets connected together are still able spin freely around
with regards to each other, ruined these first iterations. Therefore the final model is using a double
magnet setup instead, as this stops the spinning of the top and bottom arms. A last note on these
small disc magnets is that they are quite powerful, at first the tube was too close to the mounting
hub, which resulted in the magnets affecting the ball, resulting in useless measurements.
The last main part of the hardware design choice overview is the camera stand. When designing
the camera stand there were only two criteria: it should be stable enough to hold the camera
and the height of the camera should match that of the tube on the viscometer arm. The only
design choice of interest is the shape of the stand itself, the curves were added for better weight
distribution and in order to minimise plastic waste.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
32
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.4: Image and drawing of the camera stand
The total amount of printed PLA for the entire module is listed in the bill of materials chapter 10.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
33
==PAGE:43==
8
Results & Discussion
The following chapter presents the results of the viscometer as well as the discussion of said
results.
8.1
Results
The final testing of the viscometer was done using water and dropping a 3mm steel ball with a
weight of 0.13g at a 70 °inclination angle. 13 drops were made in order to ensure repeatable
results, all variables were held constant except for the rolling distance.
Drop #
Angle °
Dist [mm]
Time [s]
v [m/s]
1
70
70.2
0.82
0.08561
2
70
70.2
0.798
0.08797
3
70
70.2
0.7856
0.089358
4
70
54.2
0.723
0.074965
5
70
54.2
0.7292
0.074328
6
70
54.2
0.731
0.074145
7
70
54.2
0.723
0.074965
8
70
54.2
0.7301
0.074236
9
70
38.2
0.5127
0.074508
10
70
38.2
0.5096
0.074961
11
70
38.2
0.5115
0.074682
12
70
38.2
0.5162
0.074002
13
70
38.2
0.5115
0.074682
Table 8.1: Table showing the data for different drops at a fixed angle of 70 degrees. The drops
were made at different heights as shown by the Dist column.
Just as in the test setup mentioned in section 5.2, the equilibrium velocity (ve) was tested once
again. It was quite clear that measuring the fall time of the entire length of the tube resulted in
unstable velocity measurements, as can be seen by drop 1 - 3. When reducing the distance
to 54.2 mm the measurements started stabilising, indicating that the ball reached ve before the
timer started. This was confirmed when the distance was reduced to 38.2 mm, and the velocity
still remained the same. Looking at the velocity of drop 4 through 13, the average percentage
deviation of these velocity measurements was 0.407 %.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
34
==PAGE:44==
With a reliable velocity measurement, the expression derived from stokes’s law in eq. (4.6) can
be used to calculate the viscosity. The average velocity of drops 4 through 13 is inserted into the
equation, yielding the result: η = 0.0301 Pa · s. The table value of dynamic viscosity at ambient
temperature is 0.001 Pa · s [27]. This result means that the viscometer boasts an impressive
percentage error of 2910% when using the stokes equation.
8.1.1
Hardware Results
As previously stated, the budget for the entire project was 3333 DKK. The price for the entire
viscometer came out to be 1902 DKK, this includes all parts electrical and 3d printed. Even though
the price for the final setup was well within the budget, the entirety of the budget was spent on test
setups and spare parts.
8.2
Discussion
The development of a low-cost autonomous viscometer as described in this thesis could fill a
significant gap in the field of viscosity measurement technology, as mentioned in the related work
in chapter 3. Locating a low-cost, open-source viscometer on the market is challenging, making
this development a notable step toward democratising SDLs. The greatest success of this project
lies in the integration of accessible materials and open-source software, which in turn contributes
to the modularity of the system. As well as the achievement of repeatable velocity measurements.
One of the primary challenges faced during the development was getting high accuracy viscos-
ity measurements. This mainly came from the lack of time due to implications along the way. It
was decided that the modularity, sample size and steps towards autonomous workflow were of
greater importance than an accurate viscosity measurement. This might seem controversial, but
the reasoning behind it stems from the measurement method itself, the rolling ball viscometer is
a widely used technology. As previously stated, the technology has proven its efficiency and ac-
curacy when measuring viscosity. The gap in the industry is due to the absence of open-source
autonomous viscometers and not functioning rolling ball viscometers. It should be noted that the
results above were achieved using the aforementioned stokes equation which assumed perfect
stokes behaviour, section 4.2. If the corrected stokes equation, which uses the proportionality
constant as seen in eq. (4.7), was used instead the result would have been very different. This
method would require a calibration across different liquids to get a good proportionality constant.
This is why the stable and repeatable velocity measurements are counted as a great success,
it means that the velocity is most likely directly proportional to the viscosity. Viscosity is highly
dependent on the temperature of the sample. One might ask why there is no mentioning of tem-
perature with regards to the viscometer. The answer to this ties back into the statement about
how the working principles of the module itself were the main focus area. It was discovered early
on, that the temperature of the sample is needed to get an accurate measurement. Due to all
the measurements being done with water at ambient conditions, the temperature was neglected.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
35
==PAGE:45==
If the viscometer is to be taken further through development a temperature sensor, or a way of
knowing the sample temperature, should be included in the setup.
It can be quite difficult to compare this viscometer with existing technologies, without a concrete
accuracy benchmark, therefore it can only be compared on other metrics e.g. cost and mainte-
nance. The idea of this project was to democratise SDL’s, therefore the viscometer is supposed
to act as a frugal twin [28] of existing technologies, with the added benefits of open-source and
autonomous workflow. When it comes to maintenance, not much can be said due to the lack
of longer running time and multiple measurement cycles. The viscometer is made up of cheap,
widely available and 3d printed parts, therefore the maintenance should not be a problem. The
viscometer has only been used on water, where there is no need for any non corrosive materials.
If this is to be applied in electrochemistry the materials used, especially the steel ball, should be
reconsidered. The short operation time, and lack of completed measurements, of the viscometer
also lead to the viscosity range being quite unknown. The size of the tube and therefore the ball,
can be changed quite easily by printing new viscometer arms. This range of tube sizes together
with the ability to vary the angle at which the ball is dropped, gives the viscometer great potential
to measure a broad viscosity range. Existing rolling ball viscometer have shown broad ranges as
well as the ability to measure the viscosity of polymers and non-newtonian fluids [10]. They have
achieved this through a similar setup to the viscometer presented here, therefore the potential of
this viscometer is quite high. Although it should be noted that the viscometer can only sample fluids
that have a certain degree of transparency, otherwise the camera will not detect the ball. Knowing
the density of the sample fluid might limit the use of the viscometer, especially in materials dis-
covery. This might render the viscometer useless on its own, when synthesising new electrolytes
due to their density being unknown. This could be solved by using some sort of laboratory device
that measures density, but that would break the loop of the autonomous system. Another solution
could be to have two of these viscometers, measuring the fall time through the liquid using two
balls of different densities. With two viscometers the equations can be solved without knowing
the density. This would be a necessary step if this module were to be implemented into the beer
bot, as it does not have a module for measuring density. The methodology used in the viscometer
was more often than not chosen based on simplicity, and in hindsight some of these choices could
have been better. The ball detection algorithm, while robust, should include some real distance
tracking of the ball. This would add the feature of continuous velocity measurements, throughout
the fall, which could yield a more accurate result. Similar viscometers on the market use inductive
sensors to detect the ball at specific distances, instead of a camera. An inductive sensor would
greatly simplify the setup both in terms of hardware and especially software. An inductive sensor
detects the ball through its magnetic field, as of now this would lead to complications due to the
number of magnets present in the setup. There are also some problems present in the angle
detection. As of now, the angle detection is reliant on a white piece of tape, which has to be sig-
nificantly white in colour. As shown earlier in section 6.1, the angle detection worked quite well,
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
36
==PAGE:46==
but it relies on how well placed the square piece of tape is. One might say this is less than ideal
and a digital encoder applied to the stepper motor, would do a better job. The problem with the
digital encoder was the price of it, as the budget ran out. This lead to the use of the camera for
the angle detection, since the camera already had to be purchased for the ball detection.
This project came with the opportunity to attend the Accelerate conference 2024 hosted by UBC in
Vancouver [29]. The conference hosted some of the leading experts within SDLs and autonomous
materials discovery. The developed viscometer was presented at this conference, in a democratis-
ing SDLs workshop. Where attendees were free to walk around and ask about the different mod-
ules and products presented. This setting allowed for generous feedback from people in the in-
dustry as well as academia, about what changes could be made as well as what they wanted
to see in the viscometer for their respective use cases. The viscometer was very well received,
especially the modularity aspect of it, as being able to tailor it to a specific viscosity range was of
high value. Some of the most asked questions were about the viscometers ability to measure the
viscosity of polymers specifically.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
37
==PAGE:47==
9
Conclusion
The development and testing of a low-cost autonomous viscometer, as detailed in this thesis, un-
derscores a significant advancement in the field of viscosity measurement technology. This project
not only addresses the technological gap in affordable and modular viscometry but also aligns with
the broader initiative of democratising self driving labs (SDLs). The integration of accessible ma-
terials and open-source software, shows the project’s commitment to improving the modularity
and adaptability of laboratory instruments. It can concluded that the chosen method, the rolling
ball viscometer, can work in an autonomous setup. It was found that the normal equation derived
from stokes’s equation, refer to eq. (4.6), was simply not enough in order to get a reliable viscosity
measurement and a correction had to be applied.
Throughout this project, the challenges of balancing accuracy with cost and modular design were
evident. The final product, while not achieving the high accuracy of more expensive commercial
viscometers, successfully demonstrates repeatable velocity measurements, an important factor
for reliable viscosity estimation. The chosen methodology proved to be a good balance between
cost and reliable measurements and the final cost of the module was well within the budget, coming
down to a total of only 1902 DKK. The viscometer is designed with 3D-printed components and
readily available materials, making it easy to maintain and scale for users of various skill levels.
Additionally, the design is adaptable, allowing for future upgrades like temperature control and
advanced sensors that could enhance the precision of measurements and widen the range of
applicable fluids.
To summarise, this thesis not only offers a viable tool for measuring viscosity but also sets the
stage for further innovations in automated lab technology. The findings here have the potential
to influence ongoing research in material science, as well as the rapidly evolving sector of self
driving labs and autonomous systems. With the growing need for efficient, dependable, and cost-
effective scientific instruments, projects such as this can be essential for advancing research and
development in materials science and related fields.
9.1
Future Work
To improve the findings and understanding of the main conclusions in this masters thesis, the
following is proposed:
Measurements
The most prominent step, in order to improve the findings of this thesis, would be calibrating the
viscometer. A proper calibration on multiple fluids and finding the proportionality constant is the
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
38
==PAGE:48==
missing link to discover the true accuracy of the method. Longer operation times and multiple
sample testing could then be performed to determine the viscosity range of the viscometer. After
longer testing periods any possible drifting would be found and the correct countermeasures taken
to prevent it.
Hardware
Some immediate hardware changes could be made to the module. Adding a temperature sensor
would increase the robustness and accuracy of the viscometer. The addition of extra parts, like
the viscometer arm, in different sizes could greatly increase the viscosity range of the module.
Software
Implementing real distance tracking of the ball in the computer vision algorithm could be a method
of future proofing the viscometer. More complex fluids like non-newtonian fluids would require
delicate velocities at low inclination angles, where real distance tracking of the ball could be helpful.
An improvement to the angle detection in the form of a digital encoder or another more accurately
applied marker would improve the measurement. The current solution is only limited by the human
aspect of applying the white marker.
Electrolyte Synthesis
Lastly the implementation of the viscometer into an existing autonomous system, would justify
some of the motivation for this thesis. The relationship between electrolyte performance and vis-
cosity could further be studied and potentially lead to new, more efficient electrolytes, aiding the
discovery in more sustainable materials - and a better world for all of us.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
39
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Gary Tom et al. “Self-Driving Laboratories for Chemistry and Materials Science”. In: Chem-
ical Reviews (2024). PMID: 39137296. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00055. eprint: https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00055. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00055.
[2]
Michael Eikerling. Investigation of the Decomposition of Organic Solvent-Based Lithium-Ion
Battery Electrolytes by Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry. Last visited: 2024-08-
18. 2023. URL: https://www.spectroscopyeurope.com/article/investigation-decomposition-
organic-solvent-based-lithium-ion-battery-electrolytes-liquid.
[3]
Andreas Baer et al. “The Stokes–Einstein–Sutherland Equation at the Nanoscale Revisited”.
In: Small 20.6 (2023), p. 2304670. DOI: 10.1002/smll.202304670. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1002/smll.202304670.
[4]
Yao Yao et al. “Probing the Origin of Viscosity of Liquid Electrolytes for Lithium Batteries”.
In: Angewandte Chemie International Edition 62.6 (2023), e202214854. DOI: 10.1002/anie.
202214854. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202214854.
[5]
Qidi Wang et al. “High entropy liquid electrolytes for lithium batteries”. In: Nature Communi-
cations 14 (2023). DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-36075-1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
023-36075-1.
[6]
Sang Cheol Kim et al. “High-entropy electrolytes for practical lithium metal batteries”. In:
Nature Energy 8 (2023), pp. 814–826. DOI: 10.1038/s41560- 023- 01280- 1. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41560-023-01280-1.
[7]
Leybold. Höppler Falling Ball Viscometer. Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2024. URL: https://
www.leybold-shop.com/hoeppler-falling-ball-viscometer-665906.html.
[8]
Rheosense Inc. VROV - How it works. Last visited: 18/08/2024. URL: https://www.rheosense.
com/technology.
[9]
Rheosense Inc. Rheosense - product page. Last visited: 17/08/2024. URL: https://www.
rheosense.com/products/viscometers.
[10]
Anton Paar. Rolling Ball Viscometer LOVIS 2000 M/ME. Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2024.
URL: https://www.anton-paar.com/corp-en/products/details/rolling-ball-viscometer-lovis-
2000-mme/.
[11]
Editors of Britannica. “Matter & Energy: Viscosity”. In: Britannica (2024).
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
40
==PAGE:50==
[12]
A. Kayode Coker. “3 - PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF LIQUIDS AND GASES”. In: Ludwig’s
Applied Process Design for Chemical and Petrochemical Plants (Fourth Edition). Ed. by
A. Kayode Coker. Fourth Edition. Burlington: Gulf Professional Publishing, 2007, pp. 103–
132. ISBN: 978-0-7506-7766-0. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-075067766-0/50010-5.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780750677660500105.
[13]
Gene Mosca Paul A. Tripler. Physics for Scientists and Engineers. Susan Finnemore Bren-
nan, 2008. ISBN: 978-1-4292-0265-7.
[14]
Bronkhorst. What is the Difference Between Laminar Flow and Turbulent Flow? Last visited:
2024-08-18. 2024. URL: https://www.bronkhorst.com/int/blog-1/what-is-the-difference-
between-laminar-flow-and-turbulent-flow/.
[15]
Anton Paar. How to measure viscosity. Last visited: 13/08/2024. URL: https://wiki.anton-
paar.com/en/how-to-measure-viscosity/.
[16]
OpenStax. Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law. Last visited: 2024-08-17. 2016.
URL: https://phys.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/College_Physics/College_Physics_1e_
(OpenStax)/12%3A_Fluid_Dynamics_and_Its_Biological_and_Medical_Applications/
12.04%3A_Viscosity_and_Laminar_Flow_Poiseuilles_Law.
[17]
OpenCV. OpenCV Documentation. Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2024. URL: https : / / docs .
opencv.org/4.x/index.html.
[18]
Adrian Rosebrock. Ball Tracking with OpenCV. Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2015. URL: https:
//pyimagesearch.com/2015/09/14/ball-tracking-with-opencv/.
[19]
OpenCV. Background Subtraction Tutorial. Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2024. URL: https://
docs.opencv.org/3.4/d1/dc5/tutorial_background_subtraction.html.
[20]
Richard Szeliski. Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications. Springer Science & Busi-
ness Media, 2010, pp. 381–385.
[21]
ImageJ. Hough Circle Transform Plugin. Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2024. URL: https : / /
imagej.net/plugins/hough-circle-transform.
[22]
OpenCV. BackgroundSubtractorMOG2 Class Reference. Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2024.
URL: https://docs.opencv.org/3.4/d7/d7b/classcv_1_1BackgroundSubtractorMOG2.html.
[23]
Pierre Soille. Morphological Image Analysis: Principles and Applications. 2nd ed. Springer-
Verlag, 2003. ISBN: 3540429883.
[24]
NeuroOrb. Form T1 PC Case Feet. 2022. URL: https : / / www . thingiverse . com / thing :
5465763.
[25]
Onshape. Onshape: Product Development Platform. Accessed: 2024-08-18. 2024. URL:
https://www.onshape.com/en/.
[26]
Ultimaker. Ultimaker: 3D Printers and Printing Solutions. Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2024.
URL: https://ultimaker.com/.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
41
==PAGE:51==
[27]
International Association for the Properties of Water and Steam. Release on the IAPWS
Formulation 2008 for the Viscosity of Ordinary Water Substance. Viscosity of water at 20°C:
1002 μPa∙s (1.002 mPa∙s). Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2008. URL: http://www.iapws.org/
relguide/visc.pdf.
[28]
Stanley Loa et al. “Review of Low-cost Self-driving Laboratories: The “Frugal Twin” Con-
cept”. In: ChemRxiv (2024). URL: https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-2023-6z9mq.
[29]
University of Toronto. Accelerate 2024. Last visited: 2024-08-18. 2024. URL: https://acceleration.
utoronto.ca/events/accelerate-2024.
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
42
==PAGE:52==
10
Appendix
Code
Arduino Firmware
Controls
1
#include ”Arduino . h”
2
#include ”Wire . h”
3
#include ”SparkFun_ProDriver_TC78H670FTG_Arduino_Library . h”
4
5
// Define Stepper motor
6
PRODRIVER motor ;
7
const
int pump = 11;
8
const
int magnet = 12;
9
10
void relaySetup () {
11
// Define pins
for
relays
12
pinMode(pump, OUTPUT) ; // 11
i s
the pump
13
pinMode(magnet , OUTPUT) ; // 12
i s
the magnet
14
digitalWrite (pump, HIGH) ;
15
digitalWrite (magnet , HIGH) ;
16
}
17
18
void motorSetup () {
19
20
// Serial . println (” Invalid mode.
Using default mode 1.”) ;
21
motor . settings . stepResolutionMode = PRODRIVER_STEP_RESOLUTION_VARIABLE_1_32;
22
23
motor . begin () ;
24
}
25
26
void change_step_resolution ( int mode){
27
switch (mode)
28
{
29
case
1:
30
motor . changeStepResolution (PRODRIVER_STEP_RESOLUTION_1_1) ;
31
break ;
32
case
2:
33
motor . changeStepResolution (PRODRIVER_STEP_RESOLUTION_1_2) ;
34
break ;
35
case
4:
36
motor . changeStepResolution (PRODRIVER_STEP_RESOLUTION_1_4) ;
37
break ;
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
43
==PAGE:53==
38
case
8:
39
motor . changeStepResolution (PRODRIVER_STEP_RESOLUTION_1_8) ;
40
break ;
41
case
32:
42
motor . changeStepResolution (PRODRIVER_STEP_RESOLUTION_1_32) ;
43
break ;
44
case
128:
45
motor . changeStepResolution (PRODRIVER_STEP_RESOLUTION_1_128) ;
46
break ;
47
default :
48
Serial . println (” Invalid mode.
Using default mode 1_8. ”) ;
49
// motor . settings . stepResolutionMode = PRODRIVER_STEP_RESOLUTION_1_8;
50
}
51
}
52
void stopRelay ( int
pin ) {
53
// Deactivate a given
relay
54
55
digitalWrite ( pin , HIGH) ;
56
}
57
58
59
void runMagnet () {
60
// turns on the electromagnet
61
62
digitalWrite (magnet , LOW) ;
63
}
64
65
void runPump( f l o a t
duration ) {
66
// Turn on the pump for a given duration
67
68
digitalWrite (pump, LOW) ;
69
delay ( duration * 1000) ;
70
stopRelay (pump) ;
71
}
72
73
void runMotor( int
steps ,
int
direction ) { // Note regarding
direction : 0 i s
clockwise
and 1 i s
counter
clockwise
74
// Run the stepper motor for a given amount of
steps
75
i f
( direction != 1 && direction != 0){
76
Serial . println (” Direction has to be 1 or 0”) ;
77
}
78
79
motor . step ( steps ,
direction ) ;
80
delay (1000) ;
81
}
Code/controls.h
Comms
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
44
==PAGE:54==
1
#include <controls . h>
2
3
const byte buffSize = 40;
4
char inputBuffer [ buffSize ] ;
5
const char startMarker = ’<’ ;
6
const char endMarker = ’>’ ;
7
byte bytesRecvd = 0;
8
boolean readInProgress = f a l s e ;
9
boolean newDataFromPC = f a l s e ;
10
11
char msgFromPC[ buffSize ] = {0};
12
fl o a t
duration = 0 .0 ;
13
int
direction = 0;
14
int
steps = 0;
15
int mode = 0;
16
17
unsigned long
curMillis ;
18
19
unsigned long prevReplyToPCmillis = 0;
20
unsigned long replyToPCinterval = 1000;
21
22
//================================================
23
24
void ToPC() {
25
i f (newDataFromPC) {
26
newDataFromPC = f a l s e ;
27
Serial . print (”<Msg ”) ;
28
Serial . print (msgFromPC) ;
29
Serial . print (” Time ”) ;
30
Serial . print ( curMillis >> 9) ; // divide by 512
i s
approx = half - seconds
31
Serial . println (”>”) ;
32
}
33
}
34
35
//===================================================
36
37
void parseData () {
38
39
// send to PC
40
strcpy (msgFromPC, inputBuffer ) ;
41
42
//
s p l i t
data into
i t s
parts
43
44
char * strtokIndx ;
45
46
strtokIndx = strtok ( inputBuffer ,
” , ”) ; //
s p l i t
the data into
parts based on command
47
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
45
==PAGE:55==
48
i f
( strcmp ( strtokIndx ,
”Drain”) == 0) {
49
// Handle Drain command
50
51
// Get and set
the drain time
52
strtokIndx = strtok (NULL,
” , ”) ;
53
duration = atof ( strtokIndx ) ;
54
55
runPump( duration ) ;
56
57
ToPC() ;
58
59
} else
i f
( strcmp ( strtokIndx ,
”Magnet”) == 0) {
60
// Handle Electromagnet command
61
62
strtokIndx = strtok (NULL,
” , ”) ;
63
i f
( strcmp ( strtokIndx ,
” start ”) == 0){
64
runMagnet () ;
65
} else
i f
( strcmp ( strtokIndx ,
”stop”) == 0){
66
stopRelay (magnet) ;
67
}
68
69
ToPC() ;
70
71
} else
i f
( strcmp ( strtokIndx ,
”Motor”) == 0) {
72
// Handle the motor command
73
74
// Get the number of
steps
75
strtokIndx = strtok (NULL,
” , ”) ;
76
steps = atoi ( strtokIndx ) ;
77
78
// Get the
direction
79
strtokIndx = strtok (NULL,
” , ”) ;
80
direction = atoi ( strtokIndx ) ;
81
82
runMotor( steps ,
direction ) ;
83
84
ToPC() ;
85
} else
i f
( strcmp ( strtokIndx ,
”Step_res”) == 0){
86
// Handle the change resolution command
87
88
// Get the mode
89
strtokIndx = strtok (NULL,
” , ”) ;
90
mode = atoi ( strtokIndx ) ;
91
92
change_step_resolution (mode) ;
93
94
ToPC() ;
95
} else {
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
46
==PAGE:56==
96
ToPC() ; // Error handling
97
}
98
99
}
100
101
void getDataFromPC() {
102
103
// receive data from PC and save
i t
into
inputBuffer
104
105
i f ( Serial . available () > 0) {
106
107
char x = Serial . read () ;
108
109
// the order
of
these IF clauses
i s
s i g n i f i c a n t
110
111
i f
(x == endMarker) {
112
readInProgress = f a l s e ;
113
newDataFromPC = true ;
114
inputBuffer [ bytesRecvd ] = 0;
115
parseData () ;
116
}
117
118
i f ( readInProgress ) {
119
inputBuffer [ bytesRecvd ] = x ;
120
bytesRecvd ++;
121
i f
( bytesRecvd == buffSize ) {
122
bytesRecvd = buffSize
-
1;
123
}
124
}
125
126
i f
(x == startMarker ) {
127
bytesRecvd = 0;
128
readInProgress = true ;
129
}
130
}
131
}
Code/comms.h
Main
1
#include <comms. h>
2
3
// put function
declarations
here :
4
5
void setup () {
6
// put your setup code here ,
to run once :
7
Serial . begin (115200) ;
8
Serial . println (”<Init
Visco Disco>”) ; // Tell PC Arduino
i s
ready
9
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
47
==PAGE:57==
10
11
relaySetup () ;
12
13
motorSetup () ;
14
Serial . println (”<Pins and motor setup done>”) ;
15
16
}
17
18
19
void loop () {
20
// put your main code here ,
to run repeatedly :
21
22
curMillis = m i l l i s () ;
23
getDataFromPC() ;
24
}
Code/main.cpp
Viscometer Class
1
import
s e r i a l
2
import
s e r i a l . tools . list_ports
3
import time
4
import json
5
import numpy as np
6
import pandas as pd
7
import matplotlib . pyplot as
plt
8
import os
9
import datetime
10
11
class
viscometer :
12
def __init__( self ,
ser_port , baud_rate = 115200) :
13
14
15
16
s e l f . ser = s e r i a l . Serial ( ser_port ,
baud_rate)
17
print ( f ” Serial
port {ser_port} opened at baud rate { str (baud_rate)}”)
18
19
s e l f . wait_for_arduino ()
20
21
def send_to_arduino( self ,
send_str ) :
22
23
”””
24
Sends a string message to the Arduino over the
established
s e r i a l
connection .
25
26
Parameters :
27
- send_str ( str ) : The string message to be sent to the Arduino .
28
29
Returns :
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
48
==PAGE:58==
30
- None
31
32
Notes :
33
- The message
i s
encoded as UTF-8
before
being sent to the Arduino .
34
- The ’ ser ’
attribute must represent a valid and open
s e r i a l
connection .
35
”””
36
37
s e l f . ser . write ( send_str . encode ( ’ utf -8 ’ ) )
38
39
def recv_from_arduino( self ,
timeout = 10.0) :
40
41
”””
42
Receives data from the Arduino over the
established
s e r i a l
connection .
43
44
Parameters :
45
- timeout ( fl o a t ) : Maximum time ( in seconds ) to wait
for a response from the
Arduino .
46
47
Returns :
48
-
str : The received data from the Arduino .
49
50
Raises :
51
- TimeoutError :
I f
the Arduino does not respond within the
specified
timeout .
52
53
Notes :
54
- This method reads data from the Arduino until
i t
encounters the end marker (
ASCII 62) .
55
-
It
decodes the received data as UTF-8 and returns the complete message .
56
- The method has a timeout mechanism to prevent waiting
i n d e f i n i t e l y
for a
response .
57
-
I f a timeout occurs ,
i t
r a i ses a TimeoutError with a suggestion to
reset
the
device .
58
”””
59
60
start_marker = 60
61
end_marker = 62
62
63
start_time = time . time ()
64
65
ck = ””
66
x = ”z”
67
byte_count = -1
68
69
while time . time ()
- start_time < timeout :
70
while ord (x) != start_marker :
71
x = s e l f . ser . read ()
72
73
while ord (x) != end_marker :
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
49
==PAGE:59==
74
i f
ord (x) != start_marker :
75
ck = ck + x . decode (”utf -8 ”)
76
byte_count += 1
77
x = s e l f . ser . read ()
78
79
return ck
80
81
raise
TimeoutError (”Arduino did not respond within timeout . Try resetting
the
device . ”)
82
83
def wait_for_arduino ( s e l f ) :
84
85
”””
86
Waits for
the Arduino to
indicate
readiness
for communication .
87
88
Parameters :
89
- None
90
91
Returns :
92
- None
93
94
Notes :
95
- This method continuously checks
for
the ”Arduino
i s
ready” message from the
Arduino .
96
-
It
uses the
‘ recv_from_arduino ‘ method to
receive data and prints
the received
message .
97
- The method waits
until
there
i s
data available
in the
s e r i a l
buffer
( ‘
in_waiting ‘ > 0) .
98
- The process
continues
until
the Arduino signals
readiness ,
as indicated by the
message .
99
”””
100
101
msg = ””
102
while msg. find (”Pins and motor setup done”) == -1:
103
while
s e l f . ser . in_waiting == 0:
104
pass
105
msg = s e l f . recv_from_arduino ()
106
print (msg)
107
108
def
clear_serial_buffer ( s e l f ) :
109
110
”””
111
Clears the
s e r i a l
buffer by reading and discarding any available data .
112
113
Parameters :
114
- None
115
116
Returns :
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
50
==PAGE:60==
117
- None
118
119
Notes :
120
- This method continuously reads and discards data from the
s e r i a l
buffer
while
i t
i s
not empty .
121
-
It
ensures that any residual
or unwanted data in the
buffer
i s removed .
122
- Useful to prepare the
s e r i a l
connection
for new data transmission or
reception
.
123
”””
124
125
while
s e l f . ser . in_waiting > 0:
126
s e l f . ser . read ()
127
128
def run_command( self , cmd_str) :
129
130
s e l f . clear_serial_buffer ()
131
132
waiting_for_reply = False
133
134
i f
not waiting_for_reply :
135
s e l f . send_to_arduino(cmd_str)
136
print ( f ”Sent from PC - - TEST STR - - {cmd_str}”)
137
waiting_for_reply = True
138
139
i f
waiting_for_reply :
140
while
s e l f . ser . in_waiting == 0:
141
pass
142
143
data_received = s e l f . recv_from_arduino ()
144
print ( f ”Reply Received {data_received}”)
145
waiting_for_reply = False
146
147
print (”==========”)
148
149
def run_magnet( self , mode:
str ) :
150
”””
151
Switches the
relay
for
the electromagnet
152
”””
153
s e l f .run_command( f ”<Magnet,{mode}>”)
154
155
def run_pump( self ,
duration :
fl o a t ) :
156
”””
157
Runs the pump for
at
s p e c i f i c amount of time
158
”””
159
160
s e l f .run_command( f ”<Drain ,{ duration}>”)
161
162
def run_motor( self ,
steps :
int ,
direction :
int , mode = None) :
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
51
==PAGE:61==
163
”””
164
Runs the motor for a s p e c i f i c amount of
steps
165
”””
166
167
i f mode != None :
168
s e l f .run_command( f ”<Step_res , {mode}>”)
169
s e l f .run_command( f ”<Motor ,{ steps*mode} ,{ direction}>”)
Code/visco_controller.py
Computer Vision
Video Recording
1
import cv2
2
# from visco_controller import viscometer
3
4
def video_recording ( filename ,
duration_seconds , visco_bot ) :
5
video = cv2 . VideoCapture (0 , cv2 .CAP_DSHOW)
6
7
i f
( video . isOpened () == False ) :
8
print (”Error reading video
f i l e ”)
9
10
frame_width = int ( video . get (3) )
11
frame_height = int ( video . get (4) )
12
13
size = (frame_width ,
frame_height )
14
15
fps = 260
16
17
result = cv2 . VideoWriter ( f ’ MachineVision/video/{filename }. avi ’ ,
18
cv2 . VideoWriter_fourcc (* ’MJPG’ ) ,
19
fps ,
size )
20
# Number of frames to record
21
total_frames = int ( fps * duration_seconds )
22
23
# Frame counter
24
current_frame = 0
25
26
# Drop the
ball
27
# visco_bot . run_magnet( ’ stop ’)
28
29
while current_frame < total_frames :
30
ret ,
frame = video . read ()
31
32
i f
current_frame == 250:
33
visco_bot . run_magnet( ’ stop ’ )
34
i f
ret == True :
35
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
52
==PAGE:62==
36
result . write ( frame )
37
38
cv2 . imshow( ’Frame ’ , frame )
39
40
i f
cv2 . waitKey (1) & 0xFF == ord ( ’ s ’ ) : # allows
early
exit
41
break
42
current_frame += 1
43
else :
44
print ( ’ Failed to capture frame ’ )
45
break
46
47
video . release ()
48
result . release ()
49
50
cv2 . destroyAllWindows ()
51
52
print (”The video was successfully
saved”)
Code/video_recording.py
Ball and angle Detection
1
import cv2
2
import numpy as np
3
import math
4
5
def calculate_angle_and_direction (p1 , p2) :
6
””” Calculate the angle and direction
with respect
to the
ve rt i c al
axis . ”””
7
delta_y = p2 [ 1 ]
- p1 [ 1 ]
8
delta_x = p2 [ 0 ]
- p1 [ 0 ]
9
angle = math. degrees (math. atan2 ( delta_y ,
delta_x ) )
10
11
# Adjusting the angle to be with respect
to the
ve rt i ca l
axis
12
vertical_angle = 90
- abs ( angle )
13
14
# Determine direction
15
i f
angle > 0 and angle < 90:
16
direction = 1
17
e l i f
angle < 0 and abs ( angle ) < 90:
18
direction = 0
19
e l i f
angle > 0 and angle > 90:
20
direction = 0
21
else :
22
direction = 1
23
24
# print ( angle )
25
return abs ( vertical_angle ) ,
direction
26
27
def get_angle () :
28
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
53
==PAGE:63==
29
# Capture image from camera
30
# cap = cv2 . VideoCapture (0 , cv2 .CAP_DSHOW)
# Use 0 for
the
default camera
31
cap = cv2 . VideoCapture( ’ video //54.2mm_V1. avi ’ )
32
33
i f
not cap . isOpened () :
34
print (”Error : Could not open camera . ”)
35
exit ()
36
37
ret ,
frame = cap . read ()
38
39
i f
not ret :
40
print (”Error : Could not read frame . ”)
41
exit ()
42
43
# Release the camera
44
cap . release ()
45
46
# Convert the image to
grayscale
47
gray = cv2 . cvtColor (frame ,
cv2 .COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
48
49
# Apply a binary threshold to
i s o l a t e
the white tape on the black
surface
50
# Adjust the value 150 to
better match the brightness
of the white tape
51
_,
thresh = cv2 . threshold ( gray ,
110 , 240 , cv2 .THRESH_BINARY)
52
53
# Apply morphological
operations to clean up the image
54
kernel = np . ones ((1 ,1) ,np . uint8 )
55
morph = cv2 . morphologyEx( thresh ,
cv2 .MORPH_OPEN,
kernel )
56
57
# Find contours in the thresholded image
58
contours , _ = cv2 . findContours (morph,
cv2 .RETR_EXTERNAL,
cv2 .CHAIN_APPROX_SIMPLE)
59
60
# cv2 . imshow( ’ contours ’ , morph)
61
# Filter
contours based on area and shape
62
tape_contour = None
63
steps = None
64
for
contour in contours :
65
area = cv2 . contourArea ( contour )
66
# Adjust the area threshold based on the expected
size
of the tape
67
i f
area > 30:
68
epsilon = 0.03 * cv2 . arcLength ( contour , True)
69
# Adjust the
epsilon
value to
fine - tune contour approximation
70
approx = cv2 . approxPolyDP( contour ,
epsilon , True)
71
i f
len (approx) == 4:
# Assuming the tape contour
i s a rectangle
72
tape_contour = approx
73
break
74
75
i f
tape_contour
i s
not None :
76
# Draw the contour on the image ( optional )
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
54
==PAGE:64==
77
cv2 . drawContours(frame ,
[ tape_contour ] ,
-1 ,
(255 , 0 , 0) , 2)
78
79
# Get the bounding rectangle
of the contour
80
rect = cv2 . minAreaRect( tape_contour )
81
box = cv2 . boxPoints ( rect )
82
box = np . int0 (box)
83
84
# Identify
the
longest
side
of the box ( representing the tube edge alignment )
85
longest_side = None
86
max_length = 0
87
88
for
i
in range (4) :
89
p1 , p2 = box [ i ] , box [ ( i + 1) % 4]
90
side_length = np . l i n a l g .norm(p1 - p2)
91
i f
side_length > max_length :
92
max_length = side_length
93
longest_side = (p1 , p2)
94
# Draw the bounding box ( optional )
95
96
i f
longest_side
i s
not None :
97
p1 , p2 = longest_side
98
99
100
cv2 . lin e (frame ,
tuple (p1) ,
tuple (p2) ,
(0 , 255 , 0) , 2)
101
# Calculate the angle and direction
to achieve
ve r ti c al
alignment
102
angle ,
direction = calculate_angle_and_direction (p1 , p2)
103
degrees_to_vertical = angle
# This
i s
the degree needed to achieve
ve r ti c al
104
steps = degrees_to_vertical /1.8
105
106
i f
direction == 1:
107
print ( f ”Detected tape angle : {angle : . 2 f } degrees . Turn clockwise by {(
degrees_to_vertical* 0.7) /1.8:.2 f } steps to achieve
ve rt i c al
alignment at the bottom . ”)
108
else :
109
print ( f ”Detected tape angle : {angle : . 2 f } degrees . Turn counterclockwise
by {( degrees_to_vertical * 0.7) /1.8:.2 f } steps to achieve
ve r ti c al
alignment at the bottom . ”)
110
# print ( test_angle )
111
# cv2 . drawContours(frame ,
[ box ] ,
0 ,
(0 ,
0 , 255) , 2)
112
else :
113
print ( ’No angle detected . . .
try again ’ )
114
# Calculate the angle and direction
to achieve
ve r ti c al
alignment
115
# angle ,
direction ,
test_angle = calculate_angle_and_direction (box [ 0 ] , box [ 1 ] )
116
# print ( f ”Detected tube angle : {angle : . 2 f } degrees . Turn { direction } to achieve
vertic al
alignment .”)
117
# print ( test_angle )
118
# Display the
result
119
# cv2 . imshow( ’ Detected Tape ’ , frame )
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
55
==PAGE:65==
120
# cv2 . waitKey (0)
121
# # time . sleep (5)
122
# cv2 . destroyAllWindows ()
123
124
# cv2 . imwrite (” pictures /tape_detected . png” , frame )
125
# cv2 . imwrite (” pictures /gray_frame . png” , gray )
126
# cv2 . imwrite (” pictures /thresh_frame . png” ,
thresh )
127
# cv2 . imwrite (” pictures /morph_frame . png” , morph)
128
129
return
steps
130
131
import cv2
132
import numpy as np
133
134
def analyze_video ( video_path) :
135
cap = cv2 . VideoCapture( video_path)
136
137
i f
not cap . isOpened () :
138
print ( f ”Error : Could not open video
f i l e
{video_path }. ”)
139
return
140
141
back_sub = cv2 . createBackgroundSubtractorMOG2 ()
142
start_frame = None
143
end_frame = None
144
start_frame_image = None
# To save the
start frame image
145
end_frame_image = None
# To save the end frame image
146
fps = cap . get ( cv2 .CAP_PROP_FPS)
147
frame_count = 0
148
consistent_count = 0
149
absent_count = 0
150
min_consistent_count = 10
151
min_absent_count = 40
152
153
print ( f ’FPS: { fps } ’ )
# Confirm FPS i s
being read
correctly
154
155
while cap . isOpened () :
156
ret ,
frame = cap . read ()
157
i f
not ret :
158
break
159
160
fg_mask = back_sub . apply ( frame )
161
blurred_mask = cv2 . GaussianBlur (fg_mask ,
(11 , 11) , 2)
162
_,
thresh = cv2 . threshold (blurred_mask ,
100 , 255 , cv2 .THRESH_BINARY)
163
contours , _ = cv2 . findContours ( thresh ,
cv2 .RETR_EXTERNAL,
cv2 .
CHAIN_APPROX_SIMPLE)
164
165
found_ball = False
166
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
56
==PAGE:66==
167
for
contour in contours :
168
area = cv2 . contourArea ( contour )
169
perimeter = cv2 . arcLength ( contour , True)
170
i f
perimeter > 0:
171
c i r c u l a r i t y = 4 * np . pi * ( area / ( perimeter * perimeter ) )
172
i f
0.7 < c i r c u l a r i t y < 1.3 and area > 70:
173
found_ball = True
174
# Drawing contours and bounding
c i r c l e
for
visualization
175
(x , y) ,
radius = cv2 . minEnclosingCircle ( contour )
176
center = ( int (x) ,
int (y) )
177
radius = int ( radius )
178
frame_c = frame . copy ()
179
cv2 . c i r c l e (frame_c ,
center ,
radius ,
(255 , 0 , 0) , 2)
180
cv2 . c i r c l e (frame_c ,
center ,
5 ,
(0 ,
0 , 255) ,
-1)
181
break
182
183
i f
found_ball :
184
consistent_count += 1
185
i f
consistent_count == min_consistent_count :
# First
consistent
detection
186
start_frame = frame_count
- min_consistent_count + 1
187
start_frame_image = frame . copy ()
# Save the
start frame image with
contours
188
start_frame_image_c = frame_c . copy ()
189
# fg_mask_frame = fg_mask . copy ()
190
# blurred_mask_frame = blurred_mask . copy ()
191
thresh_frame = thresh . copy ()
192
193
absent_count = 0
194
else :
195
i f
consistent_count >= min_consistent_count :
# Ball was consistently
detected
before
196
absent_count += 1
197
else :
198
consistent_count = 0
199
200
i f
absent_count >= min_absent_count and start_frame
i s
not None and end_frame i s
None :
201
end_frame = frame_count
- min_absent_count
202
end_frame_image = frame_c . copy ()
# Save the end frame image with contours
203
break
# Exit loop once end frame
i s
set
204
205
frame_count += 1
206
207
i f
cv2 . waitKey (1) & 0xFF == ord ( ’q ’ ) :
208
break
209
210
cap . release ()
211
cv2 . destroyAllWindows ()
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
57
==PAGE:67==
212
213
i f
start_frame
i s
not None and end_frame i s
not None :
214
fall_time_seconds = (end_frame - start_frame ) / fps
215
print ( f ” Fall time : {fall_time_seconds : . 4 f } seconds”)
216
print ( f ’ Start frame : {start_frame } , End frame : {end_frame} ’ )
217
# Display
start and end frames with contours
218
i f
start_frame_image
i s
not None :
219
cv2 . imshow(” Start Frame” , start_frame_image_c)
220
# cv2 . waitKey (0)
# Wait until a key press to
close
221
# cv2 . destroyAllWindows ()
222
cv2 . imshow(”Thresh frame” , thresh_frame )
223
cv2 . waitKey (0)
# Wait until a key press
to
close
224
cv2 . destroyAllWindows ()
225
cv2 . imwrite (” pictures /Start_frame . png” , start_frame_image )
226
cv2 . imwrite (” pictures /thresh_frame . png” , thresh_frame )
227
cv2 . imwrite (” pictures /contour_frame . png” , start_frame_image_c)
228
229
230
i f
end_frame_image i s
not None :
231
cv2 . imshow(”End Frame” , end_frame_image)
232
cv2 . waitKey (0)
# Wait until a key press
to
close
233
cv2 . destroyAllWindows ()
234
else :
235
print (” Start or end frame not detected
properly . ”)
Code/CV_code.py
Run Measurement Example Code
1
import os
2
import numpy as np
3
import pandas as pd
4
from serial_help import *
5
from visco_controller import viscometer
6
import time
7
from video_recording import video_recording
8
from CV_code import *
9
10
# Init
viscometer
11
12
visco_bot = viscometer ( ’COM7’ )
13
14
# Type in
stepresolution
as well as the
desired
angle (90
-
desired
angle )
15
mode = 2
16
degrees = 25
17
filename = ’Example_drop ’
18
19
## Determine the angle
of the tube
20
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
58
==PAGE:68==
21
steps_to_vertical ,
direction = get_angle ()
22
23
# Rotate the tube
until
vertical
24
25
visco_bot . run_motor( steps_to_vertical ,
direction , mode)
26
27
# Getting ready
for drop
28
visco_bot . run_motor(90 , 1 , mode)
29
time . sleep (1)
30
# Turn on the magnet
31
visco_bot . run_magnet( ’ start ’ )
32
time . sleep (1)
33
# Turn the tupe back around
34
visco_bot . run_motor(90 ,0 , mode)
35
time . sleep (1)
36
visco_bot . run_motor(( degrees /1.8) , 1 , mode)
37
time . sleep (1)
38
print ( ’Commencing drop ’ )
39
# visco_bot . run_magnet( ’ stop ’)
40
41
video_recording ( filename ,4 , visco_bot )
42
43
time . sleep (1)
44
visco_bot . run_motor(( degrees /1.8) , 0 , mode)
45
46
# Analyse the recorded video and calculate
the
f a l l
time
47
analyze_video ( f ’ MachineVision/video/{filename }. avi ’ )
Code/viscometer_example.py
Bill of Materials
Democratization of Autonomous Viscosity Measurements Using Computer Vision and Velocity Detection
59
==PAGE:69==
Name
Price [DKK]
Price [USD]
Amount: # or grLINK
ProDriver - Stepper Motor Driver
 (TC78H670FTG) 
220.00
31.89
1
sparkfun
Stepper Motor with Cable
245.00
35.52
1.00
sparkfun
RedBoard Plus
209.00
30.30
1.00
sparkfun
12V / 2A /24W, PSU
115.00
16.67
1.00
M3 Bolts
3.51
0.51
5.00
rs-online
M4 Bolts
3.40
0.49
4.00
rs-online
M5 Bolts
6.04
0.87
7.00
rs-online
M3 Nuts
0.36
0.05
1.00
rs-online
M5 Nuts
0.58
0.08
7.00
rs-online
Disc magnet Ø 5 mm, height 2 mm,
 holds approx. 680 g, neodymium
9.00
1.30
8.00
Magnetz
USB Camera 1080P High Speed 260fps 
2.8-12mm 4X Optical Zoom Lens 2MP 
USB Webcam 
627.65
90.99
1.00
Amazon
Peristaltic Pump
126.19
18.29
1.00
Amazon
6 mm (4mm Ø inside) acrylic tube
37.00
5.36
1.00
interglas
5V Electromagnet (3KG Holding Force9
62.00
8.99
1.00
let-elektronik
Double Relay 5V
89.00
12.90
1.00
elextra
3D-printed parts
Base-back
24.86
3.60
102.97
Base-front
11.50
1.67
47.63
Stepper Motor Mount
7.56
1.10
31.30
Mounting Sheet
19.16
2.78
79.38
Feet
4.83
0.70
20.00
Mounting hub
1.20
0.17
4.99
Top arm
1.42
0.21
5.90
Bottom arm
0.77
0.11
3.18
Drain tip
0.04
0.01
0.19
Camera stand
77.53
11.24
321.14
Total cost
1902.61
275.82
DKK/USD
6.898
PLA price [USD/KG]
35
lb to g
454
Final Setup
