==PAGE:1==
Early Reflection Modelling
for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction
and its Perceptual Impact
Master’s Thesis
DTU Elektro
Acoustic Technology, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Percep-
tual Impact
Master’s Thesis
July, 2024
By
Bharat Rajagopalan
Supervisors:
Efren Fernandez-Grande
Antonio Andrés Figueroa-Durán
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Bharat Rajagopalan, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Acoustic Technology, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engi-
neering, Ørsteds Plads Building 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months (30 ECTS) in the Acoustic Technology
Group in the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering
Acoustics.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of acoustics, signal pro-
cessing and statistics.
Bharat Rajagopalan - s222488
Signature
Date
ii
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores different early reflection modelling techniques for sound field re-
construction and their perceptual impact.
For this purpose, room impulse responses
were measured for two sources in a room using a spherical microphone array. Three
source models were implemented to reconstruct each reflection independently - single
point source, cluster of point sources, and spherical harmonics expansion, and the im-
pact of the model method as well as the number of measurements used was examined
objectively. It was found that when fewer measurements are available, it is more ap-
propriate to use simpler model methods, while more complex spherical harmonics-based
methods perform better given a large dataset of measurements. The order of spherical
harmonics expansion that is appropriate to use may be limited by the spatial resolution of
the measurement positions. Also, it may be useful to model low-frequency components
using simpler point source-based methods in general. To examine perceptual effects of
the modelling process, the point source and spherical harmonics methods were each
compared for two measurement position resolutions, using a subjective listening test for
the attribute of externalisation conducted in 3 degrees of freedom using head-tracking. It
was found that the spherical harmonics method was rated as the least externalised when
fewer measurements were used, and no other differences were observed between the
methods. The listening test design had its limitations and its results must be approached
with caution.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisors Antonio Andrés Figueroa-Durán and Efren
Fernandez-Grande. To Antonio, thank you so much for being gracious with your time,
and patiently helping me at every step along the way, even when I felt like the questions I
was asking were trivial. If I am writing any words at all in my thesis, it is largely due to your
support throughout this project. To Efren, thank you for providing timely words of advice
despite being on leave.
Huge thanks to Henrik Hvidberg and Brandon Madsen for their assistance and coopera-
tion whenever I needed any equipment or IT support. I have pestered these fine gentle-
men upto 10 times a day asking for help, and their patience is unwavering.
Thanks to Tobias May and Axel Ahrens for their help with the licenses for the head-tracking
cameras and software. Thanks also to Matthias Frank for helping out with the MUSHRA
test interface, as well as the entire team at Aalto University for providing code to help
set up head-tracking with REAPER and for all their efforts in trying to debug the 6DOF
plugin. I feel grateful for all the people who showed up to participate in my listening test at
such short notice. Also, thanks to all my friends for helping me wind down during stressful
times.
I am forever indebted to my family. Without their constant support and encouragement
I would be nothing. To my baby niece Ekavali, thanks for being as cute as you are and
cheering me up every day.
Lastly, a special word of thanks to my grandfather, Dr. S. Rajagopalan, for igniting my pas-
sion for acoustics. I hope I can one day be as good an acoustician, and more importantly,
as cool a person as you are.
iv
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Focus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
2
2.1
Physical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Sound Field Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Spatiotemporal Properties of the Room Impulse Response
. . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Perceptual Consequences of Early Reflections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Measurements
7
3.1
Sound Field Control Room
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Measurements Along The Line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Modelling Methodology
10
4.1
Preprocessing the RIRs for modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2
Sound Field Reconstruction Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Objective Evaluation Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Listening Test
21
5.1
General Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Test Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6
Results
26
6.1
Objective evaluation of the different models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.2
Objective metrics for listening test stimuli
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6.3
Listening test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7
Discussion
35
7.1
Objective evaluation of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.2
Listening test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
8
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
40
A Appendix
43
A.1 Measurement setup photos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A.2 Objective evaluation results for Source 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
A.3 Additional plots from the listening test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations and Acronyms
Abbreviation
Description
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
BRIR
Binaural Room Impulse Response
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
GSVD
Generalized Singular Value Decomposition
HRTF
Head Related Transfer Function
IACC
Interaural Cross-Correlation
ILD
Interaural Level Difference
ITD
Interaural Time Difference
MUSHRA
Multiple Stimulus with Hidden Reference and Anchor
NMSE
Normalized Mean Square Error
OSC
Open Sound Control
PWD
Plane Wave Decomposition
RIR
Room Impulse Response
SH
Spherical Harmonics
SHT
Spherical Harmonics Transform
VST
Virtual Studio Technology
Table 1
vi
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
Augmented reality (AR) systems are garnering a lot of popularity, especially with the recent
release of the Apple Vision Pro. There is a growing demand to integrate the virtual world
and the real world to create enriched user experiences. While virtual reality (VR) focuses
on simulating an entirely virtual world, AR aims to integrate virtual objects into the real
world in a way that they feel like they convincingly exist and can be interacted with. In
order to be convincing, such a simulation of the virtual object must convince not only the
user’s eyes but also their ears. Imagine putting on a pair of headphones, and walking
around your bedroom listening to music that sounds like it’s coming from loudspeakers
placed on your table - only you don’t own any loudspeakers. Imagine talking to a hologram
that sounds like it’s actually standing in the room with you. In order for this effect to be
convincing, one must find ways of first determining what a loudspeaker would sound like
at all possible locations in your bedroom, and then finding a way to reproduce that over
your headphones as you walk around.
In this light, sound field reconstruction is an extremely promising field of study. It involves
using mathematical techniques to estimate the nature of a sound field created by a source
in a room, such that the effect may be recreated at any position in the room. Sound fields
behave differently in each room - for e.g. singing in an opera house sounds distinctly
different from singing in a tiny bathroom. Information about the behaviour of a sound field
in a given room is generally acquired by measuring room impulse responses (RIRs) at a
few positions in that room. With the physics of sound in mind, mathematical techniques
can then be used to predict what an impulse response would sound like at any other
position in the room. Fernandez-Grande [1] explored methods for sound field reconstruc-
tion by using a spherical microphone array, and along with Fernandez-Grande et al. [2],
used point source expansions (dubbed the equivalent source method) for reconstruction.
Figueroa-Duran and Fernandez-Grande [3] proposed a method for navigable sound field
reconstruction, which involves modelling the early reflections in the RIRs separately using
a cluster of point sources and using a statistical kernel-based approach to model the late
part separately.
1.2
Research Focus
This thesis focuses explicitly on the early part of the RIR, consisting of strong reflections.
It seeks to answer questions about how complex a reconstruction model needs to be for
these early reflections, and which parameters in the model cause perceptual effects. RIR
measurements are done in a room using a spherical microphone array, and three recon-
struction models are implemented for the early part of the RIRs. The reconstructed RIRs
are then compared with the true measurements, to objectively evaluate the model per-
formance. Moreover, a subjective listening test is conducted to determine the perceptual
effects of different parameters in the modelling of the early reflections.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
This chapter briefly lays out some theory pertaining to sound propagation in rooms, sound
field reconstruction, and the perceptual consequences of early reflections in a room im-
pulse response.
2.1
Physical Model
Acoustic Wave Equation The lossless, linear acoustic wave equation describes how
sound propagates through a medium. It is derived from the conservation of mass and
momentum, and is given by:
∇2p −1
c2
∂2p
∂t2 = 0
(2.1)
where p is the acoustic pressure, c is the speed of sound in the medium, ∇2 is the Lapla-
cian operator, and t is time. [4] Three potential solutions to the wave equation are dis-
cussed as follows - plane waves, spherical waves, and spherical harmonics.
Plane Waves Plane waves are a fundamental solution to the wave equation, representing
waves with constant amplitude travelling in a specific direction. The general form of a
plane wave solution is:
p(r, t) = P0ei(k·r−ωt)
(2.2)
where P0 is the amplitude, k is the wavevector, r is the position vector, ω is the angular
frequency, and i is the imaginary unit. [4]
Point Source (Spherical Waves) A point source emits spherical waves, which spread
out uniformly in all directions from a single point. The solution to the wave equation for a
point source is:
p(r, t) = A
r ei(kr−ωt)
(2.3)
where A is the amplitude, r is the distance from the source, and k is the wavenumber. [4]
Spherical Harmonics Spherical harmonics Y m
n (θ, ϕ) are complex functions on a sphere’s
surface, forming the angular part of the wave equation’s solution in spherical coordinates.
They are denoted by order n and degree m, with θ and ϕ being the polar and azimuthal
angles. Their normalised form is:
Y m
n (θ, ϕ) = Nm
n P m
n (cos θ) eimϕ.
where P m
n are associated Legendre functions, generalizations of the Legendre polynomi-
als, defined for −n ≤m ≤n. Nm
n is the normalisation factor given as:
Nm
n =
s
(2n + 1)(n −m)!
4π(n + m)!
,
2
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:11==
These normalized functions form a complete orthonormal set on the sphere, essential in
spatial audio as basis functions. Up to order n, there are (n + 1)2 spherical harmonics.
Spherical harmonics up to the third order are shown in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Spherical harmonics; rows show spherical harmonics for the order 0 ≤n ≤3
with the 2n + 1 harmonics of the degree −n ≤m ≤n. What is plotted is a polar diagram
with the radius R = 20 log10 |Y m
n | normalized to the upper 30 dB of each pattern, with
positive (grey) and negative (black) colour indicating the sign. [5]
The radial part of the solution to the wave equation in spherical coordinates consists of
the spherical Bessel functions jn(kr) and the spherical Hankel functions h(2)
n (kr):
jn(kr) =
r π
2krJn+ 1
2 (kr)
and
h(2)
n (kr) =
r π
2krH(2)
n+ 1
2 (kr)
These functions can be seen in figure 2.2. Any sound field evaluated at a radius r and
direction Ω= (θ, ϕ) where the medium is source-free and homogeneous in any direction
can be represented by spherical basis functions for enclosed jn(kr)Y m
n (Ω) and radiating
fields hn(kr)Y m
n (Ω) as
p =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
[bnmjn(kr) + cnmhn(kr)] Y m
n (Ω)
(2.4)
Here, bnm are the coefficients for incoming waves that pass through and emanate from
radii larger than r and cnm are the coefficients of outgoing waves radiating from sources
at radii smaller than r, also known as wave spectra of the incoming and outgoing waves
respectively. [5]
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Spherical Bessel functions jn(kr) = ℜ

h(2)
n (kr)
	
(top left), the imaginary
part of spherical Hankel functions ℑ

h(2)
n (kr)
	
(top right), and magnitude/dB of
h(2)
n (kr)

(bottom), over kr. [5]
2.2
Sound Field Reconstruction
In order to reconstruct the sound field in a room, one must first begin with some exist-
ing information about its behaviour in that room. This may present itself in the form of
measurements of the sound field at different positions in that room. An efficient way to
do this is to measure a room impulse response (RIR), by exciting the sound field at all
frequencies (typically using a sinusoidal sweep signal) from a source placed in the room,
and capturing the measured signal with a microphone also placed in the room. When
this measurement is done with an array of microphones, such as a spherical array, the
response so obtained is referred to as a spatial room impulse response (SRIR) because
it contains information about the sound field at different points in space.
Using these measurements as the ground truth and a dictionary of basis functions to
characterise the sound field with, one can solve the inverse problem to determine the
coefficients of these basis functions. To obtain unknown coefficients in inverse problems,
several techniques may be used to estimate them from the observed data. The least-
squares approach is employed as the most effective and easy to implement among others,
especially if the system is overdetermined. Least squares methods try to find the values
that make the sum of squared residuals between observed data and the fitted data as
small as possible, delivering the best fit in other terms. However, a notable disadvantage
is its susceptibility to outliers and noise. As a result, regularisation is often used to mitigate
the impact of noise. [6] The dictionary of basis functions used for reconstruction in this
work includes spherical waves (point sources) and spherical harmonics.
2.3
Spatiotemporal Properties of the Room Impulse
Response
Structure of RIR An RIR usually has three distinct parts - the direct sound, the early
reflections and the late reverberation. An illustration of the general structure may be seen
in figure 2.3. The direct sound and early reflections together comprise the “early part” of
the RIR, and the late reverberation accounts for the “late part”. Due to the sparse structure
of the early part of an RIR, it is possible to isolate and account for individual reflections,
whereas in the late part, the reflections are so densely spaced in time that one cannot
distinguish between them.
4
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.3: General structure of a room impulse response. [7]
This work focuses on the early part of the RIR, and on different ways to reconstruct it. In
order to do so, one must find a way to distinguish between the early and late parts of the
RIRs involved.
Subspace Decomposition to split SRIR into Direct and Residual parts Much of the
theory in this section is taken from Deppisch et al. [8]. Their work proposes a subspace
method for SRIRs into a direct part, consisting of the direct sound and salient reflections,
and a residual part. This facilitates analysis by providing individual access to these com-
ponents. The core principle is based on subspace methods in array processing, which
assume that target signals occupy a limited subspace of the full signal space. This al-
lows the method to confine the noisy signal to a subspace containing both signal and
noise (signal subspace), while disregarding components solely attributed to noise (noise
subspace). Using such a method also means that the original SRIR may be perfectly
reconstructed simply by adding the direct and residual parts obtained at the end.
The method uses generalized singular value decomposition (GSVD) of the spatial covari-
ance of the signals to separate the SRIRs. The spatial covariance matrix plays a crucial
role in the decomposition process by providing a statistical representation of the captured
signals’ spatial and temporal correlations, and it is calculated using the form:
Rx = E{x(t)x(t)T } = Rs + Rn
(2.5)
where x(t) is the vector of signals captured by M microphones, Rx is the covariance
matrix of the noisy signal, Rs is the covariance of the mixed source signals, and Rn is the
covariance of the noise.
The GSVD leads to
X = VxΣxΦT
(2.6)
N = VnΣnΦT
(2.7)
where X and N are the data matrices for the signal and noise, respectively, Vx and Vn
are orthogonal matrices, Σx and Σn are diagonal matrices with singular values, and Φ is a
common square matrix. The GSVs are key in separating the direct part from the residual.
Large generalized singular values are attributed to the direct part, which is then obtained
as a low-rank approximation of the SRIR.
The proposed decomposition method begins at the end of SRIR, where it is assumed that
only noise is present, and progresses backwards toward the beginning. This approach
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
5
==PAGE:14==
ensures that a reliable estimate of the residual noise is obtained before any salient re-
flections occur. As the algorithm moves backwards in time, it processes the SRIR in
blocks of time samples and employs the GSVD on each block. If the sum of the GSVs
exceeds a dynamically updated detection threshold, a reflection is identified, and the cor-
responding signal is decomposed into its direct and residual components. This threshold
is continually updated using the cumulative sum of the GSVs, ensuring that it adapts to
the spatio-temporal variations of the residual noise. The threshold is defined such that
the sum of the Qn smallest GSVs equals the sum of all GSVs in the absence of salient
reflections.
Qn(t) = max
 
k ∈N+ : ζ(k, t) < µ(t)
	
(2.8)
where ζ(k, t) is the cumulative sum of the k smallest GSVs weighted by M
k , and µ(t) is
the time-averaged sum of the GSVs.
The key parameters to be adjusted when performing this decomposition are:
• Detection Threshold Offset κ: Affects the sensitivity of reflection detection. Smaller
values make the algorithm more sensitive to weaker reflections, while larger values
detect only strong reflections.
• Block Size: Determines the temporal resolution of the subspace decomposition.
Larger block sizes decrease temporal precision but capture more signal information
in each block.
• Residual Estimate Length: Influences how quickly the GSVs react to changes.
2.4
Perceptual Consequences of Early Reflections
Early reflections in a room impulse response have significant perceptual consequences,
particularly in the context of source localisation, spectral colouration, and externalisation.
Source Localisation The perception of source localisation is highly influenced by the
timing and strength of early reflections. If a strong reflection arrives significantly later than
the direct sound, it can cause a drift in the perception of the sound source towards the
location of the reflection. This phenomenon occurs because the auditory system uses
spatial cues from both the direct sound and the reflections to localise the source. [9].
Spectral Coloration In small rooms, early reflections arrive within a few ms after the
direct sound and as a result their energies are often integrated perceptually due to the
Haas effect (i.e. precedence effect). This integration can lead to changes in the perceived
spectral colouration of the sound, causing constructive and destructive interference.
Externalisation Externalisation is the perception of sound as originating from an external
source rather than from inside the head. When listening to sounds playing from a loud-
speaker, for example, one already perceives the sound as externalised. However, when
listening to sounds over headphones, externalisation becomes trickier. Binaural room im-
pulse responses (BRIRs) are created for this purpose, where the RIRs at the positions
of the ears are convolved with head-related transfer functions (HRTFs). In the BRIRs,
the percept of externalisation is found to be closely related to interaural time differences
(ITD), interaural level differences (ILD), and the interaural cross-correlation (IACC) of the
binaural signals. Modifying the early reflections in a room can significantly alter these
binaural cues, thus affecting the degree of externalisation. [10].
6
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:15==
3
Measurements
This chapter describes the procedure for acquiring the RIRs used in this study. All mea-
surements were done using an EigenMike em32 from MH Acoustics, which is a 32-
channel rigid spherical microphone array with a radius of 4.2 cm, thereby limiting the
highest order of spherical harmonics transform (SHT) of a single array’s measurement
to N = 4 (largest value of N for which (N + 1)2 < 32). For the sake of comprehension, in
this study, whenever the word “microphone” is used it refers to one of the 32 microphones
on the Eigenmike, and whenever the word “array” is used it refers to the Eigenmike itself.
The loudspeaker used as the source for all measurements was a Dynaudio acoustics
BM6. For every measurement, the microphone array and the loudspeaker were both
placed at a height of 166 cm, as an approximation of the average height of a person’s
ears when standing. This was done so because the initial idea for the study involved con-
ducting a listening test in 6 degrees of freedom (DOF), which would require the participant
to be able to walk around in the room. The excitation signal used was a 10 second sinu-
soidal sweep covering the audible range (from 20 Hz to 20 kHz) followed by 2 seconds
of silence, sampled at 48 kHz. The RIRs so obtained were then truncated to 1 second
(since the noise floor had already been reached by that point) as well as normalised by
the largest absolute value of the entire set (consisting of 160 RIRs) for ease of processing
and analysis. The average room temperature T during the course of the measurements
was measured to be 19.4◦C and the average relative humidity RH was measured at
48.4%. Using the equation c = 331.3 + 0.606 × T + 0.0124 × RH, the speed of sound c
was then calculated as 343.66 m/s, a value used for the remainder of this study.
3.1
Sound Field Control Room
All measurements were conducted in the Sound Field Control (SFC) room, part of the
Acoustic Technology group in Building 355 at DTU. The dimensions of the room were
5.80 m×5.92 m×3.08 m. The room was selected due to its acoustical dampness (although
the reverberation time was not exactly measured since it was irrelevant to the study) and
the number of reflective surfaces. Three of the walls in the room were made from fairly
absorptive material whilst the fourth wall comprised largely of a window. Thus, there were
three major reflective surfaces in the room - the window, the floor, and the ceiling. An
exhaustive measurement campaign was conducted, once again with the initial idea of
conducting a listening test in 6-DOF. A top-down view of all of the measurement positions
may be seen in figure 3.1.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.1: Top-down view of the loudspeaker and array positions for the RIR measure-
ments conducted in the SFC room. The arrows indicate the directions in which the loud-
speakers are facing.
Two source positions were chosen, one (S1) directly facing the window from across the
room in order to get a stronger reflection from it, and the other (S2) in the corner angled at
45 ◦facing away from the window. These two positions were chosen to examine whether
or not a strong reflection from the window would make an impact on the perception of the
sound. Firstly, for each source position, 64 measurements were made at array positions
along an straight line parallel to the window, with an aperture of 315 cm measured at
intervals of 5 cm. Additionally, for each source position, 16 other array positions were
measured scattered around the room to potential help capture the additional directional
properties of the loudspeakers. Note: as seen in figure 3.1, the line positions and the
scattered positions were measured on two separate days. In between these two days,
unfortunately, the setup was altered and one of the loudspeakers was damaged. In an
effort to counter this, when everything was set back up with a new loudspeaker of the same
kind, a single measurement position from the previous day was repeated (labelled here
as number 1) and this measurement from both days was compared and the setup was
adjusted and fine-tuned until the two resembled each other, before taking the remaining
16 scattered measurements. Some photographs of the measurement setup and the SFC
room may be found in section A.1.
3.2
Measurements Along The Line
The 64 RIR measurements made along the line have been visualised in figure 3.2, by
plotting the RIR for the same microphone (microphone facing the +Y axis) for each of the
64 array positions, against the Y coordinate of those array positions. For both sources,
the direct sound clearly appears as the first strong peak for all the arrays, and the time of
arrival of the direct sound corresponds with what would is expected from the positions of
the array with respect to each source (i.e. the direct sound arrives later when the array is
farther from the source). Moreover, within the first 20-30 ms after the arrival of the direct
sound, strong and sparse peaks can be seen, beyond which the structure of all the RIRs
becomes dense and chaotic. These are the early reflections that this study concerns itself
with analysing, processing and modelling.
8
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:17==
(a) Source 1
(b) Source 2
Figure 3.2: Amplitudes of RIRs for the two sources, for a fixed microphone on the array for
the 64 array positions on the line, plotted against the Y-coordinate of the array positions.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
9
==PAGE:18==
4
Modelling Methodology
This chapters describes all of the signal processing implemented for sound field recon-
struction, as well as the procedure followed to generate stimuli for the subjective listening
test.
4.1
Preprocessing the RIRs for modelling
Removing the influence of scattering by the rigid microphone array
The microphone array used is a rigid sphere and thus introduces scattering in the mea-
sured data, which would lead to complications in the source-modelling stage. To solve
for this, the radial sound particle velocity at the rigid sphere’s surface (radius = a) must
be zero. Applying this condition to equation 2.4, leads to the equation for sound pressure
measured by the array:
p =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
"
jn(kr) −h(2)
n (kr) j′
n(ka)
h′(2)
n (ka)
#
r=a
bnmY m
n (Ω)
(4.1)
The first term represents the incident sound field while the second term represents the
scattered sound field. This total sound pressure evaluated at a distance r = a must be
the sound pressure measured by the array, which is known. From this the incident sound
field is estimated. In practice this is implemented in MATLAB for each array individually,
by first taking a single-sided fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the measured RIRs by all
32 microphones (with frequency bins 1 Hz wide, going from 1 hz upto 24 kHz i.e. half the
sampling frequency). In each frequency bin, an SHT of the microphone signals upto order
N = 4 gives the spherical harmonics coefficients for the total sound field (which is a sum
of the incident and the scattered sound fields). Using these, and equation 4.1 the spher-
ical harmonics coefficients of the incident and scattered sound field are then determined
for each frequency bin, and then the microphone signals are reconstructed using first an
inverse spherical harmonics transform (ISHT) and then an inverse fast Fourier transform
(IFFT). The RIRs thus obtained have no influence of the rigid sphere, and appear to be
measured on an open spherical array. This process was repeated for every single micro-
phone array and the RIR’s obtained at the end were normalised by the maximum absolute
value of the entire set of RIRs (2 source positions × 80 array positions × 32 microphones).
Additionally, the scattered sound field RIRs were also synthesised.
To verify this processing, figure 4.1 shows the maximum RIR amplitude of all 32 micro-
phones for the same array position and source position before and after the processing.
It can be seen that before the processing, the maximum RIR amplitudes for the micro-
phones facing in the direction of the source are noticeably larger than for the ones facing
away from it, this is due to the presence of the rigid sphere. This effect is gone after the
processing, and all the microphones have much more similar amplitudes which is to be
expected in an open array configuration.
10
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:19==
(a) Before
(b) After
Figure 4.1: Scatter plot of maximum RIR amplitudes for all the microphones on an array,
shown before and after the processing to remove the scattered field.
To verify the process further, the spectra of the total field, incident field, and scattered
field for a single microphone at a single array position are examined in figure 4.2a. Note,
here each sound field has not been independently normalised to better examine how their
amplitudes are with respect to each other. Here, it is apparent that the scattered field has
very little energy in the low frequencies, which makes sense because these wavelengths
are large compared to the dimensions of the array and thus the sound would simply un-
dergo diffraction around the rigid sphere instead of being scattered by it. Moreover, the
incident, scattered, and total sound fields all have low energy in the high frequencies,
which may be attributed to the spatial Nyquist frequency of the Eigenmike, estimated to
be around 9 kHz due to the geometry of the array and the average spacing in between
the microphones. [11].
Additionally, figure 4.2b shows the processed (normalised incident field) RIRs for the 64
array positions for Source 1. The RIRs are being visualised in the exact same way as in
figure 3.2a, for the same microphone. Comparing the two, it can be seen that while there
is a change in the signal amplitudes (as is expected from the processing), the structure
of the RIRs is preserved, and all the early reflections are still prominent.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
11
==PAGE:20==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: (a) Spectra of the incident, scattered and total sound field RIR for a single
microphone for a single array position. (b) Amplitudes of the normalised incident field
RIRs for Source 1, for a fixed microphone on the Eigenmike for 64 array positions on the
line, plotted against the Y-coordinate of the array positions.
Splitting SRIRs into direct and residual part
By applying the subspace decomposition method as described in section 2.3 to all of the
arrays individually, the incident field RIRs obtained from the previous step were split into
their direct and residual parts. Due to the previous step the rank of the incident field RIRs is
reduced to 25, since they are synthesised in the SH domain upto order N = 4. As a result
of this, the 32 microphone signals for any given array could not be directly decomposed
using the MATLAB implementation provided by the original authors. To circumvent this,
the decomposition was done in the spherical harmonics domain, by first taking a SHT
of the RIRs for each array. Some experimentation was done with the parameters of the
decomposition to achieve a balance between catching the early reflections and not the
late reflections in the direct part. Finally, a detection threshold value of κ = 3 was selected
along with all of the other default parameters as stated in the original paper. [8]
(a) Direct part.
(b) Residual part.
Figure 4.3: Amplitudes of the direct and residual parts of the RIRs for Source 1 for a
fixed microphone on the array for the 64 array positions on the line, plotted against the
Y-coordinates of the array positions.
12
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:21==
The amplitudes of the direct and residual parts of the RIRs so obtained for Source 1
for the 64 array positions on the line, are visualised in figure 4.3, in the same way as
done for figures 3.2a and 4.2b. It can be seen that the decomposition is not perfectly
consistent across the different arrays, since for some of them it includes the entire RIR
in the direct part, as is evident from the white vertical lines in figure 4.3b. Nonetheless,
the direct part manages to catch and preserve the direct sound and the important early
reflections. Beyond this point, these direct RIRs are used to model the sources for sound
field reconstruction.
4.2
Sound Field Reconstruction Model
In order to reconstruct the sound field in the room, the principles described in section
2.2 were used. The direct RIRs obtained from the preprocessing stages were used as
the measurements. The work presented by Figueroa-Duran and Fernandez-Grande [3]
strongly motivated the procedure followed for implementing this model, although the spe-
cific methods used here differ. The model begins with source localisation of the direct
sound and reflections. While many studies [12], [13], [14] assume specular reflections at
the room boundaries to model all the reflections with a single point source (image-source),
they fail to account for the different directional properties of the source and the reflections.
The model implemented here leverages the sparse properties of the early reflections to
isolate each of the strongest reflections in all the RIRs. After this, using the spatial prop-
erties of the distributed arrays, an apparent origin is estimated for the source of each
reflection. Each of these reflections is then modelled independently using three different
source models - a point source, a cluster of point sources, and a spherical harmonics
expansion source.
Isolating the direct sound and early reflections
To estimate the time of arrival of the direct sound and the reflections in each RIR, a peak
detection algorithm [15] is applied to the squared value (the energy) of the RIRs. The first
peak detected in each RIR was attributed to the time of arrival of the direct sound. Purely
for the purpose of identifying which reflections to select for modelling, the theoretically
estimated times of arrival for reflection from all 6 surfaces of the room for each source
were calculated. This was done by assuming specular reflections from each surface, and
based on the actual location of each source and the distance of each image source from
each array, the time taken for each reflection to reach each array was calculated. These
estimates times of arrival are plotted for each reflection, on top of the direct RIR’s for both
sources in figure 4.4. Here, the estimated times of arrival seem to largely concur with the
peaks observed in the actual measured data. Thus, based on this, the three reflections
from the surfaces of interest were identified - window, floor, and ceiling.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) Source 1.
(b) Source 2.
Figure 4.4: Estimated times of arrival for specular reflections from each surface of the
room, plotted on top of the amplitudes of the direct parts of the RIRs for both sources for
a fixed microphone on the array for the 64 array positions on the line, plotted against the
Y-coordinates of the array positions.
In each RIR, the direct sound as well as the three reflections of interest were each iso-
lated using a 64-sample wide Tukey window with a cosine fraction of g = 0.75, centered
around the strongest peak for the corresponding reflection. This window was selected
as a tradeoff between preserving the time structure of the strong peak at the center of
the window and the side-lobe attenuation caused in the frequency domain using FFTs.
The rest of the RIR outside the Tukey window was replaced with zeroes, to preserve the
length of the RIR and facilitate analysis in the frequency domain. It becomes crucial here
to note that for Source 2, the reflections from the window and the floor nearly coincide in
all the RIRs, arriving within 20-30 time samples of each other. This makes isolating them
independently a challenging task, and the method used was unable to do so, capturing
both peaks together. While this may prove to be detrimental, it was implemented as is for
the sake of consistency in the modelling stage. For the sake of convenience, let’s call the
RIRs obtained at the end of this entire process the “isolated RIRs”, and let’s refer to the
direct sound as “Peak 0” and the three reflections from the window, floor and ceiling as
“Peak 1”, “Peak 2”, and “Peak 3” respectively.
The isolated RIRs for Peak 0 and Peak 2 for Source 1 for the 64 array positions on the
line may be seen in figure 4.5, visualised in the same manner as the previous RIRs in this
study.
14
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:23==
(a) Peak 0.
(b) Peak 2.
Figure 4.5: Isolated RIRs for Source 1 for a fixed microphone on the array for the 64 array
positions on the line, plotted against the Y-coordinates of the array positions.
Source Localisation
After obtaining the isolated RIRs, the apparent origin of each reflection was calculated
using plane wave decomposition (PWD). For each source and each peak, a single direc-
tion of arrival (DOA) was estimated for each array. The procedure for estimation of the
DOA followed here was strongly motivated by the methods described in [16] and [17],
with a few key differences and assumptions. Then, DOA information from multiple arrays
was used to estimate the source position (apparent origin) for that peak by triangulation.
Let’s take an example of Peak 0 for Source 1 to illustrate the different steps involved in
estimating the DOA for a single array.
A single sided FFT is applied to the isolated RIR for the given array for the corresponding
source and peak, again for frequency bins 1 Hz wide, going from 1 Hz to 24 kHz. Since
the distance of the source to the array is significantly large compared to the dimensions
of the array, it is safe to assume that the source is in the far field of the microphones
on the array. This assumption allows for the approximation of the incoming waves as
plane waves since, in the far field, the curvature of the wavefronts is negligible, and they
can be treated as planar when they reach the array. This simplifies the analysis and
allows the use of PWD for DOA estimation of a single array. 3000 plane wave directions
were chosen, distributed evenly around the entire sphere (array) by means of Fibonacci
sampling [18]. PWD was implemented independently in each frequency bin.
The next step involves forming the propagation matrix H for a plane wave source, as
discussed earlier in section 2.1:
H = e(j·umic·kv)
where:
• umic is the matrix of Cartesian coordinates for the 32 microphones in the ith spherical
array, 3 × 32. (Note: here the origin is set to the center of the array)
• wavenumber vector kv = k(f)


uk(1, :)
uk(2, :)
uk(3, :)

, k(f) = 2πf
c ,
• uk contains the Cartesian coordinates for 3000 plane wave directions - 3 × 3000
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
15
==PAGE:24==
Using the least squares method, the inverse problem is solved to find the plane wave
coefficients x(f):
x(f) = H†Pii(f)
where:
• H† is the pseudo-inverse of H,
• Pii(f) is the Fourier transform of the isolated RIR at frequency f.
While it would be ideal to use a method promoting sparsity in the coefficients (to ensure
a single DOA), the least squares method is used here for computational simplicity and
efficiency, since the DOA estimation was not the main focus of this study. It is assumed
that the coefficient with the highest value corresponds to the DOA:
DOAcart(i, f) = uk(:, arg max(|x(f)|))
Converting this to spherical coordinates, the angular part of the DOA is estimated as
ΩDOA(i, f). The overall DOA for each array ΩDOA(i) is then estimated as a median of
all the values of ΩDOA(i, f) for frequencies from 1 Hz upto 10 kHz (selected due to the
spatial Nyquist frequency of the Eigenmike). The DOAs from multiple arrays are then
triangulated. To do this, the DOA from each array is taken as a straight line passing
through that array in that direction in the room. Then every possible unique combination
of 2 arrays is chosen and the midpoint of the two corresponding skew lines is calculated.
The median of the x-, y-, z-coordinates respectively of all the midpoints so obtained, gives
the final estimated source position coordinates.
(a) Source 1, Peak 0.
(b) Source 1, Peak 2.
Figure 4.6: Estimated source positions for Source 1 Peak 0 and Peak 2, versus the actual
source position in the room, using the source localisation method described. The hollow
circles denote the arrays being used for DOA estimation and triangulation, and the arrows
indicate the DOA estimates for the arrays shown.
The estimated source positions using this method for Source 1 Peak 0 and Peak 2 have
been illustrated in figure 4.6. In figure 4.6a it can be seen that the estimated source po-
sition using the described source localisation with the 16 scattered array positions nearly
exactly matches the actual source position in the room. This is highly encouraging and
grants some validity to the method being implemented, as Peak 0 is the only peak for
which a ground truth is present for comparison. For Peak 2, in figure 4.6b, the source
is estimated to be under the floor, and this is highly encouraging as well, since this peak
16
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:25==
corresponds to the reflection from the floor, and the estimated source position appears to
be approximately where the image source for Source 1 would be for that surface.
With some renewed confidence in this method, the source positions for each set of isolated
RIRs were estimated (2 sources × 4 Peaks = 8 sets of isolated RIRs). It is important to
note that since Peak 1 and Peak 2 for Source 2 nearly coincide, they were not able to be
separated, thus the estimated source position for both of those cases was the same.
Source Models
For each set of isolated RIRs, three different source models were implemented at the
corresponding estimated source position, each by first solving the inverse problem in
frequency-domain (by first using a single-sided FFT as done previously in this study) with
least-squares approximation to estimate the coefficients of the basis functions for each
source type. In order to solve the inverse problem, a subset of the available arrays is
considered as the measurement data. Let’s call this subset the “Modelling Arrays”. While
it is then possible to then synthesize RIRs for any position in the room, the RIRs are re-
constructed for the all the microphones at one of the available array positions, which was
not included in the Modelling Arrays. Let’s call this array the “Rendering Array”. This was
done so that the RIRs synthesised by the model may be compared to the actual RIRs
measured for the rendering array position, thereby providing an objective evaluation of
the different model methods use. The three source models used were:
1. Point Source: For a point source at the estimated source position, the pressure at
the source position is calculated by solving the inverse problem for each frequency
bin with a single basis function forming the propagation matrix H as:
H = e−jk(f)r
|r|
where r is the distance between the source and each microphone in the modelling
arrays and k(f) = 2πf
c
is the wavenumber at frequency f.
The coefficients of source signal S(f) are obtained using the pseudo-inverse of H:
S(f) = H†P(f)
where P(f) is the FFT of the pressure at the microphones.
The RIRs at the rendering array are reconstructed using:
Preconstructed(f) = HS(f)
where the propagation matrix H is now formed using the distance between the
source and each microphone in the rendering array.
2. Cluster of Point Sources (Tetrahedron) Four virtual point source positions are
determined to form a tetrahedron around the estimated source position. The side
length of the tetrahedron is set to 15 cm, considering the dimensions of the loud-
speaker being used, with the idea to capture some of its directional properties. This
approach is greatly inspired by [3], with one key difference - here the inverse prob-
lem for all four point sources is simultaneously solved instead of iteratively.
The distances from each virtual source to the microphones on the modelling arrays
are denoted as rc1, rc2, rc3, and rc4. The propagation matrix H is constructed by
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
17
==PAGE:26==
combining the contributions from all four sources:
H =


e−jk(f)rc1
|rc1|
e−jk(f)rc2
|rc2|
e−jk(f)rc3
|rc3|
e−jk(f)rc4
|rc4|


The 4 coefficients of the source signals Sc(f) are obtained by simultaneously opti-
mizing all four sources using the pseudo-inverse of the combined propagation matrix
H:
Sc(f) = H†P(f)
where P(f) is the FFT of the pressure at the microphones on the modelling arrays.
The RIRs at the rendering array are reconstructed using:
Preconstructed(f) = HSc(f)
where the propagation matrix H is now formed using the distances between each
virtual source and each microphone in the rendering array.
3. Spherical Harmonics Expansion Source: For the spherical harmonics expansion,
the pressure at the estimated source position is expanded using spherical harmonics
Yn,m(θ, ϕ) up to order N. The radial function Jn(kr) is calculated for each frequency
f and distance r to each microphone in the modelling arrays.
The spherical harmonics Yn,m are computed for the angular directions (θ, ϕ) of the
microphones in the modelling arrays with respect to the estimated source position.
The propagation matrix H is formed as:
H = [Yn,m(θ, ϕ)Jn(kr)]
The (N + 1)2 coefficients of the source signal An,m(f) are obtained by solving the
inverse problem:
An,m(f) = H†P(f)
where P(f) is the FFT of the pressure at the microphones.
The RIRs at the rendering array are reconstructed using:
Preconstructed(f) =
N
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
An,m(f)Yn,mJn
where the spherical harmonics Yn,m and radial functions Jn are now computed for
the positions of the microphones in the rendering array.
For each source model, the synthesised RIRs for the corresponding Source and Peak
for the rendering array are then obtained by taking an IFFT of Preconstructed in each case.
Finally, for each source, the synthesised RIRs for all four peaks are added together to
create the final modelled RIRs for the rendering array.
18
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Objective Evaluation Method
To objectively evaluate the performance of the different model types, the modelled RIRs
were compared to the actual measurements taken at those same positions. The rendering
array was selected at a position in the middle of the line with the 64 arrays. Here, it was
decided that two main parameters would be varied to examine their effect on the model
performance:
1. Source Model Type: 5 source model types were chosen - (a) Point Source (PS),
(b) Tetrahedron (TT), (c) Spherical Harmonics Expansion upto order N = 1 (SH1),
(d) Spherical Harmonics Expansion upto order N = 3 (SH3), and (e) Spherical
Harmonics Expansion upto order N = 5 (SH5)
2. Spatial Resolution of Modelling Arrays: to examine the impact of the number
and spatial resolution of the modelling arrays on the quality of the reconstruction,
two different resolutions were selected - (a) 5 cm, where all the arrays on the line
(except the rendering array) spaced 5 cm apart from each other and the all the scat-
tered array positions are chosen as the modelling arrays. (b) 100 cm, where none
of the scattered array positions are considered and only four of the arrays on the
line spaced 100 cm apart from each other are considered. To help better under-
stand these two cases, the rendering array and modelling array positions for both
resolutions are shown in figure 4.7.
(a) 5 cm.
(b) 100 cm.
Figure 4.7: Rendering array and modelling array positions in the room for the two cases
of spatial resolution of modelling arrays.
The reference RIR is taken as the sum of all the peaks for isolated RIRs obtained after
the preprocessing stage for the rendering array. To help visualise all of this, figure 4.8
shows the modelled RIRs for three of the source model types (PS, TT, SH5) versus the
reference RIR for the same microphone position on the rendering array.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.8: Amplitudes of the modelled RIRs for three of the source model types (PS, TT,
SH5) versus the reference RIR for the same microphone position on the rendering array.
Here, everything has been modelled with the 100 cm resolution case for Source 1.
Here it becomes apparent that simply visually inspecting the time structure of the mod-
elled RIRs versus the reference RIR can make evaluating the model performance very
challenging. As a result, the normalised mean square error (NMSE) was chosen as the
objective metric to evaluate the performance of the models, and was calculated as:
NMSE (dB) = 10 log10
 P
n (Pref(n) −Pmodel(n))2
P
n Pref(n)2
!
(4.2)
where:
• Pref(n) is the reference RIR pressure at time sample n,
• Pmodel(n) is the modelled RIR pressure at time sample n,
This is evaluated for every microphone on the rendering array and an average of the
NMSE for all 32 microphones is taken as the overall NMSE for that model. The NMSE for
the different models may be found in chapter 6.
20
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:29==
5
Listening Test
In order to evaluate the perceptual impact of the different modelling methods used, a
subjective listening test was conducted as a modified and adapted version of the ITU-R
BS.1534 standard Multiple Stimulus with Hidden Reference and Anchor (MUSHRA) test
framework [19]. In a MUSHRA test, the participant rates different stimuli compared to a
reference, which is assumed to have a score of 100. Initially, a listening test in 6DOF was
planned, synthesizing RIRs for different positions in the room and using the 6DoFconv
plugin from the SPARTA Suite of VST plugins [20]. However, due to a bug in the plugin
and the limited time available, this idea was eventually abandoned in favour of a 3DOF
listening test by implementing head tracking, meaning the participant was free to rotate
their head, and the stimulus would change accordingly.
5.1
General Principle
The general principle of the test was to place the subject in the same room where the
measurements were taken, and ask them to stand at the position of the rendering array.
The subject would then listen to different binauralisations and compare them for a specific
perceptual attribute within the test framework.
The modelling stage provided RIRs for the 32 microphones on the rendering array. To
create binauralisations from these, the SPARTA Suite of VST plugins was used in the
digital audio workstation REAPER. The Array2SH plugin [21] was used to encode the
rendering array RIRs (exported as a 32-channel .wav file) into higher order ambisonics
(up to 4th order). The “open-omni” configuration was selected for the baffle-directivity
(having already removed the scattered field in the preprocessing stage), and the Tikhonov
regularization option was used for the filter approach within the plugin. Figure 5.1 shows
the plugin configuration used for this. The output of this plugin is a 25-channel ambisonics
signal.
Figure 5.1: Array2SH plugin configuration used for the test.
In order to listen to the ambisonics signals over headphones, binaural room impulse re-
sponses (BRIR) were generated using the AmbiBIN plugin from the SPARTA suite [22].
This plugin employs a virtual loudspeaker approach to decode the ambisonics signals for
playback over headphones. The plugin includes a feature for rotation of the ambisonics
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
21
==PAGE:30==
signal and supports head tracking via Open Sound Control (OSC) messages to a user-
defined OSC port. Figure 5.2 shows the plugin configuration used for the test.
Figure 5.2: AmbiBIN plugin configuration used for the test.
To determine appropriate stimuli, perceptual attributes, and SPARTA plugin parameters,
extensive listening to various configurations and combinations was done by the author.
Ideally, pilot testing would have been conducted but due to time-constraints this alternative
approach was taken. Ultimately, the following key points were decided:
• The incident field RIRs for the array at the listener position were selected as the
reference for the test, to be input to the SPARTA plugins.
• The modelled RIRs were combined with the corresponding residual RIRs obtained
after the subspace decomposition stage, in an effort to ensure that the difference
between the modelled RIRs and the reference arose mainly from early reflections.
After adding the modelled RIRs with the residual RIRs, the sum was normalised by
the maximum absolute value of the RIRs over the entire rendering array, to generate
the RIRs used for the input to the SPARTA plugins.
• The most salient perceptual attribute between the different test RIRs was external-
ization, thus this was selected for participants to rate in the test.
• Two source positions were considered for the test: Source 1 and Source 2, since
Source 2 was perceived as more externalised by the author.
• Two source model types were selected for comparison: PS and SH3. The remain-
ing were abandoned because (1) there were no perceived differences between the
PS and TT models upon listening (2) having too many stimuli would increase the
duration of the test, making it difficult to recruit subjects in a short frame of time.
• Two modelling array resolutions were selected for comparison: 5 cm and 100 cm,
due to the noticeable differences between them, especially for the SH3 model.
• Three anechoic program materials were selected to convolve with the BRIRs for
listening, each 15 seconds long. The spectrograms and power spectral densities of
the three anechoic samples used are shown in figure 5.3.
1. A mono drum beat loop programmed in Logic Pro using a GetGoodDrums sam-
ple library, ensuring no room mics or reverb effects were included. This sam-
ple contained many sharp transients and had a lot of energy in the low- and
high-frequencies, while not having much mid-frequency energy. Of the three
samples, drums had the most low-frequency energy.
2. An anechoic guitar recording from the Audio Group at TU Köln [23]. This sam-
ple contains the least high-frequency energy out of the three, and its transients
are much smoother than for drums.
3. An anechoic speech recording by a female talker from the Harvard Sentence
Test [24]. This sample contained the most mid-frequency and high-frequency
22
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:31==
energy of the three, and the least low-frequency energy. There are gaps in
the time structure because there are silences in between each sentence being
spoken.
(a) Spectrograms.
(b) Power spectral densities.
Figure 5.3: Spectrograms and power spectral densities of the three anechoic samples
used for the listening test.
5.2
Test Framework
For this test, the participants wore Beyerdynamic DT770 Pro 80Ωheadphones, and a
Focusrite Scarlett 2i2 was used as the sound card. The MUSHRA test interface app
skeleton was provided courtesy of Matthias Frank from the Institute of Electronic Music
and Acoustics via one of the thesis supervisors. It was modified so that all audio playback
could be done through a REAPER project by sending OSC messages from the test inter-
face to REAPER. This allowed participants to switch between different stimuli and enabled
head tracking, updating the stimulus in real-time based on the participant’s head position.
Headphone equalisation was applied to the output from REAPER using the SoundID Ref-
erence VST plugin from SonarWorks, in an effort to reduce the effect of the headphone’s
frequency response on the test.
Optitrack cameras were used for head tracking, with four cameras being set up around
the testing area above significantly above head height and calibrated using the supporting
software Motive. Using NatNet, a client/server networking SDK, real-time data of head
tracking orientation (yaw, pitch, and roll) was streamed from Motive by attaching reflective
markers on the headphones. This data was then translated to OSC messages readable
by the AmbiBIN plugin in REAPER using a MATLAB script provided by one of the thesis
supervisors and their cohort at Aalto University.
The stimuli for the listening test were generated by convolving the selected anechoic pro-
gramme materials with the corresponding RIRs before entering the SPARTA plugin chain
to generate BRIRs in real time. The test contained six actual trials (one for each com-
bination of source number and programme material) and two trials at the beginning for
familiarization to induce a training effect.
In each trial, there were six total stimuli aside from the reference:
1. Hidden reference: the incident field RIR.
2. PS with 5 cm resolution.
3. PS with 100 cm resolution.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
23
==PAGE:32==
4. SH3 with 5 cm resolution.
5. SH3 with 100 cm resolution.
6. Hidden Anchor: The mono anechoic file without convolving with any BRIR.
The order of the stimuli and the trials was randomized. The MUSHRA scale was modified
to suit the perceptual attribute being tested, externalization, ranging from “center of head”
to “at the source.”, motivated by the listening test for externalisation done by [25]. The
MUSHRA interface can be seen in figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: MUSHRA Test Interface for a given trial.
There were 11 total participants. aged between 24 and 35. All participants reported nor-
mal hearing. They were not informed about the hidden reference and anchor (i.e., they
were not told that one stimulus must always be rated 100 and another always 0). They
were encouraged to move their heads and rotate in place to judge the externalization of
different stimuli but were instructed not to walk. Participants were instructed that the ref-
erence is assumed to be 100%, and that they should rate the other stimuli with respect
to that, and were given an explanation of what the different ranges mean with respect
to externalisation. Loudspeakers were placed at the original source positions purely for
visual cues, which may help with localization and externalization of sound sources [26].
The test setup can be seen in figure 5.5.
24
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:33==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: Listening Test Setup.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
25
==PAGE:34==
6
Results
This chapter describes the results of the study. First, an objective evaluation of the model
itself is presented. Then, objective metrics are calculated to evaluate the binaural test
stimuli used for the listening test. Lastly, a statistical analysis of the listening test results
is presented.
6.1
Objective evaluation of the different models
As described in section 4.3, the NMSE in dB was chosen as the metric for objective
evaluation. The overall NMSE for each model type, resolution and source can be seen
in figure 6.1. A lower value of NMSE (larger negative number in dB) implies that the
modelled RIR is closer to reference RIR, and thus performs better. While there are some
small differences in the trends observed between the two sources, it is crucial to note that
since for Source 2 the model was unable to distinguish between two of the reflections as
mentioned in section 4.1, it is perhaps more appropriate to rely specifically on the results
for Source 1.
(a) Source 1.
(b) Source 2.
Figure 6.1: Comparing performance of different models using NMSE (dB).
Here in figure 6.1, a few key trends are observed:
• For the 100 cm case, the PS and TT models perform better than the three SH mod-
els, with the SH1 and SH3 models performing nearly identically, while the SH5 model
performs by far the worst.
• For the 5 cm case, the SH3 and SH5 models outperform the other three models.
• For the 5 cm case, as the order of the SH models increases, the performance of the
models increases steadily as well.
• For the SH3 and SH5 models, changing resolution from 100 cm to 5 cm increases
their performance significantly, drastically so for SH5.
• For PS and TT models, changing the resolution from 100 cm to 5 cm worsens the
performance in Source 1, and in Source 2, it worsens the performance of the TT
model while only slightly improving the performance of the PS model.
To analyse the models’ performance in greater detail, the NMSE was also calculated as
a function of frequency by filtering each signal into octave bands and then calculating the
26
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:35==
NMSE in each octave band independently. Only the results for Source 1 are shown in
this section of the report. This is done with the reasoning that Source 1 gives a more
objective evaluation of the modelling process itself since it does not suffer from the flaws
in the preprocessing steps that Source 2 does. If the reader is curious, they may find the
corresponding results for Source 2 in section A.2.
Impact of source model type for different frequencies
To examine the impact of using different source model types for the same resolution, figure
6.2 visualises the NMSE (dB) in octave bands.
(a) 100 cm
(b) 5 cm.
Figure 6.2: Comparing performance of different models for Source 1 using NMSE (dB) in
octave bands. (a) shows the five source model types for the 100 cm case and (b) shows
the five source model types for the 5 cm case.
Here in figure 6.2, a few key points may be noted:
• All of the models perform poorly at high frequencies.
• For the 5 cm case, all the models have similar performance upto the 125.9 Hz band,
beyond which the SH3 and SH5 models perform noticeably better than the PS, TT
and SH1 models. Of these two, the SH5 model performs the best at all frequencies
except in the 1 kHz band where it performs identically to the SH3 model.
• For the 5 cm case, the SH1, PS and TT models perform nearly identically at all
frequencies, with the TT model performing just slightly better at some frequencies.
• For the 100 cm case, the SH5 model performs the worst across all frequencies, and
above the 1 kHz band the rest of the models perform nearly identically to each other.
• For the 100 cm case, in the mid frequencies (between 125.9 Hz to 2 kHz) the PS
model performs the best, followed closely by the SH1 model. Also, in this frequency
range, as the order of the SH models increases the performance worsens.
• For the 100 cm case, between 125.9 Hz and 1 kHz, as the order of the SH model
increases, the performance worsens.
Impact of resolution for different frequencies
To examine the impact of using different resolutions for the same source model type, figure
6.3 visualises the same data for NMSE (dB) in octave bands, grouping the models into
the point source-based methods (PS, TT) and the spherical harmonics expansion-based
methods (SH1, SH3, SH5).
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Point source-based models.
(b) SH-based models.
Figure 6.3: Comparing performance of different models for Source 1 using NMSE (dB)
in octave bands. (a) shows the PS, and TT models for the two resolutions (b) shows the
SH1, SH3, and SH5 model for the two resolutions.
Here in figure 6.3, a few key trends may be noted:
• Below 1 kHz, the PS models for 5 cm and 100 cm both perform identically to the TT
model for 5 cm.
• The PS model for 100 cm performs either nearly identically to or noticeably better
than for 5 cm, except in the 1 kHz band where it performs noticeably worse.
• Below (and including) the 1 kHz and, the TT model performs noticeably worse for
100 cm compared to 5 cm, and above 1 kHz this trend is reversed.
• The SH5 model performs worse for 100 cm than for 5 cm at all frequencies.
• Between the 63.1 Hz and 2 kHz band, the SH3 model performs significantly better
for 5 cm than for 100 cm, while above 2 kHz they both perform identically.
• Below 2 kHz, the SH1 model performs slightly better for 5 cm than for 100 cm, while
above (and including) the 2 kHz band this trend is reversed.
6.2
Objective metrics for listening test stimuli
The stimuli used for the listening test differ from the modelled RIRs discussed in the pre-
vious section, mainly due to - (1) the inclusion of the residual part of the RIRs, and (2)
the processing introduced by the SPARTA plugins used to generate the binauralisations.
Also, notably, the reference here is not the same as the reference referred to for objective
evaluation of the model. To compare the test stimuli, it is suitable to use objective metrics
relevant to the perceptual attribute being tested - externalisation. As mentioned in section
2.4, the ITD, ILD and IACC are closely related to the percept of externalisation. These
metrics are therefore calculated, for each source, for all 5 BRIRs used for the test - (i)
Reference, (ii) PS 5 cm, (iii) PS 100 cm, (iv) SH 5 cm, and (v) SH 100 cm (the mono signal
used as the anchor is not discussed, plainly because it would have no ILD or ITD). All of
the parameters are calculated for the BRIRs for a fixed head position (facing the +Y axis).
The ITD is calculated as a function of frequency by taking an FFT of the left and right
signals, then measuring the phase difference between them:
ITD(f) = ∆ϕ(f)
2πf
where ∆ϕ(f) is the phase difference between the two signals.
28
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:37==
The ILD is calculated as a logarithm of the difference between the magnitudes of the two
signals for each frequency:
ILD(f) = 20 log10
|XR(f)|
|XL(f)|

Finally, the IACC is calculated by cross-correlating the signals xL(t) and xR(t) in the fre-
quency domain by multiplying XL(f) with the complex conjugate of XR(f):
C(f) = XL(f) · X∗
R(f)
Then, transforming back to the time domain and normalising to get the cross-correlation
function:
c(τ) = IFFT(C(f))
ITD
The ITD for the test stimuli BRIRs used can be seen in figure 6.4. While the amount of
data may seem overwhelming at first glance, a few trends can be observed nonetheless:
• Above approximately 9 kHz all models deviate significantly from the reference.
• Below 300 Hz, all of the ITDs are close to zero.
• For Source 1, below 9 kHz, the SH3 5 cm and PS 100 cm models follow the reference
most closely. The most significant deviation from the reference come from the SH3
100 cm model, with the PS 5 cm model somewhere in between.
• For Source 2, all the models perform similarly below 9 kHz (note the scale of the ITD
axis is different from the scale for Source 1 by a factor of 10).
Figure 6.4: ITD for the BRIRs used.
ILD
The ILD for the test stimuli BRIRs used can be seen in figure 6.5. While the data in the
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
29
==PAGE:38==
high frequencies looks chaotic, a few key trends can be observed for the low and mid
frequencies here:
• In general, the PS 5 cm, PS 100 cm and SH3 5 cm models have similar ITDs across
the spectrum.
• Below approximately 9 kHz, the SH3 100 cm model shows the largest deviation from
the reference.
• For Source 2, below 500 Hz, the PS 5 cm, PS 100 cm, and SH3 5 cm models all
follow the reference very closely.
• For Source 1, all the models exhibit the strong negative peaks observed in the ref-
erence around 4 kHz and 6 kHz.
Figure 6.5: ILD for the BRIRs used.
IACC
The IACC for all the test stimuli BRIRs used for both sources can be seen in figure 6.6.
[10] determined that a lower IACC value reflected a better perception of externalisation.
For Source 1, the lowest value is that of the reference, which makes sense since the
reference is supposed to be the most externalised of the stimuli. However, for Source
2, the reference doesn’t have the lowest value. Other than this, for both sources the
general trend observed is that the IACCSH3, 100 cm < IACCSH3, 5 cm < IACCPS, 5 cm <
IACCPS, 100 cm.
30
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.6: IACC for the BRIRs used.
6.3
Listening test results
A box-plot of all of the responses for all subjects for the 6 trials in the test can be seen in
figure 6.7. The first 2 familiarisation trials are not included in the analysis.
Figure 6.7: Boxplot of all responses.
Here in figure 6.7, a few issues become glaringly apparent for the purposes of statistical
analysis. Firstly, the data is very noisy, with the responses for each stimulus showing
large variations. Secondly, the mean response for the Hidden Reference is 90 and for the
Hidden Anchor is 10. Ideally, for a MUSHRA test, these would be 100 and 0, respectively,
and the ITU-R BS.1534 standard [19] recommends strict post-screening of subjects that
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
31
==PAGE:40==
could not reliably identify the hidden reference and the hidden anchor. The key difference
is, in a standard MUSHRA test, the subjects are informed that among the stimuli, there is a
Hidden Reference and Anchor, which must be rated 100 and 0, respectively. This instruc-
tion was not included in the test design implemented for this study. As a consequence,
the same post-screening rules from the standard can not be applied appropriately here.
As an alternative, for post-screening the subjects, a method is proposed wherein any sub-
jects that fail to rate the anchor as the lowest among the stimuli for any trial, are filtered
out. Applying this post-screening, only 2 of the 11 subjects are removed from the data.
This indicates that most of the subjects did indicate that the anchor had the worst score in
every trial, even if they didn’t rate it exactly at 0, and lends credence to the reliability of the
9 remaining subjects and their responses. With this post-screening done, for the remain-
ing subjects, it is estimated that they rated the Hidden Reference as the highest among
the stimuli, an average of 77.8% of the time. While this number is not encouraging, it
may be attributed to the subjects finding some of the other stimuli as sounding too similar
to the Hidden Reference, and since they weren’t informed that a Hidden Reference was
present in the stimuli, some of them perceived other stimuli as more externalised. With all
this in consideration, statistical analysis of the 9 remaining subjects’ data was done using
RStudio.
Statistical Analysis A box plot of the 9 subjects remaining after the post-screening can
be seen in figure 6.8, not including the anchor. Here it can be seen that on average the
Hidden Reference is rated as the most externalised. Moreover, the SH3 100 cm model is
rated as the least externalised. The PS 5 cm, PS 100 cm and SH3 5 cm stimuli have been
rated similarly. Another thing to note is that all the means and standard deviations for the
5 stimuli here lie above 50 on the response scale. This means that most of the scale was
not used by the subjects on average.
Figure 6.8: Box plot of all responses of the 9 “reliable” subjects for the 5 stimuli after the
post-screening.
In R studio, a repeated measures Analysis of Variance (rmANOVA) was done with a linear
mixed-effects model, with 4 fixed effects (within-subject factors) including Model Method
(PS, SH3), Prog Mat (Guitar, Drums, Speech), Source Number (Source 1, Source 2),
32
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:41==
Model Resolution (5 cm, 100 cm), and all their interactions; the random effect being the
Subject. The normality of the residuals was checked using Q-Q plots and the Shapiro-Wilk
test to confirm that the residuals came from a normal distribution. The Q-Q plot for this
test can be seen in section A.3. The p-value for the Shapiro-Wilk test for the residuals was
found to be 0.0239. This value is less than the criterion suggested to assume normality
of the residuals (0.05). Nonetheless, keeping this in mind, the remaining analysis was
conducted. The results of the ANOVA may be seen in table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Type III Analysis of Variance Table
Factors
F-value
P-value
Model_Method
34.0609
2.181e-08 ***
Prog_Mat
5.0173
0.007498 **
Source_Number
29.0303
2.031e-07 ***
Model_Resolution
27.8869
3.401e-07 ***
Model_Method:Prog_Mat
0.2965
0.743757
Prog_Mat:Source_Number
2.4039
0.093022 .
Prog_Mat:Model_Resolution
0.2881
0.750013
The factors in bold are the significant effects observed. None of the interactions between
the fixed effects were significant. The box-plots of the data for all the significant effects
can be seen in figure 6.9.
Figure 6.9: Box-plots of the data for the significant fixed effects.
To compare the means of these significant factors, post-hoc Tukey’s Honest Significant
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
33
==PAGE:42==
Difference (HSD) tests were performed on the levels of the factors to determine which
groups differ significantly from each other and by how much.
The analysis comparing Model Method shows a significant difference between PS and
SH3, with PS being perceived as more externalized than SH3 by an estimate of 11.1 units
(p < 0.0001). This suggests that the PS model method leads to a higher perception of
externalization than SH3.
For Programme Material, the results indicate that Drums are perceived as less exter-
nalized than Guitar, with a difference of -7.29 units (p = 0.0056). However, no significant
difference in externalization was found between Drums and Speech (p = 0.1210) or be-
tween Guitar and Speech (p = 0.4800). This implies that Guitar tends to be perceived
as more externalized than Drums, while Speech does not significantly differ from either
Drums or Guitar in terms of externalization.
For Source Number, Source 1 is significantly less externalized compared to Source 2,
with an estimate of -10.2 units (p < 0.0001). This indicates that Source 2 is perceived as
more externalized than Source 1.
Lastly, for Model Resolution, stimuli with a resolution of 5 cm are significantly more exter-
nalized than those with a resolution of 100 cm, with a difference of 10 units (p < 0.0001).
This suggests that higher spatial resolution of the measurements (5 cm) leads to greater
perceived externalization than lower spatial resolution (100 cm).
Additionally, verbal feedback was taken from each subject after they had finished the test,
and several of them commented that it was very difficult to judge the degree of externalisa-
tion for the different stimuli when Speech was being played, as compared to the Drums or
Guitar. Some subjects also reported not fully understanding the scale being used, and that
they could not distinguish between “Centre of Head” and “In The Head”. A few subjects
commented that in some trials all of the stimuli (except the anchor) sounded completely
externalised, but each sounded different in other aspects. All subjects reported that all
stimuli were localised at the correct loudspeaker positions. The average time taken by a
subject to complete the test was 27 minutes.
34
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:43==
7
Discussion
The results described in chapter 6 are discussed here.
7.1
Objective evaluation of the model
A few key inferences can be made for the results described in section 6.1.
Preprocessing of RIRs for Source 2
Since the two reflections from the window and the floor arrived at nearly the same time
at all microphones, they were unable to be isolated. As a result, this region (containing
the two peaks) was modelled twice. This has huge repercussions on the model’s output,
and any reconstruction for this source cannot be strictly indicative of the model perfor-
mance itself. This issue arose in the first place due to the geometry of the room and the
measurement positions. Source 2 was located roughly equidistant from the floor as well
as the window. As a result, both the image sources for these surfaces ended up being
roughly the same distance from each array. Thinking about the geometry, this was mainly
because the line along which the 64 measurements were taken was parallel to the line at
the intersection of the floor and the window. In future work, this may be remedied easily by
(1) ensuring that the source is located at significantly different distance from each surface
of interest in the room, or (2) ensuring that the array positions don’t follow a line parallel
to any of edges of the surfaces of interest. Additionally, the method used to isolate the
different peaks only works well if the wavefronts of different peaks don’t intersect. For
example, in figure 4.4a, if one attempts to isolate the reflections from the Back wall and
the Door wall separately, for at least one array these two peaks would coincide. This may
lead to an overestimation of the energy for that array since both peaks would be modelled
twice.
Unreliability of models at high frequencies
As seen in figures 6.2 and 6.3, all of the models perform poorly at high frequencies. This
may be due to a number of factors. Firstly, above the spatial Nyquist frequency of the
Eigenmike, one expects to see aliasing in the array measurements. While the Eigenmike
manual [11] suggests that this spatial Nyquist frequency is estimated around 9 kHz, the
actual value may be lower than that. This causes a lot of unreliable measurement data, in
other words “noise” at the high frequencies. Secondly, there is some human error when
it comes to estimating the coordinates of the array and the sources in the room during
the measurement stage. For high frequencies, the wavelength of the sound becomes
comparable to the magnitude of this error, which may also lead to noise when solving the
inverse problem. Therefore, at every step in this study when the processing is done in the
frequency domain, the values obtained for high frequencies may be unreliable. For future
work, it would be pertinent to limit the frequency range for which all of the processing
is done in the model. Moreover, using the least-squares approach for solving all the ill-
posed inverse problems may have had an impact. The least-squares approach is highly
sensitive to noise [6], and the noise introduced in the measurement data due to aliasing
in combination with the use of the least-squares approach may have been detrimental
to the model performance. In future work, it could be interesting to see the impact of
using different regularisation methods to solve the inverse problems at different stages
of the model. As a result, it is perhaps not appropriate to draw conclusions from the
overall NMSE shown in figure 6.1, since these noisy high frequency components have
been included as well.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
35
==PAGE:44==
Impact of source model type and modelling array resolution:
To put things into perspective, the 100 cm case requires only 4 Eigenmike measurements,
while the 5 cm case requires 79 Eigenmike measurements. In practice, this means the
5 cm case requires a lot more time, effort and resources to collect sufficient data for the
model, as well as greater computational cost to process all the data. Moreover, using
a complex SH-based model (SH1, SH3, SH5) increases the computational cost signifi-
cantly as compared to using a simpler PS-based model (PS, TT), and this cost increases
drastically with the order of SH expansion used. Keeping these in mind, the results for
figure 6.2 indicate that when a large number of measurements are available, using a more
complex model may lead to better performance (more accurate reconstruction), since the
SH3 and SH5 models outperform the others. However, for 5 cm, since all the models
have similar performance up to the 125.9 Hz band, it may be useful (in an effort to save
computational costs) to model different regions of the frequency spectrum using different
source models, opting for a simpler PS approach in the low frequencies. Also for 5 cm,
since there is only marginal improvement at some frequencies going from SH3 to SH5,
it may be useful to use SH3 in an effort to save computational costs while still getting
reasonable faithful reconstruction at those mid-frequencies.
Conversely, when the number of measurements available is scarce, it may be inferred that
using a complex SH-based model is detrimental to the quality of reconstruction (figure
6.2a). Here, using a simple model like the PS yields the best results, especially in the
mid-frequencies. Additionally, since the TT model performs worse than the PS model for
5 cm and nearly identically to it for 100 cm, it may be reasonable to conclude that there is
no reason to prefer the TT model over the PS model in any case.
Comparing the performance of the same source model at different resolutions in figure 6.3,
it may be inferred that the PS model generally performs better when fewer measurements
are available, while the TT model benefits from having more measurements. On the
other hand, the SH-based models all perform worse when given fewer measurements,
especially in the mid frequencies. The SH5 model perform noticeably worse than the rest
across all frequencies when given fewer measurements. In theory, to perform a SHT upto
order N = 5, one must have at least (N + 1)2 = 36 independent data points distributed
in space, and in this case, there were 128 data points (4 arrays × 32 microphones).
However, the angular resolution between microphone positions for a given array with
respect to the source (around which the SHT is being done) is extremely fine. In contrast to
this for the 5 cm case, there are measurements from 79 arrays, and the angular resolution
for the distance between these arrays is much greater. This is all to speculate that for
a given spatial resolution of available measurements, there is perhaps a limit to which
SH-order is suitable for the SHT applied to the measured data. Moreover, it may be
interesting to explore regularisation-based methods instead of the least-squares method
to implement the SHT itself.
7.2
Listening test
In this section, results from the listening test, as well as the objective metrics for the test
stimuli, are discussed, alongside addressing potential drawbacks of the test design and
stimulus generation processes.
Impact of each significant effect
The results of the listening test from section 6.3 are discussed. PS being perceived as
more externalised than SH3 appears to mainly be a consequence of the poor performance
of the SH3 model for 100 cm. Source 2 being perceived as more externalised than Source
1 is curious, since two peaks in Source 2 were modelled twice. This meant that those
36
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:45==
peaks had a higher amplitude for Source 2 than Source 1. It may be speculated that the
stronger reflection caused a greater percept of externalisation, but considering the flaw in
the preprocessing and the difference in the residual part of RIRs for Source 1 and Source
2, it is not fair to draw a conclusion here. The drums were found to be less externalised
than the guitar, and this may be attributed to a number of factors. The limitations of the
model at the high frequencies have already been discussed, and looking at the spectral
densities of the stimuli in figure 5.3b, it is clear that the drums contain more energy in the
high frequencies than the guitar. Also, the guitar stimulus has more energy than drums in
the mid frequencies, where the models generally perform similarly well. The drums also
have a more transient nature than the guitar (see figure 5.3a), which may have contributed
to the perception of externalisation. Lastly, the models with higher resolution (5 cm) were
rated as more externalised, which may indicate that having more measurements leads to
a more faithful reconstruction. It is important here to note that the residuals of the linear
mixed-effects model used failed the Shapiro-Wilk test for normality (p = 0.0239 < 0.05).
Thus, it may not be reasonable to assume that the results of the ANOVA are reliable.
Comparison of objective metrics and subjective results
The objective metrics shown in section 6.2 are now discussed and compared with the
listening test results. The ITDs and ILDs for SH3 100 cm in general exhibit the maximum
deviation from the those of the reference, and this is perhaps reflected in this stimulus
being rated the worst out of the four models tested. Moreover, the ITDs and ILDs of the
other three stimuli all behave similarly, which is also perhaps reflected in them all being
rated similarly (see figure 6.8). [10] determined that a lower value of IACC aided in exter-
nalisation, however the values for IACC obtained here do not agree with the subjective
results, since the SH3 100 cm stimulus has the lowest IACC out of the four models, yet
is rated as the least externalised. This may indicate that the IACC alone is not a good
predictor of the degree of externalisation of a binaural stimulus. However, it is important
to consider any potential drawbacks of the test design before drawing conclusions from
the test results.
Potential drawbacks of the test design
Due to time constraints arising from logistical and technical complications during the study,
the listening test design and implementation process was expedited. In the process, ad-
equate time was not able to be spent on the intricacies of the stimuli generation and the
test design. As a result, there are several downsides -
• The ITU-R BS.1534 standard for the MUSHRA test framework [19] was not strictly
followed. As a result, the participants were not informed that there is a hidden ref-
erence and a hidden anchor present which must be rated 100 and 0 respectively,
and therefore the post screening rules recommended by the standard could not be
applied. It may be reasonably concluded that the subjects misunderstood how to
use the scale, and when they felt like a stimulus was “At the Source” or “Center of
Head”, they chose to place the slider at the exact center of those ranges, which turn
out to be 90 and 10. To mitigate this, better instructions may have been provided to
them. It is also common practice in MUSHRA tests to repeat the same trial for each
subject to assess the consistency of their response. This was not done, as it would
have doubled the test duration and made recruiting test subjects a much more chal-
lenging task within the limited time available. Moreover, externalisation was chosen
as the attribute to be rated simply after listening to various combinations, however,
ideally one would conduct a few pilots tests to determine which attributes are the
more appropriate for the test framework.
• The stimuli generation for the test may have been optimised further. The reference
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
37
==PAGE:46==
stimulus had all of the early reflections, while all of the model stimuli only had the
4 modelled peaks. Perhaps it would have been appropriate to consider using just
the same 4 peaks in the reference as well for a more appropriate comparison. Ad-
ditionally, the process of adding back the residual RIRs to the modelled RIRs may
be flawed, since they were first added and then normalised. This was done to judge
not only how well the model reconstructs the time structure of the measured RIR,
but also the amplitude. However, this meant that if the model overestimated the
amplitude of the direct part of the RIR, the residual part would have a much lower
amplitude in the final normalised stimulus than if the model had underestimated the
direct part. This mean that the different stimuli in the test may have had different
amplitudes of the residual part in them, despite all being normalised. And since the
residual part of the RIR contains mainly the late reverberation which may impact the
percept of externalisation [10], this may have affected the test results.
• The intricacies of the additional processing introduced by the SPARTA plugins were
not adequately considered. The reliability of the inverse methods being used for
ambisonics encoding within the plugins were not examined in detail. Additionally,
the default set of HRTFs in the AmbiBIN plugin was used to generate the BRIRs,
and other sets of HRTFs were not experimented with.
All of the above could be remedied by spending more time focusing on the test design
stage, and conducting pilot tests to determine the appropriate stimuli for the test as well as
the relevant perceptual attribute to be rated in the test. In future work it may be interesting
to do so, and also conduct the test for a greater number of participants to obtain more
reliable data that one can draw inferences from. Additionally it may be interesting in the
future to use acoustically transparent headphones, and conduct a listening test to com-
pare the model reconstruction as well as the binauralised measurements with the sound
being played back directly from the loudspeakers, as this would be the truly completely
externalised stimulus.
Also, the model implemented here is capable of generating RIRs for any position in the
room so in theory if the SPARTA 6DoF plugin is debugged, or any other method is used to
interpolate between the RIRs as a subject walks around the room, this model is capable
of generating stimuli for 6DOF sound field construction studies. In the future, as was
originally envisioned for this study, it would be exciting to conduct a listening test where
the participant is free to move around the room while listening to the different stimuli.
38
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:47==
8
Conclusion
This thesis has highlighted some important factors when it comes to modelling the early
reflections in an RIR for sound field reconstruction. For the purposes of isolating these
early reflections, the geometry of the room and the measurement positions may play a role
in ensuring that peaks don’t coincide for all measurements. From the objective evalua-
tion of the models, a few conclusions may be drawn. Using a spherical microphone array
like em32 may cause poor performance at high-frequencies in the model due to spa-
tial aliasing, especially in combination with the use of the least-squares method to solve
inverse problems. As such the models implemented are unreliable at high frequencies
(>≈9 kHz). It was found that using a simpler PS model at low frequencies is appropri-
ate, considering its superior performance for this region and the high computational cost
of implementing the higher-order SH-based methods. It was also found that when fewer
measurements are available, the PS model performs the best and the SH models per-
form poorly, while a large dataset of measurements causes the higher order SH models
to come out on top, with SH5 performing marginally better than the SH3 model. It is the-
orised that for a given spatial resolution of measurement positions, there exists a limit to
the order of SH expansion that is appropriate for the source model. Moreover, with the
current implementation, the TT model shows no benefit over the PS model at mid-to-low
frequencies, and only marginal benefit at the unreliable high frequencies.
From the subjective listening test, it may be speculated that the SH3 method led to a
poorer perception of externalisation due to the limitations observed in the objective evalu-
ation of the model. The test design had several limitations due to time constraints, which
meant the results of the listening must be approached with caution, and puts their relia-
bility into question. In the future, it could be interesting to spend more time and effort on
the test design, and conduct pilot testing, as well a listening test in 6DOF to compare and
evaluate the different models for navigable reconstruction of the sound field.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
39
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
Efren Fernandez-Grande. “Sound field reconstruction using a spherical microphone
array”. en. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 139.3 (Mar. 2016),
pp. 1168–1178. ISSN: 0001-4966, 1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.4943545. URL: https:
//pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/139/3/1168/910068/Sound-field-reconstruction-using-a-
spherical.
[2]
Efren Fernandez-Grande, Angeliki Xenaki, and Peter Gerstoft. “A sparse equiva-
lent source method for near-field acoustic holography”. en. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 141.1 (Jan. 2017), pp. 532–542. ISSN: 0001-4966,
1520-8524. DOI: 10.1121/1.4974047. URL: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/141/1/
532/1058251/A-sparse-equivalent-source-method-for-near-field.
[3]
Antonio Figueroa-Duran and Efren Fernandez-Grande. “Navigable Reconstruction
of Reverberant Sound Fields Using Distributed Microphone Arrays”. en. In: 2023
Immersive and 3D Audio: from Architecture to Automotive (I3DA). Bologna, Italy:
IEEE, Sept. 2023, pp. 1–8. ISBN: 9798350311044. DOI: 10.1109/I3DA57090.2023.
10289135. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10289135/.
[4]
Finn Jacobsen and Peter Moller Juhl. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics.
en. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2013.
[5]
Franz Zotter and Matthias Frank. Ambisonics: A Practical 3D Audio Theory for
Recording, Studio Production, Sound Reinforcement, and Virtual Reality. en. Vol. 19.
Springer Topics in Signal Processing. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019.
ISBN: 978-3-030-17206-0 978-3-030-17207-7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-17207-7.
URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-17207-7.
[6]
Richard C. Aster, Brian Borchers, and Clifford H. Thurber. “Linear Regression”. en.
In: Parameter Estimation and Inverse Problems. Elsevier, 2013, pp. 25–53. ISBN:
978-0-12-385048-5. DOI: 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 385048 - 5 . 00002 - 1. URL: https :
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780123850485000021.
[7]
Vincent Martin. “Auditory distance perception of static sources in the context of
Audio-only Augmented Reality : an investigation of acoustic and non-acoustic cues”.
PhD thesis. Mar. 2022.
[8]
Thomas Deppisch et al. “Direct and Residual Subspace Decomposition of Spa-
tial Room Impulse Responses”. en. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing 31 (2023), pp. 927–942. ISSN: 2329-9290, 2329-9304.
DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2023.3240657. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
10028731/.
[9]
Neofytos Kaplanis et al. “Perception of Reverberation in Small Rooms: A Literature
Study”. en. In: (2014).
[10]
Thibaud Leclère, Mathieu Lavandier, and Fabien Perrin. “On the externalization of
sound sources with headphones without reference to a real source”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 146.4 (Oct. 2019), pp. 2309–2320. ISSN: 0001-
4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.5128325. URL: https://doi.org/10.1121/1.5128325.
[11]
Eigenmike Manual. URL: https://eigenmike.com/sites/default/files/documentation-
2023-10/EigenUnits%20User%20Manual_0.pdf.
[12]
O. Thiergart et al. “Geometry-based spatial sound acquisition using distributed mi-
crophone arrays”. In: IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Process-
ing 21 (2013), pp. 2583–2594.
40
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:49==
[13]
Sakari Tervo, Jukka Pätynen, and Tapio Lokki. “Acoustic Reflection Localization
from Room Impulse Responses”. en. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica 98.3
(May 2012), pp. 418–440. ISSN: 1610-1928. DOI: 10.3813/AAA.918527. URL: https:
//www.ingentaconnect.com/content/10.3813/AAA.918527.
[14]
A. Allen and B. Kleijn. “Ambisonics soundfield navigation using directional decom-
position and path distance estimation”. In: 2017.
[15]
Tom O’Haver. Peak Finding and Measurement. 2024. URL: https://terpconnect.
umd.edu/~toh/spectrum/PeakFindingandMeasurement.htm.
[16]
Ville Pulkki, Symeon Delikaris-Manias, and Archontis Politis, eds. Parametric time-
frequency domain spatial audio. en. First edition. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2018.
ISBN: 978-1-119-25258-0 978-1-119-25261-0.
[17]
Jacob Benesty, Jingdong Chen, and Yiteng Huang. Microphone Array Signal Pro-
cessing. en. Vol. 1. Springer Topics in Signal Processing. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. ISBN: 978-3-540-78611-5 978-3-540-78612-2. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-540-78612-2. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-540-78612-2.
[18]
Edward Saff and Arno Kuijlaars. Evenly Distributing Points on a Sphere. 2024. URL:
https://extremelearning.com.au/evenly-distributing-points-on-a-sphere/.
[19]
International Telecommunication Union. Recommendation ITU-R BS.1534-3: Method
for the subjective assessment of intermediate quality level of audio systems. Tech.
rep. International Telecommunication Union, 2015. URL: https://www.itu.int/dms_
pubrec/itu-r/rec/bs/R-REC-BS.1534-3-201510-I!!PDF-E.pdf.
[20]
Thomas McKenzie, Sebastian Schlecht, and Ville Pulkki. A dataset of measured
spatial room impulse responses for the transition between coupled rooms. en. Apr.
2023. DOI: 10.5281/ZENODO.4095493. URL: https://zenodo.org/record/4095493.
[21]
Leo McCormack et al. “Real-time conversion of sensor array signals into spheri-
cal harmonic signals with applications to spatially localised sub-band sound-ﬁeld
analysis”. en. In: (2018).
[22]
Leo McCormack and Archontis Politis. “SPARTA & COMPASS: Real-time imple-
mentations of linear and parametric spatial audio reproduction and processing meth-
ods”. en. In: (2019).
[23]
Audio Group at Technische Hochschule Köln. Audio Group Download Server. Ac-
cessed: 2024-08-03. 2020. URL: https://audiogroup.web.th-koeln.de.
[24]
“IEEE Recommended Practice for Speech Quality Measurements”. In: IEEE No
297-1969 (1969), pp. 1–24. DOI: 10.1109/IEEESTD.1969.7405210.
[25]
klein florian, werner stephan, and mayenfels thomas. “influences of training on ex-
ternalization of binaural synthesis in situations of room divergence”. In: journal of
the audio engineering society 65 (3 Mar. 2017), pp. 178–187.
[26]
Juan Camilo Gil Carvajal et al. “The Influence of Visual Cues on Sound Externaliza-
tion”. In: 39th Midwinter Meeting of the Association of Research in Otolaryngology.
San Diego, California, United States, 2016. URL: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/
portalfiles/portal/123098195/ARO2016_abstract.pdf.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
A.1
Measurement setup photos
Figure A.1: Meaurement setup photos in the SFC room.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
43
==PAGE:52==
A.2
Objective evaluation results for Source 2
(a) 100 cm
(b) 5 cm.
Figure A.2: Comparing performance of different models for Source 2 using NMSE (dB) in
octave bands. (a) shows the five source model types for the 100 cm case and (b) shows
the five source model types for the 5 cm case.
(a) Point source-based models.
(b) SH-based models.
Figure A.3: Comparing performance of different models for Source 2 using NMSE (dB)
in octave bands. (a) shows the PS, and TT models for the two resolutions (b) shows the
SH1, SH3, and SH5 model for the two resolutions.
44
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
==PAGE:53==
A.3
Additional plots from the listening test results
Figure A.4: Q-Q plot from the Shapiro-Wilk test for normality.
Early Reflection Modelling for 6-DOF Sound Field Reconstruction and its Perceptual Impact
45
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.electro.dtu.dk
