==PAGE:1==
Master’s of Science in Electrical Engineering
MSc Thesis in DTU Compute
Implementation of Broadcast
Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio
for Hearing Aids
Master’s Thesis by
Pranjal Jain
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Prof. Xenofon Fafoutis
Co-supervisors: Klaus Elk (GN Hearing)
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 322
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
GN Hearing A/S
Department of Operating Systems and Wireless
Lautrupbjerg 7, 2750 Ballerup
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis was completed at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in collaboration with GN
Hearing A/S, as part of the requirements for the Master of Science in Engineering
(MSc Eng) degree.
Kongens Lyngby, 21st September 2024
Pranjal Jain
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
This thesis project was completed in collaboration with the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU) and GN Hearing, with the constant support of many individuals. I
would like to thank GN Hearing for giving me the chance to work on the topic of ”Im-
plementation of a Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids.”
The opportunity to work with the state of the art hardware and industry-leading
teams was significant to the success of this project.
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to my GN supervisor, Klaus Elk, for his
invaluable support and guidance throughout the various stages of this project. His
constant direction ensured smooth progress, and his suggestions were key in shaping
this report.
I would also like to thank my DTU supervisor, Professor Xenofon Fafoutis, for help-
ing me carry out the research associated with this project and providing valuable
feedback on the progress of the report.
Special thanks go to Rohit Kumar and Bihang Ni for their technical support in design-
ing the backend framework of the Broadcast Assistant. Their expertise was essential
to the success of this project.
Finally, I want to express my deep gratitude to my friends and family for their con-
stant encouragement and support during the thesis.
Their belief in me kept me
motivated throughout.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Bluetooth technology is essential for modern connectivity, providing an energy-eﬀicient
solution through Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) for short-range communication be-
tween devices.
However, it faces limitations in advanced audio applications such
as multi-streaming, large-scale broadcasting, and hearing aid compatibility, which
require low latency and power eﬀiciency. Bluetooth LE Audio addresses these chal-
lenges by enabling multiple audio streams to broadcast simultaneously to numerous
receivers, expanding Bluetooth’s role from personal use to public services and shared
audio experiences.
One of the key use cases is Assistive Listening Systems (ALS), which help individ-
uals with hearing loss hear more clearly in noisy environments. Traditionally, ALS
relied on technologies like hearing loops, but Bluetooth LE Audio offers the potential
to replace telecoil systems in hearing aids, providing a significantly enhanced audio
experience.
This thesis focuses on developing a Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio
specifically for hearing aids, with the goal of improving the functionality and user
experience of Assistive Listening Devices. The Broadcast Assistant was implemented
on a Raspberry Pi with a USB Bluetooth controller, as the built-in controller lacked
support for Bluetooth 5.2, which is essential for scanning in extended and periodic
advertisements required by LE Audio. Using the open-source BlueZ framework, the
project successfully designed, developed, and validated a Proof of Concept for the
Broadcast Assistant, enabling it to manage multiple broadcasters and ensure secure
connections across various transmission scenarios.
Additionally, this thesis explores the potential of the Broadcast Assistant to accel-
erate the adoption of Auracast™technology, highlighting future opportunities and
challenges within the evolving market.
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
BR
Basic Rate
EDR
Enhanced Data Rate
BLE
Bluetooth Low Energy
LE
Low Energy
SDG
Sustainable Development Goals
MFi
Made for IPhone
ASHA Audio Streaming for Hearing
Aids
ALD
Assistive Listening Device
ALS
Assistive Listening Systems
TWS
True Wireless Stereo
SIG
Special Interest Group
API
Application Programming
Interface
OTC
Over the Counter
AV
Audio Visual
PA
Public Address
HCI
Host Controller Interface
USB
Universal Serial Bus
GATT Generic Attribute Profile
ATT
Attribute Protocol
UUID Universally Unique Identifier
GAP
Generic Access Profile
PDU
Protocol Data Unit
CIS
Connected Isochronous Streams
BIS
Broadcast Isochronous Streams
BIG
Broadcast Isochronous Groups
PAST Periodic Advertising Sync
Transfer
BAAS Broadcast Audio Announcement
Service
BASS Broadcast Audio Scan Service
BRS
Broadcast Receive State
BASCP Broadcast Audio Scan Control
Point
PBP
Public Broadcast Profile
BAP
Basic Audio Profile
ISM
Industrial, Scientific and Medical
SoC
System on Chip
LC3
Low Complexity Communication
Codec
GPIO General Purpose Input/Output
HFP
Hands Free Profile
A2DP Advanced Audio Distribution
Profile
UART Universal Asynchronous
Receiver/ Transmitter
RSSI
Received Signal Strength
Indicator
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
List of Abbreviations
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
State of the Art
5
2.1
Hearing Aid Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Assistive Listening Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Bluetooth Low Energy (LE) Audio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Auracast™Broadcast Audio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Assistant Form Factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Market Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5.1
Growing Momentum for LE Audio and Auracast . . . . . . . .
10
2.5.2
Sizing the Market opportunity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.3
Market Segment and Opportunity for Public Venues . . . . . .
12
3
Background
14
3.1
Bluetooth Low Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Bluetooth LE Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Bluetooth LE Stack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
Host Controller Interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.4
Generic Attribute Profile
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.5
Generic Access Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
3.2
Bluetooth LE Audio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Broadcast Isochronous Streams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.2
LE Advertising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Broadcast Audio Scan Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Auracast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Design and Methodology
25
4.1
Hardware Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.1
Raspberry Pi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.2
Transmitters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.3
Receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.4
Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.4.1
Controller with BLE v5.2 Support . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Software Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
User Interface Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Validation Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Methodology: Designing Broadcast Assistant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5.1
Discovering, Pairing and Connecting to Receiver . . . . . . . .
32
4.5.2
Scanning for Transmitters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.3
Maintaining a database from Service Discovery . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.4
Starting and Terminating Audio Streams
. . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5.5
Setting Broadcast Code for Encrypted Transmitters
. . . . . .
36
5
Implementation
37
5.1
Device Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1
Device Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.2
Managing Connections and Pairing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.3
Integration with Flask routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Broadcast Scanner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.1
Troubleshooting Bluetooth USB Dongles . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.2
Scanning for Extended Advertisements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.3
Integration with Flask routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Broadcast Assistant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.1
Service Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.2
Broadcast Streaming Controls and Information . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3.3
Integration with Flask routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusion and Future Scope
65
6.1
Challenges and Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.3
Future Market Potential of Broadcast Assistant . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
Bibliography
69
Appendix
71
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:10==
viii
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
In the late 1990s, Bluetooth technology revolutionized device communication by en-
abling wireless connections without the need for extra networking hardware. Since
its debut in 1998, Bluetooth has gained immense popularity, with over 4.5 billion
chips sold in 2020 alone [1]. Initially, it was applied in devices like wireless mice,
keyboards, and hands-free car kits. However, its true breakthrough occurred in the
audio sector, where it powered hands-free calling and wireless headsets. This early
form of Bluetooth, known as Bluetooth Basic Rate/Enhanced Data Rate (BR/EDR),
allowed devices to connect directly and transfer data at speeds of up to 2 Mbps [2],
making wireless audio a staple in daily life.
As Bluetooth technology advanced, it became the standard for streaming music from
phones to wireless headphones and speakers [3]. While it became a fixture in nearly ev-
ery smartphone, tablet, and computer, Bluetooth also faced limitations, such as high
power consumption, diﬀiculty in supporting multiple connections simultaneously, and
challenges in maintaining audio quality across different devices like wireless earbuds
and hearing aids [4].
In order to address these challenges, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) was developed.
The use case of BLE was initially utilized in fitness trackers and smartphones but
later expanded to the audio realm with the introduction of Bluetooth LE Audio. The
LE Audio is an update to this current infrastructure of Bluetooth technology which
brings significant improvements in the area of sound by quality, energy eﬀiciency,
and compatibility across various devices designed to meet the increasing demands of
modern audio applications [3].
One of the most innovative features of Bluetooth LE Audio is Auracast™broadcast
audio. This feature allows a single device to broadcast audio to multiple receivers
simultaneously, opening up a wide range of new use cases [5]. It enables activities
like sharing music with friends, listening to public announcements, and enhancing
the listening experience for those with hearing impairments. The Auracast ecosys-
tem comprises three key components: transmitters, receivers, and assistants. The
transmitters and receivers are responsible for sending and receiving audio signals,
respectively, while the Auracast assistant helps users find, join, and manage their
preferred audio streams [6].
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
This thesis focuses on developing a broadcast assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio
specifically for hearing aids. It will explore how this assistant can be implemented,
its potential applications, technical challenges, and improvements it brings to audio
experiences for both the general public and individuals with hearing impairments. By
examining the applications of Bluetooth LE Audio technology to assistive listening
devices (hearing aids), the thesis aims to contribute to the ongoing growth of wireless
audio technology, helping to create a more inclusive and immersive audio experience
for everyone in the future.
1.1
Collaboration
This thesis aims to investigate this use case in collaboration with GN Hearing A/S,
a company renowned for its expertise in manufacturing hearing aids and related
accessories. The focus will be on three key products:
• GN Hearing aids - Auracast-enabled receivers that allow users to effortlessly
stream broadcast audio directly to their hearing aids.
• GN ReSound TV Streamer+ - Auracast-enabled transmitter that delivers
high-quality TV audio directly to compatible hearing aids.
• GN Resound MultiMic+ - Auracast-enabled remote microphone that en-
hances hearing in challenging environments by streaming audio directly to hear-
ing aids.
1.2
Problem Statement
Despite the advancements in Bluetooth technology and its integration into hearing
aids, several challenges are limiting its widespread adoption and market effectiveness:
1. Lack of User Interface: Current hearing aids, even with advanced features
like Auracast™, lack a user-friendly interface, making it diﬀicult for users to
easily select and connect to the correct audio streams, especially in environments
with multiple Auracast™transmitters.
2. High Costs and Slow Adoption: The adoption of Auracast™-enabled de-
vices has been slower than expected, mainly due to the high costs of new tech-
nology and increased production expenses, making the devices less affordable
and limiting market growth.
3. Latency issues: Wireless audio transmission can suffer from latency, leading
to a mismatch between audio and visual content, disrupting synchronization,
and negatively impacting the listening experience.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Motivation
3
1.3
Motivation
Assistive technology plays a crucial role in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG). It ensures that individuals with hearing impairments can fully engage
in society, contributing to the five goals outlined in the Figure 1.1. For those with
hearing impairments, assistive hearing technology is essential for active participation
in all areas of life, including education, employment, and social interactions [7].
((a)) SDG3
((b)) SDG4
((c)) SDG9
((d)) SDG10
((e)) SDG17
Figure 1.1. UN Sustainable Development Goals for Assistive Listening [8]
The Broadcast assistant is essential for improving the functionality and user expe-
rience of Assistive Listening Device (ALD) like hearing aids.
It serves five main
purposes:
• Power Eﬀiciency: The assistant takes on the power-intensive task of scanning
for Auracast transmitters, which helps conserve battery life in smaller devices
like earbuds and hearing aids that have limited power capacity.
• Enhanced User Experience: The assistant maintains a list of available Au-
racast streams, providing a more intuitive interface for users to easily access
and manage their audio options.
• Stream Management: It manages the selection, termination, and switching
of broadcast streams, ensuring a smooth and convenient listening experience.
• Synchronization: It ensures that multiple Auracast receivers work together
in sync by receiving the correct audio streams simultaneously.
• Security: When broadcast streams are encrypted, the assistant can provide the
necessary decryption key to the receivers, ensuring secure access to the audio
content.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.4
Goals
To achieve the overarching goals, the project is structured around three key sub-goals:
• Developing a Proof of Concept for a Broadcast Assistant: The pri-
mary goal of this thesis is to design and implement a functional prototype of a
Broadcast Assistant on physical hardware. This proof of concept aims to demon-
strate the feasibility of developing a marketable product within the emerging
Auracast™ecosystem.
• Assessing the Impact on Auracast™Market Adoption: Another key
objective is to evaluate how the Broadcast Assistant could influence the adop-
tion of Auracast™technology. The thesis will explore future opportunities and
challenges in the Auracast™market, providing insights into how this device
could promote wider adoption.
• Researching and Supporting LE Audio Development: This thesis fo-
cuses on conducting research to better understand these technologies.
This
thesis aims to support the broader development community in leveraging the
full potential of Auracast™technology.
By achieving these sub-goals, the project aims to develop a comprehensive under-
standing of Bluetooth LE Audio, its use cases in Auracast™development, and the
opportunities for market adoption.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER2
State of the Art
2.1
Hearing Aid Connectivity
Hearing aid connectivity through wireless technologies like Bluetooth has advanced
the overall listening experience for individuals with hearing impairments by enabling
direct audio transmission from various sources. This connectivity enhances sound
clarity by improving the signal-to-noise ratio, especially in challenging acoustic envi-
ronments [3].
The hearing aid industry has faced challenges such as audio quality, latency, bat-
tery life, and broadcast transmissions. Hearing aids are unique as they are worn for
extended periods, often around nine hours a day [1], necessitating eﬀicient battery
usage and continuous audio processing to amplify and clarify ambient sounds for the
wearer [9]. These devices typically include multiple microphones to allow for sophis-
ticated audio processing algorithms that can filter out unwanted background noise,
ensuring that users can focus on the sounds that matter the most [10].
Apple’s Made for IPhone (MFi) standard, launched in 2014, was a pioneering step in
integrating Bluetooth LE into hearing aids [1]. Developed in collaboration with one of
Apple’s silicon partners, the MFi solution allowed for unidirectional audio streaming
from an iPhone to one or two hearing aids. Users could control their hearing aids
via an app on their iPhone, adjusting volume, selecting presets for different acous-
tic environments, and even using the ”Live Listen” feature, which transformed the
iPhone into a remote microphone. This feature enabled hearing aid wearers to place
their phone on a table to pick up conversations, making it a convenient and effective
solution for challenging listening environments [11].
The MFi solution was limited by its exclusivity to Apple devices. It worked only
with iPhones and iPads, leaving Android users without a comparable solution. Rec-
ognizing this gap, Google partnered with hearing aid manufacturer GN ReSound to
develop Audio Streaming for Hearing Aids (ASHA), an open Bluetooth LE specifica-
tion designed for Android 10 and above [1]. ASHA provided unidirectional streaming
from Android devices to compatible hearing aids, offering a much-needed alternative
for Android users.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 State of the Art
2.2
Assistive Listening Systems
Assistive Listening Systems (ALS) help individuals with hearing loss hear broadcast
sounds more clearly, especially in environments with background noise, busy sur-
roundings, or distant sound sources.
Hearing aids as ALD capture and transmit
desired sounds directly to the user’s ear, reducing background noise, interference,
and distortion [12]. Traditional ALS, such as hearing loops, radio frequency, and
infrared systems, have long supported individuals with hearing loss. However, these
technologies face challenges like high costs, poor audio quality, and privacy concerns,
limiting their widespread adoption.
Hearing loops, commonly installed in public venues worldwide, transmit a magnetic
signal using an inductive loop. Hearing aids with telecoils (t-coils), a small copper
wire coils integrated into hearing aids, can connect directly to this signal shown in
Figure 2.1. When users activate their t-coil setting within a looped area, their hearing
aids receive audio from the facility’s sound system, improving their ability to hear
conversations and announcements in places such as theaters, train stations, and places
of worship [13]. Venues with hearing loop technology are marked by blue signage with
a white ear icon and a “T” in the lower right corner [14].
Figure 2.1. Telecoil Hearing Loop [14]
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Bluetooth LE Audio
7
2.3
Bluetooth LE Audio
Bluetooth LE Audio was developed to revolutionize the user experience by building
on the success of audio applications such as music streaming and telephony, which
have relied on profiles like A2DP and HFP for over two decades [1]. Unlike Blue-
tooth Classic Audio, which has served well for many years, Bluetooth LE Audio is a
complete redesign that redefines how Bluetooth audio functions, promising improved
audio performance and supporting a wide range of new use cases. The motivation
behind its development was not just to provide a low-power alternative to existing
profiles, but to encourage innovation in the audio industry. By addressing the needs of
modern applications like True Wireless Stereo (TWS) and voice assistants, Bluetooth
LE Audio aims to make audio more versatile, flexible, and universally accessible [6].
One of the key advancements of Bluetooth LE Audio is its potential to replace the tele-
coil system for broadcast audio. The telecoil has been a reliable but basic technology,
providing mono audio with limited bandwidth and requiring users to be physically
within the inductive loop’s range to hear the transmission [1]. Bluetooth SIG states
that ”Auracast™broadcast audio will become an advanced, new assistive listening
system”, offering easier, more affordable deployment with improved audio quality and
enhanced privacy as illustrated in the Figure 2.2 [15].
Figure 2.2. Venues with Auracast ALS [15]
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:18==
8
2 State of the Art
2.4
Auracast™Broadcast Audio
The Bluetooth SIG has introduced Auracast™broadcast audio, powered by Bluetooth
LE Audio, which promises new audio experiences such as sharing audio, unmuting
silent TVs, and improving hearing in various environments. This innovation requires
collaboration among companies to integrate with both existing and new devices.
The first wave of Auracast™receivers is emerging with dual-mode support, compat-
ible with both Bluetooth Classic Audio and Bluetooth LE Audio, enabling seamless
upgrades for earbuds, headphones, and hearing aids. Stand-alone Auracast™trans-
mitters are also entering the market, connecting to audio outputs of TVs, A/V equip-
ment, and phones.
To help users find and manage their preferred audio streams,
Auracast™assistants play a key role in navigating and selecting broadcasts.
2.4.1
Assistant Form Factors
Auracast™assistants offer versatile and innovative solutions for managing audio ex-
periences. These assistants can be developed in various form factors to meet different
user needs, providing convenient ways to discover, join, and manage audio streams
through mobile apps, dedicated hardware, or integrated features in consumer elec-
tronics.
Figure 2.3. Example of Application-based Assistant [16]
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Auracast™Broadcast Audio
9
Application-Based Implementations
Auracast™assistants can be integrated into existing smartphones via apps, allowing
users to discover and manage broadcasts without upgrading their devices. These apps
utilize the receiver’s Auracast™capabilities to scan for available broadcasts, while
the app facilitates stream selection, similar to choosing TV channels or radio stations
[17]. In the future, smartphones may also function as both Auracast™assistants
and transmitters, enabling users to share audio streams with others using QR codes.
Additionally, smartwatch apps may offer users the convenience of managing audio
streams on the go [16].
Hardware-Based Implementations
Auracast™assistants can also be embedded in dedicated hardware, such as earbud
charging cases. A charging case with an integrated Auracast™assistant could al-
low users to select and start to receive Auracast™transmission as soon as they
remove their earbuds from the case [16]. A keyfob-style remote control could serve as
an Auracast™assistant, allowing users to easily cycle through available Auracast™
streams and manage their audio experience with basic buttons. Another hardware-
based option is a lanyard device with a basic touch display, which could be used in
environments like sports events or care homes [16].
Figure 2.4. Example of Hardware-based Assistant [16]
Integrated Assistants:
Consumer TVs are expected to be among the first devices to incorporate Auracast™
transmitter capabilities. These TVs could offer multiple audio channels, including dif-
ferent language options or assistive listening streams. By integrating Auracast™as-
sistant functions directly into the TV, users could seamlessly access broadcast streams
via a QR code for easy access [16].
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:20==
10
2 State of the Art
Figure 2.5. TV with Integrated Assistant [16]
2.5
Market Adoption
2.5.1
Growing Momentum for LE Audio and Auracast
Since the release of LE Audio specifications in July 2022, the momentum for LE
Audio and Auracast™broadcast audio solutions has been steadily increasing. Nu-
merous products have either completed or are in the process of undergoing Bluetooth
SIG qualification to support LE Audio. The growth of the LE Audio and Auracast™
broadcast audio ecosystem is being driven by a broad selection of chipsets from lead-
ing vendors like Qualcomm, Broadcom, MediaTek, Nordic Semiconductor, NXP and
Realtek [18]. The hearing aid company, GN Hearing have introduced products ready
to support LE Audio with the launch of ReSound Nexia™hearing aids (receiver)
and ReSound TV-Streamer+ (transmitter) in October 2023. Similarly in November
2022, Cochlear launched its Nucleus 8 Sound Processor, making it the first cochlear
implant sound processor ready to support LE Audio [19].
As this ecosystem expands, many existing Bluetooth devices, like the Samsung Galaxy
Buds2 Pro, are receiving firmware updates to enable these new audio capabilities. LE
Audio support has been integrated into Android 13, with Samsung’s Galaxy S23 and
Fold series receiving updates via One UI 6 (and higher). Windows 11 will also add
support for LE Audio and Auracast™, allowing direct connectivity with LE Audio
receiver devices. Samsung’s 2023 Neo QLED 8K and MICRO LED smart TVs have
also received software updates to support Auracast™broadcast audio [19]. These
developments signify a rapidly expanding ecosystem ready to support Auracast™
broadcast audio across various platforms.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Market Adoption
11
These developments highlight the rapid growth of LE Audio and Auracast ecosystem
through new products or software updates.
Figure 2.6. Auracast Hearing Ecosystem Companies from Bluetooth SIG [20]
2.5.2
Sizing the Market opportunity
Figure 2.7. Bluetooth LE Audio Device Shipments in market [18]
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:22==
12
2 State of the Art
To understand the market opportunity for Auracast™broadcast audio, research from
Strategy Analytics estimates over 60 million public venues globally could benefit from
deploying this technology, with around 7 million venues poised for early adoption
[21]. According to ABI Research, annual shipments of LE Audio-enabled devices are
projected to grow from 391 million in 2023 to about 3 billion by 2027 shown in Figure
2.7, including smartphones, TVs, headsets, and hearing aids [18]. As the Auracast™
ecosystem expands, the adoption of broadcast audio in public venues is expected
to accelerate, driven by increased availability and awareness of compatible devices,
creating a significant market opportunity.
2.5.3
Market Segment and Opportunity for Public Venues
Auracast™broadcast audio offers significant potential for integration into public
venues and Audio-Visual solutions. With numerous venues worldwide, the retrofit
market for Auracast™is vast [19].
Any location with a power and audio source
can easily add an Auracast™transmitter or adapter, enabling applications such as
enhanced listening in public spaces, silent TV screens, multi-language support, and
improved tour systems. This technology enhances the audio experience in places like
airports, cinemas, gyms, and tourist sites.
Figure 2.8. Auracast Broadcast Use Case by Venue type [21]
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Market Adoption
13
Auracast™is a versatile solution for improving audio accessibility and quality in many
public settings. Adoption depends on factors like installation ease, visitor impact, and
the venue’s audio needs. Many locations can use multiple Auracast™applications
simultaneously—cinemas may provide hearing assistance and multi-language streams,
while transportation hubs can offer silent TV screens and public announcements.
Museums and tourist sites could use it for guided tours and personalized audio [21].
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER3
Background
3.1
Bluetooth Low Energy
BLE is a wireless personal area network technology developed by Bluetooth Special
Interest Group (SIG). The BLE radio operates in the 2.4 GHz Industrial, Scientific
and Medical (ISM) band, dividing this spectrum into 40 channels [4], including 3 for
advertising (Channels 37, 38, and 39) and 37 for data (Channels 0-36) as shown in
Figure 3.1. BLE operates at very low power, a primary design goal of BLE was to
achieve high energy eﬀiciency, enabling devices powered by small batteries to operate
for extended periods. It supports various communication topologies, including point-
to-point, broadcast, and mesh, enabling reliable, large-scale device networks [22].
BLE is now also widely used for high-accuracy indoor positioning, allowing devices
to determine the presence, distance, and direction of other devices. The broadcast
mode enables data transmission to an unlimited number of receivers simultaneously.
Figure 3.1. Bluetooth LE Channels
3.1.1
Bluetooth LE Specifications
The Bluetooth Core Specification is a detailed document, about 3000 pages long,
explaining how Bluetooth LE and Bluetooth Classic work. It covers the architec-
ture, key features, procedures, and communication protocols for different layers of
the Bluetooth stack [22]. It outlines how Bluetooth operates and the requirements
for developers implementing a Bluetooth stack. The document includes two main
specifications:
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Bluetooth Low Energy
15
• Profile specifications: These define the roles and behaviours of devices in a
client/server relationship, where servers store state data, and clients utilize this
data.
• Service specifications: These organize state data into characteristics and de-
scriptors, which are grouped within services. Services provide context and define
the meaning and behaviours associated with their contained characteristics and
descriptors.
Figure 3.2. Bluetooth LE Specification [22]
3.1.2
Bluetooth LE Stack
The Bluetooth LE stack is organized into multiple layers and functional modules,
divided between two main architectural blocks: the host and the controller. The host
typically functions like an operating system, while the controller is usually a System
on Chip (SoC). This separation allows components from different manufacturers to
work together seamlessly. Figure 3.3 shows the Bluetooth LE stack, highlighting the
layers and how they are distributed across the host and controller.
• The controller manages the Physical and Link Layers which deals with inte-
grated radio hardware.
• The host is responsible for upper-layer functions, enabling applications to com-
municate with peer devices in a standardized way.
• The Host Controller Interface (HCI) facilitates communication between
the host and controller, serving as a logical interface rather than a physical
component.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Background
• The Low Complexity Communication Codec (LC3) is the default audio
codec for LE Audio and is included in all LE Audio products, implemented in
either the host or controller.
Figure 3.3. Bluetooth LE Stack [22]
3.1.3
Host Controller Interface
HCI is a standardized communication interface between a host and a controller, en-
abling interaction through commands sent from the host and events returned by the
controller, including responses and unsolicited messages. Figure 3.4 illustrates the
exchange of HCI commands and events as the host configures the controller to pre-
pare for packet transmission on extended and periodic advertisement channels. HCI
is implemented either with a Bluetooth controller in a Universal Serial Bus (USB)
dongle or internally within a product to link the host and controller. In this setup,
USB is used to transport HCI.
3.1.4
Generic Attribute Profile
The Generic Attribute Profile (GATT) defines higher-level data types within the
attribute table and outlines the procedures for using these data types via the Attribute
Protocol (ATT).
Attributes in GATT are organized in an indexed list called the
attribute table and consist of a handle, a Universally Unique Identifier (UUID), a
value, and a set of permissions [22].
In a GATT interaction, two devices assume
specific roles: one acts as the GATT Client, which sends ATT commands and requests,
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Bluetooth Low Energy
17
while the other functions as the GATT Server, which processes these commands,
responds accordingly, and sends notifications or indications. GATT procedures cover
tasks like service discovery, characteristic discovery, descriptor discovery, and reading
or writing characteristic values. The key data types in GATT are:
• Services: These are groups of related data called characteristics, each identified
by a unique UUID. A service can contain one or more characteristics.
• Characteristics: These are individual data items with a type, associated value,
and properties that define how the data can be used. Characteristics belong to
a service and can be part of multiple services.
• Descriptors: Attached to characteristics, it contains metadata such as textual
descriptions or control settings that influence the behaviour of the characteristic.
Figure 3.4. Services, Characteristics and Descriptors
3.1.5
Generic Access Profile
The Generic Access Profile (GAP) outlines the procedures for device discovery and es-
tablishing connections between devices. GAP primarily revolves around transmitting
advertising packets and their reception through scanning [22]. The Link Layer defines
various advertising and scanning packet types known as Protocol Data Unit (PDU).
GAP defines four key device roles:
• Broadcaster: A device that transmits data through advertising without estab-
lishing connections. A broadcaster can also transmit a broadcast isochronous
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Background
stream, including legacy, extended, and periodic advertising. A broadcaster has
a transmitter but may not have a receiver, and it does not accept connections
from central devices unless it also acts as a peripheral.
• Observer: A device that receives advertising or broadcast isochronous stream
packets. It does not establish connections with other devices and includes a
receiver and possibly a transmitter.
• Peripheral: A device that can establish a connection with a Central device. It
is equipped with both a transmitter and a receiver.
• Central:
A device that initiates connections with Peripheral devices, also
equipped with both a transmitter and a receiver.
A Broadcaster or Peripheral device can be in non-discoverable mode or one of two
discoverable modes defined by GAP. In non-discoverable mode, transmitted pack-
ets are visible but ignored by devices performing General or Limited Discoverable
procedures. In discoverable mode, a device remains discoverable indefinitely, or lim-
ited discoverable mode, where it is discoverable for up to three minutes [22]. When
Central or Observer devices attempt to discover other devices, they can use passive
scanning - receives advertising PDU without sending any response or active scanning
- receives advertising PDU and sends scanning PDU to request more information in
response.
3.2
Bluetooth LE Audio
((a)) BIG and BIS
((b)) CIG and CIS
Figure 3.5. Broadcast and Connected Isochronous Streams
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Bluetooth LE Audio
19
Bluetooth technology initially focused on simple one-to-one connections, such as
connecting a phone to a pair of earbuds for audio transmission.
While this ap-
proach met basic needs, it had limitations, particularly in sharing audio with mul-
tiple users.
Bluetooth LE Audio was developed to overcome these challenges by
introducing more flexible topologies through Isochronous Streams.
There are two
types of Isochronous Streams: Connected Isochronous Streams (CIS) and Broadcast
Isochronous Streams (BIS) shown in Figure 3.5.
CIS is used for unicast audio transmissions, such as when a phone streams music to a
pair of earbuds. This setup functions like a private connection, where data exchange is
continuously acknowledged, ensuring smooth audio playback. In contrast, BIS enable
one-way audio transmission without the need for connections or acknowledgments.
This allows any device within range of a broadcast transmitter to receive and play
the audio.
Originally designed for hearing aids, BIS enables multiple people in a
venue to listen to the same audio stream. This feature is now extended to private
music sharing, where a phone can switch from a unicast connection to an encrypted
broadcast, allowing multiple listeners to join the stream regardless of their device
type.
3.2.1
Broadcast Isochronous Streams
Figure 3.6. Broadcast Isochronous Groups [22]
BIS allow one-way audio transmission without the need for connections or acknowl-
edgments. This means that any device within range of a broadcast transmitter can
receive and play the audio. These streams are organized into Broadcast Isochronous
Groups (BIG), with each group containing one or more BIS streams that are sched-
uled sequentially.
A BIS stream enables broadcast communication from a single
transmitter (source) to multiple receivers (sinks) by transmitting data in link layer
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Background
PDUs known as BIS Data PDUs. At the same time, control information is sent via
BIS Control PDUs. BIS streams operate on the LE Isochronous Physical Channel and
can use any Bluetooth LE PHY. Each BIG contains one or more BIS streams. A BIG
event marks the start of the scheduled activities across the BIS streams within the
group. BIS events occur at intervals determined by a parameter called BIS_Spacing,
starting from the BIG anchor point. Each BIS event is further divided into subevents,
spaced apart according to a parameter called Sub_Interval. An example of this se-
quential scheduling of BIG and BIS events, along with sub-events, is shown in the
Figure 3.6. As seen in the figure 3.6, at the end of BIG event #1, a BIS control
sub-event is transmitted.
3.2.2
LE Advertising
BLE Advertising is a method of communication used in Bluetooth to transfer data
or signal the availability of a Peripheral device for connection. Advertising packets
are designed to be received by any scanning device within range, allowing for one-to-
many data transmission.
Advertising typically involves one-way communication from the advertising device to
scanning devices. However, scanning devices can respond to these packets with PDUs
to request more information or initiate a connection [22]. This response process is
called active scanning. If no response is sent, it’s known as passive scanning.
Advertising is considered an unreliable transport method because receivers do not
send acknowledgements for received packets. There are two main types of advertising
defined:
• Legacy Advertising: This method uses smaller data packets and is less eﬀi-
cient, sending the same data multiple times across primary channels.
• Extended Advertising: This newer method supports larger data packets and
more eﬀicient data transmission.
Legacy advertising
Legacy advertising in BLE involves sending packets that are 37 octets long. Each
packet consists of a 6-octet header and a payload of up to 31 octets. These packets are
transmitted on three primary channels (37, 38, and 39), one at a time, in sequence [22].
The timing of advertising events is controlled by specific parameters, with a pseudo-
random delay (advDelay) added to each interval to prevent consistent collisions with
other devices. Legacy advertising supports different PDU types for various scenarios:
• Undirected advertising: Packets are broadcast to any scanning device.
• Directed advertising: Packets are targeted at a specific device.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Bluetooth LE Audio
21
The PDU type also determines whether active scanning (where receivers request more
data) is allowed and whether the advertising device can be connected to it. Legacy
advertising is limited to the primary channels and uses the LE 1M PHY [22].
Extended advertising
Extended Advertising brings important advancements to how advertising is con-
ducted. This new approach includes eight additional PDUs related to advertising,
scanning, and connecting, as well as new procedures collectively known as extended
advertising.
It allows the broadcast of larger amounts of data and enables the transmission of
multiple sets of advertising data. Unlike legacy advertising, which transmits the same
payload up to three times across primary channels, extended advertising transmits
the payload data only once. It uses small headers on the primary channels (37, 38,
39) and sends them on one of the general-purpose channels (0-36) [22].
Figure 3.7. Advertisements used by Broadcaster
Furthermore, Extended advertising supports packets up to 255 octets in length,
achieved by offloading the payload to general-purpose channels. The AuxPtr field
in the header references an auxiliary packet containing the payload, which is trans-
mitted on a general-purpose channel as shown in Figure 3.7. For larger data needs
(up to 1,650 bytes), the controller can fragment and chain packets across different
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Background
channels [22]. This method reduces data transmission on primary channels and lowers
the duty cycle, making advertising more eﬀicient.
Periodic advertising
Periodic advertising involves the transmission of packets at regular intervals, allowing
other devices to synchronize their scanning with the advertising device. This type
of advertising is non-scannable and non-connectable, meaning that devices cannot
request additional data or establish connections from these transmissions [22]. This
method is useful for observer devices and is a key feature in LE Audio broadcasts.
The advertising occurs at regular intervals, known as the periodic advertising interval,
during which the advertising data payload can change. During each periodic advertis-
ing interval, the device sends an AUX_SYNC_IND PDU, followed by an AUX_CHAIN_IND
PDU only if fragmentation is needed [22]. The SyncInfo field in the {AUX_ADV_IND
PDU provides timing and channel information to help devices synchronize with the
advertising schedule. Periodic advertising utilizes the 37 general-purpose advertising
channels and forms a periodic advertising train.
Periodic Advertising Synchronization Transfer Periodic
Advertising Sync Transfer (PAST)
PAST is a process in which one device acquires synchronization parameters through
scanning and then transmits them to another device over a connection. This helps a
Broadcast Assistant to streamline the synchronization of a Broadcast Receiver with
a specific Periodic Advertising train. When a Broadcast Assistant scans for adver-
tisements, it identifies Extended Advertisements.
Once discovered, the Broadcast
Assistant synchronizes with the associated Periodic Advertising train that contains
a Broadcast Audio Announcement Service (BAAS) UUID. It applies filters during
scanning to focus on relevant streams and then discovers the accompanying BIG Info
and BASE structure. After the user selects a broadcast, the Broadcast Assistant uses
the PAST procedure to transfer the necessary information to the Broadcast Receiver,
allowing it to directly locate the relevant Periodic Advertising train [1]. This enables
the Broadcast Receiver to acquire the BIGInfo and BASE and synchronize with the
appropriate BIS without needing to scan extensively, saving energy.
3.2.3
Broadcast Audio Scan Service
The Broadcast Audio Scan Service (BASS) is a key feature within Bluetooth LE
Audio, designed to manage and control connections to broadcast audio streams on
receiver devices like hearing aids or earbuds. BASS operates with the help of Broad-
cast Assistants, which handle scanning tasks for available audio streams, connecting
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Auracast
23
to them, and ensuring eﬀicient communication between the broadcast sources and
the receivers [1]. BASS primarily includes two important characteristics:
• Broadcast Audio Scan Control Point (BASCP): This characteristic al-
lows Broadcast Assistants to control actions on the receiver, such as starting
or stopping scans for Broadcast Sources, connecting to or disconnecting from a
Broadcast Isochronous Group (BIG), and providing the necessary information
to decrypt encrypted audio streams. It enables operations like adding, modify-
ing, or removing Broadcast Sources and manages the scanning process on behalf
of the receiver. The BIS_Sync parameter instructs the receiver to start or stop
receiving audio streams.
• Broadcast Receive State Characteristics: This characteristic provides the
Broadcast Assistant with the receiver’s current status, including the broadcast
streams associated with BIG and BIS. It allows the receiver to communicate
its operational state, confirm completed tasks (e.g., synchronizing with periodic
advertising or acquiring a Broadcast_Code), and eﬀiciently respond to errors
or action requests with notifications.
3.3
Auracast
The Bluetooth SIG has introduced Auracast™, a new audio technology that will
transform how we interact with each other and the world.
Auracast™broadcast
audio, powered by Bluetooth LE Audio, allows audio to be broadcast to multiple
devices at once, creating a new ecosystem of shared listening experiences. Auracast™
has attracted significant interest of consumer electronics companies, who recognize
its potential for a diverse range of applications. These companies anticipate Auracast
will expand into a variety of use cases, as described below:
How Auracast Works
The following explains the step-by-step process of how the Auracast™ecosystem
works, as illustrated in the figure below:
• Step 1: An Auracast™transmitter initiates broadcasting audio, along with ad-
vertisements containing details about the broadcast, such as the name, content,
and audio settings. These advertisements also include audio streams, such as
left and right channels for stereo sound.
• Step 2: Auracast™assistants scan for these broadcasts and display them to
users through a simple interface, much like how you choose a Wi-Fi network
in public places. Users can then select the Auracast™broadcast they want to
join.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Background
• Step 3: Once a user selects a broadcast, the Auracast™assistant sends the
necessary information to the Auracast™receiver (such as headphones, earbuds,
or hearing aids), allowing it to connect and start receiving the audio stream.
Figure 3.8. Auracast Broadcast Audio: How it works [23]
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER4
Design and Methodology
This chapter describes the design process of the broadcast assistant and explains the
functionality behind the assistant user interface. It describes the overall hardware
setup with the each components description used with the setup. The software design
for the Bluetooth stack running on the Linux system is also discussed, along with an
overview of the tools used to implement and test the broadcast assistant. Finally, the
methods employed in designing the broadcast assistant on this hardware setup are
explored.
4.1
Hardware Design
Figure 4.1. Complete Hardware Setup
The hardware setup showcased in Figure 4.1 is used to demonstrate the implementa-
tion of the broadcast assistant. The components along with their hardware specifica-
tions are described below for a deeper understanding of the complete setup.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Design and Methodology
4.1.1
Raspberry Pi
The Raspberry Pi 4 Model B serves as the core component for developing the broad-
cast assistant, paired with a 7-inch touchscreen display for a user-friendly interface.
The Raspberry Pi needs an operating system to work with; the Raspbian OS based
on the Linux distribution is installed via an SD card, which also stores necessary
files and libraries. The Raspberry Pi is powered by a Broadcom BCM2711 quad-
core Cortex-A72 chip with up to 8GB RAM, it supports dual-band Wi-Fi, Bluetooth
5.0/BLE [24], and features a 40-pin General Purpose Input/Output (GPIO) for pow-
ering the display.
4.1.2
Transmitters
The Resound TV Streamer+ sends wireless audio from televisions, computers, or mu-
sic systems directly to hearing aids. This device connects to an audio source via an
output like a headphone jack or RCA port, effectively turning the hearing aids into
wireless headphones using BLE. The ReSound TV Streamer+, equipped with Blue-
tooth® Auracast™, allows multiple users with compatible devices to simultaneously
connect and enjoy synchronized audio.
The ReSound Multi Mic is an Auracast™enabled remote microphone designed to
enhance hearing in diﬀicult listening environments. It provides clear sound from up
to 25 meters (80 feet) away, making it suitable for following conversations in settings
such as meetings, presentations, or noisy spaces. The microphone can be clipped
onto a speaker’s clothing or placed on a table to enhance listening in noisy or distant
situations. It also supports Telecoil, FM systems, and Direct Audio Input, providing
versatile solutions for assistive listening.
4.1.3
Receiver
ReSound Nexia™hearing aids serve as Auracast™receivers within the Bluetooth
ecosystem, offering connectivity with Bluetooth® LE Audio and Auracast broadcasts.
These hearing aids typically remain idle without an active Bluetooth connection until
audio streaming is required. Activation is initiated by the user, such as pressing a
button on the hearing aid or connecting a smartphone, allowing them to connect to an
Auracast™transmitter or perform other Bluetooth audio applications like Hands Free
Profile (HFP), Advanced Audio Distribution Profile (A2DP), or LE Audio. ReSound
Nexia is specifically designed to enhance hearing in noisy environments.
4.1.4
Controller
The Raspberry Pi is equipped with an inbuilt Bluetooth controller supporting Blue-
tooth LE version 5.0. However, the development of the broadcast assistant requires
support for Bluetooth version 5.2 or higher, which includes LE Audio commands for
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Hardware Design
27
extended and periodic advertisements. This feature was not available with the Rasp-
berry Pi’s built-in Bluetooth controller. Therefore, an external USB dongle was used
to fulfill these Bluetooth 5.2 requirements. The table 4.1 shows various dongles that
were tested to determine their compatibility with the required Bluetooth LE audio
support.
No.
Name
Description
1
Laird BL654 USB
Supports Bluetooth 5.3 and is compatible
with Windows, Linux, and Mac OS.
2
UGREEN USB
v5.3
Designed for Windows PCs (8.1, 10, 11), this
adapter utilizes Bluetooth 5.3 + Enhanced
Data Rate (EDR) + BLE technology for
improved performance in the 2.4 GHz band.
3
NRF52840
NRF52 series based programmable USB
dongle supporting Bluetooth 5.4, Zigbee, and
2.4 GHz protocols, configurable via nRF
Connect for Desktop using the nRFUtil tool.
Table 4.1. Overview of Selected USB Bluetooth Dongles
Figure 4.2. USB Bluetooth Dongles
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Design and Methodology
4.1.4.1
Controller with BLE v5.2 Support
Figure 4.3. Controller issues in providing BLE v5.2 support
The initial hardware setup required modifications to support BLE v5.2 or above, as
shown in the fishbone diagram. Several USB dongles were tested, each presenting
challenges during the implementation process. The Laird dongle was tested first but
was found unsuitable due to its lack of support for Extended and Periodic Scan-
ning. The UGREEN dongle was evaluated over a longer period, offering support for
Extended and Periodic Scanning, but it was incompatible with BlueZ for receiving
Extended and Periodic Advertisement Report Events.
The STM32 Nucleo board, running Zephyr Project firmware, provided the support
and was successfully flashed with LE Audio sample project. However, the output
was only available in raw data format through a Universal Asynchronous Receiver/
Transmitter (UART) debugger, and the absence of a user interface posed a challenge
for usability. The NRF52840 dongle demonstrated better results, supporting both
Extended and Periodic Scanning and BLE v5.4. However, pairing and bonding issues
were encountered during testing.
To overcome these limitations, a dual-controller
configuration was implemented, combining the Raspberry Pi’s inbuilt Bluetooth con-
troller with the NRF52840 dongle to ensure BLE v5.2 and above support.
4.2
Software Design
The software design for the Broadcast Assistant as shown in the Figure 4.4 below, is
based on the BlueZ stack running on a Raspberry Pi, which is configured as a GATT
client to communicate with a GATT server (hearing aid). Bluetooth operations are
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:39==
4.3 User Interface Design
29
managed by a Flask-based Python application, and communication between the ap-
plication and BlueZ core is facilitated by D-Bus middleware. On the server side, the
hearing aid hosts Bluetooth services and characteristics, which are accessed by the
Raspberry Pi client. The Raspberry Pi uses two Bluetooth controllers (one inbuilt
and one external dongle) to send requests for discovering devices and services, while
the hearing aid sends back the response. These operations are carried out through
the 2 HCI - (hci0 and hci1), which allows the Raspberry Pi to interact with both the
Bluetooth controllers.
Figure 4.4. Software Design for the Setup
4.3
User Interface Design
The initial design for the Broadcast Assistant’s user interface was a single web page
which serves as the central hub for managing devices, broadcasters, and streaming
controls as shown in Figure 4.5.
This design provided access to all the essential
features on a single screen, including the ability to discover and manage devices (re-
ceivers) and broadcasters, as well as to control streaming operations such as starting
and stopping streams.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Design and Methodology
Figure 4.5. Initial Design for the Broadcast Assistant UI
However, as the project progressed, this single-page design was found to have limita-
tions in terms of scalability and organization. Managing both Device Manager and
Broadcast Scanner in one view became cumbersome, particularly as more complex
interactions were introduced, such as pairing, connecting, and scanning for multiple
devices and broadcasters. To address these challenges, the UI was redesigned into a
more modular structure, splitting the Device Manager and Broadcast Scanner into
two separate web server components.
Figure 4.6. Final Design for the Broadcast Assistant UI
When selecting a UI framework for the project, several options were considered, the
goal was to develop a solution that could be accessed on multiple devices, rather
than being restricted to the Raspberry Pi’s dedicated GUI. Flask was chosen as
the framework due to its eﬀiciency on low-power devices like the Raspberry Pi. It
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Validation Design
31
allows for Python-based backend logic while enabling the front end to be built using
HTML, CSS, and JavaScript for interactive features like buttons and status updates.
Flask handles routing and processes JSON requests and responses, making it ideal
for creating dynamic web interfaces with real-time user interaction. This approach
also ensures the UI is lightweight and accessible from any device on the same network,
connecting to the Raspberry Pi’s local server.
Figure 4.7. Validation Design for testing Broadcast Assistant
4.4
Validation Design
The validation process for this project was designed to ensure the proper functionality
of the Bluetooth system, addressing various layers of the system.
The following
methods were used:
• D-Feet GUI Validation: Used on the Raspberry Pi to interact with the BlueZ
system bus, exploring interfaces, methods, and properties for troubleshooting
and development.
• Btmon Validation: Captured HCI traces on the Raspberry Pi, monitoring
commands sent between the host and controller, validating low-level Bluetooth
communication.
• Ellisys Bluetooth Analyzer: Captured nearby Bluetooth traﬀic to validate
air traces and analyze RF communication between devices.
• Ear Validation: After broadcasting the audio stream, the hearing aid receiver
was placed in the ear to confirm that the broadcasted audio was properly re-
ceived and checks for synchronization across multiple receivers.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Design and Methodology
4.5
Methodology: Designing Broadcast Assistant
This section describes the techniques used to set up the broadcast assistant and
details the functionalities of the user interface. It explains how various elements of
the assistant work together, using flowcharts for illustration. The flowcharts use color-
coded blocks to make the steps clear: blue represents processes, yellow highlights lists,
white is used for decision points, and orange indicates databases.
Figure 4.8. Design Flowchart - Receiver
4.5.1
Discovering, Pairing and Connecting to Receiver
As can be seen from Figure 4.8, the broadcast assistant starts by scanning for nearby
BLE devices, gathering details like the device name, address, and signal strength
from the LE advertisement reports. A list of these devices is displayed on the user
interface, where the user selects the desired BLE receiver. The system then checks
whether the selected device is already paired and connected. If not, it initiates the
pairing and connection processes. Once paired and connected, the device’s status
is updated in the user interface.
The assistant then conducts a service discovery
to identify the BASS, which requires a secure connection. If the BASS service is
found, the device is recognized as supporting LE audio, and the user can confirm this
selection. If not, the device is flagged as incompatible with LE audio, prompting the
user to choose another device that supports it. Additionally, the user interface offers
options to disconnect and remove a device that is no longer needed. Users can also
access detailed device information, including all services contained within the device,
displayed on the user interface. This entire process is iterated until a user successfully
pairs with an LE audio-supported device. The user then confirms their selection, and
the device information is stored for future reference.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Methodology: Designing Broadcast Assistant
33
4.5.2
Scanning for Transmitters
The primary function of the broadcast assistant is to locate the broadcasting source
for a receiver by scanning the extended and periodic advertisement channels. Instead
of continuously scanning, which can drain battery life, the assistant initiates a scan via
the user interface for a limited period of 10 seconds, which helps to conserve battery.
After the scanning is concluded, the assistant receives the LE extended advertisement
report from all detected BLE devices. It specifically filters for transmitters by identi-
fying those reports that include the BAAS. Devices with this service are recognized
as broadcasters and are added to a newly found broadcasters list displayed on the
user interface. From this list, users can select a broadcaster whose audio streams
the receiver wants to join and listen. Following the selection, users can view detailed
information about the broadcaster, which helps in making an informed choice. Based
on the information gathered from extended advertisements, the assistant scans for pe-
riodic advertisements to determine whether to collect more detailed data about the
audio streams. Finally, to proceed, users confirm their selection of the broadcaster by
pressing a button on the interface, which stores the broadcast information necessary
for subsequent steps. The overall step is explained in the flowchart shown in the
Figure4.9.
Figure 4.9. Design Flowchart - Transmitter
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Design and Methodology
4.5.3
Maintaining a database from Service Discovery
This step involves the assistant in maintaining a local database of transmitters stream
data as shown in Figure 4.10. This process begins with the assistant conducting a
service discovery for the receiving device to identify Broadcast audio scan service and
characteristics from the stored receiver data. The receiver characteristics used by
the broadcast assistant are BASCP and Broadcast Receive State (BRS). In the next
step, the assistant executes an add source operation on the BASCP characteristics
using the stored broadcast information. This action registers the identified broadcast
source within the receiver’s characteristics, directing the receiver to search for this
specific broadcaster based on its address, address type, Set ID, and Broadcast ID. If
the broadcaster is found actively transmitting the audio stream, the receiver uses the
BRS characteristics to notify the assistant that the broadcaster has been located. The
notification from the BRS is a copy of the assistant’s local database which contains
the broadcast source information. This source information contains a lot of important
data about broadcast source information included below:
• Source Address, Address Type, Set ID and Source ID which is a unique identity
assigned by the receiver (server).
• PA Sync State describes the current synchronization status with the PA con-
firming whether the source has been found.
• BIS Sync informs whether the receiver is synchronized with the audio stream
and identifies which BIS is being received, along with the streaming state of the
broadcaster.
• BIG Encryption reports if the audio stream is encrypted and informs the receiver
to send a broadcast code to decrypt it.
• Metadata contains data about the codec configuration describing the content
of the stream including audio context, program and language information.
Figure 4.10. Design Flowchart - Database
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Methodology: Designing Broadcast Assistant
35
4.5.4
Starting and Terminating Audio Streams
Figure 4.11. Design Flowchart - Streaming State
This step explains the process of initiating and terminating broadcast streams via
the user interface. The procedure begins with the assistant registering a broadcast
source using the add broadcast source feature, which writes the add source operation
to the BASCP. This operation is accompanied by the stored broadcast information,
setting the PA sync to 0x02 and BIS Sync to 0b0, which indicates not to synchronize
to the BIS.
The receiver updates the assistant with the source details through a
notification from the BRS, including the BIG encryption status. If the broadcaster
is encrypted and a broadcast code is necessary, the assistant prompts the user to
input the appropriate code. Once the source is authenticated with the correct code,
the user can control streaming through start and stop streaming options in the UI.
Starting the stream triggers a modify source operation on BASCP characteristics with
BIS Sync set to 0b1, indicating synchronization to BIS. The resulting notifications
include additional metadata including the audio context type. Stopping the stream
involves a modify operation with BIS Sync reverted to 0b0, pausing the stream at the
receiver. Removal of the broadcaster is executed via a remove source operation, which
clears source database from the BRS. The UI displays these streaming statuses in a
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Design and Methodology
table at the start screen, enabling users to make informed decisions about managing
audio streams.
4.5.5
Setting Broadcast Code for Encrypted Transmitters
Setting the broadcast code is crucial for accessing encrypted broadcast streams. This
process begins when the receiver indicates a need for a broadcast code (status 0x01)
through the BIG encryption parameter in the BRS characteristics; if the stream is
unencrypted, a Not Encrypted status (0x00) is returned. The user enters a 16-byte
encryption key, either in characters or numbers, via the UI. This input is then con-
verted by the assistant into hexadecimal bytes, padding with zeros if necessary to
complete the 16-byte format. The assistant then submits the code through the set
broadcast code operation (opcode=0x05) on the BASCP. If the code is incorrect, the
broadcaster informs the assistant with a Bad Code status (0x03). However, a cor-
rect code results in a Decrypting status (0x02), confirming successful decryption and
enabling streaming operations. This mechanism ensures secure access to encrypted
audio content, maintaining privacy and integrity of the broadcast.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER5
Implementation
This chapter outlines the implementation and validation of the Broadcast Assistant,
building on the design and methodologies discussed earlier. It details how the BlueZ
framework is used to interface with the D-Bus and manage Bluetooth applications on
a Linux-based Raspberry Pi. The chapter explains the development of Flask routes,
connecting the host application to the Flask web interface, and the integration of
the user interface with the BlueZ framework.
The Broadcast Assistant project is
divided into three key components: the Device Manager, Broadcast Scanner, and
Broadcast Assistant, with the implementation of each described in the following sec-
tions. The validation procedures for each component are discussed in the final section.
For a deeper understanding, It is recommended to refer to the source code while
reading this chapter. The source code can be accessed here: Broadcast_Assistant
following the code structure provided below:
• main_broadcast_assistant.py : Contains the core system logic.
• bass_service_discovery.py : Manages the Broadcast Audio Scan Service.
• Flask Application Templates:
– template/app_broadcast_assistant.html: Main user interface for the
Broadcast Assistant.
– template/app_device_manager.html: Interface for managing connected
devices.
– template/app_broadcast_scanner.html: Interface for scanning available
broadcasters.
– template/layout.html: General layout for the web interface.
– css/style.css: Controls the visual design of the web pages.
5.1
Device Manager
The Device Manager component manages the discovery and connection of receivers
through the user interface. It integrates the BlueZ D-Bus application with Flask,
utilizing the dbus-python module to interact with the system bus for device discovery
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Implementation
and connection management. These functions are visualized in the D-Feet GUI and
tested using the Bluetooth monitor. The user interface is developed using Flask routes
that connect to the Python functions handling the D-Bus operations.
5.1.1
Device Discovery
The device discovery process, as illustrated in the flowchart in Figure 5.1, begins when
the user initiates a scan. The system retrieves all Bluetooth devices, both active and
inactive. The Adapter interface triggers the StartDiscovery() method to search for
nearby BLE devices, and the process is automatically stopped after 10 seconds using
the StopDiscovery() method.
During the scan, the InterfacesAdded signal is emitted for each new device detected,
updating the list of detected devices. The system checks whether a device is already
known and active. If the device is known but inactive, its interface is removed using
the InterfacesRemoved signal. Detected devices are validated by their name and
address thereby, only valid devices are compiled into a final list for display in the user
interface.
Figure 5.1. Flowchart for Device Discovery
Adapter Interface
The device discovery process connects to the system bus, accessing the org.bluez
service, which exposes Bluetooth adapters through paths like /org/bluez/hci0 (for
the built-in adapter) and /org/bluez/hci1 (for external dongles).
The Adapter
interface (org.bluez.Adapter1), associated with each adapter, provides key methods
and properties for managing Bluetooth adapters.
The key methods used in this
implementation are visualized through in Figure 5.2.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Device Manager
39
Figure 5.2. Adapter API on DFeet
DBus ObjectManager
Figure 5.3. Object Manager on DFeet
The DBus ObjectManager interface is used in the device discovery process to manage
and track known devices. During discovery, BlueZ uses the DBus.ObjectManager in-
terface to retrieve a list of known devices via the GetManagedObjects method, which
returns a dictionary of device objects. When new devices are detected, BlueZ creates a
managed object and emits the InterfacesAdded signal, while the InterfacesRemoved
signal is emitted when devices go out of range. These signals are captured and pro-
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation
cessed by signal receivers set up using the bus.add_signal_receiver method. De-
vices are removed from BlueZ’s list after 30 seconds if they are no longer in range,
controlled by a timeout in the Bluetooth configuration.
The discovery process is
managed by a timer that stops scanning after 10 seconds and unregisters the signal
receivers. The ObjectManager interface methods and signals are illustrated in Figure
5.3.
The code snippet below demonstrates how to implement Bluetooth device discovery
using the Adapter1 and ObjectManager interfaces in D-Bus. It initiates device scan-
ning, sets up signal receivers for detecting newly added or removed devices, and stops
the discovery process after a 10-second timeout.
1 import dbus
2 bus = dbus.SystemBus()
3
4 def discover_devices() # Flash: /discover
5
adapter_path = "/org/bluez/hci0"
6
adapter_object = bus.get_object("org.bluez", adapter_path)
7
adapter_interface=dbus.Interface(adapter_object , "org.bluez.Adapter1")
8
adapter_interface.StartDiscovery()
9
root_path = bus.get_object("org.bluez", "/")
10
object_manager = dbus.Interface(root_path,'org.freedesktop.DBus.
ObjectManager')
11
managed_objects = object_manager.GetManagedObjects()
12
bus.add_signal_receiver(interfaces_added , "org.freedesktop.DBus.
ObjectManager", "InterfacesAdded")
13
bus.add_signal_receiver(interfaces_removed , "org.freedesktop.DBus.
ObjectManager", "InterfacesRemoved")
14
timer_id = GLib.timeout_add_seconds(timeout=10, discovery_timeout)
15
16 def discovery_timeout():
17
adapter_interface.StopDiscovery()
18
bus.remove_signal_receiver(interfaces_added ,"InterfacesAdded")
19
bus.remove_signal_receiver(interfaces_removed ,"InterfacesRemoved")
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Device Manager
41
5.1.2
Managing Connections and Pairing
Figure 5.4. List of Discovered Devices on DFeet
After the device discovery process is completed, all active devices are stored as device
objects seen in Figure 5.4 with the Device interface (org.bluez.Device1), which pro-
vides methods for managing and interacting with Bluetooth devices. These methods,
visualized in Figure 5.5, enable various operations such as connecting, disconnecting,
and pairing with devices.
Figure 5.5. Device adapter API with Method description
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Implementation
Each device object contains properties like Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI)
and device name, which are identified during discovery. The D-Bus properties in-
terface (DBus.Properties) provides standard methods—Get, Set, and GetAll—for
accessing and managing these properties, as shown in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6. PropertiesChanged on DFeet
The code snippet below demonstrates how to interact with a Bluetooth device using
the Device interface (org.bluez.Device1) via D-Bus. It handles operations such
as connecting, disconnecting, pairing, and retrieving device properties for managing
Bluetooth devices.
1
device_path = "/org/bluez/hci0/dev_CC_89_6C_35_92_81"
2
device_proxy = bus.get_object("org.bluez", device_path)
3
device_interface = dbus.Interface(device_proxy , org.bluez.Device1)
4
device_interface.Connect() # Flash: /connect
5
device_interface.Disconnect() # Flask: /disconnect
6
device_interface.Pair() # Flask: /pair
7
props_interface = dbus.Interface(device_proxy , "org.freedesktop.DBus.
Properties")
8
dbus_properties = props_interface.GetAll("org.bluez.Device1")
9
# Flask: /get_device_info
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Device Manager
43
5.1.3
Integration with Flask routes
The sequence diagram in Figure 5.7 illustrates the flow of interaction between the
User, Web Application (Flask), Python Application (Device Manager), and the D-
Bus Service (org.bluez). It demonstrates how the user performs actions through the
web interface to manage Bluetooth devices and how these actions are processed by
the backend system.
Figure 5.7. Flask routes mapped to dbus python application
The Bluetooth device scanning process begins when the user clicks the ”Discover De-
vices” button, triggering the /discover route in Flask. Once the scan is complete, a
list of discovered devices is displayed on the UI, showing details like device name,
address, RSSI, connection status, pairing status, and LE Audio support. Figure 5.8
illustrates the UI, where each discovered device is listed with a selectable radio button.
When the Connect or Pair button is clicked, the respective Flask routes /connect
or /pair are triggered. Clicking ”Get Device Info” retrieves detailed properties of
the selected device, such as adapter type, address type, and service UUID, which are
displayed on the screen shown in Figure 5.10. The device table is then updated with
the latest pairing and connection status, as shown in Figure 5.9. The same process
is used for connecting, disconnecting, pairing, and unpairing devices.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Implementation
Figure 5.8. Device manager user interface showing discovered devices
The Connect or Pair button triggers the corresponding Flask routes /connect or
/pair are triggered, and the device’s connection or pairing status is updated in the
UI.
Figure 5.9. Connected and Pair operation in Device Manager UI
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Device Manager
45
The Get Device Info button retrieves and displays detailed information about the
selected device, including adapter type, address type, and service UUID displayed on
the screen for user reference.
Figure 5.10. Device information for the selected devices
The Confirm Selection button is used to confirm the device for interaction. If no
device is selected, an alert is shown in Figure 5.11, prompting the user to choose a
device. Figure 5.11(b) shows an alert that appears when the selected device does
not support LE Audio, informing the user that a device with LE Audio support is
required.
((a)) Alert for no device selection
((b)) Alert for Non LE Audio device
Figure 5.11. Confirm selection button handles exception created
The pairing operation begins with a resolvable address, a temporary address that
changes every 10 min for hearing aids or after every boot-up. In the Figure5.12(a),
it can be seen the pairing is done with the resolvable address (4A:66:2A:F0:AD:C7)
and after pairing operation is completed, display shows with Pairing Ok, it changes
to public address of the device (CC:89:6C:35:98:A3) shown in Figure5.12(b).
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Implementation
((a)) Not paired with Resolvable Address
((b)) Paired with Public Address
Figure 5.12. Confirm Pairing operation on the Device and status update
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Broadcast Scanner
47
5.2
Broadcast Scanner
The implementation of the broadcast scanner was particularly challenging due to the
requirement for Bluetooth version 5.2. This section explains how BLE v5.2 support
was integrated into the hardware, with the use of HCI commands and debugging
HCI traces through btmon tool. As the BlueZ library only supported legacy adver-
tisement scanning, a custom low-level C program was developed to enable scanning
for extended and periodic advertisement channels. Finally, Flask was integrated to
create a web interface for the broadcast scanner.
5.2.1
Troubleshooting Bluetooth USB Dongles
Figure 5.13. Results of HCI commands used for testing USB Dongle
To ensure hardware support for extended advertisement scanning, various Bluetooth
USB dongles were tested, as summarized in Table 5.13. HCI commands from the
Raspberry Pi host were used to verify the capabilities of each dongle, following the
BLE specification (OGF = 0x04). These tests were conducted using BlueZ’s hcitool,
for further information refer to section 6.3 in the appendix.
The Laird USB Dongle, supporting Bluetooth 5.0, was only capable of legacy adver-
tisement scanning. The UGreen dongle, supporting Bluetooth 5.3, offered simultane-
ous LE and Basic Rate (BR)/EDR support and included extended scan commands.
However, it encountered an error (Unknown HCI Supported Commands (0x01)) when
extended HCI commands were sent. To overcome this, the nRF52840 dongle was
tested. It successfully enabled extended advertisement scanning by using the
HCI_LE_Set_Extended_Scan_Enable command and receiving extended advertising
reports.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Implementation
((a)) Laird Dongle with Extended Scan Parameters
((b)) uGreen Dongle with Extended Scan Parameters
((c)) NRF52 Dongle with Extended Scan Parameters
((d)) NRF52 Dongle with Periodic Create Sync Command
Figure 5.14. HCI logs from bluetooth monitor with HCI results
However, while testing the nrf52840 dongle flashed with Zephyr RTOS, it was dis-
covered that the device lacked a proper address (set to 00:00:00:00:00:00), as can
be seen in the image. Without a valid device address, nrf52 controller could not be
paired and bonded with the hearing aids. Since the Raspberry Pi’s built-in controller
(hci0) was able to maintain steady paired connections with BLE devices, the decision
was made to use the dual configuration controller.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Broadcast Scanner
49
5.2.2
Scanning for Extended Advertisements
Figure 5.15. Sequence Diagram for Broadcast Scanning
The C implementation for extended scanning, detailed in extended_scanning.c, uti-
lizes HCI commands to initiate and manage the extended advertisement scanning
process, as shown in the sequence diagram in Figure5.15. The process begins with
the LE Set Extended Scan Parameters command, which configures the scan settings,
including scan type (active or passive), scan PHY (LE 1M or LE Coded), scan inter-
val, and scan window is mentioned in BLE specification [25].
After configuring the parameters, scanning is initiated using the LE Set Extended
Scan Enable command with the enable flag set to 01. During scanning, the controller
receives extended advertising PDUs, such as ADV_EXT_IND and AUX_ADV_IND,
from the GATT server, which are reported back to the host as LE Extended Adver-
tising Reports.
Using the received advertisement reports, the next step is to synchronize with periodic
advertisements by sending the LE Set Periodic Advertising Create Sync command,
but this was returned as a Command Disallowed (0x0C) controller error as shown
in Figure 5.14(d). Finally, scanning is stopped by sending LE Set Extended Scan
Enable (flag 00) to disable further advertising reports.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Implementation
5.2.3
Integration with Flask routes
The broadcast scanning process is initiated by pressing the Start Scanning button,
which sends a POST request to the /discover_broadcast route in the Flask appli-
cation. Once the broadcasters are loaded into the broadcasters variable, the user is
redirected to the /broadcast_scanner route, where a list of discovered broadcast-
ers is displayed, showing their Name, Address, RSSI, and a selection option. The
Get broadcaster info button retrieves detailed information, such as adapter, ad-
dress, address type, and Service UUID, via the /broadcast_info route. When the
Confirm Selection button is pressed, the selected broadcaster’s details are saved in
the selected_broadcasters variable. Figure 5.16 illustrates the integration of these
Flask routes with the UI, showing the discovered broadcasters.
Figure 5.16. Discovered Broadcaster with properties information
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Broadcast Assistant
51
5.3
Broadcast Assistant
In this section, the implementation of the Broadcast Assistant component is presented.
The process begins with the discovery of characteristics from the BASS using the D-
feet GUI. Broadcast streaming controls and information are then discussed, utilizing
these characteristics for various operations.
The broadcast code is introduced to
support these operations. Finally, the integration of Flask routes is explained, which
brings together the final Broadcast Assistant component.
5.3.1
Service Discovery
Once the device is selected from the device manager component, service discovery is
performed to locate the BASS and its associated characteristics on the selected Blue-
tooth device. The DBus object manager (GetManagedObjects) is used to retrieve
objects representing Bluetooth services and characteristics.
Objects implementing the org.bluez.GattService1 interface are first identified, and
the BASS UUID (0x184f) is checked, aligning with the UUID displayed in the D-
Feet GUI in Figure 5.17. The service path (dev_/service00c7) is then stored as
bass_svc_path.
Figure 5.17. BASS Characteristics paths in D-Feet GUI
Along with the service path, the characteristics paths are identified by searching for
objects implementing the org.bluez.GattCharacteristic1 interface. The UUID
for the BRS (0x2bc8) and BASCP (0x2bc7) are matched, with their paths stored as
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Implementation
brs_char_path and bascp_char_path. Figure 5.18, generated from the D-Feet GUI,
illustrates the object paths for the BASCP and BRS characteristics, validating the
UUID properties and highlighting the key methods - WriteValue, StartNotify and
StopNotify used in the project.
Figure 5.18. BASS Characteristics path: dev/service00c7/char00c8|and/char00ca|
The code snippet below defines the service discovery function, which is used to lo-
cate the BASS service along with the BRS and BASCP characteristics using the
DBus ObjectManager.
1 def service_discovery(selected_device_path):
2
global bass_svc_path , brs_char_path , bascp_char_path
3
root_path = bus.get_object("org.bluez", "/")
4
object_manager = dbus.Interface(root_path, "org.freedesktop.DBus.
ObjectManager")
5
managed_objects = object_manager.GetManagedObjects()
6
for path, ifaces in managed_objects.items():
7
if iface_name == "org.bluez.GattService1":
8
bass_svc_path = path
9
if iface_name == "org.bluez.GattCharacteristic1":
10
char_properties = ifaces["org.bluez.GattCharacteristic1"]
11
char_uuid = char_properties["UUID"]
12
if char_uuid == bluetooth_constants.BRS_CHR_UUID:
13
brs_char_path = path
14
if char_uuid == bluetooth_constants.BASCP_CHR_UUID:
15
bascp_char_path = path
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Broadcast Assistant
53
5.3.2
Broadcast Streaming Controls and Information
Broadcast streaming controls are managed through the write_broadcast_control_point
function, which interacts with the BASCP characteristic using the WriteValue method
by sending corresponding byte arrays. These byte arrays map operation commands
to their respective BASCP opcodes and parameters in octet format. For example, the
add_stream operation corresponds to the add_source command with opcode=0x02,
while both start_stream and pause_stream use the Modify Source command with
opcode=0x03. The remove_stream operation corresponds to the Remove Source com-
mand with opcode=0x05. For further details, refer to the BASS specification [26].
Broadcast streaming information is managed by the broadcast_state_received
function, which is triggered by the PropertiesChanged signal. This function receives
notifications from the Broadcast Receive State (BRS) characteristic, following the
format specified in the BASS specification. The org.bluez.GattCharacteristic1
interface utilizes the StartNotify method to begin receiving broadcast state updates,
while StopNotify is used to halt these notifications.
The raw broadcast state data is converted from byte format and passed to the
decode_broadcast_state function, which processes and decodes key broadcast infor-
mation such as Source ID, Broadcast ID, Public Address (PA) Sync State, and encryp-
tion status. The decode_metadata function further decodes the broadcast state into
subgroups, identifying each subgroup’s BIS sync state (e.g., Pause - Not sync to BIS
or Play - Sync to BIS”) along with related metadata such as audio contexts (e.g.,
Media or Media and Live).
1 def write_broadcast_control_point(operation):
2
global bascp_char_path , decoded_state
3
char_object = bus.get_object("org.bluez", bascp_char_path)
4
bascp_char_interface = dbus.Interface(char_object , "org.bluez.
GattCharacteristic1")
5
operation_bytes = operations.get(operation)
6
bascp_char_interface.WriteValue(operation_bytes , {})
7
8 def start_broadcast_state_notifications():
9
global brs_char_path , decoded_state
10
char_object = bus.get_object("org.bluez", brs_char_path)
11
bascp_char_interface = dbus.Interface(char_object , "org.bluez.
GattCharacteristic1")
12
char_interface.StartNotify()
13
bus.add_signal_receiver(broadcast_state_received , "org.freedesktop.DBus.
Properties", "PropertiesChanged", path=brs_char_path)
14
char_interface.StopNotify()
15
16 def broadcast_state_received(interface, changed, invalidated , path):
17
global broadcast_state , decoded_state
18
if 'Value' in changed:
19
broadcast_state = bluetooth_utils.dbus_to_python(changed['Value'])
20
decoded_state = decode_broadcast_state(broadcast_state)
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Implementation
The set\broadcast\code function inputs a 16-byte broadcast code in hexadecimal
format to decrypt encrypted broadcasts, using the write\broadcast\control\point
function with the set\code operation. The code can be entered as an ASCII string,
converted into a 16-byte hexadecimal format with zero-padding if necessary.
The get\broadcast\state function decodes data from the BRS characteristic to
provide detailed broadcast information, including Source ID, Address, Address Type,
Set ID, Subgroups, and raw Metadata. This function helps monitor the current state
and properties of the broadcast source.
5.3.3
Integration with Flask routes
Figure 5.19. Flask routes mapped to Dbus python application
The Sequence diagram in Figure 5.19 illustrates the integration of Flask in the
Broadcast Assistant, showing the interaction between Flask routes, the Python ap-
plication, and DBus services. The homepage includes buttons for the Device Man-
ager and Broadcast Scanner components, accessed through the /device\manager
and /broadcast\scanner routes. After selecting devices and broadcasts from these
components, their properties are displayed on the homepage, with device informa-
tion on the left and broadcast details on the right, as shown in Figure5.20.
The
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Broadcast Assistant
55
/service_discovery route displays the BASS service path along with the BRS and
BASCP characteristic paths, which match the device address, as seen in Figure 5.20.
Figure 5.20. Selected Device and Broadcaster with Service Discovery
Figure 5.21. Add Streaming Control
Streaming controls are managed through routes such as /add_streaming,
/start_streaming, /pause_streaming, and /stop_streaming. In Figure 5.21, the
Add Streaming button triggers the addition of a source, displaying information that
shows the broadcast (C0:07:E8:9F:18:3C) has been detected by synchronizing to
the PA. The broadcast is in a paused state (not synchronized with BIS), without
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Implementation
encryption, and contains Media audio contexts.
Figure 5.22. Start Streaming Control
Figure 5.23. Broadcast Required for Encrypted Broadcaster
The Start Streaming button is shown in Figure 5.22, which modifies the source
state to reflect that the Broadcast (C0:07:E8:9F:18:3C) is now synchronized with
BIS, in a play state, still without encryption, and includes Media audio contexts. The
encryption functionality is managed through the /set_broadcast_code route while
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Broadcast Assistant
57
streaming information is retrieved via the /get_broadcast_state route.
The encryption state is s´displayed in Figure 5.23 as Broadcast Code required
after attempting to start streaming, with the broadcast still paused and not syn-
chronized with BIS. The user then enters the necessary broadcast code and clicks
Set Broadcast Code to proceed.
In Figure 5.24, after the correct broadcast code is entered, the encryption state
changes to Decrypting, and streaming starts in the play state (synchronized with
BIS). If an incorrect code is entered, an error message appears, indicating the de-
cryption failed.
Figure 5.24. Decrypting the Broadcaster and start streaming audio
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Implementation
5.4
Validation
Device Manager
The validation of the device manager was conducted using the Btmon tool, which
provides logs for HCI traces.
Figure 5.25(a) shows the validation of device dis-
covery is shown through the LE advertising report, with the LE Set Scan Enable
command both enabled and disabled.
Figure 5.25(b) demonstrates the successful
LE Create Connection for the discovered device, which had previously been recog-
nized by BlueZ, interpreting its resolvable address to the public address.
((a)) HCI logs validation for Discovery
((b)) HCI logs validation for Connection
Figure 5.25. Validation from btmon tool for device discovery and connection
The validation of the pairing operation is shown in Figure 5.26, where the host is
paired with the same resolvable address used during the connection.
Figure 5.26. HCI logs validation for Pairing
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Validation
59
Additionally, the Ellisys analyzer tool was used to validate air traces, confirming the
connection request packet (CONNECT_IND) sent on the primary advertising channels
by the Raspberry Pi controller (address: D8_3A_DD_6E_C9_02).
Figure 5.27. Ellisys validation for Connection
Figure 5.28. LE Extended Advertising Report from HCI
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Implementation
Broadcast Scanner
The Broadcast Scanner was validated using both HCI and air traces. The HCI traces
shown in Figure 5.28, display the LE meta event for the LE Extended Advertising
report of the selected broadcaster. From this report, it is evident that the Device
Information Service (0x180a) and Broadcast Audio Announcement (0x1852) are in-
cluded, as displayed in the user interface broadcast information under the UUID
parameter in Figue 5.16. The service UUID 0xfd20 identifies the GN Hearing propri-
etary service, providing manufacturer details.
The LE Extended Advertising report was further validated using the Ellisys analyzer
tool, capturing the over-the-air advertising packets. As shown in Figure 5.29, the
Ellisys analysis confirms that the parameters match, including PHY (LE 1M), PDU
Type (ADV_IND), Flags (LE and BR/EDR), and the Service UUID—Device Informa-
tion Service, Broadcast Audio Announcement, and GN Hearing (0xfd20).
+
Figure 5.29. Advertising packets captured in Ellisys tool
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Validation
61
Broadcast Assistant
The validation of the Broadcast Assistant component was conducted by analyzing
raw HCI logs captured using the btmon tool and performing ear validation by listen-
ing to the hearing aids speakers. The test involved two Bluetooth LE Audio-capable
GN Nexia hearing aids as receivers and encrypted transmitters: Resound MultiMic+.
The goal was to assess the Broadcast Assistant’s performance in managing multiple
broadcasters and ensuring secure connections across different transmission scenarios.
Figure 5.30 displays the initial user interface, where both the receiver and an en-
crypted broadcaster is selected, showing the ”Broadcast Code required” state.
Figure 5.30. Initial User Interface with Encyrpted Broadcaster
When the Add Streaming button was pressed, HCI logs confirmed the Add Source
operation sent to the BASCP characteristic, indicating that the broadcaster was
added to the receiver. The broadcast was synchronized with PA but not yet with the
BIS, remaining in a paused state:
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Implementation
1 bluetoothd[864]: < ACL Data TX: Handle 64 flags 0x00 dlen 28 [hci0]
2
ATT: Write Request (0x12)
3
Handle: 0x00c9 Type: Broadcast Audio Scan Control Point (0x2bc7)
4
Opcode: Add Source (0x02)
5
Source_Address_Type: 1
6
Source_Address: C0:07:E8:7F:B5:D0
7
Source_Adv_SID: 1
8
Broadcast_ID: 0x000000
9
PA_Sync_State: 0x02 Synchronize to PA
10
PA_Interval: 0xffff
11
Num_Subgroups: 1
12
Subgroup #0:
13
BIS_Sync State: 0x00000000
# Not Synchronize to BISs
The BRS notifications confirmed that the encrypted broadcaster required a broadcast
code for decryption.
1 > ACL Data RX: Handle 64 flags 0x02 dlen 35
[hci0]
2
ATT: Handle Value Notification (0x1b)
3
Handle: 0x00cb Type: Broadcast Receive State (0x2bc8)
4
Source_ID: 1
5
Source_Address_Type: 1
6
Source_Address: C0:07:E8:7F:B5:D0
7
Source_Adv_SID: 1
8
Broadcast_ID: 0x000000
9
PA_Sync_State: 0x02 Synchronized to PA
10
BIG_Encryption: 0x01 Broadcast_Code required
The broadcast code was then successfully sent with the correct encryption key.
1 bluetoothd[864]: < ACL Data TX: Handle 64 flags 0x00 dlen 28 [hci0]
2
ATT: Write Request (0x12) len 23
3
Handle: 0x00c9 Type: Broadcast Audio Scan Control Point (0x2bc7)
4
Opcode: Set Broadcast_Code (0x04)
5
Source_ID: 1
6
Broadcast_Code: 475031466655374941617a58396f4e45
Next, pressing the Start Streaming button sent the Modify Source operation to
BASCP, instructing the receiver to synchronize with both PA and BIS, transitioning
to a play state.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:73==
5.4 Validation
63
1 bluetoothd[864]: < ACL Data TX: Handle 64 flags 0x00 dlen 18 [hci0]
2
ATT: Write Request (0x12)
3
Handle: 0x00c9 Type: Broadcast Audio Scan Control Point (0x2bc7)
4
Opcode: Modify Source (0x03)
5
Source_ID: 1
6
PA_Sync_State: 0x02 Synchronize to PA
7
PA_Interval: 0xffff
8
Num_Subgroups: 1
9
Subgroup #0:
10
BIS_Sync State: 0x01000000 Synchronize to BIS
Figure 5.31. Final User Interface with Encyrpted Broadcaster
The BRS notifications after the start streaming operation confirms that the encrypted
broadcaster was successfully decrypted and is now synchronized, providing raw meta-
data.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Implementation
1 > ACL Data RX: Handle 64 flags 0x02 dlen 35
[hci0]
2
ATT: Handle Value Notification (0x1b)
3
Handle: 0x00cb Type: Broadcast Receive State (0x2bc8)
4
Source_ID: 1
5
Source_Address_Type: 1
6
Source_Address: C0:07:E8:7F:B5:D0
7
Source_Adv_SID: 1
8
Broadcast_ID: 0x000000
9
PA_Sync_State: Synchronized to PA
10
BIG_Encryption: 0x02 Decrypting
11
Num_Subgroups: 1
12
Subgroup #0:
13
BIS_Sync State: 0x00000001
Synchronized to BIS
14
Metadata: #0: len 0x03 type 0x01
15
Metadata:
44 00
16
Metadata: #1: len 0x03 type 0x02
17
Metadata:
44 00
Finally, ear validation confirmed that audio was successfully heard in sync across both
receivers from the encrypted MultiMic+ transmitter. Figure 5.31 shows the final user
interface after successful synchronization, where the broadcaster was decrypted and
transitioned to a play state.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER6
Conclusion and Future
Scope
The primary goal of designing, developing, and validating a Proof of Concept for
a Broadcast Assistant was successfully achieved. In hindsight, certain methods ex-
ceeded expectations, while others presented unforeseen challenges.
The decision to use the Raspberry Pi as the hardware platform proved effective,
providing reliable support for Bluetooth Low Energy. The implementation of the de-
vice manager component, responsible for managing receiver connections, proceeded
smoothly and with fewer complexities than anticipated.
In contrast, integrating
the broadcast scanner component encountered significant diﬀiculties due to limited
support for Bluetooth LE Audio v5.2 in the available hardware. Bluetooth USB don-
gles on the market did not perform as expected, resulting in significant time spent
troubleshooting. Despite initial test failures with the hardware, the necessary LE Ex-
tended scanning functionality was eventually achieved. The solution was thoroughly
tested using multiple validation methods, focusing on three key components of the
Broadcast Assistant design.
User interface validation confirmed that users could
successfully connect to and manage multiple broadcast audio streams from different
transmitters.
However, LE Periodic scanning could not be implemented due to hardware limita-
tions, forcing the Broadcast Assistant to rely on the receiver for synchronization
information. As a result, the receiver had to scan for the missing synchronization
parameters, while the assistant used BASS commands with default parameters to
manage the broadcast streams. This led to only partial implementation of remote
scanning, with the hearing aid still required to handle some scanning tasks. As a re-
sult, the original goal of optimizing power eﬀiciency was not fully met. Despite these
challenges, the broader motivation outlined in Section 1.3, enhancing user experience,
streamlining stream management, improving synchronization, and ensuring security
was largely fulfilled.
The project also revealed that Bluetooth LE Audio is still an emerging technology,
with limited industry adoption. The project explored and documented the technology
==PAGE:76==
66
6 Conclusion and Future Scope
using open-source tools, offering valuable insights that contribute to ongoing research
and development in Bluetooth LE Audio. The findings and challenges documented
in this report will serve as a useful resource for future work in this field.
The market penetration of Auracast™technology faces several significant challenges.
Currently, only a few devices support Auracast™, especially in the hearing aid indus-
try, where GN is the only manufacturer producing Auracast™enabled hearing aids.
This limited availability of compatible devices has slowed the adoption of Auracast™
technology. Testing with four different Bluetooth devices revealed compatibility is-
sues and limited support across current platforms.
Furthermore, consumer awareness of Auracast™remains low. Observations made
during the project indicated that while Bluetooth is widely recognized, most users
are unfamiliar with Auracast™broadcast audio or Bluetooth LE Audio, despite its
potential benefits. The high cost of Auracast™-enabled products has also discouraged
many consumers from upgrading. Even for those who own Auracast™-compatible
receivers, the lack of Auracast™-enabled public venues further limits the technology’s
usability.
6.1
Challenges and Limitations
Several challenges and limitations were encountered during the development and test-
ing of the Broadcast Assistant, primarily due to the novelty of Bluetooth LE Audio
and Auracast™technologies.
• Limited Documentation: Comprehensive resources for Bluetooth LE Audio
and Auracast™were lacking, as most research is proprietary to Bluetooth SIG,
with minimal publicly accessible scientific literature.
• Challenges with the Open-Source BlueZ Platform: The platform lacked
suﬀicient documentation, particularly for Bluetooth LE Audio, which is still in
development, making it diﬀicult to find reliable guidance during the project.
• Hardware Compatibility Issues: Many Bluetooth USB dongles did not sup-
port Bluetooth LE Audio on Linux, though their technical specifications stated
that they did. This required implementing a dual controller configuration, which
added complexity to the setup by using two controllers to ensure compatibility
with Bluetooth LE Audio.
• Limited Device Availability: Testing was restricted to a small number of
Auracast™-supported devices, as few devices are available on the market, lim-
iting validation to a single manufacturer’s devices.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Future Work
67
• User Interface Testing Limitations: Due to the lack of consumer awareness
of Auracast™among users made it diﬀicult to conduct thorough user interface
testing and gather useful feedback.
6.2
Future Work
Several features of the Broadcast Assistant offers potential for further development,
future work could focus on the following improvements:
• Receiver Property Discovery: Automate reading of Sink PAC records from
paired receivers to assess codec compatibility and ensure transmitter streams
are suitable for the receiver.
• Responding to Solicitations: Handle solicitation requests from Auracast™
receivers, allowing receivers to offload or supplement scanning tasks.
• Periodic Advertisement Parsing: Enable parsing of periodic advertisements
to manage streams by identifying if 16/24kHz or 48kHz streams are being trans-
mitted.
• Coordinated Set Management: Use the Coordinated Set Identification Pro-
file to manage left and right hearing aids or earbuds as a single device, ensuring
synchronized playback.
• Offloading Scanning Tasks: Offload full scanning tasks to the assistant by
implementing remote scanning through BASCP in the BASS service, improving
eﬀiciency and reducing receiver power usage.
6.3
Future Market Potential of Broadcast Assistant
The Raspberry Pi Broadcast Assistant holds significant potential as a marketable
product within the Auracast™ecosystem. The Figure 6.1 envisions how this product
can be used as a standalone display designed for deployment in public venues to
enhance assistive listening experiences. The assistant is shown as a concept design
in an airport environment, helping users with LE Audio-supported devices—such as
hearing aids, earbuds, and headsets receive information like gate numbers and flight
announcements by connecting to public address system broadcasts.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:78==
68
6 Conclusion and Future Scope
Figure 6.1. RaspberryPi based assistant in Auracast Ecosystem
With affordable hardware and open-source software, the system is designed for easy
deployment across various sectors, including entertainment, healthcare, and public
broadcasting.
The assistant can run on existing Wi-Fi networks at venues where
Raspberry Pi serves as the processing hub, hosting the assistant’s user interface,
allowing users to access it through personal devices like smartphones, tablets and
laptops. Furthermore, the assistant has the potential to be integrated into devices
such as earbuds or hearing aids charging case, resulting in a all-in-one product that
supports Auracast™.
The assistant plays a key role in accelerating market adoption by serving as a visible
advertisement for Auracast™-enabled locations, raising user awareness where the
technology is supported. Currently, many consumers do not see the need to upgrade
to more expensive devices with the latest Bluetooth hardware due to lack of awareness.
Increasing awareness in public venues is essential for encouraging consumers adoption
and motivating venues to deploy retrofit transmitters. As a retrofitted solution, the
assistant bridges the gap during the transition period, providing a practical and
accessible option in the early stages of Auracast™adoption.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
N. Hunn, Introducing Bluetooth ® LE Audio. 2022.
[2]
L. K. Baghel, R. Raina, and S. Kumar, “Evolution of Bluetooth Classic Audio
towards Bluetooth LE Audio: Challenges and Road Ahead,” 2023 IEEE 17th
International Conference on Industrial and Information Systems, ICIIS 2023 -
Proceedings, pp. 459–464, 2023.
[3]
J. Mecklenburger and T. Groth, Wireless Technologies and Hearing Aid Connec-
tivity. Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[4]
P. Bhagwat, “Bluetooth: technology for short-range wireless apps,” IEEE Inter-
net Computing, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 96–103, 2001.
[5]
R. Sharma and M. Shrivastava, “Aura cast: A new milestone over the existing
versions of bluetooth,” in AIP Conference Proceedings, vol. 3111, AIP Publishing,
2024.
[6]
Market Development and Bluetooth SIG, “An Overview of Auracast™Broadcast
Audio,” tech. rep., 2024.
[7]
Atscale Partnership, “Assistive Listening and the SDG,” 2022.
[8]
United Nations, “Sustainable Development Goals.” https://sdgs.un.org/goals,
2023. Accessed on: 2024 Sep 18.
[9]
P. Millett, “The connected life: Using access technology at home, at school and
in the community,” Education Sciences, vol. 13, no. 8, 2023.
[10] J.-C. Edelmann and T. Ussmueller, “Can you hear me now?: Challenges and ben-
efits for connectivity of hearing aids and implants,” IEEE Microwave Magazine,
vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 30–42, 2018.
[11] R. Strong, “Reviews of applications for smartphone-connected hearing aids and
implications on counseling.” https://academicworks.cuny.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=6404&context=gc_etds, 2023.
[12] J. Kim and C. Kim, “A review of assistive listening device and digital wire-
less technology for hearing instruments,” Korean journal of audiology, vol. 18,
pp. 105–11, 12 2014.
==PAGE:80==
70
Bibliography
[13] T. Kaufmann, J. Sterkens, and J. Woodgate, “Hearing loops: The preferred
assistive listening technology,” AES: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society,
vol. 63, pp. 298–302, 04 2015.
[14] Affordable Audiology, “Hearing Aids and Loops,” 2024.
[15] “Auracast
for
assistive
listening.”
https://www.bluetooth.com/auracast/
assistive-listening/. Accessed on 21st September, 2024.
[16] Market Development and Bluetooth SIG, “How to Build an Auracast™Assis-
tant,” tech. rep., 2024.
[17] Market Development and Bluetooth SIG, “Developing Auracast™Receivers with
an Assistant Application for Legacy Smartphones,” tech. rep., 2024.
[18] ABI Research and Bluetooth SIG, “LE Audio - Future of LE Audio,” tech. rep.,
2024.
[19] Zignani Andrew and ABI Research, “AURACAST™BROADCAST AUDIO
RETROFIT SOLUTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES,” tech. rep.
[20] Bluetooth SIG Staff, “Auracast™Simple Transmitter Best Practices Guide,”
tech. rep., 2024.
[21] Raskind Cliff, Strategy Analytics Inc., and Bluetooth Special Interest Group,
“Sizing the Opportunity for Auracast™Broadcast Audio in Public Locations,”
tech. rep., 2023.
[22] Martin Woolley and Bluetooth SIG, “The Bluetooth® Low Energy Primer,” tech.
rep., 2023.
[23] “Auracast how it works.” https://www.bluetooth.com/auracast/how-it-works/.
Accessed on 21st September, 2024.
[24] Raspberry Pi Ltd, “Raspberry Pi 4 Model B,” tech. rep., 2024.
[25] Core Specification Working Group, “Bluetooth Core Specification Bluetooth ®
Specification,” tech. rep., 2023.
[26] Bluetooth® Service Specification, “BASS_v1.0,” tech. rep., 2021.
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:81==
Appendix
Tools and Commands used for Troubleshooting
hcitool Description
Figure 1. Desciption of hcitool
==PAGE:82==
72
Appendix
Message Sequence Chart for Legacy advertisement scanning
Figure 2. Sequence Diagram for Device Discovery
LE Controller Commands
Figure 3. LE Controller commands
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:83==
Appendix
73
LE Set Scan Parameter
hcitool -i hci1 cmd 0x08 0x000b 00 00 10 00 10 00 00
Figure 4. LE Set scan parameters
LE Set Scan Enable
hcitool -i hci1 cmd 0x08 0x000c 01 01
hcitool -i hci1 cmd 0x08 0x000c 00 01
Figure 5. LE Set scan enable parameters
LE Set Extended Scan Parameters
hcitool cmd 0x08 0x0041 0x00 0x00 0x04 0x00 0x00 0x04 0x00 0x04
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:84==
74
Appendix
Figure 6. LE extended parameters
LE Set Extended Scan Enable
hcitool cmd 0x08 0x0042 0x01 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00
Figure 7. LE extended enable
LE Informational Parameters
Supported HCI Commands for the LE Dongle:
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:85==
Appendix
75
Figure 8. LE Information parameters
sudo hcitool -i hci1 cmd 0x04 0x0001
Read Local Supported Commands command
sudo hcitool -i hci1 cmd 0x04 0x0002
Figure 9. LE supported commands
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:86==
76
Appendix
Read Local Supported Features command
sudo hcitool -i hci1 cmd 0x04 0x0003
Figure 10. LE read local features
Hcitool Terminal Results showing Raw Data
Figure 11. hcitool commands
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:87==
Appendix
77
HCI Logs from Btmon decoding the Raw data
1 < HCI Command: LE Set Scan Parameters (0x08|0x000b) plen 7
#6 [hci0]
17.161465
2
Type: Active (0x01)
3
Interval: 11.250 msec (0x0012)
4
Window: 11.250 msec (0x0012)
5
Own address type: Random (0x01)
6
Filter policy: Accept all advertisement (0x00)
7 > HCI Event: Command Complete (0x0e) plen 4
#7 [hci0]
17.161760
8
LE Set Scan Parameters (0x08|0x000b) ncmd 1
9
Status: Success (0x00)
10 > HCI Event: Command Complete (0x0e) plen 4
#9 [hci0]
17.162084
11
LE Set Scan Enable (0x08|0x000c) ncmd 1
12
Status: Success (0x00)
13 > HCI Event: LE Meta Event (0x3e) plen 19
#10 [hci0]
17.183266
14
LE Advertising Report (0x02)
15
Num reports: 1
16
Event type: Connectable undirected - ADV_IND (0x00)
17
Address type: Random (0x01)
18
Address: 79:4B:8C:F5:3F:2D (Resolvable)
19
Data length: 7
20
Flags: 0x04
21
BR/EDR Not Supported
22
16-bit Service UUIDs (partial): 1 entry
23
GN ReSound A/S (0xfefe)
24
RSSI: -76 dBm (0xb4)
25 > HCI Event: LE Meta Event (0x3e) plen 31
#11 [hci0]
17.183983
26
LE Advertising Report (0x02)
27
Num reports: 1
28
Event type: Scan response - SCAN_RSP (0x04)
29
Address type: Random (0x01)
30
Address: 79:4B:8C:F5:3F:2D (Resolvable)
31
Data length: 19
32
Service Data: GN ReSound A/S (0xfefe)
33
Data[15]: 0410cf478a06202364206872021900
34
RSSI: -76 dBm (0xb4)
35 < HCI Command: LE Set Scan Enable (0x08|0x000c) plen 2
#8 [hci0]
17.161780
36
Scanning: Enabled (0x01)
37
Filter duplicates: Enabled (0x01)
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:88==
78
Appendix
Ellisys Analyzer Tool Capture Results
Figure 12. Ellisys1
Figure 13. Ellisys2
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:89==
Appendix
79
Figure 14. Ellisys3
Figure 15. Ellisys4
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:90==
80
Appendix
Dbus monitor tool terminal results for DBus.ObjectManager
and PropertiesChanged
1
signal time=1725887697.462407 sender=:1.7 -> destination=(null
destination) serial=299 path=/; interface=org.freedesktop.DBus.
ObjectManager; member=InterfacesAdded
2
object path "/org/bluez/hci0/dev_54_CA_40_32_F0_A9"
3
4
signal time=1725887712.383518 sender=:1.7 -> destination=(null
destination) serial=444 path=/org/bluez/hci0/dev_54_CA_40_32_F0_A9;
interface=org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties; member=PropertiesChanged
5
string "org.bluez.Device1"
6
array [
7
string "RSSI"
-79
8
]
9
signal time=1725887732.524446 sender=:1.7 -> destination=(null
destination) serial=497 path=/; interface=org.freedesktop.DBus.
ObjectManager; member=InterfacesRemoved
10
object path "/org/bluez/hci0/dev_54_CA_40_32_F0_A9"
11
array [
12
string "org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties"
13
string "org.freedesktop.DBus.Introspectable"
14
string "org.bluez.Device1"
15
]
Dbus monitor tool terminal results for DBus.Properties
1
method call time=1725887734.474240 sender=:1.46 -> destination=:1.7
serial=8 path=/org/bluez/hci0/dev_CC_89_6C_35_92_81; interface=org.
freedesktop.DBus.Properties; member=GetAll
2
string "org.bluez.Device1"
3 method return time=1725887734.474907 sender=:1.7 -> destination=:1.46 serial
=510 reply_serial=8
4
array [
5
dict entry(
6
string "Address"
7
variant
string "CC:89:6C:35:92:81"
8
)
9
dict entry(
10
string "AddressType"
11
variant
string "public"
12
)
13
dict entry(
14
string "Name"
15
variant
string "PJAIN's HI"
16
)
17
dict entry(
18
string "Paired"
19
variant
boolean true
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:91==
Appendix
81
20
)
21
dict entry(
22
string "Bonded"
23
variant
boolean true
24
)
25
dict entry(
26
string "Trusted"
27
variant
boolean false
28
)
29
dict entry(
30
string "Connected"
31
variant
boolean false
32
)
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:92==
82
Implementation of Broadcast Assistant using Bluetooth LE Audio for Hearing Aids
==PAGE:93==
==PAGE:94==
