==PAGE:1==
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability eval-
uation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain
analysis
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-
domain analysis
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Bailiang Li
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Bailiang Li, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé,
Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Civil Mechanical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of marine and ocean
engineering.
Bailiang Li - s222474
Signature
Date
ii
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
2024.8.23
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Floating offshore wind turbines, represent a promising renewable energy source with the
potential to drive more cities and countries in the world towards the goal of net-zero. How-
ever, high efficiency comes with the responsibility to ensure the stability of these structures
in harsh marine environments. This remains one of the most challenging aspects in their
design and operation. Current design practices predominantly rely on stability criteria and
rules adapted from the oil and gas industry. While these methods have proven effective
in the context of traditional offshore platforms, their applicability and safety levels when
applied to FOWTs are not fully understood.
The safety level, for example, stated in DNV-ST-0119 is set to 1.3, and this value is the
subject of the thesis. To gain deep insights into whether the value is reasonable for the
offshore wind industry, the project will focus on the combined analyses methodology: a
classic quasi-static analysis will be carried out first to obtain the critical tilt angle of the
selected model; then a time domain analysis is conducted based on numerous sea states
that will be encountered during the service life of the turbine; the angle from quasi-static
analysis is the input of the time domain analysis, and a non-exceedance probability will
be found with this input; judging from the probability, the accuracy of the current safety
level can be assessed.
Results from the long-term statistics will provide valuable insights into the structural in-
tegrity and stability evaluation during design and operation. For future large FOWT projects,
the re-assessed safety level and the long-term statistics obtained during time domain anal-
yses provide a guidance and reference, they can also contribute to the entire offshore wind
industry.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Bailiang Li, MSc Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Author of this thesis
Yanlin Shao, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Supervisor
Huirong Jia, DNV AS
Co-supervisor
iv
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
Aerodynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Hydrostatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Hydrodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Short-term statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Long-term statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Model specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
FEM modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Quasi-static analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4
Time domain analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.5
Natural period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.6
Specified force model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.7
Motion characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.8
Environment sensitivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.9
Extreme value statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.10 Long-term data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4
Results
37
4.1
Hydrostatic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2
Aerodynamic load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.3
Quasi-static analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.4
Sea state data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.5
Motion characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.6
Sensitivity studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.7
Time series analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.8
Results summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5
Conclusions and Future Perspectives
71
5.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.3
Future improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Bibliography
75
A MATLAB code for analytical integration
79
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Due to the limits of fixed-bottom offshore wind turbines in deep-water areas and the grow-
ing global need for renewable energy sources, the development of Floating Offshore Wind
Turbines (FOWTs) has advanced significantly during the last ten years. With the satura-
tion of conventional onshore and nearshore wind resources, attention is being focused on
utilizing the enormous potential for wind energy in deeper oceans, where wind speeds are
typically higher and more reliable. Where seabed conditions do not suit solid foundations,
FOWTs offer a practical answer. The study and application of FOWT technologies have
significantly accelerated since the early 2010s, with multiple prototypes and pilot projects
being commissioned worldwide. Notably, the successful operation of the Hywind Scot-
land project, which began in 2017, demonstrated the commercial feasibility of FOWTs,
further spurring industry interest and investment in this technology [1].
Technological advancements for FOWTs nowadays include dynamic cable arrangements,
mooring systems, and platform design. These developments are essential to guarantee-
ing that FOWTs can endure challenging maritime conditions without sacrificing their effi-
ciency and stability. Many studies have been conducted on the floating platforms, which
fall into the categories of spar-buoy, semi-submersible, and tension-leg designs. The goal
of these studies has been to maximize the platforms’ hydrodynamic and aerodynamic per-
formance. A major factor in increasing the profitability of FOWTs and making them com-
petitive with fixed-bottom turbines in terms of cost and dependability is the incorporation
of sophisticated materials and control systems. [2]
 For all wind turbines, stability is one of the most critical design aspects, floating offshore
wind turbines are no exceptions.
 Stability can directly impacts the operational safety
and structural integrity.  Unlike fixed-bottom turbines, which are anchored to the seabed,
FOWTs rely on their floating platforms to maintain buoyance and balance under various
environmental loads including wind, waves, and currents.  This introduces additional de-
grees of freedom and dynamic behavior, making stability analysis more complex, requiring
more advanced methodologies and computational power. However, complexity does not
mean the importance of evaluating the stability of FOWTs can be neglected, as instabilities
can lead to structural failures, leading to significant financial losses and sometimes irre-
versible damage to surrounding environment[3]. A clear rule is necessary to be adopted
by the entire offshore wind energy to ensure real sustainability.
 Traditional stability assessment methods for floating structures is largely inherited from
the oil and gas industry. This typically employs a quasi-static approach.  While the quasi-
static method has been proven effective within the oil and gas industry, the applicability to
FOWTs is still under scrutiny due to the combination of significant aerodynamic loads and
hydrodynamics involved.  To be specific, FOWTs are subject to wind loads on the rotor and
tower, which are highly variable. There are also complex coupled interactions, necessi-
tating a more rigorous stability evaluation approach.  Recent studies have highlighted the
limitations of the quasi-static method, suggesting that it may not fully capture the transient
and non-linear behaviors that could compromise the stability of FOWTs under extreme
conditions[4].  Therefore, there is a growing consensus in the academic and industrial
communities that time-domain simulations, which account for the dynamic response of
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
1
==PAGE:10==
FOWTs, offer a more comprehensive understanding of their stability characteristics and
safety margins.  
1.2
Project scope
1.2.1
Base model selection
This project will select one of the largest turbine model available today as the subject.
Larger turbines are usually able to deliver electricity at a lower cost than smaller ones. It
is certain that in the future, floating offshore wind turbines will be scaled larger as more
cities or even countries in the world are moving towards net-zero.
Because of larger rotor diameter and hub height, larger FOWTs are susceptible to higher
loads. This increases the aerodynamic forces applying on the structure, which can pro-
duce significant dynamic responses when coupled with the hydrodynamic forces from
waves and currents. The center of gravity rises with increasing turbine size, increasing
the platform’s susceptibility to pitch and roll motions. This increased sensitivity has the
potential to jeopardize the system’s overall stability, particularly in harsh environmental
circumstances. As a result, stability assessments are increasingly important to guarantee
the safe and reliable operation of these massive systems[5].
Furthermore, larger turbines often require more complex mooring systems and floating
platforms to maintain stability. These systems must be meticulously designed to handle
the increased loads without causing excessive platform motions that could lead to struc-
tural failures or reduced energy production efficiency. As the structure becomes larger,
the potential for resonance between the turbine’s natural frequencies and the environ-
mental forcing frequencies is more pronounced in larger FOWTs, necessitating thorough
dynamic stability assessments [6].
In addition, the larger response magnitudes observed in larger structures provide clearer
and more distinct signals during data acquisition, which can simplify the post-processing
and interpretation of dynamic response data. This can be particularly advantageous when
performing time-domain simulations and other detailed analyses, as the enhanced signal
strength reduces the likelihood of noise interference and allows for more accurate as-
sessments of the system’s stability characteristics [7]. This aspect further underscores the
importance of selecting a large turbine model for this project, as it will enable a more com-
prehensive and insightful evaluation of stability using advanced simulation techniques.e
1.2.2
Software selection
Software tools will be extensively used in the project, as they provide advanced algorithms
for both quasi-static and time domain dynamic analyses, reducing errors introduced by
manual coding. The following programs are included:
SIMA
SIMA is part of the Sesam software package. It is a workbench that offers a complete so-
lution for simulation and analysis of marine operations and floating systems. It supports
the entire process from the definition of the simulation and its execution to the interpreta-
tion and documentation of the results. SIMA uses software such as SIMO and RIFLEX as
the underlying analysis tools. Within SIMA, SIMO is a time domain simulation program for
study of motions and station keeping of multibody systems.[8] Flexible modelling of station
keeping forces and connecting force mechanisms including anchor lines, ropes, thrusters,
fenders and bumbers. The results from the program are presented as time traces, statis-
tics and spectral analysis of all forces and motions of all bodies in the analysed system;
RIFLEX is an advanced time domain tool for global hydrodynamic and structural analysis
2
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:11==
of slender marine structures.[9] RIFLEX also supports wind turbine aerodynamic models,
making it suitable for offshore wind applications. In addition, it can be connected to SIMO
for coupled analysis of the mooring system and floater response at each time step.[10]
HydroD
HydroD is part of the Sesam software package. It is an interactive application for com-
putation of hydrostatics and stability for ships and offshore structures. It is also the user
interface for the hydrodynamic solvers Wadam and Wasim. HydroD’s hydrostatic and
stability computations support both intact and damage conditions. HydroD can compute
the draught and heel/trim angles to ensure equilibrium. Compartments may be flooded or
balanced by HydroD. A wind heeling moment can also be provided or calculated.[11]
GeniE
GeniE is the analysis tool for structural design in Sesam. It is designed to facilitate end-
user’s needs for fast modelling tightly integrated with strength assessment. GeniE sup-
ports work phases from initial concept studies to mature design and re-analysis. It has
intuitive user interface and strong features for 3D visualisation of model and results. Its
robust modelling functions support topside structures, jackets and similar frame type struc-
tures, floating offshore structures and ships, with intelligent tubular joint design based on
user defined rules, easy interrogation of the model using browser techniques andd flexible
load application by modelling equipments, their footprints and load transfer rules.[12]
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
2.1
Aerodynamics
2.1.1
Wind shear profile
The wind shear profile of the wind field describes how wind speed varies with height above
the sea surface. According to boundary layer theory, the wind speed at the very surface
of the sea is theoretically zero due to the no-slip condition. This condition asserts that a
fluid in direct contact with a boundary adheres to the boundary’s velocity, meaning that
at the sea surface, the wind speed is effectively zero. As altitude increases, the mean
wind speed is expected to increase, with the rate of increase being location-dependent,
influenced by factors such as terrain roughness and atmospheric stability.
In the offshore wind industry, two profiles are commonly used to model this vertical vari-
ation in wind speed: the logarithmic profile and the power-law profile.
Logarithmic Profile
The logarithmic wind profile is derived from the theory of turbulent boundary layers and is
commonly used to describe wind speed variation near the surface. The wind speed V (z)
at a height z can be expressed as:
V (z) = Vref
κ ln
( z
z0
)
(2.1)
where V (z) is the wind speed at height z; Vref is a reference wind speed measured at a
known height, usually 10m above sea level; κ is the von Kármán constant, whose approxi-
mation is κ = 0.41; z0 is the surface roughness length, which characterizes the roughness
of the sea surface.
The logarithmic profile is particularly applicable in neutral atmospheric conditions, where
the temperature gradient does not influence wind speed significantly. It is widely used
in offshore wind applications because it accounts for the decreasing influence of surface
roughness with height [13].
Power-Law Profile
The power-law profile offers an alternative method to describe wind shear, particularly in
conditions where atmospheric stability or non-neutral conditions are present. The wind
speed V (z) at height z is expressed as:
V (z) = Vref
( z
zref
)α
(2.2)
where V (z) is the wind speed at height z; Vref is the wind speed at a reference height zref,
usually 10m above sea level; α is the shear exponent, which varies depending on the
atmospheric stability and surface roughness.
The shear exponent α typically ranges from 0.1 to 0.3 for offshore environments, with
lower values indicating smoother surfaces and more neutral stability conditions.
The
power-law profile is often used because it is simple and flexible, accommodating a wide
range of environmental conditions [14].
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1.2
Turbulence intensity
Turbulence intensity is a critical parameter in wind turbine design, providing a measure
of the variability in wind speed relative to its mean value. It quantifies the degree of
fluctuations in the wind velocity, which can impact the loading and fatigue life of wind
turbine components. Turbulence intensity (I) is defined as:
I =
σ
Vmean
(2.3)
where σ is the standard deviation of the wind speed, representing the extent of wind speed
fluctuations, Vmean is the mean wind speed over a specified period.
Turbulence intensity generally exhibits a trend where it decreases with increasing wind
speed when wind speeds are low. This is because, at low wind speeds, the effects of sur-
face roughness and obstacles can cause significant variability in wind speed. As the wind
speed increases, the relative impact of these obstacles diminishes, leading to a reduction
in turbulence intensity. However, at higher wind speeds, turbulence intensity may stabilize
or slightly increase due to the enhanced generation of mechanical turbulence from wind
shear and thermal turbulence resulting from temperature gradients in the atmosphere.
In offshore environments, turbulence characteristics can differ significantly from onshore
conditions [15].
2.1.3
Aerodynamic forces
The two primary aerodynamic forces acting on the turbine blades are lift and drag. The
lift force FL and drag force FD can be described by the following equations:
FL = 1
2ρV 2CLA
(2.4)
FD = 1
2ρV 2CDA
(2.5)
where ρ is the air density; V is the relative wind speed, CL is the lift coefficient; CD is the
drag coefficient; A is the reference area.
The lift coefficient (CL) and drag coefficient (CD) are dimensionless numbers that charac-
terize the lift and drag forces generated by a body moving through a fluid, and in this case,
the air. These coefficients depend on several factors, including the shape of the object
facing the incoming wind, the Reynolds number Re, and the angle of attack (α).[16] The
precise values of CL and CD are determined through experimental data or computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations.[17].
2.2
Hydrostatics
2.2.1
The restoring forces
When a floating object is disturbed from its equilibrium due to rigid-body motions η, the
pressure change can lead to a force counteracting the change, which brings the float-
ing object back to its equilibrium position[18]. The force exists in 3 directions: in heave
direction[19].
F S
3 =
∫
SB
△pn3dS = −
∫
SB
ρg (η3 + yη4 −xη5) n3dS
(2.6)
in roll direction[20]
F S
4 = ρg
∫∫
Swp
ydSη3 + ρg
∫∫
Swp
y2dSη4 +
[
−ρg
∫∫
Swp
xydS −ρgV zB + mgzG
]
η5 (2.7)
6
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:15==
and in pitch direction[21]
F S
5 = ρg
∫∫
Swp
xdSη3 + ρg
∫∫
Swp
xydSη4 +
[
−ρg
∫∫
Swp
x2dS −ρgV zB + mgzG
]
η5 (2.8)
F S
1 , F S
2 and F S
6 do not exist since these motions in these directions do not have any
vertical displacement, there’s no change in hydrostatic pressure at any given point. This
is observed when applying a force in surge, sway or yaw direction alone, the object will
never return to its initial position. The force, defined as the hydrostatic restoring force,
can be generalized into
F S
i = −Cijηj,
i, j = 1, ..., 6
(2.9)
where Cij is the hydrostatic restoring coefficient. Analogy of the restoring force is the
stiffness force from a spring F = k∆x, where k is the stiffness of the spring. The restoring
coefficients￿which forms a matrix [C]6×6 due to 6-DOF motions is understood as the
stiffness due to the unbalance due to hydrostatic and gravitational forces or moments of
the floating object. The expanded form of [C]6×6 is


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ρgAwp
ρg
∫∫
Swp ydS
−ρg
∫∫
Swp xdS
0
0
0
ρg
∫∫
Swp ydS
ρg
∫∫
Swp y2dS
−ρg
∫
Swp xydS
0
0
0
−ρg
∫
Swp xdS
−ρg
∫
Swp xydS
ρg
∫
Swp x2dS + ρgV zB −mgzG
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


When the floating object is strictly symmetric about yz-plane, C35 = C53 = 0 and C54 =
C45 = 0.
2.2.2
Intact stability
When a floating object is to be inclined from the upright by an external force or moment
which is then removed, the inclination does not affect the position of the center of gravity
as the inclination angle is small. The inclination will, however, affect the waterplane shape
and the centre of buoyancy as it inclines. Recall that
C44 = ρg
∫
Swp
y2dS
(2.10)
C55 = ρg
∫
Swp
x2dS + ρgV zB −mgzG
(2.11)
It is obvious when waterplane shape changes, the first integral term will also change.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Inclination of a floating object
From the figure it is seen that after inclination a couple g∇· GZ is formed; GZ is defined
as the righting lever. If the metacenter MT is above CoG, this couple will restore the
body to its original position. The floating object will then find its new stable equilibrium in
this condition. This is the concept of initial stability criteria of a floating object when the
object is upright or small inclination angle. The degree of stability is directly proportional
to the metacentric height GMT , and the sign of it is taken as the ultimate criterion of initial
stability. The criterion is summarised as:
GMT > 0
→
stable state
(2.12)
GMT = 0
→
neutral state
(2.13)
GMT < 0
→
unstable state
(2.14)
The exact concept of stability at larger inclination angles can be established by deriving
a general concept based on the above special case. For the generalized concept, the
(true) righting lever GZ is used, as illustrated in the figure.
8
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.2: Larger inclination angles of a floating object
GZ can be calculated as
GZ = KN −KG sin (δφ)
(2.15)
where KN itself is determined by specific loading conditions, and for a single condition,
the righting lever is now
GZ = MT S + GMT sin (δφ)
(2.16)
where MT S is defined as the residuary stability lever, and it only depends on the geometry
of the floating structure. The initial stability, in terms of the metacentric height, varies with
CoG since the centre of gravity depends upon the loading of the structure.
2.3
Hydrodynamics
2.3.1
Hydrodynamic forces
The time-harmonic, rigid-body motion equation can be rewritten as
Mij + Aij ¨ηj + Bij ˙ηj + Cijηj = ℜ{AXieiωt}
(2.17)
Since the project does not consider any second-order wave loads, by solving the equa-
tion in terms of motion amplitude, the equation can provide deep insight into the motion
characteristics of a floating object, including the direction and extreme values, which are
among the most commonly studied quantities in dynamic time domain analyses.
2.3.2
Eigenperiods
The complex notation of the motion equations is
Dijξj = AXi
(2.18)
where Dij = −ω2(Mij + Aij) + iωBij + Cij, and by solving the equations, the complex
motion becomes
ξj = D−1
ij AXi
(2.19)
The response per unit incident wave amplitude
ξj
A = D−1
ij Xi =
Xi
−ω2(M + Aij) + iωBij + Cij
(2.20)
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
9
==PAGE:18==
is defined as the Response Amplitude Operator (RAO).
When the inertia force cancels out with the restoring force
−ω2(M + Aij) + Cij = 0
(2.21)
ω can be solved as
ωn =
√
Cij
M + Aij
(2.22)
and
Tn =
2π
√
Cij
M+Aij
(2.23)
Tn is the natural period of the floating structure.
2.4
Short-term statistics
The turbine is designed to be installed at the North Sea, where a specific wave spectrum
has been developed to cope with numerous geographical and physical constraints [22]. It
is based on numerous on-site measurement.[23] This spectrum, known as the JONSWAP
spectrum, can be described by the following expression [24]:
αg2
ω5 exp
[
−5
4
(ωp
ω
)4]
γr
(2.24)
where
r = exp
[
−(ω −ωp)2
2σ2ω2p
]
(2.25)
α = 0.076
(U 2
10
Fg
)0.22
(2.26)
ωp = 22
( g2
U10F
) 1
3
(2.27)
γ = 3.3
(2.28)
α = 0.07 for ω ≤ωp, 0.09 for ω > ωp
(2.29)
F is the fetch over which the wind blows with constant velocity and U10 is the wind speed
at a height of 10 m above the sea surface.
There are two most commonly used probability distribution to model the extreme values
Weibull distribution
f(x) = k
λ
(x
λ
)k−1
exp
(
−
(x
λ
)k)
(2.30)
F(x) = 1 −exp
[
−
(x
α
)β]
, x, α, β > 0
(2.31)
Weibull distribution is used to describe the occurrences of wave peaks Xp, which is obvi-
ously a stochastic process. The parameters α and β scale and offset the function visually,
and when properly selected, it can be used to model the probability of the maxima of non-
linear waves. How the parameters are ”selected” refers to as probability fitting, which
will be described in depth in the chapter Methodology. For nonlinear water waves, when
the time series data is available, the distribution can be fitted with the observed maxima.
10
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:19==
Gumbel distribution
f(x) = 1
β exp
(
−
(x −µ
β
exp
(
−
(x −µ
β
))))
(2.32)
F(x) = exp
[
−exp −x −α
β
]
, x, β > 0
(2.33)
Similar to Weibull distribution, Gumbel distribution can be used to predict the extreme val-
ues among selected maxima[25]. The applicability of the Gumbel distribution to represent
the distribution of maxima relates to extreme value theory, which indicates that it is appli-
cable when the distribution of the underlying sample data is of the normal or exponential
type.[26]
2.5
Long-term statistics
In a long-term non-stationary wave process, Hs and Tz will also be considered as random
variables, the probability distributions that are used in short-term analyses now become
conditional probability distributions. The joint distribution can often be derived from scatter
diagrams, which are constructed from extensive long-term on-site measurements of wave
conditions. They provide a comprehensive representation of the joint occurrences of wave
heights and periods.[27]
The long-term statistical approach is essential for offshore structures because it captures
the full range of environmental conditions that the structure will encounter throughout its
life. This approach enables the prediction of probabilities of extreme events. Accurate
modeling of the joint distribution of environmental quantities and the appropriate appli-
cation of conditional probability distributions, is fundamental to ensuring the safety and
reliability of offshore structures.[28].
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
3.1
Model specifications
This project is based on the SINTEF INO WINDMOOR 12MW case. WINDMOOR is a
Competence Building Project (KPN), with the main objective of improving the understand-
ing of loads governing the mooring system design of floating wind turbines (FWTs). As a
base case, WINDMOOR adopts a semi-submersible platform supporting a 12 MW wind
turbine. The 12 MW wind turbine was upscaled from the 10 MW wind turbine, in combi-
nation with public data of the Haliade 12 MW wind turbine.[29]
The floating platform consists of a steel semi-submersible platform with three columns,
connected by pontoons and deck beams while the wind turbine tower is installed at the
top of one of the columns, the concept model is shown below
Figure 3.1: Concept of INO WINDMOOR 12MW
The INO WINDMOOR 12 MW case has the following specifications:
Main properties of the platform are key properties in this study as it will be used to
create the hydrostatic model for quasi-static analyses in later chapters.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
13
==PAGE:22==
Table 3.1: Main properties of the platform
Property
Value
Column diameter (m)
15.0
Column height (m)
31.o
Pontoon width (m)
10.0
Pontoon height (m)
4.0
Center-center distance (m)
61.0
Deck beam width (m)
3.5
Deck beam height (m)
3.5
Main properties of the full structure also provide several crucial properties, including
CoG and radii of gyration, which will also be used to create the hydrostatic model.
Table 3.2: Main properties of the full structure
Property
Value
Displacement (t)
15.0
Draft (m)
31.o
CGx (m)
0.37
CGy (m)
0
CGz (m)
4.23
Rxx (m)
43.67
Ryy (m)
44.18
Rzz (m)
30.26
Still water airgap to column top (m)
15.5
Still water airgap to deck beam bottom (m)
12.0
Main properties of the turbine will be intensively referred to mostly during time domain
analyses and verification of simulation results
Table 3.3: Main properties of the turbine
Property
Value
Rotor orientation
Clockwise rotation - upwind
Number of blades
3
Rotor diameter (m)
216.9
Hub diameter (m)
5.0
Blade length (m)
105.4
Hub height (m)
131.7
Cut-in/rated/cut-out wind speed (m/s)
4.0/10.6/25.0
Cut-in/ rated rotor speed (rpm)
5.5/7.8
Hub mass (kg)
60,000
Nacelle mass (kg)
600,000
3.2
FEM modelling
Before performing the quasi-static stability evaluation, a model suitable for the analysis
must be created. The challenges are that there’s no FEM file available for the INO WIND-
MOOR 12MW project in public domains, and the full reconstruction of such a model is
14
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:23==
time-consuming and error-prone, thus the WINDMOOR 12MW model will be simplified
before recreated. From the theories of hydrostatics, the original model can be signifi-
cantly simplified:
1. By design, even in extreme conditions, the turbine part which is the upper struc-
ture, must have zero wetted surface, so if its mass can be combined into the lower
structure and the CoG shifted, the turbine part can be removed from the hydrostatic
model
2. Small structures, such as rails and ladders on the supporting platform have negligi-
ble effect on hydrostatic stability, thus these can be skipped when modelling
3. Components on the columns which affect the downflooding point can also be ig-
nored, as this point can be controlled in the post-processing code by setting the
upper limit of the finite integral if needed.
3.3
Quasi-static analysis
For practical applications, it is necessary to present stability in the form of righting mo-
ments about the centre of gravity, as a marine vessel is heeled at constant displacement.
Such a plot, referred to as static stability curve, is critical during the quasi-static stability
evaluation. The stability curve applies to the full range of inclinations, the curve reflects
both initial stability at small angles then stability at large angles. In this project, the static
intact stability curve is obtained by plotting the result data from HydroD calculations.
Figure 3.2: Restoring moment and heeling moment of a selected marine vessel
There are several points of interest on the plot: 1) The maximum ordinate of the stability
curve is a direct measure of the largest steady heeling that the floating object can sustain
without capsizing; 2) The angle at which the righting moment becomes zero is the largest
angle from which the floating object will return once any disturbing moment is removed;
3) At certain angle, usually less than the maximum allowed angle before capsizing, signif-
icant amounts of water can enter the vessel through openings in the superstructure. This
is known as the downflooding angle; 4) The work dW done in heeling a marine vessel very
slowly through a very small angle dθ will be given by the product of the restoring moment
and the heeling angle. The area under the curve thus represents the ability of the vessel
to absorb energy imparted to it by winds, waves or any other external agency.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
15
==PAGE:24==
3.3.1
Restoring and heeling moment
The FEM file from GeniE is loaded into HydroD for hydrostatic stability analyses.
Figure 3.3: HydroD hydrostatic model
The analyses are performed in two stages. The first stage is to determined the heeling
axis. By design, the heeling axis should be the one that, when tilting around it, the right-
ing moment is always the largest compared to other axes. This axis is assumed to be the
Y-axis for this specific semi-submersible platform design because the incoming wind is
along the X-axis. The first stage is to verify this assumption. This can be done by defining
several azimuth angles in HydroD, as seen in Figure 3.3. After the heeling axis is deter-
mined, the second stage is to tilt the platform by specified angles to obtain the righting
moment curve. This righting moment, which counteracts the aerodynamic load, is one of
the most crucial indication in the quasi-static stability analyses.
3.3.2
Aerodyanmic load on the rotor
As recommended by DNV-ST-0119, there are two methods to obtain the wind heeling
moment (wind load) on the rotor[30]:
1. applying the drag force equation with CD from a provided plot in ST-0119, based on
empirical data
2. using SIMA to simulate stochastic wind field and calculate aerodynamic forces on
the rotor. Method
The second method is preferred as it is more accurate as CD is highly dependent on the
airfoil design of one specific turbine. To run the simulations under different wind speeds,
wind fields at these speeds must be generated separately. The aerodynamic forces are
calculated by computational fluid dynamics methods, and these methods require two pa-
rameters: the field size and the domain size. The wind field size specifies the physical
dimensions of the simulated wind field while the domain size specifies the resolution of the
computational grid used to simulate the wind field. Slicing the physical wind field is similar
to meshing: finer the grids more accurate the solution. But as the domain grid points are
refined after certain point, the required computing power increases exponentially. The
best number of grid points can be determined by applying the following two principles:
1. The grid size in the z- and y-direction should be approximately the size of the largest
chord length. In the context of( wind turbines, the chord length refers to the distance
between the leading edge and the trailing edge of a turbine blade. A grid size similar
16
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:25==
to the chord length ensures that critical flow features, such as pressure gradients,
vortices, and boundary layers, are adequately resolved. This is crucial for predicting
the wind loading on the blades and the resultant structural response. This sets the
preferred maximum size.
2. A grid convergence study is performed to determine after which point the numerical
results converge. This points is the preferred minimum size to balance both the
computational cost and accuracy.
For the first principle, SINTEF has provided the following chord length data:
Figure 3.4: Chord length data
Thus the maximum grid size is 6.56m; For the second principle, a convergence study has
been conducted and the results are in the Results chapter.
3.3.3
Aerodynamic loads on lower structures
To obtain external loads on the structure, several simulations are configured in SIMA,
with each simulation running for 30 minutes to ensure the turbine is fully stabilized, and
Hs set to a small enough value to remove the hydrodynamic effects from the incoming
waves. Since the incoming wind is in a 180deg direction, the aerodynamic force in x-
direction will be monitored in the process. There are two methods to extract the data
before post-processing: 1) 5-minute mean and 2) 10-minute maximum. The 10-minute
maximum method takes extreme load conditions into account and is particularly useful for
quasi-static analyses focusing on the structural integrity and safety margins of the turbine
during these conditions, thus the 10-minute maximum the selected as the primary method.
In addition to the aerodynamic load on the rotor, the lower structures are also exposed
to the incoming wind, thus there must be aerodynamic loads on the semi-submersible
platform, the tower and the nacelle, which all have large frontal areas enough to induce
aerodynamic forces. The WINDMOOR 12MW model in SIMA is modelled as a slender
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
17
==PAGE:26==
body, it does not include a mechanism to include these loads. The next part will focus on
the calculation of these loads and the evaluation of the contribution of these loads on the
turbine’s motion. No lift force will be included as the wind is only parallel to the X-axis
Semi-submersible platform
The platform model in SIMA is identical to the ones in GeniE and HydroD. For the platform,
half of the structure is above sea surface, which consists of three half columns and two
deck beams. While the height of this part is significant, the variation of wind speed along
its height is small at such altitude when considering the specific shear profile of the model,
especially from the center point of the half column to its top, thus it is appropriate to use
the wind speed at the center point for calculation.
The total wind load on the platform is
Mplatform = 2Mdeck + 3Mcolumn
(3.1)
Tower
The WINDMOOR 12MW turbine tower is not modelled as a whole, instead it is constructed
from several sections with different cross section areas.
Figure 3.5: Tower model in SIMA
Within each section, all properties are uniform along the height direction, and this makes
it possible to approximate the drag force on the section by taking the wind speed at the
vertical center of the section. The total aerodynamic load on the tower is the sum of load
on each tower section.
For each tower segment, the drag force can be calculated with
Mi = Li · 1
2ρairCDAiUi|Ui|
(3.2)
Then the total wind load on the tower is
Mtower =
N
∑
i=1
Mi
(3.3)
18
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:27==
Nacelle
The nacelle is a highly simplified component in this model.
Figure 3.6: Nacelle model in SIMA
It is simplified to a box-shaped structure, thus the projected area is just a square. Also
the height of the nacelle structure itself is small enough that the incoming wind can be
assumed to be uniform along its height.
The total wind load on the whole lower structures is
M = Mplatform + Mtower + Mnacelle
(3.4)
By comparing the combined aerodynamic load of these structures to the aerodynamic
force on the rotor, it can be determined that if magnitude of these loads is significant
enough to be included in the total wind heeling moment, for both operating turbine condi-
tion and idle turbine condition.
3.4
Time domain analysis
3.4.1
Numerical time integration
The motion equation describe by Equation 2.17 clearly indicates a nonlinear system of dif-
ferential equations. Step-by-step numerical integration of the incremental dynamic equi-
librium equations, with a Newton-Raphson type of equilibrium iteration at each time step
allows for a proper treatment of nonlinearities.[31] The step-by-step numerical integration
of the dynamic equilibrium equations is based on the Newmark β-family[32] including the
Wilson θ-method with a constant time step throughout the analysis by solving the following
temporal equations
˙ηt+∆τ = ˙ηt + (1 −γ)¨ηt∆τ + γ ¨ηt+∆τ∆τ
ηt+∆τ = ηt + ˙ηt∆τ + (1
2 −β)¨ηt(∆τ)2 + β¨ηt+∆τ(∆τ)2
(3.5)
This is the dynamic analysis method used in SIMA for all time domain simulations.
3.4.2
Numerical dynamic calculation
The motion equations are in dynamic equilibrium. When there’s a short time interval ∆t
the motion equation can be written in the following incremental form
(F I
t+∆t −F I
t ) + (F D
t+∆t −F D
t ) + (F S
t+∆t −F S
t ) = (F E
t+∆t −F E
t )
(3.6)
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
19
==PAGE:28==
where F I, F D and FS are inertia, damping and internal structural reaction forces respec-
tively, and F I + F D = F R. This equation indicates that the increment in external loading
is balanced by increments in inertia-, damping- and structural reaction forces over that
short time interval. In SIMA, a numerical algorithm is applied to obtain the solution of the
above equation by linearization.
3.5
Natural period
The natural period of a marine vessel plays a critical role in determining its response to
environmental forces, particularly when the peak period (Tp) of incoming waves aligns
closely with one or more of the vessel’s natural periods. This proximity can lead to reso-
nance, a phenomenon where the energy input from the waves is efficiently transferred to
the structure, resulting in a significant amplification of motion. The amplified response due
to resonance not only induces larger-than-usual motions but also imposes higher struc-
tural stresses, which can be detrimental to the structure’s integrity and operational safety
[21].
In the context of time-domain simulations aimed at assessing long-term statistics, it is
essential to carefully select the sea states for analysis. These sea states, based on his-
torical data, should not only include combinations of significant wave height (Hs) and peak
period (Tp) that are most probable under specific wind speeds, but also those where Tp is
close to the structure’s natural periods. This approach ensures that the simulations pro-
vide a comprehensive understanding of how the structure behaves under both typical and
extreme conditions, particularly under resonant scenarios. [33, 34] Through this prepara-
tion, deeper insights can be gained into the structure’s ability to withstand the most severe
sea states.
There are several methods to obtain the natural periods through software simulation, with
the same concept that the structure is left to vibrate itself without external load. The
first is by the combination of static offset and boundary condition change. To execute a
such a test, the structure, here the turbine’s semi-submersible must have its boundary
condition as fixed. Then a static offset is applied to displace the structure in one of the six
desired direction. After the structure is displaced, the structure is ”released” by changing
its boundary condition to free. The structure will vibrate as time progresses, until after
certain time the vibration decays to zero. The work flow is presented in Figure 3.7.
20
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.7: Work flow to obtain decay time series based on static offset method
The second method is pull-out. It is similar to the above offset method but different in
that no initial offset is applied, but one or more forces are applied to the structure. In
SIMA, to execute a pull-out test, a specified force for translation or a specified moment for
rotations on the floater is set. Figure 3.8 shows that a ramp force is applied first, followed
by a constant force. After a period the force is removed. Then the structure can vibrate
freely.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.8: Pull-out test with SIMA
The first offset method will be used in the project while SINTEF has used the second
method and obtained the rigid-body natural periods. These results are used for compari-
son to validate the feasibility and accuracy of the first method.
The decay time series can be further processed by transforming it to frequency domain,
commonly via Fast Fourier transform
Y (k) =
n
∑
j=1
X(j)e
−2πi
n
(j−1)(k−1)
(3.7)
In frequency domain, the frequency characteristics can be easily identified, that, if the
decay signal is free from noise, there will be only one sharp spike in the frequency domain
plot, the frequency at which the function reaches top of the spike is the natural frequency.
Once natural frequency is obtain, natural period can be easily calculated through
TN = 2π
ωN
(3.8)
After the natural periods are obtained, the sea state data will be prepared accordingly,
with a focus on Tp that can lead to resonance.
3.6
Specified force model
For the solvers in SIMA, the time step is a critical parameter to both control the accuracy
and to balance the computational cost. In SIMA, the WINDMOOR 12MW is a coupled
RIFLEX and SIMO model, and this coupled model significantly affect the selection of time
step. At moderate wind speeds and sea states, a 0.05s time step is optimal to archive the
desired accuracy relatively fast. But at either high wind speeds or severe sea states, the
0.05s time step will cause the algorithm to diverge at certain point, a 0.025s or smaller time
step is required to keep the algorithm stable, though this effectively doubles the compu-
tational cost. Moreover, above certain extreme wind speeds, regardless of the sea state,
22
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:31==
an even smaller time step than 0.01s is required to stabilize the algorithm, making the
calculations significantly more difficult and the results less meaningful physically. Based
on the results in previous parts and the design of this turbine, the contribution from aero-
dynamic loads on the tower nacelle and platform is negligible, and the blades will be fully
feathered at the cut-out wind speed. A practical solution is to use a specified force on the
shaft to simulate the aerodynamic force and disable the incoming wind in SIMA since fully
feathered blades won’t generate any significant drag or lift force. The model is shown in
Figure 3.9
Figure 3.9: Specified force model
To archive this, four additional short dynamic simulation with wind speeds just above the
cut-out speed will be run to obtain another 4 aerodynamic loads, and these loads in turn
can be used to obtain 4 rotor coefficients above cut-out. These 4 rotor coefficients should
stay almost constant due to fully feathered blades, and the coefficient is assumed to be
constant above cut-out[35]. At this point, the aerodynamic load on the structure is only
dependent on the incoming wind speed, and this simplification allows the 0.05s time step
to be used. One crucial point for this model is that the specified force must follow the
global coordinate system, as seen in Figure 3.9, this is because the force is attached to
the nacelle, which is a RIFLEX body, the local coordinate system will follow the body’s
motion at any given moment but the incoming wind is always parallel to the x-axis. Only
the globally fixed coordinate system can reflect the nature of the incoming wind.
3.7
Motion characteristics
The amplitude of total rotational motion of the turbine can be written as
ηr =
√
η2
4 + η2
5 + η2
6
(3.9)
While the mass distribution of the whole structure is not perfectly symmetric as is seen
from the position of CoG, the mooring system, the platform and the turbine are designed
to be highly symmetric. Two 3-hour simulations, one at rated wind speed for an operating
turbine and one at 50-year extreme wind speed for an idle turbine, are conducted to study
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
23
==PAGE:32==
the intensity of the roll and yaw motion of the turbine. This is a crucial step to verify
if these two motions are significant enough to be taken into consideration for the time
series analyses. If roll and yaw are negligible, the ”tilt” motion can be simplified to just the
pitch motion.
3.8
Environment sensitivity
While the wind and waves are set to coming the same direction, the exact direction from
which they can induce significant pitch motion (assume the motion characteristics study
concludes that only the pitch motion is the most intense among the three rotational mo-
tions) is not limited to 180deg. Under certain conditions, incoming wind and waves that
are not aligned to 180deg can induce larger pitch motion, and the performance of the
mooring system is not studied in detail in SINTEF’s datasheet, thus it is crucial to analyze
the effect of the sensitivity of the system to various wind and wave directions.
The specifications of the mooring system in INO WINDMOOR 12MW model is listed in
Table 3.4
Table 3.4: Specifications of the mooring system
Fairlead
Anchor
Mooring line
x [m]
y [m]
z [m]
x [m]
y [m]
z [m]
azimuth [deg]
ML1
42.7
0.0
0.0
700.0
0.0
-150.0
180
ML2
-21.4
37.0
0.0
-350.0
606.2
-150.0
300
ML3
-21.4
-37.0
0.0
-350.0
-606.2
-150.0
60
From the azimuth angles of each mooring line, it can be seen that the arrangement of the
mooring system has rotational symmetry with the turbine on the exact geometric center.
This is visually illustrated Figure 3.10
Figure 3.10: Top view of the mooring system
24
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:33==
The sensitivity study is intended to separately study the effect of varying wind and wave
directions, and the study methods are listed in Table 3.5
Table 3.5: Environment sensitivity study method
Wind direction [deg]
Wave direction [deg]
Current direction [deg]
Wind sensitivity
172-188
180
172-188
Wave sensitivity
180
0-180
180
The two cases are visually illustrated in Figure 3.11a and Figure 3.11b
(a) Varying incoming wind direction
(b) Varying incoming wave direction
Figure 3.11: Varying environment parameters for sensitivity study
Four quantities, with their mean, min and max values will be recorded and studied:
1. Aerodynamic force along x-axis on the rotor
2. Pitch motion
3. Axial force in the mooring lines
4. Displacement at the fairlead
The aerodynamic force is recorded to study the rotor’s response to varying external loads;
the pitch motion is to find out the exact wind and wave direction that can cause the most
intensive tilt motion and validate the assumption that 180deg is such direction, direction
found in this study will be used for long-term statistics; axial force is used to show how
sensitive the system is to varying environment condition while displacement is a supple-
mentary quantity to validate such sensitivity as the change in axial force can be very large
due to the mass of the structure.
3.9
Extreme value statistics
3.9.1
Data collection
To obtain the peak distribution, which can be interpreted as the probability a peak xp is
smaller than a given level x = a, the standard approach in probability and statistics is to
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
25
==PAGE:34==
define the level and evaluate how the signal crosses, specifically, upcrosses that level.
This approach can be visualized in Figure 3.12
Figure 3.12: Specified force model
After the peaks are collected, they are sorted in ascending order, then fitted to target
probability distributions. In this project, two probability distributions are of interest, the
Gumbel distribution, which describes the probability of the global maximum value of a
time series, and the Weibull distribution, which describes the probability of local maxima
(individual peaks) of a time series. Since the PDF f(x) and CDF F(x) of these distributions
are only determined by their scale and location parameters, each time a fitting is done, a
parameter pair is obtained, then the probability distribution functions are obtained. So for
later studies of the distributions, including convergence and sensitivity, their parameters
are used to represent the distribution.
There are three methods[36] commonly used to fit probability distributions with existing
data: probability weighted moments method, maximum likelihood method and method of
moments.
Probability weighted moments method
The Probability weighted moments method is a statistical technique used to estimate the
parameters of a probability distribution. It is particularly useful in hydrology and meteorol-
ogy for fitting distributions to sample data, especially when dealing with extreme values.
The PWM method involves weighting the sample data by a function of their cumulative
distribution function before computing the moments. The general form of the PWM for a
random variable X is given by:
βr = E[X · F(X)r]
(3.10)
where βr represents the rth probability-weighted moment, F(X) is the cumulative distri-
bution function of X, and E[·] denotes the expectation operator.
In practice, the moments βr are estimated from sample data and are then used to solve for
the parameters of the desired distribution. The PWM method is especially advantageous
26
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:35==
for distributions where traditional moments are difficult to calculate or where higher-order
moments are prone to sampling variability [37].
Maximum likelihood estimation method
The maximum likelihood estimation method is one of the most widely used techniques
for parameter estimation in statistics. The principle behind it is to find the parameter val-
ues that maximize the likelihood function, which represents the probability of the observed
data given a particular set of parameters. For a sample of independent and identically dis-
tributed observations {x1, x2, . . . , xn}, the likelihood function L(θ) for a parameter vector
θ is defined as:
L(θ) =
n
∏
i=1
f(xi; θ)
(3.11)
where f(xi; θ) is the probability density function of the distribution with parameters θ.
The MLE for θ is the value that maximizes L(θ) or, equivalently, the natural logarithm of
the likelihood function, known as the log-likelihood function:
ˆθMLE = arg max
θ
ln L(θ) = arg max
θ
n
∑
i=1
ln f(xi; θ)
(3.12)
This method is highly flexible and efficient, providing asymptotically unbiased and consis-
tent parameter estimates, particularly in large samples [38].
Method of moments
The method of moments is a classical approach to parameter estimation, where the pa-
rameters of a distribution are estimated by equating the sample moments to the theoretical
moments of the distribution. For a random variable X with k parameters θ1, θ2, . . . , θk, the
rth theoretical moment is given by:
µr = E[Xr]
(3.13)
The method involves setting the sample moments mr equal to the theoretical moments:
mr = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
xr
i
(3.14)
Then, solving the system of equations:
m1 = µ1(θ1, θ2, . . . , θk),
m2 = µ2(θ1, θ2, . . . , θk),
. . . ,
mk = µk(θ1, θ2, . . . , θk) (3.15)
This method is the simplest to implement among the three and provides consistent pa-
rameter estimates. However, it can be less efficient than other methods, such as the
maximum likelihood estimation method, especially in small samples, as it does not make
use of the full information available in the sample distribution [39].
The maximum likelihood estimation and probability weighted moments method will be
used in the sensitivity studies in later parts of the project as they can adapt to moderate
to large amount of samples with high accuracy, facilitating the convergence of distribution
parameters and providing a clear and stable trend.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
27
==PAGE:36==
3.9.2
Seed sensitivity
In the context of long-term statistical analysis of offshore structures, the sensitivity study
of seeds is a fundamental component. The stochastic nature of wind and wave conditions
necessitates the use of random seeds in simulations to generate different realizations of
these environmental forces. Each seed corresponds to a unique set of initial conditions,
leading to distinct realizations of the time history of environmental loads acting on the
structure. As such, seed variability directly influences the distribution of the simulated
responses, and consequently, the derived statistical measures.
A critical aspect of seed sensitivity analysis is to ensure the convergence of statistical
measures as the number of seeds increases. In the context of long-term statistics, con-
vergence refers to the stability of the parameters of extreme value distribution parameters
across different sets of seeds. Without sufficient convergence, the results may exhibit
significant variability depending on the chosen seeds, leading to unreliable long-term pre-
diction regarding the structure’s response.[40] Therefore, it is essential to conduct seed
sensitivity study to identify the point at which additional seeds no longer significantly al-
ter the statistical outcomes, indicating that the simulation has adequately captured the
inherent variability in the environmental conditions.
Moreover, running simulations with a large number of seeds can be computationally inten-
sive, especially in high-fidelity models that require substantial processing power and time.
A thorough sensitivity study of seeds helps to balance the need for statistical accuracy with
computational efficiency. By determining the optimal number of seeds required to achieve
reliable results, researchers can avoid unnecessary computational expense while ensur-
ing that the variability in environmental forces is appropriately represented. This approach
not only improves the robustness of the simulation results but also contributes to the effi-
cient allocation of computational resources in long-term statistical studies. In the case of
WINDMOOR 12MW model, a total of 100 seeds will be used to run two separate cases,
the operating turbine at rated wind speed and the idle turbine at 50-year extreme wind
speed.
If the Weibull distribution is to be evaluated, an additional strategy is that since the 100
seeds are different from each other, the time series generated for each seed is also in-
dependent of others. It is already clear that each local maximum (peak) within one time
series is independent of others, this means that instead of running simulations with 1
seed, 2 seeds, 3 seeds until the 100th simulation with 100 seeds, which can be extremely
time-consuming and resource-intensive. Provide the very first transient part is removed,
N 3-hour time series each with n peaks can be combined to form a N seeds single time se-
ries with a local maxima pool containing N*n peaks. High-performance computers can run
as many as 128 simulations in parallel, when combined with the strategy, can significantly
accelerate the process. This strategy is shown in Table 3.6
Table 3.6: Combination of time series for local maxima pools
Time series
Seeds
Peaks
1st
1
n1
2nd
2
n1 + n2
3rd
3
n1 + n2 + n3
4th
4
n1 + n2 + n3 + n4
...
...
...
Nth
N
n1 + n2 + n3 + ... + nN
28
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:37==
When a combined time series is obtained, the large peak pool can be used directly to fit the
Weibull distribution. This is also advantageous as more data with the same environment
condition can make the distribution converge faster and become more accurate.
It is expected that for any given sea state, both the location and scale parameter of Gumbel
and Weibull distribution will converge to a constant with increasing number of seeds. How-
ever, a large amount of seeds require also substantial amount of computational power,
and the gain in accuracy may not justify the cost. Thus a sensitivity study will be conducted
along with a convergence study. It is expected that while the parameters converge with
more seeds, they are not sensitive to the number of seeds, then an adequate number,
such as 10-20 seeds can be used to strike a balance between accuracy and computational
cost.
3.9.3
Tp sensitivity
The peak period Tp is correlated with the wave energy spectrum, any change in Tp can
lead to significant alterations to the energy spectrum. A shift in Tp can result in resonance
effects, where the natural frequency of the structure aligns with the energy-dominant wave
period, causing amplified responses and potentially leading to structural failures[41], as
mentioned previously when the methodologies of natural period studies are explained.
This is particularly important as the sea states are prepared in the manner that some Tp
are selected deliberately to induce the resonance effect. An accurate assessment of the
sensitivity of extreme value distributions to Tp is thus essential to capture the worst-case
scenarios that the structure might encounter over its lifetime.
Tp sensitivity is also important because it influences the statistical extrapolation of extreme
events. The extreme value theory relies on fitting distributions to observed data, and the
accuracy of these fits can be affected by the distribution of Tp within the dataset[42]. If
the sensitivity to Tp is not adequately accounted for, the tail behavior of the distribution
may be poorly represented, leading to underestimation or overestimation of the long-term
probability associated with extreme events.
It is initially expected that for INO WINDMOOR 12MW model, it is not sensitive to Tp, then
for each Hs, always the median Tp is selected, significantly reducing the computational
cost of time series simulation and complexity of long-term probability function integration,
which will be explained in detail in later parts. However, if the assumption is invalid, for
each Hs, several Tp must be selected, from the least probable to the most probable under
the condition of the specific Hs. Carefully selection of Tp is necessary as n Tp increase
the computational cost by n. It is ideal to select as 4 or 5 Tp for each Hs if it must be taken
into account.
The sensitivity study is carried out by setting up two environments, one at rated wind
speed and the most probable Hs at such wind speed, the other at 50-year extreme wind
speed and also the most probable Hs. With each environment, simulations are conducted
with various Tp.
3.9.4
Long-term statistics
In the context of long-term statistical analysis of marine structures, it is crucial to account
for the stochastic nature of the environmental conditions to accurately predict the extreme
responses of the system. The joint distribution of environmental variables, such as wave
height (Hs), peak period (Tp), wind speed (Uw). The long-term distribution is derived by
integrating the response CDF over the joint distribution of the environmental variables,
encompassing all possible sea states. The final step in the analysis involves determining
the annual maximum distribution by considering the number of independent sea states per
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
29
==PAGE:38==
year, which provides a probabilistic measure of the extreme responses that the structure
may encounter over its operational life. This rigorous approach ensures that the full range
of environmental conditions is considered, enabling a comprehensive assessment of the
structure’s ability to withstand extreme events.
Assume wave and wind are from the same direction. The long-term distribution of 3-hour’s
maximum tilt can be written as
FX,3h,LT (x) =
∫∫∫∫
FX,3h(x|hs, tp, uw, θ)f(hs, tp, uw, θ)dhsdtpduwdθ
(3.16)
where FX,3h(x|hs, tp, uw, θ) is 3-hour’s maximum tilt (mean + dynamic) in a given environ-
mental condition, and f(hs, tp, uw, θ) is the joint probability distribution of any short-term
environmental condition. f(hs, tp, uw, θ) can be simplified and transformed with the con-
cept of conditional probability
fX|Y = fX,Y (x, y)
fY (y)
(3.17)
so that
f(hs, tp, uw, θ) = fTp|Hs,Uw,Θ(tp|hs, uw, θ)fΘ,Hs,Uw(θ, hs, uw)
= fTp|Hs,Uw,Θ(tp|hs, uw, θ)fHs|Θ,Uw(hs|θ, uw)fΘ,Uw(θ, uw)
= fTp|Hs,Uw,Θ(tp|hs, uw, θ)fHs|Θ,Uw(hs|θ, uw)fUw|Θ(uw|θ)fΘ(θ)
(3.18)
Assume both wave and wind are independent of direction (using omni-directional distri-
butions), all θ in the distributions can be removed
f(hs, tp, uw, θ) = fTp|Hs,Uw(tp|hs, uw)fHs|Uw(hs|uw)fUw(uw)fΘ(θ)
(3.19)
Further assume Tp is independent of wind
f(hs, tp, uw, θ) = fTp|Hs(tp|hs)fHs|Uw(hs|uw)fUw(uw)fΘ(θ)
(3.20)
The long-term distribution thus becomes
FX,3h,LT (x) =
∫∫∫∫
FX,3h(x|hs, tp, uw, θ)fTp|Hs(tp|hs)fHs|Uw(hs|uw)fUw(uw)fΘ(θ)dhsdtpduwdθ
(3.21)
In this project, the incoming wind and incoming waves are always in the same direction,
and no condition with directional wind and waves will be studied, then θ can be removed
from all the terms in the equation
FX,3h,LT (x) =
∫∫∫
FX,3h(x|hs, tp, uw)fTp|Hs(tp|hs)fHs|Uw(hs|uw)fUw(uw)dhsdtpduwd
(3.22)
The sea state related distributions are given in the followings from historic data
wind speed at hub height
FUw(uw) = 1 −exp
(
−
(uw
αw
)βw)
(3.23)
where αw = 11.641, βw = 2.114
30
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:39==
wave height at specific wind speed
FHs|Uw(hs|uw) = 1 −exp
(
−
(
hs
αs(uw)
)βs(uw))
(3.24)
where αs(uw) = 0.2145 + 0.0112u1.9024
w
, βs(uw) = 0.8223 + 0.0024u2.2117
w
peak period at specific wave height
FTp|Hs(tp|hs) = Φ
(ln (tp) −µL
σL
)
(3.25)
where µL = 1.111 + 0.758h0.291
s
, σ2
L = 0.011 + 0.125 exp (−0.504hs)
When the long-term probability distribution of 3-hour sea states is obtained, the distribution
of annual maximum pitch is
FX,annual(x) = [FX,3h,LT (x)]N
(3.26)
where N is the number of sea state per year. It has been observed that for 3-hours sea
states N = 2922.
3.10
Long-term data processing
3.10.1
Data expansion
In the previous part, all terms in Equation 3.9.4 but FX,3h(x|hs, tp, uw) are analytical func-
tions that can be calculated and integrated efficiently. The 3-hour’s maximum tilt term is
the final target of the long-term statistics part. The CDF itself is a discrete function, with
its data source from all the simulations of given sea states. The procedure to calculate
this function is:
1. Extract maxima from the simulations for one specific Uw-Hs-Tp combinations with
N seeds.
2. Fitting the extreme value distribution against the extracted maxima, obtaining distri-
bution parameter pairs.
3. Assemble two three-dimensional matrices with Uw, Hs and Tp being each of the
dimension, one for each distribution parameter.
4. Iterate through the matrices and input x to FX(x) to obtain non-exceedance proba-
bility.
5. Integrate along all three dimensions to obtain FX,3h(x|hs, tp, uw).
However, the sea state is also discrete and finite, this means that at one specific Hs, Tp
can’t take the full range from 0 to positive infinity. This is not only because certain Hs and
Tp combinations never exist due to physical constraints, such as Hs = 10m, Tp = 0.01s
but also because the historic database does not have the capacity to record all Hs-Tp
combinations that are ever possible. Thus, interpolation and extrapolation are required
to extend existing data for the integral to be possible. Another problem during simulation
data processing is that, if there’s a Hs-Tp plane, one can find out the data points are
sparsely distributed, also due to the discrete nature of the sea state data. For example,
The next non-empty data point of Hs = 5m, Tp = 8s along the Tp dimension can be
Hs = 5m, Tp = 10s instead of Hs = 5m, Tp = 9s. To cope with these problems, a data
expansion strategy is developed, and can be visualized as follows:
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
31
==PAGE:40==
First, iterate through existing Hs, at each Hs, interpolate between the first and last Tp
data points with uniformly and densely distributed points. Then extrapolate outside the
first and last points to 0 and a pre-defined threshold. This is illustrated in Figure 3.13.
In the figure, green texts indicate existing data points directly obtained from simulations
and those interpolated with high-order method, red texts indicate linear extrapolated data
points.
Figure 3.13: Extrapolation along the Tp dimension
Next, iterate through all Tp, including the interpolated and extrapolated ones. Similar to
the previous step, interpolate between the first and last Hs data points with uniformly and
densely distributed points then extrapolate outside the first and last points to 0 and a pre-
defined threshold. The whole Hs-Tp plane should be filled with data points now. This is
illustrated in Figure 3.14, where green texts indicate data points that are currently known,
including those interpolated and extrapolated during the previous step, red texts indicate
linear extrapolated data points.
32
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.14: Extrapolation along the Hs dimension
The third dimension, Uw can be treated with the same strategy, iterating through each
Hs-Tp grid, interpolating and extrapolating along the Uw dimension.
At this point, the condition on the Hs-Tp plane is demonstrated in Figure 3.15 with colored
blocks indicating the accuracy of the data points.
Figure 3.15: Extrapolation and interpolation on the Hs-Tp plane
The green blocks indicate data points directly from simulations. The yellow blocks indicate
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
33
==PAGE:42==
interpolated data points along the Tp dimension. The red blocks indicate data points that
use the results from the previous dimension.
In a typical 2D interpolation and extrapolation process, it begins by interpolation and ex-
trapolation along first dimension and then proceeds to interpolate and extrapolate along
the second dimension. In the case of discrete sea state data, there are always points that
consist the outermost layer on the plane. The data points generated from the first round
of interpolation and extrapolation serve as inputs for the second round. Since these in-
puts are themselves approximations, the second stage of interpolation and extrapolation
compounds the initial approximation errors, resulting in a further deviation from the true
values.
This sequential error propagation can be mathematically characterized by considering the
interpolation and extrapolation as a sequence of operations, each introducing a bounded
error. The final error in the data points will generally be greater than or equal to the error
introduced in the first step, depending on the nature of the interpolation and extrapolation
methods used, as well as the underlying smoothness and continuity of the data being
processed [43].
Since the original sea state data is sparsely spaced, the compounded error is more sig-
nificant, as the interpolation and extrapolation are forced to estimate values based on
increasingly uncertain approximations. In such case, the accuracy of the final result can
be substantially lower than if a single-step, higher-dimensional interpolation or extrapola-
tion were applied [44].
Considering the scope of the project, it is impractical to infinitely increase the density and
range of sea states. An additional study on the interpolation and extrapolation method
will be conducted to evaluate how different algorithms affect the result of the final annual
maximum pitch in Equation 3.9.4.
3.10.2
Integration
Recall the long-term maximum pitch distribution of 3-hour sea states Equation 3.9.4, this
equation can be interpreted as the non-exceedance probability under the condition of one
specific sea state, weighted on its contribution to the full domain of all possible environ-
ment conditions (Uw-Hs-Tp combinations). On the right hand side of the equation, the first
CDF term is discrete while the others are analytical, this makes direct integration impossi-
ble. There are two general strategies to cope with this situation: 1) discretize the analytical
terms to the same extent as the CDF term; 2) ”convert” the CDF term to a continuous form
that can make the equation’s right hand side fully analytical.
The first strategy is advantageous in that discrete function can be integrated using straight-
forward numerical integration with standard trapezoidal method. However, analytical func-
tions are defined by their continuity, thus discretizing analytical functions has the potential
to cause a loss of accuracy. The precision of an analytical function lies in its ability to
represent the exact relationship between variables over a continuous domain. Discretiza-
tion, by its nature, introduces approximation errors that can degrade the accuracy of the
integral, particularly if the function has complex features such as steep gradients or oscil-
lations [45].
The second strategy allows the integral to be evaluated with the analytical function in its
original form. Although interpolation or extrapolation introduces some degree of error,
this method typically preserves more of the analytical function’s inherent accuracy. For
internal points, higher-order interpolation methods such as spline or pchip interpolation,
are designed to approximate the continuous nature of a function based on discrete data
34
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:43==
points and keep the curve’s trend, minimizing the loss of information. [43] As a result, this
strategy can offers a more accurate representation of the integral and is preferred, as it
leverages the full precision of the analytical function while accommodating the discrete
nature of the simulation data.
As explained in the previous part, certain Uw-Hs-Tp combinations are physically impossi-
ble, such as very high wave height, very low peak period at very lower wind speed, these
mostly occur close to the lower bound and upper bound of the integral. This means that
the integrand can have complex behavior close to the two bounds (especially the lower
bound if the bound itself is very close to zero as the conditional PDF terms have undefined
behavior at zero), and the selection of the two bounds can have significant impact of the
final result. An extra study will be carried out to study the sensitivity of the annual result
to the two bounds.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:45==
4
Results
This chapter will explore the results of all the model constructions and analyses con-
ducted. These include the hydrostatic models, convergence studies for several key pa-
rameters of for example, wind field and extreme value distribution, the maximum angle
from quasi-static analysis, sea state characteristics and exceedance probability from time
domain simulations.
4.1
Hydrostatic model
4.1.1
Modelling
Based on the specifications provided by SINTEF, this simplified model is created in GeniE.
The simplified model, as shown below, is a ”dummy shell” made from steel of 15mm
thickness.
Figure 4.1: FEM model in GeniE
The structure mass is simplified to a point mass model, with the CoG and mass of this
model identical to the original one, which includes compartments and ballast. No external
load case is defined. Further quasi-static evaluations will not include a damage case thus
there’s also no compartment defined in the structure.
The FEM model is then meshed with an element length 1m, as shown below
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.2: FEM model with mesh
At this element length, the mesh can capture the submerged volume and its variations
with large heel angle. It is accurate for a large structure such as the platform of the INO
WINDMOOR 12MW turbine.
4.1.2
Model validation
Setting up the FEM model in HydroD, the righting moment and GZ at various azimuth
angles are plotted against the heel angle below.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Heel angle [deg]
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Righting moment [N  m]
109
Azimuth at 0
Azimuth at 15
Azimuth at 30
Azimuth at 45
Azimuth at 60
Azimuth at 75
Azimuth at 90
Azimuth at 105
Azimuth at 120
Azimuth at 135
Azimuth at 150
Azimuth at 165
Figure 4.3: Righting moment curves at various azimuth angles
38
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:47==
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Heel angle [deg]
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
GZ [m]
Azimuth at 0
Azimuth at 15
Azimuth at 30
Azimuth at 45
Azimuth at 60
Azimuth at 75
Azimuth at 90
Azimuth at 105
Azimuth at 120
Azimuth at 135
Azimuth at 150
Azimuth at 165
Figure 4.4: GZ curves at various azimuth angles
From Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4, it is clear that at 90deg azimuth angle, which is the
Y-axis, the structure’s GZ and righting moment reach their respective maximum com-
pared to other rotational axes. This indicates that the FEM model is valid as to withstand
both incoming wind and incoming waves from 180deg, which is on the X-axis, the semi-
submersible must have the highest restoring stiffness when tilting around Y-axis.
4.2
Aerodynamic load
4.2.1
Wind field generation
The wind field to be studied is a box region with 2400m in length, 280m in width and height.
The size is fixed and the grid points on y- and z-axis are uniformly spaced. The rotor is on
the yz-plane with its shaft in the center. The wind field is generated by Mann Turbulence
Generator [46]. Table 4.1 shows the parameters to be studied. The results are plotted in
Table 4.1: Wind force and rotor coefficient, idle turbine, 4 wind speeds above cut-out
Number of grid points
16
32
64
128
256
Time step size [s]
0.1
0.05
0.04
0.025
0.02
Figure 4.5a and Figure 4.5b, which have shown how the total number of grid points and
the time step sizes affect the wind force result. From Figure 4.5a, it can be observed that
the curve shows the initial tendency to converge after 128 grid points. From Figure 4.5b,
the curve does not show a tendency to converge with gradually smaller time step sizes.
From both plots, the two parameters have negligible effect on the wind force result. For
SIMA, the maximum allowed number of grid points is 256 in each dimension before stack
overflow occurs; for Mann Turbulence Generator, any grid mesh beyond 256*256 will be
increasingly challenging to generate due to massive memory consumption, computational
power and storage space requirement. For practical reasons, the number of grid points
is selected to be 64 in each dimension. Since the result will not converge with time step
size, the evaluation is merely based on the sensitivity of wind force to time step sizes. In
Figure 4.5b, the wind force does not show any noticeable sensitivity to various time step
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
39
==PAGE:48==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Grid points
1.47
1.48
1.49
1.5
1.51
1.52
1.53
Force [N]
106
Wind force
(a) Convergence and sensitivity of grid points
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Time step size [s]
1.5215
1.522
1.5225
1.523
1.5235
Force [N]
106
Wind force
(b) Convergence and sensitivity of time step
Figure 4.5: Convergence and sensitivity results of grid points and time step sizes
sizes, and considering that halving time step size effectively doubles the computational
time, ideally the time step size which will be selected is the largest step size that can keep
the algorithms stable.
With the selected parameters, 20 wind fields, with mean wind speed from 4.6 m · s−1 to
42.6 m · s−1 are generated with a 2 m · s−1 spacing. Among them, the wind fields at rated
wind speed and 50-year extreme wind speed are plotted below
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
8
9
10
11
12
13
Wind speed [m  s-1]
Wind speed
(a) Turbulent wind field, rated
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
25
30
35
40
45
50
Wind speed [m  s-1]
Wind speed
(b) Turbulent wind field, 50-year extreme
Figure 4.6: Selected turbulent wind fields
The effect of higher turbulence intensity can immediately be identified in Figure 4.6b that
the maxima and minima deviate more frequently from the mean and the deviation is larger.
4.2.2
Aerodynamic force data
To obtain the aerodynamic force on the rotor, a total of 14 30min simulation runs are
executed in SIMA. The first 10 runs are for operating turbine, the last 4 runs aims at finding
the aerodynamic characteristics of the rotor, the rotor coefficient CT . Before simulations,
the turbine is set up in a manner that its base is fixed. This simplification eliminates the
impact of heeling on the aerodynamic load. The aerodynamic force on the rotor has
40
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:49==
been plotted for the operating turbine as shown below, with a comparison of SINTEF’s
experimental data
0
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m  s-1]
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Wind force [N]
106
F
(a) Wind force on rotor, operating turbine
(b) Wind force on rotor, operating turbine
Figure 4.7: Comparison of wind force on rotor for operating turbine
In Figure 4.7a, the vertical line indicates the rated wind speed, and general cross section
model is used. It can be observed that the tendency of the two wind force curves are
qualitatively identical. The two curves do not match quantitatively, with the project’s force
magnitude noticeably higher than SINTEF’s. This is due to the fact that the project used
the maximum value within a 10min period and SINTEF’s data is also post-processed with
peak shaving. With rotor area obtained from the spec sheet, the rotor coefficient can
be obtained from Figure 4.7a. The rotor coefficient plot is placed together with SINTEF’s
blade pitch plot for validation In Figure 4.8a, the two vertical lines indicate rated wind speed
0
10
20
30
40
50
Wind speed [m  s-1]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Rotor coefficient
CT
(a) Rotor coefficient
(b) Blade pitch
Figure 4.8: Rotor coefficient obtain from wind force data, in comparison with blade pitch
and cut-out wind speed respectively. It is observed that with increasing blade pitch, the
rotor coefficient decreases. This aligns with the design of turbine blades that, higher wind
speed induces higher aerodynamic load on the airfoil, thus a pitch controller works by
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
41
==PAGE:50==
adjust the pitch of turbine blades to reduce the aerodynamic drag to optimal level for the
turbine to generate power. It is this mechanism that reduces the rotor coefficient.
Above the cut-out wind speed, the turbine will automatically shut down by feathering its
blades (increasing the blade pitch rapidly to 90deg) to protect the turbine. This can be
observed in SIMA from the blade pitch sensor reading in Figure 4.9.
0
2
4
6
8
Time [s]
20
40
60
80
100
Blade pitch [deg]
Blade pitch
Figure 4.9: Feathering behavior of turbine blades
The plot confirms that the turbine’s controller in this project is capable of feathering its
blades to 90deg and the process is rapid enough to not create a significant transient
period that can interference with time domain analyses. Based on this characteristic, the
first 4 wind force on the rotor data above cut-out wind speed is obtained:
Table 4.2: Wind force and rotor coefficient, idle turbine, 4 wind speeds above cut-out
Wind speed [m · s−1]
Wind force [N]
Rotor coefficient CT
24.6
3.85 × 104
0.0029
26.6
4.46 × 104
0.0029
28.6
5.12 × 104
0.0029
30.6
5.37 × 104
0.0026
Based on the data above, the conclusion is obvious that after the blades are fully feath-
ered, the rotor coefficient drops significantly and remains almost constant. Applying this
conclusion, all the wind force and rotor coefficient above cut-out wind speed can now be
obtained. They are plotted below (the vertical lines on both plots indicate the cut-out wind
speed)
42
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:51==
20
25
30
35
40
45
Wind speed [m  s-1]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Rotor coefficient
CT
(a) Rotor coefficient above cut-out wind speed
20
25
30
35
40
45
Wind speed [m  s-1]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Wind force [N]
104
F
(b) Wind force above cut-out wind speed
Figure 4.10: Wind force and rotor coefficient obtained from the assumption that CT does
not change above cut-out speed due to full feathering
The loads on other large structures, including the nacelle, tower and semi-submersible
are obtained separately to study their significance. Below is the plot of the ratio between
wind moment on the rotor and total wind moment on the other three major structures
0
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m  s-1]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Ms/Mw
Ms/Mw
Figure 4.11: The ratio between wind moment on the rotor and total wind moment on the
other three major structures
From the plot it can be seen that the effect of drag force on these structures is negligible
compared to that on the rotor when the turbine is operating, but it is predictable that after
the turbine is idle, the total aerodynamic loads on other structures will become dominant,
and they are no longer negligible. The final wind moment data is plotted in Figure 4.12
and this will be used both in quasi-static and time series simulations.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
43
==PAGE:52==
0
10
20
30
40
50
Wind speed [m  s-1]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Moment [N  m]
108
Wind moment
Figure 4.12: Wind moment data under the assumption of constant CT above cut-out wind
speed
4.3
Quasi-static analyses
Before the quasi-static analyses, HydroD reports that the model’s equilibrium is calibrated
based on the input data shown in Table 4.3 There’s a 2deg trim angle at its initial position,
Table 4.3: Equilibrium correction
Waterline Z [m]
Heel [deg]
Trim [deg]
Yaw [deg]
2.76
0
2
0
indicating that the structure has a tendency to fall towards its front. This correction is used
to ensure the GZ and moment curves start from 0deg, easing the calculations. With the
correction, the wind moment (external load) and righting moment curves are plotted for
both rated wind speed and extreme wind speed
44
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:53==
0
10
20
30
40
Heel angle [deg]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Moment [N  m]
108
Righting moment
Wind moment
(a) Stability curves at rated wind speed
0
10
20
30
40
Heel angle [deg]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Moment [N  m]
108
Righting moment
Wind moment
(b) Stability curves at extreme wind speed
Figure 4.13: Stability curves at rated and extreme wind speeds
On both plots, the wind moment is a straight line due to the previous simplification that
the turbine is bottom-fixed to obtain the aerodynamic load data. Comparing the two plots:
at 50-year extreme wind speed, the turbine blades are fully feathered, the dominant aero-
dynamic load is from drag force on the tower, nacelle and semi-submersible. This load
in total is still significantly lower than the aerodynamic load on rotor while the turbine is
operating. Based on this comparison, the stability curves at rated wind speed is selected
for quasi-static analyses as the external load at rated wind speed is the highest, reflecting
a more extreme condition than at 50-year wind speed. Taking the area under both the
wind moment line and righting moment curve and applying the assumed safety factor 1.3
to the wind moment area, the area difference is plotted below
0
10
20
30
40
Heel angle [deg]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Moment area [N  mdeg]
109
|AMr-1.3AMw|
Figure 4.14: Area difference, |AMr −1.3AMw|, with assumed safety factor applied
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
45
==PAGE:54==
The maximum pitch angle in this case, is obtained by finding the point when the area
difference is zero. The vertical line in the plot is where the area difference is zero, and
at that point the angle is 20deg. This angle is the maximum allowed pitch angle for the
model INO WINDMOOR 12MW to sustain before it capsizes.
4.4
Sea state data
4.4.1
Natural periods
The natural period of all six motion directions are studied using the decay test method
described previously, the decay time series are presented in Figure 4.15, Figure 4.16,
Figure 4.17, Figure 4.18, Figure 4.19 and Figure 4.20
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Displacement [m]
Surge
Figure 4.15: Decay time series of surge
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Displacement [m]
Sway
Figure 4.16: Decay time series of sway
46
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:55==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Displacement [m]
Heave
Figure 4.17: Decay time series of heave
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Displacement [deg]
Roll
Figure 4.18: Decay time series of roll
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Displacement [deg]
Pitch
Figure 4.19: Decay time series of pitch
It can be observed that heave, roll and pitch motions decay quickly after the turbine is
released from its offset initial position, indicating that these motions experience higher
hydrodynamic damping. In contrast, slower decay in surge, sway, and yaw suggests that
these motions are less damped. Fast decay in pitch especially, is a positive indicator
of longitudinal stability, implying the structure has a good ability to resist pitch motions
induced by wave loads, preventing it from capsizing. This conclusion is qualitatively sim-
ilar to what has been drawn from Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4 that the hydrostatic restoring
stiffness in pitch direction is the largest among all five other directions, but from a hydro-
dynamic point of view.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
47
==PAGE:56==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Displacement [deg]
Yaw
Figure 4.20: Decay time series of yaw
For further analyses of the detailed characteristics, the six decay time series are trans-
formed into frequency domain via Fast Fourier transform and plotted in Figure 4.21a,
Figure 4.22a, Figure 4.23a, Figure 4.21b, Figure 4.22b and Figure 4.23b
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Displacement [m]
Surge
(a) Surge decay
-2
-1
0
1
2
Time [s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Displacement [m]
Roll
(b) Roll decay
Figure 4.21: Surge and roll decay in frequency domain
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Displacement [m]
Sway
(a) Sway decay
-2
-1
0
1
2
Time [s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Displacement [m]
Pitch
(b) Pitch decay
Figure 4.22: Sway and pitch decay in frequency domain
48
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:57==
-2
-1
0
1
2
Time [s]
0
100
200
300
400
Displacement [m]
Heave
(a) Heave decay
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Displacement [m]
Surge
(b) Yaw decay
Figure 4.23: Heave and yaw decay in frequency domain
In all the plots, there are always two highest peaks due to the nature of Fast Fourier trans-
form. The existence of these peaks means that their respective frequency components
are dominant throughout the decay of the motions. A vertical line is present in these plots,
indicating the dominant frequency component (at which ω the curve reaches its highest
peak). These dominant frequency components are natural frequencies. Natural periods
can be obtained thereafter, as shown in Table 4.4
Table 4.4: Rigid-body natural periods
Surge
Sway
Heave
Roll
Pitch
Yaw
Nat. period (s)
100.0
100.0
16.2
28.5
30.0
85.7
In comparison, SINTEF also obtained the following natural periods in SIMA but through
pull-out tests, shown in Table 4.5 It can be seen that the results are very close, especially
Table 4.5: Rigid-body natural periods, from SINTEF
Surge
Sway
Heave
Roll
Pitch
Yaw
Nat. period (s)
97.3
98.0
16.3
29.5
31.4
88.0
in pitch direction, which is of interest throughout the long-term analyses, confirming the
feasibility and accuracy of decay tests in this study. The results from decay tests will be
used to evaluate the generation of sea states and to draw conclusion later in the project.
4.4.2
Sea states
Based on historic data in the database and the natural periods, two sea states are first
produced as shown in Table 4.6. These two sea states are special cases throughout
Table 4.6: Special sea states
Condition
Uw [m · s−1]
Hs [m]
Median Tp [s]
Uc [m · s−1]
Rated wind
10.6
7.51
11.96
1.03
50-year extreme wind
37.73
12.31
14.95
1.13
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
49
==PAGE:58==
the time domain analyses part since under the two conditions the turbine work under
completely different modes: under the rated wind speed, the turbine is generating power
at its maximum designed capacity with the highest aerodynamic load on the rotor, as
observed in quasi-static analyses, having the largest motion amplitude in the negative
direction; under the 50-year extreme wind speed, the turbine has shut down with very
little aerodynamic load on the rotor and very high wave loads, thus having very large
motion amplitude in the positive direction. In later parts, these two sea states will be used
to conduct various sensitivity and convergence studies.
For long-term extreme value statistics, the full sea states are given in two matrices Ta-
ble 4.7 and Table 4.8
Table 4.7: Sea state: Uw and Hs
Uw [m · s−1]
Hs [m]
4.6
1
3
4
7
9
6.6
1
3
4
7
9
8.6
2
4
6
8
10
10.6
2
4
6
8
10
12.6
2
4
6
8
10
12
14.6
2
4
6
8
10
12
16.6
2
4
6
8
10
12
18.6
3
5
7
9
11
13
20.6
3
5
7
9
11
13
22.6
3
5
7
9
11
13
24.6
4
6
8
10
12
14
26.6
4
6
8
10
12
14
28.6
5
7
9
11
13
15
30.6
5
7
9
11
13
15
32.6
5
7
9
11
13
15
34.6
6
8
10
12
14
16
36.6
6
8
10
12
14
16
38.6
6
8
10
12
14
16
40.6
6
8
10
12
14
16
42.6
6
8
10
12
14
16
The matrix Table 4.7 presents the relationship between wind speeds and wave heights,
while the matrix Table 4.8 presents the relationship between wave heights and peak pe-
riods. The peaks periods are given in probability ranging from 5% fractile to 95%.
50
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:59==
Table 4.8: Sea state: Hs and Tp
Fractile
50%
5%
95%
Hs [m]
median Tp [m · s−1]
min Tp [m · s−1]
max Tp [m · s−1]
1
6.48
4.00
10.52
2
7.68
5.19
11.36
3
8.62
6.24
11.91
4
9.45
7.19
12.42
5
10.19
8.03
12.94
6
10.89
8.78
13.50
7
11.55
9.46
14.09
8
12.17
10.08
14.71
9
12.78
10.64
15.34
10
13.36
11.17
15.98
11
13.93
11.68
16.62
12
14.48
12.16
17.25
13
15.03
12.63
17.88
14
15.56
13.08
18.51
15
16.09
13.53
19.12
16
16.60
13.97
19.73
To realistically reflect the long-term environmental condition at the installation site, to en-
sure that during post-processing, enough data can be collected for discrete integration
along the Tp dimension, and to balance the accuracy and computational cost, 4 Tp at
each Hs are selected, with 3 of them are always the 5%, 50% (median) and 95% fractile
ones. The sea states fully assembled from given Uw, Hs and Tp are plotted below in a
scatter diagram for visualization
0
5
10
15
20
Hs [m]
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Tp [s]
Figure 4.24: Sea state scatter diagram
The Uw dimension is mapped onto the Hs-Tp plane in the plot. Each point represents a
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
51
==PAGE:60==
sea state, simulations based on one sea states will run several times with different seeds,
which affect the time series generation of the specific sea state. It can also be observed
in the plot that both Hs and Tp are not uniformly distributed, especially on the lower-left
and upper-right regions. This is because certain combinations of Hs and Tp do not exist
due to physically constraints. These combinations are not used to run simulations as
the algorithms may not be designed to handle these unrealistic conditions, introducing
errors into the results. However, these conditions will be considered and processed in the
post-processing part.
4.5
Motion characteristics
Two simulations are carried out, one at rated wind speed and the other at 50-year extreme
wind speed. All three motions within a 30min time window are recorded, the ratio
η′% = ηt
η5
(4.1)
where ηt is the total motion amplitude and η5 is the pitch motion amplitude, is plotted in
Figure 4.25a and Figure 4.25b.
2000
2500
3000
3500
Time [s]
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
t/ 5
etat/eta5
(a) ηt/η5 at rated wind speed
2000
2500
3000
3500
Time [s]
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
t/ 5
etat/eta5
(b) ηt/η5 at 50-year extreme wind speed
Figure 4.25: ηt/η5 at rated and 50-year extreme wind speed
The two plots indirectly visualize the contribution from the total of roll and yaw, higher the
peak higher the contribution. At a first glance, at 50-year extreme wind speed, the total
motion (roll+pitch+yaw) is almost identical to pitch with few fluctuations. On the other
hand, at rated wind speed, the fluctuations are more noticeable and there are spikes
where roll and yaw can affect the total motion up to 25%, but this occurs rarely, as seen
from the most part of the time window. The statistics within the two plots are listed in
Table 4.9: Motion statistics
Condition
Min
Mean
Max
Rated wind
0.99%
2.98%
24.58%
50-year extreme wind
0%
0.08%
4.76%
Table 4.9. It is now clear that at either rated or 50-year extreme wind speed, the average
contribution is negligible, with less than 5% contribution from roll and yaw. At very high
52
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:61==
wind speeds such as the 50-year extreme, even the maximum contribution is no greater
than 5%, thus for wind speeds above cut-out, roll and yaw can be completely ignored,
and the concept ”tilt motion” will refer to pitch only. The maximum 24.58% contribution at
rated wind speed along with other spikes greater than 10% are rare occurrences, that, at
wind speeds below cut-out, roll and yaw motions can also be ignored for simplification.
4.6
Sensitivity studies
4.6.1
Environment setup parameters
Figure 4.26a, Figure 4.26b are the results of the turbine and Figure 4.27a to Figure 4.29b
the mooring system’s response to 3 wind directions, 172deg, 180deg and 188deg. The
simulations are all carried out at rated wind speed, each wind direction with one seed.
In Figure 4.26a it can be noticed that both min and max have small variations, but no
170
175
180
185
190
Wind direction [deg]
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
Aerodynamic force [N]
106
Max
Min
Mean
(a) Aerodynamic force on rotor
170
175
180
185
190
Wind direction [deg]
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
Rotation [deg]
Max
Min
Mean
(b) Pitch motion
Figure 4.26: Turbine response sensitivity to varying wind directions
more than 10% from those at 180deg. The mean is very stable, insensitive to the 16deg
variation of wind directions. In Figure 4.26b, the structure’s pitch motion is not affect by a
16deg variation of wind direction, with less than 1% difference in amplitude from 172deg
to 188deg.
170
175
180
185
190
Wind direction [deg]
0
2
4
6
8
Axial force [N]
106
Max
Min
Mean
(a) ML1 axial force
170
175
180
185
190
Wind direction [deg]
18
20
22
24
26
28
Displacement [m]
Max
Min
Mean
(b) ML1 fairlead displacement
Figure 4.27: ML1 sensitivity to varying wind directions
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
53
==PAGE:62==
170
175
180
185
190
Wind direction [deg]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Axial force [N]
105
Max
Min
Mean
(a) ML2 axial force
170
175
180
185
190
Wind direction [deg]
-46
-44
-42
-40
-38
-36
-34
Displacement [m]
Max
Min
Mean
(b) ML2 fairlead displacement
Figure 4.28: ML2 sensitivity to varying wind directions
170
175
180
185
190
Wind direction [deg]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Axial force [N]
105
Max
Min
Mean
(a) ML3 axial force
170
175
180
185
190
Wind direction [deg]
-46
-44
-42
-40
-38
-36
-34
Displacement [m]
Max
Min
Mean
(b) ML3 fairlead displacement
Figure 4.29: ML3 sensitivity to varying wind directions
It can be observed from Figure 4.27a to Figure 4.29b that, first, both the structure and
the mooring system arrangement is highly symmetric along x-axis, this is reflected in the
exactly opposite trend of min, max and mean in the ML2 and ML3 plots. In the case
of ML1, the axial force primarily responds to the component of the wind force along the
line’s direction. With only 8deg wind directions variation, the components of the wind
forces along ML1 will be nearly identical. Therefore, the axial force in ML1 remains almost
unchanged. The ML1 fairlead displacement, which is also an indirect indication of pitch
motion, confirms the insensitivity. Due to the oblique angle of the wind, ML2 and ML3
experience more significant transverse loads, with more than 20% variation in axial force.
The variation of fairlead displacements of ML2 and ML3 are relatively small compared to
axial forces because of the rotor’s insensitivity to the 16deg wind direction variation, thus
inducing minor amplitude difference in pitch motion.
Figure 4.30a, Figure 4.30b are the results of the turbine and Figure 4.31a to Figure 4.33b
the mooring system’s response to 7 wave directions, from 0deg to 180deg. The simula-
tions are also carried out at rated wind speed, each wave direction with one seed. From
Figure 4.30a it can be seen that the mean value of aerodynamic force on rotor is stable
54
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:63==
0
50
100
150
200
Wave direction [deg]
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
Aerodynamic force [N]
106
Max
Min
Mean
(a) Aerodynamic force on rotor
0
50
100
150
200
Wave direction [deg]
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
Rotation [deg]
Max
Min
Mean
(b) Pitch motion
Figure 4.30: Turbine response sensitivity to varying wave directions
with varying wave direction, while min and max has 15% variation from 0deg to 180deg.
This is expected, and it should be insensitive to wave directions as the incoming wind’s
direction is static, wave loads will only affect the semi-submersible which is partially sub-
merged in water. The phenomenon that min reaches it minimum and the max reaches
its maximum at 180deg while the mean remains unchanged indicates the increased fre-
quency and intensity of peaks (extreme event) in aerodynamic force record, as misaligned
wave can lead to significant roll and yaw motions, changing the orientation of the rotor, re-
ducing aerodynamic force on the rotor. In Figure 4.30b, the mean is also stable, indicating
the structure is generally insensitive to wave directions. However, there’s a similar trend
in min and max to aerodynamic force on rotor, and this phenomenon is more important for
pitch than aerodynamic force in that the simulations in later parts rely on extreme events
to calculate the probability of extreme values, more frequent and intense extreme events
are highly advantageous for long-term statistics. Figure 4.30b, For the mooring lines,
0
50
100
150
200
Wave direction [deg]
0
2
4
6
8
Axial force [N]
106
Max
Min
Mean
(a) ML1 axial force
0
50
100
150
200
Wave direction [deg]
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Displacement [m]
Max
Min
Mean
(b) ML1 fairlead displacement
Figure 4.31: ML1 sensitivity to varying wind directions
the conclusions are mostly the similar to the varying wind direction case: 1) the opposite
behavior in ML2 and ML3 indicates a highly symmetric mooring system and main turbine
structure; 2) the mean values in axial forces and displacements are relatively stable for all
the mooring line, indicating the insensitivity to varying wave directions. The phenomenon
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
55
==PAGE:64==
0
50
100
150
200
Wave direction [deg]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Axial force [N]
106
Max
Min
Mean
(a) ML2 axial force
0
50
100
150
200
Wave direction [deg]
-46
-44
-42
-40
-38
-36
-34
-32
Displacement [m]
Max
Min
Mean
(b) ML2 fairlead displacement
Figure 4.32: ML2 sensitivity to varying wind directions
0
50
100
150
200
Wave direction [deg]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Axial force [N]
106
Max
Min
Mean
(a) ML3 axial force
0
50
100
150
200
Wave direction [deg]
-46
-44
-42
-40
-38
-36
-34
Displacement [m]
Max
Min
Mean
(b) ML3 fairlead displacement
Figure 4.33: ML3 sensitivity to varying wave directions
discovered in Figure 4.30a and Figure 4.30b are also noticeable in the mooring lines:
when the wave direction is aligned with the mooring line’s, the semi=submersible’s wave
loads in this direction reaches maximum, creating more frequent and intense extreme
events, thus the higher max and lower min compared to other wave directions.
Based on the above results, the direction of both incoming wind and wave should be set
to 180deg to accurately model the extreme motions of the structure.
4.6.2
Dynamic simulation parameters
Two distributions are studied is this section, the Gumbel distribution and Weibull distribu-
tion. The two distributions are studied for both seed convergence/sensitivity and sensitiv-
ity to Tp.
At rated wind speed, Figure 4.34a and Figure 4.34b are seed convergence and sensitivity
of Gumbel distribution parameters, where µ is the location parameter and σ is the scale
parameter; Figure 4.35a and Figure 4.35b are seed convergence and sensitivity of Weibull
distribution parameters, where A is the scale parameter and B the shape parameter.
56
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:65==
0
50
100
150
200
Seeds
4.4
4.45
4.5
4.55
4.6
4.65
 [deg]
mu
(a) Gumbel location parameter µ
0
50
100
150
200
Seeds
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
 [deg]
sigma
(b) Gumbel scale parameter σ
Figure 4.34: Seed convergence and sensitivity of Gumbel distribution parameters, at rated
wind speed
In the case of Gumbel distribution, both parameters show convergence with increasing
number of seeds. µ converges significantly slower than σ. However, even if µ does not
converge within 100 seeds, it does not show sensitivity to the number of seeds, σ as well.
For µ, the difference between 10 seeds and 100 seeds is only 3%, for σ the difference is
less than 1%, thus 10-20 seeds is enough to accurately model long-term extreme values
with Gumbel distribution at wind speeds below cut-out.
0
50
100
150
200
Seeds
3.14
3.145
3.15
3.155
3.16
3.165
A [deg]
A
(a) Weibull scale parameter A
0
50
100
150
200
Seeds
5.6
5.62
5.64
5.66
5.68
5.7
5.72
5.74
B [deg]
B
(b) Gumbel shape parameter B
Figure 4.35: Seed convergence and sensitivity of Weibull distribution parameters, at rated
wind speed
In the case of Weibull distribution, both A and B fluctuate much more than the Gumbel
case. A converges faster than µ while B converges slightly slower and is more unstable
than σ. With both A and B’s variation less than 2% from 10 seeds to 100 seeds, Weibull
parameters are also insensitive to the number of seeds.
To further confirm which distribution is more suitable for modelling extreme values, the
CDF that models the global maxima of both distributions are plotted in Figure 4.36 for
comparison using 50 seeds. Weibull distribution is originally intended to model the prob-
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
57
==PAGE:66==
ability of individual peaks, however, if the N peaks are independent with each other to
assume their own values, the probability of the maximum peak, or, the global maxima,
can be calculated with
FN(x) = [Fxp(x)]N
(4.2)
where Fxp(x) is the original Weibull distribution. This is the relationship between Weibull
and Gumbel distribution. The input angle is selected between 0 and 10deg to clearly plot
the tail behavior of the two distributions.
0
2
4
6
8
10
Angle [rad]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CDF
Gumbel
WeibullN
Figure 4.36: Gumbel and Weibull distribution CDF comparison
It can be observed that Gumbel CDF has a much smoother curvature when it approaches
0 and 1. Weibull loses this smoothness due to the power of N. This curvature is very
important as a smoother curve can capture more details of varying pitch angles.
The two distribution’s sensitivity to peak period Tp at specific Hs are plotted in Figure 4.37a
and Figure 4.37b for Gumbel distribution and in Figure 4.38a and Figure 4.38b for Weibull
distribution.
58
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:67==
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Tp [s]
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5
5.2
5.4
5.6
 [deg]
mu
(a) Gumbel location parameter µ
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Tp [s]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
 [deg]
sigma
(b) Gumbel scale parameter σ
Figure 4.37: Tp sensitivity of Weibull distribution parameters, at rated wind speed
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Tp [s]
2.85
2.9
2.95
3
3.05
3.1
3.15
A [deg]
A
(a) Weibull scale parameter A
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Tp [s]
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
B [deg]
B
(b) Weibull shape parameter B
Figure 4.38: Tp sensitivity of Weibull distribution parameters, at rated wind speed
It is clear that both distributions are highly sensitive to Tp, which is unexpected during
the generation of sea states. The peak period Tp actually affects the energy spectrum in
the sea state. Longer peak periods correspond to waves that accumulates more energy,
which in turn leads to higher and more extreme wave heights. These increase the mean
of the maxima, shifting the Gumbel distribution to the right, thus the location parameters
of the distribution is increasing with Tp. For Weibull distribution, the scale parameter A is
directly related to the characteristic size of the waves, the characteristic wave height in-
creases with increasing Tp due to the generation of more energetic waves, thus A should
increase. However A is first increasing then decreasing in this case, this is due to the
relatively lower Hs, which makes the generated waves less energetic than at high wind
speeds. Also the variation of A with Tp is 10% at most, indicating insensitivity. As Tp
increases, the wave height distribution becomes more skewed, with an increasing proba-
bility of more extreme values relative to the mean, leading to a wider spread in the heights
of the most extreme waves, thus the shape parameter B is decreasing, making the dis-
tribution’s tail heavier.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
59
==PAGE:68==
At 50-year extreme wind speed, Figure 4.39a and Figure 4.39b are seed convergence
and sensitivity of Gumbel distribution parameters; Figure 4.40a and Figure 4.40b are seed
convergence and sensitivity of Weibull distribution parameters.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Seeds
6.8
6.85
6.9
6.95
7
7.05
7.1
 [deg]
mu
(a) Gumbel location parameter µ
0
20
40
60
80
100
Seeds
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
 [deg]
sigma
(b) Gumbel scale parameter σ
Figure 4.39: Seed convergence and sensitivity of Gumbel distribution parameters, at 50-
year extreme wind speed
It is more difficult for Gumbel parameters to converge and stabilize at very high wind
speeds. µ and σ have shown the tendency to converge after 100 seeds. µ is insensitive
to the number of seeds as discovered previously, but in this case σ is noticeably sensitive.
One interpretation of the phenomenon is at very high wind speeds, the extreme events in
motion amplitude are wider spread, with only 100 seeds the sample pool is too small to
capture the trend of maxima.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Seeds
3.38
3.385
3.39
3.395
3.4
3.405
3.41
3.415
A [deg]
A
(a) Weibull scale parameter A
0
20
40
60
80
100
Seeds
3.75
3.8
3.85
3.9
3.95
B [deg]
B
(b) Weibull shape parameter B
Figure 4.40: Seed convergence and sensitivity of Weibull distribution parameters, at 50-
year extreme wind speed
However for Weibull distribution, it converges much faster than is more stable than Gum-
bel due to the nature of its large peak pools. In this case, around 1050 peaks can be
collected from each simulation, for 10 seeds, employing the combined time series strat-
egy, a total of more than 10000 peaks can be obtained, facilitating the convergence. At
60
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:69==
50-year extreme wind speed, Weibull parameters are insensitive to the number of seeds.
The two distribution’s sensitivity to Tp at 50-year extreme wind speed are plotted in Fig-
ure 4.41a and Figure 4.41b for Gumbel distribution and in Figure 4.42a and Figure 4.42b
for Weibull distribution.
10
15
20
25
30
Tp [s]
6
8
10
12
14
16
 [deg]
mu
(a) Gumbel location parameter µ
10
15
20
25
30
Tp [s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
 [deg]
sigma
(b) Gumbel scale parameter σ
Figure 4.41: Tp sensitivity of Gumbel distribution parameters, at 50-year extreme wind
speed
10
15
20
25
30
Tp [s]
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
A [deg]
A
(a) Weibulll scale parameter µ
10
15
20
25
30
Tp [s]
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
B [deg]
B
(b) Weibull shape parameter σ
Figure 4.42: Tp sensitivity of Gumbel distribution parameters, at 50-year extreme wind
speed
The exact same conclusion as the rated wind speed case can be made from the 4 plots:
both distributions are sensitive to Tp, with the same reasons as the rated case.
It is found that at different wind speeds, the behaviors of the two distributions are incon-
sistent, especially regarding the sensitivity to the number of seeds, thus further study is
required to identify the most accurate probability model. Since the Gumbel distribution
converges poorly in Figure 4.39b, a more robust fitting method, the probability weighted
moments method is used to fit Gumbel distribution against the same data. Figure 4.43a
and Figure 4.43b are sensitivities with PWM fitting.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
61
==PAGE:70==
0
20
40
60
80
100
Seeds
6.4
6.5
6.6
6.7
6.8
6.9
7
7.1
 [deg]
mu, ML
mu, PWM
(a) Gumbel location parameter µ, fitting compar-
ison
0
20
40
60
80
100
Seeds
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
 [deg]
sigma, ML
sigma, PWM
(b) Gumbel scale parameter σ, fitting compari-
son
Figure 4.43: Seed sensitivity of Gumbel distribution parameters, at 50-year extreme wind
speed, fitting comparison
From Figure 4.43b, the PWM fitted parameter σ now converges significantly faster than
ML method’s and is more stable. However, from Figure 4.43a, PWM’s µ converges slower
than ML’s, with its values noticeable smaller than ML’s. However its sensitivity to the
number of seeds is low, with 5% variation from 5 seeds to 90 seeds. To gain more insights
into the fitting methods, the CDF comparison with the original maximum likelihood method
and Weibull distribution are is plotted in Figure 4.44, all with 50 seeds.
0
2
4
6
8
10
Angle [rad]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CDF
Gumbel, ML
Gumbel, PWM
WeibullN
Figure 4.44: Comparison of CDFs of Weibull, PWM fitted Gumbel and ML fitted Gumbel
It is seen that PWM’s curve lies between Weibull and ML’s. From the previous conclu-
sions, Weibull to the power of N is incapable of capturing the behavior at small angles,
Gumbel with ML fitting has problem converging within 100 seeds, then with PWM provid-
62
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:71==
ing better convergence and relatively low sensitivity, Gumbel fitting with PWM is a candi-
date for modelling the long-term statistics. To validate, the empirical histogram, Gumbel
PDF with ML fitting and Gumbel with PWM fitting with 90 seeds are plotted together in
Figure 4.45
Figure 4.45: PDF comparison of empirical, PWM fitted Gumbel and ML fitted Gumbel
It can be seen from the plot that, Gumbel fitting with PWM performs better than with ML,
especially within the range that most global maxima occur. This confirms that Gumbel
fitting with PWM is to be selected as the probability model for long-term statistics in the
next part.
4.7
Time series analyses
4.7.1
Simulation data processing
The long-term statistics are obtained from a total of 464 sea states covering the full range
of given wind speed, wave height and peak period. Each sea state is run 16 times with 16
different seeds. Gumbel distribution with PWM fitting is used. All the specifications of the
simulations and post-processing methods are listed in Table 4.10 During post-processing,
Table 4.10: specifications of the simulations and post-processing methods
Sea states
Seeds
Probability model
Fitting method
Integration method
464
16
Gumbel
PWM
Numerical, Analytical
first the Gumbel parameters µ and σ are obtained for each of the 464 sea states by fitting,
the fitting result at rated wind speed Hs = 8m and Tp = 12s is visualized in Figure 4.46
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
63
==PAGE:72==
5
10
15
20
Angle [deg]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fx
Gumbel CDF
Figure 4.46: FX,3h at rated wind speed
Then the sea state is expanded by interpolation and extrapolation, expanding µ and σ to
cover sea states that are rarely encountered and are not provided by the original sea state
matrices. The extrapolation and interpolation process are visualized in Figure 4.47a and
Figure 4.47b along the Tp dimension at rated wind speed
0
5
10
15
20
Tp [s]
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
 [deg]
mu
Extrapolated mu
(a) Gumbel location parameter µ extrapolation,
linear
0
5
10
15
20
Tp [s]
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
 [deg1/2]
sigma
Extrapolated sigma
(b) Gumbel scale parameter σ extrapolation, lin-
ear
Figure 4.47: Linear extrapolation and interpolation of Gumbel distribution parameters,
along Tp dimension, at rated wind speed
The extrapolation and interpolation along the Hs dimension at rated wind speed are also
visualized in Figure 4.48a and Figure 4.48b
64
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:73==
0
5
10
15
20
Hs [m]
4
5
6
7
8
 [deg]
mu
Extrapolated mu
(a) Gumbel location parameter µ extrapolation,
linear
0
5
10
15
20
Hs [m]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
 [deg1/2]
sigma
Extrapolated sigma
(b) Gumbel scale parameter σ extrapolation, lin-
ear
Figure 4.48: Linear extrapolation and interpolation of Gumbel distribution parameters,
along Hs dimension, at rated wind speed
After the extrapolation and interpolation within the Tp-Hs plane is finished, a surface is
formed at each wind speed. The µ and σ surfaces at rated wind speed are visualized in
Figure 4.49 and Figure 4.50
0
40
20
40
30
60
Tp
20
20
Hs
80
10
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Figure 4.49: 3D surface of interpolated and extrapolated Gumbel location parameter µ,
at rated wind speed
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
65
==PAGE:74==
0
40
2
30
4
Tp
20
20
Hs
6
10
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 4.50: 3D surface of interpolated and extrapolated Gumbel scale parameter σ, at
rated wind speed
The effect of combined single-dimension extrapolation can be observed in Figure 4.50,
that the regions where the Hs-Tp combinations which are not originally existent, for exam-
ple at the upper-right region, are filled with smooth patches. Large smooth regions can
also be observed in Figure 4.49.
66
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:75==
4.7.2
Annual maximum tilt
When the extrapolation and interpolation are finished along all three dimensions, the in-
tegration is executed to obtain the annual maximum tilt function. This involves
1. First obtain the Gumbel distribution parameters of non-exceedance probability of
maximum tilt within 3 hours for each of the sea state.
2. Next interpolate and extrapolation along Tp, Hs and Uw dimensions to obtain an
expanded data table. The interpolation and extrapolation is made into a function
to be called during each numerical integration step to mimic the continuity of an
analytical function. This makes it possible for the discrete CDF to be multiplied
directly with the rest analytical PDFs. The code for continuous interpolation and
extrapolation is listed in Appendix A. MATLAB code for analytical integration.
3. Then execute numerical integration for Equation 3.9.4 within pre-defined bounds
After integration is finished, the final result of the non-exceedance probability of annual
maximum tilt is plotted in Figure 4.51. The result is obtained with linear extrapolation and
the full integration bounds: 0 to 30 for Hs and Tp, 0 to 42 for Uw.
5
10
15
20
Angle
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
log10(1-Fx)
1-Fx
Figure 4.51: Exceedance probability of annual maximum tilt
Before conclusions are made, several additional studies are carried out for validation.
The first is the result’s sensitivity to the integration bound of Uw. The comparison plot is
in Figure 4.52.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
67
==PAGE:76==
5
10
15
20
Angle
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
log10(1-Fx)
1-Fx,lb=0,ub=42
1-Fx,lb=1,ub=42
1-Fx,lb=2,ub=42
1-Fx,lb=3,ub=42
Figure 4.52: Sensitivity of time series results to integration bounds of Uw dimension
It is observed that the non-exceedance probability function is not sensitive to the integra-
tion bounds along wind speed dimension. This is because at wind speeds below 4m·s−1,
the ocean is relatively calm, with far less energetic waves than at high wind speeds. This
is reflected by the PDF terms in Equation 3.9.4.
The sensitivity to integration bounds of Hs is plotted in Figure 4.53
5
10
15
20
Angle
10-10
10-5
100
log10(1-Fx)
1-Fx,lb=0,ub=30
1-Fx,lb=0,ub=28
1-Fx,lb=0,ub=26
1-Fx,lb=1,ub=26
Figure 4.53: Sensitivity of time series results to integration bounds of Hs dimension
The annual maximum tilt probability function is not sensitive to the integration bounds of
68
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:77==
Hs as well. This can be interpreted similarly to Uw: physically, very low (almost zero) Hs
and very high (above 25m) wave heights occur extremely rarely at the installation site,
they don’t contribute much to the overall probability; mathematically, the low occurrence
makes the two Hs related PDF terms in Equation 3.9.4 almost zero.
Lastly, the impact of extrapolation methods is plotted in Figure 4.54. There are 4 selected
methods:
1. Linear extrapolation along all three dimensions
2. Setting all the outer points to the value of the last known point (flattening)
3. Second-order polynomial extrapolation along the Tp dimension
4. Second-order polynomial extrapolation along the Hs dimension
5
10
15
20
Angle
10-15
10-10
10-5
100
log10(1-Fx)
1-Fx
1-Fx,flat,Hs
1-Fx,poly,Tp
1-Fx,poly,Hs
Figure 4.54: Comparison of the impact of extrapolation methods to time series results
It is seen in the plot that the second and third methods will over- and underestimate the
probability. The most accurate probability curve that can reflect the response character-
istics should be the second curve (extrapolated with method 1).
On either curve, at the point when the angle is 20deg, the non-exceedance probability is
well below 1e-5. The maximum threshold is 1e-4, thus the structure is considered stable
at that angle. Also the 1.3 safety level has accurately encompassed all the uncertainties.
4.8
Results summary
To achieve a more comprehensive understanding of the overall consequence of the meth-
ods employed so far, the extensive amount of results obtained from the computations are
compiled and analyzed. This is to make sure that a practical and impartial evaluation of
the values acquired may be contrasted, validated, and further discussed.
The quasi-static method is one of the two methods used throughout the first half of the
project to study the stability of an offshore structure. This method is classic and has proven
limitations, but it is still powerful enough to provide preliminary results and basic data of the
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
69
==PAGE:78==
structure’s intact stability. The turbine is upscaled from a 10MW model, thus the maximum
angle at which it can stay stable will be larger than the original 10MW one. All studies
in the quasi-static part is conducted independent of SINTEF, and through comparison, all
the results align very well with those from SINTEF’s tech report. The obtained maximum
angle is 20deg, indicating a very stable design that has low CoG for the turbine and semi-
submersible.
Time domain analysis is the second half of the project and also the most time-consuming
and resource intensive part. However, it also provides the most important and valuable
data. There are multiple assumption to simplify the modelling as much as possible, with
most notably replacing the wind field with a constant force. Before carrying out all the
time domain simulations, all input parameters to the simulations are thoroughly studied to
ensure the most accurate parameter is selected. It is first found that wind and wave direc-
tions at 180deg can induce the largest motion amplitude; then the selection of 16 seeds
balances the accuracy and computational cost; later the best probability model is Gum-
bel distribution and the fitting method is PWM. Before the post-processing starts, there
are a total of 464*16 simulation runs with each run recorded over 1700 extreme events.
Such massive amount of data is crucial to ensure that most environment conditions are
considered to model the probability of annual maximum tilt as accurate as possible. After
the non-exceedance probability of annual maximum pitch is obtained, further studies are
carried out to look for potential optimizations of the results without running more simu-
lations. While running more simulations is the only method to cope with the problem of
missing data points, alternative interpolation and extrapolation methods have provided
the possible range, indirectly validating the results.
70
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:79==
5
Conclusions and Future Perspectives
5.1
Conclusions
The primary goal of the project is to investigate the safety level in DNV-ST-0119, which
is obtained from the oil and gas industry, to assess if the safety level can accurately
encompass all the uncertainties during the design and operation of floating offshore wind
turbines. To investigate the safety level, the general approach is to first assume the safety
level is correct, proceeding with the classic quasi-static analysis, obtain the maximum tilt
angle under the assumed safety level. Afterwards, carrying out dynamic time series sim-
ulation to obtain the long-term statistics in terms of tilt motion, then modelling the annual
non-exceedance probability of maximum tilt, with the input from quasi-static analysis to
obtain the probability level at that angle, if the level is below certain threshold, the safety
level is successfully validated, otherwise it is not suitable for floating offshore wind tur-
bines.
From the quasi-static analyses, a maximum pitch angle of 20deg is obtained. The results
are validated by existing hydrostatic data from SINTEF’s tech report. This part is relatively
easy and straightforward but forms the basis of further time series analyses. The limita-
tions of quasi-static analyses are also obvious: it does not account for inertia and damping
forces, which are crucial in dynamic situations; it can underestimate the dynamic amplifi-
cation of forces due to wave-induced motions; and more importantly, it does not account
for the time-varying nature of environmental forces, leading to potential inaccuracies in
predicting the true structural response.
The time series evaluation is the most complex and time-consuming part of the project.
There are many parameters that impact the simulations results so these parameters need
to be studied one-by-one to ensure the most accurate ones are input to the simulations. A
single wrong parameter can invalidate all finished simulations, thus not only the common
studies, such as the seed sensitivity study, are carried out, the optimal results from one
study are used to cross-check other studies, such as using the PWM fitted Gumbel distri-
bution, which is found during fitting method study, to re-evaluate the sensitivity to seeds,
to ensure all studies provide the most accurate and optimal parameters. When the final
non-exceedance probability is obtained, it is still not clear if it is correct due to the lack of
more sea state data. With limited time and resource, several interpolation and extrapola-
tion methods are studied mathematically to cope with the problem and to find the possible
range of the results. With these efforts, the safety level is successfully assessed to be
correct for the selected INO WINDMOOR 12MW model.
The project has demonstrated the sheer complexity and high level of uncertainties when
modelling large offshore structures, especially when working on the dynamics and long-
term statistics. However, it is this type of analyses that can contribute to the offshore wind
industry by continuously providing data, facilitating the development of more advanced
algorithms and methodologies to reduce complexity and reducing the impact of uncer-
tainties.
5.2
Limitations
There are several limitations throughout the project, including simplified models, idealized
conditions, assumptions, data collection and processing.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
71
==PAGE:80==
1) The FEM and hydrostatic model is simplified to the semi-submersible platform, and
the platform is constructed with only the outer shell and further simplified to a point mass
model. In reality, there are filled and empty compartments including ballast tanks in the
columns, openings and substructures on the columns and decks. These structures can
affect CoG and CoB under extreme conditions. A simplified mass model can’t account
for these and this has been observed in HydroD that after setting up the model with pa-
rameters provided by SINTEF’s specification sheet, the semi-submersible is not at its
equilibrium position as expected.
2) The fact that SIMA’s algorithms effectively prevent the study of aerodynamic loads at
very high wind speeds significantly reduces the accuracy and increases the uncertainty of
aerodynamic loads results at those wind speeds. Even after the blades are full feathered,
there are still noticeable aerodynamic load on the rotor. Higher wind speeds also create
greater pressure difference at the front and back side of the rotor, affecting the motion
amplitude and direction. This has been observed in SIMA during simulation runs with
higher than cut-out wind speeds. The constant CT after cut-out wind speed assumption
and the specified force on rotor method used in the project neglects all these phenomena.
3) There’s no yaw controller defined for the model in SIMA, with critical parameters miss-
ing in the controller’s code. Without a yaw controller, the turbine can’t respond to varying
wind directions and will not generate power efficiently in real world. This can be helpful
in producing consistent motion amplitude and, especially motion direction data from sim-
ulations but it does not reflect the operation of a real turbine and if more comprehensive
and accurate results are required, this model is no longer advantageous.
4) The INO WINDMOOR 12MW model in SIMA also does not account for the aerodynamic
loads on the nacelle, tower and semi-submersible due to simplification and time limit of
the project. Until the cut-out wind speed, the aerodynamic loads on these structures
should remain negligible. However, above certain wind speed above cut-out, the loads,
especially those on the tower, will increase significantly with increasing wind speed due to
the large frontal area and sheer height of the tower. When the loads on the tower become
the dominant external load, the motion amplitude and direction can change beyond what
a simplified model can handle.
5) The prepared sea state data for time series simulation consists the greatest weakness
in this project. Originally the sea state data is prepared with the consideration that time
is limited for the project, thus the sea state data focuses primarily on the most commonly
observed Hs and median Tp, with at most 6 Hs and 4 Tp in total of 24 sea states at each
wind speed, neglecting the combinations that occur very rarely, such as at wind speed
below 4m/s and Hs above 20m. These rare occurrences are the outermost data points for
constructing the CDF function Fx,3h,LT . Without those points, it becomes unable to predict,
especially the tail behavior of function Fx,3h at small angles. The sea state combinations
that occur more often might also be inadequate for smoother data. This further leads to
most, if not all, extrapolation algorithms to become very limited and ineffective in this case.
5.3
Future improvement
Future improvement will focus exclusively on the limitations stated above. With these
improvements, the project can give deeper and potentially more insights into the long-
term stability of large FOWT.
1) A full FEM model, with both the turbine and the semi-submersible platform completely
modelled should be created, with hydrostatic properties and mass model accurately set up
according to both experimental and simulation data. This is crucial to ensure the results
72
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:81==
from the quasi-static analyses are accurate enough since some of these results are also
inputs in time domain analyses.
2) It is necessary to evaluate the best approach to obtain the aerodynamic load or the
rotor coefficient CT . Methods such as wind tunnel experiments using models can be
used to obtain CT accurately. If software is used to directly simulate turbine operation
and measure the aerodynamic load on the rotor, algorithms that can adapt to very high
wind speed without significantly increased computational cost should be used.
3) The yaw controller module in the controller’s code should be completed to make the
turbine capable of adjusting its rotor in response to varying wind directions. Further studies
on the sensitivity of wind direction and wind shear characteristics can be conducted to gain
deeper insights into the the operation of the turbine and how these behaviors affect motion
amplitude and direction.
4) The parameters for obtaining aerodynamic loads, such as the drag and lift coefficients,
can be measured through experiments and set up in simulation software like SIMA. This
helps ensure the consistency of the model as the response of the structure is predictable
both within operational wind speeds and above cut-out speeds. It also increases the
accuracy of motion responses.
5) It is essential to collect a large amount of sea state data at the potential installation
site, especially under extreme conditions for the analyses of long-term stability. This sig-
nificantly increases the accuracy during probability fitting but requires extremely powerful
computers and large storage space for data processing and can be very time-consuming.
But this can potentially eliminates the need to extrapolate or even interpolate the source
data. Both interpolation and extrapolation introduce error and uncertainty and extrapola-
tion will generally introduce more error and uncertainty. By eliminating interpolation and
extrapolation, error and uncertainty can be greatly reduced.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
73
==PAGE:82==
74
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
R. De Castro and J. Negreira. “Historical Development and Future Perspectives of
Floating Offshore Wind Turbines: A Review”. In: Renewable Energy Journal 184
(2022), pp. 565–584.
[2]
A. Garrad. “Development of Floating Wind Turbines and the Pathway to Commer-
cialization”. In: Wind Energy 20.12 (2017), pp. 1927–1935.
[3]
J. Birkemeyer and S. Müller. “Stability Analysis of Floating Offshore Wind Turbines:
Challenges and Future Directions”. In: Ocean Engineering 206 (2020), p. 107371.
[4]
K. Johannessen and O.M. Faltinsen. “Dynamics and Stability of Floating Offshore
Wind Turbines in Time-Domain Analysis”. In: Journal of Marine Science and Engi-
neering 11.2 (2023), p. 312.
[5]
C. Cermelli and D. Roddier. “Stability Challenges in the Design of Large Floating
Offshore Wind Turbines”. In: Proceedings of the International Offshore and Polar
Engineering Conference. 2018, pp. 154–161.
[6]
J. Wang and Y. Bai. “Dynamic Response and Stability of Large Floating Offshore
Wind Turbines: A Time-Domain Analysis”. In: Journal of Marine Structures 66 (2019),
pp. 245–257.
[7]
C. Bjerkseter and S. Vik. “Analysis of Signal Quality in Large-Scale Floating Off-
shore Wind Turbine Structures”. In: Journal of Offshore Mechanics and Arctic En-
gineering 142.5 (2020), p. 051101.
[8]
SINTEF Ocean. SIMO User Manual. Version 4.0. 2021.
[9]
SINTEF Ocean. RIFLEX User Manual. Version 4.0. 2021.
[10]
SINTEF Ocean. RIFLEX Theory Manual. Version 4.0. 2021.
[11]
SINTEF Ocean. HydroD User Manual. Version 7.0. 2023.
[12]
SINTEF Ocean. GeniE User Documentation. Version 8.0. 2023.
[13]
R.B. Stull. An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorology. Dordrecht: Springer,
1988.
[14]
I. Troen and E.L. Petersen. European Wind Atlas. Roskilde: Riso National Labora-
tory, 1989.
[15]
S. Mertens. “Turbulence Intensity and its Impact on Wind Turbine Fatigue Load-
ings: A Review”. In: Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics 91.1
(2003), pp. 41–53.
[16]
J.J. Bertin and R.M. Cummings. Aerodynamics for Engineers. 5th. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2009.
[17]
J.D. Anderson. Fundamentals of Aerodynamics. 5th. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill
Education, 2010.
[18]
J. N. Sharma and R. G. Dean. “Motion and Load Responses of Floating Offshore
Structures”. In: Journal of Hydrodynamics 21.3 (1979), pp. 17–30.
[19]
J. N. Newman. Marine Hydrodynamics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977.
[20]
T. Sarpkaya and M. Isaacson. Wave Forces on Offshore Structures. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1981.
[21]
T. I. Fossen. Handbook of Marine Craft Hydrodynamics and Motion Control. Chich-
ester: John Wiley and Sons, 2011.
[22]
S. R. Massel. Ocean Surface Waves: Their Physics and Prediction. 2nd. Singapore:
World Scientific, 2013.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
75
==PAGE:84==
[23]
K. Hasselmann et al. “Measurements of Wind-Wave Growth and Swell Decay Dur-
ing the Joint North Sea Wave Project (JONSWAP)”. In: Deutsche Hydrographische
Zeitschrift A8 (1973), p. 95.
[24]
H. E. Krogstad and S. F. Barstow. “JONSWAP Spectrum, Ocean Wave Data, and
Application”. In: Applied Ocean Research 16.2 (1994), pp. 101–112.
[25]
Stuart Coles. An Introduction to Statistical Modeling of Extreme Values. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2001.
[26]
Paul Embrechts, Claudia Klüppelberg, and Thomas Mikosch. Modelling Extremal
Events: for Insurance and Finance. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[27]
DNV GL. DNVGL-RP-C205 Environmental Conditions and Environmental Loads.
Høvik, 2017.
[28]
C. Ferreira and C. G. Soares. “Long-Term Statistics of Wave Conditions: Application
to the Design of Offshore Structures”. In: Ocean Engineering 42 (2012), pp. 110–
121.
[29]
Carlos Eduardo Silva de Souza et al. Definitionof the INO WINDMOOR 12 MW base
case floating wind turbine. Tech. rep. SINTEF Ocean, 2022.
[30]
DNV ASd. DNV-ST-0119 Floating wind turbine structures. Høvik, 2021.
[31]
Ray W. Clough and Joseph Penzien. Dynamics of Structures. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1975.
[32]
I. Langen and R. Sigbjørnsson. “Inelastic Response Spectra: Computation by the
Newmark β Method”. In: Journal of the Structural Division 105.10 (1979), pp. 1895–
1908.
[33]
J.J. Jensen. “Wave-Induced Motions of Ships and Offshore Structures”. In: Journal
of Marine Structures 17.3-4 (2004), pp. 251–287.
[34]
S.K. Chakrabarti. Handbook of Offshore Engineering. Oxford: Elsevier, 2005.
[35]
DNV GL. DNV-OS-C301: Stability and Watertight Integrity. Høvik, 2010.
[36]
Smail Mahdi and Myrtene Cenac. “Estimating Parameters of Gumbel Distribution
using the Methods of Moments, Probability Weighted Moments and Maximum Likeli-
hood”. In: Mathematics Magazine: Theory and Applications 12.1-2 (2005), pp. 151–
156. ISSN: 1409-2433. URL: https://www.redalyc.org/articulo.oa?id=45326946014.
[37]
J. R. M. Hosking and J. R. Wallis. “The Use of Probability Weighted Moments in
Estimating Parameters for Distributions”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series C (Applied Statistics) 39.3 (1990), pp. 240–250.
[38]
G. Casella and R. L. Berger. Statistical Inference. 2nd. Pacific Grove, CA: Duxbury
Press, 2002.
[39]
R. V. Hogg, A. T. Craig, and J. W. McKean. Introduction to Mathematical Statistics.
7th. Boston, MA: Pearson, 2013.
[40]
J. Jonkman and L. Kilcher. “Turbulent Inflow Generation for Use in Offshore Wind
Turbine Simulations: A Comparison of Methods”. In: Journal of Solar Energy Engi-
neering 131.3 (2009), p. 031011. DOI: 10.1115/1.3197849.
[41]
R. C. Ferreira and P. T. Santos. “Peak Period Sensitivity in Offshore Structure
Design”. In: Journal of Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering 135.2 (2013),
p. 021601.
[42]
E. Vanem and E. M. Bitner-Gregersen. “Uncertainty in Extreme Value Analysis of
Environmental Data”. In: Marine Structures 24.4 (2011), pp. 375–399.
[43]
W. H. Press et al. Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing. 3rd. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[44]
T. Weise. “Global Optimization Algorithms and Applications”. In: Journal of Compu-
tational Methods in Applied Sciences 10 (2010), pp. 73–92.
76
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:85==
[45]
K. E. Atkinson. An Introduction to Numerical Analysis. New York: John Wiley and
Sons, 1989.
[46]
DTU Wind Energy. Mann 64bit turbulence generator. Version 2014. 2021.
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
77
==PAGE:86==
78
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
==PAGE:87==
A
MATLAB code for analytical integration
1
[hs_grid , tp_grid , wind_grid] = ndgrid(hs_ex, tp_ex, windspeed_ex);
2
evmu_cont = griddedInterpolant(hs_grid , tp_grid , wind_grid , evmu_ex , 'linear')
;
3
evsigma_cont = griddedInterpolant(hs_grid , tp_grid , wind_grid , evsigma_ex , '
linear');
4
F_x3h = @(in_uw,in_hs,in_tp) 1-evcdf(angle,evmu_cont(in_hs,in_tp,in_uw),
evsigma_cont(in_hs,in_tp,in_uw));
5
6
alpha_w = 11.641;
7
beta_w = 2.114;
8
f_Uw = @(in_uw) (beta_w / alpha_w) * (in_uw / alpha_w).^(beta_w - 1) .* exp(-
(in_uw / alpha_w).^beta_w);
9
alpha_s = @(in_uw) 0.2145 + 0.0112 * in_uw.^1.9024;
10
beta_s = @(in_uw) 0.8223 + 0.0024 * in_uw.^2.2117;
11
f_Hs_Uw = @(in_hs, in_uw) (beta_s(in_uw) ./ alpha_s(in_uw)) .* (in_hs ./
alpha_s(in_uw)).^(beta_s(in_uw) - 1) .* exp(- (in_hs ./ alpha_s(in_uw)).^
beta_s(in_uw));
12
mu_L = @(in_hs) 1.111 + 0.758 * in_hs.^0.291;
13
sigma_L2 = @(in_hs) 0.011 + 0.125 * exp(-0.504 * in_hs);
14
f_Tp_Hs = @(in_tp, in_hs) (1 ./ (in_tp .* sqrt(2 * pi * sigma_L2(in_hs)))) .*
exp(- (log(in_tp) - mu_L(in_hs)).^2 ./ (2 * sigma_L2(in_hs)));
15
16
integrand = @(in_uw, in_hs, in_tp) F_x3h(in_uw,in_hs,in_tp) .* f_Tp_Hs(in_tp,
in_hs) .* f_Hs_Uw(in_hs, in_uw) .* f_Uw(in_uw);
17
max_pitch = integral3(integrand , ilb, max(windspeed), ilb, iub, ilb, iub);
18
19
annual_pitch = (1-max_pitch).^2922;
Floating offshore wind turbine - stability evaluation: quasi-static approach vs time-domain analysis
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
construct.dtu.dk
