==PAGE:1==
Application of novel acoustic surveys to assess the 
Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) stocks of the Nuuk 
fjord system in Greenland 
 
Giacomo Gardella 
DTU Aqua, Institute of Aquatic Resources, Lyngby, Denmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A thesis submitted for the degree of Master of Science in Aquatic 
 Science and Technology 
 
September 2024 
==PAGE:2==
Declaration of authorship 
I hereby declare that this dissertation and the work reported in it, expect where duly 
acknowledged (see Preface), are the products of my own work. I would like to personally thank 
my main supervisor, Prof Teunis Jansen, for the motivation, guidance, and advice he provided 
throughout the entire project. I also want to thank my co-supervisor Dr Mattias Törnquist and 
Dr Christoffer Moesgaard Albertsen for the valuable work they provided during crucial steps 
of this project. Finally, I would like to thank the Greenland Institute of Natural Resources 
(GINR) who provided me, through my main supervisor, with the financial support necessary 
to travel to Greenland to participate in the acoustic survey on R/V Sanna, thus making the 
entire project possible. 
Giacomo Gardella 
 12th Sep. 2024  
This project was supervised by: 
Main supervisor 
Prof. Teunis Jansen, teja@dtu.dk  
DTU AQUA - National Institute of Aquatic Resources, 
Section for Marine Living Resources, 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
Greenland Institute of Natural Resources (GINR), 
Department of Fish and Shellfish, 
Kivioq 2, 3900 Nuuk, Greenland, 
 
Co-supervisor 
Dr Mattias Törnquist, mato@natur.gl  
Greenland Institute of Natural Resources (GINR), 
Kivioq 2, 3900, Department of Fish and Shellfish, 
Nuuk, Greenland 
==PAGE:3==
Preface 
This thesis is submitted for the fulfilment of the Master of Science in Aquatic Science and 
Technology offered by the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). This thesis follows an 
unconventional format as the project itself is a result of the close collaboration of a 
multidisciplinary team that I was coordinating as the project lead. The outcome of this project 
is a scientific paper, expected to be submitted to the journal of Fisheries Research, after a 
restructuring, shortening, and thorough revision. The current draft of the paper is presented 
as the body of the thesis. In this preface, the individual work of each member, including myself, 
is described: 
- 
Giacomo Gardella (GG): Participated on the acoustic survey on R/V Sanna. Scrutinized 
all the data from the 2024 survey and historical surveys (2021 and 2022) in LSSS. 
Contributed to the development of the method to estimate fish density from acoustic 
data. Actively participated during all parts of the project, including the steps led by 
collaborators, by discussing the results, identifying problems, organising meetings, and 
discussing following steps. Wrote all R scripts used to process and analyse the acoustic 
data, except for the length distribution model and the fish tracking algorithm. 
Presented the project and preliminary results at the annual NWWG ICES meeting in 
April 2024. Finally, wrote the current draft of the manuscript. 
- 
Prof Teunis Jansen: Conceived and designed the project. Organized and led the survey 
on R/V Sanna. Supervised GG during scrutinization in LSSS. Helped GG to write the R 
scripts used to apply the methods of echo-integration and echo-counting. Was the 
main contributor to the development of the method to estimate fish density from 
acoustic data. 
- 
Dr Mattias Törnquist: Participated on the acoustic survey on R/V Sanna. Helped during 
first ground truthing steps of the project. Developed the fish tracking algorithm 
described in section 2.10. Created the cod/redfish split described in section 2.8. 
- 
Dr Christoffer Moesgaard Albertsen: Developed the model described in section 2.11, 
which predicts length distributions from TSC distributions. 
- 
Dr Anja Retzel: Provided data from the CODI project for the creation of the age-length 
key. Provided clarifications about the methodology of the data collection for the CODI 
project and genetic split model.  
 
==PAGE:4==
Terminology 
 
Symbol 
Unit 
Description 
c 
m s-1 
Speed of sound in water 
R 
m 
Distance from the transducer 
TSC 
dB re 1 m2 
Target strength compensated for range loss 
TSU 
dB re 1 m2 
Uncompensated target strength 
NASC, sA 
m2 nmi-2 
Nautical area backscattering coefficient 
sV 
dB re 1 m2 
Volume backscattering  
𝜓 
sr 
Equivalent beam angle 
EBA, 𝛹 
dB re 1 m2 
Equivalent beam angle 
TVG 
NA 
Time-varied gain function 
σbs 
m2 
Backscattering cross-section 
𝝈𝒃𝒔
̅̅̅̅̅ 
m2 
Mean backscattering cross-section 
𝜏 
ms 
Pulse duration 
𝜏eff 
ms 
Effective pulse duration 
L 
cm 
Total length of the fish 
P[dev] 
phase steps 
Maximum phase deviation 
Rect 
NA 
Rectangles of 0.05° latitude and 0.1° longitude 
r 
NA 
Boxes of 0.05° latitude, 0.1° longitude, and 10 m 
depth 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Towards the inclusion of acoustic surveys in the stock 
assessment of semi-pelagic fish stocks 
 
Giacomo Gardellaa*, Mattias Törnquistb, Christoffer Moesgaard Albertsena, Anja Retzelb, & 
Teunis Jansena,b 
* Corresponding author, email: giaga@dtu.dk 
a Section for Marine Living Resources, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
b Department of Fish and Shellfish, Greenland Institute of Natural Resources, PO Box 570, 3900 Nuuk, 
Greenland 
 
Target journal: Fisheries Research; the manuscript will be shortened before the submission to the 
journal 
 
Graphical abstract: 
 
         
 
Abstract 
Knowledge of the size of a fish stock is a prerequisite for its sustainable exploitation. Traditional stock 
assessment methods are based on trawling and gillnet surveys, which are costly, time consuming, and 
cause high fish mortalities. Active fisheries acoustics methods are cost-effective, and provide data with 
high spatial and temporal resolution. Recent technological developments in the form of broadband 
echosounders have greatly improved their ability to detect single fish. Despite this, guidelines for 
standard procedures are lacking and the inclusion of acoustics into official stock assessments is thus 
hindered. We describe a comprehensive method to estimate the total size of a fish stock based on 
acoustic data, which builds on previous recommendations and combines them with novel suggestion. 
SAM 
Echo-counting 
Echo-integration 
≈ 
≈ 
==PAGE:6==
Within this framework, two approaches are adopted - echo-integration and echo-counting – which are 
applied in an ideal scenario for fisheries acoustics: the Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) stock of the Nuuk 
fjord system. The approaches yielded nearly equal estimates, which are also in line with official 
assessment. We suggest applying echo-counting where single echoes can be resolved and echo-
integration where this is not possible. The framework for the collection, processing, and analysis of 
acoustic data discussed here can be the starting point for a roadmap to the inclusion of acoustic data 
in official assessment.  
 
1. Introduction 
Sustainable exploitation of a given fish stock requires, among others, a reliable estimate of its 
maximum sustainable yield (MSY) and of its size. These can be generally estimated with stock 
assessment models based on detailed knowledge about the recruitment, geographical distribution, 
migration patterns, and mortality of the stock. One useful example is the age-based state-space stock 
assessment model SAM (Nielsen and Berg, 2014), which is routinely used by the International Council 
for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) to assess numerous stocks worldwide, including Atlantic cod 
(Gadus morhua) stocks in Greenland (e.g. ICES, 2024). Unfortunately, this information can be difficult 
to obtain since fish stocks tend to be widespread, can migrate over long distances, are not uniformly 
distributed, and their abundance can fluctuate considerably due to ecological and environmental 
factors (Maunder and Piner, 2015). Moreover, traditional methods such as trawling and gillnet surveys, 
are costly, time consuming, and cause high fish mortalities (Wolff and Badri-Hoeher, 2014). As a result, 
available data for numerous stocks is insufficient to construct a reliable stock assessment (Prince and 
Hordyk, 2019). 
Fisheries acoustics is an alternative approach that can overcome some shortcomings of traditional 
methods (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). These innovative techniques were first used to detect 
fish after the first world war (e.g. Kimura, 1929; Edgell, 1935), marking the beginning of the field of 
fisheries acoustics. Since then, fisheries acoustics has seen considerable technological developments 
that have drastically increased its potential and applications (Dremer et al., 2017). Broadly speaking, 
active fisheries acoustics consists in sending a pulse of sound (ping) of selected frequencies through 
the water column. The sound is emitted by an echosounder (more specifically by the transducer) and 
propagates from the vessel to the seafloor in the form of a beam. Fish, zooplankton, and other 
obstacles that have a different density than water reflect the sound and create an echo (backscatter), 
which can be detected by a receiver. Each encountered object will generate an echo of a distinct target 
strength (TS), which can be used to estimate its size and nature. However, it is rarely possible to 
==PAGE:7==
distinguish fish species of similar size and anatomy (e.g. with or without swim bladder) using the echo 
alone, and therefore acoustic data is often supplemented with catch (trawl) data (Simmonds and 
MacLennan, 2005). 
 
 
(A) 
(B) 
Capelin 
Cod/Redfish 
Capelin 
Cod/Redfish 
==PAGE:8==
 
Figure 1: Echogram of a cod, capelin, and redfish scenario from the Ameralik fjord displayed in EK80 (A) and LSSS (B) and a 
high-density cod and redfish scenario in Kapisillit displayed in LSSS (C). The sV scale of LSSS is given in the last figure (C). 
 
Acoustic surveys can be severely limited by weather (waves) and ship traffic, as these can cause noise 
interference and uncertainty in the depth estimation. They are therefore not applicable in many areas, 
but they can be advantageous compared to traditional methods in remote and calm areas. Greenlandic 
fjords are a prime example of such remote and sheltered areas (Dunning et al., 2023). In addition, the 
pelagic ecosystem of these waters is dominated by few species: Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua), beaked 
redfish (Sebastes mentella), golden redfish (S. norvegicus), and capelin (Mallotus villosus) (Dunning, 
2022).  With such few species dominating the water column it is easier to identify the insonified fish 
schools or individuals.  
Acoustic surveys can cover larger areas in a short period of time, thereby reducing costs and producing 
large amounts of data with high spatial resolution (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005), which can be 
used to derive relative indices of stock abundance and to study the geographical distribution of the 
stock. When conducted over the entire geographical range of a stock, they can even provide a direct 
(absolute) estimate of the stock’s size. It is for these reasons that acoustics is regularly used to assess 
pelagic stocks in EU waters (e.g. Turcotte et al. (2022) for Atlantic herring).  
Pelagic stocks are an ideal target for acoustic instruments as they tend to aggregate in large schools. 
The signals generated by each single fish can be easily integrated to estimate the total size of the 
schools; a method termed echo-integration (Dragesund and Olsen, 1965; see section Echo-
integration). This is achieved by measuring a total area- or volume-backscattering coefficient, generally 
reported as nautical-area scattering coefficient or NASC (sA in m2 nmi-2), and then scaling this value by 
sV dB re 1 m2 
(C) 
Cod/Redfish 
==PAGE:9==
using the in situ mean backscattering cross section (σbs in m2; Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). The 
result is a measure that is at least proportional to fish density (Foote, 1983). 
The application of fisheries acoustics is not limited to the detection of schools of pelagic species. When 
individual fish are separated by a distance greater than the range resolution of the equipment used 
and the number of fish in the effective insonified volume is low (Sawada et al., 1993), single echoes of 
the individual targets can be reliably resolved (see Echo-counting section). In this case, an algorithm is 
used which detects single echoes (thus named SED algorithm) based on the amplitude, phase, and 
duration of the echoes measured by a split-beam echosounder (Soule et al., 1996). This allows to 
simply count individual echoes to approximate fish density: the method of echo-counting (Trout et al., 
1952; Midttun and Saetersdal, 1957; Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). The number of counted 
targets must then be divided by the sampled volume to obtain fish density. Contrary to echo-
integration, echo-counting does not depend on the measurement of backscattered energy and is 
conceptually more straight-forward to implement. The detection of individual fish can also yield 
additional information coming from their individual TS, such as size distribution, from which a mean 
backscattering cross section can be derived, which can then be used in echo-integration. A major 
drawback of this method is that the number of detected targets depends on the parameters chosen 
for the SED algorithm, including maximum phase deviation and often it can be difficult to justify the 
choices made as there is no validated procedure. On the other hand, echo-integration has received 
more attention and there are standard procedures described in the literature, such as Rudstam et al. 
(2009). However, despite having been used for 5 decades in aquatic systems (Simmonds and 
MacLennan, 2005), comparisons with stock estimates from traditional methods are lacking. In 
addition, echo-integration does not have to rely on more advance equipment allowing detection of 
single fish. Catch surveys can be conducted to gather information of the size distribution of the species 
of interest and its relative abundance (McClatchie et al., 2000). For these reasons, echo-integration is 
the most widespread and applied method. For instance, in Norway an acoustic index derived from 
integration is used in combination with a swept area index for the assessment of cod and haddock (Fall 
et al., 2022). 
Technological improvements in acoustic instruments, namely novel broadband technologies, have 
drastically improved the accuracy of echo-counting. In fact, a frequency modulated (FM) pulse has a 
much smaller range resolution compared to a continuous wave (CW) pulse (Simmonds and 
MacLennan, 2005). These new systems can grant a range resolution smaller than 10 cm, which might 
even allow the detection of parts of the insonified fish (Dunning et al., 2022). In addition, they have a 
more advantageous signal to noise ratio (SBR) compared to their narrowband counterparts (Lavery et 
==PAGE:10==
al., 2017). Therefore, there is a need to test this promising method again with the newest equipment 
available and compare the results with the established method of echo-integration. 
The ideal species to apply echo-counting needs to be pelagic, as targets close to the seabed are difficult 
to detect (bottom or dead zones; Ona and Mitson, 1996; Kloser, 1996), spread out throughout the 
water column, and relatively large, so that its signal can be easily separated from ambient noise. The 
cod of the Nuuk fjord system happens to fulfil all these criteria perfectly. It can be described as 
benthopelagic, since it can be found both in proximity of the seafloor or in the water column (Riede, 
2004), where it is found especially at night (Freitas et al., 2015). In addition, it is a large species that 
has a swim bladder and produces a strong banana-shaped echo which can be easily detected (Figure 
1). Lastly, it tends to be well spread-out throughout the water column, particularly at night (Freitas et 
al., 2015; Figure 1C). These characteristics allow the application of both techniques of echo-integration 
and echo-counting and obtain reliable results. 
Atlantic cod in Greenlandic waters has a complex population structure, which was first inferred from 
tagging studies (Storr-Paulsen et al., 2004) and was then confirmed by genetic evidence (Therkildsen 
et al., 2013, Christensen et al., 2022). Four distinct Atlantic cod populations mix in Greenlandic waters 
and since 2023 ICES provides separate fishing advice for each of these populations: West-Greenland 
Inshore Spawning Cod (WISC), the West-Greenland Offshore Spawning Cod (WOSC), and the East-
Greenland Iceland Offshore Spawning Cod (EGIOSC) (ICES, 2022). The WISC is a group of local 
populations that reside in the fjord and is therefore further divided in the southern and northern 
component, S-WISC and N-WISC, respectively (ICES, 2024). The WISC cod in the Nuuk fjord system 
belongs to the S-WISC subgroup and is the largest constituent of the cod found in this fjord system. 
In this paper, the cod stocks in the Nuuk fjord system will be assessed using data from a broadband 
acoustic survey carried out in March 2024. Both methods of echo-integration and echo-counting will 
be applied, their results compared, and potential reasons and biases causing these differences will be 
discussed. Since this acoustic data has a high spatial resolution, it will also be used to study the spatial 
distribution of cod around the Nuuk fjord system and implications of this distribution will be discussed 
under a fisheries management perspective. In addition, CW data from a survey carried out in 2022 will 
be analysed with the method of echo-integration. The obtained estimates for both years will be 
compared to the results of a SAM model. In a separate run of the model, the stock estimate for 2024 
derived from acoustic data will be included in SAM as an index of age-disaggregated absolute stock 
size, and the performance of SAM will be assessed. The advantages of including indices from acoustic 
data in SAM to assess this stock will be evaluated, and recommendations for the coming years 
presented. Finally, the method of collecting, processing, and analysing acoustic data to assess semi-
==PAGE:11==
pelagic stock applied here will be evaluated, and next steps needed to include this method into official 
stock assessment procedures will be discussed. 
 
2. Methods 
2.1 Overview 
In the following sections of the Methods, the entire processes of estimating the size of a fish stock 
from acoustic data is described (Figure 2). This overall method is one of the results of the paper. The 
first step in this process consists of designing a survey and collecting the data. Then the data needs to 
be scrutinized in a software to isolate the signal that represents the fish of interest. At this point the 
two methods of echo-integration and echo-counting are applied separately to obtain fish density for 
each box of the fjord. The results were then used to estimate the total number of S-WISC cod, which 
was compared to the official ICES assessment. 
 
Figure 2: Flow diagram illustrating the process of including an index calculated from acoustic data into SAM. 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
2.2 Acoustic data collection 
The main data presented in this study was collected during a survey carried out with R/V Sanna from 
the Greenlandic Institute of Natural Resources (GINR) from the 14th to the 21st of March 2024 in the 
fjord system surrounding the capital of Greenland, Nuuk, in particular the Nuup Kangerlua and the 
Ameralik (Figure 1). These fjords are ideal locations for acoustic surveys as they are sheltered by nearby 
hills and mountains, have extremely low ship traffic, are deep, have steep slopes, and are mostly 
accessible during spring, when the percentage of WISC cod is the highest (Christensen et al., 2022). 
Early spring is the best time of the year to carry out acoustic surveys targeting cod. This is because cod 
start to spawn in May (read Anja resources), when they form dense aggregation in proximity of the 
seafloor, thus making single echo detection difficult and increasing the number of fish missed due to 
near bottom effects. In the summer, cod tend to feed close to the coast in shallow waters (Dunning, 
2022) where they cannot be reached by a large vessel. The month of March was selected so that this 
survey could be combined with the capelin survey conducted during the day. In addition, during spring, 
the sea water reaches its coldest temperature, which is on average roughly -0.2 °C (Mortensen et al., 
2022). 
The echo sounder used is the EK80 (Simrad Kongsberg Maritime AS, Horten, Norway), which is a 
modern high-end split-beam scientific echo sounder that can transmit signals both in continuous wave 
(CW), or narrowband, and in frequency modulated (FM), or broadband, mode (see Demer et al., 2017 
for an evaluation of the EK80). The echosounder was coupled with a 38 kHz broadband (ES38-7), a 120 
kHz (ES120-7C ES), and a 200 kHz (ES200-7C ES) transducer which were mounted on the hull of vessel 
close to the bow. The first transducer was set to broadband (wide band), while the other two were set 
to narrowband. In order to minimise noise generated by the engine of the vessel, minimise the impacts 
on fish behaviour, and standardize the survey, the engine was maintained at 1400 rpm and the angle 
of the propeller at 60% during data collection. The survey route was set in a way that would maximise 
fjord coverage both during the day and during the night, as this survey was conducted in combination 
with the capelin survey. However, only data collected during the night, from UTC to UTC was used to 
assess the cod. As a matter of fact, cod seemed to be mostly absent from the water column during the 
day. At night, capelin schools scatter, while cod seem to be more evenly distributed throughout the 
water column and therefore more easily detectible. Consequently, the densities of cod detected during 
the day were on average 7 times smaller than what was observed at night during the same survey 
(Supplementary material, Figure X1). This further confirms previous recommendations to use acoustic 
data collected at night to assess stock size (e.g. Guillard and Verges, 2007). During the survey, the vessel 
was turned when a depth of roughly 50 m was reached to ensure good coverage of shallow areas, 
which at this time of the year are expected to have low cod densities (Dunning, 2022). However, when 
==PAGE:13==
the shore was very steep it was not possible to get close enough to the shore with the vessel. This 
survey design resulted in a systematic zig-zag pattern along the fjord (Figure 3A). While this design is 
efficient and guarantees a good areal coverage, it does not fulfil the statistical assumption of 
randomization (Rowell et al., 2019). However, previous research has shown that zigzagging surveys 
yield statistically equivalent stock estimates and size distributions as parallel surveys (Guillard and 
Verges, 2007). Regardless, to minimise confounding effects originating from the variation in transect 
spacing the survey area was stratified into rectangles (see Data analysis). 
Data from a similar survey carried out from the 19th to the 24th of March 2022 was also analysed and 
used to estimate stock size. In 2022, a 38 kHz (ES38B), a 120 kHz (ES120-7C), and a 333 kHz (ES333-7C) 
narrowband transducer were used but a different 38 kHz transducer, which could only transmit pulses 
in CW mode. Furthermore, the survey was designed differently (Figure 3). Instead of the zigzagging 
pattern adopted in 2024 to maximise coverage, multiple transects were conducted in specific areas of 
the fjord (Figure 3). The reason for this different design is that the purpose of that survey was not to 
assess the cod stock. 
Table 1: Settings for the acoustic surveys carried out in 2024 and 2022. *A frequency range of 34-35 
kHz was used at the beginning of the survey and was then reduced to 36-43 kHz after calibration. 
 
The fjord system was split in 8 general areas (Figure 3), based on ecological knowledge of the fjord and 
geographical characteristics (coordinates of the polygon vertices can be found in the Appendix). These 
areas were used in the following sections to interpolate missing information. 
==PAGE:14==
  
 
Figure 3: Map of the fjord system surrounding Nuuk showcasing the sailed routes during the night surveys of 2024 (A) and 
2022 (B) split by fjord area. 
Calibration of the EK80 system was carried out in a small and sheltered bay, that was characterized by 
a ~100 m deep flat bottom, slow current, and a relatively low fish abundance (Figure 3). A 38 mm 
tungsten carbide sphere was attached to three fishing rods and lowered at ~25 m depth. The fishing 
lines attached to the three rods were passing over the front and either side of the vessel, allowing a 
precise control of the sphere. The sphere was then moved left, right, forward, and backwards to collect 
echoes over the entire width of the beam at ~25 m depth, as explained in the EK80 manual (Kongsberg 
Maritime, 2023). Whenever a fish was appearing on the screen in the vicinity of the sphere, the 
calibration was suspended and resumed only after the fish had left. The calibration process was 
repeated until satisfactory results were obtained, i.e. a standard deviation of the measurements of 
<0.2 dB; Kongsberg Maritime, 2023). Following the results of the calibration, the frequency range was 
restricted from the maximum range of 34-35 kHz to 36-43 kHz as the two ends of the frequency 
spectrum were found to be noisy and their inclusion was resulting in unwanted acoustic “shadows” on 
the echogram. 
2.3 Acoustic data analysis: depth compensation 
The information extracted from the raw acoustic data presented in this paper can be grouped in two 
categories: single targets and total backscatter. These data categories are processed differently, as 
explained in the following sections. A first fundamental difference lies in the different depth-
compensation that is applied for these types of data during pre-processing steps. Depth 
compensations are applied to ensure that equally sized targets produce equal echoes regardless of 
their range (R), i.e. distance from the echosounder (Simmonds and MacLennnan, 2005). 
(A) 
(B) 
2024 
2022 
==PAGE:15==
Due to geometrical spreading, the intensity of the ping decreases proportionally to the square of the 
range (depth) when travelling to the target, and then the echo of the target decreases in the same way 
when it is travelling back to the echosounder (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). For this reason, a 
time-varied gain (TVG) function of 40 log10 R (i.e. 10 log10 (R4), where R is the range in m) is applied 
during single-echo detection. On the contrary, a school of fish will cover a certain area rather than a 
point in space. In this case, the received echo will decrease with R4 as explained before, but the area 
of the school will increase with the square of the range, since the radius of the area of the cross section 
will increase with the range (R). It follows that the number of fish in the cross-section of the beam will 
increase with the range, even if the fish density does not change. This effect will partially compensate 
the transmission loss corrected by the 40 log10 R TVG and as a result, the compensation that needs to 
be applied is only proportional to R2, i.e. 20 log10 R. This type of compensation is used for sV and sA 
data. 
These compensations are handled by the software Large Scale Survey System (LSSS) version 2.16.0 
(Korneliussen et al., 2016) which was used to pre-process all raw acoustic data. Pre-processing also 
included the separation of cod from capelin, noise, plankton, and seafloor. Subsequently, the data was 
post-processed with the statistical software R version 4.3 (R Core Team, 2024) and the following 
packages: “readxl” (Wickham and Bryan, 2023), “mgcv” (Wood, 2023), “ggplot2” (Wickham, 2016), 
“tidyr” (Wickham et al., 2024), “dplyr” (Wickham et al., 2023), “fields” (Nychka et al., 2021), “sp” 
(Pebesma and Bivand, 2005; Pebesma et al., 2013), “sf” (Pebesma and Bivand, 2023), “rnaturalearth” 
(Massicotte and South, 2024), “rnaturalearthdata” (South and Massicotte, 2024), “VGAM” (Yee, 2015). 
Here, two different methods of estimating fish density from acoustic data were used: echo-integration 
and echo-counting. 
 
2.4 Acoustic data analysis: scrutinization in LSSS 
All raw acoustic data was scrutinized in the program Large Scale Survey System (LSSS) version 2.16.0 
(Korneliussen et al., 2016). This step consists in separating all acoustic signals belonging to cod from 
those originating from other sources, such as capelin, noise, and seafloor. To facilitate scrutinization in 
LSSS the colour bar was set to “Sv” and the range to -20 to -70 dB re 1 m2 (hereafter dB). A horizontal 
line was added along the entire survey at 5 m depth to exclude the upper layer where the near field 
effect is particularly problematic (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). A horizontal line was initially set 
at 25 m of depth along the entire echogram to separate capelin schools from cod. The line was the 
modified by moving it up, to include cod that occasionally appear in the top 25 m, or down, to exclude 
capelin schools that are found just below 25 m of depth. Cod was separated from capelin based on the 
==PAGE:16==
following criteria: (i) signal must be around -45 dB, i.e. must appear green (it can be advantageous at 
times to switch to a TSU colour bar), (ii) the echo-line, i.e. a the vertical succession of single 
measurements, must have one strong peak rather than multiple strong peaks, (iii) the echo-line must 
not be more than 2 m long vertically (based on the scale in LSSS).  Additional capelin school found in 
deeper layers (generally 80-120 m) where selected out of the survey using the select school function. 
Transects during which trawling was conducted were also meticulously removed. The signal coming 
from the seafloor was removed by moving the lower boundary of the region as close to the bottom as 
possible, without including any parts of the bottom and by including as many fish possible close to the 
seafloor as possible. Double bottoms and other sources of noise were removed using the rubber tool 
in LSSS. This tool was used both to delete noise and to undelete single fish found withing the noisy 
areas. 
At this point, a minimum TS threshold was applied to remove cod younger than 2 years, i.e. less than 
20 cm long, and other small fish (e.g. capelin), a minimum TSU of -45 dB was applied. This value was 
obtained by first calculating the TSC of a 20 cm cod using the general TS vs total length (L, in cm) 
formula with a b20 parameter of -65.6 dB estimated by Dunning et al. (2022) for cod in the Nuuk fjord 
system: 
𝑇𝑆𝐶𝑚𝑖𝑛= 20 log10(𝐿) −𝑏20 
This is then converted to the minimum uncompensated TS (TSUmin) by subtracting 6 dB, i.e. twice the 
maximum compensation for the angular position within the beam. It is important to consider that this 
empirical TS-L relationship comes from multiple measurements of only 8 individual cod of average size 
collected in Nuuk’s fjord system (Dunning et al., 2022). In comparison, other relationships found in the 
literature, such as from Porter and Rose (1996) were based on a higher number of individuals of a 
broader spectrum of lengths. However, the relationship described above is based on data collected 
with the same broadband setup, i.e. same frequency range, pulse duration, and ramping, and was 
collected in the same area thereby making it likely the most accurate. The b20 parameter estimated 
by Dunning et al. (2023) is also within the range of values found in the literature. Another issue during 
this thresholding step is that the TS of a fish can vary greatly due to its tilt. This variation can span over 
20 or even 30 dB (Frouzova et al., 2005; Horne and Jech, 2005; Dunning et al., 2023). This is an 
enormous range considering that a difference of 3 dB expresses a doubling in sound intensity. In this 
study the TSCmin was set to -39.6 dB, corresponding to the rough separation between 1 year-old and 2 
year-old cod. The TSUmin was obtained by subtracting 6 dB, i.e. twice the maximum compensation for 
the angular position within the beam, from the TSCmin and was then rounded to -45 dB instead of -46 
==PAGE:17==
dB to avoid the inclusion of very small targets and/or targets at the very edge of the beam and because 
LSSS only allows to set thresholds without decimals. 
While some research groups use the same sV threshold for the entire data (Simmonds and MacLennan, 
2005), when exporting the necessary files for echo-integration, others apply a constant TSU threshold 
(Rudstam et al., 2009). Since sV is a depth-dependent measure and TSU is not, a constant TSU threshold 
would imply a different sV threshold for each depth layer, as explained by Rudstam et al. (2009). To do 
this in LSSS, at least 4 targets of TSU approximately -45 dB were found in the middle of each 10 m 
depth layer (e.g. 5 m, 15 m, etc.) and the mean of the corresponding sV values, rounded to the nearest 
integer since LSSS only allows to apply a sV threshold with this precision, was calculated. The resulting 
sV thresholds were applied when storing and exporting the data (Figure 2). A small bump at 395 m is 
apparent in the 2024 survey because data below those depths was collected before the final 
calibration and before the frequency range was restricted. 
 
Figure 4: Depth-dependent Sv threshold applied (solid line) for 2022 (red) and 2024 (grey). Dots indicate echoes that were 
analysed in LSSS to obtain their depth, Sv, and TSU. 
To carry out SED in LSSS all relevant areas were selected, and the single echo detection algorithm was 
applied (Table 2). It is important to note that the algorithm applied here is the “peak” algorithm (see 
LSSS help files) which differs from the standard SED algorithm. This algorithm was selected because it 
resembles more closely the algorithm used by the software EchoView (Echoview Software Pty Ltd, 
2024), thereby facilitating ground truthing steps and comparisons with previous findings (primarily 
with Dunning, 2022). Phase deviation checks were performed, as these removed significant noise from 
the data, and the maximum phase deviation was set to the standard value of 8 phase steps. Sensitivity 
of the estimated cod numbers with respect to this parameters and algorithm type was investigated. 
==PAGE:18==
Since the maximum phase deviation was found to have a relatively low impact on the estimated total 
cod abundance, the default values of 8 phase steps was used for the final analysis, as it was found to 
be effective at removing noise without excluding fish targets upon visual inspection. 
Table 2: Setting of the single-echo detection (SED) algorithm used for the assessment. 
 
 
2.5 Acoustic data analysis: echo-integration 
Both surveys were analysed with the method of echo-integration. The approach used here requires 
three pieces of information: (i) NASC values for a grid of cells of 0.1 nmi and 10 m depth (this grid size 
was a reasonable compromise between spatial resolution and computational feasibility based on the 
available time and hardware), (ii) an empty total grid of the entire survey, and (iii) single target 
information. The NASC values were extracted by storing the data with the grid resolution of 0.1 nmi 
and 10 m depth and then saved in the report 16 (see LSSS help) format. This process was repeated for 
each 10 m depth interval by applying the corresponding sV threshold. An empty grid total is grid is 
needed because cells with a NASC of 0 are removed when exporting the data. If this is not accounted 
for, the fish density would be grossly overestimated. The empty grid was obtained simply by storing 
the data with the lowest possible sV threshold, i.e. -99 dB, and exporting a report 16 of the data. Each 
of these files was aggregated into boxes (r) of 0.05° latitude, 0.1° longitude, and 10 m depth and the 
NASC values of the grid cells (j) were averaged: 
𝑁𝐴𝑆𝐶𝑟= 1
𝑗∑𝑁𝐴𝑆𝐶𝑗
𝑗
𝑗=1
 
This large box size ensures unbiased echo-integration (Parker-Stetter et al., 2009), as averaging over a 
large volume fulfils the assumptions of randomly and homogeneously distributed fish schools 
(Furusawa, 2021). Moreover, it also increases the likelihood that each box has at least 20 detected 
single echoes, as suggested by Parker-Stetter et al. (2009). The NASCr values that originated from less 
==PAGE:19==
than 5 cells (j) were discarded, to ensure that only boxes with proper survey coverage were used for 
estimation. Subsequently, the obtained data frame was merged with the empty survey grid. 
Single targets were resolved by applying the “peak” algorithm described above (Table 2) and the 
backscattering cross-section (σbs in m2) corresponding to each TSC measurement was calculated for 
each target (k): 
𝜎𝑏𝑠𝑘= 10
𝑇𝑆𝐶𝑘
10  
At this point, the mean backscattering cross-section (𝜎̅𝑏𝑠𝑟 in m2) was computed for each box (r) and 
merged to the data set described previously: 
𝜎̅𝑏𝑠𝑟= 1
𝑘∑𝜎𝑏𝑠𝑘
𝑘
𝑘=1
 
This is a more correct approach than taking the mean TSC and then calculating the corresponding σbs 
because σbs is linearly correlated to the fish density while TSC is not (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). 
Mean backscattering cross-section that were derived from less than 20 targets were discarded 
(Rudstam et al., 2009). For these cells, the mean σbs for the same depth layer and fjord area was used. 
This interpolation rule was based on a GAM predicting TSC based on fjord area (factor) and a 
smoothened term of depth indicated that TSC varies significantly based on these two variables (Figure 
4; deviance explained = 18.8%, scale est. = 15.147, n=345169). A second interpolation rule for the final 
boxes that still had no 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠𝑟 consisting in taking the average σbs of the same area and adjacent (± 10 m) 
depth layers was applied. 
 
Figure 5: Predicted TSC by a GAM with fjord area (factor) and smoothened depth as predictors. 
==PAGE:20==
Finally, the areal (ADIr, in fish · m-2) and volume (VDIr, fish · m-3) fish densities in each box (r) could be 
estimated as follows: 
𝐴𝐷𝐼𝑟= 𝑁𝐴𝑆𝐶𝑟
4𝜋𝜎̅𝑏𝑠𝑟
 
𝑉𝐷𝐼𝑟= 𝐴𝐷𝐼𝑟
10  
The areal densities were then summed up throughout the water column to obtain areal densities for 
rectangles (Rect) of 0.05° latitude and 0.1° longitude: 
𝐴𝐷𝐼𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑡= ∑𝐴𝐷𝐼𝑟
𝑟
𝑟=1
 
 
2.6 Acoustic data analysis: correction of 𝝈̅𝒃𝒔𝒓 
A common problem in estimating fish densities from echo-integration is obtaining an accurate 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠, 
which strongly affects the results. In this study, this quantity is derived from measured TSC. However, 
TSC measurements of the same fish can have extreme variabilities. For example, Dunning et al. (2023) 
reported an average standard deviation of TSC measurements within single tracks of 5.5 dB, which 
corresponds to roughly a 3.55 times change in the acoustic signal. This phenomenon is partly 
attributed to the tilt angle of the fish but might also be an intrinsic characteristic of broadband systems 
(Dunning et al., 2023). The distribution of TSC measurements of a single fish was investigated by 
subtracting each TSC measurement by the mean TSC of the corresponding fish, thereby obtaining 
ΔTSC. The data was then subsetted for a rounded average TSC, e.g. -34 dB, and its distribution 
investigated. It was concluded that the distribution has very fat tails and that it is best explained by a 
t-distribution. A lognormal distribution has a very poor fit and a normal distribution fails to match the 
high peak and fat tails. 
Generally, the mean TSC should be calculated in the linear domain, meaning that the individuals TSC 
measurements should first be transformed to their respective backscattering cross-sections and then 
back transformed to the TS domain. However, if the TSC is not lognormally distributed than this might 
not be the best approach. Since the TSC distribution has very fat tails, the presence of extreme values 
might strongly affect the mean of σbs, while the median is more robust to outliers and might be a better 
representation of the central tendency of the data. If the TSC is assumed to be normally distributed 
with mean μ and standard deviation σ, then the median, Med(σbs) of σbs, might better represent the 
“average” target then the mean, 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠. This is because the: 
==PAGE:21==
𝜎̅𝑏𝑠= 10
𝜇
10 ∙𝑒
𝜎2(ln(10))2
200
 
Med(𝜎𝑏𝑠) = 10
𝜇
10 
It follows that the Med(σbs) can be obtained by multiplying 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠 by the term 𝑒
𝜎2(ln(10))2
200
, which is a 
function of the standard deviation of the TSC distribution for a given target. The value of σ was 
approximated by applying a fish tracking algorithm to the detected single echoes (see section 2.10.), 
then subtracting TSC by the mean TSC of the corresponding fish and deriving the standard deviation 
of these values. Finally, this σ, which was found to be 1.44, is used to calculate the ratio between 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠 
and Med(σbs), which is 1.057. All fish densities calculated for the boxes (r) were scaled with this value. 
 
2.7 Acoustic data analysis: echo-counting  
Since the 2024 night survey was carried out using a broadband transducer, which has a superior range 
resolution compared to CW equipment (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005), it was possible to apply 
the method of echo-counting. To achieve this, the following information is necessary: (i) detected 
targets, (ii) the number of pings per cell, and (iii) an empty data frame of high resolution to estimate 
the volume. The detected targets are exported from LSSS as explained above (setting shown in Table 
2). The number of pings per cell can be obtained by storing the LSSS project with a horizontal resolution 
of one ping and a vertical resolution corresponding to the depth of the water column. Lastly, a high-
resolution data frame to estimate the sampled volume was obtained by storing the survey with a 
minimum threshold of -99 dB, a horizontal grid size of 0.005 nmi, and a vertical grid size of 10 m. The 
first dataset was used to obtain the total number of pings for each box (r) of 0.05° latitude, 0.1° 
longitude, and 10 m depth, where the number of pings was summed up based on unique latitude and 
longitude combination, as the number of pings is the same for each depth. The first dataset was used 
to calculate the total number of detected targets in each box. The last data frame, was first reduced to 
an empty grid of boxes (r) of 0.05° latitude, 0.1° longitude, and 10 m depth and then used to calculate 
the volume (Vr) of one ping for each box (r) as follows: 
𝑉𝑟= 𝜓
3 (𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑟
3 −𝑅𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑟
3) 
The equivalent beam angle in steradians (𝜓) can be calculated from the equivalent beam angle in dB 
(EBA, 𝛹) estimated during the calibration: 
𝜓= 10
𝛹
10 
==PAGE:22==
Subsequently, the volume density (VDr, in fish m-3) can be estimated by diving the number of detected 
targets in the box (r) by the sampled volume per ping (Vr) multiplied by the number of pings (nr): 
𝑉𝐷𝐶𝑟= 𝑆𝐸𝐷𝑟
𝑉𝑟𝑛𝑟
 
The areal density of each box (r) can be obtained by multiplying the volume density by the depth of 
the box, which is always 10 m: 
𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑟= 𝑉𝐷𝐶𝑟∙10 
To assess the reliability of the echo-counting method, the Sawada index (Nv) was calculated for each 
box (r) (Sawada et al., 1993). This index represents an approximation of the number of fish in the 
effective reverberation volume and can be calculated using the calibration information, i.e. speed of 
sound (c in m s-1), effective pulse duration (𝜏eff in s), and equivalent beam angle (𝜓 in sr), the mean 
range of the box (Rr in m), the mean volume backscattering strength of the box (Svr in dB) and the 
mean compensated target strength (TSCr in dB): 
𝑁𝑣𝑟=
𝑐𝜏𝑒𝑓𝑓𝜓𝑅𝑟
2 ∙100.1(𝑆𝑣𝑟−𝑇𝑆𝐶𝑟)
2
 
, where 𝜏𝑒𝑓𝑓=
1
𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑓𝑚𝑖𝑛  and 𝑆𝑣𝑟= 10 log10 (
𝑠𝐴𝑟
10 ∙ 4𝜋18522) 
A Nv threshold of 0.04 is recommended to ensure reliable separation of targets and therefore accurate 
TS measurements (Sawada et al., 1993). However, other studies have applied less strict thresholds, 
such as 0.1 (Parker-Stetter et al., 2009; Rudstam et al., 2003; Warner et al., 2002) and even 1 (Ona and 
Barange, 1999; Gauthier and Rose, 2001b). Echo-integration can be applied when the Nv index is above 
the threshold. In this study, the most conservative threshold was chosen.  
Finally, the areal density of each rectangle (Rect) of 0.05° latitude and 0.1° longitude was determined 
by summing the areal density of all boxes (r) in the water column:  
𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑡= ∑𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑟
𝑟
𝑟=1
 
A statistical comparison of the estimated areal fish densities from echo-counting and echo-integration 
for each box (r) were compared with a paired T-test. The difference between the areal fish densities 
estimated by the two methods is normally distributed and hence the assumptions of the T-test are not 
violated. 
 
==PAGE:23==
2.8 Cod-redfish split 
Cod and redfish were split based on information obtained from gillnet and trawl surveys, as it proved 
impossible to distinguish the two species based on the acoustic data alone. Catch data from bottom 
trawl, pelagic trawl, and gill net surveys for the period 1985-2023 (except for 2000 and 2001), carried 
out during the night (from 21:00 to 9:00) in the Nuuk fjord system and during the months March-May 
was used to explore how the relative proportion of cod and redfish changed with depth. Multiple 
models were fitted to the data using the nls() function in R and subsequently tested for this purpose, 
namely hyperbolic, logistic, Gompertz, exponential, and sigmoidal functions. The model fits were 
evaluated based on the root mean squared error (RMSE) and on the uncertainty of the estimated 
parameters. 
To compare the data from the catch surveys to the acoustic data, vertical TSC profiles were created 
using both data sources. For this purpose, TSC of redfish and cod from the catch survey was estimated 
based on their length. The empirical TSC-Length relationships for cod and redfish were taken from 
Dunning et al. (2023) and Gauthier and Rose (2001a), respectively. 
 
2.9. Estimating the number of cod in the entire fjord system 
The number of cod in the entire fjord system was estimated by multiplying the area of the fjord 
(741.9231 nmi2) with the weighed mean areal fish density over all rectangles (Rect), where the weights 
are the proportion of each rectangle covered by sea. That proportion was estimated by drawing 10000 
random points within each rectangle and calculating the proportion of those points that are in the sea 
and not on land, according to world country polygons from the Natural Earth dataset retrieved using 
the ne_countries() function of the “rnaturalearth” package (Massicotte and South, 2024) . 
==PAGE:24==
 
Figure 6: Statistical rectangles used throughout this study coloured based on the proportion of their total area that is in the 
sea and not at land. 
While the 2024 night survey covered more or less the entire fjord (Figure 6), in 2022 specific areas 
were prioritized and the overall coverage was poor. In particular, the areas covered in 2022 turned out 
to be area where cod are highly abundant. It follows, that simply comparing the cod estimates of 2024 
and 2022 obtained by calculating a weighted mean of the cod density and then multiplying this by the 
total area of the fjord, would be incorrect. For a more rigorous comparison between the two years, 
the cod abundance in 2024 was estimated using on the same rectangles covered in 2022. Then the 
ratio between the cod abundance in 2024 and the cod abundance in 2024 calculated only using the 
selected rectangles was calculated. Finally, the cod abundance obtained for 2022 was multiplied by 
this ratio.  
 
2.10. Fish tracking 
Fish- or echo-tracking is another method used for estimating fish density from acoustic data (Brede et 
al. 1990; Ehrenberg and Torkelson, 1996). It is based on the output of single-echo detection (SED) and 
consists in applying an additional algorithm based on range, TS, angles of SEDs to group echoes 
thought to belong to the same fish (Brede et al. 1990; Ehrenberg and Torkelson, 1996). An important 
prerequisite of this method is therefore the detection of multiple consecutive echoes for each single 
fish. In this survey, the acoustic equipment used generates a relatively narrow beam (7°; Table 1), which 
combined with a ship velocity of 6 knots leads to the detection of a given fish in only one pings up until 
a depth of almost 25 m. As a result, fish in this upper layer cannot be tracked by the algorithm. Due to 
==PAGE:25==
this issue, echo-tracking is not used here to estimate the fish density, but simply to identify several 
distinct fish which are examined to estimate a size distribution of the stock.  
Each fish target is located with a range (R), an athwart ship angle (𝜃˔), and an along ship angle (𝜃𝑝𝑎𝑟), 
in reference to the EK-80 receiver. In the fish tracker algorithm, these cylindrical coordinates are 
converted into a global geographic coordinate system. If the position of the ship is assumed to be at 
the surface (z=0), for each time step (t) the depth of the target (z) can be calculated with: 
𝑧𝑡=
𝑅𝑡
√1 + tan2(θ˔,t) + tan2(θpar,t)
 
Subsequently, the local coordinates of the targets (l) in the ship-beam system can be calculated:  
xl,t = 𝑧𝑡tan(θ𝑝𝑎𝑟,t) 
yl,t = 𝑧𝑡tan(θ˔,t) 
The global coordinates of the ship (s), which are assumed to be the same as the EK-80 receiver, are 
given in latitude (lat) and longitude (lon - in Greenland assumes negative values), which can be 
converted to 𝑥𝑠 and 𝑦𝑠 via using a middle point in the global geographic system used as a reference 
(latref and lonref): 
𝑥𝑠,𝑡=
(|𝑙𝑜𝑛|𝑠,𝑡−𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑓)𝜋𝑟𝐸
180
cos (
|𝑙𝑜𝑛|𝑠,𝑡−𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑓
2
) 
𝑦𝑠,𝑡=
(𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑠,𝑡−𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑓)𝜋𝑟𝐸
180
 
, where rE is the radius of the Earth 6371000 m, 𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑓= 𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑙,𝑡
̅̅̅̅̅̅, and 𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑓= |𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑙,𝑡|
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅. 
If the angle of the direction of the ship (ϕ) is known, then the global coordinates can be calculated 
as: 
xt = xs,t + xl,tcos (φt) −yl,tsin (φ) 
yt = ys,t + xl,tsin (φt) + yl,tcos(φt) 
Since instrumental data showing the heading (𝜑) is lacking, it is assumed that the heading is 
equivalent to the direction of the ship estimated as: 
𝜑= tan−1 (𝑦0,𝑡−𝑦0,𝑡−1
𝑥0,𝑡−𝑥0,𝑡−1
) 
==PAGE:26==
 The data was treated as a 3D map of static points and a k-nearest neighbor algorithm (density-based 
spatial clustering of applications with noise, “dbscan” R package; Hahsler et al., 2019) was used to 
designate individual clusters, each one defined as a fish. In the algorithm the distance threshold was 
set to 2 meters and the minimum number of points to 2. The results were inspected visually as a 3D 
map of the tracks, and their validity was assessed qualitatively. 
 
2.11. Estimating length distribution from TS distribution 
Describe model. The model was fitted for all boxes independently and for all fjord areas, both divided 
into 10 m intervals. For both model runs, the first three depth layers were pooled together due to low 
sample size. The same was done for all layers deeper than 390 m. The model was fed with data coming 
from the fish tracking algorithm, where detected targets were grouped into fish IDs. 
A length distribution for each cell (r) can be estimated from the TSC distribution from that same cell, 
as TSC and length of cod are related by the empirical formula described above. Since broadband data 
is used here, the TSC distribution is characterized by fat tails, caused by the extreme spread of single 
TSC measurements, which are best described by a catered and scaled t distribution: 
𝑇𝑆𝐶𝑚𝑓−𝜇(𝐿𝑙)
𝜎
| 𝐿𝑙~𝑡(𝑣) 
𝜇(𝐿) = 20 log10(𝐿𝑙) −65.6 
Furthermore, this T distribution is truncated to account for the effect of the minimum TS threshold 
applied during single echo detection. The probability that a TSC (m) of a fish (f) is detected will be the 
product of the probability that that TSC is detected when a fish of length l is insonified and the 
probability that a fish of length l is encountered in the population. Since the true length distribution of 
the population is unknown, this product has to be integrated over all possible lengths. 
𝑃(𝑇𝑆𝐶𝑚𝑓) = ∑𝑃(𝑇𝑆𝐶𝑚𝑓|𝐿𝑙) ∙𝑃(𝐿𝑙= 𝑙)
𝑙
𝑙=1
 
Withing this formula, the term 𝑃(𝐿𝑙) is the unknown. On the other hand, the cohort-wise length 
distribution can be estimated using a von Bertalanffy growth model () build on the TS data and 
informed with survey data (). This allows to estimate a normally distributed length distribution for 
single cohorts (k): 
𝑓𝑘(𝑙) = 𝑁(𝜇𝑘= vonBert(𝑘), 𝜎𝑘) 
==PAGE:27==
The probability that a fish is of length l can be obtained through a sum of the estimated probabilities 
of length l of each cohort k multiplied by an estimated cohort-specific weight (wk): 
𝑃(𝐿𝑙= 𝑙)~𝑓(𝑙) = ∑𝑤𝑘𝑓𝑘(𝑙)
𝑘
𝑘=1
 
These cohort-specific weights need to add up to 1. 
The model was created in R using the RTMB package (v.1.5.; Kristensen et al., 2016; Thygesen et al., 
2017) and ran independently for each cell (r). Due to missing data in the first depth layers until 25 m, 
the model considered a single layer in the top 25 m of data. The maximum length possible was set to 
200 cm, however all fish above 150 cm were summarized into a 150+ cm. 
 
2.12. Age-length key 
A forward age-length key (ALK) was created using data from the Inshore gillnet survey for the period 
2018-2023, which is conducted every year in late spring/early summer in the NAFO divisions 1B and 
1D (ICES, 2023). The gear used is a multi-meshed gillnet: 16.5, 18, 24, 28 and 33 mm, ½ mesh. While it 
was originally designed to target juvenile cod of ages 2 and 3 years, it was found to catch fish of ages 
2 to 6 years, as other body parts apart from the gills can also get entangled in the net. During the 
surveys, the nets are set parallel to the coast at constant depth and effort is allocated evenly between 
the depth zones of 0–5 m, 5–10 m, 10–15 m and 15–20 m. The “abundance index”, which can be 
treated as a proxy of abundance as it should be linearly related to abundance, is calculated as: 
𝐼𝑎,𝑙= 100
𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑢𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑎,𝑙
𝑛𝑒𝑡∙𝑡 
, where net is the number of nets used and t the soaking time. 
The indices for each a and l combination were averaged across the years 2018-2023 to obtain the 
average index 𝐼𝑎,𝑙
̅̅̅̅. Averaging data from different years and locations (for an overview of the locations 
of the surveys refer to ICES, 2023) to create an ALK, introduces the assumptions that the age structure 
is the same through different years and locations. If the population composition changes than the ALK 
constructed for one year of data and for one area cannot be applied to a different year or area because 
the assumption that the data originates from the same statistical populations is not met (Ailloud and 
Hoenig, 2019). In addition, pooling several years of age at length data to construct an ALK can lead to 
an underestimation of estimated variance in proportions at age met (Ailloud and Hoenig, 2019). 
==PAGE:28==
However, data from different gears can be combined if the gears were sampling the same populations 
and potential biases can be minimized by choosing small length bins. 
The probability of being of age a given length l is then calculated by the dividing the index Ia,l by the 
sum of all indices of the length l: 
𝑃(𝑎|𝑙) = 𝐼𝑎,𝑙
̅̅̅̅
𝐼𝑙
 
To fill holes in the data, all fish smaller than 12 cm were assumed to be of age 1 or younger. Similarly, 
all fish above 82 cm were assigned to the 10+ age group. Then, the following quasibinomial GAM was 
fitted to the age-length data: 
Proportion ~ s(Length)*factor(Age) 
The model predictions for a matrix of ages 1 to 10 and lengths of 1 to 150 cm were then used to create 
an ALK matrix (Figure 7). This matrix was used along with the length distribution information to 
estimate numbers at age for the entire fjord. The calculated cod areal densities of each box (r) were 
multiplied by the predicted length distribution of the same box, thereby obtaining a vector of predicted 
areal densities for each length class (cm). 
 
Figure 7: Age-length key created from the GAM model and interpolation steps. 
 
2.13. Stock split 
Genetic data, which is regularly collected from commercial catches and scientific surveys, is 
implemented in stock assessment via the “split” model (ICES, 2023). The “split” model is a General 
==PAGE:29==
Additive Model (GAM) that splits commercial and survey catches among the three Greenlandic cod 
stocks based on smoothened terms of latitude and longitude, location (offshore/inshore), age, cohort, 
and random effects. The model was fitted using the R package “mgcv” (Wood, 2023) for the 2024 ICES’s 
Northwestern Working Group (NWWG) meeting, during which the Greenlandic cod stocks are 
assessed. The model was fitted for a central position of fjord, 64.3° latitude and -51.3° longitude, for 
“inshore” areas, for cohort calculated as 2024 subtracted by age in years, and the same age distribution 
predicted in by SAM for 2023 . The predicted percentages of S-WISC cod for each age were weighted 
by the corresponding proportions in the age distribution. Finally, these were added to give the 
weighted mean, which was then rounded to 55%. 
 
2.14. SAM 
The state-space stock assessment model “SAM” represents the basis for the scientific advice of 
Greenlandic cod fisheries (ICES, 2023). Therefore, the stock estimates obtained directly from acoustic 
data have been compared to the results of a SAM assessment created exclusively for the S-WISC of the 
Nuuk fjord, hereafter referred to as the stock “S-WISC_Nuuk”. This SAM was set up on the website 
www.stockassessment.org (Nielsen and Berg, 2024) and based on data exclusively for the Nuuk fjords.  
SAM estimates the numbers at age of the stock for the 1st of January of the specified year. On this date, 
the recruits (new 2-year-old fish) are added. On the other hand, the acoustic survey gives an estimate 
of the total number of cod in mid-end March. For a rigorous comparison between the two methods, 
the numbers at age estimated by SAM for the 1st of January 2023 were used to calculate this expected 
numbers at age in mid-March. This was done by applying fishing (F) and natural mortality (M) during 
the year 2023 and then two and a half months of natural mortality during 2024, since no commercial 
fishing is targeting cod during the first quarter of the year (ICES, 2024). This total number of fish was 
subtracted from the stock estimate obtained from acoustics to give the number of new recruits needed 
to make the two estimates match, which was compared to the time series of 2-year-old given by SAM. 
An alternative comparison was performed by estimating the total S-WISC_Nuuk stock size by assuming 
that the recruitment of 2-year-olds in 2024 is the average of the recruitments observed over the period 
2013-2023, since this is the recruitment assumption currently applied for the short-term forecast in 
ICES and used for the official fisheries advice. Natural mortality over 2.5 months was then applied to 
the number of age 2 recruits. 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
3. Results 
3.1. Method to assess a stock based on acoustic surveys 
A key result of this study is the description and validation of a detailed and complete method to analyse 
broadband acoustic data to estimate fish density using the software LSSS illustrated in Figure 2. This 
method is based on broadband instead of narrowband data, as this allows for a more reliable single 
echo detection which enables estimation of the 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠 more accurately. An acoustic survey should be 
conducted over the entire geographical area of the stock of interest, or at the least have a good areal 
coverage of said area. In this case study, this was possible in less than one week in the Nuuk fjord 
system following a zigzag survey design. Furthermore, for this stock it was crucial to collect data during 
the hours of darkness, since the cod were well-spread throughout the water column and thus easily 
detectible. Following data collection, the approaches of echo-integration and echo-counting were 
followed. 
Issues encountered when working with broadband data and in LSSS were circumvented. For instance, 
a depth-dependent sV threshold was applied, following the recommendation of Rudstam et al. (2009). 
Since LSSS does not support this feature, different report 16 files containing the NASC information 
were exported for each 10 m layer, with a sV threshold calculated as the sV corresponding to a minimum 
TSU of -45 dB at the centre of that layer (see Methods). Moreover, the extreme observation error in 
TSC values generated by broadband data raised challenges in deriving an accurate  𝜎̅𝑏𝑠, which is a 
crucial step during echo-integration and greatly affects the estimation of fish densities. Here, a bias 
correction based on the median backscattering cross section, Med(σbs), was proposed, based on the 
assumption that the measured TSC values follow a normal distribution. In fact, since the observed TSC 
distributions are characterized by fat tails, the median might be a more correct representation of the 
centre of the TSC distribution. For echo-counting, the calculations described by Dunning (2022) were 
followed. Finally, the cod abundance in the fjord system was estimated by taking a weighted average 
of the statistical rectangles used, where the individual weights for each rectangle are the proportions 
of the area of the rectangles that is located in the sea. 
 
3.2 Cod-redfish split 
As cod and redfish were undistinguishable based on acoustic data alone, their relative abundance was 
therefore modelled as a function of depth. All candidate models had similar RMSE (0.173-0.207) 
however the hyperbolic tangent function was selected as the best performing model because it had a 
low RMSE of 0.178, but also a low uncertainty in fitted parameters (Figure 8). 
==PAGE:31==
𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑑= 1 + tanh (−𝑘∙𝜋∙(𝑑−𝑑0))
2
 
, where k and d0 are parameters estimated to 0.00235 and 227 m respectively. 
 
Figure 8: Relative percentage of cod in the survey catches plotted against depth. The black line shows the predictions of the 
best fit hyperbolic tangent function with the 95% confidence interval. 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Mean TSC from acoustics and estimated mean TSC from catches. A cubic spline smoothing with spar=0.5 was 
used. 
The vertical profiles of mean TSC obtained from acoustic data and estimated from the catches appear 
similar (Figure 9). A low mean TS can be observed close to the surface. The mean TS then increases 
==PAGE:32==
rapidly and peaks between 50 and 100 m, where it is relatively constant. Thereafter, the mean TS 
decreases linearly until it stabilizes at approximately 250 m. In the acoustic data, the variance in mean 
TSC increases considerably from 400 m onwards, due to the decrease in detected targets. Below 100 
m depth, the vertical TSC profile is in line with the expectations coming from the cod/redfish split 
(Figure 7), knowing that the TSCs of redfish are substantially smaller than those of cod, both as a result 
of difference in size and of different b20 parameters of the TS vs length relationships.   
3.3. Estimated cod abundance from echo-integration and echo-counting 
The total number of cod in the Nuuk fjords estimates from echo-integration and echo-counting is 
13995992 and 14016702, respectively. Echo-counting estimates 0.15% more cod compared to echo-
integration. Only one box of size 0.05° latitude, 0.1° longitude, and 10 m depth was found to have a 
Sawada index higher than 0.04, indicating that overall echo-counting should be reliable in this fjord 
system (Supplementary material, Figure X1; Sawada et al., 1993). The fish density estimated from 
echo-integration could not be substituted in this box as the coverage was low and the NASC was 
discarded (only four cells (j) were averaged; see Methods).  
Both methods estimate the same spatial distribution of cod, with the highest densities being observed 
near Kapisillit, Qoqqut, and in the inner Ameralik (Figure 10). Furthermore, the estimated areal 
densities for the rectangles (Rect) using the methods of echo-integration and echo-counting are in 
general agreement. A paired T-test found that the areal fish densities estimated by the two methods 
are not significantly different (t = 0.95, df = 110, p = 0.34), with a mean difference of 715 cod nmi2, 
which is miniscule compared to the densities observed (Figure 10). 
   
 
Figure 10: Areal cod densities estimated with the methods of echo-counting (A) and echo-integration (B) for the 2024 
survey.  
(A) 
(B) 
==PAGE:33==
The vertical profiles of the estimated cod volume density from the two methods are also in reasonable 
agreement (Figure 11). The highest volume densities are observed between 50 and 100 m depth, 
which is where the mean TS is also the highest (Figure 9 and 11). Interestingly, echo-counting estimates 
a higher volume density in the first 100 m, while echo-integration estimates higher densities than 
echo-counting at depths below 150 m. 
 
Figure 11: Vertical profiles of the mean volume density estimated from echo-counting (orange) and echo-integration 
(purple) for the 2024 survey. A cubic spline smoothing of alpha=0.2 was applied. 
 
3.4. Comparison between 2024 and 2022 
 
Figure 12: Areal cod densities estimated with the method of echo-integration for the 2022 survey. 
In 2022, a total of 17661573 cod were estimated in the entire fjord, 26.2% more compared to 2024 
(Figure 12). However, it must be considered that the stock was decreasing (18% from 2022 to 2023; 
==PAGE:34==
ICES, 2023) and that this estimate is more uncertain compared to that of 2024 due to the poor coverage 
of the fjord. Nevertheless, the same general geographic pattern of cod distribution can be observed, 
with Kapisillit, Qoqqut, and the inner Ameralik having the highest cod densities. 
The TSC distribution between the two years, 2024 and 2022, was compared by normalizing the 
frequencies by the total counts (Figure 13). In 2024, a broadband equipment was used, while the data 
for 2022 was collected in CW mode. Consequently, in 2024 a total of 345169 single echoes were 
detected while in 2022 only 3187 were resolved. Compared to 2022, in 2024 a larger proportion of 
small targets as well as large targets (> -25 dB) were measured. 
 
Figure 13: Normalized TS distributions for the 2024 (blue) and 2022 (red) surveys. Mean TSC values for both years are 
shown by the vertical dashed lines of the respective colour. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
3.5. Parameter sensitivity 
 
Figure 14: Histograms showing the normalized compensated TS distribution from the peak (A) and SED (B) algorithms for 
four different settings of maximum phase deviation (P[dev]). 
One drawback of single echo detection is that it relies on parameters, such as maximum phase 
deviation and algorithm type, that must be specified a priori. Therefore, the sensitivity of the TSC 
distribution, which is relevant for echo-integration, was investigated. Less variation in the shape of the 
distribution is observed when the SED algorithm is used instead of the “peak” algorithm (Figure 14). 
Overall, the shape of the TS distribution does not seem to be affected greatly by the maximum phase 
deviation, especially when values similar to the default of 8 phase steps are used. When this parameter 
is set to 4 phase steps, the greatest change in TSC distribution can be observed (Figure 14). 
The effect of maximum deviation chosen and the algorithm used on the overall number of estimated 
cod was also explored (Figure 15). In general, a higher maximum phase deviation, which allows more 
targets to be detected, leads to an increase in stock estimates for both methods, but echo-counting is 
more strongly affected by the single echo detection settings (Figure 15). The number of estimated S-
WISC_Nuuk cod from echo-counting increased on average by 4.2% for each increase in maximum 
phase deviation of 2 phase steps when the peak algorithm was used, while it increased by 2.8% for 
each increase of 2 phase steps of P[dev] when the SED algorithm was applied. On the other hand, the 
estimates of S-WISC_Nuuk cod from echo-integration increased only by 1.5% and 1.0% for each 
increase of 2 phase steps in P[dev] for the peak and SED algorithms, respectively. Changing from the 
peak to the SED algorithm leads to a 4.2% increase in average stock estimates for echo-counting and 
3.2% for echo-integration. In conclusion, echo-counting is more sensitive for both parameters. 
 
(A) 
(B) 
==PAGE:36==
 
Figure 15: Estimated number of cod in the entire fjord estimated from echo-integration (black border) and echo-counting 
(orange border) using the “peak” (A) and SED (B) algorithms and four different settings of maximum phase deviation 
(P[dev]). 
 
3.6. Length distribution 
 
Figure 16: Length distributions estimated from TSC distributions for each box (shown in grey). The average length 
distribution of all cells is indicated by the black curve. 
The length distributions obtained from the TSC distributions turned out to be unrealistic, with too high 
proportions of extremely large cod, which is a consequence of the fat-tailed TSC distribution (Figure 
16). The cohorts of age 1 to 5 are clearly visible from the ensemble of estimated length distributions, 
however their peaks, especially for ages 3 and 4, do not match exactly the peaks indicated by the ALK 
(A) 
(B) 
==PAGE:37==
(Figure 6). The offset between the peaks of the length distributions and those of the ALK is 
approximately 2-3 cm. Two peaks corresponding to age 1 and 2 can also be seen in the average length 
distribution of all cells. 
 
3.7. Comparison with SAM 
 
Figure 17: Number of S-WISC_Nuuk cod in mid-March estimated by the three different methods.  
SAM estimated a total number of cod in fjord of 7901924, which is merely 2.7% and 2.5% higher than 
what was estimated based on echo-integration and echo-counting, respectively (Figure 16), assuming 
that the proportion of S-WISC_Nuuk is 55% (see Methods). Alternatively, the recruitment (age 2) 
needed for the stock size (ages 3 to 10) estimated by SAM to match the cod numbers estimated by the 
two acoustic methods was calculated (Figure 17). This recruitment is slightly below the average over 
the last 10 years (the recruitment assumption used in ICES for providing fisheries advice) and appears 
to fit relatively well in the time series (Figure 17). 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
Figure 18: Time series of the recruitment (2-year-olds on the 15th of March) estimated by SAM for the period 2013-2023 
(grey) and the recruitments needed in 2024 for the stock size estimated from SAM to match the estimates from echo-counting 
(orange) and echo-integration (purple). 
On the contrary, the estimated numbers at age from the acoustics data combined with the estimated 
length distributions and the ALK are far from those estimated by SAM (Table 3). Based on the acoustic 
data, a high number of 10-year-olds is estimated, approaching that of 2, 3, and 4-year-olds. 
Table 4: Cod numbers at age of S-WISC. 
Age (years) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Echo-integration: 
Numbers (thousands) 
376 
391 
1344 
1121 
858 
778 
648 
487 
449 
1245 
Echo-counting: 
Numbers (thousands) 
441 
430 
1216 
1043 
842 
780 
661 
505 
471 
1321 
ICES SAM 
 
1427 
1670 
2265 
786 
978 
354 
124 
32 
6 
 
4. Discussion and conclusions 
The main result of this study is the development of a detailed and comprehensive method to estimate 
fish density using broadband acoustic data. This method was applied to assess the S-WISC cod stock 
found in the Nuuk fjord system and was validated against SAM. This represents an ideal case scenario 
since the waters of the Nuuk fjords are calm, ship traffic is virtually absent, the cod are spread out 
throughout the water column, and the pelagic environment is dominated only by few species. The 
method builds on fisheries acoustics theory (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005) and combines it with 
recommendations from previous research (Rudstam et al., 2009; Dunning, 2022) as well as novel 
==PAGE:39==
suggestions and corrections. One of the key points of this method consist in using broadband acoustic 
equipment instead of narrowband alternatives; in this study the EK80 echosounder coupled with a 
broadband split-beam ES38-7 transducer. These novel systems have an enhanced range resolution and 
allow a more reliable single echo detection (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005; Demer et al., 2017). As 
a result, echo-counting can be applied effectively. In fact, the stock estimate obtained for 2024 was 
very similar not only to the estimate obtained from echo-integration, but also to the predictions of 
SAM. 
A problem that arises from broadband data, is the extreme measurement error of the TSC, which has 
also been observed in previous studies (Frouzova et al., 2005; Horne and Jech, 2005; Dunning et al., 
2023). This leads to the following issues: (i) a bias towards the inclusion of small targets, (ii) a slight 
positive bias in the total number of fish estimated by echo-counting and -integration, (iii) a bias 
towards a large 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠 due to the numerous extremely large TSC values observed, and (iv) problems 
during the estimation of size distribution from the TSC of detected targets. Firstly, the observation 
error of the TSC can lead to the loss of detected targets that might fall below the minimum TSC 
threshold used but simultaneously also to the inclusion of small targets that happen to surpass the 
threshold. Since, small fish tend to be more abundant than large ones, more targets are expected to 
be gained close to the threshold than lost. This observation is contradicting previous assumptions that 
threshold bias would lead to an underestimation of the fish density (e.g. Bertrand and Josse, 2000; 
Dunning, 2022). This is apparent when the TSC distributions collected with narrowband and 
broadband systems are compared (Figure 13). The latter clearly includes a higher proportion of small 
targets. However, it must be mentioned that these data were collected during different years and 
might therefore represent different populations. While echo-integration does not rely on the number 
of detected targets, it does rely on the average size. If the single echo detection algorithm has a bias 
towards small targets, the resulting 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠 will also be biased. It follows, that both methods are expected 
to overestimate the fish density.  
The third important challenge that arises from the large observation error in TSC measurements is the 
estimation of 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠. In this work, we suggest applying a correction to 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠 that lead to a small decrease 
in the latter. The distribution of the measurements of similarly sized targets follows a t-distribution 
with fat tails. In this situation, the 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠 might be influenced by the extreme measurements, and the 
median Med(σbs) can better represent the central tendency of the TSC distribution. Therefore, the 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠 
is multiplied by a correction factor that converts the 𝜎̅𝑏𝑠 to the Med(σbs) of a normal distribution with 
a mean corresponding to the true mean of σbs and standard deviation corresponding to the average 
standard deviation in TSC measurements of similarly sized targets. Further exploration of this 
hypothesis would be needed to validate it. 
==PAGE:40==
Finally, another consequence of the fat-tailed TSC distribution is the unrealistic size distribution 
predicted by our model (see section 2.11. and 3.6.), which in turn leads to highly unrealistic predicted 
age distributions (see section 3.7.). Moreover, the extreme variation in TSC values in the data caused 
the peaks of the length distribution, which reflect individual cohorts, to shift away from those of the 
ALK. This mismatch introduces yet another source of error in the estimation of numbers at age. These 
issues could potentially be solved or mitigated by implementing filtering criteria in the fish tracking 
algorithm. 
The framework to analyse acoustic data described in this study, also combined previous 
recommendations found in the literature, in particular: (i) the implementation of a depth-dependent 
sV threshold, following the recommendations of Rudstam et al. (2009), (ii) to carry out the acoustic 
survey during the night when fish are more spread out throughout the water column (e.g. Guillard and 
Verges, 2007), and (iii) to ensure a good areal coverage of the geographical distribution of the species 
of interest (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). 
During echo-integration, the raw sV data is used to calculate the NASC or sA (Simmonds and 
MacLennan, 2005; Furusawa, 2021).  The sV value corresponding to a constant TSU will decrease with 
range, since the sampled volume increases with range (Rudstam et al., 2009; Figure ). This decrease is 
the most significant close to the surface, while it becomes smaller and smaller deeper in the water 
column. At depth it eventually stabilizes. When a survey is conducted throughout the entire water 
column it is crucial to apply a depth-dependent sV threshold, especially if the vertical distribution of 
the fish is the object of interest. Unlike other acoustic data analysis software, LSSS does not have an 
option to apply a constant TSU threshold instead of a constant sV threshold. Moreover, only whole 
numbers can be specified. This problem was circumvented by exporting NASC data for each layer and 
corresponding sV threshold separately. The data was then merged. Based on the importance of this 
step we highly encourage the LSSS developers to include this feature in LSSS, as well as allowing to set 
sV thresholds with the precision of one decimal.  
The spatial coverage of the survey is also important. Ideally, the acoustic survey should be designed in 
a way to cover all areas where the species or stock of interest occurs (Simmonds and MacLennan, 
2005). This would lead to the most accurate mean area density estimate. Changes in the areal coverage 
of different surveys make a direct comparison between such surveys is uncertain or even impossible. 
For instance, in 2022 the areas surveyed were predominantly areas with high cod densities, as can be 
observed from the 2024 surveys, which covered most of the fjord. If the mean of the cells surveyed in 
2022 is taken and raised to the entire area of the fjord, the total number of cod in the fjord is grossly 
overestimated. Following the same logic, problematic areas in the 2024 survey can also be observed. 
==PAGE:41==
For example, the vessel could not reach the innermost part of the fjord near Kapisillit, where cod are 
highly abundant. In an ideal survey, data is collected up until no more cod are detected. Another such 
area with expected high cod densities is the northern part of Qoqqut which was covered in 2022 and 
was found to have around 100 000 cod nmi2 (Figure 11) but was missed in 2024 (Figure 9). Similarly, all 
rectangles within the sampled grid should have been covered at least to some degree. If needed, there 
are spatial statistical approaches to fill gaps in survey coverage, if sufficient data from other years is 
available (e.g. Jansen et al., 2015). 
Once all the described corrections were applied for echo-integration, the two approaches of echo-
integration and echo-counting were compared. The obtained stock estimates from the two methods 
matched almost perfectly thus providing support for both methods (Figure 9). Broadly speaking, echo-
counting is expected to underestimate the true fish density mainly due to failed target detection. 
Contrary to expectations, echo-counting estimated very similar fish density compared to integration, 
even slightly higher. This dismisses concerns of underestimation and provides strong support for the 
adoption of echo-counting. So far, echo-counting has been mostly applied in freshwater systems, as 
these tend to have shallower depths and lower fish densities (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). We 
argue that with the availability of broadband technologies the application of this method should also 
be extended to marine environments. In cells where the fish density is too high for reliable detection 
of individuals echoes, i.e. where the Nv index (Sawada et al., 1993) is > 0.04, echo-integration, with the 
corrections described here, should be applied. 
Interestingly, the difference between the two methods appears to be depth dependent, with echo-
counting estimating higher fish densities close to the surface compared to echo-integration and the 
opposite being true below 150 m (Figure 10). The cause for this difference is unclear and it is unlikely 
to be related to the vertical TSC profile, which would affect both the σbs and the sA. 
Compared to echo-integration, echo-counting has the advantage that it relies exclusively on one type 
of data, TS, and thus on only one TVG compensation. Furthermore, scrutinization of the acoustic data 
is more straightforward for echo-counting than it is for integration. The single echo detection algorithm 
will not detect, for example, schools of capelin, as these are often densely packed and would not meet 
the criteria of maximum echo length and a distinctive peak (if the peak algorithm is applied). 
While being a promising method, echo-counting has some drawbacks. For instance, it is more sensitive 
to parameters chosen for the single echo detection algorithm compared to echo-integration (Figure 
14). This is especially problematic when guidance on choosing a specific value for a given parameter is 
lacking. This is the case for the maximum phase deviation. A higher maximum phase deviation allows 
more targets to be detected and in particular a higher relative proportion of small targets (Figure 13). 
==PAGE:42==
However, the S-WISC_Nuuk cod estimated increased only by less than 5% for every increase of 2 phase 
steps in maximum phase deviation allowed. During the next steps the uncertainty in the estimation of 
fish densities from echo-counting and echo-integration will be assessed, for example with 
bootstrapping techniques (Simmonds et al., 1992). This will be attempted before the submission of 
this manuscript to the target journal. 
Based on the promising results of the echo-counting methods and the simplicity of its application in 
the Nuuk fjord system, we encourage the implementation of acoustic surveys for the assessment of 
cod in this area. The fishing sector generates over 95% of Greenland’s export income, making it crucial 
for its economy (Long and Jones, 2021). Cod is one of the major fish species and is targeted both 
inshore and offshore, along most of the coastline of the country (ICES, 2022). Acoustic surveys would 
be a cost-effective alternative to existing gillnet surveys, which are highly demanding in terms of 
manpower and ship time, and cause high fish mortalities. Since the survey would be conducted in 
March, as it can be combined with the capelin survey that is conducted during the day, it would come 
at a perfect time for the ICES meeting during which this stock is assessed, which takes place in April. 
The gillnet surveys are generally conducted in May or June. Therefore, only the gillnet of the previous 
year are available for this ICES meeting. In addition, the cod abundance in March can be considered a 
better representation of the effect of the fishing activities that have taken place during the previous 
year, since commercial fishing has not yet started in March. 
An additional useful characteristic of acoustic data is its high spatial and temporal resolution. In a 
relatively small place like the Nuuk fjord system, an acoustic survey covering the vast majority of the 
fjord can be conducted in one week, thus providing an abundance estimate at a specific point in time. 
Furthermore, the data can be explored to examine the geographical distribution of the cod and its 
vertical density profile. Important areas for the stock, such as spawning ground, can be estimated in 
this way. From the data presented here, areas of high cod densities can be identified around Kapisillit, 
where an important spawning ground is located (ICES, 2005), around Qoqqut, and in the inner 
Ameralik. This information can be difficult to obtain in other ways and can be used to improve our 
understanding of the fish behaviour within fjord system as well as to resolve ecological processes 
shaping the fjord’s ecosystem. 
The application of the acoustic methods described here shouldn’t be limited to cod. Redfish, which is 
also benthopelagic and is just as easily detectible as cod. In fact, the cod/redfish split model used here 
can be simply applied to derive the density of redfish instead of cod, although the minimum TSC of the 
single echo detection algorithm would have to be adapted. The method described here can even be 
==PAGE:43==
implemented in other areas, given that there are few species that can be confused with the species of 
interest. 
Table 3: Recommendations for echo-integration and echo-counting. 
 
 
5. Supplementary material 
 
Figure X1: Areal cod densities estimated with the method of echo-integration for the 2024 day CW survey. 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
Figure X2: Sawada index plotted against depth. Only one box of size 0.05° latitude, 0.1° longitude, and 10 m depth has an 
index higher than 0.04, indicating that echo-counting might be problematic. 
 
Figure X3: The age-length key scaled and overlayed to the length distributions estimated for each box (r) from 
corresponding TSC distributions. 
==PAGE:45==
 
Figure X4: Areal cod densities estimated with the method of echo-integration for the 2021 survey. Note: the data was 
discarded because the observed frequency response was unrealistic (Figure X4). 
 
Figure X5 Frequency response of the entire 2021 survey. 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
Figure X6: Survey route of 2021. 
 
 
6. Reference list 
Ailloud, L.E. and Hoenig, J.M. (2019). A general theory of age-length keys: combining the forward and 
inverse keys to estimate age composition from incomplete data. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 
76(6), pp.1515–1523. doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsz072. 
Bertrand, A., Josse, E., (2000). Acoustic estimation of longline tuna abundance. ICES Journal of 
Marine Science 57, 919–926. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmsc.2000.0579 
Bivand R, Pebesma E, Gomez-Rubio V (2013). Applied spatial data analysis with R, Second edition. 
Springer, NY. https://asdar-book.org/. 
Christensen, H.T., Rigét, F., Retzel, A., Nielsen, E.H., Nielsen, E.E. and Hedeholm, R. (2022). Year-round 
genetic monitoring of mixed-stock fishery of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua); implications for 
management. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 79, pp.1515 1529, doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsac076. 
Demer, D. A., Andersen, L. N., Bassett, C., Berger, L., Chu, D., Condiotty, J., Cutter Jr., G. R., Hutton, B., 
Korneliussen, R., Bouffant, N. Le, Macaulay, G., Michaels, W. L., Murfin, D., Pabitzer, A., Refree, J. S., 
Sessions, T. S., Stierhoff, K. L., & Thompson, C. H. (2017). Evaluation of a broadband echosounder for 
fisheries and marine ecosystem science. 
Dragesund, O., Olsen, S., 1965. On the possibility of estimating year-class strength by measuring 
echo-abundance of 0-group fish. FiskDir. Skr. Ser. Havunders 47–75. 
==PAGE:47==
Dunning, (2022) New methods for broadband acoustic surveys to study the ecology of Atlantic cod 
(Gadus morhua) in Greenland, University of Aberdeen 
Dunning, J., Jansen, T., Fenwick, A.J. and Fernandes, P.G. (2023). A new in-situ method to estimate 
fish target strength reveals high variability in broadband measurements. Fisheries Research, 261, 
p.106611. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2023.106611. 
Echoview Software Pty Ltd, 2020. Echoview® version 11.0.255. Echoview Software Pty Ltd, Hobart, 
Australia. 
Edgell, J.A., 1935. False echoes in deep water. Hydrographic Review 19–20. 
Fall, J.J.E., Wenneck, T. de L., Bogstad, B., Fuglebakk, E., Godiksen, J.A., Korsbrekke, K., Seim, S.E., 
Skage, M.L., Staby, A., Tranang, C.A., Windsland, K., Russkikh, A.A., Fomin, K., 2022. Fish 
investigations in the Barents Sea winter 2021 : IMR/PINRO Joint Report Series nr. 1 2022. 112. 
Foote, K.G., 1983. Linearity of fisheries acoustics, with addition theorems. The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America 73, 1932–1940. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.389583 
Freitas, C., Olsen, E.M., Moland, E., Ciannelli, L., Knutsen, H., 2015. Behavioral responses of Atlantic 
cod to sea temperature changes. Ecology and Evolution 5, 2070–2083. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.1496 
Frouzova, J., Kubecka, J., Balk, H., and Frouz, J. 2005. Target strength of some European fishspecies 
and its dependence on fish body par ameters. Fisheries Research, 75: 86–96. 
Furusawa, M. (2021). VOLUME SCATTERING AND ECHO INTEGRATION IN FISHERIES ACOUSTICS 
REVISITED. Journal of Marine Science and Technology, 29(2). doi:https://doi.org/10.51400/2709-
6998.1074. 
Gauthier, S. and Rose, G.A. (2001a). Target Strength of encaged Atlantic redfish (Sebastes spp.). ICES 
Journal of Marine Science, 58(3), pp.562–568. doi:https://doi.org/10.1006/jmsc.2001.1066. 
Gauthier, S., Rose, G.A., (2001b). Diagnostic tools for unbiased in situ target strength estimation. Can. 
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 58, 2149–2155. https://doi.org/10.1139/f01-152 
Guillard, J. and Vergès, C. (2007). The Repeatability of Fish Biomass and Size Distribution Estimates 
Obtained by Hydroacoustic Surveys Using Various Sampling Strategies and Statistical Analyses. 
International Review of Hydrobiology, 92(6), pp.605–617. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/iroh.200710948. 
==PAGE:48==
Hahsler, M., Piekenbrock, M., Doran, D. (2019). “dbscan: Fast Density-Based Clustering with R.” 
Journal of Statistical Software, 91(1), 1–30. doi:10.18637/jss.v091.i01. 
Horne, J. K., and Jech, J. M. 2005. Models, measures, and visualiza tions of fish backscatter. In Sounds 
in the Sea. From Ocean Acoustics to Acoustical Oceanography, pp. 374–397. Ed. by H. Medwin. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
ICES (2005). Spawning and life history information for North Atlantic cod stocks. ICES Cooperative 
Research Report, No. 274. 152 pp. 
ICES. 2022. Northwestern Working Group (NWWG). ICES Scientific Reports. 4:42. 755 pp. 
http://doi.org/10.17895/ices.pub.19771381. 
ICES. 2023. Stock Annex: Cod (Gadus morhua) in NAFO area 1, West Greenland Inshore Spawning 
Cod. ICES Stock Annexes. 20 pp 10.17895/ices.pub.23807991.  
ICES (2024). Northwestern Working Group (NWWG). ICES Scientific Reports, 6:39.714pp. 
https://doi.org/10.17895/ices.pub.25605738.  
Jansen, T., Kristensen, K., van der Kooij, J., Post, S., Campbell, A., Utne, K.R., Carrera, P., Jacobsen, J.A., 
Gudmundsdottir, A., Roel, B.A., Hatfield, E.M.C., 2015. Nursery areas and recruitment variation of 
North East Atlantic mackerel (Scomber scombrus). ICES J.Mar.Sci. 72(6), 1779–1789. 
doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsu186 
Kimura, K., 1929. On the detection of fish groups by an acoustic method. Journal of the Imperial 
Fisheries Institute, Tokyo 41–45. 
Kloser, R.J., 1996. Improved precision of acoustic surveys of benthopelagic fish by means of a deep-
towed transducer. ICES Journal of Marine Science 53, 407–413. 
https://doi.org/10.1006/jmsc.1996.0057 
Korneliussen, R., Heggelund, Y., Macaulay, G.J., Patel, D., Johnsen, E. and Eliassen, I.K. (2016). 
Acoustic identification of marine species using a feature library. Methods in Oceanography, 17(17), 
pp.187–205. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mio.2016.09.002. 
Kristensen, K., Nielsen, A., Berg, C. W., Skaug, H., & Bell, B. M. (2016). TMB: Automatic Differentiation 
and Laplace Approximation. Journal of Statistical Software, 70(5), 1–21. 
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v070.i05 
==PAGE:49==
Lavery, A.C., Bassett, C., Lawson, G.L. and Jech, J.M. (2017). Exploiting signal processing approaches 
for broadband echosounders. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 74(8), pp.2262–2275. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsx155. 
Long, S. and Jones, P.J.S. (2020). Greenland’s offshore Greenland halibut fishery and role of the 
Marine Stewardship Council certification: A governance case study. Marine Policy, p.104095. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104095. 
Massicotte P, South A (2024). rnaturalearth: World Map Data from Natural Earth. R package version 
1.0.1.9000, https://github.com/ropensci/rnaturalearth, 
https://docs.ropensci.org/rnaturalearthhires/, https://docs.ropensci.org/rnaturalearth/. 
Maunder, M.N. and Piner, K.R. (2015). Contemporary fisheries stock assessment: many issues still 
remain. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72(1), pp.7–18. doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsu015. 
McClatchie, S., Thorne, R.E., Grimes, P. and Hanchet, S. (2000). Ground truth and target identification 
for fisheries acoustics. Fisheries Research, 47(2-3), pp.173–191. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165-
7836(00)00168-5. 
Midttun, L., Saetersdal, G., 1957. On the use of echo sounder observations for estimating fish 
abundance. Paper 29 presented at the Joint Scientific Meeting of ICNAF, ICES and FAO, Lisbon 1957. 
Spec. Publ. Int. Comm. NW Atlant. Fish. 2, 4. 
Mortensen, J., Rysgaard, S., Winding, M.H.S., Juul-Pedersen, T., Arendt, K.E., Lund, H., Stuart Lee, 
A.E., Meire, L., 2022. Multidecadal Water Mass Dynamics on the West Greenland Shelf. Journal of 
Geophysical Research: https://doi.org/10.1029/2022JC018724 Oceans 127, e2022JC018724. 
Nielsen, A., & Berg, C. W. (2014). Estimation of time-varying selectivity in stock assessments using 
state-space models. Fisheries Research, 158, 96-101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2014.01.014 
Nychka, D., Furrer. R., Paige. J., Sain, S. (2021). “fields: Tools for spatial data.” R package version 
16.2, https://github.com/dnychka/fieldsRPackage. 
Ona, E. and Mitson, R.B. (1996). Acoustic sampling and signal processing near the seabed: the 
deadzone revisited. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 53(4), pp.677–690. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1006/jmsc.1996.0087. 
Ona, E., Barange, M., 1999. Single target recognition. ICES Coop. Res. Rep. 235 28–43. 
Parker-Stetter, S.L., Rudstam, L.G., Sullivan, P.J., Warner, D.M., (2009). Standard operating procedures 
for fisheries acoustic surveys in the Great Lakes. Great Lakes Fishery Commission. 
==PAGE:50==
Pebesma E, Bivand R (2005). “Classes and methods for spatial data in R.” R News, 5(2), 9–
13. https://CRAN.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/. 
Pebesma, E., & Bivand, R. (2023). Spatial Data Science: With Applications in R. Chapman and 
Hall/CRC. https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429459016 
Prince, J. and Hordyk, A. (2018). What to do when you have almost nothing: A simple quantitative 
prescription for managing extremely data-poor fisheries. Fish and Fisheries, 20(2), pp.224–238. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12335. 
R Core Team, (2024). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. 
Riede, K., (2004). Global register of migratory species: from global to regional scales: final report of 
the R&D-Projekt 808 05 081. 
Rose, G.A. and Porter, D.R. (1996). Target-strength studies on Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) in 
Newfoundland waters. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 53(2), pp.259–265. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1006/jmsc.1996.0032. 
Rowell, T.J., Erisman, B.E., Juan José Cota-Nieto, Aburto-Oropeza, O. and López-Sagástegui, C. (2019). 
Advanced Acoustic Technologies for the Monitoring and Management of Sustainable Fisheries: A 
Practice Manual. 
Rudstam, L.G., Parker, S.L., Einhouse, D.W., Witzel, L.D., Warner, D.M., Stritzel, J.L., Parrish, D.L., 
Sullivan, P.J., (2003). Application of in situ target-strength estimations in lakes: examples from 
rainbow-smelt surveys in Lakes Erie and Champlain. ICES Journal of Marine Science 60, 500507. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1054-3139(03)00046-8 
Rudstam, L.G., Parker-Stetter, S.L., Sullivan, P.J. and Warner, D.M. (2009). Towards a standard 
operating procedure for fishery acoustic surveys in the Laurentian Great Lakes, North America. ICES 
Journal of Marine Science, 66(6), pp.1391–1397. doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsp014. 
Sawada, K., Masahiko Furusawa and Williamson, N.J. (1993). Conditions for the precise measurement 
of fish target strength in situ. The Journal of The Marine Acoustics Society of Japan, 20(2), pp.73–79. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3135/jmasj.20.73. 
Simmonds, E.J., Williamson, N.J., Gerlotto, F. and Aglen, A. (1992). ACOUSTIC SURVEY DESIGN AND 
ANALYSIS PROCEDURE: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF CURRENT PRACTICE. International Council for 
the Exploration of the Sea. Copenhagen, Denamrk, ISSN 2707-7144 ISBN 978-87-7482-530-2 
==PAGE:51==
Simmonds, J. and MacLennan, D. (2005). Fisheries Acoustics: Theory and Practice. 2nd edition ed. 
Blackwell Science. 
Soule, M., Barange, M. and Hampton, I. (1995). Evidence of bias in estimates of target strength 
obtained with a split-beam echo-sounder. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 52(1), pp.139–144. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/1054-3139(95)80022-0. 
Soule, M., Hampton, I., Barange, M., 1996. Potential improvements to current methods of 
recognizing single targets with a split-beam echo-sounder. ICES Journal of Marine Science  237–243. 
South A, Michael S, Massicotte P (2024). rnaturalearthdata: World Vector Map Data from Natural 
Earth Used in 'rnaturalearth'. R package version 1.0.0.9000, 
https://github.com/ropensci/rnaturalearthdata, https://docs.ropensci.org/rnaturalearthdata/. 
Storr-Paulsen, M., Wieland, K., Hovgård, H. and Rätz, H.-J. (2004). Stock structure of Atlantic cod 
(Gadus morhua) in West Greenland waters: implications of transport and migration. ICES Journal of 
Marine Science, 61(6), pp.972–982. 14 doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icesjms.2004.07.021. 
Therkildsen, N.O., Hemmer-Hansen, J., Hedeholm, R.B., Wisz, M.S., Pampoulie, C., Meldrup, D., 
Bonanomi, S., Retzel, A., Olsen, S.M. and Nielsen, E.E. (2013). Spatiotemporal SNP analysis reveals 
pronounced biocomplexity at the northern range margin of Atlantic codGadus morhua. Evolutionary 
Applications, 6(4), pp.690–705. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/eva.12055. 
Thygesen, U.H., Albertsen, C.M., Berg, C.W. et al. Validation of ecological state space models using 
the Laplace approximation. Environ Ecol Stat 24, 317–339 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10651-
017-0372-4 
Trout, G.C., Lee, A.J., Richardson, I.D., Jones, F.R.H., 1952. Recent Echo Sounder Studies. Nature 170, 
71–72. https://doi.org/10.1038/170071b0 
Turcotte, F., McDermid, J., Dejong, R., Landry, L., Rolland, N., 2022. Biomass indices of NAFO Division 
4TVn fall spawning Atlantic Herring (Clupea harengus) from hydroacoustic surveys on spawning 
grounds. DFO Can. Sci. Advis. Sec. Res. Doc. 2022/046. 
Warner, D.M., Rudstam, L.G., Klumb, R.A., (2002). In Situ Target Strength of Alewives in Freshwater. 
Transactions of the American Fisheries Society 131, 212–223. https://doi.org/10.1577/1548-
8659(2002)131<0212:ISTSOA>2.0.CO;2 
Wickham H (2016). ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-Verlag New York. ISBN 978-
3-319-24277-4, https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org. 
==PAGE:52==
Wickham H, Bryan J (2023). readxl: Read Excel Files. https://readxl.tidyverse.org, 
https://github.com/tidyverse/readxl. 
Wickham H, François R, Henry L, Müller K, Vaughan D (2023). dplyr: A Grammar of Data 
Manipulation. R package version 1.1.4, 
https://github.com/tidyverse/dplyr, https://dplyr.tidyverse.org. 
Wickham H, Vaughan D, Girlich M (2024). tidyr: Tidy Messy Data. R package version 1.3.1, 
https://github.com/tidyverse/tidyr, https://tidyr.tidyverse.org. 
Wolff, L. and Sabah Badri-Hoeher (2014). Imaging sonar-based fish detection in shallow waters. 
OCEANS Conference. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/oceans.2014.7003213. 
Wood, S. (2023). Mixed GAM Computation Vehicle with Automatic Smoothness Estimation, v.1.9.1. 
Yee, T.W. (2015). Vector Generalized Linear and Additive Models: With an Implementation in R. 
Springer, New York, USA. 
 
Polygon information 
The coordinates of the vertices of the polygons are given below. The polygons need to be used in this 
order to label the areas correctly: 
Ice fjord - inner: pol.x=c(-50.95070228685925, -50.75698716725122, -50.37229263961623, -
50.07940324745356, -49.78160492154712, -49.32447220698425, -49.45884964929406, -
50.95070228685925), pol.y=c(64.8758824100782, 64.60580369850079, 64.58796572761753, 
64.37812440557245, 64.26825365591989, 64.25687926550468, 64.90458172862124, 
64.8758824100782) 
Kapisillit: pol.x=c(-50.55914325503232, -50.66125709309799, -50.72315988150282, -
50.6692232043405, -49.88819352279002, -49.32447220698425, -49.45884964929406, -
50.55914325503232), pol.y=c(64.46513783208208, 64.47965135451753, 64.45352158499692, 
64.40743071416496, 64.26275972317113, 64.25687926550468, 64.90458172862124, 
64.46513783208208) 
Ice fjord - outer: pol.x=c(-51.65007092266644, -51.49362974864551, -50.87570887016447, -
50.78365687565665, -49.67668456823876, -49.32447220698425, -49.45884964929406, -
51.65007092266644), pol.y=c(64.81296920414044, 64.54638372114822, 64.52638946360194, 
==PAGE:53==
64.60866138190788, 64.65817728213058, 64.25687926550468, 64.90458172862124, 
64.81296920414044) 
Qoqqut: pol.x=c(-51.23886996016934, -51.4625304806928, -51.2759694914723, -
50.79784254136037, -50.39396150867955, -49.32447220698425, -49.45884964929406, -
50.81474878035305, -51.10821857357152, -51.23886996016934), pol.y=c(64.22800787807211, 
64.20277095384839, 64.12849690504177, 64.21270406861619, 64.38183856832522, 
64.25687926550468, 64.90458172862124, 64.64188000405915, 64.33054310023292, 
64.22800787807211) 
Parallel islands: pol.x=c(-51.64039568325947, -51.77102097768694, -51.24679553435306, -
51.18772381473647, -50.93365267578322, -49.32447220698425, -49.45884964929406, -
51.64039568325947), pol.y=c(64.80961490236811, 64.26757475463523, 64.21838473823684, 
64.24945505298705, 64.49926095524991, 64.25687926550468, 64.90458172862124, 
64.80961490236811) 
Ameralik inner: pol.x=c(-50.91053247317214, -51.10045418910667, -51.071982638489, -
51.02161413014755, -50.22579051605558, -49.32447220698425, -49.45884964929406, -
50.91053247317214), pol.y=c(64.20458832721056, 64.17456308319618, 64.13971865911087, 
64.05011239038087, 64.06137993089069, 64.25687926550468, 64.90458172862124, 
64.20458832721056) 
Ameralik outer: pol.x=c(-50.91053247317214, -51.11549459087487, -51.57199974485408, -
51.60064320824927, -51.22988782260224, -49.32447220698425, -49.45884964929406, -
50.91053247317214), pol.y=c(64.20458832721056, 64.15144395544114, 64.08536575921345, 
64.02725986986758, 63.97785036825515, 64.25687926550468, 64.90458172862124, 
64.20458832721056) 
Entrance: pol.x=c(-52.13099306060508, -52.04364934352697, -51.80002886474912, -
51.34445078832292, -51.22988782260224, -49.32447220698425, -49.45884964929406, -
52.13099306060508), pol.y=c(64.27509388766522, 63.95076361403334, 63.87495103972306, 
63.91977487038407, 63.97785036825515, 64.25687926550468, 64.90458172862124, 
64.27509388766522) 
