==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Synthesis and physiochemical characterisation of
aluminum hydroxysulfate and aluminum
hydroxyphosphate vaccine adjuvants
Andreas Friis Sørensen, s184265
In collaboration with
Department of Research & Development, Croda Denmark
Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark
Supervisors:
Laurent Duroux, PhD, Croda Denmark
Peter M. H. Heegaard, Professor, DTU
August 23, 2024
==PAGE:2==
1
Preface
The presented study is my contribution to the development of new aluminum adjuvants for
vaccine use. This contribution was made to obtain the Master’s Degree of science in Pharma-
cological Design and Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The experiments
were performed at Croda Denmark facilities at DTU science-park under supervision from
PhD Laurent Duroux, Senior Research Development Scientist at Croda Denmark. The su-
pervisor from the Technical University of Denmark was professor Peter M. H. Heegaard from
the Department of Health Technology.
I would like to thank Croda Denmark for giving me the opportunity to work on their project,
developing new products based on costumer and industry demands. This has been a great
inspiration, and a valuable experience. I would like to thank the entire staff of Croda Denmark
for their kindness and help throughout the project. I want to thank Dennis Christensen, Head
of R&D at Croda Denmark, for providing me with this opportunity. I want to thank professor
Peter M. H. Heegaard for providing technical help in ensuring administrative control of the
project, and for his guidance throughout the project. I need to thank Berit Wenzell and
Kai Neufeld at the National Center for Nano Fabrication and Characterization for helping
provide EDX-SEM measurements for the project. And finally, i want to thank PhD Laurent
Duroux for supervising me throughout the project, and providing an exceptional knowledge
of Croda’s legacy products.
It has been a pleasure to experience his enthusiasm for the
project, and particular for the field of adjuvants.
i
==PAGE:3==
2
Abstract
Aluminum adjuvants have been in use for more than 80 years, and have been successfully
applied to vaccine formulations, increasing the efficiency of vaccination. The most exploited
function of aluminum adjuvants is their ability to adsorb antigens via electrostatic forces.
The industries growing demand has led Croda Denmark to develop a new aluminum adju-
vant, with a point of zero charge (PZC) at pH 7.0, differing from Crodas current products,
Alhydrogel™and Adju-Phos™, with PZCs of pH 9.5 and pH 5.2 respectively. Currently, one
other commercially available aluminum adjuvant possess the PZC of pH 7.0 - Merck & Co’s
AAHS.
The reason for Crodas focus on development of a new aluminum adjuvant with the same
characteristics as AAHS, is the world-known ability for Croda Denmark to produce alu-
minum adjuvants aseptically, ensuring the highest quality. This led customers to propose
development of a new aluminum adjuvant, directed by Croda Denmark.
The project was targeted towards initial development of aluminum hydroxyphosphate and
aluminum hydroxysulfate from Alhydrogel™. It was found that modifications of Alhydrogel™
with phosphoric acid caused a change in surface chemistry. Investigations of Alhydrogel™
modification with sulfuric acid was not found to alter the surface chemistry.
Measurements of the electrophoretic potential using zeta potential(Zp) measurements indi-
cated the possibility of modifying Alhydrogel™with phosphoric acid to achieve a PZC of
7.0. The changes in surface chemistry was further investigated measuring Zp. Here using
two model proteins, hen-egg lysozyme(Lys-C) and bovine serum albumin (BSA). Zp mea-
surements on protein-adjuvant complexes following Langmuir isotherm modelling provided
key information, such as binding constants and surface charge saturation for the properties
achieved by the new adjuvants. Measuring protein binding capacity by UV absorbance spec-
trometry using the model proteins, provided further information on the properties of the new
adjuvants. Finally, Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX) was used to identify the
stoichiometric ratio of one of the new adjuvants, to identify phosphorous content.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Preface
i
2
Abstract
ii
3
Introduction
1
4
Intro to report landscape - Vaccines
2
5
Enhancing Vaccine Efficacy: The role of Adjuvants
3
5.1
Mechanism of Adjuvants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
6
Aluminum Adjuvants
7
6.1
Aluminium adjuvant history . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.2
Aluminum salt adjuvants - Mechanisms of action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.3
Adsorption of antigens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.4
Physiochemical properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.5
Chemical structure of amorphous aluminum oxyhydroxide . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7
Synthesis of aluminum hydroxy-phosphate and -sulfate
18
7.1
Amorphous Aluminium Hydroxyphosphate Sulfate (AAHS) . . . . . . . . . .
18
7.2
Aluminum Hydroxyphosphate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7.3
Aluminum hydroxysulfate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
8
Project plan and methods
25
8.1
Experimental strategy and chosen methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8.2
Zp measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8.3
UV Absorbance measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
9
Materials and methods
31
9.1
Common materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
9.2
Synthesis of Aluminum hydroxyphosphate and Aluminum Hydroxysulfate . .
32
9.3
Zeta potential measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
iii
==PAGE:5==
9.4
Isotherms fitting of ”Zp on BSA/Lys-C adsorption of AH, AP and AH PO4
variants” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9.5
UV Absorption spectrometry - Protein binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9.6
EDX-SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
10 Results & Discussion
38
10.1 Preparation of aluminum hydroxyphosphate and aluminum hydroxysulfate
from aluminum oxyhydroxide (AH) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
10.2 Zeta potential measurement at pH 7.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
11 EDX-SEM
46
11.1 BSA and Lys-C adsorption isotherms to AH and variants measured from
changes in Zp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
11.1.1 Lys-C adsorption to AP, AH and AH variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
11.1.2 BSA adsorption to AP, AH and AH variants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
11.2 Absorbance measurements - Measuring protein adsorption capacity . . . . . .
58
11.3 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
12 Future Strategy
65
13 References
66
Appendix
71
A Appendix
71
A.1 Surface charge saturation of AH2% by BSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.2 Background abs for AH samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3 EDX raw data and measurement examples from SEM
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
iv
==PAGE:6==
3
Introduction
Croda Denmark is a world leader in the production of vaccine adjuvants for human and veteri-
nary use, and during the last 80 years, ∼70% of aluminum salt adjuvants have been produced
by Croda Denmark. Alhydrogel™and Adju-Phos™are two vaccine adjuvants developed and
produced by Croda Denmark.
To address the industries developing demands for aluminum salt adjuvants, Croda is investing
into the development of new aluminum adjuvants to meet these requests.
Alhydrogel™and Adju-Phos™have been produced at Croda Denmark since the 1970’s. Both
have been successfull as immuno-stimulators and protein antigen carriers for various vaccines.
The demands from customers of the vaccine industry have caused Croda Denmark to focus
on development of a new aluminum salt adjuvant, with a more neutral net charge at neutral
pH levels.
Alhydrogel™has a point of zero charge (PZC) at pH ∼9.5 and Adju-Phos™has a PZC at
pH ∼5.2. The goal for the development project is a new aluminum adjuvant with a PZC
at pH ∼7.0. A commercially available aluminum adjuvant with PZC at pH ∼7.0 is AAHS,
produced by Merck & Co.
A proposed solution for the production of this new adjuvant is to chemically modify Alhydro-
gel™with phosphate and sulfate respectively or a de novo synthesis of aluminum hydroxy-
sulfate or -phosphate. First, Alhydrogel will be modified with phosphate or sulfate ions, to
lower its PZC with optimization of the ion concentration to lower its PZC from pH ∼9.5 to pH
∼7.0. The PZC of the modified samples is measured as zeta potential using electrophoretic
light scattering.
The preferred modifications is obtained by screening of different phosphate and sulfate ion
concentrations at fixed pH values. The samples from the screening showing the wanted char-
acteristics(PZC close to pH 7.0) was used for further optimization of ionic concentrations,
measured at pH 7.0. Further characterisation of the modified Alhydrogel samples are per-
formed assessing their interactions with model proteins, hen-egg lysozyme (Lys-C) and bovine
serum albumin (BSA).
1
==PAGE:7==
4
Intro to report landscape - Vaccines
In the fight against infectious diseases, vaccines are one of the most effective medical inven-
tions. Infectious diseases has been a problem for human health, affecting most of the human
population. The infections are caused by bacteria, virus, parasites and fungi [31].
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), one of the main causes of death in low-
income countries, being app. 26% of the world population, is caused by infectious diseases.
The primary causes are malaria, tuberculosis, HIV, influenza and more recently COVID-19.
To fight the infectious diseases, the use of vaccination has proven to be one of the most
efficient methods for limiting disease outbreaks and disease burden. Today, vaccines save
millions of people every year, by inducing long-term prevention of infection [10].
The history of vaccines starts in 1796, where Edward Jenner from the United Kingdom
observed immunity to cowpox by the milkmaids. His hypothesis was that exposure to small
amounts of the disease over multiple occasions would lead to immunity. He inoculated small
amounts of cowpox pus from lesions into hosts, and found that this did indeed cause the
host to become immune to the disease.
From this, he invented the first ever vaccine in
1798 against cowpox. This newly acquired knowledge was utilized by Louis Pasteur, who
worked on preparing appropriate vaccine antigens, resulting live-attenuated vaccines against
chicken cholera, anthrax and rabies. The same technique has been applied to develop vaccines
against tuberculosis. Later, the use of viral cultivation in vitro allowed scientists to study the
pathogens in great details, essentially leading to better attenuation methods. This method
resulted in live oral polio, measles, rubella, mumps and varicella vaccines [31].
In the 20th century, advances in molecular biology lead to a greater understanding of the
structure and function of pathogens. Knowledge of antigen epitopes and the vaccine response
of the host was used to design efficient vaccines. Advances in molecular genetics and genome
sequencing was a massive improvement of current technology. This allowed for identification
and quantification of pathogens specific characteristics, leading to the development of the live
and inactivated vaccine against pathogens like influenza, a RNA virus with multiple variants
of epitopes, meaning different forms or versions of specific parts of their structure that the
immune system can recognize and target [31]. The incidents of some vaccine preventable
2
==PAGE:8==
diseases before and after the vaccination era are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Reduction in disease cases before vaccination (pre-vaccine era) and in 2017. Table
is from [31]
It is seen that for Smallpox, Rubella, Paralytic Polio and Diphtheria, the reduction in inci-
dents is 100%, showing the effectiveness of vaccination. It is estimated that vaccination have
prevented 6 million deaths from vaccine-preventable diseases annually [31].
A modern example of vaccine development was when the genetic sequence of the SARS-CoV-
2 virus was published. SARS-CoV-2 is the virus that causes COVID-19, an at this time, new
to the world infectious viral disease causing deaths and respiratory disease. The transmission
rate, health complications and deaths related to the virus caused global pandemic, and a
need for disease prevention was urgently necessary. When the sequence was published, vaccine
R&D departments all around the world directed their expertise and efforts towards developing
a vaccine formulation to fight the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Many vaccine platforms were evaluated,
including, nucleic acid, virus-like particle, peptide, viral vector, recombinant proteins, live
attenuated virus and inactivated virus approaches. In the early phases of development, many
of these platforms were not approved, but under investigation as potential platforms for a
new vaccine formulation [38].
5
Enhancing Vaccine Efficacy: The role of Adjuvants
Some vaccines contain adjuvants to enhance the effect of the vaccine. Adjuvants are one
of the main components in many modern vaccine formulations [30]. Adjuvants are defined
3
==PAGE:9==
as materials added to vaccines, that can shape and/or enhance the antigen-specific immune
response [40]. Adjuvants come in many different classes of materials, including mineral salts,
microbial products, emulsions, saponins, synthetic small molecules, polymers, nanoparticles
and liposomes [43].
The importance of adjuvants arise from their simple overall function - to enhance the immune
response upon vaccination. Through the evolution of vaccines, the antigens used in the for-
mulations have become simpler over time. This resulted in a decrease in immunostimulatory
effect, as the simpler antigens would elicit a weaker immune response. Many of the first
generation vaccines contained whole organisms, eliciting a moderate immune response, but
with a high occurrence of side effects. Due to the side effects, the development focused more
and more on producing simple fragments from the whole organisms, subunits or antigens.
During this process, it was observed that the immunogenicity of the vaccinations decreased,
leading to less efficient vaccination. This was due to the poor immunogenic nature of the
simple purified antigens, leading to a insufficient activation of the innate immune system [18,
4].
Immunization with pure antigens without adjuvant may result in a low induction of adaptive
immune response or no T-cell response. The wanted effect from vaccination may only be
achieved by repeating the injection of the pure antigen. Therefore, the use of an adjuvant to
increase the immunogenicity of pure antigens is favorable, as it can decrease the amount of
administered antigen, number of injections and cost of vaccination [30].
The discovery of adjuvants for vaccine formulations proved that the lost immunogenicity of
using simple purified antigens could be restored, as the combination of adjuvant and antigen
could elicit modest or high immunogenicity [4].
4
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1: The immunogenicity and tolerability of vaccine formulations containing adjuvants
and purified antigens is enhanced. Figure from [4].
An obvious advantage of using adjuvants is the reduction in antigens used during vaccination,
as the adjuvant can enhance the response to the antigen, without increasing the amount of
antigen used for vaccination. Because of the increase in potency of the adjuvant containing
vaccine, the number of doses that is administered to a patient can be reduced, meaning
that more patients can be vaccinated. Lastly, adjuvants are able to modulate the immune
response themselves, apart from the antigen administered with a vaccine. Different adjuvants
can induce different immune responses depending on the specific adjuvant. This can result
in different immune-triggering mechanisms by the adjuvant, which is highly beneficial for
vaccine developers aiming to design vaccines with specific immunogenic behavior [4].
5.1
Mechanism of Adjuvants
The basic function of the adjuvants is the enhancement of adaptive immunity by activation
of the innate immune cells.
The function can be divided into 2 overall categories.
The
first category is promotion of antigen presenting signals, and the second is activation of
co-stimulatory signals.
The generation of antigen presenting signals come when the adjuvant activate antigen pre-
senting cells (APCs). Here, the adjuvant present the antigen to APCs, which process and
present the antigen on their cell surface via the the major histocompability complex (MHC).
5
==PAGE:11==
For co-stimulatory signals, adjuvants can enhance the expression of co-stimulatory surface
molecules, such as CD40, CD80, and CD86, on the APCs, alongside MHC the molecules. In
addition to surface molecules, some co-stimulatory signals are modulated by secreted factors,
such as inflammatory cytokines, which can further enhance the immune response. The anti-
gen presenting signal, and the co-stimulatory signals are part of the innate immune system,
and upon production of these signals, a strong response towards the adaptive immune re-
sponse can be be produced. Activation of the adaptive immune system by the innate immune
system can lead to a strong adaptive immune response [43, 7].
Thus, adjuvants enhance adaptive immunity by activating the innate immune system. The ac-
tivation can be antigen-presenting and/or co-stimulatory. MHC molecules and co-stimulatory
molecules work together to amplify the immune response. Additionally, adjuvants can stim-
ulate the innate immune system through mechanisms that enhance antigen presentation, e.g
with inflammatory cytokines.
To create a signal, the APC is to be presented with a molecules associated with danger.
This can be pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), damage-associated molecular
patterns (DAMPs) and small molecule agonists of Toll-like receptors (TLRs). These molecules
can initiate an immune response. PAMP’s are molecules that the immune system identifies as
foreign molecules. An example of a PAMP is lipopolysaccharides found on the cell membrane
of gram-negative bacteria. DAMPs are associated with molecules that are release during
stress, damaged or dying cells. These molecules originate from the body and signals tissue
damage or stress. TLR agonists are foreign molecules that directly activate TLRs. But as
mentioned earlier, the presentation of these molecules to the immune system in their pure
form may not enhance a sufficient immune response. Adjuvants can then be used to enhance
the presentation of these molecules to the innate immune system. The adjuvants function
can vary, depending on the chosen adjuvant. Adjuvants can be engineered to elicit a specific
immune response. This is important for the development of vaccines, as the formulation is
dependant on the function of the adjuvant [18].
A recent and well known event that required the use of adjuvants was the worldwide vacci-
6
==PAGE:12==
nation against the SARS-CoV-19. During the COVID-19 pandemic, there was a need for an
effective, cheap and well understood adjuvant to induce long term immunity. Here, one of
the options was aluminium adjuvants. These adjuvants have a long history of use. Both the
safety profile and the immunogenicity of the aluminium adjuvants were well documented, and
thus the adjuvant could be used in vaccine formulations for COVID-19. A paper discussing
vaccine developed to fight COVID-19 showed that out of 32 vaccine formulations, over 50 %
contained aluminium adjuvants. One of the arguments for using aluminium adjuvants are
the low cost of the adjuvants, and the well known side effects, found to be local inflammation
at the injection site, and only very few cases where systemic side effects are observed [4].
With the fundamental understanding of adjuvants, and their main function, we now focus on
aluminum salts, one of the most extensively utilized adjuvant types. These adjuvants were
introduced over 100 years ago.
6
Aluminum Adjuvants
Short intro - aluminum adjuvants
The commercially available adjuvants mentioned in this report, and of which the follow-
ing general sections support is aluminum oxyhydroxide, aluminum hydroxyphosphate and
aluminum hydroxyphosphate sulfate. While ”alum” (potassium aluminum sulfate) is histor-
ically important as one of the earliest adjuvants, it is no longer in use, and therefor it is only
mentioned in the history section.
Although commonly referred to as ”salts” aluminum adjuvants such as aluminum oxyhydrox-
ide and aluminum hydroxyphosphate present themselves as colloidal gels. These colloidal gel
are composed of aggregated particles that form a gel-like structure, rather than crystalline
salt, as the term may imply.
7
==PAGE:13==
6.1
Aluminium adjuvant history
Aluminium salts were introduced as vaccine adjuvants in 1926 by Glenny et al [12], and has
been used as vaccine adjuvants ever since. The fist aluminium adjuvant was an aluminium
potassium sulfate ”alum”, that mixed with an antigen under basic conditions resulted in pre-
cipitation of the antigen and aluminium salt. This formulation was found to induce a ”Depot
Effect” essentially holding the antigen for a prolonged period to increase the exposure of
the antigen to the immune system [12]. This formulation proved effective, and subsequently
resulted in the interest and use of aluminium salts in vaccine formulations.
Since then,
aluminium adjuvants have been one of the most used vaccine adjuvant. The method pre-
pared by Glenny et al. was a precipitate of a toxoid with aluminium potassium, creating a
alum-precipitated vaccine. This was used as the main formulation with aluminium salts, but
complications with the precipitation conditions meant that the antigen had higher risk of be-
ing altered, making the formulation unfavorable. Today, the aluminum-precipitated vaccines
have been almost completely substituted for aluminum-adsorbed vaccines, where the antigen
is adsorbed to hydrated aluminum gels, like aluminum hydroxide and aluminum phosphate
[23]. Today, the most commonly used aluminum adjuvants are known as aluminium oxyhy-
droxide and aluminum hydroxyhosphate. These aluminum adjuvants are so well known and
studied, that they are used as the reference for comparing new types of aluminum adjuvants
[40, 13].
6.2
Aluminum salt adjuvants - Mechanisms of action
As mentioned, aluminum salt adjuvants are well know and have been in used extensively for
almost 100 years. Even with this in mind, there is no clear indication of the mechanisms
supporting the immune response elicited when using aluminum adjuvants. The mechanism of
actions for aluminum adjuvants is complex, but there are few aspects that are well recognised,
such as the depot effect, activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome by DAMPs and the Th2
bias [43].
The depot effect
8
==PAGE:14==
Initially, the theory behind the effect of the aluminium salts was believed to be caused by
a depot effect. The theory was supported by experiments proving the toxoids precipitated
with aluminium salts had an increased ”life” expectancy compared to soluble toxoids. One
study also found that an alum nodule from one guinea pig could be extracted and prepared
to immunize another Guinea pig [26]. This would indicate that aluminum adjuvants may
prolong the bio-availability of the antigens upon injection, and increase the presentation of
the antigen to APCs [26].
DAMPs and the NLRP3 inflammasome
Upon administration of the aluminum adjuvant formulated vaccine, the tissue at the injection
site can release signs of cellular damage. The signs of cellular damage can be presence of host
DNA or uric acid from cell death. This can cause an endogenous danger signal that acts as
DAMPs, leading to an activation of the innate immune system [7, 25].
Upon signaling from DAMPs released from cell death at the injection site, there are specu-
lation on the specific activation that causes further activation of the innate immune system.
For aluminum adjuvants, the NLRP3 inflammasome is thought to be highly related to the
immunostimulatory properties of the adjuvants. The release of DAMPs at the injections site
activate the NRLP3 inflammasome of innate immune cells, by binding to Pattern Recognition
Receptors, such as Toll-Like-Receptors of innate immune cells. This can be dendritic cells
and macrophages. Upon activation, the NLRP3 inflammasome activate caspase-1, which in
turn catalyse the production of inflammatory cytokines, the most well known being IL-1β
and IL-18 for aluminum adjuvants.
The inflammatory cytokines are responsible for inflammation at the injection site, causing the
recruitment of more innate immune cells and further activation of the innate immune cells to
produce more cytokines and direct the immune response. From this, there is another aspect
that is discussed regarding the mechanism of aluminum adjuvants. That is the activation
and promotion of an adaptive immune response [9, 18, 43].
Adaptive immunity - The Th2 bias
9
==PAGE:15==
The aluminum adjuvants currently in use have been found to induce a Th2 biased immune
response, limiting the potential use of the adjuvants. Th2 responses are primarily effective
for the protection against extracellular pathogens, by activation of B cells to promote the
production of antibodies, specifically IgG and IgE for aluminum adjuvants. This is one of the
drawbacks of using the current commercially available aluminum adjuvants, as this does not
induce protection against intracellular pathogens. The bias of the Th2 response of aluminum
adjuvants are currently under investigations, preparing nano-particle aluminum adjuvants,
with promising effect in the promotion of a Th1/Th2 balanced immune response [23, 18, 28].
6.3
Adsorption of antigens
Adsorption of the antigens by aluminium adjuvants are thought to be important for the
immunostimulatory effect of the aluminum adjuvants in the vaccine formulation [13]. An
immunostimulatory effect can also be seen when injecting the adjuvant and the antigen
separately, but this usually require larger doses of antigens to get the appropriate response.
This mechanism is not described further [18].
Aluminium adjuvants exert their main function by presenting the antigen to the APCs of
the immune system. Antigens are bound to aluminum adjuvants primarily via electrostatic
interactions, hydrophopbic interactions and ligand exchange, although other interactions can
occur. The release is dependant on the physiochemical properties of the aluminum adjuvant
and can ultimately define the amplitude of the immune response. Several studies have con-
cluded that the retention of antigens by aluminum adjuvants at the injection site allows for
accumulation of innate immune cells due to local inflammation. Here, the release rate of
antigens is important for the timing of release and presentation of the antigens to the APCs
[18].
10
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2:
Most common binding interactions between antigen and aluminum adjuvant.
Electrostatic interactions (+ , -), ligand exchange with example of dissociation of -OH from
adjuvant by phosphate group from antigen and hydrophobic interactions between two hy-
drophobic regions. The figure was created in BioRender.com.
In Figure 2 the three main adsorption interactions between aluminum adjuvants and antigens
are presented. Electrostatic interactions between oppositively charged aluminum adjuvants
and antigen, ligand exchange by the dissociation of a hydroxyl group on the aluminum adju-
vant for a phosphate group on the antigen and hydrophobic interactions between hydrophobic
regions on the aluminum adjuvant and the antigen.
Hydrophobic interactions
Hydrophobic interactions are known to be present during the interaction between antigens
and aluminum adjuvants [34].
The interactions can happen when antigens denature and
expose structure that are more prone to hydrophobic interactions. The effect of hydrophobic
interactions on immunopotentiation is limited, but the interaction is thought to interfere with
the response, as the hydrophobic forces may contain the antigen to the adjuvant surface.
A study investigated the electrostatic interactions between aluminum adjuvants and two
11
==PAGE:17==
model proteins and found that hydrophobic interactions was a part of the adsorption too. It
was found that there was an interaction between net negatively charged lysozyme and net
negatively charged aluminium hydroxyphosphate that depended on hydrophobic interactions.
This was found by increasing ethylene glycol concentration of the samples. Though the main
contribution to the interaction was found to be electrostatic forces, hydrophobic forced was
recognised to take part in the interaction too [34].
Ligand exchange
Ligand exchange is the strongest adsorption force, and can even occur when electrostatic
repulsion is present. Ligand exchange is a process, where one group/ligand attached to a
metal ion is replaced by another ligand. An example of ligand exchange is when antigens
containing phosphate groups, such as phosphorylated antigens and DNA adsorb to the surface
of the adjuvant upon displacement of hydroxyl-groups on the adjuvant surface, as shown
in Figure 2.
This forms an inner-sphere complex, which is the inorganic equivalent of a
covalent bond. Investigations on the immunopotentiation of ligand-exchange bound antigens
found that the strong ligand-exchange bond may inhibit T-cell proliferation and antigen
presentation to the APCs [16]. This had led to an investigation of the correlation between
the ligand exchange adsorption of antigens, and the immunopotentiation. Here, altering the
number of phosphate groups on the antigen was performed, to make a gradient of high-ligand
exchange to low-ligand exchange between antigen and aluminum adjuvant.
The immunopotentiation was measured, and the results from this study suggested that the
greater the adsorption to the adjuvant surface, the less effective immunopotentiation [16].
Electrostatic interactions
Electrostatic interactions are one of the most important factors for vaccine developers, when
determining the aluminum adjuvant to use in a vaccine formulation. The electrostatic inter-
action between antigen and adjuvant is defined by the respective charges of both parts. For
the proteins/antigens, the isoelectric point (pI) defines the pH of which the protein/antigen
possess a net neutral charge. For the adjuvant, the point of zero charge (PZC) defines the
pH where the adjuvant has a net neutral charge [18].
12
==PAGE:18==
For the adjuvant, the PZC is the equivalent to that of the pI to the protein. As pI/PZC
values represent the pH of which the protein or adjuvants has a net neutral charge, pH values
above will cause the net charge to be negative, and for pH values below the net charge is
positive. The electrostatic adsorption interaction takes place in the pH interval, between the
antigen pI, and the adjuvant PZC. In this interval, the antigen and the adjuvant will have
opposite charges, resulting in electrostatic attraction between the antigen and the adjuvant
[18].
Figure 3: The PZC of aluminum oxyhydroxide(AH) is ∼9.5 and for aluminum hydrox-
yphospahte (AP) it is ∼5.2. For two model proteins, Hen egg-lysozyme (Lys-C) the isoelec-
tric point (pI) is ∼11.0 and for Bovine serum albumin (BSA) the pI is ∼5.6. The figure was
inspired by [18] and created in BioRender.com.
Figure 3 is a prediction model estimate electrostatic interactions between the two Croda
adjuvants, AH and AP, and two model proteins, BSA and Lys-C. Highlighted with orange is
pH 7.0, where arrows indicate repulsion or attraction between adjuvants and proteins. The
model show that at pH 7.0, AH is electrostatic-ally repelling Lys-C, and electrostatically
attracting BSA. The opposite behavior is seen for AP, where repulsion is experienced in
13
==PAGE:19==
presence of BSA, and attraction is experienced with Lys-C, at pH 7.0.
It has been found that upon injection, that the electrostatic adsorption allows for faster
antigen release, depending on the strength of the interaction, compared to that of ligand
exchange [13]. The electrostatic interactions can be neutralized by environmental factors
present at the injection site, such as the presence of physiological salt concentrations. Though
efficient at releasing the antigen at the injection site, the timing of release is important, as
immediate release from weak electrostatic interactions may cause the antigen to diffuse and
leave the injection site, before the accumulation of APCs to the site [18].
Presence of electrostatic interactions between aluminum adjuvants and model proteins have
previously been investigated. It was found that net negatively charged aluminium hydrox-
yphosphate was effective at adsorbing net positively charged Lys-C. Identification of electro-
static interactions was found by dissociating the antigen from the adjuvant by increasing the
ionic strength of the solution. The same principle applied for the interaction between the
positively charged aluminum oxyhydroxide and the negatively charged BSA. The contribu-
tion of electrostatic forces as a major factor in the interaction between adjuvant and antigen,
and has been used in selection of adjuvants for vaccines [32].
6.4
Physiochemical properties
The physiochemical properties of aluminium adjuvants define the efficiency and use of the ad-
juvants, and are the properties that control the above described binding interactions between
antigen adjuvant. The physiochemical properties are defined by the chemical composition
of the adjuvants. Properties include particle size (both crystallite and aggregates or flocs),
surface area, surface charge and morphology. The main purpose of these properties is to
define the interaction of the adjuvants with the desired antigen for a vaccine formulation [23].
The physiochemical parameters are important for development of the vaccine formulation, as
the adjuvant can be used to stabilize the antigen prior to injection or for long term storage,
depending on the physiochemical properties the adjuvant contain [21].
14
==PAGE:20==
Surface area and morphology
As mentioned, surface area is an important physiochemical factor the adsorption of antigens
to the surface of aluminum adjuvants. Aluminum adjuvants are known for large surface area.
For AH, the surface area is estimated to 514m2/g, due to its amorphous structure. This
essentially allows for increased surface area available for adsorption of antigens [39]. The
morphology of aluminum adjuvants are dependent on the surface groups present. It is seen
for AH and AP, that the morphology of the two adjuvants differ. AH is needle-like and AP
is more ”disc-like”. The difference between the two adjuvants is that AP contain phosphate
groups. Both have hydroxyl groups, but the presence of phosphate significantly reduces the
density of hydroxyl groups and change the morphology and properties of the adjuvant [19].
Surface charge
As mentioned previously, the surface charge of the adjuvant is important for electrostatic
interactions with antigens.
The surface charge is dependant on the surface chemistry of
the adjuvant, i.e. the number and status of hydroxyl groups in AH and phosphates in AP.
For AH and AP, the surface charge of the particles have been found to contribute to the
immunopotentiation of the adjuvants [18]. The surface charge is also used to measure the
stability of colloidal suspensions, which is important for the final stability of the adjuvant
product. High surface charge of the same kind will cause repulsion by particles in suspension,
making the suspension more stable during storage [6, 29]. Specifically for this project, the
customer has provided information that the surface charge is important, as their model
antigen is highly susceptible to denaturation. Their requirement to the new adjuvant is a
PZC at pH 7.0, to avoid denaturation of the protein. Thus surface charge is important for
many functions of the aluminum adjuvants, both in term of binding of proteins and stability
of the adjuvants in colloidal suspension, but also for protein stability.
The surface charge of aluminum adjuvants can be altered, by modifying the surface chemistry
of the adjuvant. One study found that substitution of surface hydroxyl groups on aluminum
oxyhydroxide caused the surface charge to decrease [29]. The reason for this is explained
later in the report.
15
==PAGE:21==
Particle size
Aluminum hydroxides used as vaccine adjuvants are formed of aggregates of crystallites rang-
ing from few nanometers to tens of nanometers. The morphology of the crystallites differ
between various phases of aluminum hydroxides; they are in the form of needles in the case
of AH and plates in the case of AP. These structures are shown in Figure 6. The aggregates
of both crystallites will typically form globular assemblies spanning 1µm to 20µm, which can
flocculate in even larger assemblies. Some attention are coming towards size of aluminum
adjuvants, as there are indications that using nano-sized particles favor Th2 AND Th1 re-
sponse, instead of the typical Th2 response experienced with use of commercially available
micro-sized aluminum adjuvants [28].
In this project, we want to characterise the physiochemical properties of new AH derived
adjuvants. Specifically, we want to investigate the surface charge/ electrostatic potential and
the binding isotherms related to protein-adjuvant interactions, using model proteins. These
characteristics are chosen based on the previous information relating to the importance of
these factors and interactions, and from industrial need. The results that are obtained may
also be used for future development of new aluminum adjuvants.
6.5
Chemical structure of amorphous aluminum oxyhydroxide
In this work, we want to prepare aluminium hydroxyphosphate and aluminium hydroxysulfate
from amorphous aluminium oxyhydroxide. Here, we present the chemical structure of our
starting material for synthesis, AH or aluminum oxyhydroxide. Since AH is used as the basis
for synthesis of the new variants containing PO4 and SO4, an explanation in the structure
and chemical composition of AH is needed.
AH is a colloidal suspension of semi-crystalline aluminum oxyhydroxide particles with the
formula AlaOb(OH)c with a non-stochiometric ratio between a,b and c. Furthermore, the
molar fraction of hydroxyls accessible is not measured or known.
The core structure of
aluminum oxyhydroxide is boehmite or AlO(OH), the major crystalline phase of aluminum
oxyhydroxide.
16
==PAGE:22==
For the commercially available aluminum oxyhydroxide, Alhydrogel™, the growth of boehmite
crystals is controlled and limited to yield a fine dispersion of crystallites of few nanometers
in size, also called ”pseudo-boehmite”. There is no chemical or structural difference between
pseudo boehmite and boehmite as such, and the difference in nomenclature is arbitrary.
Pseudo-boehmite corresponds to a more hydrated phase with crystallites of smaller size,
as an intermediate in the path of crystalline boehmite formation, from the initial gel of
amorphous aluminum hydroxide (Al(OH)3). Essentially, the transition from pseudoboehmite
to boehmite in nomenclature is caused by dehydration and loss of molecules of H2O along
with crystal growth. The hindered growth of pseudoboehmite to crystalline boehmite creates
an amorphous structure, also known as amorphous aluminum oxyhydroxide [11, 27, 35].
Amorphous structure is defined as a solid material, with an undefined, long range structure,
where the growth of the crystal is limited. This mean that the structure of the material is
not like crystals, where the structure is a well defined lattice [14]. Structures are presented
in Figure 4.
Figure 4:
Crystalline molecular structure of boehmite a) and TEM pictures of fibrous
structure and aggregated Pseudoboehmite/ amorphous aluminum oxyhydroxide. Illustration
a) is from [22] and b) is from Croda.
In Figure 4.a the crystalline structure of boehmite is a aluminum oxyhydroxide crystal struc-
ture, consisting of aluminum atoms surrounded by six oxygen atoms in a octahedron forma-
tion. The aluminum atoms in a single layer of boehmite is connected by bidendate oxygen
(Al-O-Al). On the surface, boehmite aluminum atoms are coordinated with hydroxyl groups.
These hydroxyl groups can interact with hydroxyls present on neighboring boehmite layers
through hydrogen bonding, facilitating interlayer interactions and contributing to growth of
17
==PAGE:23==
boehmite crystals. In Figure 4.b, the amorphous needle-like structure of pseudoboehmite is
presented [22].
Previously mentioned, AH has a PZC of 9.5. The commercial product used in this work has
a pH below pH 9,5, meaning that the amorphous aluminum oxyhydroxide has a net positive
charge as a finished product. A representation of the functional groups is presented:
Figure 5: Structure model of 2D boehmite used for as representation of AH surface for this
project.
As seen in Figure 5, the presented structure of boehmite differs from that of Figure 4. At
the interface with the bulk water, bidendate oxygens (Al-O-Al) have a proton, making them
bidendate hydroxyl groups (Al-OH-Al), carrying a positive charge. The net positive surface
charge of AH originates essentially from these surface-exposed bidendate hydroxyl groups.
Thus for the experiments using AH, hydroxyl groups are present as free hydroxyls and biden-
date hydroxyls. This information is used for further modelling the modification with phos-
phate.
7
Synthesis of aluminum hydroxy-phosphate and -sulfate
7.1
Amorphous Aluminium Hydroxyphosphate Sulfate (AAHS)
For Croda, the project goal of the development of a - to Croda - new adjuvant product,
Amorphous Aluminum Hydroxyphosphate Sulfate, AAHS. AAHS is a commercially available
aluminum adjuvant, currently produced by Merck & Co. According to Merck & Co, the
18
==PAGE:24==
chemical structure of AAHS is both physically and functionally different from traditional
aluminum adjuvants. The structural characterisation of AAHS, show that is possess similar
global structure as that of AP, with an amorphous structure.
Figure 6: Transmission electron spectrometry images of AH A) and AAHS B) and AP C).
Scale bar = 50nm. Picture is from [5]
The structure of AH, AP and AAHS are shown in Figure 6. Here it is seen that the structure
of AP and AAHS differ from that of AH. The structure of AAHS is amorphous, with globular
characteristics.
AAHS has a PZC of nearly pH ∼7 where both AH and AP are of higher charge at this
pH. The exact chemical composition of AAHS is unknown due to its proprietary status
[5]. An article describes it to have a structure similar to AP, but with a higher ratio of
hydroxyls to phosphate (OH/PO4) than AP. Furthermore, the article claims that the sulfate
in AAHS is only residual sulfate, and not directly a part of the structure of the adjuvant
itself. This statement is not backed up by experimental evidence [19]. A goal in this project
is to synthesise aluminum hydroxyphosphate and aluminum hydroxysulfate. We intend to
modify AH with phosphate and sulfate for the preparation of those. Previous investigations
in production of these from hydrous aluminum materials are further described.
19
==PAGE:25==
7.2
Aluminum Hydroxyphosphate
Aluminum hydroxyphosphate is a known commercially available aluminum adjuvant, pro-
duced by Croda as Adju-Phos™. It has the formula Ala(PO4)b(OH)c with a non-stochiometric
ratio between a, b and c. In this work, we aim to prepare aluminum hydroxyphosphate with
differing PZC of that produced currently by Croda, by hydroxyl ligand exchange with phos-
phate on the surface of aluminum oxyhydroxide.
Hydroxyl ligand exchange of phosphate to the surface of hydrous alumina has previously
been done, measuring the release of hydroxyls as a function of adsorbed phosphate [29]. It
is known that phosphate has the ability to displace -OH groups from hydrous metals. The
reactions is fast, displacing hydroxyl groups of aluminum oxyhydroxide for phosphate groups.
Phosphate is know to be able to form inner-sphere coordination with aluminum hydroxides,
and in return make the overall surface charges of the aluminum oxyhydroxide less positive, as
a consequence of adsorbing negatively charged phosphate [29, 2]. Inner-sphere coordination
corresponds to a dative covalent bond (where both electrons in the covalent bond are provided
by one atom, here lone electron pairs from oxygen), a strong ionic bond between the central
metal ion and the ligand.
In this example, between the central metal Al and oxygen in
Phosphate.
The mechanism of hydroxyl ligand exchange by phosphate on the surface of aluminum oxy-
hydroxide, or other aluminum hydroxides is not well defined, but in this project, the reaction
model used define 3 different placements of phosphate:
20
==PAGE:26==
Figure 7: Project model for ligand exchange possibilities for hydroxyl ligand exchange by
phosphate onto the surface of aluminum oxyhydroxide.
The reaction models shown in Figure 7 is the model used in this project. It important to
mention that this model is a 2D model boehmite, showing bidendate hydroxyl and edge-placed
hydroxyls. The actual structure is in 3D space, with non-defined number and accessibility
of surface hydroxyl groups. This model is created to simplify the expected hydroxyl ligand
exchange outcomes. The accuracy of the ligand exchange product, and the distribution of
phosphate on the surface of aluminum oxyhydroxide is not well defined, making the model
useful for simplification. It is important to mention, that it is assumed that in the pH ranges
used in this work will cause the phosphate groups to posses a negative charge. The exact
pKa values for the phosphate groups are not known for this coordination with aluminum
oxyhydroxide, neither is that of the surface hydroxyls. The mechanism of ligand exchange is
not provided, as this has not been clearly demonstrated, and is mostly referred to ”hydroxyl
ligand exchange” in literature. The model show 3 scenarios for ligand exchange placement of
phosphate - one reacting with surface hydroxyl group, one replacing the bidendate hydroxyl
group and one creating a bidendate phosphate (Al-O-PO(OH)-O-Al) by ligand exchange with
a bidendate hydroxyl.
21
==PAGE:27==
Adsorption of phosphate to the surface of aluminum oxyhydroxide can change the structure of
aluminum oxyhydroxide from semi crystalline to non-crystalline, as the addition of phosphates
interfere with the crystallisation process [19].
Figure 8: Transmission electron spectrometry images of AH a) and AP b). Scale bar =
200nm. Picture is from [19].
In Figure 8 the difference in structure between AH and AP is shown. AH has a needle like
structure with varying size. For AP, the structure is not needle like, but ”disk-like” [19].
In this project, the aim is to measure the change in electrostatic potential at the surface of
the adjuvants directly, using Zp measurements. Investigations on adsorption of phosphate
to hydrous alumina have previously been performed. The net surface charge of the hydrous
alumina was calculated, based on the -OH released, indicating a displacement of OH groups
with phosphate groups. A visual representation of the net charge on the hydrous alumina
and -OH release was prepared:
22
==PAGE:28==
Figure 9: Changes in surface charge and the released OH- phosphate adsorption on hydrate
alumina. Charge(circles) and OH- released(Triangles) are plottet against the adsorbed Phos-
phate. Figure is from [29].
From Figure 9 it is shown that the calculated net charge of hydrated alumina decreases with
increasing phosphate addition, measured based on -OH release. For pH values less than the
PZC pH for the aluminum hydrogel, the phosphate is properly adsorbed, and displaces the
hydroxyl groups [29].
7.3
Aluminum hydroxysulfate
Aluminum hydroxysulfate is a less characterised aluminum salt, currently not available com-
mercially. Limited literature has been published regarding modifications of aluminum oxy-
hydroxide or any other hydrous alumina on the modification with sulfate. In this project, we
intent to modify aluminum oxyhydroxide with sulfate to produce aluminum hydroxysulfate.
Some litterature suggest sulfate can form both inner-sphere and outer-sphere surface com-
plexes with aluminum hydroxides, though no clear indications of inner-sphere coordinations
have been presented.
Natural minerals containing hydrated alumina in coordination with sulfate has been found.
Here, aluminum coordinated with 6 water-molecules have been fund to coordinate with sulfate
though hydrogen-bonds [44, 36]. See Figure 10.
23
==PAGE:29==
Figure 10:
The 3D structure of Alunogen (Al2(SO4)*17H2O) showing hydrogen bonds
between water coordinated to Al and sulfate [44].
Another study found that sulfate is more weakly adsorbed by aluminum hydroxides than that
of phosphate groups. It was found that the addition of sulfate ions to aluminum hydroxides
caused the surface charge of the aluminum oxides to decrease, though the experiments did
not provide strong indications of actual bound sulfate to hydrous alumina [2].
Preparation of aluminum hydroxysulfate has previously been investigated [37]. Here, the
preparation of amorphous aluminum oxyhydroxide was followed by an addition of solid
Na2SO4 to form aluminum hydroxysulfate.
A range of concentration of SO4 was added
to the aluminum oxyhydroxide. The reactions were aged at 22 ◦C for 30, 70 and 180 days,
and measured using x-ray diffraction and EDX, to determine the presence of sulfate in the
solution. They found evidence of sulfate in the solution, but no effort or focus was made
towards investigating Al-SO4 coordination [37].
The evidence supporting the findings on surface modification of aluminum oxyhydroxide or
hydrous aluminum with sulfate are inconclusive, as no proof of direct coordination of sulfate
ions to Al has been found in the literature. With the lacking evidence, no reaction model
24
==PAGE:30==
could been proposed for the reaction between sulfate and aluminum oxyhydroxide.
8
Project plan and methods
8.1
Experimental strategy and chosen methods
When samples of AH variants with varying concentrations of PO4 or SO4 concentrations are
prepared, the Zp of the variants are measured to identify any changes in surface chemistry
of AH. Accordingly, reactions of AH with H3PO4 or H2SO4, followed by dialysis to remove
excess ions were performed. To identify surface changes related to the addition of either
H3PO4 or H2SO4, the Zp of the samples are measured in a pH range of 5.9-11.0.
The aim of modifying AH is to create a new aluminum adjuvant with a PZC at pH 7.0. AH
variants are prepared with fixed PO4 or SO4 concentrations. Subsequently, these variants are
analyzed by Zp at specific pH values using buffered solutions to measure changes in surface
charge and compare the samples against the un-modified AH.
Based on Zp, the most promising modifications of AH are selected for further identification,
being the measurement of surface saturation by protein adsorption to the surface of the PO4
or SO4 modified AH. This will provide information for the binding isotherms, including bind-
ing constants, surface saturation and change in surface charge, upon adsorption of protein.
Here, using the two model proteins Lys-C and BSA. Next, the samples will be subjected to
adsorption of model proteins measured by UV absorbance spectrometry. This will provide
information on the binding capacity of the new PO4 or SO4 modified variants. The technical
aspects of Zp measurements and UV adsorption spectrometry are elaborated.
8.2
Zp measurement
Upon altering the surface of AH Zp measurements can be used to identify changes on the
AH surface. If any reaction has taken place, the change in functional surface groups would
lead to a change in overall global composition of the AH. Zp is an important technique for
studying different characteristics of dispersed systems. It can be applied to study stability,
25
==PAGE:31==
dispersion, aggregation, flocculation, and be used to detect changes to the formulations of
dispersions by giving insight to the particle system.
When measuring Zp, taking a single particle as an example, the measurement will give the
electrostatic potential at the slipping plane of the particle [41]. To understand the principle
of Zp, the principles used for Zeta measurements are visualized in Figure 11:
Figure 11: Visual representation of the principles of Zp. Figure is from [42].
From Figure 11 the principles of Zp can be explained.
The particle depicted has a net
negative charge at the surface. This net negative charge attracts ions of opposite charge to
the surface of the particle. This layer binds strongly to the particle, this is called the Stern
layer. The next layer away from the particle is less defined, but will mostly contain ions of
the opposite from the Stern layer. This layer moves with the particle when it travels through
the suspension. The plane where this layer slips through the rest of the solution is called
the shear plane, or slipping plane, as this layer divides ions associated with the particle from
those that are not. Zp is the voltage at this slipping plane, shown in Figure 11, where it is
presented as a separate layer. When referring to PZC, this value is found when there is no
detected movement of the slipping plane.
The practical mechanism of measuring Zp using equipment is simple. A sample is added to
a disposable folded capillary cell. The cell is inserted into the instrument, and current is
sent through the cell. Depending on the charge of the particles, they will move towards the
26
==PAGE:32==
oppositely charged terminal of the cell. The speed achieved by the particles is proportional
to the Zp.
The speed of the particles is measured by light scattering of a laser hitting the particles.
The scattering can be converted to electrophoretic mobility and hence Zp. A change in the
physical environment can potentially have effect on Zp. In general a change in pH will change
the surface charge of the particles. Accordingly, pH can be used to identify a very specific
characteristic of colloid particles, the isoelectric point for proteins and PZC the adjuvant [41,
42].
To identify change in surface chemistry
The use of Zp to measure the difference in surface characteristics of nanoparticles with
different functional surface groups have previously been performed [6]. Here, polystyrene
nanoparticles were synthesized with different functional groups. This study focused on the
characterization of the different group with various methods, including Zp measurement. All
prepared particles had the same core chemistry, but varying surface chemistry. Ability to
measure the difference in the different particle surface chemistry using Zp was demonstrated:
Figure 12: The Zp distribution of nanoparticles with various functional surface groups.
Figure from [6].
Furthermore, the change in Zp corresponded to the charge of the added functional group.
27
==PAGE:33==
All particles were analyzed under the same conditions, with only the functional group at the
varying factor.
As seen in Figure 12, nanoparticles with SO3 groups attached to the surface decreased the Zp
from app. 25mV to -75mV. This indicates that the use of Zp to measure change in surface
chemistry is possible. It is important to mention that the groups were not identified using
Zp, but the overall change in global characteristic of the nanoparticles was demonstrated.
This corresponds to the practical theory of Zp, as it correlates to the charge of the particles,
meaning that a change in surface groups, and an alteration of surface charge of a particle can
be measured with Zp [29].
To identify adjuvant-protein interactions
In addition to measuring the change in surface charge upon modification of functional groups,
Zp has the ability to identify change in surface charge during protein binding to the adjuvant.
Upon binding of protein to an adjuvant, the surface charge changes, thus altering the Zp of
the particles. The surface charge is a function of the number of charged molecules at the
surface of a particle. In general, when a charged or uncharged molecule attach to a particle,
the surface charge is altered due to the attachment of the molecule. The same principle can
be used for aluminum adjuvant particles, as they possess surface charge and is able to adsorb
proteins on their surface, causing a change in the surface charge [15].
8.3
UV Absorbance measurements
The use of absorbance for measurement of adsorption of proteins to adjuvant surfaces is
well described. This method can provide information of the amount of bound protein to
adjuvant surfaces [21]. Absorbance is a process of light interacting with a material. At specific
wavelengths, the material is able to absorb the light and the absorption is proportional to
the amount of material present. A detector will be able to detect light that is not absorbed
by the sample [1]. A simplified representation of this is shown in Figure 13:
28
==PAGE:34==
Figure 13: Simplified model of absorbance, showing the light in interacting with the sample,
and the exit light is then measured by a light detector. Figure is from [1].
The principle of UV absorbance can be used for determination of protein adsorption. If a given
concentration of protein is measured, this concentration will have an absorbance correlating
to the concentration of the protein. To determine the binding capacity, reaction between
the protein and a known amount of adjuvant is performed, followed by centrifuging and
removal of adjuvant-protein material. The remaining protein in the sample is then measured.
If an interaction between protein and adjuvant has taken place, the protein adsorbed to
the adjuvant is removed from the suspension through centrifugation. Thus the difference in
protein absorbance before and after can be used to determine the binding capacity of the
adjuvant [21].
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 14: Simplified model of using UV absorbance to determine protein adsorption by
adjuvants. The figure was made using Biorender.com.
In Figure 14, a simple model for the use of absorbance to measure difference in free protein
after adsorption to the surface of adjuvants is presented. As seen, the initial pure protein
sample absorb more light, than the sample after interacting with adjuvant. This is caused
by the interaction of protein with the adjuvant, which has been removed from the sample.
Measurement of protein absorption has previously been performed, measuring the binding
capacity of aluminum oxyhydroxide.
The method consisted of measuring the absorbance
of a protein at a specific concentration at a predefined wavelength.
The absorbance for
this concentration of free protein would be the initial absorbance before the absorption by
aluminium oxyhydroxide. After the binding reaction, the reaction mixture was centrifuged,
and the absorbance of the free protein was measured again, to detect the absorbance change,
and subsequently, the change in free protein in the sample [24].
30
==PAGE:36==
9
Materials and methods
9.1
Common materials
Aluminum oxyhydroxide (Alhydrogel™2%, 10mg/mL Al) and Aluminum hydroxyphosphate
(Adju-Phos™, 5mg/mL Al) was provided by the production facility at Croda Denmark, Fred-
erikssund. The products are of commercial grade. Both products used in this process are
sourced exclusively from the same production batch respectively, ensuring consistency and
uniformity throughout.
For all experiments, purified water (PW) was prepared using the Barnstead MicroPure
(Thermo scientific) with a 0.2µm Point of Dispence Filter.
To obtain specific pH levels
in the samples, the following pH buffers were prepared:
Table 2: Buffers prepared for experimental use
All buffers are prepared as 0.5M solutions.
Adjustment of the buffer pH was performed
manually using 1M HCL and 1M NaOH solutions. Samples used for the measurement of Zp
are prepared in a volume of 800µL, with a final buffer concentration of 5mM. Sample pH was
measured after Zp measurements.
31
==PAGE:37==
9.2
Synthesis of Aluminum hydroxyphosphate and Aluminum Hydroxy-
sulfate
For synthesis of aluminum hydroxyphosphate and aluminum hydroxysulfate, industrial Al-
hydrogel™2% (10mg/mL Al) provided by Croda Denmark was used. To prepare the two
hydroxy compounds, 1M working solutions of phosphoric acid (438081, SIGMA-ALDRICH )
and sulfuric acid (320501, SIGMA-ALDRICH) was prepared. The reactions were performed
in 40mL falcon tubes. Dialysis of the mixtures was carried out using a 2L glass beacon and 1
kD Spectra/Por ®Dialysis Membrane. The water used for the experiment is purified water
(PW).
For the preparation of the hydroxyphosphate and aluminum hydroxysulfate, 40mL falcon
tubes were used to mix the reactants. For at total volume of 10mL, AH was mixed with
phosphoric acid or sulfuric acid and PW to achieve specific concentrations of the acids. So
for a total volume of 10mL, the following AH samples containing sulfuric acid, or phosphoric
acid was prepared:
Table 3: Buffers prepared for experimental use
To prepare a sample variant, AH is mixed with the appropriate amount of acidic reactant to
achieve the intended final concentration of the acid. As an example for the AH2% w. 400mM
H3PO4 variant, 5mL of AH was added to a 40mL test tube. Subsequently 1mL of PW is
added to the reaction tube, followed by 4mL of H3PO4 1M solution.
The mixture is set to react for 30 min, under shaking conditions at room temperature. After
30 minutes, the reaction mixtures are transferred to a dialysis bags, to undergo dialysis.
32
==PAGE:38==
The dialysis takes place in a 2L glass beacon with PW, under stirring conditions at room
temperature. The dialysis remove excess ions in the reaction mixtures, and thus the free ions
will travel through the dialysis bag and into the surrounding PW. The dialysis is continued
until the conductivity of the dialysis water is <2 µS/cm. After dialysis, the reaction mixtures
are transferred back to a new 40mL falcon tube.
9.3
Zeta potential measurements
For the measurement of electrostatic potential as Zp, AH, AP and the above prepared sam-
ples of modified AH are used for measurements. Measurements are performed with Malvern
Instrument Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern, UK). For measuring, disposable folded capillary
cells by Malvern Instruments with a 700µL working volume are used. Once the sample is
loaded, zeta measurements are performed at 25 ◦C achieved with a equilibration time of 120
seconds. Each sample measurement was automatically measured 10-100 times, adjusted by
the Zetasizer software, and for each loaded sample, a total of 6 individual measurements
were performed. The pH of measurement samples was measured using a Mettler Toledo Sev-
enExcellence pH meter S400 (Mettler Toledo, US). The data were extracted using Zetasizer
software as a CSV file and subsequently processed and presented using basic functions in
Microsoft Excel.
PZC for 5mM, 10mM and 400mM So4 and PO4 modified AH in pH range of 5.9 to 11.0
Zp measurements were conducted to assess changes in the point of zero charge (PZC) between
unmodified and modified AH. For these measurements, 800 µL solutions were prepared, each
containing 0.05 mg/mL aluminum sourced from the samples listed in Table 3, including AP
and AH. The buffer concentration was maintained at 5mM, using the specific buffers outlined
in Table 2. The final volume was adjusted to 800µL with PW . All samples were measured
across a pH range, with pH values measured prior to Zp analysis.
Zp at pH 7.0 for PO4 modified AH samples For Zp measurements at pH 7.0, the PO4-modified
AH samples were prepared with an aluminum concentration of 0.05 mg/mL in a 5mM Bis-
Tris buffer at pH 7.0. Each sample was adjusted to a total volume of 800µL using PW. The
33
==PAGE:39==
pH was determined prior to Zp analysis.
Surface charge saturation of AH by BSA
Surface charge saturation of AH was determined to establish the maximum concentration
needed to evaluate the binding capacity of the prepared AH variants. Samples were prepared
with a total volume of 800µL. A working solution of 50mg/mL BSA(Bovine Serum Albumin,
A7030-50G, SIGMA-ALDRICH) was prepared from a 100mg/mL stock solution. For this
study, BSA concentrations of 1.0, 0.8, 0.6, 0.4, 0.2, 0.1, 0.05, and 0.0 mg/mL were prepared,
each with a fixed aluminum concentration of 0.05mg/mL and a 5mM Bis-Tris buffer at pH 7.0.
Volumes were adjusted with PW. The prepared samples were set to incubate for 30 minutes
at room temperature. The pH was measured for samples with the highest and lowest BSA
concentrations.
The results from this can be found in Appendix A.1 Figure A.1 as they are not used for the
discussion, but to determine the protein concentration to be used during Zp measurements.
Using the same concentrations found in this study, the Lys-C concentrations used later was
in the same concentrations, showing a satisfying saturation behavior. This can be seen in
Appendix A.1 Figure A.2.
Lys-C / BSA adsorption isotherms of PO4 modified AH variants - Zp
Using the saturation level found for surface saturation of AH by BSA, the following bind-
ing assay was prepared. For protein adsorption isotherms, 10 mg/mL working solutions of
Lys-C(Lysozyme from chicken egg white, 62971-10G-F, Fluka) and BSA was prepared from
100mg/mL stock solutions. All PO4 samples prepared from section 9.2 were used for mea-
surement. For reference, isotherms of AH and AP was measured. The binding assay was
performed at pH 7.0 using the pH 7.0 Bis-Tris buffer solution at a 5mM concentration. Sam-
ples containing protein concentrations of 0.0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 mg/mL BSA and Lys-C were
prepared. Sample Al concentration of 0.05mg/mL was used.
Samples were prepared for a final volume of 800µL. All volume adjustments were done using
PW. After preparation, all samples are incubated 30 min at RT under shaking conditions
34
==PAGE:40==
using a Heidolph Titramax 100, set to 600rpm. After incubation, 700µL from the sample
was transferred to the disposable folded capillary cells and Zp of the samples was measured.
The pH of the samples were measured after Zp measurements.
9.4
Isotherms fitting of ”Zp on BSA/Lys-C adsorption of AH, AP and AH
PO4 variants”
For treatment of data collected from zeta-potential measurement of protein binding isotherms,
an adapted Langmuir model was used. This model can fit the experimental isotherms directly,
using the following equation:
(1)
Here: ζ: ζ-potential (Zp); ζ0: initial ζ-potential at 0% site occupancy; ζsat ζ-potential at
100% site occupancy; Kapp: apparent Langmuir constant(units reciprocal to C units); C:
concentration of titrant(various units). Equation 1 parameters are estimated with the Least-
Squared method, using iterative minimization algorithm in Microsoft Excel Solver add-in.
9.5
UV Absorption spectrometry - Protein binding
Absorbance measurements were performed on a SpectraMax i3x (Molecular Devices, San
Jose, U.S.A.) Absorbance was measurements was carried out at 280nm and 420nm and using
the built-in ”Path-check” function provided in the SpectraMax device. Path check normalized
the absorbance measurements to a column height of 8mm for all samples, to minimize the
effect of user pipetting errors. All samples were measured in duplicates of 80µL each. Using
a 384-well absorbance plate. The data was extracted from the SpectraMax i3x software as a
CSV file and subsequently processed and presented using basic functions in Microsoft Excel.
AH variant binding capacity determination
As for binding capacity measurements with Zp, a 100mg/mL Lys-C solution was prepared,
35
==PAGE:41==
and a solution of 100mg/mL BSA. The samples were prepared in 200µL working volumes. All
samples contained AH variants in the conc. of 1.25 mg/mL Al. The pH for the reactions was
7.0, using the pH 7.0 Bis-Tris buffer in a 20mM concentration. The concentration of protein
in the samples were 5mg/mL. Determination of binding capacity for Lys-C was performed
on AP, AH and 5, 10, 20, 50, 100mM PO4 variants. BSA binding capacity was performed on
AP, AH and 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200mM PO4 variants.
After preparation, all samples are incubated 30 min under shaking conditions using a Hei-
dolph Titramax 100, set to 600rpm. After incubation, the samples were centrifuged using
a Sorvall ST 16R Centrifuge (Thermo Scientific) at 10.000 x rpm for 10 minutes at 25 ◦C
with acceleration and deceleration on 5. Centrifuged samples were collected and 50 µL su-
pernatant was extracted and diluted with 200µL PW. From each prepared sample, 2x 80µL
was transferred to the absorbance plate and measured.
The use of 5mg/mL reaction concentrations is based on data from Appendix A.2 Figure A.5
and A.2 Figure A.4, where 0, 1, 2, 5 and 10mg/mL BSA or Lys-C was reacting with AH
and AH w. 200mM PO4, respectively. Here, it was found for both that 5mg/mL protein
concentrations were sufficient for both model proteins.
Background measurements for UV absorption spectrometry was performed on all prepared
AH PO4 samples and AH without protein. The samples were prepared with a final conc. of
1.25 mg/mL Al, with a buffer concentration of 5mM using Bis-Tris pH 7.0 buffer. The volume
was adjusted to 200µL using PW. The samples were centrifuged, and the UV absorbance of
the supernatant was measured. The data from background measurement of AH samples are
found in Appendix A.2 Figure A.3
Buffer concentration investigation
Determination of the buffer effect on protein adsorption was done using buffer concentrations
of 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100mM Bis-Tris pH 7.0 buffer. The samples contained 5mg/mL Lys-C
and 1.25mg/mL Al from sample variants, AH and AP. All samples were set to incubate for
30 minutes under shaking conditions before centrifugation, and collection of supernatant.
The supernatant was diluted 5 fold, for Lys-C conc. of 1mg/mL for a final volume of 200µL
adjusted with PW.
36
==PAGE:42==
9.6
EDX-SEM
Preperation of samples for EDX-SEM was done by dehydrating samples of AH, AP and
200mM PO4 sample. The samples were dehydrated on plates with carbon tape for 24h, until
visually dehydrated. On each plate, 4 individual droplets of samples were disposed. The
samples were transferred to DTU Nanolab, where the samples were loaded and measured
using a FEI Quanta FEG 250 (Thermo Fisher) with a Oxford X-Max 50(Oxford Instruments)
EDX detector. The software used is the software built in to the FEI instrument. The data
was prepared by the EDX-SEM team, and was sent in picture format. The data was manually
transferred to Microsoft Excel for analysis. The raw data presented in a ratio of weight %
(Wt%). Using Microsift Excel, the data was transformed to a Mol/ Mol AL ratio. The raw
data can be found in Appendix A.3 Figure A.6, and a SEM picture of AH in Appendix A.3
Figure A.7 and an image visualising the use of spectrums for EDX measurement in Appendix
A.3 Figure A.8.
37
==PAGE:43==
10
Results & Discussion
10.1
Preparation of aluminum hydroxyphosphate and aluminum hydrox-
ysulfate from aluminum oxyhydroxide (AH)
The starting point in this project is based on the assumption that the high PZC value of
Alhydrogel, pH at ∼9.5, can be lowered significantly by reducing the number of positive
charges. In amorphous aluminum oxyhydroxide, positive charges are carried by protonated
bidendate oxygen, which can easily be substituted by oxyanions through ligand-exchange. In
a first attempt, AH samples were treated with PO4 or SO4 ions at a fixed concentration of
400mM assumed to be saturating for ligand-exchange sites. To identify changes in surface
chemistry due to reactions between AH and the two reactants, the Zp was measured. This
will provide information on the change in surface charge, as a consequence of ligand exchange
of hydroxyls or bidendate hydroxyls with either PO4 or SO4.
AH was dialyzed against
pure water to remove the excess of unreacted oxyanions and to insure that Zp values were
minimally affected by residual free PO4 or SO4. Zp was measured in a pH range of 5.9 to
11.0, using the buffers prepared in section 9.3 in order to determine the PZC of these samples.
For the present discussion pH values are given with one decimal, as shown in Table 2. The
actual measurement of pH in the sample solution showed that pH could change op to .4 units
after addition of sample. This is however still referred by use of the buffer pH value.
First, measurement on Alhydrogel 2% (AH), was performed, as a reference, since AH is the
starting material for the development of the variants produced in this report. The relationship
between pH and Zp for AH can be seen in Figure 15:
38
==PAGE:44==
Figure 15: The Zp of Alhydrogel 2% in the pH range 5.9-11.0 (actual measured pH values).
The blue line defined the charge point of 0mV.
In Figure 15 is seen that for AH, the surface charge changes with pH. When pH is decreased,
the surface charge increases. For AH, the Zp at pH 5.9 was measured to be +33mV and with
increasing pH decreases to -22mV at pH 11.0. At pH 7.0 / 7.1 and pH 9.0 / 9.1, we see a
behavior where the correlation between pH and Zp is out of the overall trend. These points
are transitions from one buffer compound to another. At pH 7, the change from Bis-Tris
to Trizma buffer and at pH 9, the change from Trizma to CAPS buffer. The small shifts
observed can be due to slightly inaccurate concentrations of buffers added. This behavior is
observed for other measurements, but is not investigated further. The Zp behavior of AH is
used as a basis for the following modifications with PO4 ions or SO4.
For this project, two values are important for the development of the PO4 and SO4 variants,
the PZC and the Zp at pH 7.0. These are requirements defined by the application where
protein antigen adsorption is critical in the vaccine formulation. As illustrated in Figure 15,
AH has a PZC of app. pH 9.8, and at pH 7.0, the Zp is app. +30 mV. As proposed by the
project, these values are not living up to the customer requirements, and thus we prepare
and measure PO4 and SO4 modified AH samples.
39
==PAGE:45==
The modified AH samples - the variants, were then measured. Here, we initially measured
AH affected with addition of 400mM SO4 and PO4. Investigations of the AH modified with
400mM SO4 resulted in the following Zp/pH curve:
Figure 16: The Zp of Alhydrogel 2% modified with 400mM SO4 in the pH range of 5.9-11.0
(actual measured pH values).
In Figure 16 it is seen that the surface charge behavior of the 400mM SO4 variant has similar
behavior as the non-modified AH. When pH decrease, the surface charge increase. For both
SO4 samples measured, the Zp at pH 11.0 is app. -19mV, and for pH 5.9, the Zp value is app.
+ 31mV. In Figure 16 we see that the pH dependency of Zp for the SO4-treated AH variant is
very similar to that of untreated AH, with the same amplitude and change in Zp. This result
suggests that after dialysis of unreacted SO4 ions, the resulting AH variant is not different
electrostatic-ally than the untreated AH. Therefore it is concluded that SO4 ions did not
exchange for hydroxyls in AH in the present experimental conditions, at least not in amounts
significant enough to be detected by a change in Zp. This result in in opposition to a previous
publication where the authors concluded to some degree of ligand exchange of SO4 ions based
on changes in free Gibbs energy, using differential scanning calorimetry [2]. Unfortunately
in this report [2], Zp measurements were not performed to confirm the anticipated changes
in AH net electrostatic potential. The authors argued that ligand exchange with SO4 would
lead to a reduction in Zp by partial exchange with protonated bidendate hydroxyls (carrying
40
==PAGE:46==
a positive charge), but the data did not support this hypothesis. In the various natural and
synthetic crystal forms of hydrated aluminum sulfate, such as alunogen Al2(SO4)3·17H2O,
aluminum atoms are coordinated with 6 water molecules in octahedra and form hydrogen-
bonds to isolated sulfate and water molecules, all part of the crystal unit [36, 44]. We did
not find evidence in the literature of aluminum atoms directly coordinated with sulfate ions
(inner-sphere coordination). This explains that sulfate ions can be trapped in crystal lattices
during crystallization and precipitation of Al ions and suggests at the same time that ligand
exchange of hydroxyl groups coordinated to Al by sulfate ions, from already formed AH, is
very unlikely if not impossible by simple diffusion-reaction in our experimental conditions.
The question remains whether ligand exchange with sulfate in AH is at all possible. With
the limited knowledge about modifications of AH with sulfate, this path was not further
investigated.
Having examined the impact of modifying AH modified with SO4 using Zp measurements,
we investigate the alterations achieved when modifying AH with PO4. The Zp values for the
AH modified with PO4 were measured in the same pH range as the AH, and AH modified
with SO4. For the samples treated with 400mM PO4, it is seen that the Zp of this variant is
significantly different from that of un-modified AH. The results can be seen in Figure 17
Figure 17: The Zp of Alhydrogel 2% modified with 400mM PO4 in the pH range of 5.9-11.0
(actual measured pH values).
41
==PAGE:47==
For Figure 17 it is seen that the Zp behavior of the AH 400mM PO4 samples differ from
that of non-modified AH. The Zp at pH 11.0 has been lowered from -22mV for AH to -32mV
and the Zp at pH 5.9 is decreased from + 32mV of AH, to + 10mV. This show a ∆ZP at
pH 11.0 between non-modified AH of app. -10mV, and a ∆Zp at pH 5.9 of app. 22mV. In
practically the same conditions of reaction, treatment of AH by PO4 ions clearly leads to a
a different variant of AH than when treated with SO4 ions. The fact that after dialysis of
un-reacted, free PO4 ions, the surface electrostatic potential of AH is significantly modified
shows that PO4 has reacted unlike SO4. We expected to see this behavior, as many previous
studies have proved that surface modifications of AH with phosphate has led to a decrease in
surface charge, essentially through ligand-exchange with hydroxyl groups coordinated with
aluminum atoms [17, 20, 16]. Unlike SO4 ions, there is evidence that PO4 ions form inner-
sphere coordination complexes with aluminum ions, yielding a strong ionic bond with covalent
character.
At pH 8.0, we see a behavior differing from the rest of the curve for the 400mM PO4 variants.
Here, a slight local increase in Zp is observed. This is not further investigated.
The PZC change between modified and non-modified AH seen in Figure 17 went from 9.8
to 6.5. This would indicate that in the range from 0-400mM PO4, a PZC value of 7.0 is
obtainable, which should meet costumer’s requirements. At pH 7.0 the Zp is -10mV, which
should expectedly allow for some adsorption of positively charged protein antigen (at this
pH value), unlike unmodified AH which is positively charged. This central point is further
investigated later.
Thus it was indicated that for variants containing 400mM of either SO4 or PO4, only the
variant modified with PO4 showed any significant change in the Zp for the pH range. The
defined change in Zp of PO4 variant containing 400mM resulted in further studies in the
modifications of AH with different concentrations of PO4 ions. We find that between the
PZC for non-modified AH and AH modified with 400mM PO4 lies the target PZC at pH 7.0.
The indications of potential for production of a PO4 modified AH variant with the desired
42
==PAGE:48==
PZC meant that the focus of the study was directed towards modifying AH with PO4, and the
modification with SO4 was not investigated further. It is important to note that the study is
directed towards fulfilling a customer’s requests. The only information we were provided was
a desired PZC of pH 7.0. Thus this was set as a target for the next step in the optimization
of surface charge modifications of AH.
With the above information, we had indications that it would be possible to reach the PZC
of pH 7.0, possibly by modifying AH with lower concentrations of PO4. An investigation in
variations of PO4 addition to AH can be used to define a range of PO4 modified AH with
correlated surface charge characteristics. To investigate this, samples of AH were treated
with lower PO4 concentrations than 400mM to obtain AH variants presenting a range of
PZC values. AH was treated with 5mM and 10mM PO4 in the same manner as the AH
variant treated with 400mM PO4 and Zp values were recorded as previously.
Figure 18: The Zp of AH modified with 5mM and 10mM PO4 in the pH range of 5.9-11.0
(actual measured pH values).
As seen in Figure 18 the modification of AH with 5mM and 10mM PO4 resulted in changed
Zp profiles over the pH range. This time, the relative change in Zp was less than that of
AH modified with 400mM PO4. For the 5mM AH variant, the PZC has moved from pH
9.8 to 8.2. The Zp at pH 11.0 was measured to -29mV and at pH 5.9 the Zp was +29mV.
43
==PAGE:49==
For the 10mM PO4 variant, the PZC changed from pH 9.8 to pH 7.5 and the Zp at pH 11.0
was -32mV and at pH 5.9 the Zp was +26mV. The behavior observed around pH 8.0 is not
investigated further.
It is seen that variants containing PO4 changed the Zp behavior of the AH significantly, and
with the data from the 5mM, 10mM and 400mM PO4 variants, it is concluded that modifying
AH with a defined concentration of PO4 ions provides an simple way to control the final PZC
of the AH variant, which is the main goal of this project and the prime requirement from the
customer (PZC of AH value close to 7.0).
Vaccine manufacturer interest for amorphous aluminum hydroxide variant with a neutral
PZC is due to the fact that a number of protein antigens do not adsorb significantly to
already existing AH (Alhydrogel™) or aluminum hydroxyphosphate (Adju-Phos™) because of
incompatible electrostatics (repulsive forces). Merck developed a variant of AH, amorphous
aluminum hydroxyphosphate sulfate (AAHS) used as adjuvant system for their HPV vaccine
Gardasil, with a PZC of 7.0 [5]. Details about the composition and structure of Merck’s AAHS
are not publicly available and some inconsistency is even present in the original publication
([5]) where the authors write ”Merck Aluminum Adjuvant (AAHS) is a proprietary aluminum
hydroxyphosphate sulfate formulation that is both physically and functionally distinct from
traditional aluminum phosphate and aluminum hydroxide adjuvants” with no indication of
addition of phosphate ions anywhere in the materials and method section: ”It (AAHS) is
prepared by precipitation of alum (aluminum potassium sulfate) with sodium hydroxide”,
therefore creating an uncertainty about what AAHS really is. It seems very likely that a
fraction of PO4 is added to the solution of aluminum potassium sulfate.
Indeed, a ratio P/Al of 0.3 for AAHS is mentioned in [19] to be compared to a ratio P/Al
of 0.9 to 1.0 for aluminum hydroxyphosphate (AP) [3]. At this point, it was found that
addition of low concentrations of PO4 to already formed AH resulted in variants with PZC
values close to 7.0, as alternative to forming the variants by coprecipitation with aluminum
potassium sulfate. Thus, we may be able to get similar Zp by simply adjusting the amount
of PO4 added to AH. So, can we adjust the concentration of PO4 added to AH, and prepare
an adjuvant with the right Zp, with only addition of PO4? This new hypothesis is further
44
==PAGE:50==
investigated. Also, literature surrounding AAHS only define the sulfate to be residual. The
function of the sulfate is not explained or investigated in available literature [19]. Without
knowing the impact of the sulfate in AAHS, we further investigate the AH PO4 modifications.
10.2
Zeta potential measurement at pH 7.0
In section 10.1 indications of potential PZC at pH 7.0 was found for the PO4 modified AH
samples. Here, results indicated that the PZC at pH 7.0 may be found in the concentration
range between 400mM PO4 and 5mM PO4. This led to a preparation and investigation of
samples treated with PO4 concentrations of 20mM, 50mM, 100mM, 200mM and 300mM.
These new variants are subjected to Zp measurements at pH 7.0, to identify variants with
the best potential of PZC at pH 7.0. Measurement was performed on all PO4 modified AH
variants prepared from 9.2.
Figure 19: The Zp of Alhydrogel 2% modified 400mM, 300mM, 200mM, 100mM, 50mM,
20mM, 10mM and 5mM PO4 at pH 7.0
The change in Zp at pH 7.0 for the different modified PO4 AH variants are displayed in
Figure 19. It is seen that there is a global decrease in the Zp at pH 7.0, as the concentration
of PO4 increases. There is a significant decrease between 0mM (AH) and 20mM PO4 - a
∆Zp of app. 30mV. Between the 20mM PO4 and the 400mM PO4 variants, the ∆Zp is app.
45
==PAGE:51==
11mV.
Looking at Figure 19 the most significant change in Zp at pH 7.0 between two adjecent samples
is the difference between the non-modified AH (0mM) and the 5mM PO4 AH variant. Here,
the ∆Zp is app. 14mV, compared to that between 10mM and 20mM PO4, where the ∆Zp is
app. 6mV.
Globally, it is seen that the difference in Zp at pH 7.0 is not directly correlated to the PO4
concentration of the variants. Increasing the concentration of PO4 by factor 2 does not change
the Zp with a factor 2. The 5mM PO4 variant has a Zp of app. + 16mV and for the 10mM
variant, the Zp is app. + 10mV. Then for the 20mM variant, it is app. 0mV.
It is found that the 20mM, 50mM and 100mM PO4 variants are those under these measuring
conditions that are closest to the customer requirement of PZC at pH 7.0. But the 20mM
PO4 variant is of great interest, as its PZC is found to be very close to pH 7.0.
Thus,
by preparing a range of PO4 modified AH, we now have indications that we, going by the
Zp request, are able to produce an AH modified variant with the desired requirements. It
is worth mentioning that at this point, no analyses have been performed determining the
actual chemical content of this adjuvant. We have indications, that preparing a solution of
20mM PO4 has reduced the surface charge of AH to an ideal level, but the actual cause is
unknown. Further, we need to investigate whether we can identify PO4 in the samples. This
is investigated by EDX-SEM in the section below.
11
EDX-SEM
EDX-SEM was used to make a qualitative and quantitative investigation into the stoichio-
metric composition of AH, AP and 200mM PO4 modified AH sample. EDX works by using
an electron laser beam, that when hitting the sample surface excites the inner orbital (K-
shell) in every atom in the sample. The excited electron from the inner atomic orbital is
ejected and the void left in the inner orbital filled again by an electron from lower energy
atomic orbitals. This relaxation process with electron displacement is concurrent to emission
of an X-ray photon (fluorescence) detected by the instrument. The X-ray photon energy or
46
==PAGE:52==
wavelength characterizes the element (from carbon and up in atomic masses) whereas the
number of X-ray photons collected by the detector is correlated to the relative amount of the
element. That way, elemental composition of the material deposited on the target plate is
obtained [8]. The results from EDX measuremets of AH, AP and 200mM PO4 modified AH
is shown below:
Figure 20: Molar ratio of the chemical constituents normalized to aluminum content as
reference. Here, the molar ratio for AH, AP and AH modified with 200mM PO4.
The data displayed in Figure 20 shows the elemental composition of the different samples,
expressed as elemental stoichiometric ratio reported to Al (value of 1.0). For each sample,
a minimum of 4 measurement points are analyzed during the EDX, and thus the presented
data is the average of the sample values for each sample respectively.
From the laboratory at The National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization
performing the EDX measurements, it was informed that we can consider the results being
reliable within 10 pct of the measured values, therefore giving an honest estimate of the
elemental composition.
Starting with unmodified AH, results showed a Al/O molar ratio of 1:3.25 which is close
to what would be expected from pure aluminum hydroxide Al(OH)3 (within 10 pct error).
Likewise, results for AP showed a P/Al ratio of 1:0.82 close to values measured by titrimetry
for batch release of commercial AP by the QC lab. These values are typically close to 1:0.88.
For AP the P/O ratio is 1:5.67 which is significantly higher than a theoretical P/O ratio of
1:4 for PO4. The molar excess of O atoms (5.67 - 4.0 = 1.67) in the measured AP sample may
account for hydroxy groups coordinated to Al as AP is in fact a non-stoichiometric compound
of formula Ala(PO4)b(OH)c, with variable a, b and c values. AH treated with 200 mM PO4
showed a Al/P ratio of 1:0.2, where the stoichiometric amount of PO4 is significantly lower
than for AP (Al/P ratio of 1:0.82), about 4-fold less. For the AH sample with 200mM PO4
47
==PAGE:53==
the measured P/O ratio is 1:11.65, giving a molar excess of O atoms of 11.65 - 4.0 = 7.65
with reference to PO4, indicating a higher level of hydroxyl than for AP.
11.1
BSA and Lys-C adsorption isotherms to AH and variants measured
from changes in Zp
The adsorption of protein antigens to the surface of particles of aluminum hydrated salts has
already been shown to alter their net electrostatic potential [33]. Protein molecules present a
number of charged amino-acids side chains at their surface and upon adsorption to aluminum
hydroxide particles, these charged amino acids will alter the global net electrostatic potential
of the particles they adsorb to. We took advantage of this fact to test whether changes in Zp
of AH and AH variants would show dependency on protein concentration, potentially allowing
for deriving adsorption isotherms. The main expectation was that the isotherms based on Zp
recordings would show saturation behavior when protein concentration increases, i.e. follow
a Langmuir adsorption model. Therefore a binding assay was developed measuring changes
in Zp and using 2 model proteins of opposite electrostatic potential at pH 7.0 (pI), hen egg
lysozyme (Lys-C, pI 11.0), positively charged, and bovine serum albumin (BSA, pI 5.6),
negatively charged.
We have investigated PO4 modification of AH, and found that we have good indications in
regards to synthesising an AH variant with a PZC at pH 7.0. Next, we want to investigate the
binding isotherms between the AH variants and two different proteins - Lys-C and BSA. At pH
7.0, they possess net opposite charges, Lys-C having a net positive charge and BSA with a net
negative charge. This is not a requirement by the customer, but can help provide important
information that can be used later, for development purposes, or as extra information.
As mentioned, we have no information regarding the antigen the customer intent to use, but
only have indications in regards to binding with AH and AP. We don’t know the nature of
the binding interactions, or the types. Thus, we provide an investigation, that can support
the development of the adjuvant. In this section, we present the investigations of the binding
interactions between Lys-C and BSA and the PO4 modified AH variants. The interaction
was investigated using Zp measurements at pH 7.0, with varying concentrations of protein.
48
==PAGE:54==
This allowed us to investigate the interactions between protein and adjuvants by change in
surface charge. We investigate at pH 7.0, as this is a key parameter set by the customer.
The two following sections show the Zp changes observed for each protein-adjuvant combi-
nation with varying protein concentration.
11.1.1
Lys-C adsorption to AP, AH and AH variants
As mentioned earlier, Alhydrogel with a PZC of 9.5 is positively charged at pH 7.0 and so is
Lys-C with a pI of 11.0, meaning that conditions are not favorable for electrostatically-driven
adsorption of Lys-C to unmodified AH, due to charge-charge repulsion forces as illustrated
in Figure 3.
49
==PAGE:55==
Figure 21: Change in Zp as a function of Lys-C concentration in mg/mL for AH, AP and
PO4 modified AH. The Lys-C concentrations are 0.0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 mg/mL.
In Figure 21 it is seen that for all modified AH variants, the Zp increases when the concen-
tration of Lys-C increases, indicating adsorption of Lys-C to the surface of PO4 modified AH
variants. There is an indication that when the Lys-C concentration increases, the change
in Zp is positive. Comparing the difference in the samples based on the PO4 concentra-
tion, the ∆Zp as a function of Lys-C concentration increases, as the concentration of PO4
increases. From the collection of curves presented in Figure 21, there is an indication that
with a higher concentration of PO4, the plateau can be reached with smaller concentrations
50
==PAGE:56==
of Lys-C. Meaning that with increased PO4 concentration, the amount of Lys-C needed to
reach the plateau decreases. Comparing the 50mM PO4 sample with the 400mM PO4 sam-
ple, the plateau is reached at 0.2mg/mL for the 50mM variant, and for the 400mM variant,
the plateau is reached at 0.1mg/mL. Looking at the variant with the highest amount of PO4,
the AP reached a plateau at 0.05mg/mL. As shown in Figure 21 and for all AH variants,
saturation isotherms are observed, i.e. Zp values reach a maximum as the protein concentra-
tion increases, as initially expected from the increase in adjuvant particle surface coverage
by the adsorbed Lys-C. The results confirm the initial expectation that changes in Zp as a
function of protein concentration could be used to draw adsorption isotherms, e.g. Langmuir
isotherm. In addition, the dataset clearly showed the effect on Lys-C adsorption, of modify-
ing AH which increasing concentrations of PO4, which we have shown to reduce the Zp at
pH 7.0 as illustrated in Figure 19. The higher the concentration of PO4, the lower the initial
Zp of the AH variant and the higher the magnitude in change in Zp. This pattern could
reflect an increased adsorption capacity for Lys-C the higher the concentration of PO4 used
to modify AH.
The apparent increased adsorption of Lys-C with increasing PO4 could be caused by the
decrease in electrostatic repulsion, or increased electrostatic attraction due to the presence
of PO4 groups at the surface of AH. AH has a net positive charge at pH 7.0, and this is
the same for Lys-C [21]. When the surface PO4 concentration on AH particles increase, the
electrostatic repulsion should decrease. However, with increasing concentration of PO4, it
has been found that the crystalline structure of AH decreases [19]. A change in the structure
and the available surface area of AH may interfere with a simple interpretation of the binding
isotherms. For this experiment, we have to assume that the major contributor is electrostatic
forces, but other physical and chemical changes due to PO4 adsorption to AH may play a
role in the binding interactions too.
It is seen in Figure 21 that the starting Zp for the samples differ, and that this may correlate to
the PO4 contractions of the samples, as shown in Figure 19. Using the Langmuir adsorption
isotherm model we used the experimental raw data to fit and extract characteristic parameter
values from the isotherms presented in Figure 21. These values are displayed in Table 4. Three
51
==PAGE:57==
parameters are extracted: the initial Zp value without protein (Y0), the Zp at saturation
concentration of protein (Ymax) and the binding constant Ka that reflects the concentration
of protein necessary for 50% of the binding sites to be occupied. The amplitude of change in
Zp is defined as Dz = Ymax - Y0. The goodness of fit (Calculated Langmuir value against
the experimental data) is given by the R2 value.
Table 4: Lys-C adsorption isotherm values from use of adapted Langmuir equation.
For the 5mM variant, there is an obvious error in the presented values as they do not follow
the trend and levels given for the other variants. This is not investigated further.
In Table 4 we find that there is evidence supporting the before mentioned observations.
Globally, the overall ∆zeta potential (Dz) increases, when the PO4 concentration increases.
We find that for the 400, 300, 200, 100, 50, and 20mM PO4 variants, the final Zp achieved
is ∼12-14mV. This may indicate that the same amount of protein are bound to the surface
of these variants. For 10mM and 5mM PO4 variants and AP, the Ymax is higher, possibly
because of the initial Zp, and the lack of interaction with Lys-C.
This is further backed up by the binding capacity. The Ka defines the strength of the binding
interaction between the adjuvant and the protein. The higher the Ka, the stronger the affinity
is between the protein and the adjuvant. Using Table 4 we find that generally, with increasing
PO4 concentration, the Ka increases. We find that the Ka of AH is ∼30(mL/mg), almost
the same as the 50mM and 100mM variants, disproving this theory. Here, we use the R2
value, where we find that with increasing PO4 concentration, the R2 value gets closer to 1.
So the Ka of AH may be product of poor Langmuir model fitment, since the R2 value is ∼0.8
- which may be due to the electrostatic repulsion that might be experienced in this example.
The initial Zp(Y0) value correlates to the concentration of PO4 found in the samples. The
52
==PAGE:58==
Y0 decreases with increasing PO4 concentration - except for the 200mM PO4 AH variant,
where Y0 is found to be ∼9mV, and this is more negative than the 300mM PO4 AH variant.
Looking at data for the ∆Zp between the variants, there is a global behavior indicating that
with increasing PO4 concentrations, the ∆Zp increases. This would indicate that when Lys-
C is adsorbed to the surface of the adjuvants, the surface charge increases, and since the
before mentioned Ymax is app. the same for the variants with >20mM PO4, this may be an
indication that these variants bind the same amount of Lys-C. This needs to be investigated
further before making this assumption - defining the binding isotherms in total amount of
adsorbed protein. This experiment is performed and explained later.
Overall, there is significant indications of the behavior on Zp and Lys-C concentrations for
AH variant with more than 10mM PO4 share many key characteristics, and that for PO4
concentrations from 10mM and down the data differs significantly from that of the above
concentrations.
11.1.2
BSA adsorption to AP, AH and AH variants
Now, we have investigated the Zp on Lys-C adsorption to the adjuvants. We want to compare
these results with adsorption of a protein with an opposite net charge, and thus we use BSA
with a net negative charge. Doing this, we get comparable data supporting interactions of
the adjuvants with two proteins of opposite charges.
To investigate further the behavior of the adjuvants and the PO4 variants, they were submit-
ted to the same binding assay, changing Lys-C for BSA. Here, we investigate the behavior
with a negatively charged protein, where Lys-C was a positively charged protein. This would
provide information in the surface charge behavior experienced depending on the protein net
charge. The Zp potential of interactions between BSA and AH samples, AH and AP was
measured, and the results are presented below in Figure 22:
53
==PAGE:59==
Figure 22: Change in Zp as a function of BSA concentration in mg/mL for AH, AP and
PO4 modified AH. The BSA concentrations are 0.0-0.02-0.05-0.1 and 0.2 mg/mL.
The change in Zp with depending BSA concentrations was investigated, and the results are
shown in Figure 22. The value for 0.3mg/mL BSA has been produced using fitment of the
Langmuir model, to provide a more detailed picture of the Zp behavior. This Zp value is
therefore theoretical and not measured.
Looking at Figure 22 it is seen that the change in Zp with increasing BSA concentration is
opposite from that of Lys-C. This is a global trend seen in the figure. When interacting with
54
==PAGE:60==
BSA, the Zp decreases. In Figure 22 it is clearly seen that with increasing PO4 concentration,
∆Zp decreases. As mentioned, BSA has a net negative surface charge, and thus the adsorption
of BSA will most likely cause the surface charge to decrease. This is also the behavior we
are seeing in this experiment.
The decrease in ∆Zp with increasing PO4 concentration
may be caused by electrostatic repulsion. With increasing PO4 concentration, the initial
Zp decreases, as found in Figure 19, thus the repulsion of negatively charged BSA should
increase, as indicated in Figure 22.
Looking at the plateau BSA concentration for the variants, it is seen that there are indications
that with increasing PO4 concentration, the plateau is reached with lower BSA concentra-
tions. This indicates that the saturation of surface charge is reached faster, than the variants
containing low concentrations of PO4. For the 10mM PO4 variant, the plateau is reached at
0.2 mg/mL BSA, and for the 400mM PO4 variant, this is reached already at 0.05 mg/mL
BSA. This trend is an overall behavior found in these results. But like for Lys-C binding, this
may be caused by the relative low amount to BSA necessary to reach a Zp, where electrostatic
repulsion causes no further adsorption of BSA.
We find that for AP it seems that no interactions are taking place, as the surface charge is
mainly conserved during the experiment. Again, this may be due to electrostatic repulsion
of the negatively charged BSA, by the more negatively charged AP.
The Zp behavior is further investigated, to gain insight in the behavior of each of the variants,
and to identify correlations between PO4 concentrations and Zp behavior for interactions with
BSA.
Table 5: BSA adsorption isotherm values from use of adapted Langmuir equation
As seen in Table 5, with increasing PO4 concentration, the Dz increase. For the 400mM PO4
variant, Dz is ∼11mV and for the 10mM PO4 variant, this is increased to ∼29mV. Looking
55
==PAGE:61==
at the Ymax values, representing the maximal Zp value reached, also negative values, show
that all samples, apart from AP, reach a Zp plateau of ∼-18mV to -19mV. As for Lys-C,
we expect this behavior to be caused by the binding of BSA to the adjuvants, and that the
similar saturation points reflects a coverage of the adjuvants with BSA in a way, that the
measured surface charge is almost identical. We see that for AP, this value is ∼-28mV.
Also, we see that for the 5mM PO4 variant, there is a slight increase in the Ymax value, at
20mV, compared to that of 10mM PO4 and AH, which is ∼19mV. We know from previous
measurements of the same samples, that the Zp is not identical for each measurement, and
find that a relative change in ±1mV is not unlikely. This is not further discussed.
In Table 5 we find that as the concentration of PO4 in the samples increases, the initial
Zp decreases (Y0). This may not be locally true, when looking at the values for 400, 300
and 200mM PO4 samples, as there is no clear indication of initial Zp, correlated to the PO4
concentration. The decreasing behavior is global, and is backed up from the data in Figure
19 and 22.
The Ka values from BSA adsorption does not show the same tendency as for Lys-C adsorp-
tion. For BSA, the Ka values that theoretically should be increasing with decreasing PO4
concentration are not giving clear indications. According to the table, the adjuvants with
the highest Ka values is the 400mM and 200mM variants which is out of trend for the other
data. This is directly opposite of that supporting theory and previous studies [21].
These irregularities may be attributed to a reduced reliability in the extracted parameter Ka,
particularly when the amplitude of Dz (the change in Zp from Y0 to Ymax) is low. This
suggests a potential limitation in using Zp changes to record adsorption isotherms under
conditions of low Dz amplitude.
In theory, if electrostatic interactions are the main contributor to binding, the decrease in
PO4 should increase protein affinity [34]. Another study investigating adsorption of BSA to
AH and AP found that some of the adsorption was contributed by hydrophobic interactions
[34]. And since we apply a simplified version of the Langmuir model, which was derived from
adsorption under controlled environments, we may have some error prone Ka values, due to
the complex nature of binding of BSA to the adjuvants.
56
==PAGE:62==
Comparing BSA and Lys-C zeta interactions
Comparing the results from performing Zp measurement at different protein concentrations
for AH, AP and the PO4 modified AH variants, we see that there is an overall opposite
behavior experienced, when using a positively charged Lys-C and a negatively charged BSA,
which could be expected.
When binding to Lys-C, the PO4 containing samples show an increase in Dz values, when
the concentration of PO4 increases.
This behavior is reversed for BSA, where higher concentrations of PO4 result in lower Dz
values compared to lower PO4 concentrations, when the BSA concentration is increased
Previous experiments using BSA and Lys-C to investigate the binding affinity between BSA-
AH and Lys-C-AP found that this was experienced, when the adsorption was at the adsorp-
tion capacity of the adjuvant, the Zp reflected the charge properties of both proteins[33].
Also, this would support the saturation levels for samples with BSA and Lys-C are nearly
the same for the interactions where electrostatic repulsion was expected to not interfere with
the interaction.
The Ka of the binding of BSA to the adjuvants did not provide clear indications of a correla-
tion in Ka values between BSA and adjuvant. We can see that between AH and AP, the Ka
for AP is 1/4 of that of AH, which makes sense theoretically, as AH has a net positive charge
at pH 7.0, and BSA has a net negative charge at pH 7.0. But if the binding interaction
between AP and BSA is electrostatic, repulsion between AP and BSA should occur, with
an expected Ka of app. 0. The R2 values does not indicate any significant errors in the
Langmuir model fitting of the data, except for AP, where the R2 value is ∼0.5.
The interactions investigated in this experiment are expected to be electrostatic [33], and
the global behavior seen by the curves of Zp as a function of protein mg/mL indicate that
adjuvants with net negative charges at pH 7.0 are able to adsorb proteins of positive charge,
and reversibly for the opposite charges. It has been shown that at pH range between 5.0
to 9.0, BSA and Lys-C show little to no change in surface charge, as the amino acids, and
the number of them on each protein have pKa values that reflect stable charges at these pH
levels [33].
57
==PAGE:63==
11.2
Absorbance measurements - Measuring protein adsorption capacity
In this section, we investigate the binding capacity of the prepared AH modified PO4 variants,
AH and AP. The binding capacity is expressed in mg of protein bound pr. mg Al (mg protein/
mg Al). This is due to the fact that the most defined specification of AH and AP is the Al
content of each. Thus by measuring the capacity as a function of Al, we obtain a common
comparison between the samples.
Buffer effect on Lys-C absorbance of AH, AH PO4 variants and AP
Here, we measure the amount (or concentration) of unadsorbed protein by Absorbance (UV
spectroscopy) to calculate the amount of adsorbed protein. We wanted to investigate the
effect of buffer concentration on Lys-C adsorption on the AH variants. This was due to initial
measurements of absorbance that caused negative binding capacities, which is theoretically
impossible. The initial concentration of buffer used during Zp measurements was 5mM Bis-
Tris pH 7.0 buffer, following previous conditions used in literature. It has been shown that
buffer concentration can effect the binding capacity of aluminum adjuvants [33].
An experiment was first set up to determine the optimal buffer concentration: determining
adsorption capacity with this method requires a higher concentration of AH to have enough
protein adsorbed in order to detect the difference in UV Absorbance in solution before and
after adsorption of protein to the adjuvant.
Therefore enough buffer capacity (buffer concentration) is required to insure a stable pH
value. It is important to not reach a high ionic strength, which screens electrostatic charges.
The right balance between sufficient buffer capacity and not excessive ionic strength was
determined in the following experiment. The data and information collected, is the adsorption
of protein to the surface of the AH, AP and AH variants, measured with absorbance. Thus,
absorbance is used to measure adsorption of proteins - indirectly, as the protein measured
with absorbance is the remaining protein in solution, after protein-adjuvant interactions have
occurred, and the bound protein and adjuvant has been removed by centrifugation. Initially,
investigation of the appropriate buffer concentration of Bis-Tris pH 7.0 buffer, prepared in
58
==PAGE:64==
section 9.3 was performed using Bis-Tris Buffer concentrations of 5mM, 10mM, 20mM, 50mM
and 100mM. The favorable concentration of buffer should be the concentration with the
highest binding of Lys-C, and with absorbance values above 0.0 Lys-C mg/mg Al (True
values). The results are presented in Figure 23:
Figure 23: Lys-C absorption isotherm of AH PO4 variants, with varying Bis-Tris pH 7.0
buffer concentration. Concentrations of 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100mM Bis-Tris.
In Figure 23 the correlation between the binding capacity Lys-C by AH, PO4 modified AH and
AP is shown. The binding is measured against the Bis-Tris buffer concentration. Looking at
the requirements of true values for this experiment, we observe that for Bis-Tris concentrations
of 10mM and 20mM, there are no negative values for mg Lys-C/mg Al binding. Comparing
the binding capacities of both concentrations, the Bis-Tris concentration with the overall
highest adsorption is the 20mM Bis-Tris. There is an exception in the value found for the
AH, where the binding of Lys-C decreases from ∼0.1 mg Lys-C/mg Al at 10mM Bis-Tris
to ∼0 mg Lys-C/mg Al for the 20mM Bis-Tris. It is seen that in Bi-Tris concentrations of
5mM, 50mM and 100mM that negative binding values are found.
There are clear indications that buffer concentration is important for binding isotherms. From
this experiment, the we decided to continue the experiments with a Bis-Tris concentration of
59
==PAGE:65==
20mM. This is purely based on earlier mentioned criteria of optimal binding capacity and no
negative binding values.
Adsorption of Lys-C
Following the measurement of Lys-C adsorption under different Bis-Tris concentrations, the
adsorption of Lys-C was investigated using AH, AP and selected PO4 modified AH variants.
Adsorbance measurements of Lys-C on the samples would provide information on the effect
that PO4 concentration would have on the protein adsorption on the modified AH samples.
This would further improve the characterisation of the AH modified variants. In this setup,
the 300mM and 400mM PO4 variants are not measured, as the other variants showed more
potential from Zp pH 7.0 measurement (See Figure 19), thus focusing on the most promising
PO4 concentrations.
Absorbance of Lys-C at pH 7.0 with a Bis-Tris concentration of 20mM was performed on
all PO4 variants from 5mM to 100mM, AH and AP. The results from this are presented in
Figure 24.
Figure 24: Lys-C absorption isotherm of AH PO4 variants, AH and AP at pH 7.0 buffer
concentration of 20mM.
60
==PAGE:66==
Figure 24 shows a general increase in Lys-C mg/mg Al binding as the concentration of PO4
increases. There is an almost linear tendency of the correlation between binding capacity
and the PO4 concentration of the modified AH samples. For the 10mM PO4 variant, it does
not follow the curve presented by the other 4 variants. On the other hand, the capacity of
the 20mM PO4 variant could equally be out of trend. This behavior was not investigated
further.
Though the correlation has linear behavior, we see in Figure 24 that increasing the PO4 by a
twofold increase does not result in a twofold binding capacity. This would indicate that PO4
concentration and Lys-C adsorption is not proportional. We find that for the 50mM PO4
AH variant, the adsorbed amount of Lys-C is 0.26 mg Lys-C/mg Al and for the 100mM PO4
AH variant, the adsorption of Lys-C is 0.32 mg Lys-C/mg Al.
The observed behavior may be influenced by a saturation of the surface charge as seen
in previous experiments, allowing a certain amount of Lys-C to bind the surface, before
the electrostatic charge of the Lys-C-adjuvant complex approach that of Lys-C, creating
electrostatic repulsion. It may also be caused by steric hindrance of the protein, and thus
accessibility of functional surface groups, limiting the number of proteins that can undergo
electrostatic interactions. Another factor, that is yet to be investigated is the actual presence
of PO4 on the surface of the modified AH variants.
The ∆mg Lys-C/mg Al between the lowest concentration of PO4 - 5mM and the highest
concentration of PO4 - 100mM is 0.2mg Lys-C/mg Al from 0.11mg Lys-C/mg Al to 0.31mg
Lys-C/mg Al. Here, we meet the limitations of the chemical knowledge of structure and
accessibility of active surface groups. For a 20 fold increase in PO4 concentration, the binding
capacity is increased by nearly a 3 fold, indicating a need for further investigations. Indicating
a need for further investigations. Still, we found indications that we can control the binding
capacity of AH modified with PO4 with Lys-C, by varying the concentration of PO4.
Adsorption of BSA
After the investigation of the adsorption of Lys-C to the modified AH variants, we perform
61
==PAGE:67==
the same binding assay, using BSA. BSA has a net positive charge, thus comparing the results
with those of binding with the negatively charged Lys-C would provide clues to the behavior
expressed by the AH variants, with proteins of opposite charge. Absorbance of BSA at pH
7.0 with a Bis-Tris concentration of 20mM was performed on all PO4 variants, AH and AP.
The results from this can be found in Figure 25:
Figure 25: BSA absorbance of AH PO4 variants, with Bis-Tris pH 7.0 buffer concentration
of 20mM. The value for AH and AP are added for reference.
As seen in Figure 25, the absorbance of BSA on the PO4 modified AH decreases as the
concentration of PO4 increases. The lowest value is found for the 200mM PO4 AH variant,
with a 0.75 BSA mg/mg Al, and the highest value is found for the 5mM variant, with an
absorbance of 1.20 mg BSA/mg Al. Binding capacity values are shown for the two reference
materials, AH and AP, where it i seen that AH has the highest binding capacity of 1.5 mg
Lys-C /mg Al. This approve that here is a correlation with high capacity and net positive
charge of the adjuvant. As mentioned for the adsorption of Lys-C to the PO4 modified AH
variants, a twofold increase in PO4 concentration is not projecting a twofold reduction in the
binding capacity. For BSA, the same behavior is seen for the 50mM PO4 variant and the
100mM PO4 variant, where they have almost the same mg BSA/mg Al binding capacity of
∼0.9. It is worth noting that the expectations for the interactions of the PO4 modified AH
62
==PAGE:68==
should result in a decrease in binding of BSA, and in the end, result in electrostatic repulsion.
But here, we find that the data in Figure 25 support data from Table 5. The net negative
AP indicate binding with BSA, thus we can not not conclude that electrostatic interactions
are responsible for all the binding interactions between PO4 containing Al-adjuvants, with a
net negative charge at pH 7.0.
11.3
Conclusion
Upon modifying AH with PO4 and SO4 ions, we were only able to get indications in change
of surface charge when modifying with PO4. The reasoning for SO4 result may lie in reaction
time, but we were not able to find studies supporting information regarding this process.
The experiments were accordingly continued without SO4 modification of AH, as measure-
ments on the surface charge of 5mM and 400mM PO4 modified AH resulted in a Zp range,
with an obtainable PZC at pH 7.0. This indicated that the project target PZC at pH 7.0
could be obtained using PO4 modifications, leading to further investigations on PO4 modified
AH.
From the data collected in the experiments, we find that the modification of AH with PO4
causes the Zp of AH to decrease, with increasing PO4 concentration. Zp measurements at
pH 7.0 for variants of 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 300 and 400mM PO4 suggested that the 20mM,
50mM and 100mM PO4 variants were closest to the defined target value of PZC at pH 7.0,
with a Zp of ∼0mV, - 2.5mV and -5mV respectively.
Measurement of surface charge saturation of BSA and Lys-C binding to the surface of adju-
vants showed that for binding of Lys-C, the binding constant of the Lys-C-adjuvant complex
increased with increasing PO4 concentration in general. The surface saturation Zp may be a
reflection of the surface charge of the proteins, when bound to the surface of the adjuvants.
Both for Lys-C and BSA Zp measurements the 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 300, 400mM PO4 sam-
ples showed nearly the same surface saturation level. Though for BSA-adjuvant bindings,
the binding constant did not provide a clear indication between affinity and concentration of
PO4.
63
==PAGE:69==
Binding capacity measurements using UV absorbance spectrometry was used to quantify
the binding capacity of the adjuvants, when binding to BSA or Lys-C. This pointed to an
increase in binding capacity of Lys-C, with increasing concentration of PO4, and reverse
trend identified when BSA is used for binding measurements. The nature of the binding
interactions have not been identified, and results suggest that electrostatic repulsion may
not be the main contribution to the binding interaction between the adjuvants and BSA,
but may be part of the binding between Lys-C and the adjuvants. EDX-SEM measurements
indicate that when additions of H3PO4 to AH is carried out, phosphor is detected in the
sample. There are indications of contaminations in some of the measured samples, showing
high levels of Na and Cl, which can be found in the Appendix A.3 Figure A.6.
In general, for all the experiments performed, several factors are always at play. The hetero-
geneous amorphous structure of the starting material, AH, causes a deviation prior to the
initiation of the experiments. Modification of the surface of AH with PO4 should cause the
surface to become less crystalline, and more amorphous. This change can ultimately alter
the environment that is tested. Next is the lack of knowledge in the actual substitution level
of PO4 groups on AH, and their accessibility. This makes the experimental platform very
dynamic, and unpredictable - but in this work, we have compared the samples with this in
mind, as the project is focused on PZC at pH 7.0 and the binding isotherms acquired at this
pH for the new aluminum hydroxyphosphate variants(AH PO4).
64
==PAGE:70==
12
Future Strategy
The future of the project would include investigations in the synthesis of aluminum hydroxy-
sulfate, as this product was not successfully synthesised using AH. Other methods would be
de novo synthesis of aluminum hydroxysulfate. Furthermore, proving reproducibility for syn-
thesis of PO4 modified AH with defined characteristics is necessary. In general, repetition of
experiments is needed to provide statistically significant data for use in product development
settings.
Application of zeta potential measurements to further investigate its use for analyzing bind-
ing isotherms of aluminum adjuvant and to study the adjuvants separately under varying
conditions should be continues.
Other aspects that may be explored in the future is the effect of surface modifications of AH
in regards to other physio-chemical changes than those investigated in this report. This would
include unfulfilled project goals such as size of the material particles, sedimentation behavior
and surface area, or adsorption by other model proteins. All these factors are important for
product development of new products, and thus the information can be utilized for future
work.
A key future project, is to further optimize PO4 modification of AH for better control of
manufacturing process in relation to commercial use.
65
==PAGE:71==
13
References
References
[1]
Absorbance Measurements — BMG LABTECH. url: https://www.bmglabtech.com/
en/absorbance/.
[2]
Chip Appel et al. “Calorimetric investigation of the nature of sulfate and phosphate
sorption on amorphous aluminum hydroxide”. In: Soil Science 178.4 (2013). issn:
0038075X. doi: 10.1097/SS.0b013e3182979e93.
[3]
Lana S. Burrell et al. “Aluminium phosphate adjuvants prepared by precipitation at
constant pH. Part I: Composition and structure”. In: Vaccine 19.2-3 (2000). issn:
0264410X. doi: 10.1016/S0264-410X(00)00160-2.
[4]
Javier Castrodeza-Sanz, Iv´an Sanz-Mu˜noz, and Jose M. Eiros. Adjuvants for COVID-19
Vaccines. 2023. doi: 10.3390/vaccines11050902.
[5]
Michael J. Caulfield et al. “Effect of alternative aluminum adjuvants on the absorption
and immunogenicity of HPV16 L1 VLPs in mice”. In: Human Vaccines 3.4 (2007). issn:
15548619. doi: 10.4161/hv.3.4.4309.
[6]
Wan Seob Cho et al. “Surface functionalization affects the zeta potential, coronal sta-
bility and membranolytic activity of polymeric nanoparticles”. In: Nanotoxicology 8.2
(2014). issn: 17435390. doi: 10.3109/17435390.2013.773465.
[7]
Ravi Danielsson and H˚akan Eriksson. Aluminium adjuvants in vaccines – A way to
modulate the immune response. 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2020.12.008.
[8]
EDS Analysis — Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy — Thermo Fisher Scientific - DK.
url: https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/materials- science/eds-
technology.html.
[9]
Stephanie C. Eisenbarth et al. “Crucial role for the Nalp3 inflammasome in the im-
munostimulatory properties of aluminium adjuvants”. In: Nature 453.7198 (2008). issn:
14764687. doi: 10.1038/nature06939.
66
==PAGE:72==
[10]
Jingyi Fan et al. Advances in Infectious Disease Vaccine Adjuvants. 2022. doi: 10.
3390/vaccines10071120.
[11]
A. A. Geidarov et al. “Phase Transformations during Aging of Aluminum Hydroxide
Precipitated by Hydrogen Peroxide”. In: Russian Metallurgy (Metally) 2022.11 (2022).
issn: 15556255. doi: 10.1134/S0036029522110052.
[12]
A. T. Glenny et al. “Immunological notes. XVII–XXIV”. In: The Journal of Pathology
and Bacteriology 29.1 (1926). issn: 0368-3494. doi: 10.1002/path.1700290106.
[13]
Rajesh K. Gupta. Aluminum compounds as vaccine adjuvants. 1998. doi: 10.1016/
S0169-409X(98)00008-8.
[14]
Esin G¨uven et al. “Aluminum Hydroxide Adjuvant Differentially Activates the Three
Complement Pathways with Major Involvement of the Alternative Pathway”. In: PLoS
ONE 8.9 (2013). issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074445.
[15]
Kenta Hagiya et al. “Direct Quantification of Proteins Modified on a Polystyrene
Microparticle Surface Based on ζ Potential Change”. In: Analytical Chemistry 94.16
(2022). issn: 15206882. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c00457.
[16]
Bethany Hansen et al. “Relationship between the strength of antigen adsorption to an
aluminum-containing adjuvant and the immune response”. In: Vaccine 25.36 (2007).
issn: 0264410X. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2007.06.049.
[17]
S. L. Hem and J. L. White. Structure and properties of aluminum-containing adjuvants.
1995. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4615-1823-5{\_}9.
[18]
Harm HogenEsch. “Mechanism of immunopotentiation and safety of aluminum adju-
vants”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 3.JAN (2012). issn: 16643224. doi: 10.3389/
fimmu.2012.00406.
[19]
Harm HogenEsch, Derek T. O’Hagan, and Christopher B. Fox. Optimizing the utiliza-
tion of aluminum adjuvants in vaccines: you might just get what you want. 2018. doi:
10.1038/s41541-018-0089-x.
67
==PAGE:73==
[20]
Seema Iyer, Harm HogenEsch, and Stanley L. Hem. “Relationship between the degree
of antigen adsorption to aluminum hydroxide adjuvant in interstitial fluid and anti-
body production”. In: Vaccine 21.11-12 (2003). issn: 0264410X. doi: 10.1016/S0264-
410X(02)00556-X.
[21]
La Toya S. Jones et al. “Effects of adsorption to aluminum salt adjuvants on the struc-
ture and stability of model protein antigens”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 280.14
(2005). issn: 00219258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500687200.
[22]
J´ozsef Karger-Kocsis and L´aszl´o Lendvai. Polymer/boehmite nanocomposites: A review.
2018. doi: 10.1002/app.45573.
[23]
E. B. Lindblad and L. Duroux. “Mineral Adjuvants”. In: Immunopotentiators in Modern
Vaccines: Second Edition. Elsevier Inc., 2016. doi: 10.1016/B978- 0- 12- 804019-
5.00018-9.
[24]
Erik B. Lindblad and Niels E. Schønberg. “Aluminum adjuvants: preparation, applica-
tion, dosage, and formulation with antigen.” In: Methods in molecular biology (Clifton,
N.J.) 626 (2010). issn: 19406029. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-585-9{\_}4.
[25]
Thomas Marichal et al. “DNA released from dying host cells mediates aluminum adju-
vant activity”. In: Nature Medicine 17.8 (2011). issn: 10788956. doi: 10.1038/nm.2403.
[26]
Philippa Marrack, Amy S. McKee, and Michael W. Munks. Towards an understanding
of the adjuvant action of aluminium. 2009. doi: 10.1038/nri2510.
[27]
Antonio Hortencio Munhoz et al. “Synthesis of pseudoboehmite-aging effect”. In: Ma-
terials Science Forum. Vol. 958 MSF. 2019. doi: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/MSF.
958.5.
[28]
Ali Nazarizadeh et al. Aluminium Nanoparticles as Efficient Adjuvants Compared to
Their Microparticle Counterparts: Current Progress and Perspectives. 2022. doi: 10.
3390/ijms23094707.
[29]
S. S.S. Rajan. “Changes in net surface charge of hydrous alumina with phosphate
adsorption”. In: Nature 262.5563 (1976). issn: 00280836. doi: 10.1038/262045a0.
[30]
Steven G. Reed, Mark T. Orr, and Christopher B. Fox. Key roles of adjuvants in modern
vaccines. 2013. doi: 10.1038/nm.3409.
68
==PAGE:74==
[31]
Charlene M.C. Rodrigues and Stanley A. Plotkin. Impact of Vaccines; Health, Economic
and Social Perspectives. 2020. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01526.
[32]
Sally J. Seeber, Joe L. White, and Stanley L. Hem. “Predicting the adsorption of
proteins by aluminium-containing adjuvants”. In: Vaccine 9.3 (1991). issn: 0264410X.
doi: 10.1016/0264-410X(91)90154-X.
[33]
Ragheb Al-Shakhshir et al. “Effect of protein adsorption on the surface charge charac-
teristics of aluminium-containing adjuvants”. In: Vaccine 12.5 (1994). issn: 0264410X.
doi: 10.1016/0264-410X(94)90127-9.
[34]
Ragheb H. Al-Shakhshir et al. “Contribution of electrostatic and hydrophobic inter-
actions to the adsorption of proteins by aluminium-containing adjuvants”. In: Vaccine
13.1 (1995). issn: 0264410X. doi: 10.1016/0264-410X(95)80009-3.
[35]
K. I. Shefer et al. “Features of the real structure of pseudoboehmites: Violations of the
structure and layer packing caused by crystallization water”. In: Journal of Structural
Chemistry 51.1 (2010). issn: 00224766. doi: 10.1007/s10947-010-0019-x.
[36]
Xiaoxue Sun, Yuzhu Sun, and Jianguo Yu. “Crystal structure of aluminum sulfate
hexadecahydrate and its morphology”. In: Crystal Research and Technology 50.4 (2015).
issn: 15214079. doi: 10.1002/crat.201400428.
[37]
M. Teresa Garcia-Gonzalez, Carmen Vizcayno, and Javier Cortabitarte. “Effect of kaoli-
nite and sulfate on the formation of hydroxy-aluminum compounds”. In: Clays and Clay
Minerals 48.1 (2000). issn: 00098604. doi: 10.1346/ccmn.2000.0480111.
[38]
Tung Thanh Le et al. The COVID-19 vaccine development landscape. 2020. doi: 10.
1038/d41573-020-00073-5.
[39]
Shan Li Wang et al. “Water-vapor adsorption and surface area measurement of poorly
crystalline boehmite”. In: Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 260.1 (2003). issn:
00219797. doi: 10.1016/S0021-9797(02)00150-9.
[40]
Zhenchuan Wu and Keqin Liu. Overview of vaccine adjuvants. 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.
medidd.2021.100103.
[41]
Zeta Potential - An Introduction — Malvern Panalytical. url: https://www.malvernpanalytical.
com/en/products/measurement-type/zeta-potential.
69
==PAGE:75==
[42]
Zeta Potential Measurements – nanoComposix. url: https://nanocomposix.com/
pages/zeta-potential-measurements.
[43]
Tingmei Zhao et al. Vaccine adjuvants: mechanisms and platforms. 2023. doi: 10.
1038/s41392-023-01557-7.
[44]
Elena S. Zhitova et al. “Atomic Arrangement, Hydrogen Bonding and Structural Com-
plexity of Alunogen, Al2(SO4)3·17H2O, from Kamchatka Geothermal Field, Russia”.
In: Crystals 13.6 (2023). issn: 20734352. doi: 10.3390/cryst13060963.
70
==PAGE:76==
A
Appendix
A.1
Surface charge saturation of AH2% by BSA
Figure A.1: Average of measurements on Zp to determine surface saturation on AH2% by
BSA, and ultimately project protein working concentrations. Extracted from raw data and
presented using Microsoft Excel.
Figure A.2: Satisfying Lys-C saturation behavior for protein concentrations 0.0, 0.02, 0.05
and 0.1 and 0.2 mg/mL Lys-C
71
==PAGE:77==
A.2
Background abs for AH samples
Figure A.3:
Average absorbance of supernatant after centrifugation.
Measured on AH
samples with no addition of protein. Extracted from raw data and presented using Microsoft
Excel
Figure A.4:
Average absorbance of supernatant after centrifugation.
Measured on AH
samples reacting with 0,1,2,5,10 mg/mL BSA. Extracted from raw data and presented using
Microsoft Excel
Figure A.5:
Average absorbance of supernatant after centrifugation.
Measured on AH
200mM PO4 samples reacting with 0,1,2,5,10 mg/mL Lys-C. Extracted from raw data and
presented using Microsoft Excel
72
==PAGE:78==
A.3
EDX raw data and measurement examples from SEM
Figure A.6: Raw stoichiometric data of AH, AP and 200mM PO4modified AH from EDX
measurement. Values marked with red are below confidence level.
Figure A.7: Scanning Electron Microscopy image of dehydrated Alhydrogel(AH) visualising
crystal structure.
73
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.8: Single particle of AH with 5 spectrums. Spectrums are used as measurement
point for EDX
74
