==PAGE:1==
Optimization of a scRNA-seq Bioinformatic
Pipeline to Assess Efficiency of Meiotic Cell
Induction
Master thesis in collaboration with a company
Javier Lopez Bort - s223237 (Author)
Gabriel Renaud (Supervisor, DTU Healthtech, Modern and Ancient Genomes)
Jeff Hsu (External Supervisor, Ivy Natal Inc., San Francisco)
==PAGE:2==
ABSTRACT
Meiosis induction consists of inducing meiosis in pluripo-
tent cells to avoid the time-consuming generation of gametes
in vivo, with future applications in human fertility and ar-
tificial selection in livestock. In Ivynatal, different mRNA
constructs are used to induce PGCLCs from iPSC and HEK
cells. To evaluate the efficiency of meiotic induction, a sc-
gATLAS is generated from reference datasets and a scRNA-
seq pipeline is developed to compare the transcriptomic pro-
file of the induced cells and the reference cells. The pipeline
is also optimised with the benchmarking of some methods in
the alignment, integration and annotation steps. In alignment,
Alevin-fry and Cellranger perform similarly. In integration,
scVI and scGPT have similar integration efficiency, but scVI
preserves the trajectory better. In annotation, the cells pre-
dicted by scGPT can be used to assess and correct the cell
types predicted by marker genes. Using in vivo datasets, a
scgATLAS is constructed with a clear trajectory consisting of
SPG, SCT and STD cell types. Finally, after processing Ivy-
natal and reference datasets, Ivynatal is compared with the sc-
gATLAS reference datasets using ASW score, RNA velocity
and gene set enrichment analysis, confirming the unsuccess-
ful induction.
Index Terms— scRNA-seq, meiosis induction, bench-
mark, single-cell-germ ATLAS
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. IvyNatal
Ivy Natal is a biotechnology company founded by Jeff Hsu
and located in Silicon Valley, San Francisco, California, USA.
It leverages cutting-edge cellular reprogramming technolo-
gies to develop solutions for extending fertility and reproduc-
tive health. Its research is focused on identifying key genetic
targets that can reprogram somatic cells, specifically hiPSCs
(human induced pluripotent stem cells) or HEK (Human Em-
bryonic Kidney), into functional germ cells at scale and with
high efficiency. In addition to applications in human fertility,
its approach will enable the acceleration of agricultural pro-
grams, generating significant value and improving global and
planetary health [26].
In this particular field, the induction of meiosis by Ivy-
natal would accelerate the artificial selection process that by-
passes the entire development of animals from embryo to pu-
berty. To produce the gametes of the next generation, most
farm animals take years to reach sexual maturity. Ivynatal
would shorten this period to weeks/months by producing ga-
metes directly from the embryos by meiosis induction. A
schematic is shown in Figure 1. The image has been created
with Biorender [4].
Induction efficiency can be assessed using traditional
methods such as qPCR. However, next-generation sequenc-
ing data can be obtained from these experiments and provide a
Fig. 1: Artificial selection cycle comparison between tradi-
tional methods and meiosis induction. Note the shortcut taken
by IvyNatal. The image has been created with Biorender [4].
broader view, especially scRNA-seq. To evaluate the meiosis
efficiency of IvyNatal techniques, the transcriptome profile
of induced cells is compared with the transcriptome profile of
reference germ cells obtained from scRNA-seq experiments.
Therefore, to evaluate the efficiency of meiotic cell induc-
tion, we need first a set of curated reference datasets consist-
ing of germ cells to compare the Ivynatal dataset, which will
form the scgATLAS (single-cell-germ). Secondly, an opti-
mised scRNA-seq bioinformatics pipeline to process the cu-
rated reference and Ivynatal datasets.
1.2. scgATLAS
Before we turn to the construction of scgATLAS, some spe-
cific knowledge about the origin and development of germ
cells needs to be explained. The introduction focuses only on
mammalian germ cells. Later, the list of datasets for scgAT-
LAS is described. There are two types of datasets that can
be useful for comparison with the Ivy Natal dataset: in vivo
and in vitro. In vivo consists of samples taken from the repro-
ductive organs. In vitro consists of meiotically induced cells,
with the same type of experiments that IvyNatal performs.
1.2.1. Origin and development of mammalian germ cells
Primordial germ cells (PGCs) are the precursors of germ cells
for both males and females. They are pluripotent cells that
arise in the early phase of embryonic development. They then
migrate to the genital ridges, from which the future gonads are
produced [5].
Before continuing with the germ cell development, Pri-
mordial Germ Cell like cells (PGCLCs) need a special men-
tion. They are induced in vitro from pluripotent stem cells,
such as ESCs or PSCs. They are then used in in vitro cul-
==PAGE:3==
tures of ovaries/testes produced from somatic gonadal tissue
or even in vivo organs (transplantation) to differentiate into
posterior germ cells. PGCLCs are therefore an in vitro re-
placement for PGCs and can be used for reproduction ex-
periments. Full induction in sperm and oocytes has so far
only been achieved in mice. In mammals, PGCLCs have only
reached the stage of gonocytes, the next stage of pluripotent
cells that would give rise to meiotic germ cells [38].
Once the PGCs reach the genital ridges, they divide mi-
totically to produce millions of PGCs. However, they would
undergo meiosis to produce haploid gametes.
Remember
that meiosis is divided into meiosis I (prophase I, metaphase
I, anaphase I and telophase I) and meiosis II (prophase II,
metaphase II, anaphase II and telophase II). Prophase I is a
very important step and can be subdivided into leptotene, zy-
gotene, pachytene and diplotene stage. After the first meiotic
division, the duplicated homologous chromosomes are sepa-
rated into two cells, resulting in two haploid cells (reductive
division). After the second meiotic division, the sister chro-
matids for each homologous chromosome are divided into
two cells, resulting in four haploid cells (mitotic division).
However, the timing and development of the germ cells is
slightly different for each sex [5].
In males, PGCs differentiate into spermatogenic stem
cells (SSCs) as soon as they reach the genital ridges. These
are pluripotent stem cells that divide mitotically in order to
self-renew and remain ”inactive” until maturity, which occurs
in adulthood (postnatal period). Once maturity is reached, an
unlimited number of SSCs start to divide continuously and
produce gametes until the end of the life. Initially, they divide
mitotically to produce spermatogonia (SPG) and all subtypes
(A1, A2, A3, A4, Intermediate and B). The last SPG divides
mitotically and produces the primary spermatocyte (SCT). It
then undergoes meiosis, producing two secondary SCT after
the first meiotic division and four spermatids (STD) per pri-
mary SCT after the second meiotic division. Finally, the STD
(already haploid cells) differentiate into mature sperm cells
through spermiogenesis [5].
In females, the PGCs differentiate into oogonia (OG) as
soon as they reach the genital ridges. These are pluripotent
stem cells that divide mitotically to self-renew and of which
only a limited number would undergo meiosis while still in
the embryo. These cells become primary oocytes (OCT) and
remain arrested in the diplotene stage of prophase I until
maturity, which also occurs in adulthood (postnatal period).
Then one or some OCT periodically continue meiosis. Meio-
sis in women therefore begins during embryogenesis and
ends at puberty. At the beginning of the ovulation period,
the first meiotic division restarts again and produces a sec-
ondary OCT and the first polar body, which is removed. The
secondary OCT enters meiosis II, but is arrested again in
metaphase II. The secondary oocyte would complete meiosis
and give rise to the egg cell and the second polar body only
after fertilisation [5].
A summarised diagram of the entire germ cell develop-
ment can be found in Figure 2, created with Biorender [4].
1.2.2. scgATLAS-in vivo
scgATLAS in vivo is composed of several recent studies
on spermatogenesis and ovogenesis that have performed
scRNA-seq analyses. Di Persio et. al. compare the tran-
scriptomic profile (genes that are differentially expressed)
between azoospermic adult human testes (control) and cryp-
tozoospermic adult human testes to investigate changes and
alterations in spermatogenesis [12]. Hermann et. al. analyse
the transcriptomic profile of human adult testes to identify the
different cell types in the spermatogenesis trajectory (sper-
matogonia, spermatocytes and spermatids) [24]. Murat et. al.
compares the molecular evolution of the different spermato-
genic cell types across different animals (human, chimpanzee,
bonobo, gorilla, gibbon, macaque, marmoset, mouse, opos-
sum, platypus and chicken) using snRNA [50].
Taelman
et. al. examine the morphological and molecular signatures
during sex development and compare the molecular changes
between the first and second trimester and between the sexes
to find common and sex-specific genes using male and female
human embryo gonads [60]. Huang et. al. analyse buffalo
spermatogenesis using prepubertal (3 months) and pubertal
(24 months) buffalo testicular tissue [27].
Garcia-Alonso
et. al. use male and female human embryos (first and sec-
ond trimester) and male and female mouse embryos (E10.5,
E11.5 and E12.5) to study human gonadal development [16].
Guo et. al. use samples from infants (12-13 months old) and
adults (three healthy men aged 17, 24 and 25 years) to study
spermatogenesis [20]. Reich et. al. extract 22 MII oocytes
and sibling polar bodies from infertile women to compare the
transcriptome of both cell types. The similarity of the polar
body transcriptomics can be used to analyse the quality of the
oocytes without manipulating them during IVF treatments
[54]. Ge et. al. extracted genital ridges from female mouse
embryos at E11.5, E12.5, E13.5 and E14.5 (8-10 embryos per
group) to analyse female meiosis initiation [18]. A summary
of the methods used in the scRNA-seq workflow can be found
in Table 7 in the Appendix.
1.2.3. scgATLAS-in vitro
scgATLAS- in vitro consists of data sets whose groups per-
form meiotic induction and analyse their results with scRNA-
seq.
Specifically, they attempt to induce PGCLCs from
pluripotent stem cells. Irie et. al. induce human embryonic
stem cells (4i ES) into PGCLCs using a specific combination
of Activin A, retinoic acid and BMP2/4. Some marker genes
were strongly activated, such as DMRT1, CDH5, SOX17 and
DAZL [29]. Seita et. al. induce PBMCs (blood mononu-
clear cells) to cjiPSCs and then to cjPGCLCs, and they also
induced cj embryos E50 to cjPGCs. They used a WNT sig-
nalling inhibitor in a culture with mouse embryonic fibroblast
==PAGE:4==
Fig. 2: Diagram of germ cell development. Induced male and female germ cells are categorised according to the cell stage
(mitosis, meiosis I and meiosis II). In males and females, however, these phases occur at different times (embryo, adult, next
generation). Prophase I and metaphase II are the phases in which primary oocytes (OCT I) and secondary oocytes (OCT II) are
arrested. Image created with Biorender [4].
cells and mouse somatic testis cells [55]. Smela et. al. induce
hiPSCs into meiotic cells by activating some genes such as the
retinoid signalling gene, the anti-apoptotic gene BCL2 and
the pro-meiotic genes MEIOC, BOLL and HOXB5 (using a
doxycycline-inducible construct) and inhibiting some genes
such as DNMT1 [56]. Sosa et al. artificially construct an
rOvary (reconstituted ovary) with iPSCs and FOSCs (Foetal
Ovarian Somatic Cells).
iPSCs are induced into PGCLCs
with the environment provided by FOSCs and cytokines such
as BMP-4, BMP-8a, EGF, recombinant stem cell factor, LIF
or retinoic acid. iPSCs are induced with tail-tip fibroblasts
from adult female mice and FOSCs are derived from mouse
embryos [57]. Murase et. al. induce 585B1 M1-BTAG and
NCLCN F1-AGVT cell lines (human iPSCs) to iMeLC and
then to hiPGCLCs in an expansion culture using a combi-
nation of cytokines (e.g. BMP) reporter genes from some
samples (e.g. TET1 KO) [49]. A summary of the methods
used in the scRNA-seq workflow can be found in Table 7 in
the Appendix.
1.3. scRNA-seq pipeline
The scRNA-seq pipeline can be divided into three main parts:
library preparation, sequencing and bioinformatics analysis.
Before looking at pipeline optimisation and benchmarking,
a brief background to both parts is presented. Afterwards,
several benchmarking papers are presented to identify the best
methods for each pipeline step.
1.3.1. Library preparation
There are several scRNA sequencing techniques. However,
we have opted for the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 5’
v2 kit from 10X Genomics [1], which is the one used in the
Ivynatal dataset.
Gel beads have millions of barcodes attached to their
membrane. A barcode is an oligonucleotide consisting of a
read-1 primer, a 10X barcode (unique for each gel bead), a
unique molecular identifier or UMI (unique for each barcode)
and a template switch oligo (TSO). Each isolated cell is con-
nected to a gel bead in a droplet, creating the GEMs (Gel
Beads-in-emulsion). Finally, the cell is lysed and its contents
are released.
Poli(dT)-RT primer and retrotranscriptase are added to the
mixture of the gel bead and the cell contents. The mRNA is
linked to the Poli(dT)-RT primer via its Poli-A tail and the
retrotranscriptase synthesises the cDNA. The cDNA with the
Poli-A tail is joined to the barcode by the start of the triple
C nucleotides and the retrotranscriptase synthesises the full-
length cDNA with the Read-1 primer, 10x barcode, UMI and
TSO. The cDNA amplification is carried out by PCR.
Finally, read 2 primer, sample index i7 and sample index
==PAGE:5==
i5 (multiplexing) and sequencing primers are added to the full
cDNA by a series of enzymatic fragmentation, end reparation,
A-tailing, ligation of adapters and amplification of the sample
index by PCR.
1.3.2. Sequencing
Now the dual-index libraries are ready for Illumina sequenc-
ing by synthesis [28].
dNTPs with fluorescent labels are
added to the mixture (each nucleotide contains a different
colour). Using the sequencing primers, the complementary
nucleotide is linked to the template nucleotide, the other
dNTPs are washed and a fluorescent light is emitted to obtain
the signal and annotate the nucleotide. After this cycle, the
fluorescent label is removed, new dNTPs are added and an-
other cycle is repeated until the full transcript and barcodes
have been read. This is done for Read 1 and later the pro-
cess is repeated in reverse order to generate Read 2. Finally,
the paired-end reads are generated and stored in a FASTQ
file. Figure 3 summarises the preparation of the library and
sequencing.
1.3.3. Bioinformatics analysis
A standard scRNA-seq bioinformatics pipeline contains the
following steps:
indexing, trimming (including merging),
alignment (preprocessing, quantification), filtering, normal-
isation, integration, construction of neighbours, clustering,
dimensionality reduction for visualisation, cell annotation,
velocity (including trajectory and pseudo-time inference),
DGEA (Differential Gene Expression Analysis) and GSA
(Gene-Set Analysis).
However, there are several tools for
each step, most of which are compiled in the database of
scRNA-seq tools [69].
To map the reads to the reference genome, it must first be
indexed. During reference indexing, the large genome is bro-
ken down into smaller parts that are annotated with the posi-
tion in the genome and with the gene(s) in this region. Index-
ing reduces the time required for alignment and the amount
of memory required.
The most typical algorithms are the
Burrows-Wheeler (BWT) and the FM-Index.
Read trimming is required before alignment in order to
improve the quality of the mapping. It essentially consists
of removing adapters, i.e. the non-biological sequences con-
taining primers and indices. However, regions of poor quality
are also trimmed from the reads [23]. Sometimes trimming
algorithms also perform merging, which consists of joining
paired-end reads using their overlapping region. It is very
common in ancient DNA alignment.
The alignment step usually comprises two main parts:
preprocessing and quantification. In scRNA-seq, there are
two main preprocessing steps: barcode collapse and UMI
deduplication. Barcode collapse consists of identifying the
true cell barcodes. An external permit list can be used to
identify the true barcodes, or they can be identified by other
methods, e.g. UMI counts. In this case, the barcodes require
a minimum of UMI counts to be considered true.
Subse-
quently, the unfiltered barcodes can be collapsed with the
true barcodes (including the UMI counts) if they are similar
enough (the difference might be due to a sequencing error
so that both correspond to the same barcode). During UMI
deduplication, the duplicated reads are removed taking into
account the UMI (remember that they are unique for each
read). Finally, the reads are mapped to the indexed reference
genome [21].
After quantification, a count matrix is created.
The
columns are represented by genes and the rows by cell bar-
codes. Therefore, for each true cell barcode, the counts or
number of times any read is mapped to a specific gene is
annotated in the table[21].
Once the count matrix has been created, many further
analyses can be carried out. However, the cell barcodes and
genes need to be filtered. As for the cells, some of them with
a low count might correspond to emtpy droplets that need to
be removed. Conversely, some cells with a high number of
cells might correspond to doublets (a droplet with two or more
cells), which also need to be removed. Finally, cells with a
higher number of mitochondrial genes might correspond to
dying cells that need to be removed. As for the genes, some
of them have a low count or are only present in a small num-
ber of cells, so they might not be essential and need to be
removed. Other genes have little variability between differ-
ent cells and can therefore be removed to reduce computa-
tional resources as they are not of interest (Feature selection
or High-variability genes or HVG selection) [23].
Normalisation process is essential before downstream
analysis. The counts for each cell may be different due to
technical factors rather than biological factors.
This must
therefore be corrected to allow a true comparison between
cells in the downstream analysis. Normalisation usually con-
sists of dividing each gene count of a cell by the library size
(cell total count), multiplying by a scaling factor and logarith-
mising. Sometimes scaling is also performed due to the high
variability between the genes. Single cell data are sparse, i.e.
a few genes are highly expressed while the expression of the
remaining genes is close to zero. To reduce this gene differ-
ence for downstream analysis, the data is scaled by setting the
mean to zero and the variance to 1. Other times, only highly
variable genes are selected [23].
Integration is the most difficult step in the bioinformatics
workflow. It consists of eliminating the batch effect between
different samples, studies, etc. caused by technical factors.
This is very important because in the downstream analysis,
the difference in transcriptomic profile between cells may be
explained by technical factors rather than biological factors.
Therefore, the count matrix is recalculated using some batch
variables as covariates. Integration usually reduces the di-
mensionality of the count matrix [23].
==PAGE:6==
Fig. 3: Schematic of library preparation (Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 5’ v2 kit from 10X Genomics), sequencing by
synthesis (Illumina) and generation of FASTQ files. The first step includes the first two columns. The second step includes the
first image of the third column. The third step includes the second image of the third column.
The construction of neighbours is necessary for the cre-
ation of clusters. Neighbours represent the cells and this step
creates a graph that stores the distances between the cells
based on their transcriptomic profiles. These distances can
be used to determine the nearest neighbours or cells and form
clusters. Clusters are a group of cells that normally represent
a cell type. This is very important in scRNA-seq as samples
usually contain more than one cell type and need to be sepa-
rated during analysis due to heterogeneity between cells. To
visualise the distribution of the clusters, the dimensions of the
count matrix (genes) are reduced to one or two dimensions,
which can be displayed in a 2D embedding plot (dimension-
ality reduction for visualisation) [23].
Once the clusters are formed, they must be annotated. As
already mentioned, the cells of the same cluster usually cor-
respond to the same cell type, so that the cluster can be anno-
tated uniformly. Traditionally, marker gene expression has
been used to identify the clusters, but more recently most
methods use the transcriptome profile of already annotated
cells to transfer the labels into the query cells [23].
In scRNA-seq, trajectory analysis is easy to perform be-
cause the cells extracted from the samples usually show a
continuum (transitions from one cell type to another) in the
transcriptome profile that corresponds to development in vivo
and can be visualised in a 2D embedding plot. In this contin-
uum, pseudotime can be used to establish an order between
the different cell types [23]. The pseudotime can be calcu-
lated using the RNA velocity, where the ratio of spliced to
unspliced transcripts is used. If the ratio is positive, there are
more spliced transcripts and the cell type is further along in
the developmental process (more specialised). If the ratio is
negative, there are more unspliced transcripts and the cell type
is early in the development process (less specialised).
Finally, DGEA and GSA analyses can be performed be-
tween different experimental conditions to analyse which
genes/pathways are different.
DGEA calculates the genes
that are differentially expressed under the different condi-
tions, and GSA groups the genes into gene sets to analyse
which pathways are enriched under the different conditions.
A schematic of the entire bioinformatics pipeline is shown
in Figure 4.
1.3.4. Pipeline optimization and benchmarking
Several benchmarking papers have been published in recent
years to assess the performance of these tools. They usually
use several tools for each/multiple steps and use metrics for
comparison. Lien et. al. compare different trimming algo-
rithms to analyse their qualities in merging reads and trim-
ming adapters, important features for ancient genomes [40].
Luecken et. al. compare different integration methods us-
ing four types of evaluation metrics: batch effect removal,
biology conservation, usability and scalability [45]. Tian et.
al. analyse the following steps: Normalisation, imputation,
integration, clustering and trajectory analysis, with different
metrics for each step [61]. Hie et. al. give a comprehen-
==PAGE:7==
Fig. 4: Schematic of the standard bioinformatics pipeline with all steps: Indexing, trimming, alignment, filtering, normalisa-
tion, integration, construction of neighbours, clustering, dimensionality reduction for visualisation, cell annotation, velocity,
differential gene expression analysis and gene set analysis. The images come from various sources [1] [4][23] [9].
sive overview of the most common computational methods
in the following steps: Alignment, normalisation, integration,
clustering, trajectory analysis and DGE [25]. Junttila et. al.
compares different single-cell and pseudobulk DGEA meth-
ods [32]. Knight et. al. develop IBRAP, a new benchmarking
pipeline for comparing normalisation, integration, clustering,
annotation, trajectory inference and GSE [34]. Su et. al. de-
velop another pipeline called CellBench, which is based on
R and analyses performance by combining methods for nor-
malisation and clustering steps [59]. Tran et. al. compare
different integration methods using 5 types of datasets: dif-
ferent technologies, different cell types, different batches, big
dataset and simulated dataset [63]. You et. al. compare dif-
ferent aligners for preprocessing using quantification metrics
and their impact on normalisation and clustering steps [67].
Yu et. al. perform clustering benchmarking with different
dataset compositions: different number of cell types, differ-
ent number of cells in each cell type, different ratio of ma-
jor and minor cell types (imbalance ratios), and datasets with
large numbers of cells [68]. Finally, Lee et. al. bechmark
algorithms for the integration of snRNA, snATAC and snMul-
timodal data [39]. The list of methods and metrics used for
each work is summarised in the Table 6 in the Appendix.
Deep learning models have been used for prediction mod-
els in molecular biology, such as variational autoencoders or
transformers. ScGen, for example, is a variational autoen-
coder that can predict perturbation and infection responses
of cells from different studies, species and cell types [43].
Another example is scGPT, a Generative Pre-trained Trans-
former. The base model has been pre-trained using extensive
single-cell datasets and can then be fine-tuned using ATLAS
single-cell data to perform various tasks, including batch in-
tegration, cell type annotation and perturbation analysis [10].
They have become a powerful tool for analysing single cell
data. The latent space and cell embeddings obtained from the
models can be interpreted as integrated matrices, providing a
versatile approach that rivals established integration methods
such as scVI (single cell Variational Inference) and scANVI
(single cell Adversarial Variational Inference). In addition,
scGPT can also be used for cell annotation. The cell embed-
dings from your dataset can be mapped to labelled referenced
embeddings. Therefore, these labels (usually disease condi-
tions or cell types) are transferred to the embedded cells.
Once the pipeline is optimised, the scgATLAS in vivo and
in vitro with reference datasets can be created. The two most
important steps are integration due to strong batch effects be-
tween different studies and annotation due to the reliability of
marker genes and cell individuality [46].
==PAGE:8==
2. MATERIAL AND METHODS
2.1. Introduction
The main objective of the project is to evaluate the meiotic
induction efficiency of the Ivy Natal samples. To do this, an
ATLAS from reference datasets allow to compare both tran-
scriptome profiles and check how far the Ivy Natal samples
are from the reference samples. Therefore, the project is di-
vided into four main parts: Analysis of the IvyNatal dataset,
Analysis of the Reference datasets, ATLAS construction and
Assessment of Meiotic induction. To perform the four main
parts, a standard pipeline is created using Snakemake, a popu-
lar Python-based workflow package [36]. A schematic of the
general workflow of the project can be found in 8.
This pipeline comprises 12 steps that are organised and
concatenated with Scanpy [65]. For each of these steps, a
method is selected from the Appendix tables (6 and 7). They
are: Index construction (Salmon [52]), Trimming (Trimmo-
matic [7]), Alignment (Alevin-fry [22]), Count Matrix (Py-
roe [22]), Filtering (Number of genes per cell, Number of
counts per cell, % mitochondrial genes per cell, % ribosomal
genes per cell, doublet cells), normalisation (log-norm, no
HVG, no scaling), integration (scVI [41] for first dimension-
ality reduction, KNN-Graph for the construction of neigh-
bours, Leiden [62] for clustering and mde for dimensionality
reduction for visualisation), annotation (marker-based), ve-
locity (scVelo [6]), DGE (Diffxpy [15]) and GSEA (Gseapy
[14]). However, only some of the steps are used for each part
and some of them are also optimised by benchmarking mul-
tiple methods. The methods and the metrics used for com-
parison are selected again from the Appendix tables (6 and
7).
The first part consists of the processing of the IvyNatal
samples up to annotation, where three different methods for
alignment are compared: Alevin-fry [22], STARsolo [33] and
Cellranger [30]. This step is not only necessary for bench-
marking, but also for aligning the raw data from the Ivynatal
dataset. For the execution of STARsolo and Cellranger, STAR
[13] is used for the index construction and SciPy [64] for the
construction of the count matrix. To compare them, some
typical metrics from the count matrix are used, namely the
number of cells, the number of genes, the number of total
counts, the number of counts per cell and the number of
counts per gene. The percentage of sample misclassification
coming from the sample-based annotation is also used for
comparison.
Subsequently, the IvyNatal samples must be
corrected with respect to the sample and the GFP (Green-
Fluorescent Protein) and HBB (Hemoblogin subunit Beta)
genes. Finally, trimming is performed with cutadapt [47].
The second part consists of processing all reference
datasets individually up to annotation, a step that is opti-
mised by benchmarking two methods: Marker-based and
Reference-based with scGPT [10]. Finally, cell type match
between the two methods is used as a benchmark metric.
This step is not only necessary for benchmarking, but also to
annotate the cell clusters of the reference datasets.
In the third part, the processed IvyNatal dataset and the
annotated reference datasets are concatenated into the same
count matrix using Scanpy’s concatenation method and pro-
cessed up to the integration step without filtering. Here three
methods are compared: scVI [41], scGPT [10] and BBKNN
[53]. For scGPT and BBKNN, UMAP [48] is used as a di-
mensionality reduction for visualisation. PCA is used as the
first dimensionality reduction for BBKNN. The metrics used
for the comparison are four categories, all derived from the
average silhouette width (ASW). Again, this step is not only
necessary for benchmarking, but also for integrating the dif-
ferent datasets and removing the batch effect.
Finally, in the fourth part, the integrated count matrix con-
taining all datasets (including Ivy Natal’s dataset) is used to
evaluate the meiotic induction efficiency. First, in the inte-
gration step, the ASW batch between the Ivy Natal datasets
and the remaining datasets is calculated to analyse how far
they are from the reference cells in the transcriptome profile.
Similarly, in the velocity step, embedding plots show how
far the IvyNatal cells are from the spermiogenesis/ovogenesis
trajectory of the reference cells. Finally, in the DGEA and
GSA steps, differentially expressed genes and differential sig-
nalling pathways enriched are calculated between the IvyNa-
tal samples and the reference samples.
2.2. Datasets
The datasets mentioned in the Section 1.2.2 (scgATLAS- in
vivo) that are used in the pipeline can be found in Table 1 with
a short description based on five important features: study,
sample, specie, sex and cell type. These features are impor-
tant because they are used as covariates in the integration step.
The variety of datasets in these features reflects the generaliz-
able power of scgATLAS.
2.2.1. Ivynatal dataset
IvyNatal consists of six samples: Control HEK (no transfec-
tion), Control Transfection HEK (GFP construct), Induction
HEK (mix of three experimental constructs), Control iPSC,
Control Transfection iPSC (GFP construct), Induction iPSC
(mix of three experimental constructs). The GFP construct
and the experimental constructs are identical for both cell
types. The samples were sequenced by Azenta, a biotech-
nological company. A scheme of the experiment conditions
is shown in Figure 6.
The Feature Barcode technology for Cell Surface Protein
and Immune Receptor Mapping is used for multiplexing [2].
In this variant, additional barcodes are added to the gel bead
(feature barcodes). These barcodes are also sequenced, but
independently of the transcripts, so that their reads are stored
in a different FASTQ file. The feature barcodes are different
==PAGE:9==
Fig. 5: Schematic of the pipeline workflow. In red: steps and methods that are benchmarked. In blue: the steps and methods used
to compare the Ivynatal samples with the reference. In bold: the metrics used for benchmarking. The blue square represents the
IvyNatal dataset. Red squares represent the Reference datasets. Light blue and red represent integrated datasets. If the method
is not mentioned in the four main steps, the method of the standard pipeline is used.
Fig. 6: Scheme of the IvyNatal induction experiments
for each sample and also contain the 10X barcode unique for
each cell so that each cell can be associated with a specific
sample during alignment. A draw of a feature barcode tran-
script is shown in Figure 7.
Fig. 7: Feature barcode transcript
2.3. Processing of the Ivynatal dataset
2.3.1. Index construction
The index construction is different for each method.
In
alevin-fry, the spliced transcriptome is created with the wrap-
per makesplicedintronic from Pyroe.
The spliced index is
then constructed as normal with Salmon from the spliced
transcriptome and used for alignment. The mRNA synthetic
sequences are added using the makesplicedintronic function
too. For the feature barcode index, Salmon uses the -t and
–features argument because the sequence file is a tsv file and
not a fasta file. In STARsolo, the index is created normally
with STAR and STARsolo can directly consider the splicing
with the Velocyto argument in the –soloFeatures parameter
during alignment. However, mRNA synthetic sequences can-
not be added to the index. In CellRanger, the index is not
==PAGE:10==
Table 1: Description of the datasets using the following fea-
tures: study, sample (number of samples), specie, sex and cell
type.
Study
N
Samples
Specie
Sex
Cell
type
Ivynatal
6
Human
None
Induced
Hermann
6
Human
Male
Adult
Persio
6
Human
Male
Adult
Murat
5
Human
Male
Adult
Murat
chimp
3
Chimpanzee Male
Adult
Taelman
9
Human
Male/FemaleEmbryo
Huang
8
Buffalo
Male
Adult/Pre-
pub
Murat
chicken
2
Chicken
Male
Adult
Murat
macaque
2
Macaque
Male
Adult
Murat
mar-
moset
2
Marmoset
Male
Adult
Murat
mouse
2
Mouse
Male
Adult
Reich
4
Human
Female
Adult
Ge
4
Mouse
Female
Embryo
Irie
4
Human
None
Induced
Seita
3
Marmoset
None
Induced
Smela
8
Human
None
Induced
Sosa
4
Mouse
None
Induced
created as the count matrix is provided by Azenta and there-
fore does not contain neither spliced transcripts nor mRNA
synthetic sequences.
2.3.2. Trimming
The parameters used for cutadapt are –minimum-length 54 -
q 20. The adapter sequence to be removed is the Clontech
SMART CDS Primer II A: AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCA-
GAGTACT. Cutadapt is used instead of Trimmomatic, as the
latter method cannot remove the adapter sequences from Ivy-
natal samples. The quality control of the trimming is per-
formed with fastqc [3].
2.3.3. Alignment
The sequencing technology of the Ivynatal dataset is 5’ R2-
only. Therefore, in alevin-fry alignment the following param-
eters are used in the command salmon alevin: -l ISF (libtype)
–chromium (technology); and in the command alevin-fry
generate-permit-list: -d rc (read orientation). A non-external
barcode list is provided.
To align the feature barcodes, in salmon alignment the
following parameters are used in the salmon alevin com-
mand: -l ISF (libtype) –citeseq (technology) –featureStart 10
–featureLength 15 –naiveEqclass [58].
In STARsolo alignment, the following parameters are
used in the command STAR: –soloType CB UMI Simple
–soloCBwhitelist None –soloUMIlen 12 –soloCBlen 16 –
soloUMIstart 17 –soloCBstart 1 –soloBarcodeReadLength
0 –outSAMattributes NH HI nM AS CR UR CB UB GX
GN sS sQ sM –outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate –
soloUMIfiltering MultiGeneUMI CR –soloCellFilter Cell-
Ranger2.2 –soloUMIdedup 1MM CR –outFilterScoreMin
30 –soloCBmatchWLtype 1MM multi Nbase pseudocounts
–soloFeatures Gene Velocyto.
2.3.4. Count matrix
Pyroe is used to create the count matrix for alevin-fry, Scipy
for STARsolo and Cellranger. However, the assignment of
samples differs from the standard protocol as feature barcodes
are used. The feature barcode matrix differs from the ma-
trix of spliced transcripts. Here the genes correspond to the
samples. Therefore, each cell has a number of reads aligned
to each sample reference but belonging to only one sample.
Therefore, each cell barcode is assigned to the sample that
contains the most reads. In most cases, the assignment is easy,
as the number of counts of the assigned sample is quite higher
than the others. In some cases, however, the distribution of the
sample reads is homogeneous and can lead to sample misla-
belling.
2.3.5. Filtering
The parameters for Ivynatal filtering are: % mitocondrial
genes per cell = 20 %, % ribosomal genes per cell = 51 %,
Number of counts per cell = 1000 counts, Number of genes
per cell = 500 genes. Doublet cells are also removed.
2.3.6. Annotation
The Ivynatal samples correspond to the cell types, there-
fore annotation is sample-based.
However, as mentioned
above, mislabelling of samples may result in incorrect cell
type classification.
Furthermore, HEK and iPSCs form a
different cluster (see Results and Discussion) and the cor-
respondence between samples and cell type (HEK, iPSCs)
is known. Therefore, the % sample mislabelling from each
alignment method can be calculated. Since the assignment of
the samples depends on the performance of the aligner, this
metric can also be used for comparison.
2.3.7. Correction
Before concatenating the processed Ivynatal dataset with the
Reference datasets, some corrections must be made with re-
==PAGE:11==
gard to the sample, GFP and HBB.
As already mentioned, some cells are assigned to the
wrong sample because the feature barcodes might not be
aligned correctly. Therefore, an SVM (Support Vector Ma-
chine) model is trained with the well-labelled cells to predict
the mislabelled cells and correct their assignment to the sam-
ple.
Before GFP and HBB correction, % transfection or trans-
fection rate (cells with at least 1 transcript) of each synthetic
mRNA construct and the HBB gene (basal expression) for
each sample is plot in Figure 8. % transfection of iPSC sam-
ples (Control, Control transfection and Induction) are close
to zero, therefore these samples are discarded (transfection
was not successful). Here in the ”Sample correction” row the
transfection rate of the GFP construct in the Control trans-
fection sample is high and the transfection rate of the three
experimental constructs in the Induction sample is also high.
However, the transfection rate of the GFP construct in the In-
duction sample is too high and the HBB expression is too high
in the Control transfection and Induction samples.
The reason of these inconsistencies is as follows: The
third experimental construct contains the GFP gene and the
three experimental constructs contain the HBB gene. There-
fore, some GFP and HBB transcripts corresponding to the
GFP gene from the GFP construct and the HBB gene from
the cells, respectively, may be aligned wrongly to the syn-
thetic mRNA sequences of the experimental constructs.
To correct this, the counts of the GFP construct are trans-
ferred to the third experimental construct. This only applies to
the Induction sample. Not all counts of transfected cells are
transferred, as the percentage of misalignment is taken into
account. The corrected percentages are displayed in the GFP
correction row. The HBB gene counts are then transferred
in the same proportion to the three experimental constructs.
This only applies to the Control transfection and Induction
samples. Not all counts of the transfected cells are transferred
as the percentage of misalignment and HBB basal level ob-
served in the Control sample are taken into account. The final
corrected percentages are shown in the HBB correction row.
2.4. Processing of Reference datasets
2.4.1. Index
A different index is created for the human, mouse, chicken,
macaque and marmoset species. The procedure is the same
as for the IvyNatal dataset, using Salmon and Pyroe’s make-
splicedintronic function.
2.4.2. Trimming
The parameters used for Trimmomatic are ”0:30:16”, No
trailing, No leading, No sliding window, No minimum length
and compression level equal to -3. The adapter sequences
to be removed are the TruSeq3-PE adapters from Illumina:
TACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT (Pre-
fixPE/1) and GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTC-
CGATCT (PrefixPE/2). Here too, the quality control of the
trimming is carried out with fastqc.
2.4.3. Alignment
The sequencing technology of the Reference datasets are 3’.
Therefore, in alevin-fry alignment the following parameters
are used in the command salmon alevin: -l ISR (libtype)
–chromium (technology); and in the command alevin-fry
generate-permit-list: -d fw (read orientation). A non-external
barcode list is provided.
2.4.4. Filtering
Five metrics are used for filtering: Number of (spliced) counts
per cell, Number of genes per cell, % of mitochondrial genes
per cell, % of ribosomal genes per cell and Doublet cells. No
genes are filtered, as most meiotic marker genes have low ex-
pression levels and therefore need to be retained after filter-
ing. To determine the minimum cutoff for the Number of
counts per cell and the Number of genes per cell, the num-
ber of spliced counts and the number of genes per cell from
each dataset are used. The datasets are categorised into four
groups with respect to these two metrics. The first group, cor-
responding to Hard filtering, is formed by Hermann, Persio,
Murat, Murat chimp, Taelman, Irie, Huang, Seita, Sosa and
Ge datasets. The second, which corresponds to Soft filter-
ing, is formed by Murat marmoset, Murat macaque, Murat
chicken and Murat mouse. The third, which corresponds to
Very soft filtering, contains only Smela. Finally, the fourth
group, which corresponds to non-filtering, contains only Re-
ich. The filtering metrics values are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Values of each filtering metric per group. Cutoff
counts and genes represent the minimum value that the cell
must have in terms of the Number of counts per cell and the
Number of genes per cell respectively, in order not to be fil-
tered.
Group
N counts
per cell
N genes
per cell
Cutoff
counts
Cutoff
genes
Hard
8,744
3,453
1,000
500
Soft
286
227
250
100
Very soft
109
39
100
50
Non
filtering
96,655
9,462
0
0
As can be seen from the Table, a higher Number of counts
per cell and genes per cell corresponds to more restrictive fil-
tering or higher thresholds. The number of counts per cell
depends directly on the Number of cells and the Number of
total counts. The Hard filtering group contains a high Num-
ber of counts per cell, as it has a low Number of cells (41,878)
==PAGE:12==
Fig. 8: % transfection of each synthetic mRNA construct and the HBB gene (cells with at least 1 transcript) for each HEK
sample
but a high Number of total counts (258 M). The Soft filtering
group, on the other hand, contains a low Number of counts
per cell, as it has a high Number of cells (106,539) but a
low Number of total counts (36 M). The Very soft filtering
group contains a low Number of cells (5,522) but a very low
Number of total counts (1 M), resulting in a very low Num-
ber of counts per cell. The group without filtering consists
of a dataset containing only 4 cells (2 of which are not ”real
cells” but a group of almost identical cells). For this reason,
no filtering is performed regardless of the metrics. For mito-
chondrial and ribosomal genes, the maximum thresholds are
10 % and 20 % respectively. Doublet cells are also removed.
2.4.5. Annotation
In the Marker-based method, the marker genes are extracted
individually from each paper. The list of marker genes for the
corresponding cell type can be found in the tables ??, 8 and
9 in the Appendix. As each paper has a different name for
similar cell types, all meiotic cell types are categorised into
five main categories: SPG (spermatogonia), SCT (sperma-
tocytes), STD (spermatids), PGCs (Primordial Germ Cells)
and PGCLCs (Primordial Germ Cells-Like Cells). PGCs do
not differentiate between male and female and OCT (oocytes)
could be trasncriptomically equivalent to SCT, therefore they
are categorised in this group. Somatic cells are also identi-
fied by marker genes, but they are not shown in the paper.
Some examples are somatic cells belonging to germinal tis-
sues, such as Sertoli cells, endothelial cells, macrophages,
epithelial cells, Leydig cells, etc., and pluripotent cells that
have been used to induce PGCLCs, such as ESCs or iPSCs.
Scanpy’s score genes function calculates the score of each
cell type for each cell in the dataset based on the expression of
the marker genes. Then, the mean score of each cell type for
each cluster (from the integration step) is calculated with the
individual cell scores calculated in the previous step. Third,
annotate each cluster with the cell type that has the highest
mean score. Finally, annotate each cell with the cell type
of the cluster that contains the corresponding cell. Once the
clusters are annotated, clusters corresponding to somatic cell
types are filtered out.
For Reference-based annotation, scGPT model is used.
The labels or cell types of reference cells are transferred to
the query cells.
First, the query embeddings are obtained
by running the count matrix through the pre-trained model.
In this case, the whole human model (33 million normal hu-
man cells) is used. Then, the CellXGene atlas (loaded as an
index of faiss [31]) is used, which contains the embeddings
of these cells and the metalabels (cell types). Therefore, the
query embeddings are mapped to the reference embeddings
to obtain the metalabels or cell types of the query cells. Fi-
nally, the annotation is created by clusters and not by individ-
==PAGE:13==
ual cells with the same steps as in the Marker-based method.
Now, the clusters annotated with scGPT are compared with
the marker-based clusters to determine the matches or equiv-
alences between the cell types of both methods, which are
used as metrics.
For some datasets, especially induction studies such as
Irie et. al. or Seita et. al. the annotation might be sample-
based, as the samples correspond to the cell type. Samples
are usually different experimental conditions that lead to a
specific PGCLC cell type. However, due to the heterogeneity
of cells responding to the same experimental conditions, cells
from the same sample can sometimes turn into very different
cell types.
2.5. ATLAS construction
Three methods are compared for the integration:
scVI,
BBKNN and scGPT. scVI is a variational autoencoder that
operates during the first dimensionality reduction. It trans-
forms the original embedding into a new embedding using
some variables as covariates: Sample, Study, Species, Sex
and Cell Type. BBKNN is an algorithm that calculates the
neighbours using a variable as a covariate, in this case Study.
Finally, scGPT is a transformer that fulfils several tasks. In
this case, it obtains the embeddings from the cells when the
count matrix runs through the pre-trained model (whole-
human model) without any covariates. The pre-trained model
functions as the first dimensionality reduction. This is the
same process as the first step of the scGPT annotation. For
each method, the clusters are presented in an embedding
plot, where the first two dimensions obtained from the di-
mensionality reduction for visualisation method are used.
The objective is to visually analyse how well the clusters are
mixed or separated.
2.5.1. ATLAS integration
For biological reasons, two different ATLAS are constructed
to benchmark and compare with the Ivynatal dataset. The
biological reasons concern two important assumptions of an
ATLAS: the clusters of batch covariates should be mixed and
the clusters of cell type annotations should be well separated
in a hypothetical embedding plot. In this case, both ATLAS
share some batch covariate clusters that should not be mixed.
The batch covariates are sample, study, specie, sex and cell
type. The cell type annotations are SPG, SCT / OCT, STD
and PGCs / PGCLCs. Remember that the cell type covariate
refers to the cell type of the study, i.e. adult, peri-pubertal,
embryo or induced, and that the cell type annotation refers to
the cell identity of tissues. OCT and PGCLCs are grouped
with SCT and PGCs, respectively, in the integration analy-
sis as they should overlap in the embedding plots since they
should have the same transcriptomic profile (as explained in
the introduction step). In the first case, OCT and SCT should
be similar, which supports the idea of creating an ATLAS de-
spite sex. In the second case, PGCLCs should be similar to
PGCs, as PGCLCs experiments consist of the induction of
pluripotent cells such as ESCs or iPSCs into PGCs.
The first dataset, called in vivo ATLAS, consists of the
reference datasets corresponding to the ”adult” cell type (Her-
mann, Persio, Murat, Huang, Reich) and the Ge and Ivynatal
datasets. The Ge dataset is included because the cells are an-
notated as OCT (explained in section 3.2.1). The Ivynatal
dataset is included because it is required for analysing the ef-
ficiency of meosis induction in step 4 of the workflow. With
the exception of Ivynatal, all datasets or studies contain three
cell types (SPG, SCT / OCT, STD), that should form well-
separated clusters. The covariates in these datasets also form
clusters that should be mixed (sample, study, specie and sex).
The covariate Cell type is not important, as all datasets are of
cell type ”adult”, with the exception of the Ge dataset (cell
type ”embryo”) and Ivynatal (cell type ”induced”).
The second ATLAS, called in vitro ATLAS, consists of
the reference datasets corresponding to the ”induced” cell
type (Irie, Seita, Smela, Sosa) and the Taelman and Ivynatal
datasets. The Taelman dataset is included because the ”em-
bryo” cell type datasets contain PGCs cell type annotation,
which should be clustered with the PGCLCs cell type anno-
tations from the ”induced” cell type datasets. Ivynatal is also
included here as it is required for analysing the efficiency of
meiosis induction in step 4 of the workflow. In this case, only
one cell type annotation is present: PGCs / PGCLCs. Both
cell types should form only one cluster as they are considered
transcriptomically similar. The covariates in these datasets
also form clusters that should be mixed (sample, study and
specie). The covariate Sex is not important as all datasets
are ”None” (Sex has no effect on the induced pluripotent
cells), except for the Taelman dataset (male and female). The
covariate Cell type is also not important as all datasets are
”induced” cell type, except for the Taelman dataset (cell type
”embryo”).
As seen in the previous paragraphs, in vivo and in vitro
cells contain different cell type annotations and should form
well-separated clusters in a hypothetical embedding plot, so
there is no problem here. However, both contain batch co-
variates that should not be mixed. For example, the different
”sample” and ”study” clusters from both ATLAS would over-
lap in an ideal general ATLAS. However, this would imply
mixing in vivo cell type annotations (SPG, SCT / OCT, STD)
and in vitro cell type annotations (PGCs / PGCLCs), which
violates the first assumption of the ATLAS construction rules
regarding cell type annotation.
2.5.2. ATLAS correction
Taking into account the biology of cell types (section in the
Introduction step), the expected ATLASs should have a spe-
cific shape. In vivo ATLAS should form a trajectory from
==PAGE:14==
SPG to SCT centred through SCT / OCT in the embedding
plot. Therefore, all datasets that are outside this trajectory are
removed. In vitro ATLAS should form a large cluster of all
datasets in the embedding plot. Therefore, all datasets outside
this large cluster are removed.
2.5.3. ATLAS metrics
Looking at the position of clusters of batch covariates or cell
type annotations in the embedding plot (to see if they are
mixed or well separated) is a way to measure the method ef-
ficiency. However, another way to measure intra-cluster dis-
tance is to use a specific mathematical metric, in this case
ASW.
ASW compares the distance of each cell to each cell of the
same cluster and the distance of each cell to each cell of the
nearest cluster. It ranges from -1 to 1, where -1 represents
a strong misclassification of clusters, 0 represents overlap-
ping clusters, and 1 represents well-separated clusters. Then
it takes the average of all distances. The distance used is the
Euclidean distance and the values come from the reduced di-
mensions. The basic formula is shown in Figure 9.
Fig. 9: Formula for the ASW score. a(i): average distance
between the i-th cell and the rest of the cells from cluster i.
d(i, C): average distance between the i-th cell and the rest of
the cells from C (all clusters except cluster i) [61].
The code for calculating ASW comes from the scib
pipeline [45]. However, some changes have been made to
make a total of four variants: batch, label, batch label and la-
bel batch. ASW batch uses batches as clusters and the scaling
is to take the absolute value (change the scale from -1-(+1)
to 0-1, ignoring missclassification clustering) and then invert
the value (1 - i) to consider 1 as the maximum value (over-
lapping clusters) and 0 as the minimum value (well-separated
clusters). ASW label uses cell labels as clusters and the scal-
ing consists of converting the scale to 0-1 instead of -1-(+1)
((i + 1) / 2)). ASW batch label uses batches as clusters and
the same scaling as ASW batch, but each score is calculated
separately for each cell label. Finally, ASW label batch uses
cell labels as clusters and the same scaling as ASW label, but
each score is calculated separately for each category in the
batch. ASW batch, ASW batch label and ASW label batch
are calculated for each batch variable (sample, study, specie,
sex and cell type). The four formulas are shown in Figure 10.
Finally, only ASW batch label is used to compare the in-
tegration methods. Therefore, the five batch covariates (study,
sample, specie, sex and cell type) are used to evaluate the
Fig. 10: Formulas for the ASW score for the four types:
batch, label, batch label and label batch. i = individual cell.
mixing effects of the different methods. However, the eval-
uation is done separately for each cell type annotation (SPG,
SCT / OCT and STD for in vivo ATLAS, PGCs / PGCLCs
for in vitro ATLAS). For the calculation of the metric, the
Ivynatal dataset is excluded for both ATLAS as it is not part
of the ATLAS. Remember that it is only added to analyse the
efficiency of meiosis induction in the fourth step.
2.6. Meiosis induction assessment
2.6.1. Integration analysis
One way to measure the evaluation of meiosis induction is
to calculate the ”transcriptomic distance” between the Ivy-
natal dataset and each of the ATLAS (in vivo and in vitro)
constructed in the previous step. The ASW scores are then
compared between cell types to see which one is further away
from Ivynatal cells in terms of the transcriptomic profile. The
distance is calculated using the ASW batch label, using the
same formula (Figure 10) as for the ATLAS construction. In
this case, a new batch covariate is created that separates the
data into two batches: the Ivynatal dataset and the rest of the
datasets that make up the ATLAS. As before, the ASW is cal-
culated separately for each cell type annotation.
2.6.2. Velocity analysis
Scvelo is used to estimate the RNA velocity. Using the dy-
namic model, the velocity vectors are calculated with the
functions ”recover dynamics” and ”velocity”. The velocity
vectors are then used to calculate the probabilities of cell
transitions with the function ”velocity graph” and stored in
a velocity graph (matrix). Finally, the values of the velocity
graph are displayed in a velocity embedding plot using the
low-dimensional embedding space from the dimensionality
reduction for visualisation methods (mde or UMAP). The
velocity embedding plots can be used to visually analyse the
direction of the trajectory. This is only done for ATLAS in
vivo, as ATLAS in vitro has no trajectory.
2.6.3. Differential Gene Expression Analysis
DGEA is executed by the diffxpy package.
Diffxpy is a
Python variant of DESeq2 and therefore uses the same type
of statistical test: Wald test. Non-normalised data is used for
the statistical test. It calculates the differentially expressed
==PAGE:15==
genes between Ivynatal cells and each cell type (PGCLCs
from ATLAS-in vitro and SPG, SCT and STD from ATLAS-
in vivo). The number of counts per gene and % of mitochon-
drial genes per cell are used as continuous covariates. After
obtaining the differentially expressed genes, they are filtered
using the following thresholds: qval <= 0.05, mean > 1,
log2fc >= 0.0001 and log2fc <= -0.0001.
2.6.4. Gene Set Analysis
GSA is executed by the package gseapy. The GSEA method
calculates the enriched pathways of Ivynatal cells compared
to PGCLCs, SPG, SCT or STD cells. It uses the log2fc values
obtained from the differentially expressed genes filtered by
diffxpy in the previous step. The gene-set pathways used are
”GO Biological Process 2021”. Here too, the gene set path-
ways are filtered using the following threshold values: NOM
p-val <= 0.05, NES >= 0.0001 and NES <= -0.0001. NES
is the statistic used to sort the enriched pathways. For each
cell comparison (PGCLCs, SPG, SCT and STD), the three
most upregulated and downregulated gene set pathways are
selected and analysed.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Analysis of Ivynatal dataset
3.1.1. Count matrix metrics
To analyse the performance of Alevin-fry, STARsolo and
Cellranger on IvyNatal samples, some metrics are calculated
from the count matrix step shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Comparative analysis between Alevin-fry, STAR-
solo and Cellranger using count matrix metrics
Metric
Alevin-fry
Cellranger
STARsolo
N cells
9,272
10,473
7,644
N genes
50,010
36,601
48,897
N counts
194,749,040
393,849,506
16,413,279
N counts
per cell
17,943.49
18,955.61
1,063.24
N counts
per gene
3,568.25
5,380.31
166.21
Looking at the table, the Number of cells and the Number
of genes are more or less similar between the three methods.
However, the Number of counts per cell and per gene is ex-
tremely low in STARsolo compared to Alevin-fry and Cell-
ranger. Therefore, the results from STARsolo are of lower
quality and are excluded from the comparative analysis, leav-
ing only the results from Alevin-fry and Cellranger. Cell-
ranger also uses STARsolo’s alignment algorithm, so the dif-
ference between STARsolo and Cellranger is likely to be re-
lated to UMI and cell barcode filtering and not the alignment
itself. In addition to the Number of counts, there are two
other metrics that could be useful for comparing the two al-
gorithms regarding the preprocessing step: shared cells and
shared genes. Shared cells are checked using the cell bar-
codes and shared genes using the gene ids.
Regarding cell barcodes, Alevin-fry and STARsolo have
only 10 cells in shared, so the good quality cells filtered by
both methods are different. Moreover, if we take the cells
whose barcodes are filtered by Alevin-fry but with STARsolo
results (9,272 cells), the Number of total counts is extremely
low (only 40,563). The good quality cells filtered by Alevin-
fry are therefore poor quality cells when filtered by STAR-
solo. Both examples show a clearly different preprocessing
in both aligners. Finally, Cellranger uses a different cell bar-
coding (e.g. AAACCTGAGAAGGTGA-1) than Alevin-fry
or STARsolo (e.g. CCTTCGAGTTCCGTCT) and is there-
fore not comparable looking at the cell barcodes. However,
in the embedding plot after dimensionality reduction for vi-
sualisation (Figure 11), the cells of Alevin-fry and Cellranger
could be the same, as they share the same pattern and expres-
sion profile.
Regarding gene ids, Alevin-fry and STARsolo share
48,650 genes in common. Therefore, there is no difference
in the pre-processing of genes. Cellranger cannot be com-
pared as the genes are encoded with the ensemble ids (e.g.
ENSG00000243485) instead of gene ids. However, looking
at the embedding plot mentioned in the previous paragraph,
the genes of Alevin-fry and Cellranger could be the same, as
their cells share the same pattern and expression profile.
3.1.2. Annotation metrics
Since Alevin-fry and Cellranger are very similar in terms of
the Number of cells, the Number of genes and the Number of
counts (Table 3), they are compared based on the percentage
of sample missclassification. After dimensionality reduction
for visualisation, the two mde dimensions are used to obtain
the embedding plot, shown in Figure 11. The two upper fig-
ures belong to Alevin-fry and the two lower figures to Cell-
ranger. On the left side, each cell is labelled according to the
sample. Looking at the sample annotation, the two large clus-
ters on the left belong to HEK cells and the two clusters on
the right belong to iPSC cells, for both alignment methods.
Therefore, on the right side, each cell is labelled according to
the cell type. Therefore, a threshold is set in the first dimen-
sion (-0.36 for cellranger and -0.45 for alevin-fry) to separate
and annotate the cells into HEK and iPSCs. However, not ev-
ery cell that belongs to HEK samples is annotated as HEK,
and not every cell that belongs to iPSC samples is annotated
as iPSC.
Therefore, once the cells are annotated, the percentage
of sample misclassification can be calculated. The cells are
assigned to one of the six samples using feature barcode
alignment and annotated as HEK or iPSCs using clustering.
==PAGE:16==
Fig. 11: Comparison between Alevin-fry (top two figures)
and Cellranger (bottom two figures) using embedding plots
from dimensional reduction for visualisation.
On the left,
sample-based annotation. On the right, clustering-based an-
notation
The misclassified cells would therefore be cells annotated as
HEKs but assigned to iPSC samples (Control iPSC, Control
transfection iPSC, Induction iPSC) or annotated as iPSCs and
assigned to HEK samples (Control HEK, Control transfection
HEK, Induction HEK). % of the sample misclassifications are
listed in Table 4.
The two combined percentages are very similar (6.20 and
5.44 %), so there is no clear superiority between Alevin-fry
and Cellranger. Therefore, Alevin-fry is chosen for the fol-
lowing analysis because the method is more convenient than
Cellranger in terms of running time and coding. After correc-
tion (which is explained in the section 2.3.7), only cells from
Induction HEK sample are retained.
Table 4: Comparative analysis between Alevin-fry and Cell-
ranger using % of sample misclassification. % combined is
calculated by taking the average of the other percentages
Method
% iPSC
classified as
HEK
% HEK
classified as
iPSC
%
combined
Alevin-fry
10.33
3.60
6.20
Cellranger
9.17
2.73
5.44
3.2. Analysis of Reference datasets
3.2.1. Annotation metrics
Comparing the annotated marker-based and reference-based
clusters in the mde dimensionality reduction for visualisation
(Figure X), there is a constant match between the following
cell types (the left cell type corresponds to the marker-based
and the right cell type to the reference-based):
• SPG: germ cell.
• SCT: oogonial cell.
• STD: epithelial cell, pancreatic acinar cell, thyroid fol-
licular cell, skeletal muscle satellite stem cell, classical
monocyte, monocyte, endocrine cell.
• PGCs: germ cell.
• PGCLCs: germ cell, hepatocyte, placental villous tro-
phoblast
Reference-based method also detects several somatic cell
types. These are: macrophage, myofibroblast cell, endothe-
lial cell, Sertoli cell, fibroblast, blood vessel endothelial cell,
granulosa cell, mesenchymal cell, myoepithelial cell of mam-
mary gland, neuron, pericyte, supporting cell, vascular asso-
ciated smooth muscle cell and endothelial cell of lymphatic
vessel.
They match with somatic cell types from marker-
based, such as Sertoli cells, endothelial cells, macrophages,
epithelial cells, Leydig cells, etc.
The cell type match between the Marker-based and
Reference-based methods explained in the previous para-
graphs, is shown in Figure 12. Here, embedding plots from
the dimensionality reduction for visualisation are shown and
each cell is labelled with the cell type predicted by either the
Marker-based or the Reference-based method.
SPG are assigned to germ cells. Germ cells is a broad
term that could correspond to totipotent cells that differenti-
ate to produce gametes. SPG fit this definition, so the match
is perfect and both are early in the trajectory development.
SCT are classified as oogonial cells, which correspond to OG
(oogonia). On the one hand, the match is not perfect, as OG
should correspond to SPG. However, the OG could be more
specialised and more advanced in the trajectory development
==PAGE:17==
Fig. 12: Embedding plots using dimensionality reduction for visualisation of six datasets to see the cell type match between
Marker-based and Reference-based annotation methods. For each dataset, the Marker-based plot is on the left and the Reference-
based plot on the right. The cells are labelled with the cell type predicted by the corresponding method. Three datasets are
adult in vivo datasets (Hermann, Persio and Murat), one is an embryo in vivo dataset (Ge) and the last two datasets are in vitro
datasets (Seita and Irie).
than their male counterparts. On the other hand, this clearly
shows that female and male germ cells have a similar tran-
scriptome despite the sex. STD are assigned to specialised
cells from different somatic tissues, such as epithelial or pan-
creatic acinar cells. These results imply that STDs from dif-
ferent studies have a different transcriptome associated with
specialised cells from very different tissues. PGCs are as-
signed to germ cells. PGCs could also fit the broad defini-
tion of germ cells, but they should be earlier in the trajec-
tory development than SPG or OG. Finally, PGCLCs are as-
signed to germ cells and also to specialised cells from differ-
ent somatic tissues, such as hepatocytes or placental villous
trophoblast. Some PGCLCs might have a correct induction
process so that their transcriptome resembles PGCs and thus
germ cells. However, others could differentiate into other so-
matic tissues due to the heterogeneous response of the cells to
the same experimental conditions.
3.2.2. Annotation correction
Marker-based annotation (using the five combinatorial cat-
egories) shows consistent annotation and is therefore the
method used to annotate the reference datasets for further
analysis in the ATLAS construction.
However, for most
datasets, some corrections need to be made based on the
annotations made using the reference-based or scGPT and
sample-based method (for the induction papers).
In addi-
tion, more corrections are done based on the position that the
clusters have in the trajectory with respect to other cell type
clusters.
First, some clusters annotated as STD by the Marker-
based method are annotated as germ cells or oogonial cells
by the scGPT method (e.g., the Persio and Murat datasets).
If these clusters are at an early stage of spermatogenesis
(looking at the embedding plots), they are re-annotated as
SPG (germ cells) or SCT (oogonial cells). If they are out-
side the trajectory, they are removed. This means that these
STD clusters are misclassified and the STD marker genes are
therefore not always effective. In other cases, some clusters
annotated as STD by the Marker-based method are annotated
as somatic cells by the scGPT method, such as Sertoli and
mesenchymal cells (e.g. Murat marmoset and Murat macaque
datasets). In this case, both clusters are closer to the Sertoli
and macrophage clusters (Marker-based).
In the first case
(Sertoli cells), the STD cluster is also incorrectly positioned
in the development trajectory, as the previous cluster in the
trajectory is more specific, although it should be the oppo-
site. Therefore, the STD clusters are misclassified again and
they are re-annotated as somatic clusters and removed. In the
latter cases, there are some clusters annotated as STD using
the Marker-based method that form a mass of cells without
==PAGE:18==
trajectory (e.g. Murat chicken and Murat mouse datasets). In
these cases, this mass of cells is removed and only a part of
the dataset that has some kind of trajectory is taken. All these
results also confirm that the STD marker genes are not effec-
tive. One possible explanation is that the marker genes used
for STD annotation are too general and are more strongly
expressed in other cell types than their actual marker genes.
Finally, in the induction datasets with samples corre-
sponding to cell types, some clusters are annotated as non-
PGCLCs using Marker-based but assigned to PGCLC sam-
ples. Since these clusters are also closer to other PGCLC
clusters (Marker-based), they are eventually re-annotated as
PGCLCs again. Therefore, this correction is performed using
sample-based annotation.
3.3. Analysis of ATLAS construction
3.3.1. Integration correction
Before calculating any metrics, embedding plots of the three
methods compared in the integration step are shown in Fig-
ure13 for each ATLAS. The cells are labelled with the co-
variate study to visually see how well each of the methods
integrate the different datasets from the ATLAS.
Looking at the 6 embedding plots, BBKNN can easily be
discarded for further analysis. In both cases, the cells form
a large ball cluster in which all studies are embedded and
spread out into different, separate parts, but never mix with
other studies. This is not a typical embedding plot after inte-
gration. BBKNN integrates using the graph neighbours cre-
ated from the raw input data, while most integration methods
convert the input data into an integrated embedding matrix.
This could explain the large difference in the result between
BBKNN and scVI / scGPT. Therefore, the integration perfor-
mance of BBKNN is poor and the method can be rejected.
Looking at the ATLAS in vivo, the cells from the Her-
mann and Persio studies integrate perfectly and form a trajec-
tory. Therefore, these studies are kept for further analyses.
In addition, some clusters from Murat integrate and are dis-
played in the same trajectory in scVI, but are separated in
scGPT. In the latter case, however, they are displayed in the
same direction and form a kind of distinct branch. Therefore,
these clusters from Murat study are also retained. For Reich,
this study includes only 4 cells and they are inside the trajec-
tory at the beginning, so they are kept. Huang’s cells are in
the same direction of the trajectory in both methods, but they
are separate and form a different branch. Therefore, Huang is
discarded. Finally, the Ge studies and some cells from Mu-
rat form isolated clusters without trajectory and are therefore
also discarded. Ivynatal is retained because it is necessary for
the assessment of meiosis induction.
Looking at ATLAS in vitro, the cells from the different
studies form isolated clusters without integration into a large
cell cluster, as hypothesised in the Materials and methods sec-
tion. Therefore, the strategy is changed and the study closest
to Ivynatal in terms of transcriptomic profile is retained. In
this case, both methods are one of the clusters from the Irie
study.
The reason why the studies in the embedding plot are pre-
sented in this way can perhaps be explained by the ”specie”,
”cell annotation” and ”sample” labels shown in Figure 14.
Only the embedding plots of scVI are shown, as both meth-
ods allow the same conclusions.
One possible explanation for the separation of the Murat
dataset (human and chimpanzee only) in scGPT could be due
to the experimental conditions of the Murat study. They per-
formed snRNA and not scRNA. Therefore, the difference in
transcriptomic profile between nuclei and cytoplasm may ex-
plain this difference, which is only resolved by scVI. Looking
at the ATLAS in vivo embedding plots, the isolated clusters
from the Murat study belong to different species: chicken,
macaque, mouse and marmoset. Most of these cells are also
STD. STD are cells that differ strongly between species be-
cause they are highly specialised, i.e. they have differenti-
ated strongly between species in the course of evolution for
adaptive reasons. This explains the isolation of these clusters.
The cells of the Huang study belong to the buffalo, which
explains their exclusion from the trajectory (specie barrier).
However, the branch formed follows the same direction in
terms of cell annotation: it goes from SPG to STD, passing
through SCT. These annotated cells are also located closer
to their corresponding cell annotated types of the main tra-
jectory. Finally, Ge cells belong to the mouse and they are
also OCT. Actually, they are female PGC that have entered
meiosis, which is why they are classified as OCT. Therefore,
the difference in specie and cell annotation is large enough
to isolate them. To summarise, only human and chimpanzee
cells can form a clear trajectory (buffalo excluded). The chim-
panzee is closer to humans in evolution than the other apes
(marmoset, macaque), mammals (buffalo, mouse) and other
animals (chicken), which explains their better integration into
the trajectory.
Looking at the ATLAS in vitro embedding plots, the stud-
ies belong to different species (human, marmoset and mouse),
but they have almost the same cell type annotation (PGCLCs),
with the exception of Taelman’s PGCs, which are embryo
cells. However, the PGCLCs from each study are very dif-
ferent because they are induced under different experimental
conditions, so the concept of PGCLC is very broad. There-
fore, belonging to the same cell type does not play a role in the
similarity of the cells in this case. These two characteristics
explain the isolation of the individual studies.
Finally, looking at the sample column of the embedding
plots, the samples are highly integrated in ATLAS-in vivo, but
poorly integrated in ATLAS-in vitro. The reason for this lies
in the different nature of the samples for each ATLAS. Sam-
ples from datasets belonging to ATLAS-in vivo correspond to
different individuals or tissues of the same individual, there-
fore the transcriptome profile is expected to be the same and
==PAGE:19==
Fig. 13: Embedding plots after integration with scVI, scGPT and BBKNN for the ATLAs - in vivo and in vitro. The study
covariate is the cell labelling used to visually benchmark the method for integration performance.
Fig. 14: Embedding plots after integration with scVI for the ATLAs - in vivo and in vitro. The specie, cell annotation and
sample covariates are the cell labelling used to visually explain how the studies are integrated in the first column.
==PAGE:20==
the differences are due to technical factors. However, the sam-
ples from the ATLAS in vitro datasets correspond to different
experimental conditions for the induced pluripotent cells or a
different time point in the induction process of the pluripo-
tent cells. Therefore, the difference in transcriptomic profile
could be due to biological factors and the samples should not
be mixed.
In summary, scVI and scGPT can produce an integrated
trajectory in ATLAS-in vivo that follows the logical order of
cell annotation, but only for studies belonging to species that
are close enough in evolution. In addition, technical factors
related to the individuality of the samples can be easily elim-
inated with these methods. On the other hand, they are also
unable to integrate studies from different PGCLCs induction
experiments and the same PGCLCs from different induction
time points in the ATLAS-in vitro.
3.3.2. Integration metrics
After filtering out non integrated datasets for both ATLAS, the
embedding plots are displayed again in Figure 15 to finally
compare the performance of scVI and scGPT. In addition,
the ASW batch label score is calculated separately for each
batch covariate and each cell label to allow a more mathemat-
ical comparison between the two methods. The table with the
ASW scores and their mean values can also be seen in Figure
15.
Looking at both ATLAS, the cell studies from scVI ap-
pear to be more constricted than the cell studies from scGPT,
which are more distributed out. This gives the impression
that the studies in scGPT are more integrated because their
cells are closer together. However, the general position of the
clusters is the same in both studies, so the results are very
similar. The reason why the values of the reduced dimensions
are distributed differently in both methods could be due to the
way the input data is transformed into the embeddings which
are then used by the dimensionality reduction for the visual-
isation method. Remember that scVI uses a variational au-
toencoder that is trained on the query datasets you are using,
while scGPT uses a transformer which has been pre-trained
on a large external dataset. So in order to choose one or the
other, the ASW metric can provide more information.
Looking at the ATLAS in vivo, scVI seems to generate
a more constant and better trajectory than scGPT. Moreover,
scGPT still cannot include Murat cells in the trajectory, al-
though they form a similar branch in which the annotated cell
types have the same location as in the main trajectory. For
the ASW score, only the batch covariates study, sample and
specie are considered for the mean calculation, as gender and
cell type have null values in most cases. Gender, because only
a few female studies are included, and cell type, because the
cells have the same type within the same ATLAS (adult in
in vivo and embryo / induced in in vitro). Looking at the
mean value of each cell annotated type (last column), it can
be seen that in scVI the SPG and STD cell groups are bet-
ter integrated than the SCT cells because the ASW scores are
higher. In scGPT, however, the STD cell group integrates bet-
ter than SPG and SCT because of the same reason. In the
first case (scVI), the SCT cells integrate better at the begin-
ning of their trajectory (close to SPG) and at the end (close
to STD), but the trajectory forms 4 well-separated branches
in the centre, which probably explains the lower ASW score.
The divergence of the cells in the centre of the trajectory has
no clue. One possible reason is that the subtypes or states
of SCT are very different at this point and are labelled to-
gether as SCT based on the visual representation but not in
reality. SPG and SCT appear to have the same visual separa-
tion within the groups. In the second case (scGPT), the large
separation between the branches formed by the main trajec-
tory and Murat could explain the low ASW value in SPG and
SCT, as the branches are closer to each other in STD. Finally,
the overall mean is higher for scVI, therefore this method is
chosen for the integration of in vivo datasets which require a
specific order of annotated cell types in the trajectory.
Looking at the ATLAS in vitro study, as mentioned two
paragraphs above, scGPT seems to integrate better than scVI,
as both clusters (in this case Ivynatal and Irie study) are
closer to each other in space. This proximity could explain
the higher mean ASW score for scGPT compared to scVI.
Therefore, scGPT is chosen for the integration of in vitro
datasets relying only on proximity in the embedding graph
but not in the trajectory.
To conclude, scVI has been chosen for integrating ATLAS-
in vivo and scGPT for integrating ATLAS-in vitro. The full
embedding plots with all the batch covariates labelled are
shown in the Figures 18 and 19 from Appendix.
3.4. Meiosis induction assessment
3.4.1. Integration analysis
ASW scores or distances between Ivynatal cells and each of
the annotated cell types are stored in table 5. In vitro ASW
scores are calculated using the embeddings of scGPT and
in vivo ASW scores are calculated using the embeddings of
scVI.
Table 5: ASW score between the Ivynatal dataset and the
other datasets, combined in cell annotation types, for ATLAS-
in vivo (with scVI embedding) and in vitro (with scGPT em-
bedding).
Cell annot
ASW score
ATLAS
PGCLCs
0.67
in vitro
SPG
0.73
in vivo
SCT
0.73
in vivo
STD
0.66
in vivo
In vitro and in vivo results cannot be compared as differ-
==PAGE:21==
Fig. 15: Embedding plots after integration with scVI and scGPT and after removal of non integrated data sets for the ATLAs - in
vivo and in vitro. The study covariate is the cell labelling used to visually benchmark the integration performance of the method.
Cell annotation labelling is used to analyse the differences in performance for each annotated cell type. ASW batch label scores
for each batch covariate and cell annotated type with the corresponding mean values are stored in the table directly below the
embedding plots for each method and ATLAS. Gender ASW scores are excluded in the mean calculation.
ent embeddings are used to calculate the ASW score. How-
ever, a comparison can be made between SPG, SCT and STD.
The ASW score of STD is lower than the ASW score of SPG
and SCT, as Ivynatal cells are transcriptomically more sim-
ilar to SPG and SCT than STD. This makes sense because
Ivynatal cells should be PGCLCs, which are similar to PGCs,
which are precursors in trajectory, so they should be more
similar to the early stages of gametogenesis. Following the
same explanation, Ivynatal cells should have more similarity
to SPG than to SCT, but they have the same ASW score.
Looking at the ASW scores for all annotated cell types,
ivynatal cells do not resemble any in vivo cell type or PG-
CLCs in terms of transcriptomic profile. Therefore, the in-
duction experiments have not successful and new mRNA con-
structs should be used for future experiments.
3.4.2. Velocity analysis
After the scVelo processing, velocity embedding plots are cre-
ated with the scVI embedding. They are shown in Figure 16.
The arrows indicate the probability of cell transitions.
They have different directions throughout the trajectory, ex-
cept for the Hermann and Persio cells, at the end of the SCT
trajectory and at the beginning of the STD trajectory (high-
lighted in red in the Figure). The Hermann and Persio cells
form the main esquelet of the trajectory, so it makes sense that
Fig. 16: Velocity embedding plots using the scVI embedding.
They are labelled with the batch covariate and the cell an-
notation types. The area where the arrows show a constant
trajectory are labelled in red.
this section has an RNA velocity in one direction. However,
the reason why the late SCT and early STD have an RNA
velocity remains unclear. The cell subtypes in this area might
have a true pseudotime order and this contributes to the same
direction of trajectory.
Since ivynatal cells lie outside the
trajectory, no RNA velocity directions are recorded in these
cells. The location of the ivynatal cells outside the in vivo
development means that the PGCLCs have not differentiated
into late germ cells.
==PAGE:22==
3.4.3. DGEA and GSA analysis
The four most downregulated pathways related to Ivynatal for
the four annotated cell types are summarised in Figure 17.
The pathways are selected based on the value of the statistic
NES.
Looking at PGCLCs pathways, Ivynatal cells are down-
regulated in pathways related to cytoskeleon dynamics and
sending proteins to the cell membrane. Therefore, external
PGCLCs have a higher motile activity compared to Ivyna-
tal cells. Looking at the SPG, SCT and STD pathways, Ivy-
natal cells are downregulated in pathways related to protein
synthesis. This can be easily verified by looking at the lead
genes, most of which are ribosomal genes (they start with
RP). Therefore, in vivo cells have a higher synthesis activity
compared to Ivynatal cells, which is required for differentia-
tion into the following cell stages in the trajectory, requiring
a large amount of proteins. To summarise, the Ivynatal cells
appear to be latent or inactive in terms of their movement and
synthetic activity compared to the reference cells, confirming
which the induction is not successful. In a hypothetical suc-
cess, the PGCLCs should have a higher activity as they would
differentiate into the in vivo germ cells and undergo meiosis.
4. CONCLUSIONS, CONTRIBUTION AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
A main conclusion and future direction can be extracted from
each step.
When analysing the Ivynatal dataset, the Alevin-fry and
Cellranger methods have similar performance, despite the dif-
ferent algorithms used in the alignment (Salmon and STAR).
In addition to the traditional metrics of the counting matrix,
such as number of counts and cells, this paper provides a new
perspective with feature barcode alignment and sample an-
notation to benchmark aligners. Feature barcode technology
is not always present in alignment, but the new metric con-
cept can be extrapolated and used for future benchmarking
papers. You only need real cases (cases where you know the
alignment result) and predicted cases to perform this type of
alignment evaluation. For future studies, the kallisto bustools
tool might also be benchmarked to check its efficiency.
Analysing the reference datasets, it was concluded that
scGPT can efficiently predict some germ cell types and can be
used to correct and evaluate the annotation of marker genes.
scGPT is an important tool, but it is mainly focused on the
prediction of batch integration and perturbation. Therefore,
future work on germ cells can use this method to annotate
cell types and avoid the time-consuming marker gene method.
However, only germ cell types have tested. Therefore, future
work should analyse the annotation performance of scGPT in
other cell types.
In the ATLAS construction step, scVI and scGPT show
similar integration performance, but scVI seems to preserve
the trajectory in the cells better. As for the ATLAS itself, a
decent in vivo ATLAS was constructed in this work, includ-
ing human and chimpanzee cells from different studies and
germline developmental stages (SPG, SCT and STD). This
scgATLAS can be used by groups to assess the meiotic in-
duction of their experimental cells. However, more integra-
tion analyses should be performed to integrate datasets from
different species, which we have not achieved in this work. In
addition, ATLAS should be extended to include more diverse
datasets, i.e. to include more embryo and female datasets.
In the last step we came to the conclusion that Ivyna-
tal induction was not successful.
However, this work has
shown several ways to evaluate meiotic induction using bioin-
formatic tools. Firstly, using the ASW score to check the
distance in the transcriptomic profile between experimental
and reference cells. Secondly, analyse RNA velocity to as-
sess trajectory (this is used for ATLAS construction rather
than meiotic induction assessment). And finally, analyse the
gene-set pathways enriched in the reference cells compared
to the query. However, bioinformatic evaluation should never
omit laboratory evaluation or other techniques such as qPCR
as mentioned in the introduction.
With respect to scGPT, there are other transformer models
that could be interesting to analyse, for example, their perfor-
mance in annotation. By fine-tuning model parameters such
as the number of epochs, the optimiser and the weight de-
cay, scGPT models can be optimised to achieve state-of-the-
art results for reproductive datasets. Furthermore, the next
step could be to generate an scRNA Foundation Model from
the created scgATLAS that solves the integration and anno-
tation steps at once (using the embedding space) to predict
the perturbation. scGPT is a good candidate, but other trans-
formation models could also be tried, such as GeneFormer,
scBERT or Universal Cell Embeddings (UCE) [46].
5. CODE AVAILABILITY
The code scripts of the Snakemake pipeline can be found in
the Github repository ”ivysnake” of Ivy-Natal [42].
6. DATA AVAILABILITY
To create the single-cell ATLAS, the raw FASTQ files are
downloaded from GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) and
ENA (European Nucleotide Archive).
These are the corresponding accession codes: GSE153947
- Di Persio et. al. [12], GSE109037 - Hermann et. al. [24],
PRJEB48234, PRJEB48235, PRJEB48240, PRJEB48241
and PRJEB48242 - Murat et. al. [50], GSE181558 - Taelman
et. al. [60] and GSE190477 - Huang et. al. [27], GSE223036
- Irie et. al. [29], GSE218108 - Seita et. al. [55], GSE268385
- Smela et. al. [56], GSE239488 - Sosa et. al. [57] and
GSE32689 - Reich et. al. [54] and GSE128553 - Ge et. al.
[18].
==PAGE:23==
Fig. 17: The four most downregulated gene set pathways of ivynatal cells for each cell annotation type comparison (PGCLCs,
SPG, SCT, STD) with the corresponding NES value and lead genes.
The IvyNatal scRNA-seq samples are not public as the
data is confidential.
7. RESOURCES
Data storage and running jobs, for most of the tasks, are per-
formed using Google Cloud Platform (GCP). Data storage
is performed in Google Cloud Storage (GCS) using a spe-
cific bucket and running jobs is performed in Google Kuber-
netes Engine (GKE) using a specific Virtual Machine (VM)
instance.
Google cloud SDK (GDK) is the program used
for accessing the GCP through the Command Line Interface
(CLI) [19]. It installs three comand-line tools: gcloud (access
to the GCP cluster), gsutil (interacts with GCS and manage
copy/move files within GCS and between local and GCS) and
kubectl (access to Kubernetes VM instances). To send jobs
from Snakemake to Kubernetes VM instances, two plugins
need to be installed: snakemake-storage-plugin-gcs [37] and
snakemake-executor-plugin-kubernetes [35].
Running jobs, for GPU tasks, are performed using Lambda
services. Two specific tasks require GPUs: scVI (it uses Py-
torch [51]) and scGPT (it uses Flash-attention [11]). Flash-
attention is an algorithm that increases the speed of matrix
multiplication . The GPU instance type used contains: 30
CPU cores, 214.7 GB RAM, 549.8 GB SSD and a 1x A100
(40 GB SXM4) GPU.
References
[1]
10X Genomics. Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 5’
Reagent Kits v2 (Dual Index). URL: https : / / www.
10xgenomics . com / support / single - cell - immune -
profiling/documentation/steps/library-prep/chromium-
single-cell-5-reagent-kits-user-guide-v-2-chemistry-
dual-index.
[2]
10X Genomics. Chromium Next GEM Single Cell
5’Reagent Kits v2 (Dual Index) with Feature Barcode
technology for Cell Surface Protein & Immune Recep-
tor Mapping. URL: https://www.10xgenomics.com/
support/single-cell-immune-profiling/documentation/
steps/library-prep/chromium-single-cell-5-reagent-
kits- user- guide- v- 2- chemistry- dual- index- with-
feature - barcoding - technology - for - cell - surface -
protein-and-immune-receptor-mapping.
[3]
Andrews, S. “FastQC - A quality control tool for high
throughput sequence data.” In: Babraham Bioinfor-
matics (2010).
[4]
Aoki, S. BIORENDER. 2017.
[5]
Barresi, M. J. F. and Gilbert, S. F. Developmental Biol-
ogy. 2023.
[6]
Bergen, V. et al. “Generalizing RNA velocity to tran-
sient cell states through dynamical modeling”. In: Na-
ture Biotechnology 38.12 (2020).
[7]
Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M., and Usadel, B. “Trimmo-
matic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data”.
In: Bioinformatics 30.15 (2014).
[8]
Chen, S. “Ultrafast one-pass FASTQ data preprocess-
ing, quality control, and deduplication using fastp”. In:
iMeta 2.2 (2023).
[9]
Costa, F., Gr¨un, D., and Backofen, R. “GraphDDP:
a graph-embedding approach to detect differentiation
pathways in single-cell-data using prior class knowl-
edge”. In: Nature Communications 9.1 (2018).
[10]
Cui, H. et al. “scGPT: toward building a foundation
model for single-cell multi-omics using generative
AI”. In: Nature Methods (2024).
[11]
Dao, T. et al. “Flash Attention: Fast and Memory-
Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS). 2022.
==PAGE:24==
[12]
Di Persio, S. et al. “Single-cell RNA-seq unravels al-
terations of the human spermatogonial stem cell com-
partment in patients with impaired spermatogenesis”.
In: Cell Reports Medicine 2.9 (2021).
[13]
Dobin, A. et al. “STAR: Ultrafast universal RNA-seq
aligner”. In: Bioinformatics 29.1 (2013).
[14]
Fang, Z., Liu, X., and Peltz, G. “GSEApy: a compre-
hensive package for performing gene set enrichment
analysis in Python”. In: Bioinformatics 39.1 (2023).
[15]
Fischer, D. et al. Fast and scalable differential expres-
sion analysis on single-cell RNA-seq data. Aug. 2019.
URL: https://github.com/theislab/diffxpy.
[16]
Garcia-Alonso, L. et al. “Single-cell roadmap of
human gonadal development”. In: Nature 607.7919
(2022).
[17]
Gayoso, A. et al. A Python library for probabilistic
analysis of single-cell omics data. 2022.
[18]
Ge, W. et al. “Dissecting the initiation of female meio-
sis in the mouse at single-cell resolution”. In: Cellular
and Molecular Life Sciences 78.2 (2021).
[19]
Google cloud SDK. URL: https://cloud.google.com/
sdk/docs/install-sdk.
[20]
Guo, J. et al. “The adult human testis transcriptional
cell atlas”. In: Cell Research 28.12 (2018).
[21]
He, D. et al. Alevin-fry documentation. 2021. URL:
https://alevin-fry.readthedocs.io/en/latest/overview.
html.
[22]
He, D. et al. “Alevin-fry unlocks rapid, accurate and
memory-frugal quantification of single-cell RNA-seq
data”. In: Nature Methods 19.3 (2022).
[23]
He, J., Lin, L., and Chen, J. Practical bioinformatics
pipelines for single-cell RNA-seq data analysis. 2022.
[24]
Hermann, B. P. et al. “The Mammalian Spermatoge-
nesis Single-Cell Transcriptome, from Spermatogo-
nial Stem Cells to Spermatids”. In: Cell Reports 25.6
(2018).
[25]
Hie, B. et al. Computational Methods for Single-Cell
RNA Sequencing. 2020.
[26]
Hsu, J. and Nakamura, M. Ivy Natal. 2024. URL: https:
//www.ivynatal.com/.
[27]
Huang, L. et al. “Single-cell RNA sequencing uncovers
dynamic roadmap and cell-cell communication during
buffalo spermatogenesis”. In: iScience 26.1 (2023).
[28]
Illumina. Sequencing by Synthesis. URL: https://emea.
illumina.com/science/technology/next- generation-
sequencing/sequencing-technology.html.
[29]
Irie, N. et al. “DMRT1 regulates human germline com-
mitment”. In: Nature Cell Biology 25.10 (2023).
[30]
Jackman, S. and Macklin, C. Cellranger. URL: https:
//github.com/10XGenomics/cellranger?tab=readme-
ov-file.
[31]
Johnson, J., Douze, M., and Jegou, H. “Billion-Scale
Similarity Search with GPUs”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Big Data 7.3 (2021).
[32]
Junttila, S., Smolander, J., and Elo, L. L. “Benchmark-
ing methods for detecting differential states between
conditions from multi-subject single-cell RNA-seq
data”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 23.5 (2022).
[33]
Kaminow, B., Yunusov, D., and Dobin, A. “STARsolo:
accurate, fast and versatile mapping/quantification
of single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq data”. In:
bioRxiv (2021).
[34]
Knight, C. H. et al. “IBRAP: integrated benchmark-
ing single-cell RNA-sequencing analytical pipeline”.
In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 24.2 (2023).
[35]
Kˆoster, J., Beasley, B., and Shaikh, B. snakemake-
executor-plugin-kubernetes. URL: https://github.com/
snakemake/snakemake-executor-plugin-kubernetes.
[36]
K¨oster, J. and Rahmann, S. “Snakemake-a scalable
bioinformatics workflow engine”. In: Bioinformatics
28.19 (2012).
[37]
Kˆoster, J. et al. “snakemake-storage-plugin-gcs”. In:
(). URL: https://github.com/snakemake/snakemake-
storage-plugin-gcs.
[38]
Kubiura-Ichimaru, M. et al. “mRNA-based genera-
tion of marmoset PGCLCs capable of differentiation
into gonocyte-like cells”. In: Stem Cell Reports 18.10
(2023).
[39]
Lee, M. Y., Kaestner, K. H., and Li, M. “Benchmarking
algorithms for joint integration of unpaired and paired
single-cell RNA-seq and ATAC-seq data”. In: Genome
Biology 24.1 (2023).
[40]
Lien, A. et al. “Benchmarking software tools for trim-
ming adapters and merging next-generation sequenc-
ing data for ancient DNA”. In: Frontiers in Bioinfor-
matics 3 (2023).
[41]
Lopez, R. et al. “Deep generative modeling for single-
cell transcriptomics”. In: Nature Methods 15.12 (2018).
[42]
Lopez Bort, J. and Hsu, J. Ivy-Natal ivysnake Github
repository. 2024. URL: https://github.com/Ivy-Natal/
ivysnake.git.
[43]
Lotfollahi, M., Wolf, F. A., and Theis, F. J. “scGen
predicts single-cell perturbation responses”. In: Nature
Methods 16.8 (2019).
[44]
Love, M. I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. “Moderated es-
timation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq
data with DESeq2”. In: Genome Biology 15.12 (2014).
==PAGE:25==
[45]
Luecken, M. D. et al. “Benchmarking atlas-level data
integration in single-cell genomics”. In: Nature Meth-
ods 19.1 (2022).
[46]
Mahajan, A. A primer on scRNA-seq foundation mod-
els. Mar. 2024. URL: https://www.owlposting.com/p/
the-lore-behind-scrna-seq-foundation-models.
[47]
Martin, M. “Cutadapt removes adapter sequences
from high-throughput sequencing reads”. In: EMB-
net.journal 17.1 (2011).
[48]
McInnes, L. et al. “UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approx-
imation and Projection”. In: Journal of Open Source
Software 3.29 (2018).
[49]
Murase, Y. et al. “In vitro reconstitution of epigenetic
reprogramming in the human germ line”. In: Nature
631 (May 2024), pp. 170–178.
[50]
Murat, F. et al. “The molecular evolution of spermato-
genesis across mammals”. In: Nature 613.7943 (2023).
[51]
Paszke, A. et al. “Automatic differentiation in Py-
Torch”. In: NIPS 2017 Autodiff Workshop: The Future
of Gradient-based Machine Learning Software and
Techniques. 2017.
[52]
Patro, R. et al. “Salmon: fast and bias-aware quantifi-
cation of transcript expression using dual-phase infer-
ence”. In: Nature methods 14.4 (2017).
[53]
Pola´nski, K. et al. “BBKNN: Fast batch alignment of
single cell transcriptomes”. In: Bioinformatics 36.3
(2020).
[54]
Reich, A. et al. “The transcriptome of a human polar
body accurately reflects its sibling oocyte”. In: Journal
of Biological Chemistry 286.47 (2011).
[55]
Seita, Y. et al. “Efficient generation of marmoset pri-
mordial germ cell-like cells using induced pluripotent
stem cells”. In: eLife 12 (2023).
[56]
Smela, M. et al. “Induction of Meiosis from Human
Pluripotent Stem Cells”. In: Preprint (May 2024).
[57]
Sosa, E. et al. “Reconstituted ovaries self-assemble
without an ovarian surface epithelium”. In: Stem Cell
Reports 18.11 (2023).
[58]
Srivastava, A. and Hao, Y. Feature Barcoding guide
with Alevin-fry. Apr. 2020. URL: https://combine-lab.
github.io/alevin-tutorial/2020/alevin-features/.
[59]
Su, S. et al. “CellBench: R/Bioconductor software for
comparing single-cell RNA-seq analysis methods”. In:
Bioinformatics 36.7 (2020).
[60]
Taelman, J. et al. “Characterization of the human fetal
gonad and reproductive tract by single-cell transcrip-
tomics”. In: Developmental Cell 59.4 (2024).
[61]
Tian, L. et al. scRNA-seq mixology: towards better
benchmarking of single cell RNA-seq analysis meth-
ods. 2018.
[62]
Traag, V. A., Waltman, L., and Eck, N. J. van. “From
Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected com-
munities”. In: Scientific Reports 9.1 (2019).
[63]
Tran, H. T. N. et al. “A benchmark of batch-effect cor-
rection methods for single-cell RNA sequencing data”.
In: Genome Biology 21.1 (2020).
[64]
Virtanen, P. et al. “SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms
for scientific computing in Python”. In: Nature Meth-
ods 17.3 (2020).
[65]
Wolf, F. A., Angerer, P., and Theis, F. J. “SCANPY:
Large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis”.
In: Genome Biology 19.1 (2018).
[66]
Wolf, F. A. et al. “PAGA: graph abstraction reconciles
clustering with trajectory inference through a topology
preserving map of single cells”. In: Genome Biology
20.1 (2019).
[67]
You, Y. et al. “Benchmarking UMI-based single-cell
RNA-seq preprocessing workflows”. In: Genome Biol-
ogy 22.1 (2021).
[68]
Yu, L. et al. “Benchmarking clustering algorithms
on estimating the number of cell types from single-
cell RNA-sequencing data”. In: Genome Biology 23.1
(2022).
[69]
Zappia, L., Phipson, B., and Oshlack, A. “Exploring
the single-cell RNA-seq analysis landscape with the
scRNA-tools database”. In: PLoS Computational Bi-
ology 14.6 (2018).
==PAGE:26==
APPENDIX
Table 6: List of methods used for each step in the benchmarking papers mentioned in the Section 1.3.4. Velocity metrics*: A
control trajectory is calculated using a known root cell and cell end state. This is compared with the trajectories calculated by
the different methods and evaluated using the metrics listed in the table. DGEA metrics**: Control genes are classified as DGE
or not depending on the method. Their performance is evaluated with the classification metrics listed in the table.
Step
Method
Metric
Trimming
AdapterRemoval, bbmerge, ClipAndMerge, fastp,
leeHom, SeqPrep, seqtk/adna-trim
Read quality score after merging, merging accu-
racy
Alignment
STARsolo, Kallisto bustools, Alevin-fry, HISAT2
(bulk RNA), TopHat2 (bulk RNA), Rsubread
(bulk RNA), CellRanger (STAR), scPipe (STAR
/ HISAT2), scruff (Rsubread), zUMIs (STAR),
dropseqPipe (STAR), Optimus (STAR)
Number of genes per cell, Number of counts,
Number of detected biotypes (cell types), Expres-
sion correlation between common genes and cells
Normalisation
CPM,
edgeR
(TMM),
DESeq2
(Median-of-
ratios), BASiCS, SCONE, Scran, SCnorm, Lin-
norm, SCTransform, Limma (voom), Seurat (Log-
norm)
ASW cell type, BCV (biology variability), Vari-
ance explained, PCA plots
Integration
LIGER, ComBat, scANVI, BBKNN, Harmony,
scVI, scGen,
Seurat v2 (CCA), Scanorama,
RPCA, fastMNN, MNN, trVAE, DESC, SAUCIE,
Conos, MNN, scMerge, PCA, MINT, ICA, In-
gest, Seurat v3 (Anchors), MMD-ResNet, ZINB-
WaVE, MultiVI (multimodal), BindSC (multi-
modal), Seurat v4 (WNN, multimodal), Cobalt
(multimodal), scMoMaT (multimodal), GLUE
(multimodal)
PCR, HVG conservation, Cell cycle conserva-
tion, ASW batch and cell-type, isolated labels
F1 and ASW, LISI batch and cell type, kBET,
trajectory conservation, graph connectivity, NMI,
ARI, Pearson correlation between RNA-seq gene
counts and ATAC-seq peaks (multimodal), Rare
cell type recovery (using number of true positives,
false positives and false negatives)
Clustering
clusterExperiment, RaceID3, RCA, SC3, Seurat
(Leiden), Louvain, BISCUIT, BAMM-SC, Para-
DPMM, k-means, PAM, LouvainMLR, SLM,
Fastgreedy, SNN, igraph, scLCA, CIDR, SHARP,
SINCERA, ACTIONet, SIMLR, Spectrum, densi-
tyCut, scCCeSS-Kmeans, scCCeSS-SIMLR
Entropy of cluster accuracy, Entropy of cluster pu-
rity, Connectivity, Dunn index, kSIM, cell type
proportions intra and between clusters, ASW,
ARI, Number of clusters compared to the ground
truth, t-SNE plots, Number of cell types detected,
NMI, Fowlkes-Mallows Index (FM), Jaccard In-
dex
Dim red
visualisation
Largevis, FLE
Annotation
scType
(Marker-based),
singleR
(Reference-
based)
Velocity
Slingshot,
Monocle2,
Monocle3,
SLICER,
TSCAN, DPT, Waddington-OT, PAGA
Pearson correlation in pseudotime, Coverage of
the trajectory path, Percentage of cells assigned
to correct path*
DGEA
Seurat (Wilcoxon rank-sum test), MAST, SCDE,
DESeq2 (Wald test), edgeR (QLF), Limma (t-
test/F-test), Tradeseq, ROTS, nebula, muscat
AUROC, sensitivity, specificity, precision, F1-
score and MCC**
GSA
GSEA, ssGSEA, GSVA
==PAGE:27==
Table 7: List of methods used for each step in the scgATLAS papers mentioned in the Section 1.2.2.
Filtering*: %/N
counts/cells/genes per cell/gene means that any cell/gene with a lower %/N counts/cells/genes than the threshold is filtered
out (for % mt and rb genes is greater rather than lower). Sample**: Samples are groups of already isolated cells, therefore
sample annotations can be used as cell annotations. Transfer***: An annotated reference dataset is used to transfer the cell
annotations using transcriptome comparison.
Step
Method
Trimming
cutadapt
Alignment
Alevin-fry, CellRanger (STAR), TopHat2 (bulk RNA), StringTie (bulk RNA), CASAVA (Illumina),
STARsolo, FeatureCounts, UMI-tools
Filtering*
N counts per cell, N counts per gene, N genes per cell, N cells per gene, % cells per gene, % mt
genes per cell, Doublets (clusters), N counts (clusters) Outliers counts, Doublets
Normalisation
SCTransform, Seurat (Log-norm), edgeR (TMM), HVG, scaling
Integration
Seurat v2 (CCA), LIGER, fastMNN, Harmony, PCA
Neighbours
Seurat (KNN graph)
Clustering
Seurat (Leiden), Louvain
Dim red
visualisation
UMAP, t-SNE, PHATE
Annotation
Marker-based, Sample-based**, Reference-based***
Velocity
PAGA, scVelo, Monocle2, Slignshot
DGEA
MAST, Tradeseq, Seurat / Scanpy (Wilcoxon rank-sum test), edgeR (QLF)
GSA
GSEA, IPA QIAGEN, Limma (Camera and ROAST), DOSE, DAVID, Metascape
List of Tools Abreviations
ACTIONet Attraction and Repulsion
with Graph Neural Networks. 25
ARI Adjusted Rand Index. 25
ASW Adjusted Silhouette Width. 25
AUROC Area Under the ROC Curve.
25
BAMM-SC Bayesian Mixture Model
for Single-Cell Clustering. 25
BASiCS Bayesian Analysis of Single-
Cell Sequencing data. 25
BBKNN Batch-Balancing
K-Nearest
Neighbors. 25
BISCUIT Bayesian
Inference
for
Single-Cell Clustering Using In-
formative Priors. 25
CCA Canonical Correlation Analysis.
25, 26
CIDR Clustering through Imputation
and Dimensionality Reduction.
25
Conos Clustering
on
Networks
of
Samples. 25
CPM Count per Million. 25
DAVID Database for Annotation, Vi-
sualization, and Integrated Dis-
covery. 26
DESC Deep
Embedded
Single-Cell
clustering. 25
DESeq2 Differential Expression using
Sequencing (version 2). 25
DGEA Differential Gene Expression
Analysis. 25, 26
DOSE Disease
Ontology
Semantic
and Enrichment. 26
DPT Diffusion Pseudotime. 25
fastMNN fast Mutual Nearest Neigh-
bors. 26
FLE Force-Directed Layout Embed-
ding. 25
GLUE Graph Linking Unifying Em-
beddings. 25
GSA Gene-Set Analysis. 25, 26
GSEA Gene-Set Enrichment Analysis.
25
GSVA Gene Set Variation Analysis.
25
HVG Highly Variable Genes. 25, 26
ICA Independent Component Analy-
sis. 25
IPA Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. 26
kBET k-nearest neighbor Batch Effect
Test. 25
KNN K-Nearest Neighbours. 26
kSIM k-Nearest Neighbor Similarity.
25
LIGER Linked Inference of Genomic
Experimental Relationships. 25,
26
Limma Linear Models for Microarray
Data. 25
LISI Local Inverse Simpson’s Index.
25
==PAGE:28==
MAST Modeling of Single-cell Tran-
scriptomics. 25, 26
MCC Matthews Correlation Coeffi-
cient. 25
MINT Multi-Interrogation
Network
Integration Tool. 25
MMD-ResNet Maximum Mean Dis-
crepancy - Residual Networks.
25
MNN Mutual Nearest Neighbors. 25
muscat Multi-Sample
scRNA-Seq
Analysis Toolkit. 25
NMI Normalized Mutual Information.
25
PAGA Partition-based Graph Abstrac-
tion. 25, 26
PAM Partitioning Around Medoids.
25
Para-DPMM Parallelized
Dirichlet
Process Mixture Model. 25
PCA Principal Component Analysis.
25, 26
PCR Principal
Component
Regres-
sion. 25
PHATE Potential
of
Heat-diffusion
for
Affinity-based
Transition
Embedding. 26
QLF Quasi-Likelihood F-test. 25, 26
RCA Reference Component Analysis.
25
ROTS Reproducibility-Optimized
Test Statistic. 25
RPCA Reciprocal Principal Compo-
nent Analysis. 25
SAUCIE Sparse Autoencoder for Un-
supervised Clustering, Imputa-
tion, and Embedding. 25
SC3 Single-Cell Consensus Cluster-
ing. 25
scANVI Single-cell Adversarial Varia-
tional Inference. 25
SCDE Single-Cell
Differential
Ex-
pression. 25
scLCA Single-cell Latent Class Anal-
ysis. 25
scMoMaT Single-Cell
Multi-Modal
Alignment Tool. 25
SCONE Single-Cell Overview of Nor-
malization Effects. 25
SCTransform Single-Cell Transform.
26
scVI Single-cell Variational Inference.
25
SHARP Single-cell
Clustering
through Hierarchical Agglom-
eration of Random Projections.
25
SIMLR Single-cell Interpretation via
Multi-kernel Learning. 25
SINCERA SINgle
CEll
RNA-seq
Analysis. 25
SLICER Single-cell
Lineage
Infer-
ence using Cell Expression Rela-
tionships. 25
SLM Smart Local Moving. 25
SNN Shared Nearest Neighbor. 25
ssGSEA Single Sample Gene Set En-
richment Analysis. 25
t-SNE t-distributed Stochastic Neigh-
bor Embedding. 25, 26
TMM Trimmed Mean of M-values.
25, 26
trVAE Trajectory Variational Autoen-
coder. 25
TSCAN Tools for Single-Cell ANaly-
sis. 25
UMAP Uniform Manifold Approxi-
mation and Projection. 26
WNN Weighted Nearest Neighbors.
25
ZINB-WaVE Zero-Inflated
Negative
Binomial - WaVE. 25
==PAGE:29==
Table 8: List of marker genes per study (Hermann, Persio, Murat, Huang) and cell type (SPG, SCT, STD). Only meiotic cell
types are present here. Prog: progenitor, diff: differentiated, lep: leptotene, zyg: zygotene, pach: pachytene, dyp: dyplotene,
sec: secondary, r: round, e: elongated, mito: mitotic e meio: early, l meio: late meiotic.
Study
SPG
SCT
STD
Hermann
ID4, NANOS2, TCN2 (SSC), EGR4, PLPPR5,
TSPAN33
(SPG prog),
ASB9,
NANOS3,
TMEM55A (SPG early diff), CDT1, ISOC1,
NMT2 (SPG late diff)
CT55, DHRS13, HSD17B14 (SCT prelep),
HIST3H3, MEIOB, TEX101 (SCT lep zyg),
C9orf57,
CETN3,
MGAT4D
(SCT pach),
ARMC1, PHOSPHO2, TPPP3 (SCT dip)
C17orf98, ENPP2, LRRC3B (STD early r),
PRSS37, PRSS58, TP53TG5 (STD mid r),
C17orf74, FSCN3, PHOSPHO1 (STD late r)
Persio
MAGEA4, DMRT1, SOX4 (SPG)
DPH7, SYCP3, SCML1, TEX19 (SCT lep),
LY6K,
SELENOT,
TDRG1
(SCT zyg),
PIWIL1,
CCDC112 (SCT pach),
AURKA,
CCNA1 (SCT dip)
TEX29 (STD early), PRM2, TNP1, PRM1
(STD late)
Murat
GFRA1,
PIWIL4,
STRA8
(SPG undiff),
DMRT1, STRA8 (SPG diff)
SYCE1, SYCP2, TANK, AURKA (SCT lep),
SYCP1, SYCP2, TANK, AURKA (SCT zyg),
PIWIL1, SYCP2, TANK, AURKA (SCT pach)
LRRIQ1 (STD early r),
ACRV1,
SPACA1
(STD late r),
SPATA3,
NRBP1,
PRM1,
GABBR2 (STD e)
Huang
SALL4,
ZBTB16,
ELAVL2 (SPG undiff),
NR6A1, FGFR3, FMR1 (SPG)
TEX12,
SMCHD1,
PRSS50
(SCT prelep zyg),
SYCE2,
BOLL, MLH1
(SCT pach sec)
DNAH14,
IZUMO4,
NKAPL
(STD r),
TEX29, FBXO24, ACRV1 (STD e), ODF1,
ODF2, OAZ3, AKAP4 (Sperm)
Ge
POU5F1,
SOX2,
UTF1,
DAZL,
DDX4,
CENPF, SALL4 (PGC mito)
POU5F1,
SOX2,
UTF1,
DAZL,
DDX4,
CENPF, STRA8,
SYCP1,
SYCP3,
REC8,
SMC1B,
DUSP9,
WDR89,
DPPA5A
(PGC e meio),
DAZL,
DDX4,
CENPF,
STRA8, SYCP1, SYCP3, TEX14, MAEL,
TEX101, TAF7L (PGC l meio)
Reich
ARMC1,
PHOSPHO2,
TPPP3,
AURKA,
CCNA1 (OCT)
Table 9: List of marker genes per study (Taelman, Ge) and cell type (Fetal Germ cells). Only meiotic cell types are present
here. Mito: mitotic
Study
PGC
Taelman
POU5F1, DDX4 (Fetal Germ cells)
Ge
POU5F1, SOX2, UTF1, DAZL, DDX4, CENPF, SALL4 (PGC mito)
Table 10: List of marker genes per study (Irie, Seita, Smela, Sosa) and cell type (PGCLC). Only meiotic cell types are present
here. N3+: NANOS3+, DM+: DMRT1+, DZ+: DAZL+, d2: day2, d6: day6
Study
PGCLC
Irie
SOX17, PRDM1, NANOS3, BRDT, BEND4, KLF8, HDAC4, POU5F1 (PGCLCs N3+), CDH5, DMRT1, TCL1A, SUSD2, SOX17, POU5F1,
TFCP2L1 (PGCLCs DM+), DAZL, PIWIL1, PIWIL2, DMRT1 (PGCLCs DZ+)
Seita
EOMES, TWSG1, BMPR2, HAND1, NF2, BMP7, WNT3, WLS, USP14, KLHDC3, VCP, FBXW5, ZFAND2A, HUWE1, UBE2A, AXIN2, RAD23B,
PSMB10, PSMA7, AURKA, CD2AP, PCNP, DDB1 ,CDC34, HECTD1, PSMC3, PSMD2, TRIM2, PCBP2 (PGCLCs d2), KDM5B, KDM3B, KMT2A,
CHD9, PHF20, ABRAXAS1, KMT2C, CHD6, JMJD1C, ARID4B, NR3C1, PHF8, NSD3, BABAM2, HMGN4, SOX15, SMYD2, HMG20A, SUDS3,
BRD1, GPX4, USP3, SIRT1, RSBN1, KANSL1, DPPA3, HAT1, RCOR1, ATF7IP, KMT2A, MGMT, ATRX, BAZ2A, BMI1, KLF10, RIF1, VPS72,
STAT3, KIT, NANOG, RBPJ, SOX4 (PGCLCs d6)
Smela
DAZL, DDX4, FGFR3, UTF1 (Germ cells), PIWIL4, PHGDH, SLC25A22, ICA1L, PPP1R36, MAGEB1, EGR4, MSL3, TSPAN33 (SSC state0),
UTF1, ID4, FGFR3, GFRA1, ETV5, ZBTB16, MAGEA4, TCF3, L1TD1 (SSC), TBX3, HOXA3 (SPG), KIT, DMRT1, MKI67, SOHLH1, SOHLH2,
STRA8, MAGEA4 (SPG diff), STRA8, REC8, DMRT1, SOX4 (SCT prelep), CHEK1, BRCA1, SPO11, DMC1, ATM, SYCP1, SYCP2, SYCP3,
MAGEA4 (SCT early), SYCP3, MLH3, MAGEA4, CCNA1 (SCT pach dyp), SPAG6 (STD r), ZPBP, ZPBP2, CAMK4, DNAH6, DNAH7, DNAH14,
CATSPER1, CATSPER4, CREM, MYO1D (STD e), TNP1, TNP2, PRM2, HOOK1, SPATA7, SPATA32, SPATA33, SPATA12, SPATA18, SPATA20,
PRM3 (Sperm)
Sosa
POU5F1, NANOG, SOX2, DPPA3, TFAP2C, PRDM1, PRDM14, DAZL, DDX4, NANOS3 (PGCLCs)
==PAGE:30==
Fig. 18: Embedding plots after integration with scVI in ATLAS -in vivo. Each of the plots is labelled with a different batch
covariate: sample, study, specie, gender (sex), cell type; or cell annotation type: cell annotation and cell annotation combined
Fig. 19: Embedding plots after integration with scGPT in ATLAS -in vitro. Each of the plots is labelled with a different batch
covariate: sample, study, specie, gender (sex), cell type; or cell annotation type: cell annotation and cell annotation combined
