==PAGE:1==
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from
measurements with a moving microphone
Master’s Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Acoustic Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving mi­
crophone
Master’s Thesis
Monday 30th September, 2024
Author:
Odei Díaz Gaztelumendi
Supervised by:
Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu, Efrén Fernandez Grande, Yves PENE
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Acoustic
Technology, Ørsteds plads, Building 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over eight months at DTU Electro and in collaboration
with L­Acoustics in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering
Acoustics.
Monday 30th September, 2024
Odei Díaz Gaztelumendi
ii
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis studies the spatial sampling of the sound­field in a room at low frequencies (20­
500 Hz) based on a dynamic measurement technique. This method is based on the plane
wave assumption, which allows for the decomposition of the sound­field into a limited
sum of plane waves if the receiver is located sufficiently far away from the source. The
proposed method is formulated and evaluated in a simulation framework. In this way, the
impact of different parameters in the method’s performance is analyzed, and the results
are compared with a static measurement technique based on the same assumptions. Then,
the dynamic method is evaluated in a real­system implementation with the aid of a robotic
arm, which allows for a precise movement of the microphone and a simultaneous tracking
of the position. Finally, the experimental framework and its limitations are discussed.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors Samuel, Yves and Efrén for
their dedication and commitment to this project. A special thanks to Samuel Arturo Ver­
burg Riezu for his invaluable guidance and unwavering support—it has been a privilege
to learn so much from you.
To Yves PENE, thank you for your insightful contributions and suggestions, which helped
shape the direction of this project with your genuine interest.
I am also grateful to Efrén Fernandez Grande for his trust, for making this collaboration
possible, and for providing helpful feedback throughout the process.
My thanks also go to Fabrice Katzberg, whose work was the main inspiration for this the­
sis, and for offering timely advice when it was most needed.
Lastly, I would like to extend my heartfelt appreciation to my girlfriend, family, and friends
for their encouragement and constant support, particularly in motivating me to pursue this
Master’s degree.
iv
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:7==
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
η
Additive Gaussian noise vector in the time­domain
ηl
Additive Gaussian noise vector at a given discrete frequency ωl = 2πfsl/L
hl
Pressure distribution vector at a given discrete frequency ωl for a Dirac delta exci­
tation
Hl
Sensing matrix at a given discrete frequency ωl
hm
Impulse response at position m
HlR
Reconstruction matrix at a given discrete frequency ωl
kj
Direction of propagation of the j­th plane wave
p
Time­domain vector of the measured sound pressure
ri
Cartesian coordinates vector of the i­th measurement position
Sl
Diagonal matrix containing the evolution of the discrete frequency ωl in the mea­
surement signal
xl
Complex plane wave amplitudes vector at a given discrete frequency ωl
x
Broad­band complex plane wave amplitudes vector
HRTF Head­related transfer function
IR
Impulse response
MAC Modal assurance criterion
MNSM Mean normalized system misalignment
NMSE Normalized mean square error
NSM Normalized system misalignment
RIR
Room impulse response
vi
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
Plane waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Static sampling scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Dynamic sampling scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Sub­band decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Estimation problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Simulation Framework
13
3.1
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Comparison of methods in ideal movement conditions
. . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Dynamic method procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Static method procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Evaluation of the dynamic method in a sub­optimal sampling scenario . .
23
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Experimental framework
31
4.1
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Conclusion
41
6
Future work
43
Bibliography
44
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
In the field of acoustic engineering, the acquisition of spatially sampled room impulse
responses (RIRs) is a valuable and generally experimentally demanding task which has a
multitude of applications in the analysis and control of the sound field, such as: Measuring
and simulating sound behaviour in a space, active noise control, sound zoning, reinforce­
ment system equalization and so on. These techniques have been progressively integrated
into the latest audio devices and nowadays constitute the state­of­the­art.
The sound transmission between two points in a room can be characterized by the room
impulse response. The estimation of RIRs in a room is typically limited to the set of
measuring positions, encompassing no spatial information of the sound field. Experimen­
tally, in order to obtain a spatial representation of the sound field as a uniform­sampling
problem, one should fulfill the Nyquist­Shannon sampling theorem, which provides that
the maximum distance between measuring positions should be d = λmin
2 , with λmin cor­
responding to the wavelength of the maximum frequency. The number of measurements
involved in this case escalates proportionally to the cube of the spatial sampling frequency
considering a 3D space, and this may be impractical or highly time­consuming to perform.
However, there are more efficient methods that use knowledge on the propagation of sound
waves, along with signal processing algorithms to reconstruct spatio­temporal RIRs. They
can be categorized into those based on static measurements and those based on dynamic
measurements.
The first ones use a limited number of measuring points to estimate sound­field parameters
that determine how the sound propagates in a confined space within the room. For this
task, existing literature represents the sound­field as a sum of plane waves [1], given the
commonly used assumption in acoustics which considers that sufficiently far away from
the source, sound waves are supposed to have a plane wave­front. Other studies exploit
the modal nature of the sound­field inside a room at low frequencies as in [2].
This methods are combined with compressive sensing and interpolation techniques in [3,
4, 5], proven the sparsity of the sound­field in the wavenumber domain under certain as­
sumptions [6]. Although the number of measurements in the aforementioned approaches
is drastically reduced, the process could still be time consuming and subject to time­variant
environments if the measurement time is highly prolonged. That is why a dynamic ap­
proach may be worth investigating.
Dynamic measurement methods consist in a constantly moving microphone or array that
records the room’s response to a given excitation signal along a trajectory. In these, the
measurement process might take only a few minutes, and in certain scenarios, they seem
to offer a valuable alternative to the static sampling approach, with promising results.
At the same time, in general these methods require a high precision tracking device that
can provide exact positioning of the microphone along the trajectory and synchronization
with the recorded response down to the sample. The error due to non­ideal microphone
tracking is studied in [7] for really small deviations. A recent study has also addressed
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
1
==PAGE:12==
the localization of the moving microphone by using perfect sequences and distributed
loudspeakers without the need of a tracking system [8].
Several studies have addressed the dynamic sampling problem with different methods. In
[9], continuous measurement of spatial room impulse responses is proposed in a circular
trajectory using a microphone with a fluctuating speed. Here, the captured signal along a
pre­defined path is considered as a spatio­temporal sampling of the sound­field, which can
be spatially interpolated to obtain the RIRs. This method is extended in [10] for multiple
sound sources.
A method to reconstruct the sound­field along a line or a circular trajectory has been pro­
posed in [11] using a uniformly moving microphone, which is proven to be especially use­
ful for the fast acquisition of HRTFs. The key of the reconstruction lays on the frequency
spreading due to the Doppler effect, which may be undone knowing the microphone speed.
This one, along with two other methods for continuous sampling of the sound­field in a cir­
cular contour, are reviewed in [12]. The first one interprets the obtained impulse responses
as an orthogonal expansion, where its coefficients are interpolated using the properties of
perfect sequences, which are used as the measurement signal, and the second one based
on adaptive filtering.
More recently, Katzberg et al. proposed the following algorithms to solve the dynamic
sampling problem using complex trajectories, where the sound­field reconstruction is not
only confined in the pre­defined path but also extrapolated to points outside of it. Those
do not require an uniform movement or any knowledge on the velocity but only the in­
stantaneous position information.
In [13], an algorithm is proposed to reconstruct the sound­field at discrete grid positions
given the continuous measurement of it along the trajectory. Here, the spatially varying
RIRs along the path are interpreted as a weighted sum of the modelled grid RIRs, sub­
ject to the displacement from the instantaneous position of the microphone to the grid
points. By using a known interpolation function to weight the grid RIRs and knowledge
on the excitation signal and the trajectory, a system of linear equations is formed. Later on
this system is solved in a least­squares way to determine the unknown grid’s RIRs. This
method is extended in [14] for a compressed sensing framework.
Contrarily to the previous study, [15] uses knowledge on the propagation of sound waves
in a room to solve the continuous measurement problem. Here, the spatio­temporal RIRs
along the trajectory are represented in terms of spherical harmonics. Its frequency depen­
dent parameters are then estimated in a least­squares way by knowing the measurement
signal and the exact trajectory. This parameters will determine how the sound propagates
in a measurement volume limited by the maximum radius of the trajectory, allowing for
the reconstruction of a 3D sound­field in a volume free of sound sources. It may also be
extrapolated to outside points with some degree of error.
The Doppler effect on this method is studied in detail in [7], along with a more general
formulation of the problem, including a representation of the spatio­temporal RIRs as a
plane wave expansion and other multidimensional basis functions. On the other hand,
there is little or close to none experimental validation of the dynamic sampling methods
in existing literature, outside from numerical simulations.
This Master’s Thesis will study a plane wave representation of the dynamic sound­field
2
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:13==
sampling problem focused in the low frequency range (20­500 Hz). At those frequencies,
the sound­field can be represented with just a few plane waves, based on the assumption
used in this thesis. This will reduce the size of the problem considerably. The method
will be experimentally validated in a highly damped room. The low frequency range was
also chosen to provide that the precision errors induced by the equipment would not have
a major influence on the results.
First, a static sampling method will be formulated based on a plane wave representation
similarly to [3], only in a least­squares way. Afterwards, this will be extended to the
dynamic approach, both methods aiming for the reconstruction of a 3D sound­field over an
extended region of space inside a volume of 0.5x0.5x0.5 m. The results will be compared
in a simulation framework.
Later on, the effectiveness of the dynamic sampling algorithm will be validated experi­
mentally in a real system implementation using a UR5 robot arm. The use of a robotic arm
allows for the continuous movement of the microphone while tracking its position very
precisely. The practical setup will be discussed along with its limitations.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:15==
2
Theory
This chapter contains all the necessary theoretical background for the sound field recon­
struction methods studied in this thesis. Starting from the basic theory on the propagation
of sound waves, and a formulation of plane waves, the static sampling scheme will be de­
scribed. Then, using the same assumptions the dynamic sampling scheme will be derived,
remarking its differences and possible limitations. Both approaches are based on the as­
sumption that the sound­field in a 3D space can be approximated by the combination of a
limited number of plane waves. After composing the linear system, the unknown complex
amplitudes of the plane waves are estimated. To do that, a Least­Squares approach will
be used, which will be discussed in detail along with other available solutions.
2.1
Plane waves
A sound pressure field in a domain Ω∈R3 free of sound sources can be described in
terms of the acoustic wave equation [16], which represents how changes in pressure evolve
through time and space. The acoustic wave equation is formulated as
∇2p −1
c2
∂2p
∂t2 = 0,
(2.1)
where ∇2 denotes the Laplace operator, p represents the pressure, and c the speed of sound
in air. The zero term in the right side of the equality indicates the absence of sound sources
in the studied domain, or homogeneity.
The frequency domain representation of Equation 2.1 is known as the Helmholtz equation,
formulated as
∇2p + k2p = 0,
(2.2)
where the overline notation in p represents the pressure in the frequency domain and k =
2πf/c is known as the wavenumber.
A wave propagating only in one direction of a 3D space is a solution to the homogeneous
Helmholtz equation, and is known as a plane wave. These kind of waves are characterized
by a constant pressure and particle velocity in the plane perpendicular to the direction of
propagation or wavefront. An harmonic plane waves with amplitude X is formulated as
p(x, y, z, t) = Xej(kxx+kyy+kzz−ωt),
(2.3)
where the ωt dependency has been made explicit following the notation used in [16]. This
is a solution of the wave equation only if
k2 = k2
x + k2
y + k2
z,
(2.4)
that represents the wavenumber space. Equation 2.3 can be rewritten in a more compact
form as
p(x, y, z, t) = Xej(kr−ωt),
(2.5)
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
5
==PAGE:16==
where k = kxˆi+kyˆj+kzˆk represents its direction of propagation, and r = rxˆi+ryˆj+rzˆk
the point at which the pressure is evaluated. In this study only the propagating waves will
be considered, and therefore k lies in the surface of a sphere with radius k = 2πf/c.
Other combinations of kx, ky, kz that satisfy Equation 2.4 will lead to evanescent waves
[17], which are not considered here.
By omitting the ωt dependency in Equation 2.3, an harmonic plane wave can be formulated
as
p(k, r) = X(k)ej(kr),
(2.6)
which will be the notation used in this thesis. A common assumption in linear acoustics is
that at a certain distance from the source, the sound waves are considered to have a locally
plane wavefront. In the following section, it will be explained how this assumption will
be the basis of the methods described in this thesis, allowing for the decomposition of the
sound­field in a sum of plane waves.
2.2
Static sampling scheme
Having a measurement volume Ωfree of objects and sound sources, where the impact
of the microphone is considered negligible, the objective of the following methods is to
reconstruct the sound­field at positions inside of Ωthat have not been measured. The sound
pressure field in Ωfor a Dirac delta excitation at t = 0 is a solution to the homogeneous
Helmholtz equation. Then, according to [18], and given that the measurement volume
is far away from the source (to assume plane wave­fronts), the pressure distribution at a
specific frequency f can be approximated as
hk(r) ≃
N
X
j=1
Xjejkjr + ηk(r),
(2.7)
where N represents the number of plane waves that compose the sound field, the coeffi­
cient Xj represents the amplitude of the jth plane wave, with a direction of propagation
determined by kj. The point at which the pressure is observed is represented by r, ηk(r)
represents additive Gaussian noise, and k = 2πf/c represents the wavenumber. This
equality is true when N →∞, however, in [19] an expression is provided to limit the
number of plane waves involved in the sum using the Vekua theory [18] as
N ≃(⌈kaΩ⌉+ 1)2,
(2.8)
where aΩrepresents the maximum radius inside Ω. Equation 2.7 may be represented as a
matrix equation
hl = Hlxl + ηl,
(2.9)
where hl ∈CM represents the pressure observed in each one of the M measuring points
at a given discrete frequency ωl = 2πfsl/L and kl = ωl/c, with l ∈{0, ..., L −1} ,
providing that the sampling frequency fulfills the Nyquist theorem fs > 2fmax, with fmax
being the maximum temporal frequency of the signal. As in Equation 2.2 and Equation 2.7
the overline notation indicates a frequency domain signal. This is important to remark to
avoid confusions with the measurement vector p in the dynamic case which is formu­
lated in the time domain (see section 2.3). Hl ∈CM×N is the so called sensing matrix,
with entries Hlij = ekj(l)ri. The unknown complex amplitude Xj of each plane wave in
6
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:17==
Equation 2.7 is included in the elements of xl ∈CN, and the vector ηl ∈CM represents
the additive Gaussian noise measured at each position M. By solving Equation 2.9, the
complex amplitude vector xl may be estimated. This allows for the reconstruction of the
sound field at positions rR ∈Ωthat have not been measured. The pressure at those points
is computed as
hl(rR) = HlR ˜xl,
(2.10)
where HlR ∈CRxN is the reconstruction matrix and ˜xl ∈CN contains the complex
amplitudes estimations.
2.3
Dynamic sampling scheme
To describe the dynamic sampling model, the analysis made in [15] will be followed with
some variations. First, let’s consider the transmission of sound between two points in a
closed environment with constant atmospheric conditions
p(r, t) =
Z ∞
−∞
s(t −τ)h(r, τ)dτ,
(2.11)
where p(r, t) represents the sound pressure measured at the observer’s position r subject
to time t, h(r, t) corresponds to the spatio­temporal RIR between those two points and
s(t) conforms the measurement signal. The discrete time version of this signal might be
defined as
p(r, n) = s(n) ∗h(r, n) + η(n),
(2.12)
providing that the sampling frequency fs is sufficient according to the Nyquist theorem to
avoid temporal aliasing, i.e., fs > 2fmax. Then, the sound pressure measured along the
sampled trajectory r(n) ∈Ωwill read
p(r(n), n) = s(n) ∗h(r(n), n) + η(n),
(2.13)
with equidistant samples spaced by tn = n/fs. Here, the spatio­temporal and time­varying
RIR h(r(n), n) is convolved with the measurement signal s(n) to obtain the sound­field
measurement along the trajectory p(r(n), n) as
p(r(n), n) =
L−1
X
m=0
s(n −m)h(r(n), m) + η(n),
(2.14)
assuming that the RIRs h(r, t) vanish into the noise level after tn > tL−1, so that the length
of the impulse responses are assumed to be L. The RIR h(r, t) describes the sound­field
measured at the position r for a Dirac delta excitation, and therefore, it is a particular
solution for the homogeneous Helmholtz equation. Considering Ωto be homogeneous
and free of objects, a frequency­wise parametrization is proposed similarly to [15] as
h(r, n) = 1
L
L−1
X
l=0
hkl(r, n) = 1
L
L−1
X
l=0
hkl(r)ejωltn,
(2.15)
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
7
==PAGE:18==
where h(r, n) is the inverse Fourier transform of hkl(r), with frequency­dependent terms
parametrized by the sum of plane waves
hkl(r) ≃
N
X
j=1
Xj(l)ejkj(l)r,
(2.16)
where Xj(l) represents the complex amplitude of the j­th plane wave at the discrete fre­
quency ωl = 2πfsl/L. kj(l) is a vector representing its direction of propagation, with
radius k since only the propagating waves are considered. Substituting 2.15 and 2.16 into
2.14 follows
p(r(n), n) =
L−1
X
m=0
s(n −m) 1
L
L−1
X
l=0
N
X
j=1
Xj(l)ejkj(l)r(n)ej2π l
L m + η(n)
=
L−1
X
l=0
Sl(n)
N
X
j=1
Xj(l)ejkj(l)r(n) + η(n),
(2.17)
where Sl(n) = 1/L PL−1
m=0 s(n −m)e2πjml/L represents the inverse discrete short­time
Fourier transform of the measurement signal s(n) with window length L and overlap be­
tween windows of L −1 samples (note that s(n) is a time­domain signal). It is useful to
express 2.17 as a matrix equation to compose the linear model
p =
L−1
X
n=0
SlHlxl + η,
(2.18)
where p ∈RM is the time­domain measurement vector and η ∈RM corresponds to the
noise term. Sl ∈CM×M is the diagonal matrix that renders the evolution of discrete
frequencies in s(n), with entries Sl = diag{Sl(0), ..., Sl(M −1)} for the sampled fre­
quency ωl. The unknown complex amplitude of each plane wave at ωl is contained in
xl ∈CNl. Hl ∈CM×Nl is the sensing matrix at the discrete frequency ωl, with entries
Hlij = ekj(l)ri. Note that in this equality M corresponds to the total number of samples
of the measured signal.
This linear system can be rearranged and form the M × N matrix
Λ = [S0H0, ..., SL−1HL−1] ,
(2.19)
and the vector concatenation x =

x0T, x1T, ..., xL−1TT with N = PL−1
n=0 Nl parame­
ters to rewrite 2.18 as
p = Λx + η.
(2.20)
By solving this system of linear equations, the coefficients x may be estimated, allowing
for the reconstruction of the sound­field at arbitrary positions inside of Ωin the same way
as in section 2.2.
Since p(r(n), n) and h(r(n), n) are shaped by the same motion function r(n), this analysis
is correct regardless of the Doppler effect, that will affect both signals equally, sharing the
same Doppler artifacts. A full discussion on the topic can be found in [7].
8
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:19==
2.3.1
Sub­band decomposition
A method is proposed in [7] for frequency sub­band decomposition of the dynamic sam­
pling scheme, consisting in band­pass filtering the time­domain measurement signal and
solving Equation 2.20 for subsets of frequencies. However, the linear system described
in this thesis represents a broadband parameter estimation problem. This means that, con­
trarily to the static sampling scheme, this method does not allow for the estimation of
the coefficients at a specific frequency. Therefore, it has a much higher computational
demand, which in practical cases could be a limitation in terms of memory and run­time
depending on the computer in use.
A sub­band approach might be especially useful for improved performance at low fre­
quencies in large bandwidths. The decomposition of the problem in frequency bands will
alleviate the computational cost of the problem and allow for parallel processing, reducing
the computing times considerably, and making it suitable for large datasets. However, a
further decomposition in successively smaller sub­problems may not yield better results
due to the unrealizability of the ideal band­pass filters that should sum up to unit mag­
nitude in the full frequency response [7], inducing errors on the estimation. Moreover,
as described in [7], this method is subject to Doppler shifts. Thus, appropriate Doppler
margins should be considered when designing the band­pass filters.
Due to the increased complexity of the sub­band approach, it has been opted for a broad­
band approach, since this thesis will focus on the reconstruction of the sound field at low
frequencies in a relatively small bandwidth (20­500 Hz).
2.4
Estimation problem
There are several ways of solving the linear system to estimate the unknown plane wave
expansion coefficients. The theory behind it will be explained in this section.
In undetermined or ill­posed problems, where the number of variables is greater than the
number of linearly independent equations in the system, there are infinite possible solu­
tions. This will be the case in most of the sound­field estimation problems presented in
this thesis. In those cases, the chosen solver will differ in which solutions are prioritized.
The Least­Squares solution of a given optimization problem consists in minimizing
˜x = arg min
x∈CN ||Ax −b||2
2,
(2.21)
where the operator ||.||2 indicates the l2­norm, defined as
||a||2 =
sX
i
|ai|2.
(2.22)
Then, by definition, Least­Squares will provide the solution ˜x with the minimum energy
residual, as Equation 2.22 represents the energy of the signal a, which in this case corre­
sponds to the residual. This solution is commonly obtained by means of the pseudo­inverse
matrix AH(AHA)−1. In practice, noisy measurements might induce errors in the estima­
tion, since the low­level noise components are amplified when calculating the inverse.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
9
==PAGE:20==
For this reason, a regularization term can be added to Equation 2.21 to penalize certain
solutions
˜x = arg min
x∈CN ||Ax −b||2
2 −λ||x||2
2,
(2.23)
where λ represents the Tikhonov regularization term. This equation is proven to have
solutions in the form [20]
˜x = AH(AAH + λI)−1b,
(2.24)
where H represents the Hermitian transpose. The regularization term λ will be determined
experimentally by trying different values and plotting the log of the residual ||Ax −b||2
2
against the log of the solution norm ||x||2
2. Ideally, this will produce an L­shaped curve,
and the optimized value of λ will be located at its corner. A MATLAB package can be
found in [21] that already implements this functions, along with its documentation [22].
An example of the L­curve can be seen in Figure 2.1, which shows how, starting from high
values of λ, the residual norm cannot be reduced any further after its corner, while the so­
lution norm only increases. The optimal value of λ can be found when the minimum
solution norm meets the minimum residual norm in its corner. In highly undetermined
cases, the l­shape of this curve is poorly defined, which may lead to an incorrect identi­
fication of the optimal value of λ. Hence, it is a good practice to verify that this value is
determined correctly to obtain a valid solution.
Figure 2.1: Example L­curve generated using the regtools MATLAB package [21]. The
possible values of λ are indicated in the red crosses.
For larger datasets and extended bandwidths, a direct method, such as the one described
above, might reach its limitations, producing unreasonable computational times. In those
cases, an iterative approach might be useful, compromising a bit the quality of the re­
sults for a shorter run­time. This methods will iterate over the residual norm to find an
approximate solution after a finite number of steps [23].
Other methods based on compressed sensing such as the one used in [3] and [14] are proven
to give really good results for a relatively low number of measurements. This method will
10
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:21==
prioritize sparse solutions, i.e. solutions where only a few waves from the sum of plane
waves are non­zero, which is proven to be the case in the sound wave transmission in a
room given certain assumptions [6]. Hence, it is highly encouraged to extend the dynamic
model for a compressed sensing framework in future works.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:23==
3
Simulation Framework
In this chapter, the proposed methods, static and dynamic, will be evaluated in a simu­
lation framework, and the results will be presented. The first experiment will consist in
comparing both methods assuming that the microphone has complete freedom of move­
ment, without hard limitations on maximum speed or trajectory complexity. Then, the
dynamic sampling of the sound­field will be simulated along a complex trajectory. For
comparison, M measuring positions will be drawn from the trajectory to be used in the
static method. The results will be evaluated subjectively and objectively using various
error metrics.
The second experiment will evaluate the dynamic method in a more realistic scenario,
where mobility is limited. This will be the case in the experimental part of this thesis,
given that the UR5 robot arm has several limitations in terms of movement, or if a per­
son would be performing the dynamic sampling using a tracking system, there would be
limitations in terms of speed, complexity of the trajectory and so on. In this experiment,
the effects of sub­optimal sampling will be investigated by simulating the sampling of the
moving microphone along a trajectory which was especially designed taking into account
the limitations of the robotic arm.
3.1
Methods
The numerical part of this thesis was performed by means of the image source method
[24]. This method consists in creating mirror sources across the boundaries of the room
to emulate how they interact with the sound­field. It is meant for simple, small room
simulations without considering the presence of objects. There are several already imple­
mented packages in most programming languages that perform this task, while in this case
the simulation was conducted in MATLAB. The order of this method will determine the
number of wall reflections that should be considered, which for the following simulations
will be 4.
A room was simulated using the image­source method, trying to emulate similar charac­
teristics to the one that will be used for the experimental part of this thesis. Such room is
an IEC listening room, which complies with the IEC 268­131 standard, and it is designed
for the purpose of evaluation of sound systems.
The IEC room has an approximate measure of 7.5x4.7x2.8 m, with a reverberation time
of T30 ≃0.4 s stable across frequencies. Figure 3.1 shows an overview of the model
seen from the xy and xz planes. The volume of interest will be a cube of 0.5x0.5x0.5 m,
centered at the measurement position. These dimensions were chosen subject to the UR5
robot arm limitations that will be used in practice, which cannot reach much further in a
consistent way.
As the frequency range of interest is 20­500 Hz, the sampling rate was set to fs=1024
Hz. One might notice that the sampling rate is quite close to the Nyquist frequency; the
reason behind this is that in the dynamic method, the computational time and memory
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
13
==PAGE:24==
were limiting factors, and therefore the size of the problem as been reduced as much as
possible.
For the recordings, additive Gaussian noise was added with an SNR of 32 dB, replicating
the conditions measured in the experimental part of this thesis.
The results will be evaluated objectively using three error metrics: modal assurance crite­
rion (MAC), normalized mean square error (NMSE) and normalized system misalignment
(NSM). The MAC is a measure of spatial correlation between the reference and the es­
timated sound­field, and it is calculated as the normalized scalar product of two sets of
vectors:
MAC(fl) =
hl
H ˜hl

2

hl
Hhl
 
˜hl
H ˜hl
,
(3.1)
where hl and ˜hl are the vectorial forms of the reference and estimated sound pressure
distributions for a Dirac delta excitation at a given discrete frequency fl. This will take
values ranging from 0 to 1, with 0 meaning that the vectors are orthogonal (i.e., maximally
uncorrelated), and 1 that they are completely parallel. High values of MAC will indicate
a good correspondence between the shape of the reference and estimated sound­field.
The NMSE will be used as an estimate of the average error at a given discrete frequency
fl, and it is formulated as follows
NMSE(fl) = 1
M
||hl −˜hl||2
2
||hl||2
2
,
(3.2)
where M represents the total number of positions. On the other hand, the NSM will give
an indication of the error at each position. It is calculated as
NSM = ||hm −˜hm||2
2
||hm||2
2
,
(3.3)
where hm and ˜hm represent the reference and reconstructed IR at the position m. Fi­
nally, the total error may be quantified using the mean normalized system misalignment
(MNSM), formulated as
MNSM = 1
M
M
X
m=1
||hm −˜hm||2
2
||hm||2
2
,
(3.4)
which is equivalent to the NMSE over position and frequency.
14
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: Overview of the IEC room shoebox model. The source and measuring posi­
tions are indicated in the figure. The measuring position indicates the center of the volume
of interest.
3.2
Comparison of methods in ideal movement
conditions
In this section, the specific procedure of each method will be discussed, following the
simulation procedure step by step, and the obtained results will be presented, which will
be used to compare the static and dynamic methods. Finally, a small discussion sub­section
will summarize the major findings of this experiment.
3.2.1
Dynamic method procedure
In the dynamic method, the measurement signal will consist on R = 120 repetitions of
an MLS signal with power σ2 = 1 and period L = 511, chosen to cover the estimated
duration of the impulse response (≃0.4 s). There are other possible options regarding the
measurement signal, as long as they have a white spectrum. Although it will not be object
of study in this thesis, the MLS signal has been chosen for its potential applications, such
as localization of the moving microphone [8]. Moreover, it has been proven to be a good
choice in recent studies [14, 15].
The number of repetitions was chosen to emulate approximately 1 minute of acquisition
time, as it will be the case in the experimental part of this thesis.
A Lissajous trajectory was used for sampling of the moving microphone, centered at the
measurement position. The choice of trajectory is not trivial and has not been optimized.
However, this one has been used with good results in different papers [13, 14, 15]. The
x, y, z coordinates of the trajectory are defined as follows
x = A sin(ωxx + ϕx),
y = A sin(ωyy + ϕy),
z = A sin(ωzz + ϕz).
(3.5)
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
15
==PAGE:26==
The amplitude of the curves is represented by A, which is set to the maximum radius A
= 0.25 m. The angular frequency in each direction of space is represented by ωx, ωy and
ωz. This values were set to 10, 11 and 12, respectively. The phase in each direction is
represented by ϕx, ϕy and ϕz, which were set to ϕx = π/2, and ϕy, ϕz = 0. The objective
of this trajectory is to cover the measurement volume thoroughly, especially the sides of
it, and that is why a Lissajous trajectory is a good choice. Figure 3.2 shows the trajectory
used for this simulation.
Previous literature [15] also recommends sampling the edges of the measurement volume
coarsely, at a lower speed, and crossing the interior faster. For simplicity, in this thesis the
microphone velocity is constant along the trajectory.
The recorded data was generated as follows: By use of the image source method, an
impulse response was generated in each point of the trajectory. The number of positions
in the trajectory should be equal to the number of samples in the input signal. Then, the
input signal is convolved with each of the M RIRs generated in this way. From each
convolution, only the m­th sample is kept, corresponding to the m­th position. In this
way, each position contributes one sample to the system of linear equations.
The inverse discrete short­time Fourier transform of the measurement signal, represented
by Sl in Equation 2.18 is calculated as the inverse Fourier transform of the time­reversed,
sliding window of length L, with hop size of 1. The inverse Fourier transform is computed
using the built­in MATLAB ifft function. Then, only the positive side of the spectrum is
kept, given the conjugate symmetry.
Finally, the number of plane waves used for the reconstruction is set to N = 16, according
to Equation 2.8, using the wavenumber k of the maximum frequency fmax=500 Hz. This is
kept to the minimum to limit the size of the problem and obtain a reasonable computational
time. However, the number of plane waves involved in the sum was incremented to 25 and
50 with no substantial differences, and therefore it has been decided that the initial value
is a good choice for this case. The directions of propagation of the plane waves kj are
distributed uniformly on the surface of a sphere of radius k using an already implemented
MATLAB package [25], to conform the sensing matrix Hl.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2: Lissajous trajectory used for dynamic sampling. (a) Three dimensional view
(b) x −y view (c)x −z view
16
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:27==
3.2.2
Static method procedure
For the sake of simplicity, in the static method the measurement signal will not be con­
sidered. The impulse response at the measurement positions will be generated using the
image source method, simulating that the recorded signal has been already deconvolved
and processed.
The measurement positions were distributed along the same trajectory for a fair compar­
ison. The number of positions M was increased until the results were similar to those
of the dynamic method, resulting in M = 40. In this way, both methods may be com­
pared in terms of the experimental complexity of the sampling process. An outline of this
distribution can be seen in Figure 3.3.
The number of plane waves used for the reconstruction is set to N = 16. This assures that
the evaluation of both methods is performed in similar conditions.
Figure 3.3: Distribution of the measurement positions. The shadowed plane represents
the reference plane. The interpolated and extrapolated points will be used to evaluate the
results.
3.2.3
Results
Figure 3.4 shows the normalized frequency responses at the interpolated and extrapolated
positions. In this case, both methods show a really similar performance, exhibiting a good
agreement between the measurement and the estimation in the interpolated point. As ex­
pected, at high frequencies the quality of the reconstruction decreases considerably in the
extrapolated position for both methods. This is because as the wavelength decreases, the
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
17
==PAGE:28==
relative distance to the extrapolated point would increase, being more difficult to predict
the behaviour of the sound­field at that point with no measurements on the area.
A small and constant difference in level can also be observed between the reference and
the dynamic method reconstruction. This is especially noticeable in the interpolated point.
The reason behind this is the choice of regularization parameter. During the processing
stage of the static method, where the estimation problem is solved one frequency at a
time, it was observed in the l­curve that the value of the regularization parameter (which
is determined experimentally as discussed in section 2.4) varies considerably for each
frequency, from values in the order of 100 to the order of 10−1. Therefore, it could be
assumed that choosing the optimal value for a broad­band problem, such as the dynamic
method, is not trivial and may lead to this deviations.
Other regularization options rather than Tikhonov might allow for the assignment of indi­
vidual regularization parameters to each frequency, producing better results, and therefore
it would be worth investigating.
It is also noticeable that the dynamic method has more difficulties in capturing the depth of
the dips in the frequency response, corresponding to points of small sound pressure caused
by the destructive interference of neighbouring modes. This will be confirmed examining
the MAC. One of the reasons behind this could be the broad­band choice of regularization
parameter, apart from the fact that the low sound pressure encountered at those points will
be more challenging to estimate.
Figure 3.4: Measured and reconstructed frequency responses at the interpolated and ex­
trapolated positions for the dynamic and static methods.
The MAC on the reference plane for both methods is compared in Figure 3.5. The Schroeder
frequency is indicated in red, and it is calculated as follows
fsch = 2000
r
RT
V
(3.6)
where V is the volume of the room, and RT the mean reverberation time. In general, this
frequency gives an estimation of the point from where the sound­field can be considered
18
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:29==
to have a statistical distribution, and is no longer dominated by modes. Since the sound­
field becomes more complex, a degradation of the results could be expected. However,
this is not so evident in this case. The reason for this could be that the order of the image
source method is relatively low, modelling mostly the early reflections of the IR, which
simplifies the sound­field, producing better results on the estimation.
Previous studies [3] have used a MAC value from 0.9 to 1 as an indication of a good
agreement between the measured and estimated sound­fields. A value from 0.6 to 0.8
would indicate that the results differ but are not far from correct. In that sense, both
methods can achieve really good results up to 350 Hz, while the static method outperforms
the dynamic method a bit. In general, the dynamic method seems more sensitive at the
dips of the frequency response, partially because of the choice of regularization parameter
that was mentioned before. In general, the sound pressure level at those frequencies would
have really low values, which would difficult the estimation in both methods. From 350
Hz in advance, both methods are prone to errors at the dips. However, the estimates are
still a good indication of the overall behaviour of the sound­field at those frequencies, as
there are no values lower than 0.65.
It is clear that the performance drops as the frequency increases, since the sound­field
becomes more complex and therefore the problem needs more information to be solved
successfully. Contrarily, only a few samples can produce good results at low frequencies.
In the dynamic method, this could be improved using longer acquisition times, as the one
used here is relatively low (around 1 minute). However, the computational time should be
taken into account, as it will increase proportionally. In the static method, high frequency
performance might be improved by incrementing the number of measurement points M
and distributing them optimally according to the theory on design of microphone arrays
[26]. Obviously, this will slow the measurement process, apart from being subject to time­
variance.
Figure 3.5: MAC for the dynamic and static methods on the reference plane
Figure 3.6 shows the measured and estimated impulse responses at the interpolated and
extrapolated points. It can be seen how the impulse response is quite simplified to the
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
19
==PAGE:30==
early reflections, due to the order of the image source method. Both approaches show
a good performance at the interpolated point, and a clear degradation at the extrapolated
point. Nonetheless, the estimates still follow the overall shape of the measured impulse
responses, indicating that it could be used to produce a fair prediction. Again, in this
figure, it is apparent that the dynamic method does not capture the peaks of the impulse
response so well, corresponding to the high frequencies, especially at the extrapolated
point.
Figure 3.6: Estimated and measured IRs in the interpolated and extrapolated points
The error over frequency (NMSE) is depicted in Figure 3.7. In accordance with the argu­
ments explained previously, for both methods the average error increases with frequency,
while in the static method with M=40 it is substantially lower. As it can be seen con­
trasting the NMSE with Figure 3.4, the NMSE is highly sensitive to level differences. By
averaging the normalized difference between the reference and the reconstruction point by
point, this error metric will be influenced by individual poor reconstruction points, which
could be caused by low pressure values or any given reason. A clear example appears
in the peak present in the NMSE of the static method in Figure 3.7, which corresponds
with a level difference at the extrapolated point in Figure 3.4. Then, the small level differ­
ence between the reference and the reconstruction in the dynamic method, caused by the
broad­band choice of regularization parameter will be reflected in a higher NMSE, while
the shape of the spectrum is shown to be really similar. In that sense, the MAC gives a
better sense of spatial correspondence.
20
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.7: Comparison on the NMSE over frequency for the static and dynamic methods
Figure 3.8 illustrates the error over position. Both approaches show a good agreement
between the measured and estimated sound­field inside of the measurement volume, al­
lowing for some extrapolation. Note that, a value of ­10 dB would correspond with a
relative error of the 10% in the estimation, so mostly the corners of the reference plane
have a higher relative error, as they correspond to the points that are further away from
the measurement volume.
It is hardly noticeable, but it can be seen that in general, points that are closer to the source,
located in the direction of the bottom left corner (0.6 m, 3.2 m, 1.3 m), have a slightly
higher error than those further away. This is because of the plane wave assumption, which
stands true if the observers position is located sufficiently far from the source. This will
not be an issue as the difference is minimal, but it is interesting to point out.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
21
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: Errors of the spatially reconstructed IRs over position in the xy reference plane
centered at the measurement volume. Results of (a) the static method and (b) the dynamic
method. The limits of the measurement volume are indicated in black.
The MNSM was calculated for both methods, giving a value of ­12.9 dB for the static
method and ­10.5 dB for the dynamic method. All of these results indicate that even
with a few less measurement positions for the static method, a similar performance could
be achieved. However, the experimental complexity in the dynamic method could be a
significant advantage against the static method, with the usage of just one microphone and
a tracking system, in comparison with the need for a microphone array or having to move
a single microphone to each one of the measuring positions instead.
Finally, the measured and reconstructed spatial pressure distribution can be observed in
Figure 3.9. This shows how at low frequencies, the sound­field is just composed by a
few waves and it is almost a plane, being much easier to reconstruct. As the frequency
increases, the pressure distribution is more complex and the reconstruction differs slightly
from the reference, yet giving a reasonable approximation for both methods.
22
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.9: Measured and estimated sound pressure field at the reference plane. Compar­
ison of both methods
In general, the performance of both methods can be improved by increasing the acquisi­
tion time or the measuring positions, as proved in previous studies [3, 15]. Although it is
difficult to compare them directly because of the differences in the measurement proccess,
this experiment shows a similar performance between the static method with a set number
of measuring positions and the dynamic method with a given acquisition time. Having
this into account, it would be worth considering the usage of the dynamic method in cer­
tain circumstances in which the static method is not suitable or is highly experimentally
demanding for any given reason, such as availability of equipment, setting limitations and
so forth.
3.3
Evaluation of the dynamic method in a sub­optimal
sampling scenario
In this experiment, the dynamic method will be tested in a more realistic scenario, where
the mobility may be limited and the complexity of the trajectory needs to be much lower.
Such will be the case in a real­system implementation, where the dynamic sampling could
be done with a robot arm, by a person equipped with a tracking system or using some kind
of machinery to facilitate the task. In all of those cases, certain limitations may exist in
terms of speed, complexity or freedom of movement, and therefore it is possible that the
dynamic sampling cannot be done so uniformly along the measurement volume as in the
previous experiment.
Here, the limitations that will be taken into account will be those of the UR5 robot arm,
which will be discussed in the experimental part of this thesis. Mainly, the robot arm had
difficulties in reaching the central part of the volume, where the base of the robot is placed,
and for that, a Lissajous trajectory was chosen that avoided this positions. This trajectory
has angular frequencies ωx=3, ωy=5 and ωz=4 and phases ϕx = π/2, and ϕy, ϕz = 0, and
the positions that are closer to the center, located at (0,0,0), were substituted to have a
minimum radius of 0.1 m. For more accuracy, the trajectory was extracted directly from
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
23
==PAGE:34==
the robot, that was sending positioning data at an approximate rate of 100 Hz while per­
forming the dynamic sampling. Then, small fluctuations will be observed in the resulting
trajectory, depicted in Figure 3.10.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.10: Lissajous trajectory designed for the robot. (a) Three dimensional view (b)
x −y view (c)x −z view
The acquisition time is the same as in the previous experiment, around 1 minute or R=120
repetitions of an MLS signal of length L=511, with a sampling rate of fs=1024 Hz. The
interpolated and extrapolated points used to evaluate the results are the same and can be
observed in Figure 3.3. Other parameters of the simulation remain the same, so that both
experiments can be compared only in terms of the dynamic sampling trajectory.
Results at the interpolated and extrapolated points can be observed in Figure 3.11. In
general, the same comments from the last experiment could be applied to these results:
At the interpolated point, the reconstruction follows the general trend of the reference
frequency response and captures the reflections of the impulse response, with a higher
error at the highest frequencies, which is depicted in the peaks of the impulse response,
which are not completely captured in the reconstruction. The method seems to have more
problems at the dips of the frequency response, because of the low pressure level which is
more difficult to estimate, apart from the choice of regularization parameter, that causes
the small deviation in level. Nevertheless, the method is able to provide a really close
approximation to the true data.
On the other hand, a clear degradation can be observed in the extrapolated point, which
is especially noticeable in the pronounced and misaligned dips in the frequency response
reconstruction. A reason for this might be that as the trajectory does not sample the volume
uniformly, the low error reconstruction area is focused around the trajectory, giving a
worse approximation in the extrapolated point.
This effect can be observed in Figure 3.12. This figure depicts the error of the spatially
reconstructed IRs at the xy plane centered in the measurement volume. By contrasting it
with Figure 3.10, it can be seen that the low error areas are focused near the points where
the trajectory crosses the reference plane, located at z=0 m. Moreover, it is apparent
that in those areas, the error is lower than in the last experiment (see colorbar range in
Figure 3.8b).
24
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:35==
In this experiment, the trajectory is much shorter compared to the previous experiment,
but the acquisition time remains the same. Consequently, the microphone velocity is much
lower. As a result, the microphone will spend more time sampling the areas that it crosses,
providing more information about them to the system of linear equations. For this reason,
the error is lower in those areas.
In other words, following the analysis made in section 2.3, each position will contribute
one sample to the general system of linear equations. Then, as the velocity decreases,
the distance between these positions will be smaller, providing more information about a
more restricted area, which would converge to a static measurement for v = 0 m/s.
As the speed increases, and the trajectory is distributed uniformly, the error will be dis­
tributed evenly in the measurement volume. However, since there is less information
about specific points, because of the lower sampling time spend in each of them, the error
may be a bit higher in those points.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
25
==PAGE:36==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11: Dynamic method reconstruction compared to the reference at the interpolated
and extrapolated points. (a) Frequency responses and (b) impulse responses
26
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.12: Normalized system misalignment map for the dynamic method reconstruc­
tion
From these results, it is clear that, for a given acquisition time, the choice of trajectory will
be a trade­off between complexity and high velocities, which will provide a better spatial
correspondence between the reference sound field and the reconstruction, and simple tra­
jectories with lower speed, yielding a better reconstruction in some specific areas. This is
confirmed by examining the MAC in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: MAC comparison in a complex vs a simple trajectory
There is a clear degradation on spatial correspondence by comparing the MAC to the last
experiment, especially noticeable from 350 Hz. However, the results are comparable and
indicate that even with a simple trajectory, a high quality reconstruction can be obtained
with this method up to that frequency, with higher instability from there in advance. Then,
the frequency range of interest should be taken into account when choosing the trajectory.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
27
==PAGE:38==
The reconstructed sound field is compared with the reference in Figure 3.14 at four given
frequencies.
Figure 3.14: Measured and estimated sound pressure field with the dynamic method using
a simple trajectory
Finally, in Figure 3.15 the average error over position is computed at each given frequency,
and showing similar results for both trajectories. The total error is computed using Equa­
tion 3.4, giving MNSM = ­9.5 dB, slightly higher than in the last experiment. All of these
results indicate that the effect of a simpler and non­even trajectory will affect mostly the
spatial properties of the sound­field, yet giving a reasonable approximation, and poten­
tially diminishing the error at limited areas, due to the lower speed of the microphone.
Figure 3.15: Comparison of the average error over position frequency by frequency for a
complex and a simple trajectory in the dynamic method
28
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:39==
3.4
Discussion
The experiments presented here were analyzed and led to several conclusions that will be
discussed in this section.
In the first experiment, a similar performance was achieved between the dynamic and
static methods, despite the difficulties of comparing them directly. This showed that it is
possible to obtain similar results to the static method with the dynamic method, and in cer­
tain situations, the dynamic method might convey a lower experimental effort. The static
method would be more precise if the number and positioning of the measurement points
are chosen wisely, equivalently to an increase of the acquisition time and the optimization
of the trajectory in the dynamic method.
The precision difference in the previous experiment is explained in the second one. The
key lies in the microphone speed. There, it is shown that by using a simpler trajectory
and a lower speed, the reconstruction error decreases at the areas nearby the trajectory.
This happens because the effective contribution of each position in the trajectory to the
system of linear equations decreases inversely proportional to the microphone velocity, or
equivalently, increases proportionally to the time spent sampling that position. Contrarily,
the static method uses considerably less measurement points than the dynamic method,
but the information about each of those points, or effective contribution, is substantially
greater. Consequently, by optimizing the measurement positions according to previous
literature [3, 26], it is possible to extrapolate the sound­field to the area of interest with a
higher precision.
Moreover, in the dynamic method an increase of the acquisition time yields better re­
sults, as indicated by previous studies [15]. However, from a practical point of view, the
memory requirement and computational time will be determined by the size of the mea­
surement volume, the frequency range of interest, the number of parameters used for the
reconstruction, and so forth. Therefore, increasing the acquisition time will be subject to
the computer in use.
Based on the aforementioned results, one potential application of the dynamic sampling
method presented in this thesis would be the fast acquisition of IRs along a simple trajec­
tory, proven that the results will be optimal in the area nearby. For example, as in [11],
this method would serve for the fast acquisition of HRFTs by measuring the IRs along a
circle.
However, if the objective is the reconstruction of the sound­field in a three dimensional
volume, it is recommended to choose a trajectory that covers the three axial directions
evenly, for an even distribution of the error, preferably with low microphone velocity
and higher acquisition time. Note that high complexity on the trajectory would lead to
impractical velocities and may not yield better results.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
29
==PAGE:40==
30
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:41==
4
Experimental framework
In this chapter, the experimental setup used for the implementation will be discussed, and
the obtained results will be presented and evaluated.
The dynamic sampling method was implemented on a real system with the aid of a UR5
robot arm. This arm has the capability of reaching any point in a sphere of 0.8 m radius,
with some limitations, as well as reporting the instantaneous position of the microphone
with a precision of 0.1 mm. Those two abilities will be the key to put this method into
practice.
4.1
Procedure
A thin steel bar of 688 mm of length was mounted in the arm of the robot with a holder
at the end, where the microphone was placed. The steel bar allows to reach positions that
are further away from the robot’s base, to avoid scattering effects caused by the presence
of these metallic parts. However, in this scenario, the conditions are not so ideal as they
were considered in the simulation framework, and even though the steel bar is used, some
scattering will appear. Since this thesis will focus in low frequencies, it can be considered
that the presence of the robot will not have a crucial influence in the results. A picture of
this setup is included in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Experimental setup: UR5 robot arm with the microphone at the end of the
steel bar, and loudspeaker placed in a 1.6 m stand.
The robot is equipped with a simple controller to send instructions and move the different
rotatory parts of the arm, which can be programmed using a basic programming language.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
31
==PAGE:42==
This interface was connected via network to a desktop computer with MATLAB, and both
ends were programmed to perform this task.
From the desktop computer, the trajectory was sent position by position to the robot’s
interface using MATLAB. In parallel, the positioning information sent from the robot was
read and stored continuously in MATLAB. From the robot’s interface, one process was
receiving the next position at which the robot should move, while another process was
sending the microphone’s instant location to the desktop computer every 0.01 seconds.
The trajectory used for the dynamic sampling was designed taking into account the robot’s
limitations. Namely, the path between positions should avoid the arm crashing with itself,
and even if the final position was higher than the robot’s base, the positions closer to the
center of the base were difficult to reach. Apart from that, all the rotatory parts have a se­
curity stop to ensure that the motor does not operate further than 720◦in both directions,
so the trajectory should take all of this into account. The speed of the moving micro­
phone was also adjusted, since high velocities produced noisy measurements because of
the vibration induced by the moving parts.
The UR5 robot arm counts with several analog and digital inputs and outputs. One of the
analog outputs was used to send a trigger when the movement starts, which is read by
a National Instruments Data Acquisition card connected to the desktop computer. This
trigger is used to synchronize the measurement signal with the microphone’s trajectory.
The microphone in use is a G.R.A.S free­field microphone, connected to a Nexus ampli­
fier. A Dynaudio BM6 passive loudspeaker and a speaker amplifier were used to repro­
duce the measurement signal. Figure 4.2 shows an schematic chart connecting all of these
components.
Figure 4.2: Schematic chart of the measurement setup. Taken from [27].
32
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:43==
The measurement procedure is as follows: From the desktop computer, the measurement
signal is played at the loudspeakers, while simultaneously, the microphone records the re­
sponse. After the processing delay required to send the instructions to the UR5 controller,
the robot arm starts moving and follows the pre­defined trajectory. After the trajectory
is finished, the measurement signal stops playing. The trigger produced by the robot that
was mentioned previously will be used to determine the start and ending of the dynami­
cally sampled data, and to synchronize it with the positioning information received from
the UR5 controller. An example is shown in Figure 4.3. Alternatively, this task could be
performed manually by visual inspection.
Figure 4.3: Measurement signal and UR5’s analog trigger indicating the dynamically sam­
pled trajectory
The room under test is the IEC listening room, described in section 3.1, and the center of
the measurement volume is approximately placed in the position shown in Figure 3.1. The
experiment was carried out in measured conditions of 32 dB of SNR. The measurement
signal is sampled at fs=1024 Hz, and consists on R repetitions of an MLS signal with
length L=511, chosen subject to L > RT · fs, and band­pass filtered in the range 20­500
Hz. As mentioned previously, the approximate reverberation time is RT ≃0.4 s. In
Figure 4.3 it can be seen although the total length of the measurement signal is defined to
allow time for the robot to start and stop the movement, the useful part is kept around 63
seconds. The rest of the data will be discarded.
Then, the positioning vector received from the UR5 controller will have a different num­
ber of samples than the recorded response, since the position is sampled at a different rate
than the measurement signal. After windowing the data and keeping the useful part, corre­
sponding to the dynamically sampled trajectory, the position vector is linearly interpolated
to match the length of the recorded response. In this way, each position contributes one
sample to the system of linear equations. It is acknowledged that this method might induce
position mismatches due to the imperfect interpolation, however, in the frequency range
of interest this will not have a major impact on the results. At higher frequencies, small
positioning errors may induce a clear degradation of the results [7].
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
33
==PAGE:44==
Finally, after processing the data accordingly, the method proposed in section 2.3 is exe­
cuted to estimate the plane wave coefficients, allowing for the reconstruction of the sound
field inside of Ω. The number of plane waves used for the reconstruction is chosen ac­
cording to Equation 2.8, resulting in N = 16. This number was incremented to 25 and
50 plane waves, producing non significantly better results, and higher computation times.
Therefore it was decided to keep as the minimum number.
4.2
Results
In this section, the results for the real­system implementation will be presented. First, the
reconstruction will be evaluated in the points shown in Figure 4.4. For this implementa­
tion, the robotic arm was used to obtain a reference measurement of the RIR at 880 static
positions on a 0.75 m x 0.75 m plane approximately centered at the sampling volume,
which were measured using a logarithmic sweep. This allows for the evaluation of the
results in extrapolated points up to 0.17 m away from the measurement volume, in the
corners of the reference plane. The response was deconvolved and processed to obtain the
individual impulse responses. Due to the aforementioned UR5 robot arm’s limitations, the
positions at the center of the reference plane were not possible to reach. Hence, the sound
pressure at those points have been omitted for the calculation of the following results.
34
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.4: UR5 robot arm trajectory and reconstruction points. The shadowed plane
represents the reference plane. The cube represents the volume of interest.
The measured and reconstructed frequency response at the interpolated and extrapolated
points are compared in Figure 4.5a. At low frequencies, it can be seen that the reconstruc­
tion matches the measurement in both points. However, as the frequency increases, the
results are clearly degraded. This degradation starts much earlier in the extrapolated point,
that presents a huge difference with the measurement from around 200 Hz. On the other
hand, in the interpolated point, the reconstruction seems to follow the overall shape of the
spectrum, despite of the apparent level difference that increases with frequency, which
could be a result of the broad­band choice of regularization parameter that was mentioned
in section 3.2, causing an over­regularization at high frequencies.
Similar comments could be applied to Figure 4.5b. While in both points the overall shape
of the impulse response is captured, the algorithm seems to have more problems detecting
the small fluctuations and peaks, corresponding to high frequencies in the spectrum. As
expected, there is a clear positive difference in that sense in the interpolated point.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
35
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Dynamic method reconstruction compared to the reference at the interpolated
and extrapolated points. (a) Frequency responses and (b) impulse responses
From this comparison alone, one might expect that the spatial properties of the recon­
structed sound­field would be degraded respect to the simulation results. This is confirmed
by looking at the MAC in Figure 4.6. Here, it is observed that the reconstruction has a
good spatial correspondence up to the Schroeder frequency. As it was commented before,
from this frequency the sound­field becomes much more complex due to a high number
(>3) of active modes at the same time, or modal overlap, and therefore it needs more infor­
mation for a successful reconstruction. In the simulation framework, the sound­field was
simplified by the order of the image­source method, set to 4, mainly considering the early
reflections of the impulse response. Contrarily, in a real world scenario, the sound­field
has a higher complexity, increasing with frequency, which translates into longer impulse
responses with diffuse tails. Hence, the estimation problem is more challenging.
36
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:47==
Even in that frequency range, it can be seen that the spatial correspondence is more un­
stable, assuming values lower than 0.5 at certain frequencies. By contrasting it with Fig­
ure 4.5a, it can be seen that these frequencies correspond to the dips of the frequency
response, where the algorithm is more unreliable because of the encountered low pressure
values.
Yet, it could be considered that the results are reasonably accurate up to 200­300 Hz,
considering that a MAC value in the range 0.6­0.8 indicates that the reconstruction differs
but is not far from correct.
Figure 4.6: MAC of the real­system implementation calculated at the reference plane
By observing Figure 4.7 it can be noticed a similar distribution of the error to the one
presented in Figure 3.12 for the simulation framework. The low error area is focused
near the points where the trajectory crosses the reference plane (see Figure 4.4). In that
area, the errors on the estimated IRs are within an acceptable range, taking values down
to ­10 dB, corresponding to a 10% of error. However, the error increases rapidly out of
that area, resulting in an almost impractical reconstruction in the positions outside of the
measurement volume.
The effects of a non­even trajectory are now more pronounced than in the simulation
framework, due to the increased complexity of the estimation problem. It can also be
noticed that the low error area is distributed at the right side of the map. This is because,
according to the coordinate system of the UR5 controller, from where the positioning data
is taken, the source is located in the direction of the top left corner of Figure 4.7, which
causes a degradation of the results at the nearest points. As mentioned in previous sections,
proximity to the source will deprecate the plane wave assumption.
The main outcome from this result is that, even that a more complex trajectory will spread
the error evenly in the measurement volume, as shown by the previous experiments pre­
sented here, the error at specific points would be a bit higher, being already on the limit of
a good reconstruction. Apart from that, considering that the acquisition time remained the
same, this would imply increasing the microphone velocity, which is practically proven to
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
37
==PAGE:48==
produce noisy measurements due to the vibrations induced by the rotatory motors of the
robot arm.
From this conclusions it may be deduced that in this experiment, the biggest drawback
is the short acquisition time that was used. In a complex, real­life scenario, the solution
for a higher quality reconstruction would be to increment the acquisition time whenever is
possible, and design the trajectory to cover the volume of interest evenly for a good spatial
representation. This would be crucial especially when the reverberation time of the room
under test increases, yielding a higher complexity of the IRs.
Figure 4.7: Errors of the spatially reconstructed IRs in the reference plane for the real­
system implementation. The limits of the measurement volume are indicated by the black
square.
Finally, the dynamic method reconstruction is compared to the reference plane measure­
ments in Figure 4.8. At low frequencies, where the pressure is almost constant the re­
construction seems near­perfect. However, as the frequency increases the errors in the
38
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:49==
reconstruction are evident, especially considering the points at the borders of the figures,
outside of the measurement volume, where the difference is clearly higher.
Figure 4.8: Reconstructed sound­pressure field against real­life measurement at the refer­
ence plane
4.3
Discussion
This experiment has studied the feasibility of a real­system implementation of the dynamic
sound field reconstruction method. The results were explained comparing them to those
of the simulation framework, and by that it is shown that the key for a successful recon­
struction in a complex scenario is an even distribution of the trajectory in the volume of
interest and longer acquisition times.
Several possible causes of error have been identified that could degrade the results in this
experimental setup. First, it was noticed that the steel bar supporting the microphone was
vibrating when the robot arm was moving. The UR5 controller informs about the instant
position of the microphone based on the length of the steel bar. However, this vibration
is not taken into account and could lead to positioning errors in the order of mm, which
would affect mainly at high frequencies. This, combined with the interpolation errors
could induce a degradation of the results.
Secondly, the proximity to the source has been proven to have a detrimental impact in
the performance of the method. From that, it is proven that this method is well­suited to
measure positions that are a bit further away from the source.
Although it is not clearly identified in the performed experiment, another cause of error
might be the proximity to the ceiling. The highest measured positions in the trajectory
were around 0.25 m away from the ceiling, which could also have an impact on the results
due to the increase of pressure caused by the presence of a hard boundary. This might lead
to a misidentification of the plane wave coefficients. However, this would probably not
have a big impact on this experiment since the room under test is highly damped, meaning
that the boundaries have a high absorption coefficient.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
39
==PAGE:50==
Despite of the earlier, the experiment shows to have good results in a reasonable portion
of the measurement volume for really low acquisition times, with errors down to the 10%.
Although the positions in the center have not been measured, from the NSM map presented
in Figure 4.7, it can be inferred that they would have a low error as well. This confirms
the realizability of the dynamic sampling method in a experimental setup, and motivates
further investigation on the topic based on the findings presented in this work.
40
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:51==
5
Conclusion
This thesis has focused on the study of a dynamic sound­field sampling method based on
a plane wave representation at really low frequencies. This one and similar methods that
use knowledge on the propagation of sound waves to solve the dynamic sampling problem
have been formulated and proposed in previous literature. Yet, most of the results are based
on numerical simulations, while the major contribution of this thesis is the experimental
validation of the method using a robotic arm.
For this purpose, first, the proposed method has been evaluated in a simulation framework
and the results were compared against those of a static sampling scheme based on the same
plane wave assumption. This comparison led to various findings that ultimately helped
understanding the dynamic sampling approach and its limitations. Among those, one of
the biggest differences between both methods is the broad­band approach taken in the
dynamic method, in contrast with the static method, which solves the estimation problem
frequency by frequency. In this experiment, this was reflected on the broad­band choice
of Tikhonov regularization parameter, having a clear impact on the results. As it was
discussed, the optimization of the regularization parameter in a broad­band problem is not
trivial, as it usually takes really diverse values between different frequencies.
Despite of that, similar results were obtained with both methods for a low number of mea­
suring points in the static approach and a low acquisition time in the dynamic approach.
This confirms the validity of the dynamic sampling method, providing for an alternative
way of spatially sampling the sound­field with possible lower experimental effort, and
motivates further investigation on the topic.
The second experiment in the simulation framework studied the impact of a simpler trajec­
tory in the dynamic method, resembling the one used in the real­system implementation,
with the same acquisition time. This had a clear detrimental effect on the spatial properties
of the results. However, unexpectedly the error in some specific areas diminished respect
to the previous one. This was explained by the fact that, implicitly, a simpler trajectory
in the same acquisition time corresponds to lower velocities, or equivalently, to a longer
acquisition time in the areas nearby. The most significant conclusion that can be extracted
from this experiment is that the quality of the reconstruction in the dynamic approach pro­
posed here will be mainly determined from the acquisition time and the distribution of
the trajectory, equivalently to the number and positioning of measuring points in a static
sampling scheme.
These findings served as a guidance for the real­system implementation of the dynamic
method. The experimental part of this thesis confirmed the feasibility of this method in
a real­world scenario, obtaining a similar spatial distribution of the error in the reference
plane compared to the simulation framework, while observing a bigger impact in the high­
est frequencies of the reconstruction. Obviously, the increasing complexity of the sound­
field, characterized for long impulse responses with diffuse tails, apart from precision
errors and other factors, was clearly reflected in the results. In these cases, the acquisition
time would be crucial for a high quality reconstruction, considering the latter conclusions.
This should increase proportionally to the expected complexity of the sound­field.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
41
==PAGE:52==
Finally, the effect of proximity to the source was distinctly identified in the experimental
results. A higher error was observed in the reconstruction at the points closer to the source
in the reference plane. This is because of the underlying plane wave assumption of the
methods proposed here, suggesting that these methods are well­suited to reconstruct the
sound­field in positions far away from the source.
42
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:53==
6
Future work
Several lines of investigation on the dynamic sampling approach might arise from the
results presented in this thesis. First, the results of the plane wave approach could be
compared to those of a dynamic method based on a spherical harmonics representation
as the one presented in [15]. This could have a significant impact at positions near the
source, where the plane wave assumption does not withstand.
Second, a sub­band approach as the one discussed in subsection 2.3.1 could be especially
useful in larger bandwidths or bigger measurement volumes, in order to reduce the size of
the problem by decomposing it in smaller sub­problems. In the same line, sampling of big­
ger spaces could also be performed by diving the space into multiple smaller measurement
volumes, and solving the estimation problems individually.
In this thesis, the usage of different solvers for the optimization problem has not been
studied. However, this would modify the results substantially and therefore it would be
worth investigating in future work. In previous literature [3], compressed sensing has
been used in combination with a static method based on the same assumptions with really
promising results, suggesting that this approach could be successfully incorporated to the
dynamic sampling method presented here.
Lastly, in a numerical framework, the dynamic method could be perfected by analyzing
and optimizing the usage of different trajectories. This could be done in combination with
longer acquisition times.
On the experimental side, it would be interesting to test the dynamic sampling method
with a more realistic and accessible setup, which could be just a person equipped with a
tracking device and a microphone, allowing to perform measurements with a really low
effort. This could possibly be perfomed in bigger spaces such as concert halls, with the
potential application of calibration of sound­systems, reinforcement system equalization
and other applications in live music.
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
43
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
Yoichi Haneda, Yutaka Kaneda, and Nobuhiko Kitawaki. “Common­acoustical­
pole and residue model and its application to spatial interpolation and extrapolation
of a room transfer function”. In: IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Process­
ing 7.6 (1999), pp. 709–717.
[2]
Wenyu Jin and W Bastiaan Kleijn. “Theory and design of multizone soundfield re­
production using sparse methods”. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing 23.12 (2015), pp. 2343–2355.
[3]
Samuel A Verburg and Efren Fernandez­Grande. “Reconstruction of the sound field
in a room using compressive sensing”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 143.6 (2018), pp. 3770–3779.
[4]
Niccolo Antonello et al. “Room impulse response interpolation using a sparse spatio­
temporal representation of the sound field”. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing 25.10 (2017), pp. 1929–1941.
[5]
Rémi Mignot, Laurent Daudet, and François Ollivier. “Room reverberation recon­
struction: Interpolation of the early part using compressed sensing”. In: IEEE Trans­
actions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 21.11 (2013), pp. 2301–2312.
[6]
Rémi Mignot, Gilles Chardon, and Laurent Daudet. “Low frequency interpolation
of room impulse responses using compressed sensing”. In: IEEE/ACM Transac­
tions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 22.1 (2013), pp. 205–216.
[7]
Fabrice Katzberg, Marco Maass, and Alfred Mertins. “Doppler frequency analysis
for sound­field sampling with moving microphones”. In: Frontiers in Signal Pro­
cessing 4 (2024), p. 1304069.
[8]
Fabrice Katzberg et al. “Positional tracking of a moving microphone in reverber­
ant scenes by applying perfect sequences to distributed loudspeakers”. In: 2022
International Workshop on Acoustic Signal Enhancement (IWAENC). IEEE. 2022,
pp. 1–5.
[9]
Nara Hahn and Sascha Spors. “Continuous measurement of spatial room impulse
responses using a non­uniformly moving microphone”. In: 2017 IEEE Workshop on
Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA). IEEE. 2017,
pp. 205–208.
[10]
Nara Hahn and Sascha Spors. “Simultaneous measurement of spatial room impulse
responses from multiple sound sources using a continuously moving microphone”.
In: 2018 26th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO). IEEE. 2018,
pp. 2180–2184.
[11]
Thibaut Ajdler, Luciano Sbaiz, and Martin Vetterli. “Dynamic measurement of
room impulse responses using a moving microphone”. In: The Journal of the Acous­
tical Society of America 122.3 (2007), pp. 1636–1645.
[12]
Nara Hahn and Sascha Spors. “Comparison of continuous measurement techniques
for spatial room impulse responses”. In: 2016 24th European Signal Processing
Conference (EUSIPCO). IEEE. 2016, pp. 1638–1642.
[13]
Fabrice Katzberg et al. “Sound­field measurement with moving microphones”. In:
The Journal of the Acoustical society of America 141.5 (2017), pp. 3220–3235.
44
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
==PAGE:55==
[14]
Fabrice Katzberg et al. “A compressed sensing framework for dynamic sound­field
measurements”. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Pro­
cessing 26.11 (2018), pp. 1962–1975.
[15]
Fabrice Katzberg, Marco Maass, and Alfred Mertins. “Spherical harmonic repre­
sentation for dynamic sound­field measurements”. In: ICASSP 2021­2021 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE. 2021, pp. 426–430.
[16]
Finn Jacobsen and Peter Moller Juhl. Fundamentals of general linear acoustics.
John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[17]
Earl G Williams. Fourier acoustics: sound radiation and nearfield acoustical holog­
raphy. Academic press, 1999.
[18]
Andrea Moiola, Ralf Hiptmair, and Ilaria Perugia. “Plane wave approximation of
homogeneous Helmholtz solutions”. In: Zeitschrift für angewandte Mathematik
und Physik 62 (2011), pp. 809–837.
[19]
Thibault Nowakowski, Julien de Rosny, and Laurent Daudet. “Robust source lo­
calization from wavefield separation including prior information”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 141.4 (2017), pp. 2375–2386.
[20]
Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge univer­
sity press, 2004.
[21]
Per Christian Hansen. “Regularization tools version 4.0 for Matlab 7.3”. In: Nu­
merical algorithms 46 (2007), pp. 189–194.
[22]
Per Christian Hansen. “Regularization tools: A Matlab package for analysis and so­
lution of discrete ill­posed problems”. In: Numerical algorithms 6.1 (1994), pp. 1–
35.
[23]
Yousef Saad. Iterative methods for sparse linear systems. SIAM, 2003.
[24]
Jont B Allen and David A Berkley. “Image method for efficiently simulating small­
room acoustics”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 65.4 (1979),
pp. 943–950.
[25]
Anton Semechko. Suite of functions to perform uniform sampling of a sphere. https:
//github.com/AntonSemechko/S2-Sampling-Toolbox. Retrieved September 28,
2024. 2024.
[26]
Gilles Chardon, Wolfgang Kreuzer, and Markus Noisternig. “Design of spatial mi­
crophone arrays for sound field interpolation”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Signal Processing 9.5 (2015), pp. 780–790.
[27]
Samuel A Verburg. “Master’s Thesis: Plenacoustic function acquisition in rever­
berant spaces”. In: DTU (2017).
Reconstruction of the sound field in a room from measurements with a moving microphone
45
