==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master Thesis
AI Tools for Tattoo Image Synthesis
Susan Babu Pandey (s223713)
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Tattoos have long been used as a form of identification in forensic investigations
due to their unique patterns and designs, which are valuable for identifying individ-
uals and linking them to specific crimes. However, privacy concerns surrounding the
collection of real tattoo databases have hindered the development of robust tattoo
recognition systems. With recent advancements in artificial intelligence (AI), it has
become possible to generate synthetic tattoos, opening new possibilities for research.
This study aims to explore AI tools suitable for creating synthetic tattoos and
assess their potential for tattoo recognition. The primary focus is to train a tattoo
recognition algorithm using a synthetically generated tattoo database and evaluate
its performance. The synthetic database has shown promising results when used for
training. The process of generating this database with AI tools, as well as the training
and evaluation of the tattoo recognition algorithm, will be described in detail.
The experiments are conducted in different phases, and when compared with a
semi-synthetic benchmark dataset, the synthetic database has demonstrated signifi-
cant improvements in performance. Thus, this work not only showcases the capabil-
ities of AI in creating synthetic tattoos but also provides valuable insights and data
for further research in the field of tattoo recognition.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in close collaboration with
da/sec, fulfilling the requirements for acquiring a Masters Science Degree degree in
Computer Science and Engineering. This thesis began on May 1, 2024.
Kongens Lyngby, October 1, 2024
Susan Babu Pandey (s223713)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors: Lazaro Janier Gonzalez-
Soler, Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Christian Jensen, Nicola Dragoni, and Christian
Rathgeb. Special thanks go to Janier for his continuous support, helpful advice, and
the dedicated time he has given to my thesis. I am extremely grateful to Christian
Rathgeb for providing me with the opportunity to work on this project. I also ex-
tend my thanks to Emmanouil for taking over the supervision of my thesis following
Christian Jensen’s departure to Aarhus University.
I am deeply thankful to my family for their unwavering support and encourage-
ment throughout my studies.
Finally, I would like to thank my friends for their
constant support and motivation.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goal and Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Fundamentals
3
2.1
Biometrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Artificial Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Generative AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Background and Related Work
19
3.1
Tattoos: A Brief Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Tattoos in Forensics and Law Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Experiments
23
4.1
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Training, Testing and Retrieval Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Phases of the experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Testing Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Results and Discussion
37
5.1
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Conclusion
51
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter introduces the topic of the thesis, the motivation behind the study, and
the problem statement that the thesis will address. The structure of this thesis is
also outlined in this chapter.
1.1
Context and Motivation
Tattoos have long been recognized as a significant form of self-expression and cultural
art, practiced for centuries accross diverse societies [Lea15]. In recent years, their role
has expanded beyond mere body art to become a form of soft biometric for people
identification, particularly in forensics and law enforcement [Sun+16].
Due to their unique patterns and personal significance, tattoos have been used
to identify individuals in criminal investigations. The global tattoo market, driven
by increasing demand for personalized and custom designs, is expected to grow from
USD 2.22 billion in 2024 to USD 4.83 billion by 2032, reflecting a Compound Annual
Growth Rate (CAGR) of 10.20% [Noa].
This growing interest in tattoos has led to significant attention and interest from
researchers in the area of tattoo recognition. However, gaining the necessary data
for training and testing tattoo recognition algorithms remains a challenging task.
Traditional recognition systems face considerable challenges, primarily due to their
reliance on databases containing real world images.
The collection of such images is often hampered by privacy concerns, ethical con-
siderations, and legal restrictions, leading to a scarcity of comprehensive databases.
This lack of publicly available tattoo datasets has hindered the development of effec-
tive tattoo recognition systems.
The rapid advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has revolutionized many
creative fields, providing innovative tools and methods for digital art creation. In
the tattoo industry, AI has enabled artists and designers to push the boundaries
of creativity by generating unique tattoo designs that were previously unimaginable.
This technological shift is especially relevant in context of tattoo image synthesis,
where AI tools such as diffusion models and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
offer new possibilities for overcoming the limitations of traditional tattoo databases.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Goal and Research Question
The purpose of this thesis is to explore the potential of AI in the tattoo industry,
particularly focusing on the generation of synthetic tattoo images.
The primary research question that this master thesis aims to address is:
How effective are existing AI tools in generating synthetic tattoo image
database, and how well do tattoo recognition algorithms perform when
trained on these synthetic images?
In order to answer this research question, the study will focus on the following
objectives:
• Investigate and apply the state-of-the-art AI tools for generating synthetic tat-
too images.
• Evaluate the quality and diversity of synthetic tattoo images generated by these
AI tools.
• Assess the performance of tattoo recognition algorithms trained on synthetic
tattoo images.
1.3
Overview of thesis
This document is divided into six chapters, each focusing on a specific aspect of the
study. The chapters are structured as follows:
• Chapter 2 introduces the fundamental theoretical concepts related to this work.
It provides an overview of the key ideas and technologies utilized in the study.
• Chapter 3 offers background and related information relevant to the study.
• Chapter 4 details the experiments conducted in this research.
It includes
descriptions of the dataset, data generation process, and experimental setup.
• Chapter 5 discusses the results and provides an analysis of the experiments.
The results are then compared with the baseline.
• Chapter 6 concludes the thesis and discusses the limitations of the study and
provides recommendations for future work.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Fundamentals
This chapter details the fundamental concepts and methodologies related to this work.
The key areas covered include biometrics 2.1, artificial intelligence 2.2, deep learning
2.3, image generation 2.4 and evaluation metrics 2.5.
2.1
Biometrics
Biometric is the measurement of the characteristics of human body for the purpose
of identification or authentication. It is the science of establishing the identity of a
person based on their physical, chemical or behavorial attributes [Jai07].
The first known use of biometrics was the was the application of fingerprints for
identification purposes in China during the 14th century. The concept of biometrics
in a forensic context was introduced by Alphonse Bertillon in 1883, who developed a
system based on body measurements, such as weight, size, and the dimensions of the
head, to identify criminals. This method became widespread in France and laid the
groundwork for modern biometric systems [Mag09].
2.1.1
Categories of Biometrics
Ever since the introduction of biometrics, the field has evolved constantly and has
become the integral part of the security systems. The biometric trait has become more
reliable and secure means of identity than the traditional methods like passwords and
PINs.
In the modern context, biometrics can be broadly divided into [Sha+19]:
• Biological biometrics: This category includes traits that are related to the
physical characteristics of an individual. Common examples of biological bio-
metrics include [Sha+19]:
– Fingerprints: One of the most widely used biometric traits, fingerprints
are unique to each individual.
– Iris and Retina Scans: This biometric trait involves the scanning of the iris
or retina to identify individuals. The iris has a unique pattern and high
accuracy.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Fundamentals
– Facial recognition: This biometric trait involves the analysis of facial fea-
tures to identify individuals. Facial recognition systems are widely used in
security applications.
– Hand and finger geometry: This biometric trait involves the measurement
of the physical characteristics of the hand, their shape size and fingers to
identify individuals.
– DNA: This is one of the most unique biometric traits, as it is unique to
each individual. DNA analysis is primarily used in forensic applications.
• Behavioral biometrics: This category includes traits that are based on the
behaviour of tan individual and are typically less distinctive than physiological
traits. Common examples of behavioral biometrics include [Sha+19]:
– Signature recognition: This biometric trait involves the analysis of individ-
ual’s signature to identify them.
– Voice recognition: This biometric trait involves the analysis of individual
based on their voice patterns.
– Keystroke dynamics: This biometric trait involves the analysis of individ-
ual based on their rhythm and pattern of typing on keyboard.
– Gait analysis: This biometric trait involves the analysis of individual based
on their walking pattern.
Figure 2.1: Biometrics classification based on the type of biometric trait Source :
[Yan+18]
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Biometrics
5
Besides the above mentioned main biometric traits, an additional category of
biometrics is also recognized, known as Soft biometrics.
• Soft biometrics: This category includes traits that are not unique to an indi-
vidual but can provide additional information about them. Soft biometrics are
often used in conjunction or used as a compliment with other biometric traits
to enhance identification and verification accuracy. Examples of soft biometrics
include:
– Tattoo recognition: Tattoos, often considered as a form of body art, are
increasingly used as a complement biometric trait for the identification of
individuals.
– Periocular recognition: This biometric trait involves the analysis of
the area around the eyes to identify individuals.
Each category of biometrics has its own set of advantages and limitations, making
the choice of biometric trait dependent on the specific application and requirements.
2.1.2
Applications of Biometrics
Biometrics can be applied to a wide range of domains, including:
• Security and Access Control: Biometrics are widely used in security and
access control systems to authenticate individuals and provide secure access to
restricted areas
• Health Care: In healthcare, biometrics are used for patient identification,
management, and ensuring secure access to medical records.
• Banking and Finance: Biometrics are used in the banking and finance sectors
for identity verification in transactions, both in-person and online, to prevent
fraud and theft.
• Forensics: Biometrics play a crucial role in forensic investigations, where iden-
tifying suspects through fingerprints, facial recognition, or tattoos can be piv-
otal.
In the context of this thesis, the application of biometric systems is particularly
relevant to the field of tattoo generation and identification. The use of tattoos for
personal identification and retrieval has gained significant interest in recent years due
to the increasing popularity of tattoos as a form of body art [Lee+12].
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Fundamentals
2.1.3
Identification and Verification in Biometrics
Identification and verification are two primary tasks in biometric systems. Identifica-
tion refers to determining an individual’s identity by comparing their biometric traits
against a large database of enrolled users. In contrast, verification involves authenti-
cating an individual’s claimed identity by comparing their biometric traits against a
single user’s template. These tasks can be categorized into one-to-one (1:1) verifica-
tion and one-to-many (1:n) identification scenarios. One-to-one verification compares
a single biometric trait against a single template, while one-to-many identification
compares a single biometric trait against multiple templates.
The figure 2.2 illustrates these concepts as explained above
Figure 2.2: Identification and Verification workflow in Biometrics Source : [Dro+20]
In addition, identification in biometric is done with two main approaches: Closed-Set
Identification and Open-Set Identification which is discussed in detail in 2.5.
2.2
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a technology that enables computers and machines to
perform tasks requiring learning and problem-solving capabilities similar to those of
humans.
AI encompasses a wide range of techniques, including machine learning,
deep learning, natural language processing, computer vision, and more. In recent
times, AI has gained significant popularity and has been applied to various domains
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Deep Learning
7
such as security (e.g., facial recognition), healthcare (e.g., diagnostic tools), finance,
and transportation.
2.2.1
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a subset of artificial intelligence that enables systems to learn from
data using various algorithms [21]. Machine learning algorithms identify patterns in
data and make predictions or decisions based on these patterns. Machine learning is
mainly categorized into two types: supervised learning and unsupervised learning.
2.2.1.1
Supervised Learning
Supervised learning involves training a model on labeled datasets. The model learns
to map input data to the correct output using these labels. The algorithm uses a loss
function to minimize the error between the predicted output and the actual output.
Supervised learning is used in tasks such as classification (e.g., image recognition,
spam detection), regression (e.g., predicting housing prices), and object detection
[21].
2.2.1.2
Unsupervised Learning
Unsupervised learning is a technique where the model learns to identify patterns in
data without labeled responses. The model observes data and extracts features to
discover underlying structures or distributions. These algorithms are suited for dis-
covering hidden patterns and extracting features from data. Unsupervised learning
is used in tasks such as clustering (e.g., customer segmentation), dimensionality re-
duction (e.g., data visualization), and anomaly detection (e.g., fraud detection) [21].
2.3
Deep Learning
Deep learning, a subset of both machine learning and artificial intelligence, employs
neural networks with multiple layers (known as Deep Neural Networks or DNNs) to
discern intricate patterns within data. DNNs have gained popularity for achieving
state-of-the-art performance across diverse tasks, including image recognition, natural
language processing, and speech recognition [Hos24].
DNNs consist of multiple layers structured as follows [Hos24]:
• Input Layer: The first layer of the network where raw input data, such as
pixel values in an image, is fed into the model.
• Hidden Layers: Intermediate layers that progressively extract and refine fea-
tures from the input data. Lower layers might detect basic patterns like edges,
while deeper layers learn more abstract features such as shapes and objects.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Fundamentals
The number of hidden layers and neurons varies based on the complexity of the
task.
• Output Layer: The final layer that produces the model’s predictions. For
classification tasks, this layer outputs a probability distribution over possible
classes, while for regression tasks, it produces a continuous value.
Deep learning models leverage the hierarchical representations learned in these
layers to make accurate predictions and classifications across various domains.
Figure 2.3: Deep Neural Network architecture consisting of an input layer, multiple
hidden layers, and an output layer (Source: [IBM])
2.3.0.1
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a class of deep neural networks particu-
larly well-suited for computer vision tasks such as image recognition, object detection
and more. CNNs are widely used in image classification workflows due to their ability
to automatically and eﬀiciently extract information for specific tasks.
The CNN architecture consists of several key components:
• Convolutional Layers: Convolutional layer play a crucial role in extracting
features from the input image. Their primary task is to detect patterns and
features using a set of filters that convolve over the input image. These filters
pass through an activation function to produce feature maps, which capture
essential characteristics of the image, such as edges and textures [Hos24].
• Activation Functions: Activation Functions are used to introduce non-linear
transformations in the network. The most commonly used activation functions
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Generative AI
9
in CNNs are Rectified Linear Unit(ReLU). This function helps the network to
learn complex patterns in the data.
• Pooling Layers: Pooling layers in CNN reduces the spatial dimentsions of
the feature maps and enhance the network’s a bility to variations in the input
by performing down-sampling operations.
They are often used between wo
convolutional layers. The pooling layer reduces the number of parameters and
computations in the network [Hos24].
• Fully Connected Layers: This is CNN’s final layer which is responsible for
the integration of the features extracted by the preceding layers and present the
final output. The fully connected layer is a traditional multi-layer perceptron
that uses a softmax activation function for classification tasks [Hos24].
• Batch Normalization: Batch normalization is a technique used to normalize
the imput of each layers in the network. It enhances the training eﬀiciency and
ensures faster and stable convergence [IS15].
CNNs have revolutionized the field of computer vision and consistently achieve
state-of-the-art performance in image recognition tasks.
Several pre-trained CNN
architectures, such as VGG-16 [SZ15], ResNet50 [He+15], and EﬀicientNet [TL20], are
commonly used due to their high accuracy and eﬀiciency. Beyond image classification,
CNNs are highly versatile and have been successfully applied to a wide range of other
domains.
Figure 2.4: CNN architecture (Source: [Mat])
2.4
Generative AI
Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) refers to computational techniques capable of
generating new data such as text, images, videos, or audio by learning the under-
lying patterns in the training dataset. These models create outputs similar to the
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Fundamentals
data they were trained on, making them useful in applications like content creation,
data augmentation, and simulation [24]. Notable examples of generative AI include
OpenAI’s GPT-4 for text generation [GPT], DALL-E for image generation [AI], and
StyleGAN for realistic image synthesis.
Generative AI models learn the patterns and structures within the training data
and use this knowledge to create new instances that resemble the original data. These
models can be used across various fields such as creative arts, game development,
scientific simulations, and more.
2.4.1
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are a type of deep learning architecture
and one of the most popular generative models. First introduced by Ian Goodfellow
and colleagues in 2014 [Goo+14], GANs are particularly effective for tasks such as
image generation, data augmentation, and style transfer.
The architecture of GANs consists of two deep neural networks: the generator
and the discriminator. These two networks engage in a competitive process often
referred to as a ”zero-sum game.” The generator’s role is to create synthetic or fake
data that resembles the real data from a random noise, while the discriminator’s task
is to distinguish between real and fake data from the pool of real data and the data
generated by the generator. Both networks are trained simultaneously—while the
generator attempts to improve the realism of the data it generates, the discriminator
continuously enhances its ability to detect fake data [Cre+18].
Some of the primary examples of GANs include, StyleGAN [KLA19], DCGAN
[RMC16], CycleGAN [Zhu+20]
Despite the success of GANs, they suffer from several limitations, including mode
collapse (where the generator produces limited diversity in its outputs), training in-
stability, and the high computational resources required for training. Overcoming
these challenges is an ongoing area of research.
Mathematical Formulation
The process of a GAN is formulated as a minimax optimization problem. The gener-
ator G maps random noise z from a latent space pz(z) to the data space, generating
synthetic data G(z). The discriminator D distinguishes between real data x and gen-
erated data G(z), providing a scalar value representing the probability that the input
is real.
The objective function for GANs is expressed as [Goo+14]:
min
G max
D V (D, G) = Ex∼pdata(x)[log D(x)] + Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))]
Here, pdata(x) is the real data distribution, and pz(z) represents the prior noise
distribution.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Generative AI
11
Figure 2.5: Formula illustration (Source: [Goo+14])
The generator G tries to minimize the function log(1 −D(G(z))), while the dis-
criminator D tries to maximize the probability of correctly distinguishing real samples
from generated ones. In practice, the generator is trained to maximize log D(G(z)),
as this formulation provides better gradients in the initial stages of training.
2.4.2
Diffusion Models
Diffusion models are a class of generative models that learn from the data during train-
ing and generate similar examples based on what they have learned. They are based
on the concept of a diffusion process, where the model generates data by iteratively
adding noise to input data and then learning to reverse this process [Erd23].
Diffusion Process: Mathematical Formulation
In diffusion models, the forward process involves gradually adding Gaussian noise
to the data over several time steps. The forward diffusion process is modeled as a
Markov chain, where noise is added at each time step t, transforming the data x0 into
a noisy version xt. The forward process is defined as:
q(xt|x0) = N(xt; √αtx0, (1 −αt)I)
Here, αt controls the amount of noise added at each time step t, and I is the
identity matrix.
The reverse process involves learning a model pθ(xt−1|xt) to reverse this diffusion
by predicting the original data from the noisy version. The reverse process is defined
as:
pθ(xt−1|xt) = N(xt−1; µθ(xt, t), Σθ(xt, t))
Where µθ and Σθ represent the predicted mean and variance of the denoised data,
which are learned by a neural network [HJA20].
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Fundamentals
Advantages Over GANs
Diffusion models offer several advantages over GANs, particularly in terms of training
stability. Unlike GANs, which require delicate balancing between the generator and
discriminator, diffusion models do not suffer from mode collapse or vanishing gradi-
ents. Additionally, diffusion models provide tractable likelihood estimation, which
GANs cannot do directly. This makes diffusion models more reliable for some tasks
where precise likelihood estimation is important [DN21].
Training Stability: Diffusion models have been shown to be more stable to
train than GANs because the training objective involves directly modeling the data
distribution without the adversarial dynamic between a generator and discriminator.
This allows diffusion models to scale more easily to larger datasets without the risk
of mode collapse.
Scalability and Parallelization: Diffusion models are well-suited for parallel
processing, making them more eﬀicient for generating large amounts of data. As a
result, diffusion models have been increasingly adopted in generative tasks like image
synthesis, particularly for applications where stability and diversity are crucial.
2.4.2.1
Latent Diffusion Model
With the introduction of the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) by Rombach et al.[Rom+22b],
diffusion models have been significantly improved to generate high-resolution images.
LDMs aim to reduce the computational complexity that arises when generating high-
resolution images by operating in a latent space.
This approach allows for more
eﬀicient and scalable training. LDMs have achieved state-of-the-art performance in
image synthesis tasks, generating high-quality images with fine details and realistic
textures.
Figure 2.6: LDM pipeline (Source: [Rom+22b])
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Generative AI
13
The Latent Diffusion Model has three primary components: the encoder, the
decoder, and the diffusion process. The encoder compresses an input image into a
latent representation that captures the essential features of the image. The diffusion
process involves adding noise to the latent code to manipulate the image’s features.
The decoder then reconstructs the final image from the manipulated latent code.
The Latent Diffusion Model possesses several advantages over traditional diffusion
models, including computational eﬀiciency, the ability to generate high-resolution im-
ages, flexible conditioning of synthetic data, and the preservation of intricate details.
2.4.3
Diffusers
The Diffusers library provides a comprehensive collection of state-of-the-art, pre-
trained diffusion models for generating images, audio, and text.
Built on top of
PyTorch, the library offers a user-friendly interface for training and evaluating dif-
fusion models. It supports a variety of diffusion architectures, making it a valuable
resource for research and development in generative AI [Pla+22].
2.4.3.1
Stable Diffusion XL
Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL) is a highly advanced text-to-image generation model,
leveraging the power of diffusion processes. It is based on the Latent Diffusion Model,
which operates in the latent space rather than directly on pixel space, leading to
more eﬀicient and high-quality image generation. Trained on a large-scale dataset of
text-image pairs, SDXL is capable of generating diverse, photorealistic images from
textual prompts. This makes it particularly useful in creative fields such as digital
art, content creation, and design, where high-quality image generation from text
descriptions is crucial [Pod+23].
2.4.3.2
Stable-Diffusion-v1-5
Stable-Diffusion-v1-5 is an earlier version of the latent diffusion model and represents
a significant step in the development of diffusion-based generative models. While still
highly capable, it may lack some of the optimizations and advancements seen in later
versions like SDXL. Nevertheless, it remains a very popular model for tasks requir-
ing eﬀicient text-to-image generation with a focus on balancing speed and quality
[Rom+22a].
2.4.3.3
SDXL-Turbo
SDXL Turbo is an enhanced, adversarially time-distilled variant of the Stable Dif-
fusion XL (SDXL) model. This model introduces adversarial training techniques to
improve both the speed and accuracy of image generation, offering faster sampling
times while maintaining the high-quality image outputs typical of SDXL [Sau+23].
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Fundamentals
2.5
Metrics
Metrics are the quantitative measures used to evaluate the performance and effec-
tiveness of the biometric systems. They provide a standardized way to access how
well the system identifies individuals. In context of biometric systems, these metrics
are crucial for comparing different systems and configurations, and for assessing the
system’s reliability and accuracy [23].
2.5.1
Closed-Set Identification
Closed-Set Identification is a biometric scenario where the system is required to iden-
tify an individal’s identity from a database of enrolled users. The system is expected
to provide the correct identity if the individual is present in the system. The perfor-
mance of the system is evaluated using metrics such as Rank-1 Identification Rate,
Rank-5 Identification Rate, Rank-20 Identification Rate and Cumulative Match Char-
acteristics (CMC) curve.
2.5.1.1
Identification Rate(IR)
Identification Rate (IR) is a metric that measures the percentage of correct identi-
fications made by the system. It is the measure of the system’s ability to correctly
identify an individual’s identity from a database of enrolled users. The IR is cal-
culated as the ratio of the number of correct identifications to the total number of
identification attempts.
2.5.1.2
Rank-N Identification Rate(IR)
The Rank-N Identification rate is a metric that measures the percentage of queries
for which the correct match is found within the top N ranks of the candidate list
returned by the system.
• Rank-1 Identification Rate: The Rank-1 Identification Rate is the percent-
age of queries for which the correct match is found at the top of the candidate
list returned by the system.
• Rank-5 Identification Rate: The Rank-5 Identification Rate is the percent-
age of queries for which the correct match is found within the top 5 ranks of
the candidate list returned by the system.
• Rank-20 Identification Rate: The Rank-20 Identification Rate is the per-
centage of queries for which the correct match is found within the top 20 ranks
of the candidate list returned by the system.
These ranks allow system evaluators to assess the system’s performance at different
levels of accuracy and eﬀiciency.
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Metrics
15
2.5.1.3
Cumulative Match Characteristics (CMC) curve
The Cumulative Match Characteristics (CMC) curve is a graphical representation
used to evaluate the performance of identification systems. The curve plots the Rank-
N Identification Rate against the rank NN, illustrating how the system’s identification
rate improves as the rank increases. The CMC curve indicates the probability that
the correct match is found within the top NN ranks of the candidate list. A higher
CMC curve corresponds to better system performance, as it reflects the system’s
ability to accurately identify individuals across a range of ranks.
The CMC curve starts at Rank-1, which shows the percentage of queries where
the correct match is the top-ranked candidate. As NN increases, the curve reflects
how considering more candidates improves the identification rate. For example, in a
tattoo-recognition system, if the CMC curve reaches 90% at Rank-5, this means that
in 90% of the cases, the correct match is found within the top 5 candidates on the
list.
2.5.2
Open-Set Identification
Open-Set Identification is a biometric scenario in which the system is required to iden-
tify an individual’s identity from a database of enrolled users, while also determining
if the individual is not present in the system. The system is expected to provide the
correct identity if the individual is enrolled, and to reject the individual if they are
not in the database. The performance of the system is evaluated using metrics such
as Detection Error Tradeoff (DET) curve, False Positive Identification Rate (FPIR),
and False Negative Identification Rate (FNIR).
2.5.2.1
False Positive Identification Rate(FPIR)
False Positive Identification Rate (FPIR) is the rate at which the system incorrectly
identifies a non-enrolled individual as a valid user.
It is also known as the False
Acceptance Rate (FAR). FPIR is a crucial metric for security-sensitive applications,
where it is important to minimize the chances of granting access to unauthorized
individuals.
Mathematical Formulation:
FPIR = Number of false positive identifications
Total number of identification attempts
2.5.2.2
False Negative Identification Rate(FNIR)
False Negative Identification Rate (FNIR) is the rate at which the system fails to
correctly identify an enrolled individual, even when the individual is present in the
system. It is also known as the False Rejection Rate (FRR). FNIR is a critical metric
in biometric systems, where it is important to minimize the chances of rejecting valid
users.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Fundamentals
Mathematical Formulation:
FNIR =
Number of false negatives
Total number of genuine user attempts
2.5.2.3
Detection Error Tradeoff(DET) Curve
The Detection Error Tradeoff (DET) curve is a graphical tool used to assess the
performance of detection and biometric systems, including open-set identification
and verification systems. It is designed to visualize the trade-off between two key
error metrics: the False Positive Identification Rate (FPIR) and the False Negative
Identification Rate (FNIR) [23].
The DET curve plots the FPIR on the x-axis against the FNIR on the y-axis,
offering a comprehensive view of the system’s performance across a range of oper-
ating points. This curve is especially useful in biometric systems, where balancing
false positives (incorrectly identifying someone) and false negatives (failing to identify
someone) is critical to the system’s reliability and effectiveness.
At different operating thresholds, a system may exhibit various trade-offs between
these two error rates. For instance, a lower threshold may reduce false negatives but
increase false positives, while a higher threshold may have the opposite effect. The
DET curve allows evaluators to visualize this balance and choose an optimal operating
point depending on the specific requirements of the application.
For example, in a tattoo recognition system, if the DET curve shows that at
a certain threshold, the FPIR is 3% and the FNIR is 8%, this means that 3% of
non-matching tattoos are incorrectly recognized as matches, while 8% of matching
tattoos are incorrectly rejected. A DET curve closer to the origin indicates better
performance, as it reflects lower error rates for both false positives and false negatives.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Background and
Related Work
This chapter provides the background knowledge and previous work related to the
study.
3.1
Tattoos: A Brief Overview
Tattoos have a long history as a form of body art and cultural expression. The practice
of tattooing dates back thousands of years, with evidence of tattooed mummies found
in ancient Egypt and other civilizations [Lea15]. Tattoos have been used to signify
social status, religious beliefs, and cultural identity in various societies. In modern
times, tattoos have become a popular form of self-expression, with people choosing
to get tattoos for personal, aesthetic, and symbolic reasons.
The global tattoo market has seen significant growth in recent years, driven by
increasing demand for personalized and custom designs.
The market is expected
to grow from USD 2.22 billion in 2024 to USD 4.83 billion by 2032, reflecting a
Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 10.20% [Noa]. Tattoos are no longer
limited to a niche subculture but have become mainstream, with people from all
walks of life getting tattoos.
Tattoos are often personalized and hold significance for the individual, with de-
signs that can range from simple symbols to intricate patterns. Similar tattoos can
appear on different individuals, regardless of their cultural background or personal
beliefs since duplicating designs is common. However, the distinct placement, size,
and customization of tattoos on their body as well as their potential personal signifi-
cance, can provide valuable information in forensic investigations and law enforcement
helping to identify individuals and link them to criminal activities.
3.2
Tattoos in Forensics and Law Enforcement
Tattoos have been used as a form of identification in forensic investigations for many
years. The unique patterns and designs of tattoos make them valuable for identifying
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Background and Related Work
individuals and linking them to specific crimes. In many cases, tattoos have helped
law enforcement agencies solve cold cases and bring criminals to justice.
The use of tattoos in forensics and law enforcement has gained prominence in re-
cent years, with researchers developing tattoo recognition algorithms to automate the
identification process. These algorithms analyze tattoo images and extract features
that assist in narrowing down the potential suspects. The accuracy and reliability of
these algorithms depend on the quality and diversity of the tattoo images used for
training.
One of the challenges in tattoo recognition is the lack of comprehensive tattoo
databases containing real-world images. Collecting such images is often hampered
by privacy concerns, ethical considerations, and legal restrictions. As a result, syn-
thetic tattoo databases have emerged as an alternative solution for training tattoo
recognition algorithms.
3.3
Related Work
Biometric identification technologies have been widely used in law enforcement and
personal identifications, making tattoo recognition a critical research area. However,
the lack of comprehensive tattoo databases has hindered the development of effective
tattoo recognition systems.
Various datasets like NIST, Tatt-C, and Tatt-E have demonstrated significant
advancements. The list of available database is shown in Table 3.1.
However, these datasets are often limited in terms of the number of categories,
sample size and also they are not publicly available. In response to these challenges,
the TattTRN system [Gon+24] was developed, utilizing a semi-synthetic database
comprising 571 categories and 28,550 samples. This database was tested on real-world
datasets such as BIVTatt and WebTattoo, showing promising results. The system
introduced components like Synthetic Tattoo Generation (STG), Image-to-Template
Translation (ITT), and Feature Space Representation (FSR), yielding high accuracy
and demonstrating substantial effectiveness in practical applications. The shift from
purely real tattoo images to incorporating semi-synthetic data has driven significant
progress in the development of robust tattoo recognition systems, establishing new
benchmarks for both technical performance and ethical data management.
In parallel to the advancements in tattoo recognition datasets, the development
of AI tools for art and tattoo generation has seen significant innovations, primarily
driven by the evolution of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and their vari-
ations, leading up to sophisticated diffusion models. Initially, GANs revolutionized
the field by enabling the generation of artwork and designs from simple descriptions.
Several studies have explored the use of GANs for generating synthetic tattoo images
and training tattoo recognition algorithms. Sun et al. [Sun+16] proposed a tattoo
recognition system based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) trained on a
dataset of real-world tattoo images. The authors found that the performance of the
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Related Work
19
Table 3.1: Overview of available tattoo databases.
Database
#Categories
#Samples
Public
Synthetic
HDA-STD
-
5,500
Yes

WebTattoo [Han+19]
400*
1,400
Yes

DeMSI [HBK16]
-
890
Yes

Tatt-C [NG15]
157†
215
No

BIVTatt
210
4,200
Yes

PinTatt
160
454
No

NTU-Tattoo-V1
-
10,000
Yes

TattTRN [Gon+24]
571
28,550
Yes
✓
* Publicly available training set.
† Number of categories reported for the identification case.
recognition system was limited by the lack of diverse tattoo images in the training
dataset.
By leveraging the power of AI tools, researchers can overcome the limitations
of traditional tattoo databases and develop more accurate and reliable recognition
systems. The next chapter will introduce the experimental setup used in this study to
generate synthetic tattoo images and evaluate the performance of tattoo recognition
algorithms trained on these images.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments
This chapter details the experiments conducted in this study, including the dataset,
data generation process, and the overall experimental setup.
4.1
Data Generation
Selection of AI tools
At the start of this study, it was essential to select the appropriate AI tools for
generating tattoo images, as the choice of model directly affects the quality of the
output. Numerous AI tools are available for image generation, and a few popular
ones are listed in Table 4.1.
The following criteria were considered during the selection process:
• Open Source: The tool needed to be open-source, allowing for free modifica-
tion and adaptation to meet the specific needs of the project.
• Free of Charge: The tool had to be free, eliminating the need for any financial
investment.
• Popularity: A popular tool, widely used in the community, was preferred.
This ensures that the tool is well-tested, has a large community of users, and is
regularly updated.
Based on these criteria, and after careful evaluation, the following AI tools were
selected for this study:
• Stable Diffusion XL [Pod+23]
• Stable-Diffusion-v1-5 [Rom+22a]
• SDXL-Turbo [Sau+23]
The selected models were sourced from the Hugging Face platform [Fac], where
they are available free of charge. To identify suitable models, text-to-image generation
tools were filtered, and the top three models were chosen based on the number of
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Experiments
AI Tool
Publicly Available
Technology
Latent Diffusion Model [Rom+22a]
Yes
Diffusion Model
Midjourney [Mid]
No
Diffusion Model
DALL-E 3 [AI]
No
Diffusion Model
StyleGAN3 [Kar+21]
Yes
GAN
SDXL [Pod+23]
Yes
Diffusion Model
BigGANs
Yes
GAN
Table 4.1: AI Tools for Tattoo Image Synthesis
downloads, as it was assumed that higher popularity suggests broader usage and
validation. These tools were tested in preliminary experiments, and the satisfactory
results led to their selection for further study.
Setting up the Environment
The selected AI tools were tested on a local machine with the following hardware and
software configuration:
• Operating System: Ubuntu 22.04.4 LTS - 64-bit
• CPU: AMD® Ryzen 5 7600x 6-core processor × 12
• GPU: NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060
• RAM: 16 GB
• VRAM: 12 GB
To prepare for image generation as part of the experimental setup, Miniconda
was installed—a minimal installer for Anaconda that includes essential packages and
conda [Ana]. A conda virtual environment was then created and activated.
Within the conda environment, the required libraries, such as PyTorch, torchvi-
sion, and other dependencies, were installed. Since the models were sourced from
the Hugging Face platform, one crucial library used was the Hugging Face diffusers
library, wich provides state-of-the-art pre-trained diffusion models for image gener-
ation. With these installations, the environment was fully set up and ready for the
image generation.
Data Generation Process
The data generation process involved creating a synthetic dataset of tattoo images
using selected AI tools. The dataset was structured into categories, with each category
representing a distinct tattoo style. To ensure diversity in the dataset, different body
placements and skin tones were incorporated into the prompts. The data generation
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Data Generation
23
process was divided into phases to incrementally expand the dataset and improve
performance, as discussed in Section 4.3.
Automation of the data generation process was achieved using Python scripts. The
tattoo categories were generated with the assistance of the GPT-4 model and stored in
a file named categories.json. Similarly, body placements and characteristics were
saved in separate files, body_placements.json and characteristics.json, respec-
tively. The body parts or placements specified in the prompts included ”shoulder,”
”arm,” ”neck,” ”back,” ”leg,” and ”chest.” Two distinct skin tones were used for the
characteristics: ”dark” and ”light.”
The prompts for the models followed a structured format, as shown below:
• Prompt:
A category tattoo on the body placement of a person with a
characteristic.
Before generating the images, the appropriate tools and checkpoints were loaded.
Since the Diffusers 1 library provides pretrained models, it was particularly useful in
this case. The models were loaded using the Hugging Face Diffusers library with the
following checkpoints:
• stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0 for SDXL
• stable-diffusion-v1-5 for SDv-1.5
• sdxl-turbo for SDXL-Turbo
The StableDiffusionPipeline was used to load the checkpoints for SDXL and SDv-
1.5, while AutoPipelineForText2Image was used for SDXL-Turbo. These pipelines
provide a simple interface through the from_pretrained function call, which sets up
the necessary configurations to run the model. float16 precision was used instead of
the default float32 due to GPU memory limitations.
The workflow for the tattoo image generation process is depicted in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Workflow for Dataset creation
1https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/en/index
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Experiments
The workflow above can also be represented as an algorithm, as shown in Algo-
rithm 1. The algorithm outlines the steps involved in generating tattoo images using
the selected AI tools. The process begins by loading the settings and prompts from
the configuration files. The model configurations are then extracted, and the models
are initialized with the specified parameters. The pipelines are loaded, and the image
generation process is initiated. The algorithm also includes error handling to manage
any issues that may arise during the image generation process.
Under the same configurations defined above, the time required to generate each
image was approximately:
• 33 seconds for SDXL
• 6 seconds for SDv-1.5 and
• 4 seconds for SDXL-Turbo
Some of the images generated during the process are shown in Figure 4.2.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Data Generation
25
Algorithm 1 Image Generation Process
1: Input: Prompts JSON, Settings YAML
2: Output: Generated images saved to directory
3: Load settings from settings.yaml
4: Extract configurations from settings
5: Load prompts from prompts.json
6: Initialize empty list of models
7: for each model_config in model configurations do
8:
Initialize model with name, pipeline_class, and version
9:
Append model to the list of models
10: end for
11: function initialize_pipelines
12:
for each model in models do
13:
Load pretrained pipeline from model['name']
14:
Enable CPU offload for the pipeline
15:
if initialization fails then
16:
Print error message
17:
end if
18:
end for
19: end function
20: function generate_images
21:
for each model in models do
22:
Retrieve pipeline from model
23:
for each category in prompts do
24:
for each prompt in category do
25:
Define image directory and path
26:
if image already exists then
27:
Skip generation
28:
else
29:
Generate image using the pipeline
30:
Save image to the output directory
31:
end if
32:
end for
33:
end for
34:
end for
35: end function
36: Call initialize_pipelines()
37: Call generate_images()
38: Print ”Image generation completed”
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Experiments
Figure 4.2: Images from the generated dataset
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Training, Testing and Retrieval Algorithm
27
4.2
Training, Testing and Retrieval Algorithm
Figure 4.3: Image illustration for the algorithm used for tattoo retrieval (Source:
[Gon+24])
After preparing the synthetic tattoo dataset, the next step was to train and test the
algorithm to recognize and categorize the generated images. The algorithm used for
training and testing was based on the previous work done by Gonzalez-Soler et al.
[Gon+24], which combined deep learning models with metric learning techniques to
classify tattoo images. This approach was designed to learn the features of tattoo
images and create an embedding space where similar tattoos are clustered together.
Since our study is built upon the work of Gonzalez-Soler et al. [Gon+24], the
algorithm used in this study follows a similar structure to theirs.
The Synthetic Tattoo Generation section of Figure 4.3 represents the stage where
synthetic tattoo images are generated using AI tools, which forms the basis of our
dataset. These generated images are then passed through the Feature Space Rep-
resentation architecture (depicted by the light blue trapezoid in the figure). In our
experiment, only the light blue architecture is used. This segment of the algorithm
directly represents the synthetic tattoo images and is designed to capture the intrinsic
properties of each tattoo.
The light blue trapezoid in the Feature Space Representation module is specifi-
cally structured to extract meaningful features from the input tattoo images. These
features are then used to position the images in an embedding space where tattoos
with similar characteristics are grouped together. The yellow box at the end of the
architecture represents the Retrieval mechanism, which retrieves tattoos from the
database that are similar to a query image.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Experiments
In summary, the algorithm is designed to learn the features of tattoo images and
create an organized embedding space. The system is trained on the synthetic tattoo
dataset generated in the previous steps, enabling it to recognize and retrieve similar
tattoos from the database effectively. This action is also performed for the baseline
dataset provided by the supervisor, allowing for a comparative analysis of the results.
Training Process
The training dataset was organized into a structured format to simplify data loading
and management. Each tattoo category (e.g., Tattoo-ID-1, Tattoo-ID-2) was stored in
its own subfolder, containing all images belonging to that category. This organization
allowed for eﬀicient data handling during training.
For training, the small version of EﬀicientNetV2 [TL21] and SwinTransformer
[Liu+21] were chosen as backbones based on their eﬀiciency, scalability, and proven
performance in large-scale image classification tasks [Gon+24]. These networks were
particularly suitable for the tattoo dataset due to their ability to extract detailed
features and handle high-resolution images effectively.
Key hyperparameters, such as margin settings (m) of 0.1 and 0.5, were tested to
optimize the separation in embedding space, which is crucial for distinguishing tattoo
categories. Embedding sizes (K) of 256 and 512 were also evaluated to determine the
most effective feature vector dimensions for tattoo recognition.
Parameter
Value
Description
val_freq
10
Frequency of validation (in epochs)
num_features
512
Embedding size
epoch_grid_size
10
Size of validation grid
max_epochs
100
Maximum number of epochs
input_size
224
Image size to resize (in pixels)
batch_size
32
Batch size
num_workers
2
Number of workers to load the database
val_split
0.05
Proportion of data used for validation
Table 4.2: Training Configurations
The model was trained for 100 epochs with a batch size of 32. During each epoch,
the model iteratively improved its performance by learning from the entire training
dataset generated in each phase. Periodic validation checks were conducted every 10
epochs to assess the model’s accuracy and make adjustments to hyperparameters as
necessary.
Training was conducted on the same hardware and software configuration detailed
earlier. Training was conducted on both the dataset generated by AI tools and the
semi-synthetic database of tattoo images provided by supervisor.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Phases of the experiment
29
Testing
The testing phase involved evaluating the trained model checkpoints on the testing
dataset (see Section 4.4). The evaluation was conducted in both closed-set and open-
set scenarios. In the closed-set evaluation, the focus was on how well the model iden-
tified known instances within the dataset. For the open-set evaluations, the model’s
ability to handle unknown instances was tested. To assess the model’s performance
and establish a comparison baseline, the semi-synthetic tattoo image database from
Gonzalez-Soler et al. [Gon+24] was used. This served as a benchmark for evaluating
our model’s results. Additionally, as the experiment was divided into different phases,
each phase’s specific performance was considered in the evaluation.
The testing was performed using the same hardware and software configuration
as during the training phase. The results and analysis of the testing phase will be
discussed in detail in the next chapter.
4.3
Phases of the experiment
Phase 1
The first phase involved the creation of a small dataset of tattoo images using the
selected AI tools. At this initial stage, the focus was on generating images across 98
distinct categories of tattoos, with each category containing 44 images, resulting in a
total of 4,312 images.
Since this was the initial phase, images were generated using different models,
and each category’s images were produced by a different AI tool. These images were
stored in a local directory to be used later in the training and testing phases.
Using the parameters described in the table 4.2, the dataset was trained on the
EﬀicientNetV2 and Swin neural network architectures. The results were evaluated
based on the model’s accuracy in classifying the tattoo images into their respective
categories which is discussed in the next chapter.
Phase 2
In Phase 2, the dataset was significantly expanded to include 512 categories of tattoos,
with each category containing 36 images, resulting in a total of 18,432 images.
This phase followed the same models as Phase 1, but with an expanded set of
categories. The key distinction between Phase 1 and Phase 2 was the use of all AI
tools to generate images for each category, ensuring greater diversity and reducing
potential bias from relying on a single model per category. Additionally, only two
distinct skin tones (dark and light) were used to ensure clear differentiation, and
the number of body placements was slightly reduced to improve the realism of the
generated images. These adjustments were essential for achieving better category
distinction and overall image quality.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Experiments
Phase 3
Both the synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets went through the same augmentation
process, as the semi-synthetic dataset was used as the baseline. In Phase 3, the focus
was on further improving the diversity of the dataset through augmentation and
preprocessing techniques. The dataset was expanded to 565 categories by generating
additional images, following the same steps as the previous phase 4.3.
After generating these new images, data augmentation was applied to selected im-
ages. Instead of augmenting all images, 15 images per category were chosen randomly
and passed through a set of transformations. This resulted in the generation of 15
new, augmented images per category, leading to an overall increase in dataset size to
27,651 images. The decision to augment only 15 images per category was driven by
the increasing size of the dataset and the computational resources available.
The augmentation was performed using the torchvision library, which provides a
range of image transformation tools. The transformations applied were as follows:
• RandomHorizontalFlip: Randomly flip the image horizontally.
• RandomVerticalFlip: Randomly flip the image vertically.
• RandomRotation: Rotate the image by a random angle.
• RandomResizedCrop: Crop the image to a random size and aspect ratio.
• Brightness and Contrast: Adjust the brightness and contrast of the image.
• Noise and Blur: Add noise and blur to the image.
Some of the images from dataset with the transformation are shown in Figure 4.4.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Phases of the experiment
31
Figure 4.4: Some Images from the applied transformations
These transformations helped make the dataset more robust and diverse by simu-
lating real-world variations in tattoo appearance. The augmented dataset was subse-
quently used for training and testing the models with the same parameters as in the
previous phases.
The dataset created in this phase has demonstrated the best performance com-
pared to all previous phases and even outperforms the baseline dataset, as discussed
in the following chapter.
Phase 4: Algorithm Improvement
Unlike the previous phases, Phase 4 did not involve generating new data but instead
focused on applying an additional augmentation function to the dataset.
In this
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Experiments
Algorithm 2 Image Augmentation and Transformation Process
1: Input: Base path of the dataset, target number of images per category
2: Output: Augmented and transformed images saved to the dataset
3: function add_gaussian_noise(image, mean, std)
4:
Convert image to tensor
5:
Generate random Gaussian noise with mean and std
6:
Add noise to the image
7:
Clamp pixel values between 0 and 1
8:
Convert image back to PIL format
9:
return Noisy image
10: end function
11: Define transform_list:
• Random rotation
• Horizontal flip
• Vertical flip
• Color jitter for brightness, contrast
• Gaussian blur
• Add Gaussian noise
• Random resized crop
12: function apply_transform(image, transform)
13:
Apply the transformation to the image
14:
return Transformed image
15: end function
16: function process_category(category_path, target)
17:
List all image files in the category directory
18:
Initialize new_images_created to 0
19:
while new_images_created < target do
20:
for each transform in transform_list do
21:
if new_images_created ≥target then
22:
break
23:
end if
24:
Randomly choose an image file from the directory
25:
Open the image file
26:
Apply the transformation to the image
27:
Save the transformed image with a new filename
28:
Increment new_images_created
29:
end for
30:
end while
31: end function
32: function process_all_categories(base_path, target)
33:
List all categories (directories) in the base path
34:
for each category in the list do
35:
Get the category path
36:
Call process_category for each category
37:
end for
38: end function
39: Main:
40: Set the base path for the dataset
41: Call process_all_categories with base path and target images
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Testing Dataset
33
phase, the cutout technique [DT17b] was used to evaluate the model’s performance.
This augmentation technique involves the random removal of patches from the images
and was only applied during the training phase—no new images were generated. The
cutout technique was implemented using the code provided by DeVries et al. [DT17a].
The results of this phase are discussed in the next chapter.
Below is a summary table of the experimental phases, providing a clear overview
of the dataset generated in each phase and the notable changes implemented.
Table 4.3: Summary of Experimental Phases
Phase
Number
of
Categories
Samples per
Category
Total
Im-
ages
Notable
Changes
Phase 1
98
44
4,312
Image
gener-
ation
using
different
AI
tools
per
category
Phase 2
512
36
18,432
Image genera-
tion using all
AI
tools
for
each category,
with
fewer
body
place-
ments
and
two
distinct
skin tones
Phase 3
565
15
more
augmented
images (from
randomly
selected)
27,651
Augmentation
(flip, rotation,
crop,
bright-
ness, contrast,
noise, blur)
Phase 4
565
Same
as
Phase 3
27,651
(no
new images)
Cutout
aug-
mentation
applied
dur-
ing training
4.4
Testing Dataset
For testing the model, two publicly available real image datasets provided by the
supervisor were used.
These datasets, which are also listed in Table 3.1, provide
tattoo category labels: WebTattoo [Han+19] and BIVTattoo [NMM19].
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Experiments
The WebTattoo dataset comprises approximately 300,000 samples from 600 dif-
ferent tattoo categories. In accordance with [Han+19], 1,400 tattoo images from 400
tattoo classes were randomly selected, while the remaining tattoo images from 200
classes were reserved for testing. In this experiment, the dataset used was the training
set of the WebTattoo dataset, which was also utilized during the training and testing
phases for Semi-Synthetic Tattoo Generation [Gon+24].
Similarly, the BIVTattoo dataset consists of 210 original images and 4,200 images
generated by applying various transformations to the original images. Along with the
images, bounding box information is provided for each tattoo. However, the dataset
used in the testing phase contains images from only 159 categories.
The images from the WebTattoo and BIVTattoo datasets are shown in Figure 4.5.
((a)) BIVTattoo
((b)) WebTattoo
Figure 4.5: Some images from the testing dataset
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents the results of the experiments conducted in this study and
provides an analysis of the findings. The chapter is divided into two main sections:
the first section presents the results of the experiments, while the second section
discusses the implications of these results and compares them with the state-of-the-
art methods.
5.1
Results and Discussion
The experiments are conducted in four different phases and results are presented in
this section. Closed-set identification performance 5.1.1, open-set identification per-
formance 5.1.2 are reported in the first and second subsections. The tattoo-retrieval
performance 5.1.3 is reported in the third subsection.
5.1.1
Closed-Set Evaluation
The first phase was only the preliminary experiments, the results will not be discussed
in details. However, the result from the first phase are presented here in the form of
table.
Phase 1 - Results
Database
WebTattoo
BIVTatt
m
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.5
Backbone/K
256
512
256
512
256
512
256
512
EﬀicientNetv2
73.14
74.10
66.31
67.30
83.52
84.28
78.30
79.18
Swin
78.60
79.90
75.53
76.09
89.62
89.69
86.10
86.35
Avg.
75.87
77.00
70.92
71.70
86.57
86.98
82.20
82.77
Table 5.1: Closed-set identification performance for different backbones in terms of
Rank- 1 (%) on real images in WebTattoo and BIVTatt. The best result per backbone
and database is highlighted in bold.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Results and Discussion
The Swin model demonstrated the highest Rank-1 IR on the WebTattoo database,
with a value of 79.90% when m = 0.1 and K = 512. Similarly, Swin model, achieved
the highest Rank-1 IR on the BIVTatt database, with a value of 89.69% when m = 0.1
and K = 512. So, swin outperformed EﬀicientNetv2 in both databases.
Phase 2 - Results
In the second phase of the experiments, we compared the performance of two types
of tattoo image datasets: synthetic tattoo images and semi-synthetic tattoo images
(TattTRN [Gon+24]). The results for each dataset were evaluated using the Rank-1
identification rate and displayed in tables for the WebTattoo and BIVTatt databases.
The performance comparisons are further analyzed using the Cumulative Match Char-
acteristic (CMC) curve.
The second phase of the experiments demonstrates an improvement in perfor-
mance compared to the first phase. By comparing the results on the synthetic and
semi-synthetic datasets (TattTRN), we observe the following trends:
• BIVTatt (Synthetic Data): The performance is generally better for the synthetic
dataset, especially for BIVTatt images. This could be attributed to the higher
quality and diversity of images in the synthetic dataset.
• WebTattoo (Semi-Synthetic Data): The semi-synthetic dataset (TattTRN) per-
forms better for WebTattoo images. This may be due to the lower quality of
WebTattoo images, which challenges the synthetic dataset more.
The semi-
synthetic dataset, on the other hand, may capture more realistic variations,
leading to improved performance.
In conclusion, Swin consistently outperforms EﬀicientNetv2 across both synthetic
and semi-synthetic datasets.
The overall performance is dataset-dependent, with
synthetic data performing better for BIVTatt, while semi-synthetic data (TAttTRN)
achieves better results for WebTattoo images.
Database
WebTattoo
BIVTatt
m
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.5
Backbone/K
256
512
256
512
256
512
256
512
EﬀicientNetv2
72.53
76.41
52.14
63.22
84.15
89.37
63.33
71.13
Swin
78.89
81.47
59.66
65.63
89.31
90.19
72.08
78.11
Avg.
75.71
78.94
55.90
64.42
86.73
89.78
67.70
74.62
Table 5.2: Closed-set identification performance of synthetic tattoo images for
different backbones in terms of Rank- 1 (%) on real images in WebTattoo and BIVTatt.
The best result per backbone and database is highlighted in bold.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Results and Discussion
37
Database
WebTattoo
BIVTatt
m
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.5
Backbone/K
256
512
256
512
256
512
256
512
EﬀicientNetv2
77.00
77.74
76.22
79.85
78.24
80.44
80.06
82.52
Swin
78.85
81.01
82.06
82.75
80.50
85.41
83.96
85.60
Avg.
77.92
79.37
79.14
81.30
79.37
82.92
82.01
84.06
Table 5.3:
Closed-set identification performance of semi-synthetic tattoo im-
ages [Gon+24] for different backbones in terms of Rank- 1 (%) on real images in
WebTattoo and BIVTatt. The best result per backbone and database is highlighted
in bold.
The visual representation of the CMC curves provides a more detailed analysis of
the performance of the models. The CMC curves for the different backbones in the
synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets are presented in th4e figures 5.1 and 5.2.
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.1: CMC curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on synthetic tattoo images.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Results and Discussion
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.2: CMC curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on TattTRN [Gon+24]
In Figure 5.1, at Rank-1, the identification rate for EﬀicientNet is approximately
77% for WebTattoo and 90% for BIVTatt. For Swin, the identification rate is slightly
higher, at 83% for WebTattoo and 91% for BIVTatt. Compared to the baseline 5.2,
the performance is better for the synthetic dataset, where at Rank-1, EﬀicientNet
achieves 80% for WebTattoo and 83% for BIVTatt, while Swin performs better with
82% for WebTattoo and 85% for BIVTatt.
For WebTattoo, the performance is better with the semi-synthetic dataset, while
for BIVTatt, the synthetic dataset shows better results. As the rank increases, the
identification rate improves for both datasets and models.
At Rank-20, the identification rate for the synthetic dataset in WebTattoo is
around 91% for EﬀicientNet and 93% for Swin. In the semi-synthetic dataset, these
rates are 92% for EﬀicientNet and 94% for Swin.
For BIVTatt, at Rank-20, the
synthetic dataset’s identification rates are 98% for EﬀicientNet and 97% for Swin,
whereas the semi-synthetic dataset shows 96% for EﬀicientNet and 93% for Swin.
These results indicate that EﬀicientNet outperforms Swin at higher ranks for
BIVTatt, showing a better performance trend with increasing rank.
Phase 3 - Results
In the third phase of the experiments, since we increased the number of synthetic
tattoo images by applying random transformations, we expect the performance to
improve compared to the previous phase. The results for each dataset were evaluated
using the Rank-1 identification rate and displayed in tables for the WebTattoo and
BIVTatt databases. The performance comparisons are further analyzed using the
Cumulative Match Characteristic (CMC) curve.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Results and Discussion
39
Database
WebTattoo
BIVTatt
m
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.5
Backbone/K
256
512
256
512
256
512
256
512
EﬀicientNetv2
76.51
77.74
45.11
67.15
90.25
89.18
60.44
77.30
Swin
80.09
83.51
48.70
71.72
92.83
94.59
68.36
83.08
Avg.
78.30
80.63
46.90
69.43
91.54
91.89
64.40
80.19
Table 5.4: Closed-set identification performance for different backbones in terms of
Rank- 1 (%) on real images in WebTattoo and BIVTatt. The best result per backbone
and database is highlighted in bold.
Semi-Synthetic Tattoo Images - TattTRN [Gon+24]
Database
WebTattoo
BIVTatt
m
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.5
Backbone/K
256
512
256
512
256
512
256
512
EﬀicientNetv2
79.41
79.51
79.12
80.86
88.68
89.56
89.31
89.69
Swin
81.84
83.05
80.42
81.97
90.06
91.38
90.00
92.33
Avg.
80.63
81.28
79.77
81.41
89.37
90.47
89.15
91.01
Table 5.5: Closed-set identification performance for different backbones in terms of
Rank- 1 (%) on real images in WebTattoo and BIVTatt. The best result per backbone
and database is highlighted in bold.
We observed a notable improvement in performance in the third phase compared
to the second phase. When comparing the synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets, the
synthetic dataset, generated using various AI tools as previously described, achieved
better performance for the Swin model across both the WebTattoo and BIVTatt
databases.
In the BIVTatt database, Swin achieved the highest Rank-1 Identification Rate
(IR), reaching 94.59% when m=0.1 and K=512, while EﬀicientNetv2 reached 90.25%
under the same conditions with m=0.1 and K=256. The overall performance on the
BIVTatt database was better on the synthetic dataset compared to the semi-synthetic
dataset, which may be attributed to the diversity of images, incorporating different
skin tones and tattoo types. The broader variety of features in the synthetic dataset
likely contributed to the superior performance of the models.
However, for the WebTattoo database, the performance was not as high as ex-
pected, even after applying transformations such as Gaussian blur and noise. This
may be due to the lower quality of images within the WebTattoo dataset. More-
over, the suboptimal results could be influenced by the fact that not all images were
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Results and Discussion
subjected to all transformations. Only 15 images per class were selected for random
transformations due to the increasing size of the dataset, which might have reduced
the effectiveness of these transformations in improving the model’s generalization
capabilities.
Our approach aligns with the findings of Gonzalez-Soler et al. [Gon+24], where the
researcher suggested implementing extreme sharpening or blurring transformations
during training to degrade image quality as a means to test model robustness. While
we applied similar transformations in this phase, the performance did not improve as
much as anticipated, possibly due to the limitations imposed by the dataset size and
the specific transformations applied.
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.3: CMC curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on synthetic tattoo images.
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.4: CMC curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on TattTRN [Gon+24]
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Results and Discussion
41
Phase 4 - Results
In the fourth phase of the experiment, the focus was on applying an additional trans-
formation, CutOut[DT17b], to both the synthetic and semi-synthetic (TattTRN) tat-
too datasets.
The aim of this transformation was to further enhance the models’
ability to generalize by simulating occlusion, which is a common real-world issue in
tattoo recognition, where parts of tattoos may be obstructed or incomplete.
Database
WebTattoo
BIVTatt
m
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.5
Backbone/K
256
512
256
512
256
512
256
512
EﬀicientNetv2
74.91
78.13
50.59
70.05
87.36
89.94
65.91
78.68
Swin
78.85
79.43
48.67
68.28
92.77
94.21
68.43
81.57
Avg.
76.88
78.78
49.63
69.16
90.06
92.07
67.17
80.13
Table 5.6: Closed-set identification performance for different backbones in terms of
Rank- 1 (%) on real images in WebTattoo and BIVTatt. The best result per backbone
and database is highlighted in bold.
Semi-Synthetic Tattoo Images - TattTRN [Gon+24]
Database
WebTattoo
BIVTatt
m
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.5
Backbone/K
256
512
256
512
256
512
256
512
EﬀicientNetv2
80.42
79.61
78.43
79.56
87.23
87.92
85.91
90
Swin
82.26
83.37
82.28
82.56
91.38
89.69
88.93
92.01
Avg.
81.34
81.49
80.36
81.06
89.31
88.81
87.42
91.01
Table 5.7: Closed-set identification performance for different backbones in terms of
Rank- 1 (%) on real images in WebTattoo and BIVTatt. The best result per backbone
and database is highlighted in bold.
The application of the CutOut transformation in this phase did not lead to a sig-
nificant improvement in model performance compared to the results from the previous
phase. The performance of the models on semi-synthetic tattoo images (TattTRN)
was generally better than on synthetic tattoo images. The only better performas-
nce was observed on BIVTatt database in sythetic dataset for Swin model. Swin still
outperformed EﬀicientNetv2 on both the WebTattoo and BIVTatt datasets. On BIV-
Tatt, Swin achieved the highest Rank-1 IR (94.21%) with m=0.1 and K=512, while
EﬀicientNetv2 reached 89.94%. In comparison to baseline which is semi-synthetic,
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Results and Discussion
Swin achieved the highest Rank-1 IR (92.01%) with m=0.5 and K=512, while Eﬀi-
cientNetv2 reached 90.00% achieveing the best performance.
The visual representation of the CMC curves provides a more detailed analysis of
the performance of the models. The CMC curves for the different backbones in the
synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets are presented below.
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.5: CMC curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on synthetic tattoo images.
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.6: CMC curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on TattTRN [Gon+24]
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Results and Discussion
43
5.1.2
Open-Set Evaluation
Phase 2
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.7: DET curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on synthetic tattoo images.
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.8: DET curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on TattTRN [Gon+24]
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Results and Discussion
From the figures, we can observe that for the synthetic dataset, at low FPIR values,
the algorithm exhibits relatively higher FNIR values for WebTattoo. As the FPIR
increases, the FNIR values decrease. This trend holds for both the synthetic and
baseline datasets. When FPIR reaches 40% in Figure 5.7, the FNIR is around 18%
for EﬀicientNet and 16% for Swin.
In the semi-synthetic dataset (Figure 5.8), the FNIR values are generally lower
compared to the synthetic dataset. At FPIR 40%, the FNIR is around 12% for Swin
and 10% for EﬀicientNet. This indicates that the models are more robust to false
positives with the semi-synthetic dataset for WebTattoo.
Similarly, for BIVTatt, the FNIR values in the synthetic dataset are around 8%
for Swin and 10% for EﬀicientNet. In contrast, for the semi-synthetic dataset, the
FNIR values increase to 12% for Swin and 15% for EﬀicientNet. This suggests that
the models are more robust to false positives for BIVTatt in the synthetic dataset.
Comparing both graphs, we can see that the synthetic dataset, particularly when
using BIVTatt, shows higher accuracy and reliability for tattoo identification.
Phase 3
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.9: DET curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on synthetic tattoo images.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Results and Discussion
45
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.10: DET curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on TattTRN [Gon+24]
From the figures 5.9 and 5.10, we can observe that the performance of the models
improved in the third phase compared to the second phase. The FNIR values are
generally lower in the third phase compared to the second phase. The performance
gap between the synthetic and semi-synthetic tattoo images is very minimal. The
models show better performance on the BIVTatt database compared to the WebTat-
too database. The use of augmentation techniques in the third phase has improved
the models’ generalization capabilities, leading to accuracy improvements in environ-
ments with more realistic tattoo images.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Results and Discussion
Phase 4
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.11: DET curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on synthetic tattoo images.
((a)) WebTattoo
((b)) BIVTatt
Figure 5.12: DET curves for EﬀicientNetv2 and Swin on TattTRN [Gon+24]
In phase 4 of the experiment, the application of the CutOut transformation did not
lead to a significant improvement in model performance compared to the results from
the previous phase. The results are similar to that of the third phase, with the models
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Results and Discussion
47
showing better performance on the BIVTatt database compared to the WebTattoo
database. The FNIR values are generally lower in the third phase compared to the
fourth phase for both synthetic and TattTRN dataset.
5.1.3
Tattoo-Retrieval Evaluation
In this section, examples of candidate lists generated by the models for the query
images are presented. These candidate lists are ranked based on the similarity score
between the query image and images in the database. For each query image, the
top-4 ranked images from the candidate list are displayed.
The candidate lists presented are from 4.3 of the experiment, which gave the best
results compared to other phases.
Figure 5.13: Tattoo image retrieval result from BIV tattoo database.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.14: Tattoo image retrieval result from Web tattoo database.
The images 5.13 and 5.14 in the candidate lists clearly show a distinction between
the two databases, highlighting the limitations of the synthetic database in terms of
quality. The images in the BIVTattoo database are more diverse and of higher quality
compared to the WebTattoo database.
The models were able to retrieve similar
tattoos from the BIVTattoo database more accurately than from the WebTattoo
database.
The similarity scores between the query image and the retrieved images in the
database are higher for the BIVTattoo database, indicating that the models were
more effective in identifying similar tattoos from this database, as also reflected in
Figure 5.9. The performance of the models in the tattoo retrieval task aligns with the
results from the open-set identification experiments. The models performed better
on the BIVTattoo database compared to the WebTattoo database.
Given that higher-quality images already exist in the BIVTattoo database, a po-
tential solution to improve performance on the WebTattoo database is to apply more
augmentation techniques to the synthetic dataset. Decreasing the quality of the im-
ages through augmentation will help the models generalize better, improving their
performance on the WebTattoo database.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In conclusion, this thesis has explored the potential of AI tools in generating synthetic
tattoo images and evaluating the performance of tattoo recognition systems.
We
created a synthetic dataset of tattoo images using three different AI tools.
The
generated synthetic database was then used to train models following the algorithm
developed by Gonzalez-Soler et al. [Gon+24], and performance was tested against
real-world databases, including WebTattoo and BIVTatt. The results were compared
to the baseline of the semi-synthetic database TattTRN.
The results demonstrate that the synthetic tattoo image database generated using
AI tools performed competitively with the TattTRN semi-synthetic database. One of
the key advantages of using synthetic data is the ability to generate large amounts of
diverse images at minimal cost, facilitating eﬀicient training of tattoo recognition algo-
rithms, particularly in situations where access to real-world data is limited. Addition-
ally, our findings showed that synthetic data can achieve high accuracy, particularly
when applied to datasets like BIVTatt, which contains higher-quality images.
However, this study also highlighted several limitations.
While the synthetic
dataset performed well overall, its performance was slightly lower when tested on
the WebTattoo database, which contains lower-quality images. This suggests that
further refinement of the synthetic generation process may be necessary to improve
the model’s ability to generalize across different real-world datasets. Moreover, the
visual quality of some synthetic images did not fully replicate the complex features
found in real tattoo images, indicating a potential need for more advanced AI gen-
eration techniques, such as improving texture details or incorporating more diverse
styles. Better prompt design and more advanced AI models could also address these
challenges.
For future work, expanding the dataset to include more low-quality tattoo im-
ages could help improve the model’s performance across a wider range of real-world
datasets. Additionally, continuous refinement of the recognition algorithm could fur-
ther enhance the system’s performance. More augmentation techniques, such as Cut-
Mix, could be explored to improve the model’s generalization to real-world databases.
The practical implications of this research are significant, particularly for law en-
forcement and security applications where tattoo recognition plays an important role.
AI-generated synthetic datasets can help mitigate ethical concerns around privacy
by reducing reliance on real tattoo images, while still providing high-quality data
for training recognition systems. Moreover, the ability to generate large datasets on-
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Conclusion
demand allows for better scalability and the continuous improvement of recognition
algorithms.
In summary, this work underscores the value of synthetic data in advancing tattoo
recognition technology. While synthetic data may not always accurately reproduce
the nuances and diversity of real images, which can limit their applicability in certain
scenarios, the results suggest that synthetic images generated using AI tools offer
a promising path toward improving both generation and recognition systems in a
cost-effective and scalable manner. Future developments in both the generation of
synthetic images and the refinement of recognition algorithms could further enhance
the performance and applicability of these systems in real-world scenarios.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[21]
en. September 2021. url: https://www.ibm.com/topics/machine-
learning.
[23]
en. 2023. url: https://www.iso.org/standard/73514.html.
[24]
en. March 2024. url: https://www.ibm.com/topics/generative-ai.
[AI]
Open AI. DALL·E 3. en. url: https://openai.com/index/dall-e-
3/.
[Ana]
Anaconda. Miniconda. https://docs.anaconda.com/free/miniconda/.
[Cre+18]
Antonia Creswell et al. “Generative Adversarial Networks: An Overview.”
In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 35.1 (January 2018), pages 53–
65. issn: 1558-0792. doi: 10.1109/msp.2017.2765202. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2017.2765202.
[DN21]
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. “Diffusion models beat gans on
image synthesis.” In: Advances in neural information processing systems
34 (2021), pages 8780–8794.
[Dro+20]
Pawel Drozdowski et al. “Demographic Bias in Biometrics: A Survey
on an Emerging Challenge.” In: IEEE Transactions on Technology and
Society 1 (March 2020). doi: 10.1109/TTS.2020.2992344.
[DT17a]
Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. “Improved Regularization
of Convolutional Neural Networks with Cutout.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.04552 (2017).
[DT17b]
Terrance DeVries and Graham W. Taylor. Improved Regularization of
Convolutional Neural Networks with Cutout. 2017. arXiv: 1708.04552
[cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.04552.
[Erd23]
Kemal Erdem. “Step by Step visual introduction to Diffusion Models.”
In: https://erdem.pl (November 2023). url: https://erdem.pl/2023/
11/step-by-step-visual-introduction-to-diffusion-models.
[Fac]
Hugging Face. Models - Hugging Face. https://huggingface.co/
models.
==PAGE:62==
52
Bibliography
[Gon+24]
Lazaro Janier Gonzalez-Soler et al. “TattTRN: Template Reconstruc-
tion Network for Tattoo Retrieval.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Work-
shops. June 2024, pages 1529–1538.
[Goo+14]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. Generative Adversarial Networks. 2014. arXiv:
1406.2661 [stat.ML]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661.
[GPT]
Hello GPT-4o. Introducing Deep Learning with MATLAB. en. url:
https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/.
[Han+19]
Hu Han et al. “Tattoo Image Search at Scale: Joint Detection and
Compact Representation Learning.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 41.10 (2019), pages 2333–2348. doi:
10.1109/TPAMI.2019.2891584.
[HBK16]
Tomislav Hrkać, Karla Brkić, and Zoran Kalafatić. “Tattoo Detection
for Soft Biometric De-identification Based on Convolutional Neural Net-
works.” In: 2016. url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
65116827.
[He+15]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015.
arXiv: 1512.03385 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.
03385.
[HJA20]
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Prob-
abilistic Models. 2020. arXiv: 2006.11239 [cs.LG]. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239.
[Hos24]
Eklas Hossain. Machine Learning Crash Course for Engineers. en. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2024. isbn: 978-3-031-46989-3. doi:
10.1007/978-3-031-46990-9. url: https://link.springer.com/
10.1007/978-3-031-46990-9.
[IBM]
IBM. IBM. https://www.ibm.com/topics/artificial-intelligence.
[IS15]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch Normalization: Accelerat-
ing Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. 2015.
arXiv: 1502.03167 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.
03167.
[Jai07]
AK Jain. “Handbook of Biometrics.” In: Springer google schola 2 (2007),
pages 114–116.
[Kar+21]
Tero Karras et al. Alias-Free Generative Adversarial Networks. 2021.
arXiv: 2106.12423 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.
12423.
[KLA19]
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A Style-Based Generator
Architecture for Generative Adversarial Networks. 2019. arXiv: 1812.
04948 [cs.NE]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.04948.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
53
[Lea15]
Karen J Leader. “Stories on the skin: Tattoo culture at a South Florida
university.” In: Arts and Humanities in Higher Education 14.4 (2015),
pages 426–446.
[Lee+12]
Jungeun Lee et al. “Image Retrieval in Forensics: Tattoo Image Database
Application.” In: IEEE MultiMedia 19.1 (2012), pages 40–49. doi: 10.
1109/MMUL.2011.59.
[Liu+21]
Ze Liu et al. “Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transformer us-
ing Shifted Windows.” In: 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2021, pages 9992–10002. doi: 10.1109/
ICCV48922.2021.00986.
[Mag09]
Mark Maguire. “The birth of biometric security.” In: Anthropology Today
25 (April 2009), pages 9–14. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8322.2009.00654.
x.
[Mat]
The MathWorks. Introducing Deep Learning with MATLAB. en. url:
https://se.mathworks.com/campaigns/offers/next/deep-learning-
ebook.html.
[Mid]
Midjourney. MidJourney. en. url: https://www.midjourney.com/
home.
[NG15]
Mei Ngan and Patrick Grother. “Tattoo recognition technology - chal-
lenge (Tatt-C): an open tattoo database for developing tattoo recogni-
tion research.” In: IEEE International Conference on Identity, Security
and Behavior Analysis (ISBA 2015) (2015), pages 1–6. url: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:17423854.
[NMM19]
Miguel Nicolás-Díaz, Annette Morales-González, and Heydi Méndez-
Vázquez. “Deep Generic Features for Tattoo Identification.” In: Progress
in Pattern Recognition, Image Analysis, Computer Vision, and Applica-
tions: 24th Iberoamerican Congress, CIARP 2019, Havana, Cuba, Oc-
tober 28-31, 2019, Proceedings. Havana, Cuba: Springer-Verlag, 2019,
pages 272–282. isbn: 978-3-030-33903-6. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 030-
33904-3_25. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-33904-
3_25.
[Noa]
Noauthor. Tattoo Market Size, Growth, Forecast | Industry Trends [2032].
en. url: https : / / www . fortunebusinessinsights . com / tattoo -
market-104434 (visited on August 19, 2024).
[Pla+22]
Patrick von Platen et al. Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models.
https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers. 2022.
[Pod+23]
Dustin Podell et al. SDXL: Improving Latent Diffusion Models for High-
Resolution Image Synthesis. 2023. arXiv: 2307.01952 [cs.CV]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.01952.
==PAGE:64==
54
Bibliography
[RMC16]
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised Rep-
resentation Learning with Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial
Networks. 2016. arXiv: 1511.06434 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1511.06434.
[Rom+22a]
Robin Rombach et al. “High-Resolution Image Synthesis With Latent
Diffusion Models.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June 2022, pages 10684–
10695.
[Rom+22b]
Robin Rombach et al. High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Dif-
fusion Models. 2022. arXiv: 2112.10752 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2112.10752.
[Sau+23]
Axel Sauer et al. Adversarial Diffusion Distillation. 2023. arXiv: 2311.
17042 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17042.
[Sha+19]
Muhammad Sharif et al. “An Overview of Biometrics Methods.” In:
Handbook of Multimedia Information Security: Techniques and Applica-
tions. Edited by Amit Kumar Singh and Anand Mohan. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2019, pages 15–35. isbn: 978-3-030-15887-3.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-15887-3_2. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-15887-3_2.
[Sun+16]
Zhaohui H. Sun et al. “Tattoo detection and localization using region-
based deep learning.” In: 2016 23rd International Conference on Pat-
tern Recognition (ICPR). December 2016, pages 3055–3060. doi: 10.
1109/ICPR.2016.7900103. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
abstract/document/7900103 (visited on April 25, 2024).
[SZ15]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Net-
works for Large-Scale Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
[TL20]
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. EﬀicientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling
for Convolutional Neural Networks. 2020. arXiv: 1905.11946 [cs.LG].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11946.
[TL21]
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. EﬀicientNetV2: Smaller Models and
Faster Training. 2021. arXiv: 2104.00298 [cs.CV]. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2104.00298.
[Yan+18]
Wencheng Yang et al. “Securing Mobile Healthcare Data: A Smart Card
Based Cancelable Finger-Vein Bio-Cryptosystem.” In: IEEE Access PP
(June 2018), pages 1–1. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2844182.
[Zhu+20]
Jun-Yan Zhu et al. Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation using Cycle-
Consistent Adversarial Networks. 2020. arXiv: 1703.10593 [cs.CV].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.10593.
