==PAGE:1==
AI­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training: A
Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation
Fly­XR journey, AI­impact and entrepreneurial
landscape on aviation in 2024
MSc Thesis in Technology Entrepreneurship
DTU Entrepreneurship
Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
AI­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training: A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Inno­
vation
Fly­XR journey, AI­impact and entrepreneurial landscape on aviation in 2024
MSc Thesis in Technology Entrepreneurship
September, 2024
By
Juan Perez Perez
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Author’s vision of the future of aviation and training (AI generated), 2024
Published by:
DTU, Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship, Diplomvej 371, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
https://www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Entrepreneurship Department, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Technology Entrepreneurship, MSc.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of entrepreneurship and
aviation.
Juan Perez Perez ­ s213098
Signature
Date
ii
AI­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training: A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation
01 /10 / 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis examines the development and impact of Fly­XR, a startup aiming to address
inefficiencies in traditional pilot training systems. The study analyzes the current land­
scape of innovation in the aviation industry, as well as current trends and gaps in the
market. It explains how Fly­XR tried to capitalize on these opportunities and what its con­
tributions to the development of Virtual Reality for Pilot Training and Artificial Intelligence
are.
The research objectives of the thesis include analyzing the impact of these emerging tech­
nologies, comparing traditional and modern training methods, and assessing regulatory
and operational barriers to their implementation. Drawing on the founder’s entrepreneurial
journey, the thesis also reflects on the challenges faced by aviation startups, including
regulatory hurdles, fundraising difficulties, and team dynamics. Through a combination of
technical analysis and entrepreneurial insights, this study provides a comprehensive ex­
ploration of the potential for AI­driven and VR­powered solutions to revolutionize aviation
training while offering practical lessons for future innovators in the field.
AI­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training: A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Juan Perez Perez, MSc in Technology Entrepreneurship, DTU
Graduate in Technology Entrepreneurship postulate and writer of this thesis.
Carina Lomberg, Associate Professor and MSc in Technology Entrepreneurship Head
of Studies, DTU
My biggest support during my studies at DTU and the strongest advocate of the onset of
my entrepreneurial career.
My cofounders and every other team members whose work was meaningful for
Fly­XR: Adam Aryeh, Roshan Mohan, Brandon Matchett, James Andrews, Melanie
Miksis, Alperen Turkmen, Gaspard Kuhn, Amanda Ye, and Xuan Huang.
They all helped Fly­XR one way or another. They believed in our vision and supported
the team and myself through the hard moments. Thank you because without your hard
work nothing would have been possible.
Steve Ahn, Entrepreneur and Visiting Professor, DTU
An example as a person, as a professional and entrepreneur. And overall one of the best
friends from my stay at DTU. He inspired not only for this thesis but for my development
as an entrepreneur.
Gigi Wang, Entrepreneur and Faculty, University of California, Berkeley
A great leader and an exceptional mentor, not only taught me a lot, but always put a smile
on my face while sharing knowledge and experiences.
Derek S. Chan, Entrepreneur and Faculty, University of California, Berkeley
One of the biggest supports to the startup and a firm believer in it. He always had time to
provide feedback and guide the product development through the right path.
Every person who contributed to make Fly­XR a reality, Around the World
All people interested in the idea, fellow aviators and other aviation stakeholders who tested
the app, and many, many people who offered their time for free to support Fly­XR on its
journey to success. To all of you, thank you.
iv
AI­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training: A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation
==PAGE:7==
Content 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Fly-XR 
1.2 Research Objectives 
1.3 Thesis Goals 
2. Background and Context 
2.1 Technological Landscape 
2.2 Geopolitical and Macroeconomic Landscape 
2.3 The Aviation Industry 
2.4 My Background as an Entrepreneur 
3. The Startup: Fly-XR’s Journey 
3.1. The Fly-XR’s Journey 
3.2. Technological Innovation and Market Research 
3.3. The Business behind the Tech 
4. Conclusions 
4.1 Summary of Findings about aviation and new technologies 
4.2 Final Reflections on Fly-XR and My Journey 
5. References 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
1
==PAGE:8==
6. Appendices 
Appendix A: Last Pitch Deck from Fly-XR 
Appendix B: First Pitch Deck from Leading Edge Technologies 
Appendix C: Fly-XR Prototype Documentation 
Appendix D: Fly-XR Market Research Documented 
Appendix E: Fly-XR MVP Scoping and Business Model 
Documented 
Appendix F: Short Promotional Video, Collateral 
Appendix G: Market Research Interviews 
Appendix H: Prototype User Interviews Key Takeaways 
Appendix I: Clickable Prototype: ATC Communications Trainer in 
Figma
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
2
==PAGE:9==
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
3
==PAGE:10==
Detailed Thesis Structure 
This section provides an overview of the thesis and its content. The thesis is divided 
into chapters providing context for the current entrepreneurial landscape, 
technological innovations, and the aviation industry. Later, it guides the reader 
through the analysis of Fly-XR’s technological innovations, the entrepreneurial 
challenges faced by the founder, and reflections on the future of AI in aviation 
training. It breaks down the work into chapters, sections, subsections, and page 
counts.  
1. Introduction	
 
8
1.1 Overview of Fly-XR	
 
8
1.2 Research Objectives	
 
9
1.2.1. Analyze the Impact of Emerging Technologies on Aviation, 
particularly on aviation training	
 
9
1.2.2. Compare Traditional Pilot Training Methods with AI and VR-
Enhanced Training Solutions	
 
9
1.2.3. Evaluate the Effectiveness of AI-Driven Pilot-ATC Communication 
Training	
 
9
1.2.4. Investigate the Effectiveness and the Regulatory Barriers to New 
Technologies in Aviation, specifically AI and Automation and its relation with safety	
 
10
1.2.5 Evaluate the potential of the aviation industry to fulfill the SDGs and 
the steps taken in this direction	
 
10
1.2.6. Analyze the viability of Fly-XR’s developed and proposed 
technology for aviation training and other industries	
 
10
1.2.7. Study the sustainability of Fly-XR as a business if funding was 
raised and the team did not disintegrate	
 
10
1.2.8. Explore the Fundraising Challenges Faced by Fly-XR and Aviation 
Startups	
 
10
1.2.9. Analyze the Team Dynamics and Their Impact on Fly-XR’s Failure	
 
10
1.2.10. Propose Integration Strategies for AI and VR Technologies into 
Existing Aviation Training Systems	
 
10
1.3 Thesis Goals	
 
11
1.3.1 Identifying Key Opportunities in Aviation through Emerging 
Technologies	
 
11
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
4
==PAGE:11==
1.3.2 Understanding the Startup Ecosystem in Aviation and the Impact of 
Aviation Startups towards a sustainable progress of aviation	
 
11
1.3.3 Examining the Role of Global Startup Ecosystems in Aviation 
Innovation	
 
11
1.3.4 Documenting the Entrepreneurial Journey of Fly-XR: From 
Inception to Failure	
 
11
1.3.5 Assessing the Role of DTU, UC Berkeley, and Silicon Valley in the 
Startup’s Development	
 
12
1.3.6 Providing Lessons Learned for Other Entrepreneurs	
 
12
1.3.7 Reflecting on the Founder’s Future as an Entrepreneur	
 
12
1.3.8 Proposing Strategies for Future Startups in Aviation	
 
12
2. Background and Context	
 
13
2.1 Technological Landscape	
 
13
2.1.1 Raising Technologies	
 
13
2.2 Geopolitical and Macroeconomic Landscape	
 
17
2.2.1 Geopolitical Factors Impacting Aviation Innovation	
 
17
2.2.2 Macroeconomic Factors Impacting Technological Innovation	
 
19
2.2.3 Opportunities in Emerging Markets	
 
20
2.2.4 Where to go? Ideal Startup Ecosystems in Aviation	
 
21
2.2.5 Fundraising Scene	
 
23
2.3 The Aviation Industry	
 
28
2.3.1 Introduction to the Industry’s Current Landscape	
 
28
2.3.2 Trends and Market Gaps	
 
29
2.3.3 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Aviation	
 
33
2.3.4 Current Training Methods in Aviation	
 
34
2.3.5 Opportunities in Current Training Methods	
 
36
2.3.6 Pilot Training: Challenges and Technological Solutions	
 
39
2.4 My Background as an Entrepreneur	
 
44
2.4.1 Early Entrepreneurial Ventures	
 
44
2.4.2 Academic Studies and the Search for Innovation	
 
45
2.4.3 Founding Fly-XR	
 
46
2.4.4 UC Berkeley and Silicon Valley Experience	
 
46
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
5
==PAGE:12==
2.4.5 Foundation for Growth as an Entrepreneur	
 
47
3. The Startup: Fly-XR’s Journey	
 
49
3.1. The Fly-XR’s Journey	
 
50
3.1.1 Founding Vision	
 
50
3.1.2 The First Founding Team	
 
51
3.1.3 Fly-XR in Silicon Valley and new partners	
 
52
3.1.4 Pivot from VR Simulation to AI communication training	
 
54
3.1.5 Early Development and Prototyping	
 
55
3.1.6 Promoting Fly-XR and Trying to Raise Funding	
 
56
3.1.7 Leaving the Bay: The End of the Journey	
 
56
3.2. Technological Innovation and Market Research	
 
57
3.2.1 Fly-XR’s AI agent: Prototype and Development	
 
57
3.2.2 Fly-XR’s Market Research	
 
61
3.2.3 Fly-XR and Virtual Reality in Pilot Training	
 
63
3.2.4 Scalability and Cost-Effectiveness of AI and VR Solutions for 
Aviation Training	
 
66
3.2.5 Technology Ownership	
 
66
3.3. The Business behind the Tech	
 
67
3.3.1 The Fly-XR Team	
 
67
3.3.2 Business Model and Financials	
 
69
3.4 Fly-XR’s Challenges	
 
70
4. Conclusions	
 
72
4.1 Summary of Findings about aviation and new technologies	
 
72
4.1.1 Key Contributions to Aviation Training Through AI and VR	
 
72
4.1.3 Lessons Learned from Fly-XR’s Entrepreneurial Journey	
 
72
4.2 Final Reflections on Fly-XR and My Journey	
 
73
4.2.1 Differentiating Fly-XR from Past Projects	
 
73
4.2.2 Mistakes are Future Lessons	
 
74
5. References	
 
75
6. Appendices	
 
77
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
6
==PAGE:13==
Appendix A: Last Pitch Deck from Fly-XR	
 
77
Appendix B: First Pitch Deck from Leading Edge Technologies	
 
77
Appendix C: Fly-XR Prototype Documentation	
 
77
Appendix D: Fly-XR Market Research Documented	
 
77
Appendix E: Fly-XR MVP Scoping and Business Model Documented	
 
77
Appendix F: Short Promotional Video, Collateral	
 
78
Appendix G: Market Research Interviews	
 
78
Appendix H: Prototype User Interviews Key Takeaways	
 
79
Appendix I: Clickable Prototype: ATC Communications Trainer in Figma	 82
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
7
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Fly-XR 
Fly-XR was founded in 2023; its initial goal was revolutionizing aviation by leveraging 
the latest technologies. Particularly, the founder and author of this thesis  focused on 
1
Virtual Reality (VR), Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of Things (IoT) and 
autonomous systems (including but not limited to drones or UAS (Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles). 
Fly-XR found an unexploited niche in commercial aviation training. Its goal was 
revolutionizing its training systems through the application of cutting-edge 
technologies such as Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Reality. The aviation industry, 
traditionally slow to adopt new training methods, presented an opportunity for Fly-XR 
to address key inefficiencies; mainly, high costs, time constraints, and lack of realism 
in existing pilot training programs. 
As a founder, I recognized the potential for technological innovation in aviation thanks 
to my background as a commercial pilot, aerospace engineer, ex-cabin crew 
member, and flight instructor. Coupling my professional experience with my past 
entrepreneurial ventures and my studies in Technology Entrepreneurship from DTU, I 
tried to find a solution that would improve the realism and effectiveness of pilot 
training while reducing costs. This vision was slowly brought into reality after a year 
of market analysis and product development with different team members who have 
joined the startup. The initial idea pivoted into the development of Fly-XR’s AI Agent, 
designed to simulate real-time pilot-Air Traffic Control (ATC) communications, an 
essential aspect of flight training. During the founder’s stay in Silicon Valley this was 
identified as a potential beachhead to tackle the pilot training industry while bringing 
innovation into professional flight simulation. 
Fly-XR’s approach represented a significant shift in how pilot training could be 
delivered, combining immersive simulations with AI-driven interactions to replicate 
real-world flying scenarios more effectively than traditional simulators. While VR was 
initially part of the broader vision for Fly-XR, the startup eventually focused more on 
AI as the core technology for enhancing communication training, allowing pilots to 
experience dynamic, real-time scenarios in a controlled environment. 
Despite the innovation and vision behind Fly-XR, the startup faced several 
challenges, including difficulties in raising funds and managing a geographically 
dispersed team. These issues ultimately led to the dissolution of the startup. 
 When refering to the founder of Fly-XR or author of this thesis, we are refering to the postulate to graduate with a 
1
MSc in Technology Entrepreneurship, Juan Perez.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
8
==PAGE:15==
However, Fly-XR’s journey highlights the untapped potential of AI in the aviation 
industry, laying the groundwork for future advancements in pilot training technologies. 
This thesis explores the technological innovations introduced by Fly-XR, the 
entrepreneurial journey of its founder, and the broader implications for AI in aviation. 
1.2 Research Objectives 
The research objectives of this thesis focus on the key aspects and challenges 
encountered by Fly-XR during the development, implementation, and impact of its AI-
powered solutions for aviation training. These objectives will focus on the startup's 
entrepreneurial and technological aspects while analyzing the broader regulatory 
environment of the aviation industry. 
The objectives serve to understand how emerging technologies, such as AI and 
Virtual Reality, can transform traditional pilot training methods. Whether the industry 
is ready and what are the challenges similar startups will need to navigate to 
revolutionize aviation. 
These research objectives try to be SMART , detailed and based on a specific 
2
question, compared with the thesis goals that have a more holistic approach of this 
project. By the end of this study, the findings will contribute to both the academic 
understanding of technological adoption in aviation and provide practical lessons for 
other entrepreneurs in similar sectors. 
	
1.2.1.	 Analyze the Impact of Emerging Technologies on Aviation, 
particularly on aviation training 
Explore how the integration of AI, VR, and IoT can transform pilot training and 
address gaps in current aviation training systems. 
	
1.2.2.	 Compare Traditional Pilot Training Methods with AI and VR-
Enhanced Training Solutions 
Conduct a comparative analysis of costs, time efficiency, and learning outcomes 
between traditional aviation training and Fly-XR’s AI and VR technologies. 
	
1.2.3.	 Evaluate the Effectiveness of AI-Driven Pilot-ATC Communication 
Training 
Assess how Fly-XR’s AI Agent improves realism, cost-effectiveness, and pilot 
preparedness compared to traditional training methods. 
 SMART objectives are defined as Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-limited.
2
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
9
==PAGE:16==
	
1.2.4.	 Investigate the Effectiveness and the Regulatory Barriers to New 
Technologies in Aviation, specifically AI and Automation and its relation with 
safety 
Examine the regulatory challenges that limit the implementation of AI and VR 
technologies in aviation training and suggest pathways to overcome them. 
	
1.2.5 Evaluate the potential of the aviation industry to fulfill the SDGs 
and the steps taken in this direction 
Examine the industry initiatives and progress made towards achieving the UN agreed 
SDGs to assess how well the aviation industry can contribute to achieving them. 
	
1.2.6.	 Analyze the viability of Fly-XR’s developed and proposed 
technology for aviation training and other industries 
Analyze whether Fly-XR’s technologies can be successfully applied not only in 
aviation training but also in other sectors, assessing their adaptability, scalability, and 
market potential beyond aviation. 
	
1.2.7.	 Study the sustainability of Fly-XR as a business if funding was 
raised and the team did not disintegrate 
Assess whether Fly-XR could have implemented successfully its business model by 
focusing on scalability and market fit. 
	
1.2.8.	 Explore the Fundraising Challenges Faced by Fly-XR and 
Aviation Startups 
Investigate the difficulties Fly-XR encountered in securing venture capital and how 
these challenges might show trends in fundraising for similar aviation startups. 
	
1.2.9.	 Analyze the Team Dynamics and Their Impact on Fly-XR’s Failure 
Study how team composition, communication, and geographic distribution influenced 
the startup's progress and contributed to its eventual dissolution. 
	
1.2.10.	Propose Integration Strategies for AI and VR Technologies into 
Existing Aviation Training Systems 
Suggest practical ways that AI and VR-based training tools, like those developed by 
Fly-XR, can be integrated into traditional aviation training programs. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
10
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Thesis Goals 
The Thesis Goals provide a broader view of the startup, its founder and the aviation 
industry as a whole. From the prism of entrepreneurship, we will try to get personal 
with the startup and its founders to extract lessons and design strategies to tackle 
this overregulated and conservative industry through innovation. 
While the research objectives break down the specific questions addressed, the 
thesis goals provide a more holistic view of what the thesis seeks to achieve on a 
strategic level. These goals focus not only on the technical analysis of Fly-XR’s 
innovations but also on the startup’s journey through the entrepreneurial ecosystem, 
and the personal and professional development of the founder. 
In essence, while the Research Objectives guide the specific inquiries of the thesis, 
the Thesis Goals define the wider impact and contributions of the work. Together with 
the research objectives, they form a comprehensive structure that ensures both the 
technical and personal aspects of Fly-XR’s journey are deeply explored, offering 
insights for entrepreneurs and academics. 
The goals of the thesis include: 
1.3.1 Identifying Key Opportunities in Aviation through Emerging Technologies 
Explore how emerging technologies can address current gaps in aviation training, 
improving efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and promoting safety. 
1.3.2 Understanding the Startup Ecosystem in Aviation and the Impact of 
Aviation Startups towards a sustainable progress of aviation 
Investigate the unique challenges and opportunities that startups face in the aviation 
industry, including regulatory barriers, high capital for entry, market adoption, and 
competition from established players. As well as uncovering opportunities to make 
aviation more sustainable. 
1.3.3 Examining the Role of Global Startup Ecosystems in Aviation Innovation 
Evaluate the role of different global startup ecosystems, including Silicon Valley, in 
fostering aviation innovation and how these ecosystems could support startups like 
Fly-XR. 
1.3.4 Documenting the Entrepreneurial Journey of Fly-XR: From Inception to 
Failure 
Fly-XR’s memories from its initial vision through its key milestones to its eventual 
dissolution, focusing on the entrepreneurial decisions and challenges encountered 
along the way. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
11
==PAGE:18==
1.3.5 Assessing the Role of DTU, UC Berkeley, and Silicon Valley in the 
Startup’s Development 
Examine how exposure to the innovation ecosystems at DTU, UC Berkeley, and 
Silicon Valley influenced Fly-XR’s technological development and the founder’s 
entrepreneurial mindset. Explore how these ecosystems can influence future 
startups, not only focused on aviation. 
 
Image representing some of the core topics of this thesis. Created with Ideogram 
1.3.6 Providing Lessons Learned for Other Entrepreneurs 
Provide entrepreneurial insights gained from Fly-XR’s journey, offering lessons 
learned for future entrepreneurs in aviation. 
1.3.7 Reflecting on the Founder’s Future as an Entrepreneur 
Small reflection about the founder’s journey after completing the studies at DTU. 
Explore the founder’s aspirations, considering the opportunities ahead in the aviation 
landscape and beyond. 
1.3.8 Proposing Strategies for Future Startups in Aviation 
Offer recommendations for future aviation startups, how to navigate regulatory 
challenges, secure funding, and successfully implement emerging technologies in the 
industry while competing with the established players. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
12
==PAGE:19==
2. Background and Context 
In today’s rapidly changing world, technological advancements are reshaping 
industries and creating new opportunities for innovation. This chapter provides an 
overview of the technological, geopolitical, and industrial landscapes that form the 
context of this study performed in 2024 during the revolution of AI in a postpandemic 
world. 
The chapter begins by examining the technological advancements that are reshaping 
the aviation sector, including innovations in Artificial Intelligence (AI), Virtual Reality 
(VR), the Internet of Things (IoT) and autonomous systems. By examining the rise of 
these transformative technologies relevant to aviation and autonomous systems, we 
will explore the unlocking opportunities in the sector. 
The chapter also explores the geopolitical and macroeconomic context, which plays 
a critical role in shaping the startup ecosystem. Factors such as global economic 
trends, fundraising challenges, and ideal ecosystems for startups growth are 
discussed. These elements influenced Fly-XR and are affecting other startups today.  
Finally, this section analyzes the aviation market itself, identifying gaps, opportunities, 
and the relationship between aviation and space exploration. The chapter concludes 
with a brief exploration of the founder’s personal journey before embarking into Fly-
XR, including past entrepreneurial ventures, academic studies, and the experiences 
gained at DTU. 
Through this lens, the chapter will set the stage for evaluating Fly-XR, its impact and 
future ventures in the industry. 
2.1 Technological Landscape 
2.1.1 Raising Technologies 
In the era of AI, there are so many other trends worth mentioning in 2024. Some 
industries and technological innovations have peaked in the past. They are now 
showing its real possibilities, like blockchain and 3D printing technologies, mature 
enough to see applications in diverse industries, including aviation. 
In this section, we will mention the current innovation landscape today in 2024. This 
short point will not be particularly focused on the aviation industry but more on 
technology as a whole. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
13
==PAGE:20==
Below we will list some of the hottest technologies and we will discuss its influence 
on the aviation and aerospace industries: 
1. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML), including Generative AI and 
AI-driven automation, impacting all industries from supply chains to healthcare 
and finance. Of course a strong candidate to revolutionize aviation. 
2. Sustainable Technologies: from hydrogen to electric vehicles, including airplanes, 
to sustainable fuels (SAFs). This a trend that is definitely here to stay, great 
progress has been achieved in the last ten years, and it looks like some of them 
will have the greatest impact on aviation in this decade. 
3. Autonomous Vehicles: From EVs to drones or air taxis. Endless possibilities that 
will first be established on other sectors like the automotive industry. Main 
challenges for aviation or aerospace on this field are mainly the regulatory 
environments. 
4. Quantum Computing: Promising technology still under development, with the first 
quantum computers being built and tested and facing challenges for scalability. 
This technology, paired with Gen AI, creates endless opportunities for businesses, 
although the technology is not mature enough yet. 
5. Internet of Things (IoT) and Smart Devices: One of the revolutions least talk-
about compared with its potential. IoT ecosystems could completely change the 
world as we know it, from homes, transportation, logistics and cities. 
6. Blockchain and Web3: An old technology that is maturing now. Many businesses 
have or are integrating its capabilities in their workflows, making big jumps in 
efficiency, security and decentralized management and decision making, from 
revolutions in DeFi, DAOs and smart contracts and digital ownership and NFTs. 
7. Virtual and Augmented Reality (VR/AR): Great progress has been made in this 
space with mature devices like the Apple Vision Pro; although the tech did not 
have as much traction as expected, it is anticipated that it will go mainstream 
when it price decreases. Within this realm, we could include the metaverse, 
hyped in the last year, but eventually making its way through 
It is worth mentioning that VR has been used for years in military applications and 
other government-funded industries. It is one of the main candidates to expand 
within the aviation industry, in particular in training personnel and operations, from 
engineering to flight control. 
8. 5G and 6G Networks: This is more of a tool that will enable faster network and 
bigger chunks of data, opening the door for all kinds of uses for communication. 
What to do with faster speeds depends on every particular industry. It does not 
look like will be a gamechanger in aviation in the short term. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
14
==PAGE:21==
9. Cybersecurity: This field has been growing exponentially out of need. 
Cyberthreats have become more sophisticated, requiring better security models 
and architectures, with innovations in cryptographic methods.  
10.Batteries and Energy: Not only energy production has seen amazing 
developments, but alongside, energy storage systems had to keep up with less 
certain production outputs and different type of energy storage. From solid state 
batteries, to grid-scale energy storage. 
11. New Manufacturing Techniques: 3D printing , able to produce at scale complex 
3
structures including implants and aerospace components. Even digital twins , 
4
used to optimize the design and manufacturing processes. Some of these 
technologies have already being widespread both in the aviation and space 
sectors. 
12.Robotics: Coupled with automation vehicles, robots can be seen in all kind of 
industries, from warehouses, to food handling, even wearable robotic 
exoskeletons are being used in industries like construction and healthcare. 
This graph classifies some of the mentioning technologies with its timeframe and impact. Source Gartner Inc. 2024 
 Airbus has been using 3D printing for years at a mass scale, due to the higher quality of the products and even 
3
cheaper cost at times.  “Airbus. Bridging the Gap with 3D Printing.” Published April 2018. Available at: https://
www.airbus.com/en/newsroom/news/2018-04-bridging-the-gap-with-3d-printing
 McKinsey & Company. What is Digital Twin Technology? Published on July 14, 2023. Available at: https://
4
www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/mckinsey-explainers/what-is-digital-twin-technology
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
15
==PAGE:22==
13.Smart Materials: Biodegradable plastics, self-healing materials, and shape-
shifting products. All promise great impacts, from the environment to performance 
optimization, although they are still far from being widespread in most industries 
this far. 
Although the next points are not technologies perse, they are fields that have been 
bustling in the last years and have a great future ahead. The synergies in between 
them and aviation can prove very interesting in the coming decades. 
14.Biotechnology and Healthcare Innovations: From gene editing to new vaccines 
and wearable tech, the healthcare and biotech fields have been bustling with 
innovation in recent years. 
15.Space Technologies and Commercialization: Finally, the space frontier is being 
attacked by private players, including SpaceX, Blue Origin, and Virgin Galactic. 
The lines between aviation and space are getting thinner, and soon, we will see 
regular commercial operations in space. Commercial satellites are already a 
reality, and soon, tourism will follow, with long-term missions to the Moon and 
Mars in the pipeline. 
16.Food Tech and Agriculture: Plant-based protein and meat substitutes, vertical 
farming, and genetically modified crops have stayed here. Most of them just need 
further adoption by either the industry or the consumers. 
17.Smart Cities: Endless possibilities for traffic management, autonomous public 
transport, sustainable urban design and connected infrastructure via IoT and AI. 
Its intersection with aviation UAVs  and VTOL vehicles (Vertical Take Off and 
5
Landing) are very exciting. 
 Unmanned Aerial Vehicles better known as drones.
5
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
16
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Geopolitical and Macroeconomic Landscape 
The global aviation industry is strongly influenced by geopolitical and macroeconomic 
factors, which creates challenges and opportunities for innovation. The industry is 
particularly susceptible to volatility during key geopolitical events. As well as finance 
and tourism, aviation is an inherent industry without borders, and in many cases, it is 
propelled by non-essential spending, making it vulnerable to financial crises, wars, 
and other international events. 
Understanding the current geopolitical climatecand economic conditions is crucial for 
startups like Fly-XR seeking to introduce groundbreaking technologies into a highly 
regulated and capital-intensive industry. This section explores the key geopolitical 
and macroeconomic forces shaping the aviation sector today and their impact on 
emerging technologies. 
2.2.1 Geopolitical Factors Impacting Aviation Innovation 
The aviation industry operates within a global framework, meaning political stability, 
international relations, and regulatory alignment all play significant roles in 
determining the success or failure of technological adoption. 
a. Global Regulation Differences 
Different countries have varying levels of regulation towards the adoption of new 
technologies, this, coupled with the strong focus on safety, creates a risk averse 
environment, not ideal for startups.  
Additionally, regulations in aviation are strongly dependent on the local or regional 
aviation authorities, being the most important ones: ICAO , the International Civil 
6
Aviation Organization, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) and the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in the United States. 
Some of these regions are more proactive in integrating AI-driven safety mechanisms 
or a forward-thinking regulation on UAS . In contrast, others, constrained by 
7
government regulations or lack of regulatory infrastructure, lag in adopting new 
technologies. 
EASA and the FAA are influential in setting standards that ripple across the global 
aviation market. Both institutions are becoming increasingly open to technological 
innovations. However, navigating these regulatory frameworks can be challenging for 
startups, as the certification process for new technologies often takes years, delaying 
market entry and commercial viability. 
 Official Website of the International Civil Aviation Organization, accessed on July 5, 2024,  https://www.icao.int/
6
Pages/default.aspx
 UAS, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, commonly known as drones.
7
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
17
==PAGE:24==
b. International Trade Relations and Technology Transfers 
The political landscape affects the exchange of innovations and technologies in key 
sectors like aviation, closely linked to military power from its inception. Trade tensions 
in between the USA and China and the developing military conflicts around the world 
have raised concerns about technology transfer restrictions and exports. This  can 
easily derail fragile startups dependent on stability and private funding. 
Many of these technologies are a double-sided sword, hard to implement for civilian 
applications with great funding and resources if founders are willing to turn their 
efforts toward military applications. Something Fly-XR did not want to consider. 
Global Aerospace Market Share (2023)  
8
c. Geopolitical Tensions and Airline Operations 
Geopolitical conflicts and tensions directly affect the main operations of the aviation 
industry, damaging all sectors, from manufacturing to innovation to training new 
professionals and funding. These tensions, many times unexpected, lead to shifts in 
air travel routes, dramatically increase fuel costs, and suddenly change the demand 
for aviation services. 
 Market.us. Aerospace Market Report: Trends, Growth, and Forecasts (2024). Available at: https://market.us/
8
report/aerospace-market/
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
18
==PAGE:25==
2.2.2 Macroeconomic Factors Impacting Technological Innovation 
a. Impact of Economic Cycles on Aviation Investment 
Global economic conditions profoundly affect the aviation sector, particularly in terms 
of investment in innovation. The industry's cyclic nature regulates consumer demand 
for air travel and airlines’ budgets for adopting new technologies.  
During downturns, operators tend to focus on cutting costs and maintaining 
profitability. The pandemic is the best example of how a global economic crisis can 
stop air travel demand and cause airlines to slow investments in new technologies. 
However, during economic peaks, airlines tend to invest more heavily in technologies 
that can increase efficiency, reduce operational costs, and improve safety. 
Technologies like IoT predictive maintenance or AI fuel optimization systems can 
directly contribute to cost savings, making them more attractive investments during 
periods of economic growth. 
Source: McKinsey value chain modeling for IATA  
9
b. Globalization and Low-Cost Carriers (LCCs) 
Low-cost carriers have been around for a while, particularly in developed regions, the 
examples of Southwest (USA, 1991) and Ryanair (Europe, 1971) prove this. 
However, new and fast-growing LCCs present unique opportunities for new 
technologies promoting efficiency and cost reductions. 
 McKinsey & Company and IATA. Understanding the Pandemic’s Impact on the Aviation Value Chain. Published in 
9
2021. Available online at IATA.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
19
==PAGE:26==
As a result, technologies that can provide training, operational, and maintenance 
efficiencies are highly valued in these regions like South East Asia and Latin 
America. For instance, pilot training using VR tools can drastically reduce the costs of 
physical simulators, and AI-powered analytics can help route planning optimization, 
minimizing fuel consumption. These are only two applications that can be critical for 
the bottom line of operators. 
c. Venture Capital and Investment Trends 
The availability of private capital, VCs, and angels is fundamental in determining if 
startups like Fly-XR can successfully reach the market with their innovations. In 
recent years, the aerospace industry has been attracting a new flow of funding, 
particularly in space travel and autonomous systems. However, macroeconomic 
conditions, like inflation, high interest rates, and market volatility, have made private 
investors more prudent. With high economic uncertainty, the flow of capital toward 
startups drastically reduces, as shown on the chart. 
US Venture Capital Financings (2005 to 2023)  
10
2.2.3 Opportunities in Emerging Markets 
Opportunities in emerging markets are present due to looser regulatory challenges 
and positive demographic trends. Regions like Africa, Southeast Asia, and Latin 
America are experiencing rapid growth in air traffic, and authorities and governments 
may be more open to adopting cost-effective and efficient technologies to handle 
increasing demand. 
For instance, in regions where access to traditional training simulators is limited, VR-
based training solutions could provide a cost-effective alternative. Similarly, IoT 
 Source: PitchBook, as cited in the 2024 Venture Capital Report by WilmerHale.
10
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
20
==PAGE:27==
technologies that can enhance maintenance may be more attractive to emerging 
markets looking to expand their fleets while maintaining the safety standards. 
In summary, global political and economic conditions are critical to aviation, playing a 
fundamental role in startups tackling this sector. Fly-XR and other startups must be 
able to position strategically developing products to capture the opportunities of such 
a changing industry while mitigating risks. 
2.2.4 Where to go? Ideal Startup Ecosystems in Aviation 
Where to establish your startup is a fundamental decision for any founder. Most of 
the time, it is determined by the geographical location of the founding team. However, 
in order to maximize the chances of success and get the optimum environment, both 
for product development and venture funding, the startup location should be, in the 
author’s opinion, carefully considered. 
Ideal startup ecosystems have a combination of favorable regulation, access to 
funding, availability of talent, and proximity to customers or other industry 
stakeholders. For aviation tech startups, specific regions are clear winners on their 
support to innovation, availability of venture capital, and access to global markets. 
Below, some of these ecosystems, specially favorable to aviation and space startups 
will be analyzed: 
a. United States 
In particular, Silicon Valley is still one of the top startup ecosystems in the world. Its 
main advantages are the wide access to talent and venture capital, especially for 
software startups with different applications. For aviation tech startups, Silicon Valley 
provides access to the latest AI developments, leading aerospace companies, and a 
network of investors familiar with capital-intensive industries. 
The proximity to major tech companies like Google, Apple, and Tesla, together with 
NASA’s Ames Research Center, creates opportunities to meet investors and to 
create strategic partnerships. 
Although Silicon Valley might be the hottest spot for startups worldwide, the aviation 
scene might be more vibrant in other locations, like Seattle, due to the proximity and 
influence of Boeing headquarters or the Pacific Northwest Alliance.  
Other cities like Dallas, TX or LA, CA can focus more on access to major airline hubs 
and aerospace innovation. Likewise, if the project's focus is military applications, 
Denver, CO, or Phoenix, AZ, might be better candidates, with closeby Air Force 
Bases and research centers or other big aerospace companies like Honeywell 
Aerospace and startups like Boom Supersonic. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
21
==PAGE:28==
As shown in the image, some cities can be more desirable due to the high concentration of aerospace manufacturers 
and operators. This is the case of Dallas in Texas.  
11
b. Israel 
Israel is also known as the “Startup Nation” due to its concentration on technology 
startups and a strong focus on innovation. Especially attractive for deep tech and 
cybersecurity projects, the region also boosts many defence applications. Other 
interesting fields are predictive analytics, IoT, AI, and autonomous vehicles. 
As in Silicon Valley's case, Tel Aviv startups benefit from a strong network of venture 
capital and government agencies. From Israel, it is easy to access global markets 
like the USA, Middle East, and Europe, although with the ongoing conflict, it might be 
an option less desirable than the others. 
c. Singapore 
Singapore has established itself as a major hub for logistics, aviation, and technology 
in Asia. The city is an ideal location for global travel and trade, a crossroads between 
Southeast Asia, China, and Australia, and boosting several fast-growing airlines with 
strong operations from its main airport. Singapore’s government support and pro-
business environment are very favorable for tech-driven companies. 
 Image by Glaocal Aviation Aerospace https://globalaviationaerospace.wordpress.com/2016/04/21/texas-aviation-
11
aerospace-industry/
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
22
==PAGE:29==
The Singaporean government also supports initiatives in the aerospace sector like 
the Singapore Aerospace Programme. All these conditions with an easy access to 
venture capital from Asia makes it a very suitable candidate to establish a new 
aviation startup. 
d. United Arab Emirates 
Dubai has rapidly grown as a 
global hub of aviation due to its 
strategic location, developed 
infrastructure, and ambition to 
become a leader in smart cities 
and future technologies. The 
city’s government has made 
significant investments in 
innovation. Several government-
funded accelerators and research 
centers, like the Dubai Future 
Accelerators and the Dubai AI 
Lab, are emerging in the city. 
Additionally, Dubai’s free tax 
zones offer clear advantages for 
new businesses, also easy 
business regulations, and access 
to global markets, making it very 
attractive to scale in this sector. 
Dubai Future Accelerators, in partnership with Emirates, 
 offers the opportunity for startups to work directly 
 with one of the biggest airlines in the world 
2.2.5 Fundraising Scene 
The fundraising environment since the pandemic in 2020 has been marked by the 
economic outlook swinging wildly from chaos to overoptimism and by the interest rate 
policies followed by most central banks worldwide. Fundraising is fundamental for 
early-stage ventures, and as such, we will consider the latest trends in funding in the 
2020s. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
23
==PAGE:30==
This section explores trends in venture capital, corporate investments, IPOs, and 
alternative financing methods such as crowdfunding or government-backed grants, 
providing a detailed look at the current funding state in the innovation ecosystem. 
a. Venture Capital Trends 
VC funding is still one of the most common funding sources for startups. The first half 
of the 2020s saw increased venture capital investments due to low interest rates and 
investor enthusiasm for new technologies. However, as central banks raised interest 
rates in response to inflation, VCs became more cautious. 
Global VC/PE investments through funding rounds per month  
12
VC funds have started to focus on startups with proven revenue models and quicker 
ways to profitability, making it more difficult for average startups in competitive 
industries to secure funding. 
Investors are increasingly looking for startups in the aviation sector that can be 
quickly profitable and offer cost-saving solutions, such as AI predictive maintenance 
or IoT fuel optimization. These technologies have a clear value proposition for 
airlines facing increasing operational costs due to the global environment. 
 It is clear in the image how, after the pandemic, there was a great influx in VC money to early ventures, both in 
12
value and number of deals due to the low interest rate environment. The amount of funding has been greatly 
reduced into more profitable business models since the fight against inflation by the Fed began in 2022. Imtiaz, M., 
& Sabater, A. Global venture capital investment value, volume down in Q1 2024 (2024). Available at this link.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
24
==PAGE:31==
Startups with big market sizes and global scalability are more likely to secure 
funding, particularly if they operate in specific areas like sustainability, efficiency, and 
safety. VCs are increasingly looking at startups aligning with environmental, social, 
and governance (ESG) criteria, these factors are becoming increasingly important, 
particularly in industries like aviation many times scrutinised due to its carbon 
footprint. 
b. Strategic Investments 
Strategic investments from established aerospace companies and airlines have also 
become a source of funding for startups, and it is one of the best ways to secure 
money and gain credibility, expertise, and initial traction with potential customers. 
Major players in the aviation industry, such as Boeing, Airbus, and Lufthansa, have 
created venture divisions within their corporations. 
 
Sources: LH Innovation Hub, The Boeing Company and Airbus Ventures Official Websites 
c. IPOs and SPACs 
Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) have been one of the main exits for startups; however, 
due to the high volatility of markets from 2022, the number of IPOs has decreased 
compared with post-pandemic levels. In this last year, however, the trend has started 
to revert, expecting more IPOs if the economy continues to grow accompanied by 
decreasing interest rates. 
Many companies have delayed or canceled IPOs due to unfavorable market 
conditions, inflation, global conflicts and rising interest rates, inflation, and 
geopolitical tensions have contributed to reduce investor confidence. 
Due to this challenging exit environment, another financial vehicle, SPACs (Special 
Purpose Acquisition Companies), became a popular alternative for startups to go 
public in the early 2020s. SPACs simplified the listing process, making it faster and 
easier than IPOs. Several high-profile aerospace tech companies went public 
through SPACs, including Virgin Galactic (2019), Joby Aviation (2021) and Rocket 
Lab (2021). 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
25
==PAGE:32==
IPO count and volume by quarter in the USA, 2019-2024  
13
However, in recent years, the SPAC model has gone under tighter scrutiny, and its 
appeal has decreased for startups as it is seen as a form of fundraising for 
businesses not ready for the financial requirements for an IPO. 
d. Government Funding and Grants 
Government funding has become essential for aerospace technology startups, 
especially in regions prioritizing sustainability and innovation. In Europe, the US, and 
parts of Asia, grant programs like Horizon Europe and FAA initiatives support a 
number of startups in the field. Startups that align with government goals, particularly 
in areas like sustainability and safety, can access these funds.  
However, obtaining government grants is complex and requires meeting strict 
regulatory and reporting standards, which is time-consuming and can potentially take 
resources from developing products and the daily operations of the business. 
 Source: Carta. IPO Market in 2024: Trends and Insights (2024). Available at: https://carta.com/data/ipo-
13
market-2024/
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
26
==PAGE:33==
e. Crowdfunding and Alternative Financing 
Startups in recent years are looking at alternative financing methods, like 
crowdfunding, revenue-based financing , convertible notes  or ICOs (Initial Coin 
14
15
Offerings).  
16
This approach has been particularly effective for consumer-facing aviation 
technologies, such as drone-based solutions or flight simulation products designed 
for the broader market. However, for more established and capital intensive 
aerospace startups these are less practical financing methods. 
We can conclude that understanding the current fundraising environment and 
considering financing options is essential for aerospace tech startups. Furthermore, 
the aviation and space industries are unique in that they are often very capital 
intensive in highly regulated environments, often scaring investors off. 
 Revenue-based financing (RBF) allows businesses to receive funding in exchange for a percentage of their 
14
future revenues. 
 A convertible note is a loan that converts into equity during a future funding round.
15
 An Initial Coin Offering (ICO) is a fundraising method where companies issue digital tokens or cryptocurrencies 
16
to investors in exchange for capital.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
27
==PAGE:34==
2.3 The Aviation Industry 
The aviation industry plays a fundamental role in global transportation and trade. It is 
a critical industry for international relations, and its disruptions are felt worldwide. 
Over the decades, the sector has gone through numerous transformations, once 
known to be at the spearhead of technology, it is nowadays overregulated and slow 
to implement innovations. 
The main task of national and international aviation authorities is to ensure and 
increase its levels of safety. However, this main focus has hampered growth and 
innovation. On top of this structural issue against progress, the industry has faced 
unprecedented challenges. The significant impact of the COVID19 pandemic and the 
rise of operational costs. These factors have reshaped the field creating both 
obstacles and opportunities for the future. 
The following sections explore the current state of the aviation industry, analyzing key 
trends, market gaps, and the biggest challenges faces by the sector. It will also focus 
on emerging opportunities, particularly in training methods. We will quickly mention 
the connection between the aviation and the space sectors. 
By understanding these dynamics, we can appreciate the role that Fly-XR and other 
tech startups play in shaping the future of aviation. 
2.3.1 Introduction to the Industry’s Current Landscape 
The pandemic deeply impacted global air travel, causing airlines to ground fleets and 
forcing the industry to stop operations. As the recovery progresses, technology 
adoption has accelerated, with advancements in AI applications, manufacturing 
innovations like 3D printing, IoT systems for manufacturing and maintenance, and 
VR for personnel training. Other technologies like automation, blockchain, 5G 
networks, and cybersecurity are also rapidly being adopted. 
Sustainability is another main focus, with the industry prioritizing the development of 
Sustainable Aviation Fuels (SAFs), electric and hybrid aircraft, and hydrogen 
propulsion systems to reduce carbon emissions. Civil aviation authorities, such as 
ICAO and the FAA, play a crucial role in deciding when innovations are integrated 
into the aviation ecosystem through their regulations on safety and quality control. 
The post-pandemic era presents unique opportunities not seen in decades, thanks to 
many of the smaller, weaker players disappearing or merging with others, from 
airlines to aircraft manufacturers. 
However, as air travel demand rebounds, companies must innovate to increase 
efficiency, meet sustainability goals, and comply with developing regulatory 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
28
==PAGE:35==
frameworks. The integration of new technologies and the need for greener solutions 
will define the future of aviation. 
 
2.3.2 Trends and Market Gaps 
The following technologies (image on the right) were identified 
as drivers of change by IATA  in 2018 in their study “The 
17
Future of Aviation Industry 2035.” Of course, to those 
incumbents, we should add the presence of Generative AI, 
which took the entrepreneurial landscape by storm in the last 
couple of years. 
Some of these technologies will definitely have a key impact on 
the aviation industry in the years to come. However, only some 
of them are realistic for a small startup without established roots 
in the industry. Naming a few, innovations in propulsion or 
alternative fuels like SAFs (Sustainable Aviation Fuels) and 
hydrogen engines are only relevant for companies well-known 
in the industry and trusted by regulators, for example, Rolls-
Royce, General Electric, Pratt & Whitney or Airbus and Boeing 
themselves. 
The example of Boeing shows that even the most trusted and 
experienced companies in the sector can easily get sidetracked 
in safety matters in the eyes of regulators.  
18
In this article, we can see how Boeing, despite its wide experience and the FAA's 
trust, has suffered major setbacks in the last decade. This presents an opportunity for 
new startups as there are signs of exhaustion from some of the established players.  
Some startups in the last decade, however, have shown how this hegemony can be 
broken; examples like “Boom Supersonic,” with more than 150 orders of its first 
independently developed supersonic airliner, show how big innovations can also be 
brought to the industry by startups. 
Below, we mention some of the gaps and issues pressing on the aviation sector(in 
bold, the most pressing issues in the author’s view): 
	
1.	
Maintenance and Repair: Most aircraft use a reactive rather than 
predictive maintenance system. This gap offers potential for AI predictive 
 IATA (The International Air Transport Association)
17
 Boeing recurring problems with safety have the company under scrutiny since the Boeing 737 MAX disaster and 
18
subsequent scandal in 2018 and 2019. “FAA Continues to Hold Boeing Accountable for Implementing Safety and 
Production Quality Fixes” accessed on June 30, 2024, https://www.faa.gov/newsroom/faa-continues-hold-boeing-
accountable-implementing-safety-and-production-quality-fixes
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
29
==PAGE:36==
maintenance systems, which would allow real-time monitoring and preventive 
maintenance actions that reduce costs and equipment downtime. 
	
2.	
Electric, Hydrogen, and Hybrid Propulsion: This is a mandatory 
step for the industry to achieve the sustainability goals required from aviation. An 
example is ZeroAvia, which focuses on one of the biggest hopes in the sector: 
hydrogen propulsion.  
19
	
3.	
eVTOL and autonomous air taxis: This has always represented the 
idea of a futuristic future, but it looks like it will finally roll out to the public in the 
coming year or two in selected cities around the globe.  
Startups like Joby Aviation  are trying to capitalize on electric vehicles, autonomous 
20
systems and new transportation trends in current cities. The startup is developing 
electric vertical take-off and landing (eVTOL) air taxis for intracity travel. 
	
4.	
Supersonic and Hypersonic travel: Although a counterintuitive move 
towards the future due to its significant footprint, some startups have made real 
progress in the last years to achieve the first supersonic airliners. We have already 
mentioned the case of “Boom Supersonic” 
Overture, the supersonic airliner in design by Boom Supersonic.  
21
 Official Website of ZeroAvia, accessed on June 30, 2024, https://zeroavia.com/
19
 Official Website of Joby Aviation, accessed on June 30, 2024, https://www.jobyaviation.com/
20
 Boom Supersonic. Boom Supersonic Announces New Aircraft, Engine, and Investment Milestones (2023). 
21
Available at the link.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
30
==PAGE:37==
	
5.	
 Air Traffic Management: Incremental air traffic, including drones and 
other unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), highlights the need for more efficient air 
traffic control systems. More automation and AI supported ATC systems would help 
manage airspace congestions.  
22
	
6.	
Training and Talent Shortages: The aviation industry faces a 
shortage of trained personnel, particularly pilots, mechanics, and air traffic 
controllers. Depending on expensive simulators and in-person training proves 
extremely inefficient today. And this is the gap that Fly-XR was trying to fill in! VR 
training systems and AI-driven training programs could help reduce costs and training 
times, helping to tackle the personnel shortage.  
23
	
7.	
Cybersecurity: With growing digitalization across aviation, 
cybersecurity is a critical concern. Last July's chaos when a Crowdstrike system on 
Microsoft malfunctioned, grounded aircraft, and stopped operations at hundreds of 
airports around the world proves this point. Aircraft systems, airports, and even 
passenger data are vulnerable to cyberattacks. There is a growing demand for 
cybersecurity solutions against threats to this critical infrastructure.  
24
	
8.	
Infrastructure for Electric Aviation: While electric aircraft are under 
development, the infrastructure to support them is not in most cases. When electrical 
aviation, starting with general aviation and corporate jets, spreads out, the 
infrastructure necessary, such as charging stations and maintenance facilities, will be 
required. This gap presents a massive opportunity. 
	
9.	
Digital Integration: Many airlines and airports still rely on outdated 
systems. Full integration of digital tools remains a critical gap, offering opportunities 
for platforms that can consolidate operational data across different aviation 
stakeholders. Better integration would also improve resource optimization, a critical 
aspect in an industry with such small margins. 
	
10.	
Supply Chain Vulnerabilities: Many aviation components, from 
engines to avionics, rely on global suppliers, making aviation especially susceptible 
to bottleneck problems and delays in deliveries and maintenance actions. Blockchain 
solutions have been developed to improve these issues. 
The aviation sector’s reliance on global suppliers creates bottlenecks, particularly for 
critical components like engines and avionics. Startups can introduce blockchain and 
automation to improve transparency and efficiency in the supply chain. 
	
11.	
Operational Complexity: Airports and airlines still face challenges 
related to baggage handling, ground operations, and boarding, which could be 
addressed through automation and AI tools to improve efficiency. 
 Rising congestion problems in Europe and the USA have many trying to fix different angles of the problem, from 
22
better infrastructure to faster ATC trying to tackle shortages.  
Aviation Week. Outlook For European Air Traffic Congestion Not Bright (2023). Available at this link.
 Article by Boeing about the Pilots' and Technicians' Outlook for the next two decades. Boeing. Pilot and 
23
Technician Outlook 2023-2042. Available at this link.
 Goodin, D. CrowdStrike Outage on Windows Causes Airport Travel Delays (2024). Available at this link.
24
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
31
==PAGE:38==
Some of the most interesting and successful startups in the aerospace sector  
25
	
12.	
Passenger Experience: Many airlines struggle with providing 
personalized, better passenger experiences, especially during check-in, security, and 
boarding. This presents an opportunity for already implemented AI biometric 
solutions and personalized travel services to improve the overall passenger 
experience. 
	
13.	
Infrastructure for Drones and Urban Air Mobility (UAM): As drones and 
Urban Air Mobility solutions become more prevalent, gaps in infrastructure, like 
landing pads and charging stations, are emerging. 
	
14.	
 Carbon Offsetting and Emissions Management: Effective carbon 
management solutions are lacking, so startups are creating tools for airlines to better 
track, reduce, and offset emissions. Helping the industry to achieve the SDGs. 
 Source of this image: TNMT. New Air Travel Leaderboard (2024). Available at this link.  
25
eVTOL (Electric Vertical Take-Off and Landing), eSTOL (Electric Short Take-Off and Landing and 
eCTOL (Electric Conventional Take-Off and Landing)
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
32
==PAGE:39==
However, civil aviation authorities are cautious about approving new technologies 
due to safety concerns, especially when isolated accidents have generated bad 
publicity in recent years. This slows the adoption of innovations that could reshape 
the market and optimize operations. 
2.3.3 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Aviation 
Aviation faces many challenges in its journey towards sustainability, creating 
opportunities for startups to contribute.  
One major issue is the limited production and high cost of Sustainable Aviation Fuels 
(SAFs), where new businesses could scale production or innovate with alternative 
fuels. Battery limitations also slow down the development of electric and hybrid 
aircraft, offering opportunities for energy storage solutions. 
There are also challenges in emissions management and carbon offsetting; startups 
can fill this gap with systems to track emissions and different ways to reduce them. 
The aviation industry is trying to align with the UN SDGs as it tries to reduce its 
environmental impact. Key SDGs relevant to aviation include: 
- SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy): Efforts to adopt 
alternative propulsion systems, including electric, hydrogen, 
or hybrid solutions, and SAFs to avoid reliance on fossil fuels. 
- SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure): IoT and AI 
allow for innovations in smart infrastructure, enhancing 
operational efficiency, safety, and sustainability. 
-SDG 13 (Climate Action): The main industry weakness is its 
environmental footprint. There are numerous opportunities for 
fuel efficiency and emissions reduction solutions to be brought 
in the near future. 
By aligning with these SDGs, the aviation sector aims to find 
sustainable growth while reducing its footprint. 
 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
33
==PAGE:40==
2.3.4 Current Training Methods in Aviation 
This section introduces training methods in aviation, which has been Fly-XR's main 
focus since its origin. We will discuss training for different aviation personnel, 
including pilots, air traffic controllers, maintenance engineers, and technicians. These 
three groups face similar shortages because this is one of the industry's biggest pain 
points at the moment. Below a breakdown of the current solutions for the different 
groups: 
Pilots Training: Traditionally, pilots undergo an extensive training. It includes the 
following phases in summary: 
- A phase of theory learning is normally completed through CBTs (Computer-Based 
Training), outdated presentations, and quizzes to absorb the theoretical knowledge. 
- A flying phase, on general aviation or small aircraft, where pilots get the first 200h 
to 250h of flying experience. 
- A simulator phase, which extends throughout the pilot’s career through refreshers 
and new courses with aircraft updates and new aircraft types that the pilot will learn 
to fly. This is one of the main expenses airlines phase as they have to send their 
pilots for training every six months by regulation 
- A line training phase, in which the pilot continues its training while flying in 
commercial operations. This phase aims to polish the last required knowledge in 
daily operations that cannot be covered on a simulator.  
Engineer and Maintenance Crew Training: Maintenance Personnel are trained in 
diagnosing issues, conducting routine maintenance checks, and repairing aircraft 
components. Their training shares a similar structure to pilot training. There are 
phases of classroom-based theoretical training and hands-on sessions in aircraft 
maintenance facilities. Simulators are used for troubleshooting and familiarizing 
themselves with new systems.  
26
Some of the problems faced by pilot training are common to engineers and 
technicians. They must many times travel to perform the training, which in most 
cases is in-person (at least the practical part of it, either with real parts or with 
simulators). This increases the cost of the training, the complexity of personnel 
scheduling and downtime of human resources. 
Air Traffic Controller Training: Controllers are required to manage very stressful 
environments, handling multiple aircraft at once. They must master their multitasking 
skills and manage multiple aircraft under a wide variety of weather and operational 
conditions. 
 Aviation Maintenance Magazine. Training Challenges in the New Digital Age (2022). Available at this link.
26
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
34
==PAGE:41==
Air traffic controllers are trained in most cases using simulators that recreate real-
time flight data and traffic scenarios, “pseudopilots”  are also a common way of 
27
training for air traffic controllers. This enables safe learning in a controlled setup. 
 
Airservices, an example of a government-owned training provider in Australia  
28
For this group, in particular, the OJT (On-the-job) training is quite extensive for the 
different airspace areas to be controlled. 
There is a peculiarity for this group, as many of the training programs are directed by 
the military (due to the nature of the air traffic controller job interlinked with national 
defense) or directly funded by the government.  
29
Also, training programs are often completely independent between countries and 
provided by public authorities. This creates a very fragmented training environment 
globally, and in most cases, it limits the geographical flexibility of these professionals. 
 Normally, several student pilots act as if they are actually flying in a virtual environment for controllers to 
27
coordinate them and make decisions. Even though this
 A brief explanation of its technology is on the link. Anybody familiar with current technology developments can 
28
notice the opportunities for training systems on this and many other providers.
 MITRE. Integrating Advanced Technology into Air Traffic Controller Training (2014). Available at this link.
29
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
35
==PAGE:42==
2.3.5 Opportunities in Current Training Methods 
Opportunities in aviation training are obvious at this point. The references section 
contains some articles and reports on this topic.  
30
The personnel shortages reasons are similar in the three groups of aviation 
personnel analyzed; we enumerate some of the main reasons (the reasons in bold 
letters are those identified as possible to revert): 
•
Aging Workforce: A significant portion of the workforce is approaching retirement 
age. To make matters worse, there is a mandatory retirement age for pilots which 
is leaving a large gap in experienced personnel. 
Average age of active pilots in the United States from 2002 to 2020. Source: Statista 
•
High Training Costs: The costs of training are prohibitive across the three 
groups of personnel mentioned above. For pilots, the cost varies between 
$70,000 and $150,000, depending on the region. Maintenance technicians and 
ATCs also have extensive and expensive certifications, limiting the number of 
applicants to these careers. 
 Oliver Wyman Study. The Airline Pilot Shortage Will Get Worse (2022). Available at this link.
30
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
36
==PAGE:43==
•
Increased Air Travel Demand: As global air travel demand increases, especially in 
emerging markets and post-pandemic recovery, the need for pilots, ATCs, and 
technicians has quickly outnumbered the supply of professionals. 
 
Long-term international and domestic passenger traffic (2016–2052). Source Airports Council International Bi-
annual report, February 2024 
•
Lengthy Training and Certification: Becoming fully certified in aviation roles 
takes time, between 2 and 5 years, depending on the role, particularly for ATCs 
and maintenance personnel. ATC also requires years of supervised work as part 
of the training, this slow process limits the ability to respond to growing demand 
•
Pandemic Disruptions: COVID created chaos in the industry, leading to massive 
layoffs and early retirements. Many professionals left the industry during the 
pandemic and have not returned, leading to shortages once global travel 
rebounded. 
•
Burnout and Stress: Jobs like ATCs are stressful due to the responsibility of 
managing air traffic safely. This has caused high turnover rates contributing to 
ongoing shortages. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
37
==PAGE:44==
•
Less Military Pilots: Historically, the main source of commercial pilots was the Air 
Force in different countries. The rise of UAVs for military applications has reduced 
this pipeline entering the commercial industry. 
•
Government Constraints: In the case of ATCS, government regulations and 
budget restrictions from the aviation authorities (many times training and service 
providers for air traffic control management) slow the hiring process, this delays 
the ability to fill job vacancies. 
•
Barriers to Entry: High barriers to entry on top of costs across all aviation roles, 
like demanding requirements for hours flown (for pilots), long certification 
processes, and the need for very specialized training, making it difficult to attract 
new talent. 
•
Training Bottlenecks: Often, the supply of new professionals is calculated 
according to ideal conditions. However, the different phases of training create 
natural bottlenecks when simulators or aircraft go for long maintenance, 
experienced instructors finish their careers, or switch jobs. 
•
Cost of equipment for training providers: One of the reasons why training 
providers don’t plan early for the demand is the huge upfront cost of these 
certified devices. As an example, full flight simulators (required for pilot 
certifications and bi-annual refreshers) cost between $5 million and $15 million.  
31
Making it prohibitive for training providers and even airlines to overspend on 
them. 
Despite this gloomy outlook, recent innovations, such as AI-powered systems and 
Virtual Reality, are transforming aviation training. These technologies allow for more 
personalized, data-driven training sessions, making simulations more adaptive and 
efficient. Additionally, these methods are cheaper as well as more effective.  
AI enables real-time feedback and progress tracking, improving learning. VR offers 
an immersive environment, allowing trainees to practice various scenarios without 
needing physical equipment or simulators, reducing costs and increasing 
accessibility. Furthermore, AI in flight training can simulate rare and dangerous 
events difficult to replicate with regular simulators. 
However, regulatory requirements and certification are among the main challenges to 
widespread adoption of these innovations. VR has been used in military applications 
and UAS for years, but commercial aviation is several steps behind due to the risk-
averse industry tendencies.  
 Frasca Flight Simulation. How Much Does a Frasca Simulator Cost? (2023). Available at this link.
31
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
38
==PAGE:45==
These advances also address the growing need for frequent, flexible learning 
opportunities across different aviation roles, keeping knowledge and training 
programs up to date. This is particularly crucial in ensuring that maintenance crews 
and air traffic controllers remain highly skilled in the face of increasing air traffic and 
technical complexities. 
2.3.6 Pilot Training: Challenges and Technological Solutions 
Fly-XR’s decision to focus on pilot training was driven by one of the founders 
professional experience and network on the field and due to the substantial 
challenges in the current training ecosystem. Pilot training involves extensive use of 
simulators, mainly Full Flight Simulators, very expensive to operate and maintain.  
Growing demand for pilots and the limited availability of simulators worldwide, 
particularly for some aircraft types, force airlines to send pilots away for training, 
leading to additional accommodation and transport costs and making personnel 
unavailable for flight operations during these periods.  
FFS could not be replace because of their complexity as they replicate a variety of 
weather conditions, mechanical failures, and emergency scenarios that pilots must 
be trained for. 
Full Flight Simulator built by CAE at the Lufthansa Aviation Training Center. Source Lufthansa Aviation Training 
Website 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
39
==PAGE:46==
However, airlines and training centers are often unable to invest in a large number of 
these simulators due to its exorbitant prices and delays on their deliveries, limiting 
training capacity. 
Bottlenecks in Training 
Because of the limited number of simulators, airlines frequently face training 
bottlenecks, especially during peak times when more pilots must be certified or 
recertified. This is exacerbated by the limited number of instructors, who are very 
senior pilots in most cases. Creating a vicious cycle that perpetuates the pilot 
shortage.  
Reliance on physical equipment for training also creates a logistical challenge. 
Sometimes, the simulators may go through maintenance or upgrades, delaying 
training schedules even more. 
This combination of a lack of instructors, high demand for simulators, and the 
logistical challenges of moving pilots across training locations shows the need for 
more scalable, flexible solutions, such as VR-based training devices for the initial 
phases of training and AI-powered training systems that allow customized solutions 
and proper follow-up on individuals' performance. 
These innovations could help alleviate bottlenecks by providing more accessible and 
cost-effective training options that do not rely as heavily on physical equipment or 
instructors at all. 
The application of VR and AI-based solutions to tackle the problem will be studied in 
more detail in the Fly-XR startup section. 
Phases of Pilot Training  
In this subsection, I would like to point out the different training phases the pilot 
should go through during training. This will help us understand the decisions made by 
Fly-XR in the following sections. 
1. From zero to Airline Transport License (ATPL): This is the minimum 
license
 a pilot needs to operate commercially. A pilot needs: 
32
✦
Ground training (theory) 
✦
Actual flight training on general aviation aircraft (smaller planes) 
✦
Simulator training 
 There is a different type of license called CPL with which a pilot could operate commercially, but it is not very 
32
common nowadays to obtain this. For more information check the following links.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
40
==PAGE:47==
 
This is a more detailed breakdown of the pilot training phases. More details at the link by Aviation Academy. 
2. Training with the airline employer: After the pilot obtains his/her basic 
license, more training needs to be completed with the operator: 
✦
Type Rating: Specific training for the type of aircraft the pilot will fly, for 
instance, Airbus 320 or Boeing 737. Most of it is completed on full flight 
simulators replicating the specific aircraft.  
33
✦
Line Training: Newly trained airline pilots fly real routes under the 
supervision of line training captains, very experienced captains who act 
as instructors and examiners on real routes. This ensures pilots are 
ready to operate commercially in real airline conditions. 
✦
Recurrent Training: Annual or bi-annual refreshers, depending on the 
civil aviation authority requirements. Pilots must complete simulator 
sessions to stay updated on emergency procedures and maneuvers; 
these simulators must always been performed on FFSs. 
 There are all kinds of simulator devices for the initial phases of a pilot's simulator training to obtain their ATPL 
33
and at the beginning of their type rating. More information is here, where the different simulator levels and uses are 
explained.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
41
==PAGE:48==
This section has set the basis required to understand the decisions to embark on the 
Fly-XR project and the basic knowledge required about the industry. 
2.3.7 Intersection of the Aviation and Space Industries 
Finally, we will discuss the intersection between the aviation and space industries. 
The author believes this topic is relevant to understanding the future of aviation and 
its emerging opportunities.  
The boundary between aviation and space has always been thin. In recent years, 
however, it has become even more blurred due to technological advancements, 
making it much more common for vehicles to operate simultaneously in space and 
the atmosphere of the Earth.  
34
Aircraft and spacecraft might look different to the eye. But they share the atmosphere as part of both operations or 
transition and they share many systems and procedures 
The space industry has begun to expand to include private companies such as 
SpaceX, Blue Origin, and Boeing developing spacecraft systems. The rise of these 
private companies is creating new business models that combine aviation and space 
technologies. Innovations developed for space travel are finding applications in 
aviation and vice versa, leading to convergences in safety, materials, and navigation. 
This short section reflects on how the overlap is shaping the future of both fields: 
 Aircraft operate in the Earth’s atmosphere, they depend on air and air density for creating aerodynamic forces 
34
and propulsion, spacecraft operate in the vacuum of space, hence requiring rockets as a medium of propulsion.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
42
==PAGE:49==
- Shared technologies: From hybrid propulsion systems allowing aircraft to fly higher 
and become more efficient in longer routes, advanced materials, like composites 
and 3D printed components, and autonomous navigation systems sharing 
technology advancements between space, unmanned vehicle applications and 
commercial aviation. 
- High Altitude Flights: Reaching the edge of space, either for suborbital flights like 
the ones commercialized by Companies like Blue Origin, and Virgin Galactic. The 
opposite craft also applies; the ones flying at the edge of the atmosphere, as well 
as supersonic and hypersonic commercial planes, are irrupting again in the 
commercial scene. 
- Infrastructure for Space operations resembling typical aviation designs like current 
spaceports. 
One of the main challenges in this convergence is the regulatory framework. Aviation 
has long established international regulatory bodies agreed under UN treaties like 
ICAO. On the other hand, space has been dominated by government agencies like 
NASA and ESA. Challenges with regard to airspace management in the atmosphere/
space transition, safety and certification standards and the increasing number of 
autonomous vehicles are some of the challenges to this new frontier. 
2.3.8 Conclusion 
As we have seen in this section, the aviation industry is experiencing a period full of 
challenges and opportunities. This is the ideal scenario for innovation to happen and 
startups to proliferate. However, regulatory complexities are slowing the adoption of 
innovations. 
Key trends such as sustainable fuels and propulsion systems, the integration of AI, 
IoT, and other technologies can potentially fill in the gaps in training methods, air 
traffic management, and maintenance practices. 
Finally, the industry is trying to catch up on its overdue subject, sustainability goals. 
Slowly but surely, it is showing commitment to aligning with the SDGs. 
Fly-XR, was trying to capitalize on one of these opportunities. The journey proved 
more challenging than anticipated, causing the disintegration of the startup and its 
team. 
In summary, the aviation industry is at a critical point where regulators must adapt to 
allow startups to lead sustainable change. Regulatory flexibility and proactive 
measures will be key to restoring the sector’s capacity for innovation and growth..  
35
 ICAO. Aviation Innovation Posing Opportunities and Challenges for Operators and Regulators: ICAO Council 
35
President (2023). Available at the link.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
43
==PAGE:50==
2.4 My Background as an Entrepreneur 
My journey as an entrepreneur has been driven by a strong passion for business, 
aviation, space, and cutting-edge technology. 
Although my academic foundation lies in aerospace engineering, my professional 
experience spans various roles within the aviation industry. I have worked as a 
commercial pilot, aerospace engineer, flight instructor, cabin crew, and UAV 
instructor. Now, I apply this diverse background as the founder of an aviation startup 
focused on harnessing innovative technologies for the industry. 
Over the years, I have also ventured into multiple entrepreneurial pursuits, ranging 
from e-commerce to running small-scale food businesses. These early ventures have 
provided invaluable lessons in business management, customer engagement, and 
operational efficiency. This section reflects on my entrepreneurial experiences, 
illustrating how they intersected with my academic pursuits and culminated in the 
creation of Fly-XR. Through this narrative, I will outline how these diverse 
experiences have uniquely equipped me to lead innovation in aviation training. 
2.4.1 Early Entrepreneurial Ventures 
My entrepreneurial mindset has been evident from a young age, as I have always 
found joy in negotiating and trading physical products. This natural inclination toward 
entrepreneurship became even more pronounced during the global shutdown in 2020 
when the pandemic grounded my career as a commercial pilot due to closed borders 
and halted air travel. 
Taking advantage of the unexpected downtime, I decided to fully embrace my 
entrepreneurial side. I launched a small business on Shopify called “The Wine 
Class”, specializing in Spanish and Portuguese wine accessories for a global market. 
This venture taught me valuable lessons in managing relationships with suppliers, 
understanding customer preferences, and navigating the financial aspects of running 
a small business. 
Logo of The Wine Class e-commerce store from the archive 
While managing The Wine Class, I simultaneously pursued my growing interest in 
finance and accounting, enrolling in courses to deepen my understanding of these 
fields. What captivated me wasn’t just the potential for profit, but the strategic aspect 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
44
==PAGE:51==
of finance, something that proved extremely useful for my entrepreneurial career in 
the future. 
Ultimately, as global travel resumed and I returned to flying, it became increasingly 
difficult to balance the demands of my professional life with the operational needs of 
the business. Despite the relative success of the venture, I made the decision to 
close it down, but my passion for entrepreneurship remained strong. 
The following year, while providing instruction on drones and aviation, a new 
opportunity arose—this time in the food industry, an area that had always intrigued 
me. Along with a colleague, I planned to launch a Poke food truck. Everything was in 
place: we had secured a location, signed rental agreements, hired legal counsel, and 
were ready to incorporate the business. However, my business partner’s decision to 
relocate unexpectedly disrupted our plans, as he was meant to manage daily 
operations while I focused on the business setup and financial investment. 
This experience, though challenging, offered an invaluable lesson about the 
importance of selecting the right business partner—someone who shares your values 
and work ethic and with whom you can build a mutual foundation of trust. 
2.4.2 Academic Studies and the Search for Innovation 
Following my early ventures, I realized that while my background as an engineer 
allowed me to set up small businesses, I had the potential to do much more. This 
recognition led me to pursue formal education in the entrepreneurial field, believing 
that with the right knowledge, I could build something far more impactful. With this 
goal in mind, I moved to Denmark and enrolled in the MSc in Technology 
Entrepreneurship program at DTU. 
This program not only provided me with invaluable knowledge about building and 
scaling technology businesses, but it also instilled in me the confidence that I could 
lead such an endeavor. It became clear that success in the tech world requires not 
just an idea, but the right team and a solid business opportunity. 
During my time at DTU, I was fortunate to collaborate with a group of colleagues on a 
Web 3 startup called Soltype, which focused on creating literary NFTs on the Solana 
ecosystem. As someone with a keen interest in FinTech trends, this project 
captivated me, and I took an active role in developing the business. We successfully 
raised $100,000 in funding before the crypto market downturn, although I had exited 
the venture before that phase. 
Some of the first NFTs minted in Soltype, 
screenshot of the real site 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
45
==PAGE:52==
Working at Soltype taught me a crucial lesson: in a startup, your compensation 
should directly reflect your contributions, whether that be through skills, knowledge, 
network, time, or capital. After some thoughtful reflection, I realized that my skill set 
wasn’t the perfect fit for what the startup needed at that stage. As a result, I made the 
difficult decision to move on and seek out new opportunities where I could make a 
more meaningful impact. 
2.4.3 Founding Fly-XR 
After the disappointment with Soltype, I became determined to focus on an industry 
where I had both extensive experience and deep expertise—aviation. This decision 
led me to brainstorm various ideas centered around leveraging my knowledge in 
aviation technology. One of these ideas took shape during a Tech Entrepreneurship 
Bootcamp in the UK. 
What I didn’t anticipate was that the lecturer at the bootcamp, Gigi Wang, was also a 
lecturer at UC Berkeley, the same institution where I had been invited earlier that 
year to share my aviation insights along a semester. My time with Gigi proved 
invaluable, as she shared her vast experience in entrepreneurship and her unique 
leadership style, both of which greatly influenced my own entrepreneurial approach. 
More importantly, it was at this bootcamp that I met my first co-founders: Adam 
Aryeh, Alperen Turkmen, along with Brandon Matchett and James Andrews, who 
contributed significantly to the early stages of the idea. Together, we laid the 
groundwork for what would soon become Fly-XR, a startup aimed at revolutionizing 
aviation training through AI-driven immersive virtual reality simulations. 
Although Fly-XR faced significant challenges, including the geographical dispersion 
of the team and difficulties securing funding, the venture provided me with invaluable 
lessons. The network I built, the technical and leadership skills I developed, and the 
overall experience have prepared me for future opportunities in the aviation tech 
space. 
2.4.4 UC Berkeley and Silicon Valley Experience 
A key turning point in my entrepreneurial journey occurred during my academic stay 
at UC Berkeley in the spring of 2024. After gaining experience in entrepreneurship 
and reconnecting with my passion for aviation, I decided to explore opportunities 
within my area of expertise. 
My journey at UC Berkeley began in January 2024, when I arrived in the Bay with a 
startup concept but without a clear team. My primary objectives were to find co-
founders, network within Silicon Valley, learn from the innovative ecosystem, raise 
funding, and ultimately join an accelerator or incubator in the United States. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
46
==PAGE:53==
The entrepreneurial energy in Silicon Valley, combined with access to an extensive 
network of investors, technologists, and innovators, greatly influenced my 
perspective on startups and the future of aviation technology. It also presented me 
with invaluable opportunities, such as pitching to investors in San Francisco and 
engaging with successful entrepreneurs. 
During this time, I sharpened my focus on the application of AI in aviation. I 
participated in various workshops, hackathons, pitching competitions, and networking 
events, all of which helped me refine and solidify the idea behind Fly-XR. The 
university’s access to exceptional talent and mentorship from experienced 
entrepreneurs and investors gave me a clearer roadmap for transforming Fly-XR 
from a concept into a tangible reality. 
Additionally, interacting with professionals from diverse industries expanded my 
understanding of how cross-industry technologies could drive innovation within the 
aviation sector. The risk-taking mentality that permeated every aspect of Silicon 
Valley life inspired me to pursue my ideas with even greater determination and 
confidence. 
Startup Semester Ceremony with David Law at UC Berkeley in May 2024 
2.4.5 Foundation for Growth as an Entrepreneur 
My entrepreneurial background is intricately tied to my expertise in aviation and my 
passion for leveraging technology to address the industry's challenges. From my 
early business ventures to my academic development and hands-on experience in 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
47
==PAGE:54==
Silicon Valley, each phase of my journey has contributed to the creation and 
evolution of Fly-XR. Although I encountered significant obstacles along the way, 
these experiences have equipped me with the skills, knowledge, and mindset 
necessary to continue driving innovation in aviation and beyond. 
As I look to the future, the lessons learned from Fly-XR will serve as a solid 
foundation for my continued growth and success as an entrepreneur. My commitment 
to applying technology in creative ways to solve industry challenges and turn aviation 
into a more sustainable industry remain strong, and I am confident that the skills and 
networks I’ve developed will enable me to explore new opportunities in aviation and 
other sectors. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
48
==PAGE:55==
3. The Startup: Fly-XR’s Journey 
Fly-XR represents the result of the author’s vision to use emerging technologies in 
aviation. Specifically, artificial intelligence and virtual reality trying to address key 
challenges in the aviation industry.  
The idea behind Fly-XR came up while trying to tackle one of aviation's biggest 
challenges: the shortage of qualified personnel. Lacking experienced personnel, such 
as engineers, air traffic controllers, and pilots, causes the cancellation of thousands 
of flights per year by airlines around the world.  
36
Hence, the idea came from there, Fly-XR (formerly known as Leading Edge 
Technologies) was trying to make training for pilots more efficient, scalable, and cost-
effective, an area where traditional methods are proving to be both expensive and 
limited in scope for the technology available today. 
Fly-XR wanted to revolutionize aviation training by creating AI-powered virtual reality 
simulators that could provide a more immersive training environment for flight crew, 
while reducing costs and improving training effectiveness. 
The next section goes through the journey of Fly-XR from idea to failure, we will 
explore its challenges. the motivations behind the startup, milestones achieved, and 
the pivot from virtual reality to AI-based solutions. Also, in this chapter, we will cover 
the hurdles encountered in securing funding and navigating a geographically 
dispersed team. The journey of Fly-XR will show the potential of technology to disrupt 
traditional aviation training programs and the reality of building a startup in a capital-
intensive and heavily regulated industry. 
Fly-XR’s logo and cover from one of the pitchdecks 
 CNN Travel on Flight Cancellations due to staff shortages. US Aviation Meltdown: What’s Being Done to Fix the 
36
Travel Crisis (2023). Available at this link.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
49
==PAGE:56==
3.1. The Fly-XR’s Journey 
This section explains the different phases the startup went through, divided into 
subsections; it walks the reader through the biggest milestones and the decision-
making process behind the scenes for the different team members. 
Lessons learned along the way will also be spread throughout the section, paving the 
way for future startups not to make the same mistakes. Through this journey, we will 
also gain a deeper understanding of the opportunities and challenges faced by 
aviation technology startups in an increasingly competitive and regulated market. 
3.1.1 Founding Vision 
The journey began with the startup's founder researching problems in the aviation 
industry and exploring new technologies that could fix them or at least make them 
more efficient. 
In June 2023, the startup’s founder decided to create a startup that could leverage 
some of the latest technology and innovation trends. Independently, the founder 
researched the industry's main pain points and challenges and mixed everything 
together. As it was explained in previous sections, the focus on aviation was due to 
the expertise of the founder in this professional field. 
The founder brainstormed ideas for a few weeks. While talking to friends and 
colleagues in his aviation network. Many ideas came up, some of them are sketched 
below: 
1. Automatic Air Management System for autonomous aerial vehicles. IoT systems 
able to communicate and take evasive measures in case of flight path conflict. 
Beachhead, air management at low level, intracity of only UAVs, expanding to the 
rest of the airspace. 
2. Improved flight briefing packages for flight dispatchers and pilots. Current flight 
plans are extremely outdated (example below) , apart from the fact that many of 
37
the biggest airlines in the world still use paper flight plans.  
3. Virtual Reality aided flight simulators for professional pilots and pilot trainees. This 
would be the idea selected to pursue. 
 Here you can find a Youtube video that walks you through the typical flight plan I would see when working for 
37
Ryanair or Qatar Airways.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
50
==PAGE:57==
4. Virtual brokers for private flights as the industry still relies on individual corporate 
jet brokers to find the best deal for your next private flight. The founder found out 
when visiting a friend in Dubai who literally calls aircraft operators individually to 
offer private flight quotes to their customers. Unfortunately, somebody took the 
lead and accomplished exactly that solution.  
38
5. Flight route optimization tool inflight. A tool designed to provide cues and advice to 
the pilots inflight in order to help their decision-making process. The goal of the 
tool is to provide accurate calculations and give the pilot information about route 
congestion on arrival at the airports, the impact of their altitude and speed on 
consumption, and critical points along the route where shortcuts could represent 
the biggest fuel savings. 
6. Delivery UAVs intracity landing platforms, both secure for customers to pick up 
their delivered products and safe for the drones to land and take off. The landing 
pad was envisioned as a tower where the products could be dropped and 
assigned to different pickup boxes. 
These are some of the ideas that were in the pipeline at the time.  
One of the founder's main concerns was finding a software solution rather than a 
physical, capital-intensive product for aviation. This was not only because less capital 
was needed but also because it would be easier to scale and take it globally. 
The founder was also concerned about bringing a solution to the world that would 
reduce the environmental impact of aviation, or at least a solution that would be 
neutral about it, never detrimental to nature. 
In conclusion, Leading Edge Technologies'  founding vision was born out of a desire 
39
to address the growing challenges in aviation, contribute to and bring the industry 
back to its place of innovation as a nest for new technologies. 
3.1.2 The First Founding Team 
From idea to reality, Leading Edge Technologies was a task for which more than one 
was required. A talented team started working on the idea at a boot camp from 
Exeter University. The founding team was composed by Adam Aryeh (Israeli) and 
Alperen Turkmen (Turkish), and Brandon Matchett and James Andrews from the UK, 
also contributed to the project. 
 Their official website here.  An interview with the CEO in August 2023.
38
 The name of the startup was Leading Edge Technologies until the founder moved to San Francisco and several 
39
mentors critize the name as unsuitable for an AI startup.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
51
==PAGE:58==
 
Founding team working on the idea at the University of 
Exeter’s Bootcamp, posing together with Gigi Wang. 
Soon, Alperen was established as the technical member of the team, Brandon was 
the designer, and Adam and James were trying to contact potential customers and 
other stakeholders in the industry while developing the project's business plan. I was 
left steering the direction of our efforts and providing background and clarity on all the 
aviation-related questions and challenges we were facing. 
Back then, the problem to be solved, the pilot shortage, was very easily recognized, 
and people used to quickly accept that it was a significant pain point of the industry. 
But very quickly, we realized that it wasn’t easy to find customers who were willing to 
pay for it. Most stakeholders saw it as other stakeholders' problem, and they were 
not willing to invest in an unproven technology that would not bring them direct 
results. 
The team did a superb job defining the problem and brainstorming different business 
models for the idea. In the first weeks, the first discovery interviews were conducted, 
but then the first major setback kicked in.  
The team had been working remotely for a few weeks, and during summer, it looked 
like the project could move forward. Eventually, Alperen started university back in the 
UK, and I got busier at work flying for Qatar Airways; soon after, war was declared in 
Gaza, and Adam was called to the front, bringing the project to a sudden halt. 
3.1.3 Fly-XR in Silicon Valley and new partners 
After the project stopped in September 2023, I tried to keep it alive and take it with 
me to UC Berkeley through the Startup Semester program I was invited to. 
Unfortunately, I did not have a team anymore, so I arrived in San Francisco with a 
pitch deck and the intention to recruit talent for my startup in January 2024. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
52
==PAGE:59==
The first weeks were hectic, marked by amazing networking and time spent in 
between workshops, lectures from entrepreneurs and events from the different 
entrepreneurship associations at Berkeley. 
After a few weeks and after pitching my idea a few times, some guys started getting 
interested, and we decided to continue working on the idea together. Some of the 
professionals interested were Roshan Mohan (who would become the CTO and co-
founder of the startup), Melanie Miksis, Gaspard Kuhn, Amanda Ye, and Xuan 
Huang. 
The new team continued the market research and conducted over 20 discovery 
interviews. After this, we realized that the users wanted a full solution to the problem. 
For them, it was useful software that could simulate many scenarios and could 
integrate many of the capabilities that current simulators could. 
It was unfeasible, particularly with the team assembled, with only two technical 
profiles and no expert on VR or XR (Extended Reality). 
At this point, the team made the risky decision to descope the product with one or 
more features that users could find useful immediately. 
Part of the Fly-XR at the Jacobs Design Showcase. Spring 2024 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
53
==PAGE:60==
3.1.4 Pivot from VR Simulation to AI communication training 
The team decided to descope the product to be able to develop a prototype. At the 
time, momentum was being lost due to the complexity of designing a whole new VR 
software.  
This was the right decision back then because we did not know how to meaningfully 
prototype the VR software for investors. We descoped it into a tool we could build 
ourselves. Looking back, I would reconsider our decision, as the vision looked dull 
after we descaled the project. And it was much more difficult to communicate the 
vision of Fly-XR after descaling. 
Back then, the main reasons we found in order to descale the product were: 
- Uncertain Market Demand: Airlines find it difficult to perceive the value of the 
product at the beginning of its development due to its lack of certification (and lower 
quality associated with the initial phases of development). Our market research  
40
showed low demand or slow adoption of VR technology for commercial pilot 
training. 
- Development Risks: Two huge constraints on product development were the scope 
and time-to-market of the VR software. 
- There are limited human resources for prototyping (within the current team), and 
the process to an MVP was long enough for the product to be useful for the airlines 
and your paying customers.  
41
- Competition: it seemed difficult to differentiate from our competitors, and there was 
a risk of them addressing our target customer if we were successful with adoption. 
- Authorities regulatory challenges and resistance to innovation: If a product fails to 
meet the strict regulatory standards set by aviation authorities or cannot secure the 
necessary certifications within a reasonable time, it may face significant barriers to 
market entry, delaying or even preventing its adoption. 
It was worth mentioning that during this pivoting process, we changed our focus from 
selling the VR software to airlines to selling the ATC communications trainer to 
individuals. This proved to be one of the main mistakes, because we could not 
potentially build onto a product for airlines if we were developing and testing with 
another customer at the beginning. 
 During our market research, we interviewed student pilots, flight instructors (from airlines and flight schools), 
40
airline management from the founder’s network, aerospace engineers working in simulator design at L3 Harris and 
CAE, other airline pilots and flight school owners.
 One of the biggest issues regarding the VR software initially proposed by Fly-XR was the lack of software 
41
developers specialized in VR applications. Which slowed down the project significantly and made it unrealistic 
without having an expert who could 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
54
==PAGE:61==
3.1.5 Early Development and Prototyping 
After the product was descoped, the team started to work on the prototype. Within a 
few weeks, we had a working prototype and were able to test and iterate the first 
version of the software. 
We found then, many of the features the customers were looking for and some that 
were deemed unnecessary. However, we also found that our new customer  was 
42
willing to pay a very small price. 
 
One of the first prototype versions of the ATC Trainer module. Read more at Appendix I: Clickable Prototype: ATC 
Communications Trainer in Figma 
 When the pivot happened and the initial MVP was defined as an app for commercial pilots to train their ATC 
42
communications, the customers changed from being airlines to being individual pilots and pilot students who 
needed to practice their ATC communications.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
55
==PAGE:62==
3.1.6 Promoting Fly-XR and Trying to Raise Funding 
Having a prototype and a pitchdeck ready, we could start pitching to investors and we 
aprticipated in some showcases, workshops and pitch competitions. We raised 
awareness around our startup and many people loved our Demo. 
We had a couple of meetings with investors from Antler and Plug and Play and they 
were interested on teh idea with a twist. They both suggested to pursue the bigger 
vision proposed from the beginning and attack more vertically aviation training 
instead of a tiny niche. 
One of their main concerns was the market size the startup could capitalize on. Truly, 
the bigger vision had a market big enough, creating VR software for commercial pilot 
training, but the initial MVP with ATC communications? They had their doubts, 
regardless, we were told to keep them in the loop with our progress. 
3.1.7 Leaving the Bay: The End of the Journey 
Unfortunately, a couple of weeks later, mid-
May, my stay at Silicon Valley came to an end. 
Soon after our investor pitches, my other co-
founder confessed me his priority  was to 
secure a visa to stay in the USA and the 
easiest way to achieve that was through an 
internship. 
The rest of the team members, although 
interested in continuing with the startup, were 
either coming back to their home country or 
working on different projects during the 
summer. Making it very difficult to continue the 
work. 
Personally, I had been spending my savings 
into Fly-XR and my stay at Berkeley and I 
needed a job not only to pay my debts but to 
try and secure a different way to the United 
States, to the heaven of entrepreneurship, 
where I could try to bring innovation to aviation, 
from a more stable position, not on a 
temporary visa anymore. 
AI Entrepreneurs at Berkeley Pitching Competition.   
UC Berkeley, April 2024 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
56
==PAGE:63==
3.2. Technological Innovation and Market Research 
Fly-XR’s technological innovation was the development of its AI Agent, which was 
designed to revolutionize pilot training by providing a more adaptive and realistic 
communications simulation experience. Traditional aviation simulators, while effective 
in replicating aircraft controls and flight scenarios, lack the capacity to simulate ATC 
communications. Fly-XR’s AI Agent was created to address these limitations by 
introducing automated communication simulation, and personalized training 
feedback. 
The main features of the Fly-XR Agent were aimed to be: 
1. ATC simulation: Fly-XR’s AI Agent was designed to fill this gap by providing a 
realistic ATC interaction simulation. 
2. Real-Time Scenario Adaptation: This is unlike traditional scenarios, which follow a 
pre-programmed script or require an instructor to modify them. 
3. Personalized Feedback and Data Analytics: its ability to provide personalized 
training feedback based on a pilot’s performance. This feature allowed for a highly 
personalized training experience. 
4. Continuous Imporvement through Mchine Learning: Opening the possibilities for 
our tool to become, not only a trainer, but in the future an assistant for ATC. 
In this section we will cover the technological tools used and applied by Fly-XR and 
its development plans for the future. 
3.2.1 Fly-XR’s AI agent: Prototype and Development 
In this chapter, we will discuss how AI's potential was used to simulate ATC-pilot 
interactions for the Fly-XR prototype and the plans for the future development of 
more complex features. 
1. The first step was customizing the LLM (Large Language Model).  
Due to the ease of access and familiarity of the team members, the ChatGPT 
platform was used for the prototype. Initially the team thought about creating the 
agent in other platforms but soon we saw the versatility of ChatGPT was ideal for this 
project. 
First, we gathered ATC Communication Data; thankfully, this was an easy task as all 
the aviation radio communications are open source. We took information from 
several sources: 
- Radiotelephony Manuals: Aviation ATC communications is a particular language on 
its own and as such there are radiotelephony manuals from the main aviation 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
57
==PAGE:64==
authorities worldwide: ICAO , FAA , EASA , UK CAA . This allowed us not only 
43
44
45
46
to simulate general radiotelephony communications, but we were able to adapt it to 
different regions in the world. 
- Live ATC communications: By using LiveATC.net  , we can access live and 
47
recorded communications and use its transcriptions to feed our GPT. 
- The NASA Aviation Safety Reporting System  (ASRS): It contains thousands of 
48
reports including communications and incidents. Fundamental to train the model 
and learn from previous incidents and accidents. 
- Eurocontrol ATC Communications: Eurocontrol , a division of EASA, offers data 
49
and transcripts and communication logs, which are very useful to training the model 
with communications in Europe. 
We used data from several resources to see how scalable was the model and how it 
would behave with different inputs. The results were better tahn expected. 
Unfortunately, there was not much time to train the model before Roshan, the 
Roshan, the CTO, in charge of the GPT development started to disengage from the 
project a couple of weeks after we started working on the prototype. 
After data was collected, the model was fine-tuned, training a customized version of 
ChatGPT that we called ATCGPT. The communications were labelled for the model 
to better understand the sequence of events of the ATC interactions. 
Short example of communications data fed into the model: 
	
•	
Pilot: “ATC, Delta 215 requesting clearance to climb to FL350.” 
	
•	
ATC: “Delta 215, cleared to climb to flight level 350, report reaching.” 
2. It is also important to mention that context is everything, in particular in these 
scenarios. Both the GPT and the app user need to have a clear context of the 
situation, including location (with airport charts and information), current weather 
and forecast, and other aircraft (if any). 
 International Civil Aviation Organization (2007). ICAO Doc 9432: Manual of Radiotelephony (4th ed.). Available at 
43
this link.
 Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). FAA Summarized Phraseology Document. Available at this link.
44
 European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). Easy Access Rules for Standardised European Rules of the Air 
45
(SERA). Available at this link.
 UK Civil Aviation Authority (2021). Radiotelephony Manual. Available at this link.
46
 LiveATC.net (2024). Live ATC Communications. Available at this link.
47
 NASA Aviation Safety Reporting System (2024). Available at this link.
48
 Eurocontrol (2024). Air Traffic Management and Communication Logs. Available at the link.
49
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
58
==PAGE:65==
Also, aircraft location, trajectory, and intentions needed to be implemented into the 
model before each scenario. As you can imagine, with so many variables, complex 
scenarios simulating many aircraft were going to be challenging to simulate. That 
was one of the big tests the model would have had to face. 
Some standard scenarios were developed for the first users to try, test and further 
train the model. 
Standard steps to train an AI model. Source Harvard University  
50
3. After training the model with some basic data and creating some standard 
scenarios, we took our prototype and tested it with users. We wanted to prove our 
hypothesis that users needed our product. On top of that, we wanted to hear their 
willingness to pay and assess how often they could foresee them using it. 
  
 Harvard University (2023). The Making of ChatGPT: From Data to Dialogue. Available at the link.
50
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
59
==PAGE:66==
 
Some of the feedback was 
obtained from our user 
interviews with the prototype. 
The full reactions to these 
interviews and to our market 
research are in Appendix H: 
Prototype User Interviews Key 
Takeaways 
It is worth noting that the feedback collected with the agent from professional pilots 
and students was really good and in most cases, users were surprised about how 
realistic the interactions were. 
4. The next step planned was to do Reinforcement Learning to improve its 
performance and avoid inconsistencies and mistakes. 
We had defined some rules for the model to prioritize. Some of them were: 
Following accurate communication phraseology from the manuals, even if some 
ATC-pilot interactions didn’t follow them. 
Prioritizing safety and emergency commands over standard communications. 
Providing resolution communications in case of aircraft conflict. 
Once the rule functions were defined, we could improve the model's performance 
with OpenAI Gym by simulating feedback scenarios and providing positive 
feedback to the model when it follows the correct procedures and negative 
feedback when it makes mistakes. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
60
==PAGE:67==
5. The next objective was to train the model in special and emergency scenarios. 
That included non-standard communications and critical decision making form the 
user (pilot) point of view. 
6. The last step to have a fully functioning model was training it to handle multiple 
pilots in the same airspace. The team did not really discuss how this would be 
achieved due to the complex nature of the task and because we were prioritizing 
the previous steps to have a successful AI Agent. 
To achieve this, we should have designed a method for the agent to track different 
conversations simultaneously and keep the memory of each of the individual 
individual conversations. I believe this would not have been extremely complicated, 
given the fact that all pilot communications use unique identifiers (or callsigns) for 
each interaction. 
All in all, developing the AI agent was doable, and the early prototype we created 
was working surprisingly well. However, we realized the market for this solution was 
unwilling to pay for this tool, making it very complicated for us to transition from this 
tool to more advanced steps of the project, including virtual reality. 
3.2.2 Fly-XR’s Market Research 
The market research performed at Fly-XR went through different phases. The initial 
market research was performed well before Fly-XR first steps by mapping all relevant 
technologies to innovation and potential market gaps as it was described on the Fly-
XR’s Journey. 
After an idea was selected and a team was formed, the formal market analysis 
started: 
1. During the startup's first months, the founder used his aviation network and his 
current job as a commercial pilot to discuss ideas with colleagues and managers 
and analyze gaps from inside. 
2. The first discovery interviews took place with airline pilots, student pilots, flight 
instructors, flight school owners, aerospace engineers, management positions at 
airlines and air traffic controllers.  
During the startup's lifecycle, close to 30 discovery interviews were completed. 
Some of them showed the main pain points of different stakeholders in the aviation 
industry and their opinions about current methods to cover those gaps. You can 
find these interviews in Appendix I: Market Research Interviews. 
Other interviews during the prototype's development supplied key takeaways as 
feedback for the product. You can find more about these interviews in Appendix H: 
Prototype User Interviews Key Takeaways. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
61
==PAGE:68==
3. Define the user, customer, and user cases. Determine their value proposition and 
establish some hypothesis that we will contrast with more interviews about what 
the customer needs. Refer to Appendix D: Fly-XR Market Research Documented. 
During this step the target market is determined as well as its market size. In the 
case of our VR solution, we focused on airlines as a customer and airline pilots as 
users. Image below shows the market size in the USA and its annual expected 
growth. 
 
US Only Flight Simulator Market Size. Source Grand View Research Report 
4. Once the idea was determined worth pursuing (in this case, VR simulation for 
commercial pilots), we looked at the startup's competitor landscape. The main 
competitors for the project were traditional training devices, but some companies 
are still trying to do the same, applying VR to pilot training, this is for instance the 
case of VRPilot, image below. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
62
==PAGE:69==
 
VRPilot is a Danish company selling VR software for pilot training. Link to their website here 
5. Regulatory Landscape Study: After the competitive landscape was analyzed, we 
hit one of the main challenges for Fly-XR, the regulatory environment and the 
certification process. 
As we have mentioned in previous chapters, certification is one of the main 
drawbacks to innovation in aviation. Systems like our VR simulation software 
normally take several years to get a green light, if they do at all. We were aware 
about this being one of the main risks of our startup. 
6.Finally, we created customer personas after we had already pivoted to the ATC AI-
agent. You can meet Jason and Rachel, our cutomer personas on the Appendix D: 
Fly-XR Market Research Documented. 
Summing up, we believe the market research for Fly-XR was clear and well-mapped. 
Thanks to it, we identified the strengths and weaknesses of the project, and it helped 
align the team on the startup's direction. 
3.2.3 Fly-XR and Virtual Reality in Pilot Training 
We have already discussed the technical aspect of the AI Agent for communications 
training. Now, we will mention a little bit about the next steps planned to achieve the 
big vision of Fly-XR. A fully certified VR simulator trainer. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
63
==PAGE:70==
First of all, we should mention the platform on which we were planning to build the 
software. The founder’s idea was to build directly on the Apple ecosystem, thanks to 
the release of the Apple Vision Pro. This was indeed one of the assumptions when 
the idea was born. The VR/XR phenomenon would surely take off with the release of 
the Apple Vision Pro. 
Unfortunately, it didn't turn out that way, and the founder, who had already bought an 
Apple headset, was discouraged by the general public's poor acceptance. Still, after 
using the headset, I can say the product is definitely the future if Apple has patience 
and more companies and developers move to the VR ecosystem.  
However, we can say without a doubt that it will take its time. 
Once we realized the Apple Vision Pro was not going to be such a huge hit, we 
thought about moving toward the Quest 3 from Meta. And here is when we realized 
that we need developers wiht experience in that ecosystem… At least with the Vision 
Pro, it was a levelled field because everybody would be building from scratch. 
Regardless, in the near future, when these applications move onto VR, we are going 
to describe briefly the basic steps Fly-XR was going to take to bring this vision into 
reality. 
From zero to a VR software 
In the section below, we will explain the steps we followed in our quest to achieve this 
technological innovation and the ones that were necessary for success if we had not 
descoped and pivoted our product. 
1.Define the Scope and Use Cases: Thanks to our deep market research, we could 
envision exactly how the solution would look based on the feedback from the first 
stakeholders interviewed. 
2.Select the Available Software and Open Source Data to build on: There are several 
open source high fidelity aviation software with excellent airplane characteristics 
taken from the manufacturers. Some of the candidates are X-Plane and Microsoft 
Flight Simulator. 
3.Developing a prototype is easier said than done. We should start by descoping the 
MVP and target to build the features that can give us a working prototype in a 
reasonable timeframe first. To achieve this task, we would need an important 
amount of software engineers specialized in VR and AI. 
4. Once we have a working prototype, the goal would be to test it as much as 
possible for the program to learn and improve its capabilities over time.  
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
64
==PAGE:71==
5.When the product is good enough the main goal of Fly-XR should be establishing 
partnerships with some of the stakeholders, either aircraft manufacturers, simulator 
developers, airlines or flight schools. 
6.Once our software is reliable enough, the key step of certification has to be 
achieved for Fly-XR to capture an important segment of the market first. 
Descoping and Pivoting 
Two things happened throughout this period: 
1. We realized that the team lacked the skills (or time) to build a basic prototype. 
2. At the time of descoping, we found an application that was both easy to build and 
filled a clear gap in the market: an ATC AI Agent able to integrate into current 
training devices. Completely lacking this feature, communications with different 
entities are typically mocked by the instructor during training sessions. 
Below are the reasons why the team deemed descoping into an ATC AI Agent was 
the best idea with the resources available: 
- Uncertain Market Demand: It is difficult for airlines to perceive the product's value at 
the beginning of its development; due to the lack of certification of the product (and 
lower quality associated with the initial phases of the development). 
Our market research showed low demand or slow adoption of VR technology for 
commercial pilot training. 
- Development Risks: Lack of skills within the current team. 
- Long time to market: It takes a long time to build a prototype, even with the right 
team. Additionally, the time taken to develop an MVP that is useful for the customer 
was presumably long, as certification was one of their key requirements. 
- Competitors: Difficult to differentiate from competitors and risk of them addressing 
our target customer if we are successful with adoption. 
- Aviation authority regulations and certification: Even if the product is useful for 
users, the authorities have to certify it within a reasonable timeframe. 
Additionally, we saw an opportunity to promote the often forgotten radiotelephony 
training, and we could prove its importance through several articles and reports.  
51
 Great articles showing the importance of promoting good ATC communications practices in aviation and its 
51
relationship to incidents and accidents: 
	
- Skybrary (2024). Pilot-Controller Communications (OGHFA BN). Available at the link. 
	
- Reuters (2024). Japan Airlines Crash: Air Traffic Controllers Call for Significant Staff Increase. Available at 
the link.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
65
==PAGE:72==
3.2.4 Scalability and Cost-Effectiveness of AI and VR Solutions for Aviation 
Training 
In this subsection, we will focus on the benefits of using these technologies for 
aviation training. Hence, we are sure if it is not Fly-XR somebody will bring the 
innovation to the industry, as it is desperately needed. 
The main advantages of these technologies against traditional methods are their 
scalability (tackling directly the problem of the pilot shortage), cost and the level of 
realism they can achieve. We break them down below: 
• Cost-Effective and Scalable: These systems are far more affordable and flexible 
than current simulator devices. They can be deployed across multiple locations, 
allowing airlines to train more pilots simultaneously without requiring full-flight 
simulators at every facility. 
• Level of Realism: VR Tools allow pilots to immerse themselves in in-flight 
scenarios, allowing for more comprehensive preparation without the need for 
expensive physical equipment. 
• AI Training Customization: AI systems can customize training experiences for 
individuals, improving the quality of training. This helps reduce the overall time 
required to achieve certification. 
• Aligning with SDGs: These innovations contribute to the SDGs (SDGs 4 and 9). By 
improving the accessibility and cost of training. AI and VR technologies will make it 
easier for individuals from all economic backgrounds to become pilots, contributing 
to solving industry staffing issues. 
Leveraging AI and VR tools for pilot training presents a unique opportunity to address 
industry pain points. However, the capital required and the challenges to overcome 
cannot be undermined. 
3.2.5 Technology Ownership 
The topic of IP protection in this project is not straightforward, beginning with the fact 
that many of the initial elements from the system from the hardware device (probably 
the Quest 3 headset) and the software platform (probably X-Plane or Flight 
Simulator) would be third-party licensed. 
Ideally during the development, the startup would develop proprietary software 
focusing on protecting its intellectual property, both by signing NDA agreements with 
partners and customers and by licensing the service, exploring different models, 
including SaaS. 
Regardless, finding the right formula for protecting the company assests wpoulld be 
fundamental in this high tech competitive space. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
66
==PAGE:73==
3.3. The Business behind the Tech 
Every startup needs to bring innovation but also has a solid business model and a 
financial plan. Due to the complexity of technical developments and the number of 
pivots on the target customer and core technologies, the FLy-XR business plan was 
not very developed.  
Through market research, we saw that there was a demand for a solution, and the 
main challenge was achieving that technical feat. However, in this section, we will 
examine the business behind the startup.  
3.3.1 The Fly-XR Team 
First of all, we will take a look at the team. We will divide this section into two parts:  
- The original founding team 
- New Team Members in Silicon Valley 
The original founding team (2023) 
When documenting Fly-XR's story, the names of the team members at the 
foundation were mentioned. In this section, we will mention a few words about 
each of the members of the original idea: 
✦ Adam Aryeh: Systems Engineer passionate about aviation. One of the first three 
cofounders and a great mixed technical and business profile. A fantastic point of 
contact for our market research at the initial stage. Unfortunately, he was forced 
to leave the project when the Gaza war started in his country. 
✦ Alperen Turkmen, computer scientist, cofounder and first CTO of the startup. 
Unfortunately, his knowledge about VR was very minimal, but he tried to learn the 
technicalities for all of us to understand. 
✦ Juan Perez is the author of this thesis, CEO, and founder of Fly-XR. His 
background has been extensively covered in other sections. His main strength 
was the industry knowledge, business intuition and ablity to pitch and sell his 
idea. 
✦ Brandon Matchett, graphic designer and in charge of the startup's brand identity 
at the initial stage. 
✦ James Andrews, consultant at PwC and capable of fixing team issues and 
proposing a better business plan. An all rounded. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
67
==PAGE:74==
Image of the original founding team after a day of work 
New Team members in Silicon Valley 
After the team disintegrated in autumn 2023, the founder went to Silicon Valley 
trying to recruit a mores table team. Unfortunately, luck was not on his side, and 
even when getting advice not to get new recruits that weren't to stay in the long 
run, he assembled the best team possible, but still with no VR experts on it. 
The new team members found in Berkeley were:  
✦ Roshan Mohan, CTO and mechanical engineer. He has been the one who 
believed the most in Fly-XR besides the founder. With ample experience in 3 
startups throughout 3 years. There was always his useful advice to listen to. Able to 
learn anything, he was in charged of developing the prototype, training the model 
and making sure the technical side of the startup was covered. 
✦ Melanie Miksis, education in Business Administration, Marketing and Public Health 
and with a longer professional experience than most of the others, she was able to 
handle the team at its lowest points through the change of scope from the VR to the 
ATC solution. Really involved facing potential customers and other potential 
stakeholders. 
✦ Gaspard Kuhn, Project Manager and Business Developer, he started the semester 
very involved with the idea, but gradually declined his contributions. He was fighting 
the key fires and was good at managing people and getting us back on track. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
68
==PAGE:75==
✦ Amanda Ye, Product and UX Designer, the only designer on the team. She did a 
great job when needed. 
✦ Xuan Huang, Development Engineer, the heavy lifting of the software aspect 
should have been his responsibility, unfortunately. His priority was the completion of 
his MSc and he didn’t participate as actively as it looked at the beginning. 
Many other people contributed in different ways, but they were not considered part 
of the startup's core team. 
Unfortunately,  reviewing the startup's journey now. We can conclude that one of 
the main reasons for its failure was the lack of technical expertise, particularly in 
the realms of VR, AI and ML. 
3.3.2 Business Model and Financials 
Unfortunately, the business model changed as often as the startup pivoted the target 
customer or core product altogether. We will not go through the different business 
models proposed, but we will just focus on its final iteration. 
Then, the team decided to focus its efforts on developing an ATC Communications 
trainer, targeting pilot trainees, students, and inexperienced professional pilots, who 
need the most help with their radiocommunications. 
Phase 1 
The idea was to release the app into the App Store, not only to make a profit but 
mainly to prove product-market fit, to iterate the product and to train the model with 
real students. 
Phase 2 
This was only the beginning, we used to refer to it as phase one, aiming to partner in 
the future to integrate this system in traditional training devices, and simulators to 
add to them this extra module to increase their realism. 
Phase 3 
After the model being extensively used, the GPT would have become so accurate 
that it could act as a watchdog for real air traffic controllers or even act as an 
assistant for them. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
69
==PAGE:76==
Regardless, it was fundamental at a given point in time to establish a strong 
partnership, either with a direct customer, with the regulators, or with the simulator 
and aircraft manufacturers themselves. 
One of the reasons funding could not be secured was likely the lack of a clear 
business vision as the team was more focus in morphiong the idea to fit the customer 
and stakeholders needs with the product to be created. 
 
The three phases of the project on an image  
52
3.4 Fly-XR’s Challenges 
Fly-XR went through numerous challenges during its development; some were 
technical, and others related to the team and its geographical distance. But overall, 
the main hurdle was the lack of value of an uncertified product in an overregulated 
industry. Below we enumerate and briefly explain some of these challenges: 
1. The need to meet certification requirements in an overregulated and often slow 
industry, postponing the time-to-market over time frames many times 
unacceptable to investors. 
 Fortune Business Insights (2024). Air Traffic Control (ATC) Market Report. Available at this link. 
52
IMARC Group (2024). Civil Aerospace Simulation and Training Market Report. Available at this link.
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
70
==PAGE:77==
2. High Development Costs in a capital-intensive industry. The capital required to 
achieve Fly-XR's full vision was probably impossible to raise, given the doubtful 
nature of the return on investment or the timeframe to obtain this return. 
3. Lack of the necessary skillset on the team, particularly on the technical side. It is 
difficult to develop a VR system, but it is even more difficult if you don't have the 
experience and the knowledge to do it in-house. 
4. Team dispersion, the constant separation of the team members, starting with the 
founder, cannot help a startup's stability. It is difficult to go through the ups and 
downs of a startup as a team if the members are not geographically together, or 
at least if the founders cannot meet regularly. 
5. Difficulties raising capital: The reason for this is probably a combination of all of 
the above. As an investor, I would not bet my money if I am solely looking for 
profit with so many circumstances against the startup to start with. 
6. Third parties and technology dependencies. Building software on the wrong 
ecosystem is a catastrophic mistake, and choosing the winner in a new industry 
is never guaranteed. The startup's dependency on other hardware and software 
is, without a doubt, one of its weaknesses. 
7. Penetrating a market with established incumbents is never easy. Particularly in 
an industry that values safety and reliability as much as aviation does. From the 
start, you have to prove that your product is of the highest quality, very difficult to 
ask for a startup, particularly when developing solutions with artificial 
intelligence. 
All these reasons are enough to keep new companies out of the industry. The 
barriers of entry are truly high, but if any, this is the time to change the status quo 
through the possibilities posed by Artificial Intelligence. 
It is, however, necessary to choose a market gap that is 2easy to cover, establishing 
a beachhead to grow further with other applications in the space. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
71
==PAGE:78==
4. Conclusions 
This conclusions section summarizes the key findings and insights gained throughout 
this thesis. We have focused on the role of new technologies transforming aviation, 
particularly Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Reality. The thesis reflects on Fly-XR's 
contributions to this space, examining how these technologies can potentially fill in 
the gaps in the industry. 
Lessons have been highlighted throughout the document but will be synthesized 
here. The study also explores broader challenges inherent to the industry, like the 
reluctance to innovate and the importance of establishing strategic partnerships to 
succeed in the entrepreneurial journey in aviation. 
The second part of the conclusion provides conclusions on the development of Fly-
XR and lessons learned. 
4.1 Summary of Findings about aviation and new 
technologies 
This section provides a comprehensive summary of the key findings regarding 
integrating new technologies, particularly AI and VR, in aviation and specifically in 
aviation training. Fly-XR's ambitions, lessons, and mistakes highlighting its role. 
4.1.1 Key Contributions to Aviation Training Through AI and VR 
Despite its failure, one of the most promising findings from the development of Fly-
XR is the potential for new technologies to represent the future of aviation and 
aviation training, particularly AI and possibly VR. 
The scalability potential and personalized learning capabilities will be 
groundbreaking, not only in pilot’s training but also in other personnel in a variety of 
fields. I truly hope to participate actively in this transition, and regardless, I cannot 
wait to see what these new technologies can offer us through the next few years. 
4.1.3 Lessons Learned from Fly-XR’s Entrepreneurial Journey 
Fly-XR’s journey offers several key entrepreneurial lessons: 
✦ Surgical focus from the beginning: Dealing with several complex fronts, from 
technical complexities, regulatory concerns, fundraising issues, and team lack of 
cohesion, are big enough problems when resources are thin. Seize the opportunity 
identified through market research and keep the rest of the problems away from the 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
72
==PAGE:79==
team and the startup: identify the problem with customers and focus on developing 
the solution with them. 
✦ Talk to your stakeholders, particularly your customers. There will never be too 
much conversation with customers. they have all the answers in the entrepreneurial 
journey. 
✦ Team Cohesion is Fundamental: The disintegration of the Fly-XR team twice, 
mainly due to geographical constraints, reflects the importance for the founders to 
be stable geographically and emotionally when embarking in a new startup project. 
Maintaining communication and ensuring alignment when choosing team members 
is essential. 
✦ Stringent Regulation Requires Patience: Startups in heavily regulated industries 
need to engage early with regulators, plan for long approval timelines since their 
inception, and know they should be in the game for the long run if they want to 
succeed. 
✦ Fundraising in some industries is really challenging: Securing funding for an 
industry that has a long time to market and is very capital intensive is not an easy 
task; another extreme example of this kind of industry is space. It is really hard to 
build a startup in these spaces.  
✦ Partnerships are key in this kind of industry. They make a huge difference in ease 
of securing funding, gaining credibility from customers and regulators, and maybe 
granting some money in a revenue-based financing model. 
These lessons will proof very valuable in the author's future entrepreneurial career, 
within aviation, space and beyond. 
4.2 Final Reflections on Fly-XR and My Journey 
The journey of Fly-XR has been one of personal and professional growth, filled with 
both triumphs and challenges. While the company ultimately disintegrated, the 
experiences and lessons learned along the way have shaped my outlook on 
entrepreneurship, leadership, and innovation. This section reflects on how Fly-XR 
differed from past projects, how I have grown as an entrepreneur, and the ways in 
which managing uncertainty and setbacks provided invaluable insights for future 
ventures. 
4.2.1 Differentiating Fly-XR from Past Projects 
One of the most significant aspects of Fly-XR was how it ended up similar to previous 
projects by team dissolution due to geographical constraints, which is the biggest 
lesson I have learned. Entrepreneurship requires stability. A team is like a plant, it 
requires constant watering and it needs deep roots to flourish. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
73
==PAGE:80==
Furthermore, embarking on a project of this technical complexity in the super 
enriching environment of San Francisco was exactly what I needed; after this, I can 
only hope to grow on my mistakes and failures and keep my passion for technology 
and entrepreneurship alive until the next opportunity appears.  
Key differences between Fly-XR and my previous projects included: 
✦ Scale and Impact: Fly-XR had the potential to impact the global aviation industry, 
which is why I love entrepreneurship: to improve people’s lives. 
✦ Technological Complexity: Fly-XR involved integrating cutting-edge technologies to 
develop new projects, and it was as exciting as it sounds.  
✦ Industry Challenges: I faced the reality of a complex industry full of challenges, 
because of this, I believe, it is possible to break in, at least not many other stratups 
will think about it. 
These differences made Fly-XR a challenging experience, but also pushed me to 
grow as a leader and as an entrepreneur. 
4.2.2 Mistakes are Future Lessons 
In this small section, I would like to mention the mistakes undergone on the way, to 
remember not to repeat them in my next project: 
1. Geographical Dispersion: My main lesson, without a doubt, is a mistake I have 
repeatedly made. It has been discussed several times throughout the thesis. 
2. Descoping the Idea to Thin: Losing sight of the core vision and becoming less 
appealing to investors and customers. 
3. Not Finding the Right Team: Cliche mistake, but it is the truth, a startup is as 
strong as it is its team. 
4. Not Considering a Large Enough Market: The startup won't be attrctive if the 
market is too small. VC funding requires a high reutrn on invesment, aiming at 
moonshots not at average growth businesses. 
5. Focusing on an Industry Problem Without a Clear Value Proposition and Pain 
Point: another rookie mistake by founders, but it still happens, even when you 
know the industry well. To avoid it, talk to customers as much as you can! 
6. Delayed Partnerships: In high barriers of entry industries, having early 
partnerships with big stakeholders makes the difference in terms of credibility, 
andease of financing.  
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
74
==PAGE:81==
5. References 
The following section contains the sources cited in this thesis. This ensures that all 
claims and data provided are well supported and can be referenced for future 
readers. 
These sources were fundamental to the writing of this thesis, and as such, I would 
like to credit those authors’ work on which I could build. These references have been 
useful, particularly in the areas of aviation technology, entrepreneurship and industry 
trends, mainly across chapter 2 of this thesis work. 
The sources are categorized below into books, articles, websites and reports for 
ease of access to the reader: 
Books 
1. International Civil Aviation Organization (2007). ICAO Doc 9432: Manual of 
Radiotelephony (4th ed.). Available at: https://www.ealts.com/documents/
ICAO%20Doc%209432%20Manual%20of%20Radiotelephony%20(4th%20ed.
%202007).pdf 
2. UK Civil Aviation Authority (2021). Radiotelephony Manual. Available at: https://
www.caa.co.uk/publication/download/18165 
3. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). FAA Summarized Phraseology Document. 
Available at: https://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/publications/atpubs/fs_html/
chap11_section_1.html 
4. European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). Easy Access Rules for 
Standardised European Rules of the Air (SERA). Available at: https://
www.easa.europa.eu/en/document-library/easy-access-rules/online-publications/
easy-access-rules-standardised-european?page=21 
Websites 
	
•	
International Civil Aviation Organization (2023). Aviation Innovation 
Posing Opportunities and Challenges for Operators and Regulators. Available at: 
https://www.icao.int/newsroom/Pages/aviation-innovation.aspx 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
75
==PAGE:82==
	
3.	
Boom Supersonic. Boom Supersonic Announces New Aircraft, Engine, 
and Investment Milestones (2023). Available at: https://boomsupersonic.com/press-
release/boom-supersonic-announces-new-aircraft-engine-and-investment-milestones 
	
4.	
Frasca Flight Simulation (2023). How Much Does a Frasca Simulator 
Cost? Available at: https://www.frasca.com/how-much-does-a-frasca-simulator-cost/ 
	
•	
VRPilot (2024). Virtual Reality Solutions for Pilot Training. Available at: 
https://vrpilot.aero/ 
Reports 
	
•	
Boeing (2024). Pilot and Technician Outlook 2024-2043. Available at: 
https://www.boeing.com/commercial/market/pilot-technician-outlook 
	
1.	
Airports Council International (2024). Long-Term Passenger Traffic 
(2016–2052). Available at: https://aci.aero/2024/02/13/the-trusted-source-for-air-
travel-demand-updates/ 
	
2.	
IATA (2018). The Future of Aviation Industry 2035. 
	
3.	
McKinsey & Company. What is Digital Twin Technology? Published 
July 14, 2023. Available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/mckinsey-
explainers/what-is-digital-twin-technology 
	
4.	
Oliver Wyman (2022). The Airline Pilot Shortage Will Get Worse. 
Available at: https://www.oliverwyman.com/our-expertise/insights/2022/jul/airline-
pilot-shortage-will-get-worse.html 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
76
==PAGE:83==
6. Appendices 
Supplementary material includes pitchdecks from the startup, interview material, the 
interactive prototype on Figma, Market Research and Scoping well Documented and 
a promotional video for the product: 
Appendix A: Last Pitch Deck from Fly-XR 
Uploaded together with the MSc thesis into DTU Inside. 
Pitchdeck from June 2024. 
In this pitchdeck the focus is shifted to an initial ATC training module to be 
integrated into existing flight simulators through partnerships later. Eventually, 
becoming an assistant for real air traffic controllers. 
Appendix B: First Pitch Deck from Leading Edge 
Technologies 
Uploaded together with the MSc thesis into DTU Inside. 
Pitchdeck from September 2023. 
In this pitchdeck the initial vision of a VR-powered flight trainer is still untouched. 
Appendix C: Fly-XR Prototype Documentation 
Uploaded together with the MSc thesis into DTU Inside. 
The study was documented in such a formal manner as it was used in one of the 
subjects of a team member at UC Berkeley, Spring 2024. 
Appendix D: Fly-XR Market Research Documented 
Uploaded together with the MSc thesis into DTU Inside. 
The study was documented in such a formal manner as it was used in one of the 
subjects of a team member at UC Berkeley, Spring 2024. 
Appendix E: Fly-XR MVP Scoping and Business 
Model Documented 
Uploaded together with the MSc thesis into DTU Inside. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
77
==PAGE:84==
The study was documented in such a formal manner as it was used in one of the 
subjects of a team member at UC Berkeley, Spring 2024. 
Appendix F: Short Promotional Video, Collateral 
The link contains a video with the collateral for the product. The team came up with 
it in April, around the same time the Prototype was completed: 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-yW8rUEfF1UehJNeusTqCDAtgt7koOoJ/view?
usp=sharing 
Appendix G: Market Research Interviews 
In this section different links to Interview Notes and an Interview Guide to be 
followed by all the team members when conducting interviews. The goal was to 
obtained wuantitative data about our target customers and other stakeholders: 
- Customer Interview Guide: 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-
YuUYg0UWA0zVk_CE510I_GBe78jhDLUscWS6tq6EkM/edit?usp=sharing 
- Aviation Stakeholders’ Interview Notes (the documents are fragmented containing 
several interviews), for further reference follow them together with the “Customer 
Interview Guide”: 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/
1QrogVBjjSlU2a0xSC1jRc_GOLJxqAm4gYgM8aXCjmQc/edit?usp=sharing 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/
18YGRqid0mcdgh2xhZHEVOTAUO2s_akoiEq382FI4Wtg/edit?usp=sharing 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1igW-4WnAj-
nPuC_eTmr4IgcOgGLpkIN__fd2Qq6lnIQ/edit?usp=sharing 
- Usability Interviews Transcripts 
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1pJljdrf3BRwUpLQYtQ52JtXhZ5O1eKrJ?
usp=sharing 
- Usability Interviews Script 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SKo9Dv8f8ZJbFP_J7J3xe2-
uRBiSHl0xyHxJ5LcEX6Q/edit?usp=sharing 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
78
==PAGE:85==
Appendix H: Prototype User Interviews Key 
Takeaways 
This appendix shows the main takeaways from the user interviews performed with 
the prototype. The team in Miro collected them and organized them according to 
different criteria. Screenshots from Miro are shown in this appendix. 
A) User Interview Product Reactions 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
79
==PAGE:86==
B) Interview feedback organized by interviewee 
Simply shown for the reader to see how the work was organized. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
80
==PAGE:87==
C) Interview feedback classified in groups 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
81
==PAGE:88==
Appendix I: Clickable Prototype: ATC 
Communications Trainer in Figma 
Access the prototype in Figma via this link: Figma Prototype 
Note the prototype isn’t linked to the GPT, it is a clickable Figma file to be used for 
the Demo togehter with the GPT on an external device. 
Prototype Completed in April 2024. 
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
82
==PAGE:89==
AI-­Powered Solutions for Aviation Training:  A Study on Fly­XR’s Impact and Innovation       
83
