==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Computer Science and Engineering
Learning Procedural 3D Representation of
Material Microgeometry
Adam Bosák
Kongens Lyngby, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Jeppe Revall Frisvad, Technical University of Denmark
Co-supervisor: Venu Bojja, Technical University of Denmark
External Co-supervisor: Juan Raúl Padrón Griffe, Universidad de Zaragoza
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Microstructure reconstruction is critical in applications such as manufacturing,
light simulations, realistic rendering and understanding natural mechanisms like
structural coloration. Traditional approaches to microstructure reconstruction
are either computationally expensive to evaluate or lack expressiveness. In this
thesis, we propose microstructure representation using Signed Distance Func-
tions (SDFs) to address these limitations. We explore three approaches to find-
ing a SDF that closely represents the microstructure. First, we formulate the
reconstruction as a data fitting problem, then we look at the problem through
the lens of analysis-by-synthesis, and finally we learn implicit neural represen-
tations of the microstructural patterns. We simplify the problem to synthetic
exemplars. An evaluation on our synthetic dataset demonstrates that the data
fitting method outperforms the other approaches. However, all methods are
unable to solve high-dimensional problems. Despite these limitations, we think
that our findings offer a promising direction for microstructure reconstruction,
while leaving a space for potential future improvements.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute, Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science at Technical University of Denmark in partial fulfilment of
the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
In the course of writing this thesis, I have utilized OpenAI’s ChatGPT, an AI-
based language model, to assist me with improving grammar and readability
of the text in certain sections. While ChatGPT has been a valuable resource,
all ideas, analyses, code and conclusions presented in this thesis are entirely my
own. I take full responsibility for the content and the integrity of the research
presented.
Adam Bosák - s222960
Lyngby, 16-October-2024
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Jeppe Revall Frisvad, Venu Bojja and
Juan Raul Padron Griffe for being so generous with their time. The completion
of the thesis would not have been possible without their great help, insightful
suggestions and feedback on my work. I would also like to thank my family for
their support throughout this journey.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
TSDF Truncated Signed Distance Function
PCG Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient
SDF
Signed Distance Function
MAE Mean Absolute Error
CMA-ES Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy
SHGO Simplicial Homology Global Optimization
BH
Basin-Hopping
SGD Stochastic Gradient Descent
NLLS Non-Linear Least Squares
DFT
Discrete Fourier Transform
LPIPS Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity
MVD Multiview Diffusion Method
SAM Segment Anything Model
MSE Mean Squared Error
DFT
Discrete Fourier Transform
SLSQP Sequential Least Squares Programming
QP
Quadratic Programming
==PAGE:10==
BRDF Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function
BSDF Bidirectional Scattering Distribution Function
MC
Marching Cubes
MLP Multilayer perceptron
NeRF Neural Radiance Fields
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit
PRNG Pseudorandom Number Generator
SfM
Structure from Motion
MVS Multi-View Stereo
CT
Computed Tomography
microCT Microcomputed Tomography
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
INR
Implicit Neural Representation
LOD Levels of Detail
HDR High Dynamic Range
SEM Scanning Electron Microscopy
TEM Transmission Electron Microscopy
KAN Kolmogorov-Arnold Network
==PAGE:11==
List of Notations
Vector Spaces and Sets
R
the set of real numbers
N
the set of natural numbers without 0
Rn
the vector space of n-dimensional vectors
pa, bq
the open interval of real numbers between a and
b
ra, bs
the closed interval of real numbers between a
and b
A ˆ B
Cartesian product of the set A and B
inf A
infimum of the set A
Linear Algebra
A P Rmˆn
a matrix with m rows and n columns
a P Rm
a vector with m rows and 1 column
aT P Rm
a transposed vector with 1 row and m columns
Ai,j
component in i-th row and j-th column of the
matrix A
ai
component in i-th row of the vector a
1
1-th vector with appropriate number of rows
==PAGE:12==
x
Functions and Other
logpxq
the natural logarithm of a positive number x
||x||
the Euclidean norm of the point x P Rn :
přn
i“1 x2
i q1{2
txu
elementwise flooring operation of the vector x
Er¨s
expectation function
η
random variable
==PAGE:13==
xi
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Acronyms
vii
List of Notations
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Works
3
2.1
Signed Distance Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Microstructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Scene Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Differentiable Rendering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methods
17
3.1
Analytical Optimization-based Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Problem Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.2
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.3
Loss Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.4
Optimization Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Analysis-by-Synthesis Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.1
Problem Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
3.2.4
Optimization Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Neural Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.1
Problem Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.2
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.3
Network Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.4
Loss Function and Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Implementation Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Results
35
4.1
Synthetic Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
Gyroid Family
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.2
Spherical Microstructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.3
Fibers Microstructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.4
Porous Microstructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Set-Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4.1
Analytical Optimization-based Methods . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4.2
Analysis-by-Synthesis Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4.3
Neural Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4.4
Approaches Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.4.5
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
Appendix A: Tables
73
Appendix B: Plots
75
Appendix C: Images
79
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Microgometry plays a fundamental role in many areas of our lives.
From a
physical perspective, it is well-established that macro-scale appearance is deter-
mined by small-scale details [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], making the final look dependent
on various scales. A good example are granular materials such as sand, snow,
and sugar, as they show different visual characteristics depending on the scale
of the observation. To achieve highly realistic rendering, it is therefore desirable
to also incorporate the microgeometry information into the rendering process.
Furthermore, much of the research focuses on discovering the mechanisms be-
hind structural coloration found in nature [7, 8]. Microgeometry plays a crutial
role in this process. The vibrant colors that change with the angle of view and
illumination of various animals, such as butterflies and beetles, are a result of
micro- and nanostructures that control how light is absorbed, reflected, and re-
fracted, producing their final appearance. Closely related, microstructures are
crucial for accurate light scattering simulations in different materials [9].
Moreover, the micro- and nanostructure greatly influence the material prop-
erties.
Humans have drawn inspiration from nature to fabricate innovative
designs, such as gecko-toe-inspired climbing robots [10, 11].
Similarly, drag
reduction of solid objects moving through liquids, like boats, can be achieved
using 3D-printed swordfish and shark skin microstructures [12]. The ability to
simulate [13, 14] and 3D print [15, 16, 17, 18, 19] reconstructed microgeometries
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
offers more possibilities to improving and using such technologies. Therefore,
for further advancements in the field, it is desirable to accurately reconstruct
the microgeometry observed in the nature.
Microstructures are traditionally reconstructed by statistical models [20], e.g.
statistical properties of the microstructural image [21, 22, 23], descriptors of
an image [24] or latent vector representations [25]. While these methods are
expressive enough, their evaluation can be computationally expensive. Other
approaches to representing microstructures, such as skeleton graphs [26] and
splines [27], also exist but suffer from memory inefficiency for dense microstruc-
tures and are not expressive enough.
Our goal is to identify a pattern within the microstructure from a Microcomputed
Tomography (microCT) [28] or a RGB image [29]. The pattern can later be
used to procedurally fill objects of arbitrary size and shape. While extracting
meshes from Computed Tomography (CT) scans using methods like Marching
Cubes (MC) [30] and alike [31, 32, 33, 34], is possible, these techniques often
introduce artifacts such as blockiness, can be inefficient for noisy input, are
limited to only modeling the extracted patch and explicitly store the geometry.
To overcome these limitations, we represent the microstructures through Signed
Distance Functions (SDFs). Such representation is computationally and memory-
efficient, expressive enough to capture a wide variety of microgeometries, easily
visualized, and has a relatively low evaluation cost. We propose three different
approaches to reconstructing a SDF that accurately models the microstructure.
Two of these approaches are fitting methods, with their fitting functions build-
ing on a prior work in microstructure modeling using SDFs proposed in Venu
Bojja’s Ph.D. thesis. In the third approach, we express the SDF as a neural
implicit function. For the proof of concept, we only focus on reconstruction
of synthetic microstructures with the possibility to extend our approaches to
real world microCT and/or RGB in the future. This transition can be achieved
without requiring major modifications to the proposed approaches.
To summarize, the contributions of our work include:
• Formulation of microstructure reconstruction as a data fitting problem us-
ing signed distances, addressed by first-order and gradient-free optimizers.
• Microgeometry reconstruction via the lens of analysis-by-synthesis, solved
by gradient-free optimizers.
• Reconstruction approached through finding an Implicit Neural Represen-
tation (INR) of the SDF representing the microgeometries.
• Benchmarking and evaluation of the approaches on our synthetic dataset.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Related Works
In this chapter, we would like to present current research in the microstructure
and scene reconstruction. We begin by reviewing related works on signed dis-
tance functions and different modeling of microstructures. Secondly, we mention
current state-of-the-art macro-scale reconstruction methods which do not neces-
sarily rely on the distance functions, but have potential applications for micro-
geometry reconstruction. We then discuss differentiable rendering techniques,
as adapting our non-differentiable pipeline for the analysis-by-synthesis could
be useful in the future. Finally, we mention some publicly available datasets.
2.1
Signed Distance Function
Signed distance functions are a specific class of implicit surfaces.
They
express the surface by a function f : Rn Ñ R. The formal definition of the SDF
of a surface S is
fpxq “
$
’
’
&
’
’
%
inf
yPS0}x ´ y},
if x P RnzS poutside the surfaceq,
0,
if x P S0 pon the surfaceq,
´ inf
yPS0}x ´ y},
if x P SzS0 pinside the surfaceq,
(2.1)
==PAGE:20==
4
Related Works
where }x´y} is the distance between the point x and the closest point y on the
surface S0. SDFs can be categorized into two subsets: exact and approximate.
Exact SDFs are guaranteed to output a distance, thus satisfying the Eikonal
equation almost everywhere:
|∇fpxq| “ 1.
(2.2)
When using approximate SDFs in rendering, deviations from the Eikonal equa-
tion can cause issues. Specifically, having a Lipschitz constant greater than 1
(i.e., upperbound of gradients larger than 1) can introduce rendering artifacts
such as incorrect surface sharpness [35]. On the other hand, if the Lipschitz
constant is smaller than 1, the convergence of the rendering algorithms can be
slowed down.
Visualization. The first method of visualizing the SDF is by ray marching.
Consider a ray parameterized by the time t, with a starting point x0 and a
unit-scale direction vector d : rptq “ x0 ` td. The ray marching method boils
down to finding roots of the implicit surface using iterative steps along the ray
with a fixed steps size ∆t. In each step, we evaluate the SDF and once the
sign changes, we find the root using a binary search. However, a key problem
of this approach is the potential to overshoot the surface, leading to missed
intersections and incorrect renders.
A better alternative to the ray marching is the sphere tracing rendering algo-
rithm [36, 37]. The sphere tracing also progresses along the ray, however, the
step size is adaptively set to ∆t “ fpxiq ´ ϵ where ϵ is a small positive value
to account for numerical errors. This means that the step size is always a lower
bound of the true distance along the ray, preventing overshooting and ensur-
ing that no objects are missed along the ray. The algorithm terminates once
the signed distance is small enough. An illustration of the sphere tracing algo-
rithm can be found in the Figure 2.1. To know more about the modeling and
ray tracing of the implicit surfaces, we recommend the reader to consult Inigo
Quilez articles [38]. The sphere tracing is a key algorithm for visualization, with
its advancement being represented in Segment Tracing using a Local Lipschitz
Bound [39].
Another method for visualizing the SDF is the Marching Cubes algorithm [30].
Originally proposed for the visualization of CT and Magnetic Resonance Imag-
ing (MRI) data, this algorithm generates an isosurface mesh by discretizing the
volume into a grid of cubes and evaluating the SDF at the corners (vertices)
of each cube. Based on the relative SDF values at the corners, the algorithm
then uses a pre-defined lookup table to determine how the surface intersects
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Signed Distance Function
5
Figure 2.1: Sphere Tracing. The illustration of the adaptive step size of the
sphere tracing algorithm. Source: [40].
the edges of each cube producing a triangulated surface that approximates the
isosurface. Note that this method generates a discretized mesh, which can result
in visible artifacts, such as blockiness or aliasing, especially when the resolution
of the grid is low, compared to the sphere tracing algorithm which produces a
smoother and more accurate visualization of the implicit surface. More modern
approaches to generating mesh from the signed distance fields are [31, 32, 33, 34].
Learning SDF. And how does one learn the SDF from examplars? The most
straightforward way is by fitting a model f : Rn Ñ R to the ground truth signed
distance data. A most suitable and flexible choice for the fitting function is a
neural network, which creates what is known as an INR. For instance, Sitzmann
el al. find the INR of the SDF using the SIREN [41] neural network with sine
activation function to fit the distances. Recently, a Gabor wavelet activation
function has been proposed, offering a better performance than SIREN for INR
tasks [42]. In theory, any fitting function can be used to fit the SDF, such as
the generalized implicit neural representation [43], the octree-based neural net-
work with different Levels of Detail (LOD) [44] of a signed distance, Multilayer
perceptron (MLP) with Fourier features [45], or MLP with a trainable multires-
olution hash encoding [46]. However, it is important to note that the INR will
only approximate the SDF, most probably resulting in a gradient with non-
unit magnitude. Coiffier and Béthune [35] try to mitigate this problem with
a neural network which is 1-Lipschitz by construction together with a hinge-
Kantorovitch-Rubinstein loss to enforce the gradient’s upper bound.
A more generalized and scalable approach to modeling SDFs is proposed by Park
et al. with DeepSDF [47]. Instead of learning the signed distance for a single
exemplar, DeepSDF learns a MLP expressing continuous representation for an
entire class of objects. The key innovation is the concatenation of a latent vector
z to the input coordinates, allowing the model to encode various objects within
a shared latent space. The model is trained across a dataset of N shapes, where
for each shape, the model minimizes the difference between predicted signed
==PAGE:22==
6
Related Works
distances and the ground truth values from the labeling function ˆS : R3 Ñ R.
Mathematically, this is formulated as
min
θ,tziuN
i“1
N
ÿ
i“1
¨
˝
|Ωi|
ÿ
j“1
Lpfθpzi, xjq, ˆSpxjqq ` 1
σ2 }zi}2
2
˛
‚,
(2.3)
where θ represents the network parameters, zi is the latent vector for each
object i, and Ωi is the set of input points for each object. At inference, the
network parameters θ are frozen, and only the latent vector z for the current
object is optimized to represent the object’s specific signed distance function.
The inference can be described as
ˆz “ arg min
z
ÿ
xjPΩ
Lpfθpz, xjq, ˆSpxjqq ` 1
σ2 }z}2
2.
(2.4)
The primary advantage of DeepSDF over standard INRs for SDF modeling lies
in its significantly faster inference speed. During inference, only the latent vector
is optimized, whereas traditional INRs require the optimization of all network
parameters. Furthermore, a well trained model can work with noisy and even
incomplete data.
All of the methods discussed above rely on ground truth signed distance val-
ues. From another perspective, Atzmon et al. introduced Sign Agnostic Learn-
ing [48] and Amos et al. the Implicit Geometry Regularization[49], both bypass-
ing the need for estimating ground truth signed distances, which is a process
that can be complex and can introduce errors. Instead, both methods learn the
implicit surface directly from a point cloud or a triangle soup.
Finally, a different option to bypass the extraction of signed distance fields en-
tirely is to directly learn the signed distance function from multi-view RGB
images using differentiable rendering as proposed in [50, 51, 52, 53]. This ap-
proach leverages differentiable sphere tracing R to render the scene. Using the
backpropagation in automatic differentiation, they compute the gradients with
respect to scene parameters ϕ, enabling the use of first-order optimization meth-
ods. The typical loss function is either the L1 or the L2 between the target I
and the scene-parameters-dependent rendered images Rpϕq
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Microstructures
7
L1pRpϕq, Iq “ ||Rpϕq ´ I||1,
(2.5)
L2pRpϕq, Iq “ ||Rpϕq ´ I||2
2.
(2.6)
Extracting Signed Distance Fields. In case of the CT scan, exemplar rep-
resented as a 3D voxel grid ΩD, one can generate a signed distance field, also
represented on ΩD, based on the selected density. A common approach involves
first creating a binary segmentation of the material according to the chosen
density and then calculating the distance [54]. However, this method can in-
troduce artifacts. Bryce et al. [55] address this issue by employing basis spline
interpolation techniques, which yield improved results. Alternatively, one can
extract the iso-surface represented by a triangular mesh from the density field
using the MC algorithm [30] and then compute the signed distance by sampling
a finite number of points on the mesh. This distance is determined by finding
the closest distance from each point to the mesh using a KD-tree, as described
in [47].
A method for estimating the signed distances from a set of RGB-D images,
proposed by Zollhöfer et al. [56], uses depth fusion, followed by refinement of the
truncated signed distance field. The method refines the depth fused initial signed
distance field through an energy minimization process. The energy consists of
both a shading-based term that compares the shading of the current field to
that of the input images, and a signed distance-based term. The problem is
formulated as a non-linear least squares problem which they linearize using a
first-order Taylor expansion and further solve iteratively using a Preconditioned
Conjugate Gradient (PCG) solver.
2.2
Microstructures
Traditional Microstructure Representations: Microstructures are typi-
cally not represented explicitly as it would be too computationally and memory-
wise expensive. Instead statistical approaches [20] are used to implicitly repre-
sent the 2D and 3D images I of microstructures which later enables the image
reconstruction from the implicit representation. While these methods are typi-
cally expressive enough, their evaluation is however costly and it could sacrifice
some geometric details.
The first approach to expressing microstructures is by statistical functions such
as the two-point correlation function[21] that measures the expected distance
==PAGE:24==
8
Related Works
between two points in an image or a voxel grid: Spr1, r2q “ Erηr1, ηr2s, where
random variable ηr1 is either 1 in case of a presence of a microstructure on the
position r1, or 0 otherwise. The two-point correlation function is particularly
effective for describing porous materials, as it captures the spatial distribution
and connectivity of the material’s structure. Some other statistical functions
are for example lineal-path function [22] or two-point cluster correlation func-
tion [23].
The reconstruction of a given microstructure’s statistical function
can be framed as an energy minimization problem, where the goal is for the re-
constructed image’s statistical properties to closely match the learned statistical
function. A common approach to this is the Yeong and Torquato reconstruction
method [57].
Another approach to microstructure characterization is through the use of phys-
ical descriptors [24]. These can be either deterministic or stochastic. A mi-
crostructure is typically characterized by a set of descriptors, such as total sur-
face area, pore sizes, the nearest neighbor distance between clusters, eccentricity,
and others. To reconstruct a microstructure from its physical descriptors, an
optimization approach is again applied, aiming to generate an image whose
physical descriptors closely resemble the learned ones [58].
The spectral density function describes microstructures by analyzing the Fourier
coefficients of the microstructural signal [59]. Typically, the squared amplitudes
of these coefficients are sufficient to represent the microstructure. This equals to
encoding it as a series of amplitudes of sine and cosine waves with different fre-
quencies, making the spectral density function more generalizable and compact
compared to the former approaches:
ρpIq “ ApFpIqq2,
(2.7)
where ρ, I, F, A are the spectral density function, the image, Fourier transform
and amplitude function respectively. The principles behind image reconstruc-
tion involve either sampling from a distribution derived from the normalized
spectral density function, as in the level-cutting random field method [60], or
geometrically arranging disks of various sizes, as in the disk-packing method [61].
Finally, machine learning has been used to extract features and charactarize the
microstructures, offering a better flexibility compared to the traditional hand-
crafted approaches. The idea is to learn a statistical model that implicitly rep-
resents the microstructure image as a conditional probability distribution over
the pixels. Various techniques have been applied, such as unsupervised learn-
ing with convolutional deep belief networks [62], and supervised learning [63].
From a different perspective, microstructure classification using support vector
machines [64] allows for identifying and searching for similar structures within
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Microstructures
9
a database. Moreover, deep learning has been used to reconstruct 3D images
from the 2D exemplars, for instance using transfer learning [65] and diffusion
models [66]. An overview of machine learning methods for encoding 2D mi-
crostructure images into a latent space can be found in [25].
Alternative Microstructure Modeling. To achieve elasticity in materials,
Tozoni et al. [27] developed a representation of rhombic microstructures by
merging cell structures, which are parametrized by smooth spline functions.
Similarly, Panetta et al. [26], with the aim to minimize stress concentrations,
represent microstructures as a skeleton graph, with each vertex sphere param-
eterized by position, radius, and a smoothing factor. The primitives are then
defined as the convex hull of the vertices. These approaches, and others such as
Voronoi open-cell foam [16], work for the given problem but might not be ex-
pressive enough for representing any microgeometry. Additionally, their memory
footprint can become prohibitively large when dealing with microscopic struc-
tures, which are often extremely dense.
On the other hand, Venu Bojja in his Ph.D. thesis explores microstructure mod-
eling using SDFs. Bojja represents microstructures by using trigonometric and
periodic functions, specifically sine and cosine waves. Noise can be added to in-
troduce randomness into the structures, although this step could make the SDF
non-differentiabile.
The benefit of such representation is the ability to gen-
erate infinite amount of geometry (extrapolation) without any need for tiling
of learned structures, while being computationally and memory efficient. Fur-
thermore, such representation is highly expressive in representation of different
microstructures and could be easily visualized using techniques described in the
Section 2.1. In this work, two of our approaches utilize this representation, and
our synthetic dataset is constructed using this method.
Mimicking Microstructures: Another approach is modeling or simulating
micro-scale properties instead. For instance, Papas et al. [67] propose a new
Bidirectional Scattering Distribution Function (BSDF) that simulates the scat-
tering behaviour of the paper material closely resembling their measurements.
Another modeling of a paper was introduced in the [68], where Green et al.
introduced a simplified stochastic of the paper fibers and Monte Carlo simula-
tion of the light scattering. Other fine-detailed microstructure can be simulated
by displacement maps, such as skin microstructure [69].
The skin displace-
ment map is convolved with blurring or sharpening filters to mimic a natural
skin microstructure behaviour. Yan et al. proposed a Bidirectional Reflectance
Distribution Function (BRDF) model for specular microstructures [2], such as
metallic paint and steel with surface scratches and bumps, where the BRDF
is represented as a mixture of Gaussians. An approach to detailed rendering
affected by small-scale features is addressed by the Interactive Bi-material De-
sign [3], where users can modify small-scale geometry, and material BRDF to
==PAGE:26==
10
Related Works
achieve realistic results.
Modeling and efficient rendering of granular materials across multiple scales [4,
70] rely on path tracing only at the finest scale while using light approxima-
tions at distance where errors are less visible. Similarly, Zhao et al. mimic a
microstructure of a fabric [5] using a volume rendering for close-up views and
using a BRDF for distant renders. As a follow-up, Zhao et al. fitted a pro-
cedural yarn models [71], with parameters such as fiber twisting and flyaway
fiber distribution, to CTs exemplars. More recently, Seyb et al. introduced the
microfacets theory [6], proposing a novel method for light transportation within
a stochastic geometry represented as a stochastic implicit surface using Gaus-
sian processes. This approach allows them to model micro-scale uncertainty,
managing to represent both volumetric and hard-surface objects.
2.3
Scene Reconstruction
Reconstruction methods of 3D scenes based on exemplars have recently flooded
the machine learning, computer vision and computer graphics community [72,
73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78] due to its big potential impact on video game devel-
opment and virtual production. One of the reasons for its potential are the
advancements in the novel view synthesis and surface mesh reconstruction from
exemplars. Despite not necessarily finding a SDF to reconstruct the scene, many
of the following ideas and techniques are highly relevant and could be used for
microgeometry reconstruction from RGB and/or CTs, as also seen later in one
of our approaches.
Though, it is important to note that the techniques de-
scribed in this section would need to be adapted, as the microstructure is more
challenging compared to the macro domain. For example, RGB images of a
surface alone might not be sufficient, given that microstructures are typically
dense materials.
Early Techniques. One of the classical approaches to reconstructing scenes
from multi-view images is Structure from Motion (SfM), which estimates camera
poses and generates a sparse 3D point cloud by detecting, matching, and opti-
mizing features across multiple images [79, 80]. Subsequently, the Multi-View
Stereo (MVS) [81, 82], performs dense stereo matching between views, resulting
in a surface mesh with a texture. Other hand-crafted reconstruction methods
are [83, 84].
Neural Radiance Fields. Within the recent years, Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [85] was a used approach in representing scenes as a neural network. The
idea is to learn a neural network output a color and volume density c, α based on
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Scene Reconstruction
11
the input coordinates x P R3 and 2D angle camera parameters ι, κ. The network
is trained through a process of enforcing the differentiable volume renders to
match the multi-view images. The volume rendering integral representing the
color of a camera ray is approximated by sampling the network’s color and its
density. To improve the learning, the authors introduced a positional encoding
to better represent high-frequency details and volume priority sampling where a
coarse pretrained network guides the sampling strategy for a fine network. Since
the publication of NeRF, many more contributed to enhancing the technique,
such as the Neural Density Distance Fields [86], the SDF based NeuS [87], and
others found in the great survey on Neural fields [88].
Gaussian Splatting. As one can see, the volume rendering and training of
the NeRFs is computationally expensive due to the dense sampling along rays
and repeated neural network queries. Its faster, and more efficient successor,
the Gaussian Splatting [89], uses learnable Gaussians to represent the scene. A
3D Gaussian is represented by its optimizable variables: center µ, covariance
matrix Σ, opacity α and the color c. The training process begins with an ap-
proximation of the camera poses using SfM, and the Gaussians are initialized
based on points extracted from a point cloud generated during the SfM camera
estimations. The Gaussians are then rendered using a differentiable rasterizer
with α-blending. The Gaussian parameters are later optimized using standard
first-order methods, together with a process of geometry densification or re-
moval. During the optimization, Gaussians with large positional gradients are
either split (in the case of large Gaussians) into smaller Gaussians to improve
detail, or duplicated and moved along the gradient direction (in the case of
small Gaussians) to increase coverage in regions requiring more detail. Recent
advancements in the field of splatting, can be found in the survey [90].
Diffusion and Inference based Networks. Last but not least, the Multiview
Diffusion Methods (MVDs) utilize the preconditioned diffusion models to gener-
ate the scene from different viewpoints. Newly generated images together with
the reference are later used for a 3D reconstruction of the model [91, 92, 93, 94,
95]. Such methods are becomming more and more relevant with the improve-
ment and generalization of the generative models [96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102,
103, 104]. Very recently, Zheng et al. [105] introduced a new MVD. The model
generates the multiview images, encodes the multiview features into a 3D grid,
and later decodes it using a network to a 3D mesh with no texture. The texture
could be then mapped on the 3D object through the multiview images. From a
different perspective, [106] utilizies the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [107] to
distinguish different parts of the model for a more detailed recreation. Another
research direction of obtaining the 3D shape, is the inference-based reconstruc-
tion methods such as the NeRF-based [108], Gaussian-splatting based [109],
or [110]. The most recent inference-based method introduced by the Stability
AI [111] also uses a normal map estimation and delighting step of the texture
==PAGE:28==
12
Related Works
to not only reconstruct the mesh but also a high quality material texture.
Small-scale Reconstruction. NeRF has been successfully applied to medical
imaging data [112], such as CT, MRI, and X-ray scans. Gaussian splatting,
called GaSpCT [113], has also been used for representing CT scans of a brain
trained just on a set of 2D images, achieving the state-of-the-art in implicit
representation of brain’s CT. Gaussian splatting has been also applied to novel
view synthesis of X-ray projections [114], again achieving the state-of-the-art.
This opens new doors for microgeometry reconstruction from microCT using
radiance fields and splatting. CT2Hair [115] reconstructs hair from a 3D den-
sity volume of a CT, representing it as a set of 3D curves populated by a neural
interpolation. Gaussian splatting has also been trained on hair images, allowing
the extraction of hair strands from the fitted Gaussians [116]. Hair structure
is very similar to the fibers typically found in textiles, paper and related mi-
crostructures. Reconstructing a surface mesh from the CT can be also done
using MC [30] and its improved alternatives [31, 32, 33, 34]. The downsides of
these methods were discussed in the Section 2.1.
2.4
Differentiable Rendering
Differentiable rendering can be helpful to provide a physical prior in learning
process involving image synthesis. In our case, the forward model is unfortu-
nately not differentiable. We still find it relevant to mention research in the
field of differentiable rendering. The ability to compute a gradient with respect
to the scene parameters could be of great use for the microstructure reconstruc-
tion in the future. It is again important to note that this could be useful in
cases when the microstructure reconstruction is purely based RGB images, as
demonstrated in one of our approaches.
Rasterization. The main problem with differentiation of the rasterization is
the process of selecting which triangles are visible at each pixel based on the
z-buffer. Small changes in the scene parameters (such as vertex positions) can
lead to discontinuities in the pixel colors. This is because the visibility test for
a pixel is a binary operation: a pixel is either fully covered by a triangle or not
at all. The Liu et al. [117] solves this using a soft rasterization technique. The
test for whether a pixel lies inside a triangle is now probabilistic, based on the
distance between the pixel and the triangle. The color of a pixel Ci is calculated
as a convex combination of faces colors Ij and color of the background Ib:
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Differentiable Rendering
13
Ci “ wi
bIb `
ÿ
j
wi
jIj,
(2.8)
where the weights wi
j are calculated based on the depth and the probability of
the pixel belonging to triangle a Ij. Other approaches to solving a differentiable
rasterization can be found in [118, 119].
Ray Tracing. In path tracing, the goal is to approximate the rendering equa-
tion:
Cpϕq “
ż
rPP
spr, ϕq,
(2.9)
where s is the scene function, ϕ are the scene parameters, and r P P denotes the
set of all available light paths. This is typically achieved through Monte Carlo
sampling. However, the process is usually non-differentiable due to discontinu-
ities caused by small changes in scene parameters. Techniques like differentiable
Monte Carlo path tracing by Li et al.[120] address this by making random sam-
pling along the edges. Some other methods to solving differentiable path tracing
are [121, 122, 123].
As sphere tracing serves as an alternative to ray tracing for SDFs, differentiat-
ing also encounters issues related to per-pixel Monte Carlo sampling, which can
potentially introduce discontinuous gradients once the change in the parame-
ters ϕ of the SDF is not adequately reflected in the samples. Vicini et al. [50]
propose a reparametrization of the rendering equation 2.9 using a vector field.
The continuous reparametrization is outputted during the sphere tracing, which
makes it possible to use smooth gradients of the Monte Carlo samples of the
reparametrized integral.
DIST[52], propose a forward and backward speedups of the differentiable sphere
tracing algorithm. The optimization of the forward rendering pass is sped up
by course-to-fine sampling strategy and larger steps towards the isosurface. In
the backward pass of the differentiable rendering a gradient approximation is
used, which has negligible impact on the training performance.
SDFDiff [51], takes a different direction.
Jiang and others observe that the
derivatives of a pixel with respect to the rendering parameters depend only on
a local neighborhood of eight SDF samples at the intersection point. Thus, the
sphere tracing process itself does not need to be differentiable. Instead, they
first apply non-differentiable sphere tracing to locate the nearest SDF samples
around the intersection. In the second stage, they perform differentiable trilinear
interpolation of these neighborhood samples to compute the pixel color, and use
the automatic differentiation to obtain the gradient.
==PAGE:30==
14
Related Works
Volume Rendering. Differentiable volume rendering has already been pro-
posed by Niemeyer et al. [124] with implicit representation of a scene by an
occupancy network. A more intuitive and effective way of achieving a differ-
entiable rendering is by accumulating the colors and weighting them by the
accumulated density.
The NeRF’s [85] differentiable rendering of a ray r is
calculated as
Cprq “
ż tf
tn
Tptq αprptqq cprptqq dt,
(2.10)
where rptq is a point along the ray r at time t, cprptqq is the color at that
point, and αprptqq is the volume density. Tptq is the accumulated transmittance,
defined as:
Tptq “ exp
ˆ
´
ż t
tn
αprpsqq ds
˙
,
(2.11)
which accounts for the occlusion along the ray from the near bound tn to the
current time t. The integral is approximated using the sampling in the interval
rtn, tfs forming a sum instead of the integral. Consequently, the final rendered
color Cprq in Eq. 2.10 remains differentiable with respect to α and c since
all operations involved are differentiable. SDF differentiable volume rendering
derived from the Eq. 2.10 is used in the Neuralangelo [53] or in NeuS [87].
In contrast, the Gaussian splatting method [89] offers a more efficient differen-
tiable rendering pipeline, eliminating the need for sampling. The sorted list of
N Gaussians then forms:
C “
|N|
ÿ
i“1
ciα1
i
i´1
ź
j“1
p1 ´ α1
jq,
(2.12)
where cn is the learned color of Gaussian i, and α1
n is the final opacity, computed
by multiplying the learned opacity αn with the contribution of the Gaussian.
The Π product accounts for the occlusion and visibility through prior Gaussians.
Similar to NeRF, the final rendered color C in Eq. 2.12 remains differentiable
with respect to all parameters since it relies on differentiable operations like
linear transformations and summations.
Reconstruction Surrogate. Last but not least, in case the rendering pipeline
is non-differentiable and cannot be easily modified, an alternative approach is
to use ZeroGrads [125]. ZeroGrads learns online a surrogate loss function based
on the samples of the original loss function of the inverse rendering problem.
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Datasets
15
The surrogate function has the same parameters as the scene function spϕq.
During the training, gradients of the surrogate function can be used instead.
The surrogate approximation can be a neural network or a set of polynomials.
Sampling is computationally expensive, as for each sample, it is required to
render the full scene.
For this reason, an efficient sampling method is also
proposed.
2.5
Datasets
Signed Distance Functions. Some approaches, especially those using neural
networks, require big datasets of 3D objects to train and generalize better. The
problem is the quality and scarse 3D data available. A 3D dataset of signed
distance functions that ensures, according to the authors, a consistency among
all objects is [126]. However, this dataset only provides distance functions of an-
imals, geometry, vehicles, and fractals, becoming unusable for a microgeometry
domain.
Microstructures. Open microgeometry datasets are relatively scarce. Some
microCTs are available in QIM [127], 2D microstructures can be found in MI-
CRO2D [128]. Iren et al. introduced a Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)
steel microstructure dataset [129], similary DeCost et al. introduced a dataset
of SEMs of UltraHigh Carbon Steel [130]. In the future, we see a potential
in automatic extraction of microstructures using deep learning models [131] or
their generation using generative models [132, 133, 134], which might expand
the availability of microstructure microCT, SEM and Transmission Electron
Microscopy (TEM) datasets and enable a broader coverage of diverse materials.
3D Meshes.
The current issues, based on [126], with available 3D meshes
datasets, such as [135, 136, 137, 138], are associated with inconsistently oriented
normals, non-watertightness of the objects or non-manifoldness. Geometric deep
learning-oriented datasets of 3D meshes also exist, among such are [139, 140,
141]. Last but not least, datasets which are introduced specifically to test mesh
parametrization could also be of use, one of which is already mentioned [138] or
other examples might be [142, 143]. None of the mentioned datasets however
are represented as SDFs, neither do they include microgeometry samples.
Given the scarcity of publicly available microstructure datasets, especially of
microCTs scans, for the proof of concept, we created our own small synthetic
dataset of SDF to address this gap.
==PAGE:32==
16
Related Works
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Methods
This chapter presents the methodologies developed to address the microstruc-
ture reconstruction.
We propose three distinct approaches.
The first solves
the problem using a conventional data fitting, the second leverages a render-
ing pipeline to guide the optimization process, and the third trains a neural
representation of the microstructure. In each section, we a) formulate the op-
timization problem, b) specify the fitting functions used, c) detail the required
data for each approach and its derivation for our synthetic problems. Finally, we
describe d) the loss functions, and e) list the optimization algorithms employed.
The three different approaches are illustrated in the Fig. 3.1. For the purposes
of this thesis, we simplify the problem by focusing only on synthetic microstruc-
tures, thus we assume the availability of the signed distance field or the RGB
image of the microstructure. In the future, these could be theoretically extracted
from real data using methods discussed in the Section 2.1.
3.1
Analytical Optimization-based Approach
In the first approach, we frame the problem as an intuitive data fitting task.
Our goal is to find the optimal parameters of a distance fitting function for
accurately representing the microstructure signed distance field.
==PAGE:34==
18
Methods
Signed Distance Field 
Input (Sec. 3.1.2)
Loss (Sec. 3.1.3)
Signed Distance Field 
Input (Sec. 3.3.2)
Optimization (Sec. 3.1.4)
Loss (Sec. 3.2.3)
Optimization (Sec. 3.2.4)
Rendered Input (Sec. 3.2.2)
Loss (Sec. 3.3.4)
Optimization (Sec. 3.3.4)
Model (Sec. 3.3.3)
Model (Sec. 3.2.1)
Model (Sec. 3.1.1)
Render (Sec. 3.4)
Render (Sec. 3.4)
Render (Sec. 3.4)
Render (Sec. 3.4)
Rendered Output
Rendered Output
Rendered Output
Figure 3.1: Methods Overview.
The diagram illustrates the analytical
optimization-based approach 3.1 (top row),
the analysis-by-
synthesis approach 3.2 (middle row), and the neural approach 3.3
(bottom row). The diagram was created using Lucid [144], and the
neural network was visualized with NN-SVG [145].
3.1.1
Problem Formulation
Given a set of point coordinates Ω“ tx | x P R3u, a labeling function ˆS : R3 Ñ
R that provides the ground truth signed distance from the surface at a point, a
bounded parameter space Φ “ ra1, b1sˆra2, b2sˆ¨ ¨ ¨ˆran, bns with n parameters,
a signed distance fitting function f : R3 ˆ Φ Ñ R, and finally a loss function
L : R ˆ R Ñ R, the problem can be formulated as follows:
min
ϕPΦ
ż
Ω
Lpfpx, ϕq, ˆSpxqqdx.
(3.1)
f in our case is a space-filling function suitable for the given microstructure.
Thanks to the simplification of the problem of working with only synthetic
microstructures defined by the function ˆf : R3 ˆ Φ Ñ R, we set the f :“ ˆf.
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Analytical Optimization-based Approach
19
In practice, we could create a sufficiently expressive database of space-filling
functions a user can choose from prior to the optimization process based on the
microstructure’s exemplar. We describe the used functions ˆf later in the results
Chapter 4.
One of the major advantages of this formulation is its ability to extrapolate
the microstructure’s SDF beyond the learning domain without requiring any
modifications to the fitted function f. Furthermore, because the fitting functions
used are typically characterized by a relatively small number of variables, the
optimization process remains manageable.
3.1.2
Data Generation
Since we are working with synthetic examples, we can easily generate the ground-
truth data for our data fitting.
We describe how to obtain the coordinates
ΩĎ R3, the corresponding signed distances and the sampling method used.
Given a rotation matrix R P R3ˆ3, we generate slices of the space RDˆW ˆH
in the transformed coordinate system defined by R. Specifically, we create W
points, H points and D points along the direction of the rotated right basis
vector, the rotated up basis vector and the rotated forward basis vector respec-
tively. These points are equidistant from each other, with their mean positioned
at the origin inside of a unit sphere. To introduce slight perturbations, we apply
Gaussian noise to each point. Specifically, i P r1, Ds, j P r1, Ws, and k P r1, Hs
represent the indices corresponding to the generated points in the respective
directions and ¯x is a point inside of the coordinates space with standard basis:
Ω“
␣
R¯xi,j,k ` ϵi,j,k | ϵi,j,k „ Np0, σ2Iq
(
.
(3.2)
Note that R may become redundant if D, W, and H are sufficiently large, as
the result would be a very dense point cloud. However, for smaller values of D,
W, and H, the rotation matrix R defines the precise orientation of the slices.
We compute the signed distances using a labeling function ˆSp¨q “ ˆfp¨, ϕ˚q, where
ˆf and ϕ˚ are the ground-truth SDF and the optimal parameters respectively.
Recall that thanks to our simplification, we set f :“ ˆf.
==PAGE:36==
20
Methods
3.1.3
Loss Function
In this subsection, we first present the primary loss function used in the opti-
mization process, which has shown to be the most effective. We then briefly
discuss other loss functions we experimented with. Lastly, we address the dif-
ferentiability of these functions, assuming that f is differentiable. Note that the
loss functions are non-differentiable if f is non-differentiable, based on the the-
orem on the differentiability of compositions of differentiable functions. Thus,
in cases where f is not differentiable, all of the loss functions are also not.
3.1.3.1
Primary Loss
The main challenge with the analytical optimization-based approach is the pres-
ence of many local minima in the loss functions. The Figure 3.2 illustrates this
issue with examples of two loss functions for a single-variable synthetic problem
involving the ’noise scale’ variable.
Figure 3.2: Loss functions as a function of the parameter values. The plots
a) and b) depict respectively the LMSE 3.4 and LF T 3.3 loss
functions of a single variable synthetic example with the optimum
value in x “ 100.
The key idea behind the primary loss function is to represent the signed dis-
tance signal using periodic functions, specifically sine and cosine, to capture the
repetitive patterns of the microstructure. By transforming the signal into the
frequency domain, we can more effectively compare the periodic components.
We do this by using the logarithm of the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between
the amplitude and phase spectra of the discrete Fourier coefficients of the signed
distance values. Mathematically, this is expressed as:
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Analytical Optimization-based Approach
21
LF T
´
fpΩ, ϕq, ˆSpΩq
¯
“ log
ˆ 1
2N
N
ÿ
i“1
´ˇˇˇAipFpfpΩ, ϕqqq ´ AipFp ˆSpΩqqq
ˇˇˇ
2
`
ˇˇˇθipFpfpΩ, ϕqqq ´ θipFp ˆSpΩqqq
ˇˇˇ
2¯
` ϵ
˙
,
(3.3)
where we for simplification purposes use the Ωto express series of points, F being
a Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT), AipFpfpΩ, ϕqqq and AipFp ˆSpΩqqq denoting
the amplitudes, and θipfpΩ, ϕqq and θip ˆSpΩqq the phases of the Fourier coeffi-
cients derived from fpΩ, ϕq and ˆSpΩq, respectively, N representing the number
of coefficients, and ϵ being a small positive value. Recall that AipFpxqq “ |zi| “
a
ℜpziq2 ` ℑpziq2, and θipFpxqq “ arctan
´
ℑpziq
ℜpziq
¯
, where zi is the i-th Fourier
coefficient of x, and ℜpziq and ℑpziq are the real and imaginary parts of zi, re-
spectively. An example of the loss function can be seen in the Figure 3.2. Please
note, that the LFT itself is differentiable because all of the operations used are
differentiable including the DFT. Additionally, observe the connection between
the Eq. 3.3 and the spectral density function typically used to characterize image
microstructures 2.7.
3.1.3.2
Experimental Losses
The first experimental loss that proved to have too many local minima is the
MSE:
LMSE “ 1
|Ω|
ÿ
xPΩ
´
fpx, ϕq ´ ˆSpxq
¯2
,
(3.4)
This loss penalizes large differences between the prediction and ground truth,
but the function’s smooth quadratic form often leads to issues with local min-
ima during the optimization. An example of the loss function is shown in the
Figure 3.2. Finally, it is clear that the loss is differentiable.
Next, we tried to smooth the loss function using a simple smoothing window
function, expressed easily using a convolution:
LSmooth “ pL¨ ˚ wqpfpΩ, ϕq, ˆSpΩqq “
ż
Rn L¨
´
fpΩ, ϕ ´ tq, ˆSpΩq
¯
wptq dt, (3.5)
==PAGE:38==
22
Methods
where w : Rn Ñ R denotes a simple average smoothing window function, with
n representing the number of optimization variables. As illustrated by the for-
mula, the computational overhead increases with the size of the smoothing win-
dow and grows exponentially with the number of variables. We evaluated both
L¨ :“ LF T and L¨ :“ LMSE. However, our experiments show that the addi-
tional computational expense is not justified by the small improvement in the
smoothness of the loss function. An example of the loss function can be seen in
the Figure 3.3. The loss is differentiable due to the nature of the integral and
function compositions.
Next we incorporate the gradient in the loss function (similar to the loss pro-
posed in the SIREN [41]) to enforce the model to learn not only the signed
distances but also the microstructure’s features. We simply compute
LGrad “ λLMSEpfpΩ, ϕq, ˆSpΩqq ` λxLMSE
˜
BfpΩ, ϕq
Bx
, B ˆSpΩq
Bx
¸
`
λyLMSE
˜
BfpΩ, ϕq
By
, B ˆSpΩq
By
¸
` λzLMSE
˜
BfpΩ, ϕq
Bz
, B ˆSpΩq
Bz
¸
.
(3.6)
We choose the lambdas to form a convex combination with equal weights. In
practice, the loss inherits the same issues as the LMSE, as seen in the Figure 3.3
loss, and thus is not useful. It is clear that the loss is again differentiable.
Finally, we propose a perceptual loss as they have been effective on other op-
timization problems.
To explore the idea, we visualize the signed distances
in the image I P RDˆW ˆHˆ3, where D, W and H are the depth, width and
height of the tensor respectively. The green component is computed as Ii,j,k,1 “
maxpfpxi,j,k, ϕq, 0qq, and the blue component as Ii,j,k,2 “ maxp´fpxi,j,k, ϕq, 0qq.
The red component is set to 0. Please note, here we consider the data points Ω
to be a batch of 2D slices, thus the procedure results in a batch of images. The
loss is computed as
LP “ log
˜
1
D
D
ÿ
i“1
LPIPS
´
IpfpΩ, ϕqqi, Ip ˆSpΩqqi
¯¸
,
(3.7)
where LPIPS is the lightweight AlexNet version of the Learned Perceptual Image
Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [146, 147].
While this loss performs well (see the
Figure 3.3), the loss is however too computationally expensive compared to
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Analytical Optimization-based Approach
23
other losses and so we decided to discard it. Also note, that the loss is again
differentiable since the LPIPS network is also differentiable.
Figure 3.3: Experimental losses as functions of a parameter. The graphs repre-
sent a loss of a synthetic single variable problem with the optimum
value in x “ 100. The a) shows the smoothing loss 3.5, b) depicts
the grad loss 3.6 and the c) shows the perceptual loss 3.7.
3.1.4
Optimization Algorithms
The key step in solving an optimization problem is selecting the appropriate
optimizer.
As seen in previous subsections, we are aiming for an optimizer
suitable for an unconstraint global optimization. While we have demonstrated
that all proposed loss functions are differentiable, some fitting functions may not
be. Consequently, the composition L ˝ f may also become non-differentiable.
We list the first-order and gradient-free optimizers used.
3.1.4.1
First-Order Optimizers
In cases where f is differentiable, it is preferable to use the gradient information.
The first first-order method we apply is the Basin-Hopping (BH) algorithm [148].
This optimizer works well with funnel-like functions, which aligns with the be-
havior of our problem in most cases. The algorithm operates in two phases,
switching between the local and the global optimization. We can describe the
procedure in three main steps:
• Apply a random perturbation to the coordinates of ϕi´1,
• Perform the local minimization,
• Accept or reject the new coordinates ϕi based on the loss value.
==PAGE:40==
24
Methods
The first critical hyperparameter is the step size s, which defines the bounds
of the uniform distribution used to perturb the random coordinates. We em-
pirically found that values in the range s P r100, 150s work well for our mi-
crostructures. Another key hyperparameter is the temperature T, which con-
trols whether a worse function value is accepted or not. A better function value
is always accepted, while a worse one is accepted with the probability
p “ exp´pLpfpΩ,ϕiq, ˆSpΩqq´LpfpΩ,ϕi´1q, ˆSpΩqqq{T .
We empirically found that T “ 0.001 yields good results. Finally, selecting an
effective local minimizer is crucial for the second phase. In our case, we use
the Sequential Least Squares Programming (SLSQP) algorithm [149], which
iteratively solves a Quadratic Programming (QP) subproblem derived from a
second-order Taylor expansion of the loss function. The BH algorithm requires
an initial ϕ0.
The next first-order optimizer we consider for our optimization problem is the
Simplicial Homology Global Optimization (SHGO) algorithm [150]. The algo-
rithm is a global general-purpose optimization algorithm based on homology
groups approximation of a complex, providing an approximation of a locally
convex subdomains. The complex is built up using sampling points in the fea-
sible domain. Most of the theoretical advantages of the method are proven for
Lipschitz smooth functions. Exploring the existence of a Lipschitz constant in
our formulation, across various microstructures and their respective parameters,
could be an interesting avenue for future research. The full explanation of the
mathematics behind the algorithm is far beyond the scope of the thesis however
an interested reader is encouraged to read the details in [150].
Key hyperparameters include the number of iterations l and the number of
samples m used to build the complex. Depending on problem complexity, we
typically select m P r10, 10000s X N and set l “ 1. For our problems, the ’sobol’
sampling method yields the best results, and we use SLSQP as the local search
method. The SHGO algorithm only requires variable bounds and no initial ϕ0
is needed.
3.1.4.2
Gradient-Free Optimizers
It is also useful to use gradient-free optimizers when f is not differentiable.
Among the gradient-free optimizers we tested, the only gradient-free algorithm
capable of achieving similar results as the first-order optimizers is an evolution-
ary algorithm Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES)
[151]. The algorithm iteratively pertrubes the positive definite covariance ma-
trix and the mean of the sampled population around the current coordinates
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Analysis-by-Synthesis Approach
25
ϕi, eventually converging to the global optima.
The method is suitable for
very rugged and non-differentiable problems.
There are only two important
hyperparameters: the populations size P and the initial σ0 of the covariance
matrix. Based on the complexity and dimensionality of the problem, we choose
P P r40, 400s X N and σ0 P r70, 250s. The CMA-ES algorithm requires an initial
mean of the population ϕ0.
3.1.4.3
Experimental Optimizers
Besides these global optimization methods, we also experimented with the op-
timizers typically used for neural networks, such as Stochastic Gradient De-
scent (SGD) or ADAM [152].
Moreover, we also formulated the problem as
a Non-Linear Least Squares (NLLS) problem: we tested the residuals to be
both the differences in the SDF values and the differences in the Fourier co-
efficients extracted from SDF signal using the DFT. None of these methods
however proved to be of any practical use for SDF-based optimization due to
their proneness to local minima.
3.2
Analysis-by-Synthesis Approach
The main difference between the analytical optimization-based approach dis-
cussed in the first section and the analysis-by-synthesis method lies in the com-
parison process. Despite this difference, both methods aim to find an optimal
SDF. In the latter approach, we employ a non-differentiable rendering pipeline
to visualize the SDF and subsequently compare the resulting renders.
3.2.1
Problem Formulation
Given a camera intrinsics K P R3ˆ3 taken from a set of intrinsics matrices
K, the camera extrinsics E “ rR | ts P R3ˆ4 taken from a set of extrinsics
matrices E, a labeling function ˆS :
R3 Ñ R, a bounded parameter space
Φ “ ra1, b1sˆra2, b2sˆ¨ ¨ ¨ˆran, bns with n parameters, a signed distance fitting
function f : R3 ˆ Φ Ñ R, a loss function L : RW ˆHˆ3 ˆ RW ˆHˆ3 Ñ R, with
W, H being width and the height respectively, a set of functions A, and finally
the rendering function R : A ˆ K ˆ E Ñ RW ˆHˆ3, we can express the problem
as follows
==PAGE:42==
26
Methods
min
ϕPΦ L
´
R pf p¨, ϕq , K, Eq , Rp ˆS p¨q , K, Eq
¯
.
(3.8)
R renders the microstructure bounded by a unit sphere from the given view
with the camera parameters by employing the sphere-tracing algorithm [36] in
the CUDA-based framework OptiX [153]. The microstructure is rendered in
white, with a basic Lambertian reflection model applied as our simple BRDF.
We found W “ 400, H “ 400 to be sufficient for the optimization. For a better
visualization, we include a background image. We describe the implementation
details of the rendering pipeline in the Section 3.4.
Thanks to our simplification, we can set f :“ ˆf. Again, in the future, the user
could select f from an available set of functions. Similarly to the Approach 3.1,
this approach comes with its ability to extrapolate the microstructure’s SDF be-
yond the learning domain. As evident from the formula, the optimization prob-
lem depends on the matrices K and E. These matrices remain fixed throughout
the optimization and are selected through a trial-and-error approach by visualiz-
ing the microstructure under various configurations of K and E. We determined
that the optimization process works effectively as long as the microstructure
patterns are sufficiently visible.
The main advantage of this formulation is that it provides more informative in-
put to the loss function, allowing us to find a microstructure that is perceptually
similar to the exemplar. However, the downside is the significant computational
overhead introduced by the rendering function R. Since each evaluation of R re-
quires rendering the entire scene with the updated parameters, the optimization
process can become computationally expensive. Additionally, since R is non-
differentiable, we are limited to using gradient-free optimizers for solving the
Problem 3.8. Furthermore, while multi-view optimization is theoretically possi-
ble, we opted for a single-view optimization due to its computational overhead,
as rendering multiple views would be even more time-consuming.
3.2.2
Data Generation
To generate the ground-truth data for the analysis-by-synthesis method, we
must provide a target render image. This involves rendering the microstructure
using the R
´
ˆSp¨q, K, E
¯
with a fixed K, E later used for the optimization.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Analysis-by-Synthesis Approach
27
3.2.3
Loss function
The best-performing loss function in our experiments is again based on the com-
parison of the periodic components of the signal. Similarly to the Equation 3.3,
we now use the two-dimensional DFT, denoted as F2D, to transform the image
signal for comparison in the frequency domain expressed as
L2DF T
´
Rpfp¨, ϕq, K, Eq, Rp ˆSp¨q, K, Eq
¯
“
log
ˆ 1
N
N
ÿ
i“1
ˇˇˇAi
´
F2DpRpfp¨, ϕq, K, Eqq
¯
´ Ai
´
F2DpRp ˆSp¨q, K, Eqq
¯ˇˇˇ
2
` ϵ
˙
,
(3.9)
where Ai
´
F2DpRpfp¨, ϕq, K, Eqq
¯
and Ai
´
F2DpRp ˆSp¨q, K, Eqq
¯
denote the am-
plitudes of the 2D Fourier coefficients for the rendered image and the target
image, respectively. N represents the total number of coefficients, and ϵ is a
small constant. By focusing on the amplitudes of the Fourier coefficients, we
capture the key periodic features of the image, which proved to be crucial for an
effective global optimization in our experiments. The loss is differentiable by it-
self, however the R makes the process non-differentiable. Once again, note that
the Eq. 3.9 is very similar to a difference of the spectral density functions 2.7.
3.2.4
Optimization Algorithms
As already discussed, the pipeline R is non-differentiable, forcing us to use
gradient-free optimizers only. The first optimizer used is the already mentioned
evolutionary algorithm CMA-ES [151]. As evident from the current problem
formulation, each evaluation of the loss function 3.9 is computationally expensive
due to the overhead of R. For this reason, we need to adequately decrease the
population size to P P r5, 10s X N.
For our microstructure experiments, we
maintain the initial standard deviation at σ0 P r60, 80s.
Second optimization algorithm we found usefull is the slightly modified Powell
method [154, 155]. The method starts with an initial guess ϕ0 and a set of
initial search directions that are mutually non-parallel, which are updated at
each iteration. The method iteratively performs a one-dimensional minimization
along each direction. At the end of each iteration, a new search direction is
==PAGE:44==
28
Methods
determined by computing the difference between the initial and final points.
The biggest advantage of the method is the lack of hyperparameters.
Last but not least, we experimented with more gradient-free optimizers but
the Powell and CMA-ES, such as the Nelder–Mead method.
We tested the
Nelder-Mead method on the analysis-by-synthesis optimization. Based on our
experiments, we concluded that the method is very vulnarable to local minima
and thus not suitable for our problem.
3.3
Neural Approach
In the final approach, we treat the problem as a data fitting task once more,
but this time with the objective of training a neural network to represent the
signed distance field.
3.3.1
Problem Formulation
Given a set of point coordinates Ω“ tx | x P R3u, a signed distance labeling
function ˆS : R3 Ñ R that provides the ground truth signed distance from the
surface at a point, a parameter space Θ with h parameters, a neural network
f : R3 ˆ Θ Ñ R, and finally a loss function L : R ˆ R Ñ R, the problem can be
formulated as follows:
min
θPΘ
ż
Ω
Lpfpx, θq, ˆSpxqqdx.
(3.10)
Note that the formulation is identical to the Problem 3.1 except for the fitting
function used. The biggest advantage, and also its drawback, is the black-box
nature of the network f. In contrast to the first Approaches 3.1, and 3.2, there
is no need for a manual selection of a suitable fitting function for the current
problem. This is especially useful for users unfamiliar with the characteristics
of the available fitting functions. However, it also comes with drawbacks, such
as difficulties in encoding of certain patterns, depending on the architecture of
the network. Furthermore, the network also cannot extrapolate outside of the
training domain, which could be potentially solved in the future by tiling the
fitted volume. Last but not least, the network f does not ensure to be a distance
compared to the fitting functions used in prior approaches. In this section, we
assume the use of a Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF) within a unit
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Neural Approach
29
sphere, meaning that the SDF is only relevant inside the unit sphere and is
truncated beyond it.
3.3.2
Data Generation
To generate the ground truth signed distances, we use the same technique as
described in the Section 3.1.2. For the neural optimization, we also need to com-
pute the gradients with respect to the inputs. Since not all of the space-filling
functions generating the synthetic microstructure examples are differentiable,
we cannot simply use the torch.autograd function of the PyTorch [156] frame-
work. Instead, we approximate the gradients using the central difference, with
h “ 10´3 and ei being the i-th unit vector in Rn:
B ˆSpxq
Bxi
«
ˆSpx ` heiq ´ ˆSpx ´ heiq
2h
.
(3.11)
This procedure generates all the necessary data for the loss function described
later in the Equation 3.15. We also later need to obtain the surface-level points
for the loss function 3.14, we apply a simple masking technique based on the
signed distances. Specifically, a point x is considered to belong to the surface
Ω0 if its signed distance satisfies |fpxq| ă ϵ, with ϵ “ 10´3.
3.3.3
Network Architectures
Before discussing the loss functions and the optimization behind the neural ap-
proach, we describe the network architectures f used to solve the Problem 3.10.
3.3.3.1
MLP with Positional Encoding
The first network is a standard MLP with Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) ac-
tivation function.
We also use a periodic encoding of the input coordinates
adapted from the NeRF [85].
And so the network becomes f “ ¯f ˝ γ with
γ : R3 Ñ R3p2L`1q and ¯f : R3p2L`1q Ñ
R being the positional encoding of
length L and ReLU MLP respectively. The γ is computed per each component
of the input, denoted here as γc : R Ñ R2L`1, as follows
==PAGE:46==
30
Methods
γcpxq “ px, sinp20πxq, cosp20πxq, . . . , sinp2L´1πxq, cosp2L´1πxqq
(3.12)
This enables the network to better represent higher frequency signal (such as
sharp details of the microstructure). We initialize the network using the He
initialization [157]. Also, we fix five hidden layers and experiment with 256 and
512 features per layer.
3.3.3.2
SIREN
The second network architecture utilizes a periodic sine activation function in-
stead of the standard ReLU [158]. We hoped the periodic component, similarly
to the periodic encoding in previous architecture 3.3.3.1, would help the network
encode the repetetive patterns of the microstructures. Mathematically, this is
expressed as
fpxq “ Wn pfn´1 ˝ fn´2 ˝ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˝ f0q pxq ` bn,
fipxiq “ sin
´
ω ¨ pWixi ` biq
¯
.
(3.13)
The ω helps the network capture different frequencies of the data and is set
to ω “ 30, as in the paper.
The weights need to be initialized correctly to
ensure a numerical stability, meaning to avoid vanishing and exploding gra-
dients.
Sitzmann et al.
propose to draw the initial weights from a uniform
distribution W0 „ U
´
´ 1
nin ,
1
nin
¯
and to draw other weights of the network
as Wi „ U
´
´
?
6
30¨?nin ,
?
6
30¨?nin
¯
with nin being the number of inputs.
For a
derivation of the initialization and ω scaling, please see [41].
To ensure fair comparison with the MLP with Positional Encoding 3.3.3.1, we
use fixed 5 hidden layers and experiment with 256 and 512 features per layer.
3.3.4
Loss Function and Optimization
We adopt the first loss function from the [41].
The proposed loss function
transforms the approach into a semi-supervised learning by only comparing
the ground truth distances and gradients at zero-level set points, while enforc-
ing non-zero distances for off-surface points. Additionally, it incorporates the
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Neural Approach
31
Eikonal constraint, ensuring that the gradient magnitude equals to 1, thus en-
forcing the function to behave as a distance function. The loss has the following
form
Lsur “ λ1
ż
Ω
|∥∇xfpxq∥´ 1| dx ` λ2
ż
Ω0
|fpxq|dx`
λ3
ż
Ω0
´
1 ´ ∇xfpxqT ∇x ˆSpx
¯
dx ` λ4
ż
ΩzΩ0
ψpfpxqqdx,
(3.14)
where Ω0 denotes the surface points, ∇xfpxq represents the gradient of f with
respect to x in x, and ∇x ˆSpxq here is the normal at a given surface point. The
function ψpxq “ expp´100 ¨ |fpxq|q encourages off-surface points to maintain a
non-zero distance.
The first term enforces the Eikonal constraint, constraining the gradient norm
to be 1. The second term forces zero-level set points to have a zero value. The
third term aligns the normals of the function f with the ground truth normals.
We adopt the the hyperparameters from the paper as follows: λ1 “ 50, λ2 “
3000, λ3
“
100, λ4
“
100. During training, for each point with a known
ground truth signed distance and normal from x P Ω0, an additional random
off-surface point x P Ωz Ω0 is sampled.
In the second loss function, we use the fact that the signed distance function is
well-defined not only at the zero-level set points but also throughout the training
domain. Therefore, we propose a loss that forces the network to learn the signed
distances and gradients in the entire domain. The loss takes the following form
Lvol “ λ1
ż
Ω
|∥∇xfpxq∥´ 1| dx ` λ2
ż
Ω
|fpxq ´ ˆSpxq|dx
` λ3
ż
Ω
´
1 ´ ∇xfpxqT ∇x ˆSpx
¯
dx.
(3.15)
This loss is more appropriate for very dense microstructures but might not be for
very sparse ones. We use the same λ values as in the loss 3.14. Note that we do
not normalize the signed distances ˆSpxq. We experimented with normalization,
scaling the signed distances to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1:
ˆSnormpxq “
ˆSpxq ´ µ ˆS
σ ˆS
,
==PAGE:48==
32
Methods
where µ ˆS and σ ˆS are the mean and standard deviation of the signed distance
values over the domain Ω. However, during the inference, the network ¯f needs
to be denormalized by
fpxq “ ¯fpxq ¨ σ ˆS ` µ ˆS,
which results in a non-unit norm gradients and would be impractical for the
sphere tracing algorithm. Despite this, the approach gave decent results, how-
ever we found that the non-normalized optimization performed better for all
microstructures. We also attempted to enforce the gradient constraint
ż
Ω
ˇˇˇˇ∥∇xfpxq∥´ 1
σ ˆS
ˇˇˇˇ dx,
to ensure that the denormalized gradient has a unit norm. However, this ap-
proach proved to be numerically unstable.
To find the minima of the loss functions 3.14, 3.15, we use the ADAM opti-
mizer [152] with the α “ 10´4 and β1 “ 0.9, β2 “ 0.999 for all our experiments.
3.4
Implementation Details
We use the SciPy [159] implementation of the BH, SHGO and the Powell
method. We use the CMA-ES [151] implementation. For our neural network
implementation, we modified the code from the SIREN [41] to our needs. We
use the PyTorch’s auto-differentiation r156s functionality for obtaining gradients
when possible and appropriate.
To visualize the fitted microstructure given by fp¨, ϕ˚q, found by Approaches 3.1
and 3.2, and fp¨, θ˚q, found by Approach 3.3, we use the OptiX ray-tracing
framework [153], before denoted as R. OptiX is a recursive rendering pipeline
with flexible shader composition.
Simply put, the framework generates rays
from the camera pinhole in a manner defined by the user. The rays then tra-
verse through the scene until a miss or closest hit shader is invoked. In the case
of a miss, the framework returns the environment map’s color. When a geome-
try hit is detected (with our scene consisting only a unit sphere), we employ a
sphere-tracing algorithm. This algorithm either returns the shaded microgeom-
etry within the unit sphere using the Lambertian reflection model or continues
traversing until it returns the environment map color. The lifecycle of OptiX is
illustrated in the Figure 3.4.
The sphere tracing algorithm queries the distance function f. This requires two
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Implementation Details
33
Figure 3.4: OptiX lifecycle.
The OptiX framework lifecycle diagram.
Source: [160].
main tasks: 1. loading the optimal parameters ϕ˚ and θ˚ to the GPU, and
2. implementing the function f within a CUDA shader.
To load the ϕ˚ or θ˚, we save the optimal parameters into a NumPy [161] array.
This array is then loaded within the C++ code using the libnpy library [162]
and uploaded to the GPU before ray generation. We use this procedure for
both the function parameters found by the Approaches 3.1, 3.2, and for the
parameters of the neural networks 3.3. Rendering pipeline parameters, such as
the K, E and the reference to the NumPy array with parameters, are stored
inside a JSON file and passed as an argument to the C++ code.
To query f, we implement the function in the CUDA shader. We use our own im-
plementation of the microstructure fitting functions ˆf and we also implemented
the SIREN 3.3.3.2 and the MLP with positional encoding 3.3.3.1 architectures
inside of CUDA. A minor drawback of this approach is the need to implement
the f in both CUDA and the PyTorch framework for Approaches 3.1 and 3.3.
For the Approach 3.2, the CUDA implementation is sufficient.
The backbone of the rendering pipeline was provided to me prior to starting the
thesis. I implemented the parameter loading onto the GPU and parametrized
functions f and network architectures inside of CUDA shader. The full code is
available in the supplementary material provided with the thesis and can also
be accessed on the private GitHub repository upon request [163].
==PAGE:50==
34
Methods
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Results
In this chapter, we demonstrate the results of our experiments. The results
section is divided into the following parts: First, we introduce the synthetic
dataset used to evaluate our methods.
Next, we showcase the outcomes of
the experiments, followed by a discussion of the findings and possible areas for
improvement.
To ensure reproducibility, we provide the code with the thesis. In addition to
that, we have prepared two Jupyter Notebook scripts which can reproduce all of
the results presented in this chapter: optimization_reconstruction.ipynb,
which covers the analytical optimization-based approach (described in the Sec-
tion 3.1) and the analysis-by-synthesis method (covered in the Section 3.2), and
neural_reconstruction.ipynb, which showcases the neural approach from the
Section 3.3.
4.1
Synthetic Dataset
For the proof of concept and more control over the experiments, we test our algo-
rithms on representative synthetic examples that closely resemble SEM/TEM
images.
Let us now describe our synthetic dataset of microstructures.
The
dataset consists of six microstructures.
Each microstructure is defined by a
==PAGE:52==
36
Results
Figure 4.1: Instances
of
exemplar
renders
(top row)
Gyroid
[1D]
4.1,
Fibers [2D] 4.10, Gyroid [3D] 4.2 respectively.
Rest of the
renders (bottom row) are Spheres [2D] 4.7, Gyroid [5D] 4.4,
Porous [28D]4.13 respectively.
SDF ˆf with n parameters, denoted as ϕ in Approaches 3.1 and 3.2. We include
the number of parameters inside square brackets in the naming conventions to
reflect both the degrees of freedom and to provide an indication of the opti-
mization complexity, even though these parameters are distinct from the neural
network parameters θ used in our Approach 3.3. The renders of the exemplars
can be seen in the Figure 4.1. All of the microstructure defining SDFs ˆf were
taken from the Venu Bojja’s Ph.D. thesis. All ground-truth parameter values
presented in the dataset were selected for their convenience and to ensure they
fit in the defined domain range.
4.1.1
Gyroid Family
The first family of microstructures are the gyroid microstructures. These consist
of periodic fully deterministic patterns created using trigonometric functions.
Our dataset includes three such microstructures with 1, 3, 5 degrees of freedom
respectively.
The simplest example is the Gyroid [1D]. The only parameter is a scalar variable
η P R. We call η the noise scale. The η variable controls the density of the
microgeometry. We create the ground-truth using η “ 100:
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Synthetic Dataset
37
ˆfpx | ηq “
3ÿ
i
sinpxi ¨ ηq{η.
(4.1)
The second element from the set of gyroid functions, Gyroid [3D], is guided by
η P R, and k “ 2 ¨ π{a P R, t P R. The a represents the cell size of the gyroid
structure, t represents the wall thickness. We create the ground-truth using the
setting of η “ 100.0, a “ 7.0, t “ 1.2 as follows
ˆfpx | η, k, tq “ gpx ¨ η | k, tq{η,
(4.2)
gpx | k, tq “ sinpkx0q cospkx1q ` sinpkx1q cospkx2q ` sinpkx2q cospkx0q ` t.
(4.3)
Finally, the last exemplar, the Gyroid [5D], closely resembles the Gyroid [3D]
problem. The only difference is the division of the a P R3 parameter into three
variables ki “ 2 ¨ π{ai, each controlling the cell size of the gyroid in the x,
y, and z directions. We create the ground-truth using the setting η “ 100.0,
a “ p7.0, 10.0, 15.0q, t “ 1.2. The fitting is again thus:
ˆfpx | η, k, tq “ rpx ¨ η | k, tq{η,
(4.4)
rpx | k, tq “ sinpk1x0q cospk2x1q ` sinpk2x1q cospk3x2q ` sinpk3x2q cospk1x0q ` t,
(4.5)
Note that the ˆf is in all cases differentiable, thus enabling the use of first-order
optimization.
4.1.2
Spherical Microstructure
Our next microstructure consists of a signed distance function for randomly
placed spheres.
We generate a granular material microgeometry, to achieve
this, we use a space filling grid-based random variable of points. A grid cell
index, which is computed from its floored location, is used to generate a seed
t for Pseudorandom Number Generator (PRNG). A multilinear hash function
defining the seed looks as follows:
tlpxq “ M
1ÿ
i“0
1ÿ
j“0
1ÿ
k“0
aijkqlpx0qiqlpx1qjqlpx2qk,
(4.6)
==PAGE:54==
38
Results
where pqlpx0q, qlpx1q, qlpx2qq are grid indices generated in eight possible direc-
tions by adding binary-encoded offsets, dependent on l, to the base grid coordi-
nates computed from the floored location η ¨ x which is noise-scale η dependent.
M and all aijk were selected such that regularity artifacts are avoided. Seed tl
is later used as an input to PRNG generating a pseudo random number in the
interval r0, 1q. We then add the randomly generated number to the grid posi-
tion to obtain a center of a random sphere in the current grid. We repeat the
described procedure in total 8 times (once for each potential overlapping grid
cell). Finally, the signed distance is calculated by finding a minimum distance
to all spheres taking into account their radius. The variables are the density-
controlling η P R and the radius of the spheres r P R. Mathematically, the
procedure looks as follows
ˆfpx | η, rq “
´
8
min
l“1 ||clpη ¨ x, tlpη ¨ xqq ´ x||2 ´ r
¯
{η,
(4.7)
clpη ¨ x, tlpη ¨ xqq “ qlpη ¨ xq ` PRNGptlpη ¨ xqq,
(4.8)
qlpη ¨ xq “ tη ¨ xu ` Ul,
(4.9)
where x, tipxq, cpx, tipxqq, Ul are a point of evaluation, generated random seed,
generated center of a random sphere, and l-th element of the unit cube vertices
U “ tpv1, v2, v3q | vi P t0, 1uu, respectively. We use the following setting to
create the ground-truth η “ 30.0, r “ 0.08.
The qlpη ¨ xq is computed by flooring the point coordinates, which eliminates
the gradient with respect to η entirely. Additionally, the center is calculated by
adding a random value PRNGptlpη ¨ xqq to the grid. However, the PRNG is not
differentiable, making ˆf a non-differentiable function.
To maintain consistency between the Python implementation of the signed dis-
tance field generation, defined by the Equation 4.7, and the rendering of the
microstructure, given by the same equation, and processed within a CUDA
shader, the CUDA PRNG is called directly from Python. This ensures both en-
vironments use the same random number generation process, avoiding potential
differences in results.
4.1.3
Fibers Microstructure
Next, we describe a procedure to obtain a union of two rotated set of fibers
parallel to the y-axis arranged in layers. To achieve this, we need a rotation
transformation matrix Tφ along the axis y by an angle φ P r0, 2πs, which is
a parameter. Thanks to the symmetry of the problem, we can constrain the
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Set-Up
39
φ P r0, πs. We also need a function u : R3 Ñ R defining the fibers. The last
parameter is the η P R controlling the density of the fibers. The microstructure
Fibers [2D] is defined by
ˆfpx|η, ϕq “ hpx ¨ η|ϕq{η,
(4.10)
hpx|ϕq “ min
´
upxq ` uppx1, x1, x1qq, upTϕpxqq ` upTϕpx1, x1, x1qq
¯
,
(4.11)
upxq “ psinpx0q cospx1q ` sinpx1q cospx2q ` sinpx2q cospx0qq2.
(4.12)
Note that all functions used are periodic functions and linear transformations,
all of which are differentiable, making the ˆf also differentiable. To create the
ground-truth, we set η “ 100, φ “ π{4.
4.1.4
Porous Microstructure
Lastly, we present the function defining a porous microstructure, named as
Porous [28D]. The first parameter, η P R, controls the density of the material.
The SDF is composed of a summation of various sine and cosine waves with dif-
ferent amplitudes and frequencies resulting in a complex material structure. The
frequencies are determined by three 3 ˆ 3 parameter transformation matrices,
simplified as T P R3ˆ3ˆ3. The final distance is then given by
ˆfpx|η, Tq “ min
´
ϵ, vpηT1xq ` wpηT2xq ¨ vpηT3xq
¯
{η,
(4.13)
vpxq “
´
sinpx0q cospx1q ` sinpx1q cospx2q ` sinpx2q cospx0q
¯2
,
(4.14)
wpxq “
´
sinpx0q sinpx1q ` sinpx1q sinpx2q ` sinpx2q sinpx0q
¯2
,
(4.15)
where ϵ is a small positive number. The ˆf is again differentiable thanks to a
differentiability of composition of linear transformations and periodic functions.
The ground truth is created with a fixed η “ 30 and the T P r´4, 7s3ˆ3ˆ3.
4.2
Set-Up
To set up the analytical optimization-based approach (see Section 3.1), we gen-
erate a set of points Ωon a discrete grid, with dimensionality ranging from
==PAGE:56==
40
Results
400 ˆ 400 ˆ 10 (approximately 800,000 points) for lower-dimensional problems,
up to 400 ˆ 400 ˆ 41 (about 6.5 million points) for higher-dimensional cases,
following the procedure described in the Section 3.1.2. The rotation matrix R is
chosen for each microgeometry such that the point samples sufficiently represent
different regions of the structure. The optimizer hyperparameter values align
with the intervals specified in the Section 3.1.4. To ensure a fair comparison
between the optimization algorithms used in this approach, the same data is
used across all methods.
For the set-up of the analysis-by-synthesis methods, we fix the camera intrin-
sics K P R3ˆ3 and change the camera extrinsics rR | ts P R3ˆ4 for each micro-
geometry. It is worth noting that the K is simplified, with the only parameter
being the focal length (or field of view), while the other parameters are fixed
on standard assumptions, e.g. zero skew and optical center at the image mid-
point.
Using such a setup and the mentioned sphere tracing framework, we
render the ground truth image I P RW ˆHˆ3 as described in the Section 3.2.2,
where W, H are width and height respectively. For all optimizations, we fix
W “ 400, H “ 400. To ensure a fair comparison, the same ground truth image
is used across all optimizers in the approach.
The neural approach setup follows a similar procedure to the analytical opti-
mization based method. We generate a point sets Ω, Ω0 with approximately 2.5
million points per microstructure, using the process outlined in Section 3.3.2.
We use the ADAM optimizer with the previously mentioned parameters in the
Section 3.3.4, and with a batch size of 100,000.
Additionally, we generate a validation dataset Ωval using the method in the
Section 3.3.2 containing around 1 million points to validate both the results of
optimization-based approaches and the neural network during training.
In the Approaches 3.1 and 3.2, the hyperparameters of each method are ad-
justed for the specific microstructure. Initial values and variable bounds are
set uniformly across all optimizers to ensure meaningful comparisons. These
values were determined through a process of trial and error of visualizing the
microstructure with different parameter values.
Initial values for each mi-
crostructure can be found in the Appendix in the Table 1. For more details
about the hyperparameters of all approaches, please see the Jupyter Notebooks
optimization_reconstruction.ipynb and neural_reconstruction.ipynb.
Finally, to visualize and compare the quality of the fitted models, we use the
same extrinsics E and intrinsics K as parameters in the rendering function R
across all approaches.
We conducted the experiments for Approaches 3.1 and 3.2 on a personal laptop
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Results
41
equipped with a GeForce RTX 4060 GPU (8GB VRAM), 16GB RAM, and
an Intel i7-13620H processor.
However, the large parameter space Θ of the
neural networks 3.3 required additional memory for training. Therefore, the
networks were trained on a cluster with a Tesla V100 GPU (32GB VRAM),
512GB RAM, and Intel Xeon Gold 6342 processors, kindly provided by DTU
Computing Center[164].
4.3
Results
The comparison of the the function fitting global optimizers used for meth-
ods 3.1, 3.2 evaluated on our synthetic dataset (Section 4.1), can be observed
in the Table 4.1 below. For each of the microgeometry in the row, we list the
following measured indications: a) Validation error computed as a sum of Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) of signed distances and error in the cosine similarity of
gradients:
Val. Error “
1
|Ωval|
ÿ
xPΩval
ˇˇˇfpx, ϕq ´ ˆSpxq
ˇˇˇ
`
1
|Ωval|
ÿ
xPΩval
˜
1 ´
∇fpx, ϕqT ∇ˆSpxq
}∇fpx, ϕq}}∇ˆSpxq}
¸
,
(4.16)
where Ωval is the validation dataset, and ϕ are the found parameters, otherwise
the notation follows the Chapter 3. We also present b) Perceptual loss of the
rendered solution and the ground truth image using the VGG-based network of
the LPIPS [146, 165]. It is important to note that the LPIPS (as specified by the
authors) was trained on 161k distorted patches extracted from the MIT-Adobe
5k dataset [166] which includes photographs taken in the wild. This is by no
means similar to the microstructure images we are dealing with, nevertheless,
we find the loss to be quite meaningful, as we show later. Furthermore, we
also present c) Low dynamic range image
F
LIP error of the rendered solution
and the ground truth render [167], d) Time of the optimization and e) The
difference between the loss at the beginning and at the end of the optimization
process denoted as ∆-loss which gives the reader an idea of how much the loss
improves. We do not list in the table the minimum loss reached per optimizer
due to the inconsistency of the used losses per scenario. The parameters ϕ found
per microstructure and method, can be found in the Appendix 1.
The time limit for all examples was set to 20 minutes, as results typically do
not improve significantly beyond this point. We consider a numerical 0 to be a
==PAGE:58==
42
Results
Microstructure
SHGO-SDF
BH-SDF
CMA-ES-SDF
CMA-ES-S
Powell-S
Gyroid [1D]
Val. ErrorÓ
0.00
0.00
0.00
10´4
10´6
LPIPSÓ
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
F
LIP Ó
3 ˆ 10´7
1 ˆ 10´7
1 ˆ 10´3
2 ˆ 10´3
2 ˆ 10´3
TimeÓ
2.85s
16.67s
2.23s
20m
7m
∆-lossÒ
23.67
23.87
19.25
4.55
8.12
Fibers [2D]
Val. ErrorÓ
0.34
1 ˆ 10´3
0.65
1.00
1.00
LPIPSÓ
0.41
0.13
0.54
0.56
0.56
F
LIP Ó
0.3
0.14
0.42
0.40
0.43
TimeÓ
13m
20m
6m
20m
5m
∆-lossÒ
2.17
7.58
1.46
0.08
0.05
Gyroid [3D]
Val. ErrorÓ
1 ˆ 10´3
6 ˆ 10´3
1.02
0.15
2 ˆ 10´3
LPIPSÓ
0.01
0.04
0.65
0.35
0.02
F
LIP Ó
0.01
0.05
0.61
0.42
0.03
TimeÓ
22.7s
20m
7m
14m
20m
∆-lossÒ
18.2
18.88
0.72
1.64
4.66
Spheres [2D]
Val. ErrorÓ
N/A
N/A
1 ˆ 10´5
1.01
1.01
LPIPSÓ
N/A
N/A
0.00
0.53
0.53
F
LIP Ó
N/A
N/A
3 ˆ 10´7
0.55
0.55
timeÓ
N/A
N/A
4m
20m
5m
ϵ-lossÒ
N/A
N/A
11.34
0.63
0.61
Gyroid [5D]
Val. ErrorÓ
0.66
0.65
3 ˆ 10´4
0.03
0.44
LPIPSÓ
0.42
0.57
0.00
0.21
0.54
F
LIP Ó
0.42
0.62
6 ˆ 10´3
0.28
0.60
TimeÓ
2m
15m
11m
20m
15m
∆-lossÒ
1.92
1.75
20.34
2.14
1.60
Porous [28D]
Val. ErrorÓ
N/A
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
LPIPSÓ
N/A
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.61
F
LIP Ó
N/A
0.51
0.52
0.52
0.59
TimeÓ
N/A
4m
8m
20m
20m
∆-lossÒ
N/A
0.88
0.01
1.6
0.23
Table 4.1: Fitted Functions. Table of comparison of the global optimization
algorithms used on our sythetic dataset 4.1. We show for each prob-
lem the following: a) Validaton Error 4.16, b) LPIPS Perceptual
loss, c)
F
LIP error, d) Time of the optimization, e) The difference
between the loss at the beginning and at the end of the optimiza-
tion process denoted as ∆-loss. The time limit for all examples was
set to 20 minutes. We consider a numerical 0 to be a number below
1 ˆ 10´7. The N/A implies that the method could not be used for
the problem.
number below 1 ˆ 10´7. We denote the analytical optimization-based function
fitting using the "SDF" suffix and the analysis-by-synthesis function fitting by
the "S" suffix in the names of the methods in the Table 4.1. The best results are
highlighted in orange, while the second-best results are marked in yellow. Note
that both SHGO and BH optimizers are in some cases not applicable, as they
require differentiability, which is not a property of the Spheres [2D] SDF (see
the Section 4.7). Moreover, the preprocessing of SHGO takes too long for the
Porous [28D] example, preventing it from producing any meaningful results
within the 20-minute limit.
We also present a comparison of the trained neural networks 3.3, evaluated on
our synthetic dataset (Section 4.1), in the Table 4.2. Similarly to the function
fitting table, we include the same metrics, except for d): instead of time, we
present the maximum norm of the gradient of the network with respect to to
the input coordinates (ideally close to 1).
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Results
43
Microstructure
SIREN-SUR-256
SIREN-SUR-512
SIREN-VOL-256
SIREN-VOL-512
MLP-PE-SUR-256
MLP-PE-SUR-512
MLP-PE-VOL-256
MLP-PE-VOL-512
Gyroid [1D]
Val. ErrorÓ
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.04
0.15
0.13
0.36
LPIPSÓ
0.42
0.31
0.21
0.19
0.47
0.65
0.37
0.49
F
LIP Ó
0.28
0.22
0.18
0.16
0.32
0.46
0.19
0.25
max ||∇fpxq|| Ù 1
2.18
1.95
2.07
1.91
2.51
4.81
7.04
11.94
∆-lossÒ
130.31
149.31
289.02
387.23
17650.59
16391.40
23623.22
22462.19
Fibers [2D]
Val. ErrorÓ
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.07
0.60
0.39
0.43
LPIPSÓ
0.72
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.71
0.73
F
LIP Ó
0.95
0.51
0.49
0.54
0.51
0.51
0.38
0.37
max ||∇fpxq|| Ù 1
3.58
4.73
5.43
3.88
2.08
2.79
2.75
4.31
∆-lossÒ
66.99
88.40
208.28
274.95
20743.34
17657.37
20647.70
23504.41
Gyroid [3D]
Val. ErrorÓ
0.12
0.10
0.09
0.05
0.06
0.13
0.08
0.15
LPIPSÓ
0.41
0.34
0.61
0.59
0.47
0.52
0.65
0.72
F
LIP Ó
0.46
0.40
0.58
0.56
0.46
0.46
0.57
0.58
max ||∇fpxq|| Ù 1
3.41
2.86
2.83
3.42
1.99
2.77
2.90
3.69
∆-lossÒ
121.56
178.95
311.83
412.26
21315.19
19604.08
24535.98
20033.85
Spheres [2D]
Val. ErrorÓ
0.70
0.94
0.46
0.36
1.02
1.00
1.00
1.01
LPIPSÓ
0.66
0.64
0.61
0.59
0.66
0.66
0.64
0.64
F
LIP Ó
0.57
0.58
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
max ||∇fpxq|| Ù 1
4.61
4.98
2.67
4.55
4.7
10.59
15.45
19.13
ϵ-lossÒ
133.71
238.88
345.84
544.73
23633.08
21651.34
24528.74
25124.24
Gyroid [5D]
Val. ErrorÓ
0.11
0.08
0.03
0.04
1.02
1.04
0.46
0.30
LPIPSÓ
0.33
0.35
0.31
0.33
0.67
0.67
0.66
0.69
F
LIP Ó
0.38
0.41
0.36
0.38
0.61
0.61
0.60
0.57
max ||∇fpxq|| Ù 1
2.66
2.37
2.81
1.61
2.89
2.89
4.41
4.40
∆-lossÒ
138.95
167.09
244.68
383.13
21584.95
17986.02
20003.56
22752.97
Porous [28D]
Val. ErrorÓ
0.91
1.00
0.79
0.70
0.92
0.94
1.00
1.00
LPIPSÓ
0.63
0.63
0.6
0.6
0.77
0.71
0.79
0.8
F
LIP Ó
0.47
0.47
0.55
0.51
0.46
0.56
0.59
0.47
max ||∇fpxq|| Ù 1
3.77
3.92
4.23
4.18
2.75
3.19
3.57
3.92
∆-lossÒ
49.25
86.32
271.66
393.56
15319.12
17610.17
22234.11
22713.46
Table 4.2: Trained Networks. Table of comparison of the network architec-
tures and the training domains used on our sythetic dataset 4.1.
We show for each problem the following: a) Validaton Error 4.16,
b) LPIPS Perceptual loss, c) Image
F
LIP error, d) The maximum
norm of the gradient inside of the learning domain, e) The dif-
ference between the loss at the beginning and at the end of the
optimization process denoted as ∆-loss.
The architectures compared are SIREN (Section 3.3.3.2) and MLP-PE (Sec-
tion 3.3.3.1), with the second part of each method name indicating the training
loss: ’SUR’ for surface-based loss (Section 3.14) and ’VOL’ for volume-based
loss (Section 3.15). The final part of the method name specifies the number
of features, which vary between 256 and 512. Best results are highlighted in
orange, and second-best results are marked in yellow.
For the Gyroid [1D] microstructure, we train the networks with 256 features
for 300 epochs and the 512-feature network for 150 epochs. For the other mi-
crostructures, the training lasts 600 epochs for the 256-feature networks and 300
epochs for the 512-feature networks. This results in approximately 30 minutes
of training for the Gyroid [1D] and 1 hour for the remaining microstructures.
To show the full story behind the optimization process of the function fitting
approaches 3.1, 3.2, we present the plot depicting the log loss as a function of
iteration in the Figure 4.2 of the Gyroid [5D] and Fibers [2D] microstructures.
Plots of the rest microstructure optimizations can be found in the Appendix in
the Figure 1.
For each microstructure optimization plot, the top row displays the loss for
==PAGE:60==
44
Results
Figure 4.2: Function Fitting.
Function log10 loss of iteration of a Gy-
roid [5D] (left column) and Fibers [2D] (right column) microstruc-
ture. The first (top row) subplots show losses of the analytical
optimization-based methods 3.3. The second (bottom row) sub-
plots show losses of analysis-by-synthesis methods 3.9. The best-
reported solution by the optimizer is marked using a diamond
marker.
analytical optimization-based methods (Section 3.3), while the bottom row il-
lustrates the loss for analysis-by-synthesis methods (Section 3.9).
The best-
reported solution by the optimizer is marked using a diamond marker. Each
loss function was smoothed using a smoothing window of size 5. We follow the
same naming convention from the Table 4.1.
Similar plots but those of the neural networks training, can be found in the Fig-
ure 4.3 depicting the log loss as a function of epochs for each type of loss func-
tion. The figure focuses on the optimization of the Gyroid [5D] and Fibers [2D]
microstructures, rest of the networks training plots can be found in the Ap-
pendix 2.
For each microstructure training, the top row shows the surface-based training
loss (Section 3.14), the middle row displays the volume-based training loss (Sec-
tion 3.15), and the bottom row presents the validation loss (Section 4.16). We
follow the same naming convention as in the Table 4.2. Presenting the validation
loss is particularly important for the neural approach, as the fitting function of
the neural networks does not exactly match the ground truth distance function
ˆf, unlike for the function-fitting methods. Thus, the validation loss tests the
architecture’s generalizability in capturing the microstructure patterns.
Finally, we present the comparisons of rendered ground truth exemplars and the
rendered fitted approximations in the Figures 4.4, 4.5. Per each microstructure
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Results
45
Figure 4.3: Networks Training.
Function log10 loss of epoch of a Gy-
roid [5D] (left column) and Fibers [2D] (right column) microstruc-
ture. The first (top row) shows the surface-based training loss 3.14.
The second (middle row) subplots show the volume-based train-
ing loss 3.15. Finally, the last (bottom row) depicts the validation
loss 4.16 of all methods.
of the synthetic dataset (Section 4.1), we show the rendered reference (outermost
left column), two (one for the Spheres [2D]) best analytical optimization-based
method(s) (left column(s)), the best (two best for the Spheres [2D]) analysis-by-
synthesis method(s) (middle column(s)), two best neural-based methods (two
right columns). The best methods in each section are selected based on the
validation error 4.16. We describe in the title the name of the method together
with the validation error in the brackets, also specified in the Table 4.1, and 4.2,
while following its naming convention.
==PAGE:62==
46
Results
Reference
BH-SDF (0.00)
SHGO-SDF (0.00)
Powell (10´6)
SIREN-VOL-512 (0.01)
SIREN-VOL-256 (0.02)
Gyroid [1D]
BH-SDF (10´3)
SHGO-SDF (0.34)
CMA-ES-S (1.00)
MLP-PE-VOL-256 (0.39) MLP-PE-VOL-512 (0.43)
Fibers [2D]
SHGO-SDF (10´3)
BH-SDF (6 ˆ 10´3)
Powell-S (2 ˆ 10´3)
SIREN-VOL-512 (0.05) MLP-PE-SUR-256 (0.06)
Gyroid [3D]
Figure 4.4: Renders Comparisons (continued in the next figure). Comparison
of rendered ground truth exemplars and the rendered approxima-
tions (top row per microstructure) with the measured
F
LIP (bot-
tom row per microstructure). Outermost left column: Rendered
reference.
Two left columns: Two best analytical optimization-
based methods.
Middle column: The best analysis-by-synthesis
method. Two right columns: Two best neural-based methods. The
best methods in each section are selected based on the validation
error 4.16. We describe in the title the name of the method to-
gether with the val. error in the brackets, also specified in the
Tables 4.1, 4.2.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Results
47
Reference
CMA-ES-SDF (10´5)
CMA-ES-S (1.01)
Powell-S (1.01)
SIREN-VOL-512 (0.36) SIREN-VOL-256 (0.46)
Spheres [2D]
CMA-ES-SDF (3 ˆ 10´4)
BH-SDF(0.65)
CMA-ES-S (0.03)
SIREN-VOL-256 (0.03) SIREN-VOL-512 (0.04)
Gyroid [5D]
BH-SDF (1.00)
CMA-ES-SDF(1.00)
CMA-ES-S (1.00)
SIREN-VOL-512 (0.7) SIREN-VOL-256 (0.79)
Porous [28D]
Figure 4.5: Renders Comparisons (continuation).
Comparison of rendered
ground truth exemplars and the rendered approximations (top
row per microstructure) with the measured
F
LIP (bottom row
per microstructure). Outermost left column: Rendered reference.
Two (one for Spheres [2D]) left column(s): Two best analyti-
cal optimization-based methods. Middle (two for Spheres [2D])
column(s): The best analysis-by-synthesis method(s). Two right
columns: Two best neural-based methods. The best methods in
each section are selected based on the validation error 4.16. We
describe in the title the name of the method together with the val.
error in the brackets, also specified in the Tables 4.1, 4.2.
==PAGE:64==
48
Results
4.4
Discussion
Let us compare respectively the analytical optimization-based methods, the
analysis-by-synthesis methods, and the neural approaches.
We conclude the
discussion with the overall comparison of all methods and potential directions
for future work.
4.4.1
Analytical Optimization-based Methods
As illustrated in the Table 4.1 and the Figure 4.2, there is no silver bullet con-
sistently outperforming others in the context of analytical optimization-based
approaches. The SHGO-SDF and BH-SDF methods show a solid performance
for problems with a small number of variables. However, as the complexity in-
creases with more optimization variables, the methods struggle, failing to pro-
duce good enough results, as seen in the Gyroid [5D] case, or even SHGO-SDF
not yielding any results for the Porous [28D]. A significant limitation is their sen-
sitivity to hyperparameters. To get the results of the SHGO-SDF and BH-SDF,
we had to rerun the optimization multiple times for each case, using different
hyperparameters and random seeds, making the optimization quite tedious and
expensive. Additionally, their need for differentiability of the fitting function
f makes it unusable for certain problems, such as the Spheres [2D]. Another
drawback of SHGO-SDF is its unstable convergence behavior, as seen in the
Figure 4.2, which leaves the user uncertain about whether the optimizer is ap-
proaching a solution, complicating the interpretation of its progress. Likewise,
BH-SDF exhibits the same flaw, however BH-SDF shows a slightly more stable
convergence behavior, though this depends on the problem, as demonstrated by
two different convergence plots for BH-SDF in the Figure 4.2. BH-SDF might
also be, to some degree, more suitable for multi-variable problems compared
to SHGO-SDF. This is demonstrated on the Porous [28D], where SHGO-SDF
completely fails, while the BH-SDF at least returns some result. Finally, the
CMA-ES-SDF method performs reasonably well even for higher-dimensional as
well as for smaller-scale problems. The hyperparameters, i.e. the population
size and σ0 are intuitive to tune. For more complex problems, simply increas-
ing σ0 and the population size often yields better results, making the method
user-friendly in terms of parameter selection. The nature of the evolutionary
algorithm of not requiring a differentiability of the fitting function f are impor-
tant advantages. Additionally, it exhibits a steady convergence rate making it
more informative for the user during the training. However, it also fails even
in certain smaller-scale scenarios, such as the Fibers [2D] and the Gyroid [3D].
This is due to a higher proneness to local minima, which can be seen, for exam-
ple, in the Fibers [2D] example in Figure 4.2. Overall, we suggest working with
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Discussion
49
SHGO-SDF and BH-SDF for small-dimensional problems (when applicable) and
using CMA-ES-SDF for non-differentiable or higher-dimensional problems.
4.4.2
Analysis-by-Synthesis Methods
In the analysis-by-synthesis methods, as seen in the Table 4.1 and in the Fig-
ure 4.2, there is a little difference between the Powell-S and CMA-ES-S methods.
Both are very slow, and are only able to solve the gyroid family problems. Al-
though, the Gyroid [5D] problem can be solved only with CMA-ES-S and CMA-
ES-SDF methods, making the analysis-by-synthesis useful in certain scenarios.
Furhermore, they do have the advantage of being applicable to non-differentiable
cases, such as the Spheres [2D]. If any preference is to be given, Powell-S has a
small advantage over CMA-ES-S. While it is more sensitive to the initial value
than the CMA-ES-S method, it requires no hyperparameter tuning beyond the
initial value ϕ0, and also requires fewer evaluations. It is also important to note
that analysis-by-synthesis is a more challenging problem to solve compared to
the other two signed distance value fitting approaches, as its only input is the
RGB image. Despite this limitation, we think it can achieve good results in
certain cases, as the image loss may provide more information for parameter
tuning. For this reason, we think the approach has yet unexplored potential.
4.4.3
Neural Methods
Turning to the comparison of neural approaches, as seen in Table 4.2 and in the
Figure 4.3, the SIREN network architecture generally outperforms the MLP-
PE architecture. In most cases, SIREN not only converges faster but also finds
better solutions than the MLP-PE (Figure 4.3). These results were anticipated,
as similar conclusions were presented in the SIREN [41]. Additionally, SIREN’s
initialization appears to be more effective, which suggests that the comparison
between the architectures could vary with a different initialization strategy for
the MLP-PE. Moreover, the MLP-PE architecture tends to produce unsmooth
artifacts in the SDF, which is also evident in the Gyroid [3D] problem (see
the renders Figure 4.4 or more examples in the Appendix 3), even though the
MLP-PE yields a more consistent result in that specific case.
Furthermore, volume-based training loss generally produces superior results
compared to surface-based training loss with the same amount of data. How-
ever, we think that surface-based training loss might be more advantageous for
very sparse microstructures. Additionally, in practice, extracting surface points
from CT scans is likely simpler and should produce less errors than computing
==PAGE:66==
50
Results
Figure 4.6: Gradient Norm Visualization. Visualization of the norms of the
gradients inside a unit sphere of the trained neural networks. The
a) shows the Gyroid [3D] microstructure with the MLP-PE-SUR-
256 architecture, b) shows the Spheres [2D] microstructure with
the SIREN-VOL-256 architecture, and c) shows the Gyroid [5D]
microstructure with the SIREN-VOL-512 architecture.
the signed distance for each point in Ω. How much this difference could im-
pact the efficiency of volume-based loss in practice remains to be a topic for the
future research.
Finally, the number of features in the networks does not appear to significantly
impact the performance. While the 512-feature variant yields slightly better
results compared to the 256-feature version, it comes at the cost of increased
memory footprint, inference time and thus with an increased rendering com-
plexity. Therefore, we recommend fixing the number of features at 256 for the
best balance of performance and efficiency.
A key indicator of a well-defined distance function is that its gradient norm
with respect to the inputs remains as close to 1 as possible. We report the
Lipschitz constant L (the upper bound of the gradient norm) in the Table 4.2.
An implicit function with L ą 1 tends to overestimate the true distance resulting
in an incorrect render.
In contrary, when L ă 1, the function consistently
underestimates the distance which could make the sphere tracing algorithm
take longer. Our results show that the Lipschitz constant of our networks is
generally too large. To mitigate this, we scale the network’s signed distance
output by a number 0.170 during the sphere tracing process.
Nevertheless,
one can see that the SIREN architecture tends to learn an implicit function
with a smaller Lipschitz constant making it more suitable for accurate distance
approximation. Figure 4.6 provides a visualization of some of the gradient norms
for further analysis.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Discussion
51
Overall, the neural methods struggle to learn equivalent signed distance func-
tions. The render comparisons in Figures 4.4 and 4.5 demonstrate that while
the networks can successfully learn the gyroid family of microstructures, they
completely fail on the Fibers [2D] problem, where the best interpolation re-
sembles pure noise. Similarly, the networks are unable to capture the spherical
features in the Spheres [2D] problem. Surprisingly, they also fail to solve the
Porous [28D] problem. In many of these cases, the network fails to produce a
SDF with any negative values, resulting in an empty space when rendered. This
behavior is typical for surface-based trained networks, this happened across all
architectures for Fibers [2D], for all MLP-PE networks for Spheres [2D], and
across all architectures for Porous [28D].
We believe there are two potential reasons for these failures. First, the small
magnitude of distances due to the dense nature of the microstructures might
play a critical role. Interestingly, the normalization approach discussed in Sec-
tion 3.3.4 did not improve training stability. It might be interesting to explore
some other normalization approaches in the future. The second reason could be
that the failed cases involve higher frequency signals. This aligns with findings
by Rahaman et al. [168], who showed that neural networks tend to have a bias
toward learning lower frequencies.
4.4.4
Approaches Comparison
The Figure 4.2 clearly shows that the number of iterations required for ana-
lytical optimization-based methods is significantly higher compared to analysis-
by-synthesis approaches. However, as seen in Table 4.1, the analytical meth-
ods are considerably faster. Furthermore, the render comparisons demonstrate
that the analytical optimization-based methods produce better results than the
analysis-by-synthesis methods. Furthermore, analytical optimization-based and
the analysis-by-synthesis approaches produce better and more coherent results
compared to the implicit neural representation of the SDF. Even in the high-
dimensional Porous [28D], which we are not able to solve with any of the cur-
rent artillery, the function-fitting approaches retain some structural consistency,
whereas the neural results are incoherent. Furthermore, both function fitting
methods compared to the neural methods enable to extrapolate the microstruc-
tures out of the box without any need of tiling the learned microstructure patch
while also being distances functions with unit-norm gradient.
In conclusion, the analytical optimization-based methods achieve the best over-
all performance, outperforming both the neural and analysis-by-synthesis meth-
ods. It is important to note that the function fitting methods are idealized due
to the simplification of working with synthetic exemplars. Whether both the
==PAGE:68==
52
Results
analytical optimization-based and analysis-by-synthesis approaches would out-
perform the neural approach for real microstructure exemplars requires further
research.
4.4.5
Future Work
As previously discussed, no analytical optimization-based method serves as a
one-size-fits-all solution.
Ideally, future work could treat the choice of opti-
mizer itself as a hyperparameter within a multi-threaded system, where different
methods are applied simultaneously. This could be further extended by incorpo-
rating analysis-by-synthesis methods as an additional stage in the optimization
pipeline, particularly for handling non-differentiable problems.
Another major limitation, however, is the sensitivity of the BH and SHGO
optimizers to hyperparameters. A potential solution to address this would be
adding another hypothetical stage to the system. This process would involve
rerunning the optimization multiple times with a set of empirically determined,
high-quality hyperparameters of the optimizers. Each stage would progressively
analyse the quality of hyperparameters based on previous results, eventually
returning only the solution with the smallest loss.
Finally, our inability to solve high-dimensional problems, even with neural net-
works that are microstructure-number-of-variables-independent, highlights the
need for more research into better global optimizers and improved loss function
formulations. Potentially, next step could be to reformulate the problem as a
simpler linear system of equations Ax “ b and solve it using the recently devel-
oped learned preconditioning of the conjugate gradient [169]. Another promising
direction could involve an iterative two-phase optimization approach: first, a 1D
optimization of the noise-scale parameter, followed by optimizing the remaining
parameters. This idea comes from the fact that the noise-scale influences every
microstructure SDF and has a significant impact on the visuals, often more so
than the other parameters.
What’s more, we find a big potential in the analysis-by-synthesis methods. How-
ever, the results show that the gradient-free optimization is not sufficient. Mov-
ing forward, we could either transform our pipeline to a differentiable one using
some of the methods outlined in the related works Section 2.4, or potentially
apply the ZeroGrads [125] on our analysis-by-synthesis loss.
Furthermore, it would be worth exploring some other INRs, such as the network
with Gabor wavelet activation function [42] or the MLP with a trainable mul-
tiresolution hash encoding [46]. A novel perspective on MLPs is offered by the
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Discussion
53
Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs) [170] which, according to the authors,
should be superior to the tradional MLP architecture. Another advantage of
KANs is their explainability, which allows the network to be reduced to an an-
alytical formula. This could be a tool to discovering new SDF representations
of microstructures. An interesting direction of future research could also be to
compare our INRs with the 1-Lipschitz Neural Distance Fields [35].
Moreover, for all methods, we believe incorporating importance sampling of
the ground truth data around the surface Ω0 for sparse structures, like the
Spheres [2D], could improve the learning process. In addition, we believe that
additional comparison metrics for microstructures could be introduced.
The
metrics we used tend to penalize small changes in linear transformations, which
are unimportant in microstructure reconstruction. This is evident in the Fig-
ure 4.5, in the example of the Gyroid[5D] when comparing CMA-ES-SDF and
BH-SDF. One option is to fine-tune the LPIPS network on the microstructure
exemplars.
Finally, we would like to extend our microstructure dataset with real microstruc-
tures extracted from the microCT. Different approaches to obtain the ground
truth signed distance field from the scans is described in the related works Sec-
tion 2.1. To get the ground truth exemplar for the analysis-by-synthesis meth-
ods, any suitable render of the microstructure’s microCT scan image, where the
patterns are clearly visible, can be used as the target, as long as the parameters
K and E stay fixed and the shading somewhat corresponds to the BRDF in the
pipeline R. To get the render of the microCT, Tomviz [29] tool can be used.
It would be interesting to find out whether the analysis-by-synthesis approach
would also work with SEM/TEM exemplars.
==PAGE:70==
54
Results
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In this work, we focused on reconstructing synthetic microstructures as signed
distance functions, approaching the problem from three perspectives:
a) Formulating a data fitting problem where the fitting functions are drawn
from a set of distance functions and solved using global first-order and gradient-
free optimizers due to the complexity of the task.
b) Using an analysis-by-synthesis approach for function fitting, again draw-
ing the fitting functions from a set of distance functions, and solving it using
gradient-free optimizers.
c) Employing an implicit neural representation of the signed distance function.
We demonstrated that the analytical optimization-based methods a) seem to
be superior based on the evaluation on our synthetic dataset of microstructures.
However, we find that none of our methods efficiently solve high-dimensional
problems. To address this limitation, we propose future improvements to our
methods. Additionally, we also believe that the other two methods b), c) hold
potential for further exploration with alternative refinement, especially for non-
synthetic cases. To our knowledge, we are among the first to reconstruct micro-
geometry, though just synthetic, through the lens of signed distance functions,
and we believe this direction could prove to be valuable in the future research
of microstructure reconstruction.
==PAGE:72==
56
Conclusion
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1] E. Bruneton and F. Neyret, “A survey of nonlinear prefiltering meth-
ods for efficient and accurate surface shading,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 242–260, 2011.
[2] L.-Q. Yan, M. Hašan, S. Marschner, and R. Ramamoorthi, “Position-
normal distributions for efficient rendering of specular microstructure,”
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 1–9, 2016.
[3] H. Wu, J. Dorsey, and H. Rushmeier, “Physically-based interactive bi-
scale material design,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 30,
no. 6, pp. 1–10, 2011.
[4] J. Meng, M. Papas, R. Habel, C. Dachsbacher, S. Marschner, M. H. Gross,
and W. Jarosz, “Multi-scale modeling and rendering of granular materi-
als.,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 49–1, 2015.
[5] S. Zhao, W. Jakob, S. Marschner, and K. Bala, “Building volumetric
appearance models of fabric using micro ct imaging,” ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG), vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1–10, 2011.
[6] D. Seyb, E. d’Eon, B. Bitterli, and W. Jarosz, “From microfacets to par-
ticipating media: A unified theory of light transport with stochastic ge-
ometry,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1–17,
2024.
[7] Y. Fu, C. A. Tippets, E. U. Donev, and R. Lopez, “Structural col-
ors: from natural to artificial systems,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 758–775, 2016.
==PAGE:74==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] K. Li, C. Li, H. Li, M. Li, and Y. Song, “Designable structural coloration
by colloidal particle assembly: from nature to artificial manufacturing,”
Iscience, vol. 24, no. 2, 2021.
[9] D. Modrić, S. Bolanča, and R. Beuc, “Monte carlo modeling of light scat-
tering in paper,” Journal of Imaging Science and Technology, vol. 53,
no. 2, pp. 20201–1, 2009.
[10] D. Santos, S. Kim, M. Spenko, A. Parness, and M. Cutkosky, “Direc-
tional adhesive structures for controlled climbing on smooth vertical sur-
faces,” in Proceedings 2007 IEEE international conference on robotics and
automation, pp. 1262–1267, IEEE, 2007.
[11] S. Kim, M. Spenko, S. Trujillo, B. Heyneman, V. Mattoli, and M. R.
Cutkosky, “Whole body adhesion: hierarchical, directional and distributed
control of adhesive forces for a climbing robot,” in Proceedings 2007 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1268–1273,
IEEE, 2007.
[12] M. Liu and L. Ma, “Drag reduction methods at solid-liquid interfaces,”
Friction, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 491–515, 2022.
[13] Z. Zhang, C. Brandt, J. Jouve, Y. Wang, T. Chen, M. Pauly, and
J. Panetta, “Computational design of flexible planar microstructures,”
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1–16, 2023.
[14] B. Li, B. Deng, W. Shou, T.-H. Oh, Y. Hu, Y. Luo, L. Shi, and W. Ma-
tusik, “Computational discovery of microstructured composites with op-
timal stiffness-toughness trade-offs,” Science Advances, vol. 10, no. 5,
p. eadk4284, 2024.
[15] C. Schumacher, B. Bickel, J. Rys, S. Marschner, C. Daraio, and M. Gross,
“Microstructures to control elasticity in 3d printing,” ACM Transactions
on Graphics (Tog), vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1–13, 2015.
[16] J. Martínez, J. Dumas, and S. Lefebvre, “Procedural voronoi foams for
additive manufacturing,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 1–12, 2016.
[17] B. Zhu, M. Skouras, D. Chen, and W. Matusik, “Two-scale topology opti-
mization with microstructures,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
vol. 36, no. 4, p. 1, 2017.
[18] Y. Lan, Y. Dong, F. Pellacini, X. Tong, et al., “Bi-scale appearance fab-
rication.,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 145–1, 2013.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[19] T. Tricard, V. Tavernier, C. Zanni, J. Martínez, P.-A. Hugron, F. Neyret,
and S. Lefebvre, “Freely orientable microstructures for designing de-
formable 3d prints,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1–
16, 2020.
[20] R. Bostanabad, Y. Zhang, X. Li, T. Kearney, L. C. Brinson, D. W. Apley,
W. K. Liu, and W. Chen, “Computational microstructure characterization
and reconstruction: Review of the state-of-the-art techniques,” Progress
in Materials Science, vol. 95, pp. 1–41, 2018.
[21] S.-Y. Kim, J.-S. Kim, J. H. Lee, J. H. Kim, and T.-S. Han, “Compari-
son of microstructure characterization methods by two-point correlation
functions and reconstruction of 3d microstructures using 2d tem images
with high degree of phase clustering,” Materials Characterization, vol. 172,
p. 110876, 2021.
[22] B. Lu and S. Torquato, “Lineal-path function for random heterogeneous
materials,” Physical Review A, vol. 45, no. 2, p. 922, 1992.
[23] S. Torquato and H. W. Haslach Jr, “Random heterogeneous materials:
microstructure and macroscopic properties,” Appl. Mech. Rev., vol. 55,
no. 4, pp. B62–B63, 2002.
[24] S. N. Chiu, D. Stoyan, W. S. Kendall, and J. Mecke, Stochastic geometry
and its applications. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[25] E. A. Holm, R. Cohn, N. Gao, A. R. Kitahara, T. P. Matson, B. Lei, and
S. R. Yarasi, “Overview: Computer vision and machine learning for mi-
crostructural characterization and analysis,” Metallurgical and Materials
Transactions A, vol. 51, pp. 5985–5999, 2020.
[26] J. Panetta, A. Rahimian, and D. Zorin, “Worst-case stress relief for mi-
crostructures,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 36, no. 4,
pp. 1–16, 2017.
[27] D. C. Tozoni, J. Dumas, Z. Jiang, J. Panetta, D. Panozzo, and D. Zorin,
“A low-parametric rhombic microstructure family for irregular lattices,”
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 101–1, 2020.
[28] J. D. Boerckel, D. E. Mason, A. M. McDermott, and E. Alsberg, “Micro-
computed tomography: approaches and applications in bioengineering,”
Stem cell research & therapy, vol. 5, pp. 1–12, 2014.
[29] J. Schwartz, C. Harris, J. Pietryga, H. Zheng, P. Kumar, A. Visheratina,
N. A. Kotov, B. Major, P. Avery, P. Ercius, et al., “Real-time 3d anal-
ysis during electron tomography using tomviz,” Nature communications,
vol. 13, no. 1, p. 4458, 2022.
==PAGE:76==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[30] W. E. Lorensen and H. E. Cline, “Marching cubes: A high resolution 3d
surface construction algorithm,” in Seminal graphics: pioneering efforts
that shaped the field, pp. 347–353, 1998.
[31] S. Sellán, Y. Ren, C. Batty, and O. Stein, “Reach for the arcs: Recon-
structing surfaces from sdfs via tangent points,” in SIGGRAPH 2024,
2024.
[32] S. Sellán, C. Batty, and O. Stein, “Reach for the spheres: Tangency-
aware surface reconstruction of sdfs,” in SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference
Papers, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[33] Z. Chen, A. Tagliasacchi, T. Funkhouser, and H. Zhang, “Neural dual
contouring,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1–
13, 2022.
[34] Z. Chen and H. Zhang, “Neural marching cubes,” ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1–15, 2021.
[35] G. Coiffier and L. Béthune, “1-lipschitz neural distance fields,” in
Computer Graphics Forum, p. e15128, Wiley Online Library, 2024.
[36] J. C. Hart, “Sphere tracing:
A geometric method for the antialiased
ray tracing of implicit surfaces,” The Visual Computer, vol. 12, no. 10,
pp. 527–545, 1996.
[37] J. C. Hart, D. J. Sandin, and L. H. Kauffman, “Ray tracing deterministic
3-d fractals,” in Proceedings of the 16th annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 289–296, 1989.
[38] Inigo Quilez, “Inigo quilez articles,” 2024.
Available at:
https://
iquilezles.org/articles/ (Accessed: 2024-09-30).
[39] E. Galin, E. Guérin, A. Paris, and A. Peytavie, “Segment tracing using
local lipschitz bounds,” in Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 39, pp. 545–
554, Wiley Online Library, 2020.
[40] C. Bálint and G. Valasek, “Interactive rendering framework for dis-
tance function representations,” in Annales Mathematicae et Informaticae,
vol. 48, pp. 5–13, 2018.
[41] V. Sitzmann, J. N. Martel, A. W. Bergman, D. B. Lindell, and G. Wet-
zstein, “Implicit neural representations with periodic activation func-
tions,” in arXiv, 2020.
[42] V. Saragadam, D. LeJeune, J. Tan, G. Balakrishnan, A. Veeraraghavan,
and R. G. Baraniuk, “Wire: Wavelet implicit neural representations,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 18507–18516, 2023.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[43] D. Grattarola and P. Vandergheynst, “Generalised implicit neural repre-
sentations,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35,
pp. 30446–30458, 2022.
[44] T. Takikawa, J. Litalien, K. Yin, K. Kreis, C. Loop, D. Nowrouzezahrai,
A. Jacobson, M. McGuire, and S. Fidler, “Neural geometric level of de-
tail: Real-time rendering with implicit 3d shapes,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 11358–11367, 2021.
[45] M. Tancik, P. Srinivasan, B. Mildenhall, S. Fridovich-Keil, N. Raghavan,
U. Singhal, R. Ramamoorthi, J. Barron, and R. Ng, “Fourier features
let networks learn high frequency functions in low dimensional domains,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 7537–7547,
2020.
[46] T. Müller, A. Evans, C. Schied, and A. Keller, “Instant neural graphics
primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding,” ACM transactions on
graphics (TOG), vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1–15, 2022.
[47] J. J. Park, P. Florence, J. Straub, R. Newcombe, and S. Lovegrove,
“Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape rep-
resentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 165–174, 2019.
[48] M. Atzmon and Y. Lipman, “Sal: Sign agnostic learning of shapes from
raw data,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2565–2574, 2020.
[49] A. Gropp, L. Yariv, N. Haim, M. Atzmon, and Y. Lipman, “Im-
plicit geometric regularization for learning shapes,”
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.10099, 2020.
[50] D. Vicini, S. Speierer, and W. Jakob, “Differentiable signed distance func-
tion rendering,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 41, no. 4,
pp. 1–18, 2022.
[51] Y. Jiang, D. Ji, Z. Han, and M. Zwicker, “Sdfdiff: Differentiable rendering
of signed distance fields for 3d shape optimization,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pp. 1251–1261, 2020.
[52] S. Liu, Y. Zhang, S. Peng, B. Shi, M. Pollefeys, and Z. Cui, “Dist: Render-
ing deep implicit signed distance function with differentiable sphere trac-
ing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2019–2028, 2020.
==PAGE:78==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[53] Z. Li, T. Müller, A. Evans, R. H. Taylor, M. Unberath, M.-Y. Liu, and
C.-H. Lin, “Neuralangelo: High-fidelity neural surface reconstruction,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 8456–8465, 2023.
[54] H. Breu, J. Gil, D. Kirkpatrick, and M. Werman, “Linear time euclidean
distance transform algorithms,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 529–533, 1995.
[55] B. A. Besler, T. D. Kemp, N. D. Forkert, and S. K. Boyd, “Constructing
high-order signed distance maps from computed tomography data with ap-
plication to bone morphometry,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.01350, 2021.
[56] M. Zollhöfer, A. Dai, M. Innmann, C. Wu, M. Stamminger, C. Theobalt,
and M. Nießner, “Shading-based refinement on volumetric signed distance
functions,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1–14,
2015.
[57] M. D. Rintoul and S. Torquato, “Reconstruction of the structure of disper-
sions,” Journal of colloid and interface science, vol. 186, no. 2, pp. 467–476,
1997.
[58] H. Xu, Y. Li, C. Brinson, and W. Chen, “A descriptor-based design
methodology for developing heterogeneous microstructural materials sys-
tem,” Journal of Mechanical Design, vol. 136, no. 5, p. 051007, 2014.
[59] S. Yu, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, W.-k. Lee, B. Dong, T. W. Odom, C. Sun,
and W. Chen, “Characterization and design of functional quasi-random
nanostructured materials using spectral density function,” Journal of
Mechanical Design, vol. 139, no. 7, p. 071401, 2017.
[60] J. W. Cahn, “Phase separation by spinodal decomposition in isotropic
systems,” The Journal of chemical physics, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 93–99, 1965.
[61] Y. Zhang, B. Dong, A. Chen, X. Liu, L. Shi, and J. Zi, “Using cuttlefish
ink as an additive to produce-non-iridescent structural colors of high color
visibility.,” Advanced Materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.), vol. 27, no. 32,
pp. 4719–4724, 2015.
[62] H. Lee, R. Grosse, R. Ranganath, and A. Y. Ng, “Convolutional deep
belief networks for scalable unsupervised learning of hierarchical repre-
sentations,” in Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on
machine learning, pp. 609–616, 2009.
[63] R. Bostanabad, A. T. Bui, W. Xie, D. W. Apley, and W. Chen, “Stochastic
microstructure characterization and reconstruction via supervised learn-
ing,” Acta Materialia, vol. 103, pp. 89–102, 2016.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
[64] V. Sundararaghavan and N. Zabaras, “Classification and reconstruction
of three-dimensional microstructures using support vector machines,”
Computational Materials Science, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 223–239, 2005.
[65] R. Bostanabad, “Reconstruction of 3d microstructures from 2d images via
transfer learning,” Computer-Aided Design, vol. 128, p. 102906, 2020.
[66] J. Phan, M. Sarmad, L. Ruspini, G. Kiss, and F. Lindseth, “Generating
3d images of material microstructures from a single 2d image: a denoising
diffusion approach,” Scientific Reports, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 6498, 2024.
[67] M. Papas, K. de Mesa, and H. W. Jensen, “A physically-based bsdf for
modeling the appearance of paper,” in Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 33,
pp. 133–142, Wiley Online Library, 2014.
[68] K. Green, L. Lamberg, and K. Lumme, “Stochastic modeling of paper
structure and monte carlo simulation of light scattering,” Applied Optics,
vol. 39, no. 25, pp. 4669–4683, 2000.
[69] K. Nagano, G. Fyffe, O. Alexander, J. Barbic, H. Li, A. Ghosh, and
P. E. Debevec, “Skin microstructure deformation with displacement map
convolution.,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 109–1, 2015.
[70] T. Müller, M. Papas, M. Gross, W. Jarosz, and J. Novák, “Efficient ren-
dering of heterogeneous polydisperse granular media,” ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1–14, 2016.
[71] S. Zhao, F. Luan, and K. Bala, “Fitting procedural yarn models for re-
alistic cloth rendering,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 1–11, 2016.
[72] P. Dai, J. Xu, W. Xie, X. Liu, H. Wang, and W. Xu, “High-quality sur-
face reconstruction using gaussian surfels,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024
Conference Papers, pp. 1–11, 2024.
[73] Y. Hong, K. Zhang, J. Gu, S. Bi, Y. Zhou, D. Liu, F. Liu, K. Sunkavalli,
T. Bui, and H. Tan, “Lrm: Large reconstruction model for single image
to 3d,” 2024.
[74] B. Zeng, S. Li, Y. Feng, L. Yang, H. Li, S. Gao, J. Liu, C. He, W. Zhang,
J. Liu, B. Zhang, and S. Yan, “Ipdreamer: Appearance-controllable 3d
object generation with complex image prompts,” 2024.
[75] C. Yang, S. Li, J. Fang, R. Liang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Shen, and Q. Tian,
“Gaussianobject: Just taking four images to get a high-quality 3d object
with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10259, 2024.
==PAGE:80==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[76] H. Wu, A. Graikos, and D. Samaras, “S-volsdf:
Sparse multi-view
stereo regularization of neural implicit surfaces,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3556–3568,
2023.
[77] V. Sitzmann, M. Zollhöfer, and G. Wetzstein, “Scene representation
networks: Continuous 3d-structure-aware neural scene representations,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[78] C. Jiang, A. Sud, A. Makadia, J. Huang, M. Nießner, T. Funkhouser,
et al., “Local implicit grid representations for 3d scenes,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 6001–6010, 2020.
[79] N. Snavely, S. M. Seitz, and R. Szeliski, “Modeling the world from inter-
net photo collections,” International journal of computer vision, vol. 80,
pp. 189–210, 2008.
[80] J. L. Schonberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp. 4104–4113, 2016.
[81] M. Goesele, N. Snavely, B. Curless, H. Hoppe, and S. M. Seitz, “Multi-view
stereo for community photo collections,” in 2007 IEEE 11th International
Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2007.
[82] J.-M. Frahm, P. Fite-Georgel, D. Gallup, T. Johnson, R. Raguram,
C. Wu, Y.-H. Jen, E. Dunn, B. Clipp, S. Lazebnik, et al., “Building rome
on a cloudless day,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2010: 11th European
Conference on Computer Vision, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, September
5-11, 2010, Proceedings, Part IV 11, pp. 368–381, Springer, 2010.
[83] O. Sorkine and M. Alexa, “As-rigid-as-possible surface modeling,” in
Symposium on Geometry processing, vol. 4, pp. 109–116, Citeseer, 2007.
[84] P. Bhat, S. Ingram, and G. Turk, “Geometric texture synthesis by
example,” in Proceedings of the 2004 Eurographics/ACM SIGGRAPH
symposium on Geometry processing, pp. 41–44, 2004.
[85] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi,
and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
synthesis,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106, 2021.
[86] I. Ueda, Y. Fukuhara, H. Kataoka, H. Aizawa, H. Shishido, and I. Ki-
tahara, “Neural density-distance fields,” in European Conference on
Computer Vision, pp. 53–68, Springer, 2022.
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
[87] P. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Theobalt, T. Komura, and W. Wang, “Neus:
Learning neural implicit surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view re-
construction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10689, 2021.
[88] Y. Xie, T. Takikawa, S. Saito, O. Litany, S. Yan, N. Khan, F. Tombari,
J. Tompkin, V. Sitzmann, and S. Sridhar, “Neural fields in visual com-
puting and beyond,” in Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 41, pp. 641–676,
Wiley Online Library, 2022.
[89] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimkühler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.,” ACM Trans. Graph.,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 139–1, 2023.
[90] G. Chen and W. Wang, “A survey on 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.03890, 2024.
[91] J. Ma, J. Liang, C. Chen, and H. Lu, “Subject-diffusion: Open domain
personalized text-to-image generation without test-time fine-tuning,” in
ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, pp. 1–12, 2024.
[92] O. Avrahami, A. Hertz, Y. Vinker, M. Arar, S. Fruchter, O. Fried,
D. Cohen-Or, and D. Lischinski, “The chosen one: Consistent characters
in text-to-image diffusion models,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference
Papers, pp. 1–12, 2024.
[93] S. Tang, F. Zhang, J. Chen, P. Wang, and Y. Furukawa, “Mvdiffusion:
Enabling holistic multi-view image generation with correspondence-aware
diffusion,” 2023.
[94] R. Liu, R. Wu, B. V. Hoorick, P. Tokmakov, S. Zakharov, and C. Vondrick,
“Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object,” 2023.
[95] Y. Shi, P. Wang, J. Ye, M. Long, K. Li, and X. Yang, “Mvdream: Multi-
view diffusion for 3d generation,” 2024.
[96] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 27, 2014.
[97] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851,
2020.
[98] P. Esser, S. Kulal, A. Blattmann, R. Entezari, J. Müller, H. Saini, Y. Levi,
D. Lorenz, A. Sauer, F. Boesel, et al., “Scaling rectified flow trans-
formers for high-resolution image synthesis,” in Forty-first International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
==PAGE:82==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[99] C. Saharia, W. Chan, S. Saxena, L. Li, J. Whang, E. L. Denton,
K. Ghasemipour, R. Gontijo Lopes, B. Karagol Ayan, T. Salimans, et al.,
“Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language under-
standing,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 35,
pp. 36479–36494, 2022.
[100] A. Sauer, F. Boesel, T. Dockhorn, A. Blattmann, P. Esser, and R. Rom-
bach, “Fast high-resolution image synthesis with latent adversarial diffu-
sion distillation,” 2024.
[101] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer, “High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
[102] D. Podell, Z. English, K. Lacey, A. Blattmann, T. Dockhorn, J. Müller,
J. Penna, and R. Rombach, “Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for
high-resolution image synthesis,” 2023.
[103] A. Blattmann, R. Rombach, H. Ling, T. Dockhorn, S. W. Kim, S. Fidler,
and K. Kreis, “Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with
latent diffusion models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22563–22575, 2023.
[104] X. Dai, J. Hou, C.-Y. Ma, S. Tsai, J. Wang, R. Wang, P. Zhang, S. Van-
denhende, X. Wang, A. Dubey, et al., “Emu:
Enhancing image gen-
eration models using photogenic needles in a haystack,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.15807, 2023.
[105] X.-Y. Zheng, H. Pan, Y.-X. Guo, X. Tong, and Y. Liu, “Mvdˆ 2: Efficient
multiview 3d reconstruction for multiview diffusion,” in ACM SIGGRAPH
2024 Conference Papers, pp. 1–11, 2024.
[106] A. Liu, C. Lin, Y. Liu, X. Long, Z. Dou, H.-X. Guo, P. Luo, and W. Wang,
“Part123: Part-aware 3d reconstruction from a single-view image,” in
ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, pp. 1–12, 2024.
[107] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson,
T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick,
“Segment anything,” 2023.
[108] J. Li,
H. Tan,
K. Zhang,
Z. Xu,
F. Luan,
Y. Xu,
Y. Hong,
K. Sunkavalli, G. Shakhnarovich, and S. Bi, “Instant3d: Fast text-to-
3d with sparse-view generation and large reconstruction model,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.06214, 2023.
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[109] S. Szymanowicz, C. Rupprecht, and A. Vedaldi, “Splatter image: Ultra-
fast single-view 3d reconstruction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10208–
10217, 2024.
[110] J. Tang, Z. Chen, X. Chen, T. Wang, G. Zeng, and Z. Liu, “Lgm: Large
multi-view gaussian model for high-resolution 3d content creation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.05054, 2024.
[111] M. Boss, Z. Huang, A. Vasishta, and V. Jampani, “Sf3d: Stable fast 3d
mesh reconstruction with uv-unwrapping and illumination disentangle-
ment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00653, 2024.
[112] X. Wang, S. Hu, H. Fan, H. Zhu, and X. Li, “Neural radiance
fields in medical imaging: Challenges and next steps,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.17797, 2024.
[113] E. Nikolakakis, U. Gupta, J. Vengosh, J. Bui, and R. Marinescu, “Gaspct:
Gaussian splatting for novel ct projection view synthesis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.03126, 2024.
[114] Y. Cai, Y. Liang, J. Wang, A. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, Z. Zhou, and
A. Yuille, “Radiative gaussian splatting for efficient x-ray novel view syn-
thesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04116, 2024.
[115] Y. Shen, S. Saito, Z. Wang, O. Maury, C. Wu, J. Hodgins, Y. Zheng,
and G. Nam, “Ct2hair: High-fidelity 3d hair modeling using computed
tomography,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1–
13, 2023.
[116] E. Zakharov, V. Sklyarova, M. Black, G. Nam, J. Thies, and O. Hilliges,
“Human hair reconstruction with strand-aligned 3d gaussians,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.14778, 2024.
[117] S. Liu, T. Li, W. Chen, and H. Li, “Soft rasterizer: A differentiable ren-
derer for image-based 3d reasoning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
international conference on computer vision, pp. 7708–7717, 2019.
[118] S. Laine, J. Hellsten, T. Karras, Y. Seol, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila,
“Modular primitives for high-performance differentiable rendering,” ACM
Transactions on Graphics (ToG), vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1–14, 2020.
[119] W. Chen, H. Ling, J. Gao, E. Smith, J. Lehtinen, A. Jacobson, and S. Fi-
dler, “Learning to predict 3d objects with an interpolation-based differ-
entiable renderer,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 32, 2019.
==PAGE:84==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[120] T.-M. Li, M. Aittala, F. Durand, and J. Lehtinen, “Differentiable monte
carlo ray tracing through edge sampling,” ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1–11, 2018.
[121] M. Fischer and T. Ritschel, “Plateau-reduced differentiable path tracing,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 4285–4294, 2023.
[122] W. Jakob, S. Speierer, N. Roussel, and D. Vicini, “Dr. jit: A just-in-time
compiler for differentiable rendering,” ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1–19, 2022.
[123] S. P. Bangaru, L. Wu, T.-M. Li, J. Munkberg, G. Bernstein, J. Ragan-
Kelley, F. Durand, A. Lefohn, and Y. He, “Slang. d: Fast, modular and dif-
ferentiable shader programming,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1–28, 2023.
[124] M. Niemeyer, L. Mescheder, M. Oechsle, and A. Geiger, “Differentiable
volumetric rendering: Learning implicit 3d representations without 3d
supervision,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3504–3515, 2020.
[125] M. Fischer and T. Ritschel, “Zerograds: Learning local surrogates for non-
differentiable graphics,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 43,
no. 4, pp. 1–15, 2024.
[126] T. Takikawa, A. Glassner, and M. McGuire, “A dataset and explorer for
3d signed distance functions,” Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques,
vol. 11, no. 2, 2022.
[127] QIM, “Qim 3d data repository,” 2024.
Available at:
https://qim.
compute.dtu.dk/data-repository/ (Accessed: 2024-10-09).
[128] A. E. Robertson, A. P. Generale, C. Kelly, M. O. Buzzy, and S. R. Ka-
lidindi, “Micro2d: A large, statistically diverse, heterogeneous microstruc-
ture dataset,”
Integrating Materials and Manufacturing Innovation,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 120–154, 2024.
[129] D. DeScrIPtor, “aachen-heerlen annotated steel microstructure dataset,”
[130] B. L. DeCost, M. D. Hecht, T. Francis, B. A. Webler, Y. N. Picard, and
E. A. Holm, “Uhcsdb: ultrahigh carbon steel micrograph database: tools
for exploring large heterogeneous microstructure datasets,” Integrating
Materials and Manufacturing Innovation, vol. 6, pp. 197–205, 2017.
[131] C. Li, X. Han, C. Yao, and X. Ban, “Matsam:
Efficient materi-
als microstructure extraction via visual large model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.05638, 2024.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[132] C. Düreth, P. Seibert, D. Rücker, S. Handford, M. Kästner, and M. Gude,
“Conditional diffusion-based microstructure reconstruction,” Materials
Today Communications, vol. 35, p. 105608, 2023.
[133] Y. Zhang, T. Long, and H. Zhang, “Stable diffusion for the inverse design
of microstructures,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.19133, 2024.
[134] S. Kench, I. Squires, A. Dahari, and S. J. Cooper, “Microlib: A library
of 3d microstructures generated from 2d micrographs using slicegan,”
Scientific Data, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 645, 2022.
[135] S. Koch, A. Matveev, Z. Jiang, F. Williams, A. Artemov, E. Burnaev,
M. Alexa, D. Zorin, and D. Panozzo, “Abc: A big cad model dataset for
geometric deep learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9601–9611, 2019.
[136] A. X. Chang, T. Funkhouser, L. Guibas, P. Hanrahan, Q. Huang, Z. Li,
S. Savarese, M. Savva, S. Song, H. Su, et al., “Shapenet: An information-
rich 3d model repository,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
[137] Q. Zhou and A. Jacobson, “Thingi10k: A dataset of 10,000 3d-printing
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.04797, 2016.
[138] A. Myles, N. Pietroni, and D. Zorin, “Robust field-aligned global
parametrization.,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 135–1, 2014.
[139] D. Vlasic, I. Baran, W. Matusik, and J. Popović, “Articulated mesh ani-
mation from multi-view silhouettes,” in Acm Siggraph 2008 papers, pp. 1–
9, 2008.
[140] K. Mo, S. Zhu, A. X. Chang, L. Yi, S. Tripathi, L. J. Guibas, and
H. Su, “Partnet: A large-scale benchmark for fine-grained and hierarchi-
cal part-level 3d object understanding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 909–918, 2019.
[141] R. Hanocka, A. Hertz, N. Fish, R. Giryes, S. Fleishman, and D. Cohen-
Or, “Meshcnn: a network with an edge,” ACM Transactions on Graphics
(ToG), vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1–12, 2019.
[142] L. Liu, C. Ye, R. Ni, and X.-M. Fu, “Progressive parameterizations.,”
ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 37, no. 4, p. 41, 2018.
[143] G. Shay, J. Solomon, and O. Stein, “A dataset and benchmark for mesh
parameterization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01772, 2022.
[144] Lucid Software Inc., “Lucid software inc.,” 2024. Available at: https:
//lucid.co/ (Accessed: 2024-09-28).
==PAGE:86==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[145] A. LeNail, “Nn-svg:
Publication-ready neural network architecture
schematics.,” J. Open Source Softw., vol. 4, no. 33, p. 747, 2019.
[146] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang, “The unrea-
sonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,” in CVPR,
2018.
[147] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 25, 2012.
[148] D. Wales, “Energy landscapes (cambridge molecular science),” 2003.
[149] D. Kraft, “A software package for sequential quadratic programming,”
Forschungsbericht- Deutsche Forschungs- und Versuchsanstalt fur Luft-
und Raumfahrt, 1988.
[150] S. C. Endres, C. Sandrock, and W. W. Focke, “A simplicial homology algo-
rithm for lipschitz optimisation,” Journal of Global Optimization, vol. 72,
pp. 181–217, 2018.
[151] N. Hansen, Y. Akimoto, and P. Baudis, “CMA-ES/pycma on Github.”
Zenodo, DOI:10.5281/zenodo.2559634, Feb. 2019.
[152] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[153] S. G. Parker, J. Bigler, A. Dietrich, H. Friedrich, J. Hoberock, D. Luebke,
D. McAllister, M. McGuire, K. Morley, A. Robison, et al., “Optix: a
general purpose ray tracing engine,” Acm transactions on graphics (tog),
vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1–13, 2010.
[154] W. H. Press, W. T. Vetterling, S. A. Teukolsky, and B. P. Flannery,
Numerical recipes. Cambridge University Press, London, England, 1988.
[155] M. J. Powell, “An efficient method for finding the minimum of a function of
several variables without calculating derivatives,” The computer journal,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 155–162, 1964.
[156] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin,
A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, and A. Lerer, “Automatic differentiation in py-
torch,” 2017.
[157] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into recti-
fiers: Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[158] V. Sitzmann, J. Martel, A. Bergman, D. Lindell, and G. Wetzstein, “Im-
plicit neural representations with periodic activation functions,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 7462–7473, 2020.
[159] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy,
D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J.
van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson, K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J.
Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey, İ. Polat, Y. Feng, E. W.
Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Henrik-
sen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pe-
dregosa, P. van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors, “SciPy 1.0: Funda-
mental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python,” Nature Methods,
vol. 17, pp. 261–272, 2020.
[160] NVIDIA Corporation, “Nvidia optix 8.0 documentation,” 2024. Available
at:
https://raytracing-docs.nvidia.com/optix8/index.html (Ac-
cessed: 2024-09-13).
[161] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virta-
nen, D. Cournapeau, E. Wieser, J. Taylor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern,
M. Picus, S. Hoyer, M. H. van Kerkwijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. F. del
Río, M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, P. Gérard-Marchant, K. Sheppard, T. Reddy,
W. Weckesser, H. Abbasi, C. Gohlke, and T. E. Oliphant, “Array program-
ming with NumPy,” Nature, vol. 585, pp. 357–362, Sept. 2020.
[162] Leon Merten Lohse, “libnpy,” 2024. Available at: https://github.com/
llohse/libnpy (Accessed: 2024-09-13).
[163] Adam
Bosák,
“Microgeometry-reconstruction,”
2024.
Available
at:
https://github.com/bosakad/Microgeometry-Reconstruction
(Accessed: 2024-10-13).
[164] DTU Computing Center, “DTU Computing Center resources,” 2024.
[165] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[166] V. Bychkovsky, S. Paris, E. Chan, and F. Durand, “Learning photographic
global tonal adjustment with a database of input / output image pairs,”
in The Twenty-Fourth IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2011.
[167] P. Andersson, J. Nilsson, T. Akenine-Möller, M. Oskarsson, K. Åström,
and M. D. Fairchild, “Flip: A difference evaluator for alternating images.,”
Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 15–1, 2020.
==PAGE:88==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[168] N. Rahaman, A. Baratin, D. Arpit, F. Draxler, M. Lin, F. Hamprecht,
Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, “On the spectral bias of neural networks,”
in International conference on machine learning, pp. 5301–5310, PMLR,
2019.
[169] Y. Li, P. Y. Chen, T. Du, and W. Matusik, “Learning preconditioners for
conjugate gradient pde solvers,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 19425–19439, PMLR, 2023.
[170] Z. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Vaidya, F. Ruehle, J. Halverson, M. Soljačić,
T. Y. Hou, and M. Tegmark, “Kan: Kolmogorov-arnold networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.19756, 2024.
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A: Tables
Problem
Ground Truth
Init.
SHGO-A
BH-A
CMA-ES-A
CMA-ES-S
Powell-S
Gyroid [1D]
η: 100.0
300.0
100.000
100.000
100.000
100.001
100.000
Fibers [2D]
η: 100.0
200.0
100.000
100.000
100.100
175.159
133.202
θ : π{4
π
0.142
0.785
2.825
3.126
0.831
Gyroid [3D]
η: 100.0
300.0
116.633
213.469
32.000
186.593
86.780
a : 7.0
6.0
8.164
14.942
11.010
12.958
6.075
t : 1.2
0.0
1.200
1.200
1.196
1.173
1.198
Spheres [2D]
η: 30.0
150.0
N/A
N/A
29.999
291.739
300.964
r : 0.08
0.2
N/A
N/A
0.079
0.093
0.086
Gyroid [5D]
η: 100.0
200.0
114.983
142.570
97.668
74.162
89.104
a : 7.0
6.0
8.051
9.979
6.836
5.180
6.319
t : 10.0
6.0
11.534
14.162
9.766
7.376
9.228
t : 15.0
6.0
14.961
14.778
14.650
11.062
13.125
t : 1.2
6.0
1.180
1.199
1.200
1.165
1.151
Porous [28D]
η: 30.0
50.0
N/A
38.586
42.796
28.268
43.272
Table 1: Optimal function parameters ϕ Table.
Optimal parameters found
by the specified global optimizers.
These results refer to the Ta-
ble 4.1.
The parameters were rounded to 3 decimal points.
We
also specify the ground truth and the initialization of the vari-
ables.
For more details about the setting see the results Chap-
ter 4.
The found transformation matrix T
P
R3ˆ3ˆ3 of the
Porous [28D] is for practical reason only listed in the Jupyter Note-
book optimization_reconstruction.ipynb.
==PAGE:90==
74
Appendix A: Tables
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B: Plots
==PAGE:92==
76
Appendix B: Plots
Figure 1: Function Fitting (Continuation). Function log10 loss as a function
of iteration of Gyroid [1D] (upper left), Gyroid [3D] (upper right),
Spheres [2D] (bottom left), and Porous [28D] (bottom right) mi-
crostructures. The first (top row per microstructure) subplots show
losses of the analytical optimization-based methods 3.3. The second
(bottom row per microstructure) subplots show losses of analysis-by-
synthesis methods 3.9. The best-reported solution by the optimizer
is marked using a diamond marker. For more details about the plots,
please see the Chapter 4.
==PAGE:93==
77
Figure 2: Networks Training (Continuation). Function log10 loss of epoch of
a Gyroid [1D] (upper left), Gyroid [3D] (upper right), Spheres [2D]
(bottom left), and Porous [28D] (bottom right) microstructures. The
first (top row per microstructure) shows the surface training loss 3.14.
The second (middle row per microstructure) subplots show the vol-
ume training loss 3.15. Finally, the last (bottom row per microstruc-
ture) depicts the validation loss (4.16) of all methods.
For more
details about the plots, please see the Chapter 4.
==PAGE:94==
78
Appendix B: Plots
==PAGE:95==
Appendix C: Images
Figure 3: Typical unsmooth artifacts produced by the MLP-PE-512 architec-
ture on Gyroid [1D] and Gyroid [5D] microstructures.
==PAGE:96==
80
Appendix C: Images
Figure 4: High Dynamic Range (HDR) environment map of all scenes.
