==PAGE:1==
Masters Thesis
theoretical
Structural and Electronic Dynamics of 2D Perovskites by Machine Learn-
ing and Tight Binding
Chiara Spezzati
MA 475
2024/10
Remove this and the next page in the print-out; This page is for the pdf-version only.
Diese Seite und die darauﬀolgende in der gedruckten Version entfernen; nur für die PDF-Version.
==PAGE:2==
Remove this page in the print version.
Diese Seite in der Druckversion entfernen.
==PAGE:3==
Title of Master’s Thesis:
Structural and electronic dynamics of 2D perovskites
by machine learning and tight binding
Author:
Chiara Spezzati
Enrolment Number:
03785694
Supervisor:
David Egger (TUM, Physics)
Ludwig Irrgang (TUM, Mechanical Engineering)
Ivano E. Castelli (DTU Energy)
Assigned by:
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Hartmut Spliethoﬀ
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Energy Systems
Boltzmannstr. 15
85748 Garching
Assigned:
02.04.2024
Handed in:
18.10.2024
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Statutory Declaration
I hereby declare that I have prepared the present work independently and without help of
others. Thoughts and quotes that have been taken over directly or indirectly from other sources
are marked as such. This work has not been submitted to any examining authority in the same
or similar form and has not been published yet.
I hereby agree that the work can be made available by the Institute of Energy Systems to the
public.
Garching, the 18th of October 2024
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This thesis would not have been possible without the help of many people who have supported,
encouraged, and believed in me along the way.
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to Prof. David Egger for the support, feedback,
and interesting discussions during these six months of my thesis. It was great to be part of
his research group. I am also really grateful for the opportunity to present my work at the
SolTech conference.
Then, I would like to thank immensely my advisor Frederik Vonhoﬀ, for all the help I received
throughout the project. He was always available to answer my questions, discuss the results,
and guide me through topics that were completely new to me. I’m really grateful for everything
I have learned from him. I would also like to express my gratitude to everyone in the TheoFem
group, for the amazing environment I found. I enjoyed all the discussions, physics-related or
not, from which I have learned a lot. They made my stay here at TUM invaluable.
I am grateful to my supervisor at DTU, Prof. Ivano E. Castelli, for all the support I have
received throughout my Master’s degree. He has always believed in me, and helped me choose
which directions to take in these two years.
I would then like to thank all my friends for the support I have received during this thesis
and my studies. A special mention goes to Elena, for believing in me more than I do, and to
Matteo, who I could always count on. A big thank you goes to all the people I have met in
Copenhagen, who have become like a family to me, and to all the people I have met here in
Munich, who have made me feel at home.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family, my parents and my sisters, for the immense
support and love I received in all these years, despite all my crazy ideas.
I thankfully acknowledge the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing e.V. for providing computing
time through the John von Neumann Institute for Computing on the GCS Supercomputer
JUWELS at Jülich Supercomputing Centre.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
2D halide perovskites are a highly promising class for solar energy conversion, for which the
interplay between structural and electronic properties has not yet been fully studied. Here, we
investigate the structural dynamics of BA2PbI4 at ﬁnite temperatures from machine learning
Molecular Dynamics simulations, which account for anharmonic eﬀects. We combine each
simulation snapshot with a tight binding Hamiltonian to calculate the electronic couplings in
the structure.
We ﬁnd that BA2PbI4 is an anharmonic material with a ﬂexible lattice. The displacements of the
atoms are large and anharmonic, an eﬀect that increases with the temperature. Anharmonicity
is detected both in the motion of I and Pb atoms but more signiﬁcantly for the I atoms, which
can be attributed to their lighter masses. In particular, as the temperature increases from
375 K to 450 K, the potential energy surface for the I atoms along the direction perpendicular
to the Pb-Pb bond resembles a double well, with two equilibrium position separated by an
energy barrier of 36 meV. The anharmonic displacements of the atoms lead to ﬂuctuations
in the Pb-I bond length, which is more frequently stretched than compressed within the
simulation. Consequently, the orbital overlaps also ﬂuctuate, and the electronic couplings
are more frequently weaker than what would be predicted by the harmonic approximation.
Compared to 3D perovskites, the average Pb-I bond length is 0.1 Å larger, leading to weaker
electronic couplings and, thus lower charge carrier mobility. This work is one of the ﬁrst
approaches to understanding the structural and electronic dynamics of BAPI. It highlights the
importance of including anharmonic eﬀects and dynamic disorder when describing the behavior
of 2D perovskites.
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Acknowledgements
III
Abstract
VI
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
Many Body Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Born-Oppenheimer Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Density Functional Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Kohn-Sham Scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Exchange-Correlation Functionals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Tight Binding Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Lattice Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.1
Harmonic Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.2
Anharmonicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Molecular Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.1
Ab Initio MD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.2
Force-Field MD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.3
Machine Learning Force-Fields MD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Dynamic Disorder Multi-Scale Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
Perovskites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7.1
Halide Perovskites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7.2
Two Dimensional Perovskites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Results
29
3.1
Structural Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.1
Pb-I Bond Lengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.2
Pb-I-Pb Angles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.3
Displacements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.1.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.2
Electronic Couplings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4
Discussion
51
5
Conclusion and Outlook
55
Bibliography
57
A Appendix
65
A.1 AIMD and ML-FF MD for CsPbBr3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.1.1
Br Displacements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.1.2
Br-Pb Distances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
==PAGE:12==
VIII
Contents
A.2 1D Displacement Distributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2.1
I displacements, in-plane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2.2
I displacements, out-of-plane
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2.3
Pb displacements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.3 Hoppings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
Photovoltaics (PVs) represent one of the most important technologies for sustainable electricity
production, oﬀering a viable alternative to fossil fuels thanks to the abundance and almost
unlimited availability of solar radiation. They are based on a semiconductor material, which
absorbs photons and generates free electrons through the photovoltaic eﬀect. The performance
of a material for solar cells is represented by the power conversion eﬃciency (PCE), which is
inﬂuenced by several interconnected factors. One of the most critical aspects of this is the
bandgap of the material, which is the minimum energy needed for an electron to be excited to
the conduction band. The bandgap needs to align with the solar spectrum. If the bandgap is
too large, the material will absorb only high-energy photons, and the generation of electrons
is insuﬃcient. On the other hand, if the bandgap is too small, the absorbed photons will
generate low-energy charge carriers, reducing the overall voltage output. In addition to the
bandgap, the transport of the charge carriers needs to be eﬃcient so the electrons and holes
can reach the respective electrodes without recombining. Finally, other aspects, such as surface
recombination or defects, also impact the PCE. The theoretical maximum eﬃciency that a
single-junction solar cell can achieve when converting sunlight into electricity is deﬁned by
the Shockley-Queisser limit [1]. The maximum theoretical eﬃciency is 33%, with an optimal
bandgap of 1.34 eV [2].
In addition to a high PCE, a material needs to have low to moderate production costs and
a long lifespan in order to be viable for solar energy technologies. Among the materials
used in PV technologies, silicon-based solar cells dominate the market, with over 85% of
the share [3]. They exhibit PCEs that exceed 20%, long lifetimes, and reliance on earth-
abundant materials.
However, the production of Si-based solar cells is energy-intensive
and requires harmful chemicals, and thus, alternative materials are being explored [4].
Figure 1.1: Comparison of the PCEs of
3D and 2D HaPs from 2009
to 2018. Figure from [5].
Among them are thin ﬁlm technologies, such as
cadmium telluride (CdTe), and copper indium gal-
lium selenide (CIGS), which have lower production
costs. Unfortunately, they are limited by the low
eﬃciencies, around 10-15%, which do not compete
with Si solar cells [6].
However, a promising group of emerging materi-
als in recent years are halide perovskites (HaPs),
which have shown a drastic increase in the PCEs,
from 3% in 2009 to over 25% today [7]. In addi-
tion to the high eﬃciencies, they have a low-cost
manufacturing process, as they can be produced
with simple methods at low temperatures [8].
Nevertheless, HaPs show high degradation rates,
which limit their applicability and opportunity to
scale up as technology [4]. This stability challenge
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
has seen layered perovskites as a possible solution. Layered perovskites include large organic
molecules in the structure, improving the stability against moisture and light due to their
hydrophobic nature and ability to suppress ion migration. These organic spacers eﬀectively
decrease the dimensionality of the structure to 2D, aﬀecting its properties [9].
The PCE of 2D perovskites is lower than its 3D counterpart, but it has shown a promising
increase in recent years [5], as shown in Figure 1.1. 2D perovskites have not been investigated
extensively, and many properties are not fully explained yet. Understanding the properties of a
material at an atomic scale is essential for optimizing its performance.
In the case of 3D perovskites, which have been explored more, one of the most intriguing
and complicated characteristics is the strong interplay between structural dynamics and
optoelectronic properties. This is because they have a soft lattice, which is uncommon in
traditional inorganic semiconductors [10]. Consequently, the harmonic approximation breaks
down. As this is the starting point in the most commonly used transport models, modeling
and understanding the properties of HaPs is challenging. A soft lattice was observed in 2D
perovskites as well, but the impact on their properties has been studied less. This thesis,
therefore, aims to investigate this connection between structural dynamics and electronic
properties in 2D perovskites, to gain insights into their transport properties. For this, a
prototypical 2D perovskite, BA2PbI4, is considered and its 3D counterpart MAPbI3 is used for
comparison.
The ﬁrst challenge in this investigation comes from the complex structure of 2D perovskites
and the need for large supercells. In order to accurately model the transport of charge carriers
in the structure, the description needs to go beyond the harmonic approximation to capture
the anharmonic eﬀect. This complexity would lead to high computational costs and unfeasible
simulation times. To overcome this, the model starts by simulating the motion of atoms in
the structure through Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations, as they are not restricted by
the harmonic approximation. While the most accurate method would rely on ﬁrst-principle
calculations to predict atomic movement over time, this is unfeasible for large systems, and thus
a diﬀerent approach is needed. In recent years, machine learning (ML) has shown the potential
to accelerate these simulations while maintaining the accuracy of ﬁrst-principle calculations.
The idea is to train an ML model on ﬁrst-principles data, from which it learns the interatomic
potentials and then makes accurate predictions for new structures [11]. Once the motion of
the atoms is obtained with MD, the next step is to calculate the electronic properties. The
most well-established computational methods for doing so are ﬁrst-principle methods based
on fundamental physics laws without relying on experimental data. Between these, Density
Functional Theory (DFT) is an extensively used method to calculate the electronic properties of
a material. The main drawback of ﬁrst-principle methods is the high computational cost, which
for DFT scales with N3, where N is the number of particles in the system [12]. It is, therefore,
necessary to have a method that has lower computational costs and still leads to accurate
predictions. Tight Binding (TB) provides an alternative, as it reduces the computational costs
by approximating the electronic interactions, scaling linearly with N [13]. It is often applied
as a semi-empirical method, meaning that external parameters are needed. In this thesis, we
combine DFT and TB to accurately describe large and complex systems. DFT can be used in
==PAGE:15==
3
small cells, for which calculations are feasible, and then used to parametrize the TB model for
large supercells.
The combination of ML-MD and the TB model parametrized with DFT allows us to study the
structural dynamics as well as the electronic couplings of 2D perovskites at ﬁnite temperatures.
The aim is to investigate how the nuclear dynamics of 2D perovskites inﬂuence their electronic
properties and have a ﬁrst understanding of their transport properties through a comparison
with 3D perovskites. Understanding this can lead to advancements in the development of
eﬃcient and reliable materials for solar cells.
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
2 Theory
In this project, we want to describe accurately the structural dynamics and electronic properties
of BAPI with reasonable computational times and costs. In this chapter, I will ﬁrst introduce
the theoretical foundations of the computational methods used in this thesis. Then, I will
introduce 3D and 2D perovskites, in order to have a good overview of their properties before
presenting and discussing the results.
2.1 Many Body Problem
The Schrödinger equation is a fundamental equation in quantum mechanics, which describes
how the wavefunction Ψ of a system evolves in time and space. The equation is given by
i¯hBΨpr, tq
Bt
“ ˆHΨpr, tq
(2.1)
where ˆH is the Hamiltonian operator, ¯h is the reduced Planck’s constant and Ψpr, tq is the
wavefunction.
In solid-state physics, however, the system is commonly considered stationary, and thus the
time-independent Schrödinger equation is used,
ˆHΨprq “ ϵΨprq
(2.2)
where ϵ is the energy eigenvalue and the wavefunction is dependent only on spatial coordinates.
Solving Schrödinger equation is one of the goals of the ﬁeld, as it gives many of the properties
of the system.
For a system composed of Ne electrons and Nn nuclei, the Hamiltonian operator includes all
the contributions to the energy of the system: kinetic energies T of both atoms and electrons,
the repulsive interaction between electrons Vee, the nuclei-electron attractive interactions Ven,
the repulsive interaction between nuclei Vnn. The many-body Hamiltonian can, therefore, be
written as
ˆH “ ˆTe ` ˆTn ` Vee ` Ven ` Vnn “
“ ´
Ne
ÿ
i“1
¯h2
2me
∇2
i ´
Nn
ÿ
k“1
¯h2
2Mk
∇2
k `
ÿ
iăj
e2
|ri ´ rj| ´
ÿ
i,k
Zke2
|Rk ´ ri| `
ÿ
kăl
ZkZle2
|Rk ´ Rl|
(2.3)
where me is the electron mass, ri is the position of the i-th electron, Mk and Zk are the mass
of the k-th nucleus, and its atomic number respectively, and Rk its position.
For realistic, non-trivial systems, which contain many interacting particles, the Schrödinger
equation becomes too complicated to be solved, and thus, it is necessary to make approximations.
2.1.1 Born-Oppenheimer Approximation
A ﬁrst simpliﬁcation can be achieved by considering the electrons separately from the nuclei.
Due to the higher nuclei than electron mass, the motion of the electrons is much faster than
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Theory
that of the nuclei. Thus, the dynamics of electrons and nuclei can then be decoupled. The
electrons will follow the motion of the nuclei adiabatically and instantaneously. On a longer
time scale, the ions move based on an eﬀective potential inﬂuenced by the electrons.
This leads to the Born-Oppenheimer approximation for solving the electronic ground state
problem, where the electronic Hamiltonian excludes the kinetic energy of the nuclei, Tn [14].
With these assumptions, the total wavefunction is expressed as the product of the electronic
wavefunction, ψpr, Rq, and the nuclear wavefunction χpRq. The vector r indicates the positions
of the electrons, while R the positions of the nuclei.
Ψpr, Rq “ ψpr, RqχpRq
(2.4)
The electronic Schrödinger equation is therefore
ˆHepr, Rqψpr, Rq “ EepRqψpr, Rq.
(2.5)
The electronic energy EepRq is used in the nuclear Schrödinger equation as an external potential
energy,
ˆHnχpRq “ p ˆTn ` EepRqqχpRq.
(2.6)
Solving the electronic Schrödinger equation is now the main challenge and will be the focus of
the next sections. There are diﬀerent approaches to this problem, and the choice depends on
the nature of the system studied and the level of accuracy needed.
I will introduce the two main methods used in this project: Density Functional Theory and
Tight Binding.
2.2 Density Functional Theory
In DFT, the electron density describes the system instead of the electronic wavefunction. The
employment of the electron density decreases the many-body problem of N electrons, each
with 3N spatial coordinates, to three spatial coordinates of the electron density. Although
this approximation seems rather strong, it comes so far just to the cost of being limited to
capturing only the electronic ground state of the system. The following explanations are based
on Ref. [15, 16].
The theoretical basis for DFT is set in the Hohenber-Kohn (HK) theorems, which prove that
the ground state energy is a functional, i.e. a function of a function, of the ground state electron
density [17].
Hohenberg-Kohn 1
The external potential vext is, up to a constant, a unique functional of the ground state electron
density n0.
Here, the external potential vext includes any potential acting on the electrons, such as the
electron-nuclei interaction or any external electric ﬁeld. This ﬁrst theorem means that the
electron density determines all the properties of the system.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Density Functional Theory
7
Hohenber-Kohn 2
The total energy E is a functional of the electron density, and the ground state density n0
corresponds to the global minimum of E.
From these two theorems, the energy can be expressed as a functional of the electron density,
Erns “ Trns ` Urns ` Vextrns
(2.7)
where Trns is the kinetic energy, Urns the interaction energy, Vextrns is the energy from the
external potential, with
Vextrns “
ż
vextprqnprqdr.
(2.8)
The external potential here is deﬁned as the potential on the electrons from the nuclei since
they are treated separately due to the Born-Oppenheimer approximation.
Moreover, it is possible to use the variational principle, searching for the ground state density
an optimization problem.
If all the exact contributions for the energy functional were known, it would be possible to ﬁnd
the ground state density and energy of the system. However, the exact expression of the kinetic
energy Trns and the interaction energy Urns with the electron density nprq are unknown, so the
problem is not yet solved. The Kohn-Sham (KS) scheme oﬀers one step toward obtaining an
approximated solution to this challenge. It proposes mapping the complex system of interacting
electrons into a non-interacting one, which can more easily be approached [18].
2.2.1 Kohn-Sham Scheme
In the KS scheme, as mentioned above, there are two systems, the realistic one with interacting
electrons and a ﬁctitious one with non-interacting electrons. The two systems have the same
ground-state electron density n0prq, meaning that there is an eﬀective potential vs, for which
the non-interacting Hamiltonian gives the same ground-state density for the interacting system
as for the non-interacting one. The potential vs is determined uniquely by the electron density,
according to the ﬁrst HK theorem.
Due to the non-interacting nature of the KS system, the Schrödinger equation
„
´ ¯h2
2me
∇2 ` vsprq

φiprq “ ϵiφiprq
(2.9)
can solved for each electron separately. The many-body wavefunctions are expressed with
single-particle wave functions.
The energy functional for the KS system is composed of the kinetic energy and the eﬀective
potential,
EKSrnprqs “ TKSrnprqs ` Vs
(2.10)
where TKSrns is the kinetic energy of the non-interacting particles, and Vs “
ş
vsprqnprqdr.
The external potential Vext from the nuclei, Hartree potential VH, and exchange-correlation
potential VXC form the eﬀective potential Vs,
Vs “ Vext ` VH ` VXC.
(2.11)
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Theory
The Hartree potential
VH “ 1
2
ĳ nprqnpr1q
r ´ r1
drdr1
(2.12)
represents the classical electrostatic interaction between the non-interacting electrons.
The exchange-correlation (XC) potential accounts for all the many-body eﬀects that are not
included in the other terms. The main eﬀects are the Fermi exchange, with the Pauli exclusion
principle, the electron-electron interaction beyond the classical Coulomb potential, and the
self-interaction error. Other eﬀects that can be captured by the XC potential are the Van Der
Waals interactions or spin correlations.
The exchange-correlation functional is deﬁned as
EXCrns “ Trns ´ TKSrns ` Veerns ´ VHrns
(2.13)
where Trns ´ TKSrns represent the contribution of the correlation interactions to the kinetic
energy, and Veerns ´ VHrns the electronic interaction beyond the Hartree energy.
Having a good expression for this functional is a key element for reaching an accurate solution
to the problem and calculating the properties of the system accurately. In the next section, I
will explain the options for choosing the exchange-correlation functional in more detail.
KS equations are usually solved numerically, with a self-consistent method, illustrated in
Figure 2.1. The iterative process starts with a guess electron density, from which the eﬀective
potential is calculated. This is then used to solve the KS equations, obtain the wavefunctions
and calculate a new electron density. If this meets the convergence criterion, then the electron
density is near enough to the ground state energy, and it is therefore used to calculate further
properties.
Figure 2.1: Self-consistent ﬁeld process in DFT
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Density Functional Theory
9
2.2.2 Exchange-Correlation Functionals
An exact formulation of the exchange-correlation functional is unknown and needs to be
approximated. The XC functionals can be divided into groups according to the approach used,
which goes from local density approximations (LDA) to double-hybrid functionals. The level of
accuracy often increases with the complexity of the functional. This hierarchy is described by
Jacob’s ladder, shown in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Hierarchy of the XC functionals according to Jacob’s ladder. The lowest level,
the "earth", is represented by the Hartree-Fock theory, while the highest level,
the "heaven", by the chemical accuracy. The level of accuracy usually increases
together with the complexity and computational cost.
The simplest approximation for the XC functional is the local density approximation. Here the
XC energy is considered dependent only on the local electron density,
ELDA
XC
“
ż
nprqϵHEG
XC pnprqqdr
(2.14)
where ϵHEG
XC
is the XC energy density of a homogenous electron gas (HEG) with density nprq.
The exchange term is known exactly, while Monte-Carlo methods are used to calculate the
correlation part [19]. This approximation mostly works for systems where the density varies
slowly.
Additional accuracy can be reached by including the gradient of the density with the generalized
gradient approximation (GGA),
EGGA
XC
“
ż
fpnprq, ∇nprqqdr
(2.15)
which allows the description of inhomogeneous systems. There are diﬀerent possible forms for
the GGA functionals, which can be tailored to describe diﬀerent systems. GGAs are one of the
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theory
most frequently used types of functionals, as they provide a good balance between accuracy
and computational cost.
Meta-GGAs include higher-order derivatives of the gradient, such as the kinetic energy density,
which allows to capture eﬀects such as non-local correlations.
The next step forward in accuracy is usually achieved with hybrid functionals. They combine
GGA or Meta-GGA with a fraction of the exact exchange from the Hartree-Fock theory, leading
to an improved description of the exchange interactions. In this project, the DFT calculations
are carried out with the hybrid Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) functional [20].
Finally, the highest level of accuracy is reached with double hybrid functionals. Here, a portion
of second-order perturbation theory is added to the hybrid functionals to obtain a more precise
description of exchange and correlation interactions.
Overall, DFT is a very widely used method that works well for many systems if the right
approximations are made. However, it scales approximately with N3, where N is the number
of atoms in the system [12]. This leads to very high computational costs for large systems, or
studies in which large supercells are needed, such as the 2D perovskites investigated in this
thesis. Other methods are therefore needed in order to have accurate simulations on more
complex materials. Hence, I used the Tight Binding method in this project. The TB model is
based on DFT calculations to reach a computationally eﬃcient and still accurate analysis of
more complicated systems. The DFT calculations were carried out only for small supercells, for
which the computational times are reasonable, with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package
(VASP) [21, 22].
2.3 Tight Binding Method
The TB method is a semi-empirical approach used to calculate the electronic band structure
and properties of solids, particularly for materials where electrons are strongly localized around
atoms. It is based on the assumption that the electronic wavefunctions can be represented
by a linear combination of atomic orbitals, with the primary interactions occurring between
neighboring atoms. Because of this, TB can be a computationally eﬃcient method to study
the properties of a material. I will now go into the details of the TB formalism, the following
explanations are based on Ref. [23, 24].
First of all, the model considers electrons independently, treating them as moving in a potential
created by the atomic nuclei and other electrons. This allows us to simplify the many-body
Hamiltonian, Equation 2.3, by deﬁning an internal potential Vintprnq and an external potential
VextpRmq. The internal potential describes the eﬀect of all the electrons on the n-th electron,
while the external potential is the potential from the nuclei. Together, these two potentials
give the eﬀective potential Veffprq. This can be expressed with respect to the contribution of
each atom,
Veffprq “
ÿ
i,l
Vlpr ´ Ri ´ τlq
(2.16)
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Tight Binding Method
11
where τl is the deviation of the atom l from its lattice site. The Hamiltonian in Schrödinger
equation can then be written as follows
ˆH “
„
´ ¯h2
2me
∇2 ` Veffprq

(2.17)
The electrons are considered as tightly bound on their respective nuclei. In the following
explanations, the band index is labeled m, while the index j is used for the unit cell.
At a given lattice point, the electronic wavefunction ψi is approximated as the combination of
atomic wavefunctions φm of the respective nucleus i. Atomic orbitals are often chosen as atomic
wavefunctions. Figure 2.3 illustrates two localized electron wavefunctions on their respective
nuclei. Since we are considering a crystal, the periodicity of the system needs to be fulﬁlled.
Figure 2.3: Simpliﬁed representation of two localized orbitals on two nuclei, represented by
the red and blue dot. The overlap between the two orbitals is the shaded area in
orange.
Bloch’s theorem states that the wavefunction ψmk in a periodic potential can be written as
ψmk “ umkprq ¨ eikr
(2.18)
where k is the wavevector, eikr a plane wave component, umkprq a periodic function with the
same periodicity of the lattice, i.e. umkpr ` Rq “ umkprq [25].
It is now possible to write the m-th crystal wavefunction Ψmk. This is determined by the
combination of the m-th atomic wavefunctions φm in the crystal, with Bloch’s factor to ensure
the periodicity of the system.
Ψmk “
1
?
N
N
ÿ
j“1
eikRjφmpr ´ Rjq
(2.19)
where N is the number of unit cells, 1{
?
N a normalization factor, Rj is a lattice translation
vector.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Theory
By multiplying the left-hand side of the corresponding Schrödinger equation with Ψ˚
nk, and
integrating in real space, we obtain the following expression for Schrödinger Equation, in matrix
form.
”
Hk ´ ϵpkqSkı
“ 0
(2.20)
where Hk is the Hamiltonian matrix and Sk is the overlap matrix. For two wavefunctions, of
the states m and n, they are deﬁned as
Hk
mn “
ż
drΨ˚
mkHΨnk
(2.21)
Sk
mn “
ż
drΨ˚
mkΨnk
(2.22)
The overlap matrix would be an identity matrix if the orbitals were orthogonal to each other,
which is not the case for atomic orbitals at diﬀerent sites. However, it is possible to obtain an
orthogonal basis from a non-orthogonal one by, for instance, applying the Löwdin scheme [26].
The transformed orbitals maintain the symmetry properties of the initial atomic orbitals, and
therefore we will keep the same notations (s, p, ...). This is called orthogonal TB, which is used
in this project. The overlap matrix Sk is thus treated as identity matrix I.
In a periodic crystal, the wavefunction in Equation 2.21 is given by Equation 2.19, and thus
the Hamiltonian matrix can be written as:
Hk
mn “
N
ÿ
j
eikRj
ż
drφ˚
mprq ˆHφnpr ´ Rjq
(2.23)
The eﬀective potential in the Hamiltonian and the orbitals are all dependent on their positions
in the lattice. There are, therefore, four possible combinations, depending on the atomic sites
involved.
• One-center integrals: the two orbitals and the potential are all located at the same atomic
site, shown in Figure 2.4a.
• Two-center crystal ﬁeld, or on-site correction: the two orbitals are located at the same
site, while the potential is on a diﬀerent site, as in in Figure 2.4b.
• Two-center integrals: the two orbitals are at diﬀerent sites, and the potential is at the
same site as one of them, illustrated in in Figure 2.4c.
• Three-center integrals: the two orbitals and the potential are in three diﬀerent atomic
sites, as in in Figure 2.4d.
The many-body problem would, in principle, now be solvable, as it requires solving real space
integrals. However, this can be very complex and computationally expensive. Hence, it is
common to make a two-center approximation, neglecting the crystal ﬁeld eﬀects as well as the
three-center elements. The crystal ﬁeld would lead to a constant energy shift relative to the
atomic energy level, and since it can be assumed to be approximately the same for all orbitals,
it can be set to zero. The three-center integrals can be ignored because the atomic orbitals are
highly localized, meaning their overlap with orbitals from distant atoms is very small, making
the value of the integrals close to zero.
This leaves only two integral types that need to be solved: the one-center or on-site integrals
and the two-center integrals, also called overlap integrals. Another simpliﬁcation is made by
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Tight Binding Method
13
assuming that the overlap integral is zero for sites that are not nearest neighbors, as the overlap
between atomic wavefunctions decreases rapidly with the distance. However, the elements in
the matrix are often ﬁtted to experimental data, making TB a semi-empirical method.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.4: Diﬀerent types of TB integrals, (a) One-center integral, (b) Two-center crystal
ﬁeld, (c) Two-center integral and (d) Three-center integrals. The nuclei are the
red dots, while the yellow circle is used to indicate the potential. The orbitals are
represented by the blue curves.
This thesis focuses on the hopping elements, i.e., the overlap integrals, of the TB matrix. They
are obtained through a general mapping rule, which relates them to the interatomic distances.
I will provide more details on this in section 2.6, with an overview of how the various methods
are combined.
Before this, the following sections will focus on introducing lattice dynamics and their
simulations, as the aim is to study the structural and electronic dynamics of 2D perovskites.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theory
2.4 Lattice Dynamics
This next section will focus on harmonic approximation, which is commonly used to obtain
potential energy in function of atomic displacement, and what it means to go beyond it by
including the anharmonic eﬀects.
2.4.1 Harmonic Approximation
In a periodic structure at 0 K, the atom i is located at the equilibrium position Ri. With
ﬁnite temperature, the atoms move out of their equilibrium position which is described by the
displacements ui of the atom i. The potential energy U can be written as a Taylor expansion
around the equilibrium positions Ri. U0 is the energy at equilibrium, α, β, γ denote the three
cartensian coordinates.
U “ U0`
ÿ
i,α
BU
Bui,α
ˇˇˇˇ
0
ui,α`1
2
ÿ
i,j,α,β
B2U
Bui,αBuj,β
ˇˇˇˇ
0
ui,αuj,β` 1
3!
ÿ
i,j,k,α,β,γ
B3U
Bui,αBuj,βBuk,γ
ˇˇˇˇ
0
ui,αuj,βuk,γ`...
(2.24)
We can then deﬁne the force-constant tensors Φ as the derivatives of the energy with respect
to the displacement.
Φi,α ” BU
Bui,α
ˇˇˇˇ
0
(2.25)
Φi,α,j,β ”
B2U
Bui,αBj,β
ˇˇˇˇ
0
(2.26)
Φi,α,j,β,k,γ ”
B3U
Bui,αBuj,βBuk,γ
ˇˇˇˇ
0
(2.27)
...
(2.28)
Since the ions are in equilibrium at a minimum of the potential energy, Φi,α is zero. The
second order tensor, Φi,α,j,β, is indicative of how a displacement of the atom i in the direction
α changes the β component of the force on the atom j. In the harmonic approximation, the
expansion is considered up to the second order, neglecting all the higher-order terms, which
are called anharmonic terms. The potential energy therefore becomes
U « Up2q “ U0 ` 1
2
ÿ
i,j
uiΦi,juj
(2.29)
This means that the potential energy around the equilibrium position has a quadratic behaviour.
The probability distribution Ppuq of the displacements u is determined by Boltzmann factor
Ppuq9e
Upuq
kBT
(2.30)
where kB is Boltzmann constant and T the temperature. With the harmonic approximation,
this leads to a Gaussian distribution of the displacements.
The harmonic approximation is the starting point for the phonon model. Phonons are quasi-
particles that represent the quantized lattice vibrations and correspond to the normal modes
of lattice vibrations. There are two types of phonons: acoustic and optical phonons. Acoustic
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Lattice Dynamics
15
phonons correspond to vibrations of the lattice in which the atoms move in phase with each
other. In optical phonon modes, the atoms instead move out of phase with each other. The
energy of acoustic phonons is usually lower than that of optical phonons. In the harmonic
approximation, the phonons are independent of each other and would have inﬁnite lifetimes if
scattering with charge carriers is not considered.
Phonons can, in fact, interact with the charge carrier, aﬀecting the mobility and transport
properties of the material. Within the harmonic approximation, the electron-phonon coupling
is usually modeled as linear.
This is achieved with a perturbative approach, where the
electron-phonon interaction is considered a linear perturbation in the electronic Hamiltonian.
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the
concept of a polaron
in a material. Fig-
ure from Ref. [27].
In the case of polar materials, where the atoms displaced are
charged, the vibrations in the lattice change the electrical
polarization of the lattice. This is primarily relevant for
optical phonons, where the adjacent atoms move in opposite
directions. Within the harmonic approximation, the interac-
tion between a charge carrier and the long-range Coulomb
ﬁeld generated by the optical phonons can be described by
Frölich interaction [27]. The strength of the interaction is
dependent on the material properties. Frölich interaction
can be used to model the charge carrier transport with the
Boltzmann transport equation.
This interaction comes with the concept of polarons, which
are quasiparticles consisting of a charge carrier and the
lattice polarization induced by it, as shown in Figure 2.5.
Polarons can be distinguished into small polarons and large
polarons, based on the range of the polarization.
The
polarization radius in small polarons is close to the lattice parameter, so the electron-phonon
coupling is short-ranged. Large polarons have a polarization radius signiﬁcantly larger than the
lattice parameter, and the electron-phonon interaction is long-ranged, as described by Frölich
interaction [27].
2.4.2 Anharmonicity
The harmonic approximation usually describes accurately the behaviour of materials with small
atomic displacements. However, the terms beyond the second order in the Taylor expansion
in Equation 2.24 become signiﬁcant for larger displacements. The harmonic approximation is
then no longer accurate, and the anharmonic terms need to be considered. The anharmonic
contributions to the potential can be deﬁned as
UanhpRq “ U ´ Up2qpRq
(2.31)
where Up2qpRq is the potential from the harmonic approximation in Equation 2.29. Examples
of anharmonic potentials, with diﬀerent levels of anharmonicity, are shown below in Figure 2.6.
The number of higher-order terms that should be included in the Taylor expansion to describe
accurately the energy depends on the speciﬁc case.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theory
Figure 2.6: Examples of energy potentials from harmonic to strongly anharmonic as function
of the atomic displacement. Figure from Ref. [28].
Materials at high temperatures, with soft lattices or without a clear equilibrium position,
are examples of cases for which the harmonic approximation fails. As I will explain more
in detail later, perovskites are anharmonic materials, as they exhibit large and disordered
atomic displacements. Including the anharmonic terms in the expression of the potential energy
with respect to the displacements introduces some physical phenomena that are otherwise not
captured or accurately described. Interactions between phonons are now included, meaning
that their lifetime and mean free path decreases. As the mean free paths of phonons shrink,
they become more localized in the material. This aﬀects the scattering of the charge carriers,
which cannot be modeled as linear anymore.
For anharmonic materials, it is therefore critical that the modeling of their dynamic behavior
goes beyond the harmonic approximation.
This can be achieved by molecular dynamics
simulations, as they use the full potential energy surface.
2.5 Molecular Dynamics
MD is a method to simulate the nuclear dynamics. The atoms are in a box with periodic
boundary conditions and move classically along forces acting on them. The displacements of
the atoms can signiﬁcantly impact the properties of a material, as mentioned in section 2.4.
MD simulations start from an initial system with speciﬁed parameters (such as the atomic
coordinates, temperature, pressure, ...) and boundary conditions and calculate its evolution by
solving Newton’s equations of motion Fi “ mi d2r
dt2 . The motion is discretized in time, with a
chosen number of timesteps considered, and the system assumes a certain conﬁguration at each
timestep. For the system at time t, the forces on each atom are calculated, and their positions
are updated accordingly. The forces are derived from the potential energy of the system.
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Molecular Dynamics
17
The approach for solving these equations is iterative, where the positions and velocities at the
new time t ` δt are calculated from the previous ones. One of the simplest and most used
algorithms is Verlet’s algorithm. The position at t ` δt of the ion i are found as follows
Ript ` δtq “ 2Riptq ` Ript ´ δtq ` δt2
Mi
Fiptq.
(2.32)
An MD simulation needs to relate to measurable quantities, such as temperature or pressure.
The ergodic hypothesis is central to this connection. It states that over a suﬃciently long
period, the time average of a physical property will equal the ensemble average. The measurable
quantities can be considered as the ensemble averages and can, therefore, be found from the
time average over the simulation. There are various possible choices for the physical ensemble.
In an MD simulation, the most straightforward option would be the microcanonical ensemble,
with a constant number of molecules N, constant volume V , and constant energy E. However,
this is diﬃcult to relate to experimental setups; thus, other ensembles are commonly used.
Between these, the canonical NV T ensemble and the isothermic-isobaric NPT ensemble are
the two most employed. The NV T ensemble keeps the number of particles N, the volume V ,
and the temperature T constant. The NPT ensemble has the pressure constant instead of the
volume.
The ensembles in the MD can be realized by thermostats, which make the nuclear dynamics
follow the distribution of energy states of the ensemble. Two examples of thermostats are
the Nosé-Hoover thermostat and the Langevin thermostat. The former is a deterministic
thermostat, where the equations of motion are modiﬁed deterministically to contain the given
system temperature. This is achieved by adding a degree of freedom to the system, which
represents the interaction of the system with a heat bath at temperature T. The temperature
constraint is observed by regulating the velocities of the particles and thus adjusting the kinetic
energy of the system. The Langevin thermostat is instead a stochastic method, which uses
random forces to simulate the eﬀect of a thermal bath with the given temperature. The
equations of motion are modiﬁed by introducing a friction term and a random noise term,
which balance each other to maintain a constant temperature.
In this thesis, the NPT ensemble was used with the Langevin thermostat in the training process
of the ML-FF, while the NV T ensemble with the Nosé-Hoover thermostat was employed for
the prediction process.
The statistical ensemble is not reached immediately at the beginning of an MD simulation,
as the system requires some time to reach equilibrium. Every simulation, therefore, starts
with an equilibration period, where the system adjusts to the given physical conditions. Any
conﬁguration reached during this period is discarded.
The forces can be obtained with diﬀerent approaches. In the following sections, I will give an
overview of Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics (AIMD), Force Field Molecular Dynamics (FFMD),
and Machine Learning Force-Field Molecular Dynamics (ML-FF MD).
In this project, the results from ML-FF MD simulations are analyzed. The simulations were
carried out by Frederico Simões in his master’s thesis [29].
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theory
2.5.1 Ab Initio MD
In AIMD, the potential energy and thus the forces are found from ﬁrst principle calculations,
typically with DFT. The forces are calculated using the Hellman-Feynmann theorem, which
relates the derivative of the energy with the expectation value of the derivative of the
Hamiltonian,
BEλ
Bλ “
C
ψλ
ˇˇˇˇˇ
B ˆH
Bλ
ˇˇˇˇˇ ψλ
G
(2.33)
where λ is a parameter of the system, ψλ is the wavefunction of the system, dependent on λ,
and Eλ is its energy eigenvalue. In the case of MD, the parameter λ is the position R of the
nucleus. This means that the force on each ion i can be found as the gradient of the total
energy with respect to the position of i, Fi “ ´∇RiEpRptqq. The atomic positions are then
updated, and a new self-consistent ab initio calculation is performed.
The main advantage of AIMD is the high accuracy, since it is based on ﬁrst principle quantum
mechanics methods. However, because of this, it is also a computationally expensive method,
which scales cubically with the system size.
2.5.2 Force-Field MD
In FFMD, to decrease the computational costs, the potential energy surface (PES) is approx-
imated with force ﬁelds (FF). These describe the PES as a function of the positions of the
atoms and account for interactions to diﬀerent levels of accuracy.
The interactions are commonly considered as either bonded or non-bonded interactions. Bond
stretching, angle bending and torsions are the main contributions to bonded interactions. These
are often described with the harmonic approximation if the displacements are not too large.
The non-bonded interactions considered are usually Van der Walls and electrostatic interactions
[30].
The goal is to describe classically the energy, in order to simplify the calculations. However, to
achieve this, it is necessary to make signiﬁcant approximations which limit the accuracy of the
description. Therefore, force ﬁelds are often parameterized through empirical data, limiting
the transferability of the FF [30].
The computational times of FFMD are several orders of magnitude smaller than those of
AIMD, allowing the study of larger systems and longer timescales. However, the process of
parameterizing a FF can be very diﬃcult and demanding in time, defying the purpose of using
FF-MD for the lower computational costs.
2.5.3 Machine Learning Force-Fields MD
In ML-FF MD, the force ﬁelds are parametrized with a machine learning model trained on
ab initio data. This would lead to results with similar accuracy to AIMD, but at much lower
computational costs, overcoming the disadvantages of both methods.
The ML model can be interpreted as an interpolation model, which has learned from the training
data and is able to predict an FF for a new structure. The training data are conﬁgurations for
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Molecular Dynamics
19
which the exact PES and FF have been calculated, commonly with ab initio methods. The
atomic structures need to be represented as input data with all the relevant features. These
atomic representations are called descriptors. The input data is then used in an ML method,
which can be a kernel-based or a deep-learning method [11]. This concept is illustrated in
Figure 2.7 for a Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) method.
The MD simulations used in this project were carried out using the ML-FF method from VASP.
The descriptor is the Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP) [31], and the method is the
Gaussian Approximation Potentials (GAP), based on the GPR [32].
Figure 2.7: Overview of the Gaussian Process Regression model for atomic applications. On
the left, the structures are represented with atomic descriptors, and the similarity
between structures is computed with kernels. This is used on a GPR model
to make predictions, as shown in the centre. It can then be applied to predict
diﬀerent properties, as exempliﬁed on the right. Figure from Ref. [33].
The SOAP descriptor is constructed to ensure invariance to symmetries, such as rotations and
translations, and smoothness. A detailed explanation can be found in Ref. [31]. The main
drawback of SOAP is its incompleteness, i.e. two diﬀerent atomic conﬁgurations could map to
the same descriptor. However, this seems to have a small impact on the ﬁnal predictions [33].
The GAP model then uses the SOAP descriptors for the input data and is trained to predict
interatomic potentials. A more detailed explanation of the GAP model and the GPR methods
can be found in Ref. [32, 33]. First, the similarity between the local descriptors and the
reference descriptors is measured with a similarity kernel. Then, a linear combination of all
the similarity kernels is then used to parameterize the PES and make a prediction for the new
conﬁguration. Each prediction is associated with an uncertainty value, which can be interpreted
as the conﬁdence level that the model has.
The training process of the ML-FF is based on an "on-the-ﬂy" approach, where the uncertainty
is used to determine whether the next step is performed with an ab initio simulation or with
the ML model. An ab initio simulation is run if the uncertainty is high and the model is not
conﬁdent with the prediction [34]. The FF is constantly updated based on the new data. After
the on-the-ﬂy run, the obtained FF is used to produce the ﬁnal MD trajectories.
The main advantages of ML-FF MD are the low computational costs and the possibility to
reach high accuracy thanks to the high-quality ab initio training data. However, it comes with
some limitations. The assumption of energy locality excludes long-range interactions, such as
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Theory
Van der Walls interactions, and thus could be inaccurate for some materials. The training data
can also limit the model’s transferability to new physical situations not captured in the data
like other phases. A better performance could be achieved with more data, but this comes with
the need for more ab initio calculations, which makes the training process more expensive.
2.6 Dynamic Disorder Multi-Scale Model
All these methods come together in a Dynamic Disorder Multi-Scale (DD-MS) model, as
developed in Ref. [35] and illustrated in Figure 2.8. The goal is to obtain the dynamics of the
electronic structure, inﬂuenced by the nuclear dynamic disorder, to then calculate transport
properties. The main challenge lies in having a model for large supercells, for which DFT
cannot be used as it is too expensive. Large supercells are needed to avoid ﬁnite-size eﬀects
[35]. For each time step of the MD simulation, a TB Hamiltonian matrix is computed. They
are used to calculate a series of time evolution operators. With the time evolution operators,
the initial wavefunction, either a localized electron or hole, is propagated in time within the
crystal. With these time-evolved wavefunctions, one can determine the electronic mean square
displacement (MSD), from which the mobility is obtained with the Einstein-Smoluchowski
relation. MD calculations are used because they are not limited to the harmonic approximation,
and thus anharmonicity and dynamic disorder can be included. Commonly, transport models
are based on the harmonic approximation and, therefore, would not lead to a realistic picture
of the transport in anharmonic materials, such as perovskites.
For small supercells, the electronic structure is computed with DFT, and then the TB matrix
parameters are obtained with the Wannier90 projection scheme [36]. The goal of performing
these DFT calculations is to obtain a mapping rule for calculating the Hamiltonian, which
can be applied to large supercells. By analyzing the hopping elements from the Wannier90
calculation, it was found that, for 3D perovskites, they relate to the atomic distance with an
exponential relation [35, 37]. This mapping can be applied to larger supercells without running
expensive DFT calculations. Here, it is also applied to 2D perovskites. The on-site elements
would be calculated using Ewald summations aligned to the atomic levels assessed from the
DFT and Wannier90 scheme.
This project focuses on analyzing the tight binding hopping elements and how they relate to
the atomic displacements in the structure. Although I will not calculate the on-site energies nor
analyze the time evolution of the electronic states, this analysis of the TB hopping elements can
already give an insight into the dynamics of the electronic structure and transport properties.
==PAGE:33==
2.7 Perovskites
21
Figure 2.8: Dynamic disorder multi-scale model used to calculate the dynamics of the
electronic states. DFT with Wannier90 projection scheme is used to ﬁnd the
TB Hamiltonian for small supercells, while a general mapping rule and Ewald
summation are used for large supercells.
2.7 Perovskites
Perovskites are a class of materials with the chemical formula ABX3, where A and B are
cations, and X is an anion. The crystal structure is nearly cubic, with the A anion at the
center and a frame of corner-sharing BX6 octahedra, as shown in Figure 2.9. The cubic phase
is, however, usually found only at high temperatures, and as the temperature decreases, the
octahedra start to tilt, leading to lower symmetry phases, such as tetragonal, orthorhombic, or
monoclinic. Numerous possible combinations of elements for A, B, and X allow for tuning of
the properties of the perovskites, which therefore have applications in diﬀerent ﬁelds [38].
Figure 2.9: Structure of an ideal cubic perovskite, with formula ABX3. The cation A is in
yellow, the cations B in dark blue, and the anions X in red. Figure from Ref. [39].
2.7.1 Halide Perovskites
Halide perovskites are perovskites where the X anions are halides (I, Br) and B a divalent
metal cation (Pb2+, Sn2+). The cation A is either a large monovalent alkali metal, such as
Cs+, or a small organic molecule, such as methylammonium (CH6N+, MA+) or formamidinium
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Theory
(CH3NH3+, FA+). Between the hybrid HaPs, MAPbI3 (MAPI) is a prototypical material that
has shown highly promising results for solar energy conversion. Its structure is shown below in
Figure 2.10. MAPI is the 3D HaPs considered in this project as a reference for the results of
the 2D perovskites. These results are taken from the PhD thesis of Maximilian Schilcher [40].
Figure 2.10: Schematic illustration of the structure of MAPI. The following colors are used
for the diﬀerent atoms: black for Pb, purple for I, blue for N, brown for C, and
light pink for H.
HaPs can be synthesized at low temperatures and with low processing costs, increasing their
potential as new solar cell technology. The fabrication of perovskite thin ﬁlms, used as absorbing
layers in solar cells, happens in one or two steps, where the precursor solutions (MAX and
PbX2 for MAPbX3) are dissolved in a solvent such as dimethylformamide and deposited on a
substrate [41].
I will now shortly introduce the most relevant and exciting properties of HaPs, which are
necessary to understand why HaPs have shown such a great performance for solar energy
conversion and what distinguishes them from traditional inorganic semiconductors.
Optoelectronic properties
First of all, the band gaps of HaPs are usually direct and close to optimal values for solar light
absorption, with values around 1.4-1.7 eV [42]. Their electronic structure is characterized by
highly dispersive energy bands, with similar curvature of the valence band (VB) and conduction
band (CB). This leads to low eﬀective masses of the charge carriers, which are in the range of
0.15-0.25 times the electron mass. With similar eﬀective masses of electrons and holes, HaPs
show ambipolar conduction, which contributes to their energy conversion eﬃciency. The BX6
octahedra form the near-edge band structure, so the cation A does not directly contribute to
it, and it plays mostly a structural role [43].
==PAGE:35==
2.7 Perovskites
23
For MAPI, the near-edge VB structure is given by 5p orbitals of I and 6s orbitals of Pb. The 6p
orbitals of Pb form the CB near-edge structure. This band structure is interestingly inverted
compared to traditional III-V inorganic semiconductors, such as GaAs. Here, the 4p orbitals
of As form the VBM while the Ga and As 4s orbitals contribute to the CBM [44]. Spin-orbit
coupling (SOC) eﬀects due to the presence of heavy elements such as Pb also impact the band
structure, leading to energy band splitting [45].
The exciton binding energy is around 10 meV–15 meV, lower than the room temperature thermal
energy, kB ¨ T« 25 meV. Consequently, the free carrier generation is very eﬃcient [46].
The recombination rates of photo-generated charge carriers are remarkably low, and their
lifetimes and diﬀusion lengths are consequently high. This can be due to the low density of
intrinsic defects or polaronic eﬀects [47]. Despite the low eﬀective masses and recombination
rates, the mobility of the charge carriers is not exceptionally high. At room temperature,
experiments ﬁnd that the mobility is 1-2 orders of magnitude lower than traditional inorganic
semiconductors [10]. This could be related to the vibrational properties of HaPs, which are
diﬀerent from traditional semiconductors and impact the carrier scattering mechanisms [37].
Structural Properties
HaPs are characterized by a soft lattice, 3-10 times softer than the other inorganic semicon-
ductors [10], which results in signiﬁcant atomic displacements from the equilibrium position.
In hybrid HaPs, the anion A plays a central role in the lattice softness, as its movement and
rotation within the lattice introduce distortions in the octahedral framework [48]. Due to the
large displacements and the dynamic lattice, the harmonic approximation is not valid for HaPs,
and anharmonic eﬀects are present. The phonon mean free paths are less than half the unit
cell, meaning that the vibrations are highly localized within the structure [49]. Moreover, the
atomic displacements cause disorder in the lattice and ﬂuctuations in the orbital overlaps. This
is the concept of dynamic disorder, illustrated in Figure 2.11, which reduces the transport of
the charge carriers in the material [35].
As HaPs are polar materials, the electric polarization changes as the atoms are displaced.
This leads to local polar ﬂuctuations, which inﬂuence the motion of the atoms as well as the
electronic properties [50]. Large polarons occur in HaPs, with an intermediate coupling strength
[51]. However, the mobilities calculated with Frölich interaction in the Boltzmann transport
equation fail to predict the correct relation between the mobility and the temperature [51].
This conﬁrms the need to go beyond the harmonic approximation to describe the transport in
HaPs.
Due to their softness, one of the main issues with HaPs is their high degradation rate, as they
are susceptible to moisture and light. When they are exposed to moisture, mono or dihydrate
species form, followed by the decomposition of the perovskite ABX3 irreversibly into HX and
BX2. The presence of vacancies and defects accelerates this process [8]. When exposed to air
and light, the oxygen molecules absorbed on the halide vacancies are photo-oxidized, forming
superoxides. The pervoskite then degrades into BX2, X and H2O [8]. Moreover, the migration
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Theory
Figure 2.11: Illustration of the concept of dynamic disorder in HaPs. Scenario (a) shows
the case of a static lattice, with a periodic potential energy surface and a large
orbital overlap. Scenarios (b) and (c) illustrate how the lattice distortions change
the potential energy and, therefore, cause ﬂuctuations in the orbital overlap.
The radial part of s-orbitals and p-orbitals are shown in continuous blue and
dashed red lines, respectively. Figure from Ref. [52].
of halide anions in the lattice also destabilizes the perovskite, which over time leads to its
degradation [8].
A possible solution is replacing the cation A with a large organic cation, leading to a 2D layered
structure. Since the organic cation is hydrophobic, it protects the inorganic structure from
degradation.
==PAGE:37==
2.7 Perovskites
25
2.7.2 Two Dimensional Perovskites
Layered perovskites have chemical composition A’2An-1BnX3n+1, or A’An-1BnX3n+1, where
A’ are large cations, A are small organic cations, and n is the number of inorganic layers.
As for 3D HaPs, B is a divalent metal cation, and X is a halide anion. Pure 2D perovskites
have only one inorganic layer, and their structure comprises alternating organic and inorganic
layers without any smaller cations A. With increasing n, the structures become more similar
to a 3D perovskite. Figure 2.12 illustrates schematically the structures of layered perovskites.
As the number of inorganic layers increases, the structure is more diﬃcult to synthetize and
a mixture of phases with diﬀerent n values is obtained [5]. The two most used spacers are
butylammonium (BA, C4H12N) and phenylethylamine (PEA, C8H11N). 2D perovskites are
signiﬁcantly more stable to moisture and light than their 3D counterparts. The organic spacers
in fact make the material hydrophobic, preventing degradation in high humidity or water.
Moreover, the presence of halide vacancies is reduced, and halide migration is suppressed by
the organic spacers, enhancing the stability of the structure towards sunlight [8].
The fabrication of layered perovskites is not as simple as 3D HaPs, as more control over the
structure is needed. It is possible to use mechanical exfoliation, which reaches high accuracy
but is not feasible to scale up, or solution and colloidal-based methods, where some precision is
lost for a gain in practicability [53].
Figure 2.12: Layered perovskite structures from a 2D structure, with n “ 1, to a 3D structure,
with n “ 8.
The structures in between are generally deﬁned as quasi-2D
perovskites. Figure from Ref. [42].
2D perovskites are classiﬁed based on the stacking geometry of the layers and the cations
separating them. They can have a Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) phase, a Dion-Jacobson (DJ)
phase or an Alternating Cation Interlayer (ACI) phase. The RP phase, shown in Figure 2.13a,
has two layers of inorganic molecules in between the inorganic layers. The adjacent inorganic
layers are shifted by 1/2 of the unit cell vector along the two axes perpendicular to the stacking
direction. In the DJ phase, Figure 2.13b, one layer of organic molecules is in between inorganic
layers, and adjacent inorganic layers are aligned. Since the distance between the inorganic
layers is now decreased compared to the RP phase, the interactions are not limited to Van der
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Theory
Walls [54]. Finally, the ACI phase has alternating organic cations separating the inorganic
layers, Figure 2.13c. Guanidinium is the only cation for which the ACI phase exists so far [54].
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.13: Possible structural phases of layered perovskites, based on the stacking geometry.
(a) RP phase (b) DJ phase (c) ACI phase. Figure from Ref. [55].
RP perovskites are the most studied until now because of their stability and ability to control
the inorganic layer thickness [5], and thus in this project, I will focus on butylammonium lead
iodide, BA2PbI4 (BAPI), an RP perovskite. Its structure is shown below, in Figure 2.14.
Figure 2.14: Schematic illustration of the structure of BAPI, focus of this thesis. The following
colors are used for the diﬀerent atoms: black for Pb, purple for I, blue for N,
brown for C, and light pink for H.
==PAGE:39==
2.7 Perovskites
27
The properties of 2D perovskites are related to those of their 3D counterpart, but the
dimensionality reduction and large organic cations give them distinct properties.
The large cations A’ decouples the inorganic layers in one direction, conﬁning the charge
carriers to two dimensions and forming a multiple quantum well (MQW) structure, shown in
Figure 2.15. This quantum conﬁnement eﬀect increases the band gap of the structure, which
can, therefore, be tuned by the number of inorganic layers. For BA2MAn-1PbnI3n + 1, the band
gap goes from 2.43 eV for n “ 1, 2.03 for n “ 3 and 1.50 for n “ 8 [56].
The diﬀerence in dielectric constant between the organic and inorganic layers leads to a dielectric
conﬁnement eﬀect, as shown in Figure 2.15. Together with the quantum conﬁnement, this
leads to high exciton binding energies, which reach several hundreds of meVs [57]. Excitons
are, therefore, stable in 2D perovskites, which is unusual for semiconductors. Extracting free
charge carriers can be challenging because excitons cannot be directed toward the interfaces
using an electric ﬁeld. The softness of the lattice, inﬂuenced by the organic spacer, has been
found to impact the exciton transport.
Speciﬁcally, a soft lattice decreases the diﬀusion
lengths of excitons because of the strong electron-phonon coupling and the presence of large
exciton-polarons [58]. The crystal structure and composition strongly inﬂuence the properties
of the excitons, such as their eﬀective masses [42].
Figure 2.15: Quantum well structure in 2D perovskites, and dielectric conﬁnement leading to
the formation of a stable exciton because of the diﬀerence in dielectric constants
εw and εb. Figure from Ref. [59].
Compared to 3D HaPs, the charge carriers in 2D perovskites have higher eﬀective masses, in
the range of 0.4-0.55 eV times the electron mass, with less dispersive energy bands [60]. The
lifetimes of the charge carriers are found to be increased compared to the 3D perovskites [42].
The organic spacers have a substantial impact on the chemical properties of the material,
while the inorganic layer determines the optoelectronic properties. The main contributions
to the near-edge electronic structure, as for the 3D HaPs, come from the B and X orbitals.
The organic molecules A and A’ indirectly aﬀect the electronic properties of the material by
inducing some changes in the geometry [61].
So far, the lattice dynamics of 2D perovskites have been less investigated than 3D perovskites.
The inorganic layer of 2D perovskites has shown signiﬁcant octahedra tilting and distortions,
aﬀecting the Pb-X bond length and the Pb-X-Pb bond angle. The organic spacers inﬂuence these
structural changes with electrostatic and hydrogen-bond interactions with the octahedra [8]. It
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Theory
can be expected that 2D perovskites have similar dynamic features to their 3D counterpart, i.e.
anharmonic eﬀects and dynamic disorder, but it is essential to investigate how they diﬀer.
==PAGE:41==
3 Results
Firstly, I will present the structural dynamics of BAPI. Then, I will investigate the dynamics
of the electronic couplings.
In the discussion, I will then connect the two analyses.
As
mentioned before, where possible, I will compare the results for the 2D perovskite BAPI with
the corresponding 3D structure, MAPI.
BAPI was studied within a 4ˆ 4ˆ 1 supercell, which comprises a total of 624 atoms. For BAPI,
the unit cell is already large because of the large organic spacers and a large supercell is needed
to avoid ﬁnite-size eﬀects. The dynamics were studied at three diﬀerent temperatures: 250 K,
375 K and 450 K. It is known that a phase transition happens at 274 K, which is related to the
orientation of the organic spacers and, consequently, the tilting of the octahedra in the structure
[62]. Below 274 K, the octahedra are locked in a tilted position, while at higher temperatures,
they are mobile [62]. Thus, it is particularly interesting to study the dynamics above and
below this temperature. Because of this phase transition, the experimental structures that
have been considered in this work are diﬀerent, as shown in Figure 3.1. At 250 K, the structure
is orthorhombic, with a “ 16.856 Å, b “ 17.972 Å and c “ 26.233 Å. At higher temperatures,
the lattice parameters become a “ 17.753 Å, b “ 17.387 Å and c “ 27.616 Å which can be
interpreted as tetragonal.
(a) 250 K
(b) 375 K
(c) 450 K
Figure 3.1: Experimental structures for BAPI at (a) 250 K, (b) 375 K and (c) 450 K. The
structures were obtained from experimental results, and the diﬀerences are due to
the orientation of the organic molecules, which straightens with the temperature.
The structure used at 375 K and 450 K is the same. Brown is used for C atoms,
pink for H, light blue for N, purple for I, and black for Pb. The continuous black
line marks the supercell.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Results
The MD simulations were obtained with ML-FF MD with 1 fs timestep; more details can
be found in Ref. [29]. The choice of ML-FF MD comes from the large size of the system
considered, as AIMD would not be feasible.
For MAPI, a 16 ˆ 16 ˆ 16 supercell was used, with a total of 49152 atoms. FF-MD was used for
the simulations with the LAMMPS software [63]. The FF ﬁelds employed are the ones set up in
Ref. [64, 65], and they were run using a 0.5 fs time step. More details on the simulations can be
found in Ref. [40]. At low temperatures, MAPI exhibits an orthorhombic crystal structure. It
undergoes a phase transition to a tetragonal structure at 200 K, followed by another transition
to a cubic structure at 330 K [66]. Anharmonicity is present in all phases, and it increases
with the temperature. It is related to the tilting and rotations of the octahedra [49]. The MD
simulations were run at 200K, 250 K, 300 K, 350 K and 400 K, and I will mainly refer to the
one at 250 K since it is the only one run at the same temperature as for BAPI.
I have analyzed the structural and electronic dynamics by calculating the distributions of the
relevant features throughout the MD simulations. Due to the diﬀerences in the size of the
structures, I have considered a diﬀerent amount of time steps for calculating the distributions.
The goal is to have an accurate sample of the dynamics within reasonable computational times.
Thus, I have used 100000 time steps for BAPI and 100 for MAPI.
Before analyzing the structural dynamics of BAPI, I evaluated the validity of the ML-FF
simulations for geometric analysis. This is necessary because, while the ML-FF MD method
may correctly predict certain properties, such as the vibrational density of states or lattice
parameters, it may not accurately capture the dynamics of all atoms in the structure. The
structure of BAPI used in this thesis is, however, too large to carry out AIMD, and therefore,
I have studied the bond lengths and atom displacements in CsPbBr3, comparing AIMD and
ML-FF MD. As it can be observed in Figure 3.2, the results have shown high agreement
between the two methods. It is, therefore, possible to assume that the ML-FF MD simulations
are suitable for structural analysis.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Structural Dynamics
31
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: Comparison of ML-FF MD and AIMD for the (a) Pb-Br distances distributions
and (b) Br displacements along the x-axis. Further results are reported in the
Appendix, section A.1. The dashed lines represent the Gaussian ﬁttings. The
distributions have been normalized for the number of timesteps of the simulations.
3.1 Structural Dynamics
The main aspects of the structural dynamics I have investigated are the bond lengths, the
Pb-I-Pb angles, and the displacements of the atoms. Relating all the structural eﬀects with
each other is not trivial, as the diﬀerent atoms move simultaneously and in a disordered matter.
The bond lengths are the ones used to calculate the hoppings, with the exponential mapping, as
explained in section 2.6. They are a ﬁrst indicator of the anharmonicity and dynamic disorder
in the structure. The Pb-I-Pb angles relate to the tilting of the octahedra and the ﬂexibility of
the lattice [67]. Finally, the displacements of the I and Pb atoms give a more in-depth insight
into how the anharmonicity is present in the material.
3.1.1 Pb-I Bond Lengths
The distribution of the bond lengths between Pb and I atoms over the time steps provides a
ﬁrst insight into the lattice dynamics of the two materials. For MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, the
distances were found to deviate signiﬁcantly from a harmonic behavior [35, 37].
As shown in Figure 3.3, all the distributions deviate from a Gaussian distribution, as they are
skewed to the right. In Table 3.1, I have reported the data of the distributions. The standard
deviation σ and the skewness ˜µ3 both provide information on how the atoms are displaced
from their equilibrium positions.
The standard deviation represents how much the distances ﬂuctuate, where a small σ means
that the distance is more constant than when σ is large. A larger σ consequently is a sign of
a more ﬂexible lattice. As can be expected, this value increases with the temperature. The
skewness can be considered a measure of the anharmonicity in the material, as it measures the
deviation from a Gaussian distribution. This also increases with the temperature, with the
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: Distributions of the Pb-I distances at the 3 studied temperatures for BAPI and at
250 K for MAPI, with (a) normal scaling and (b) logarithmic scaling to enhance
the deviation from the Gaussian curve. The Gaussian ﬁtting distributions are
plotted with the dashed lines. The distributions have been normalized by the
number of time steps and bonds considered for each structure.
distributions at 375 K and 450 K being remarkably skewed. The fact that the distributions are
skewed to the right indicates that the bonds are overall more stretched than compressed.
µ rÅs
σ rÅs
˜µ3
3D, 250 K
3.165
0.145
0.617
2D, 250 K
3.256
0.125
0.401
2D, 375 K
3.279
0.172
0.871
2D, 450 K
3.281
0.190
1.001
Table 3.1: Data of the Pb-I distances distributions. Each row corresponds to a distribution in
Figure 3.3.
The distances are approximately 0.1 Å larger for the 2D perovskite than the 3D, directly
impacting the electronic couplings, as we will see later.
Ref. [56] reports the experimental Pb-I distances in BAPI and MAPI at 293 K, measured
with X-ray diﬀraction (XRD). For BAPI, they are found to be around 3.20 Å, while for MAPI,
around 3.16 Å. The MD results are, therefore, in good agreement with the experimental ones,
with a slight overestimation of the distances in BAPI, which could be due to the accuracy of
the MD simulations.
In a 2D perovskite, the I atoms can be distinguished into in-plane (ip) and out-of-plane (oop),
based on their position in the layer, as shown in Figure 3.4. The former lie in the 2D planes
and are bonded to two Pb atoms. The latter are the ones coming out of the plane, towards the
organic ligand, and are bonded to only one Pb atom.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Structural Dynamics
33
Figure 3.4: Schematic representation of the in-plane and out-of-plane I atoms in a layer of
BAPI. The ip I atoms are always bonded to two Pb atoms, while the oop I atoms
are only to one.
The distributions of the Pb-I distances for the ip and oop planes at the three diﬀerent
temperatures are shown in Figure 3.5. The distance for the oop atoms is larger than for the ip
atoms at each temperature, with a diﬀerence of approximately 0.05 Å, making the octahedra
slightly elongated in the vertical direction. Interestingly, the skewness is also more signiﬁcant
for oop atoms, likely indicating higher anharmonicity. This could be due to the higher degrees
of freedom that the oop I atoms have in their movements and the possible asymmetry in their
movement due to the position of the organic spacers. In fact, the hydrogen in the BA molecule
forms a hydrogen bond with the nearest I atom, which aﬀects the movement of the atoms [62].
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.5: Distributions of the distances for ip and oop atoms at the three temperatures
analyzed (a) 250 K, (b) 375 K, (c) 450 K. The dashed line is used for the Gaussian
ﬁtting distribution.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Results
3.1.2 Pb-I-Pb Angles
The Pb-I-Pb angle, deﬁned as shown in Figure 3.6, represents how much the octahedra is shifted
compared to a perfectly ordered position. In general, the smaller the angle, the greater the
octahedra tilting. As the octahedra tilt more, the orbital overlap decreases, and the electronic
couplings become weaker. If the angle is 180˝, the bond would, on average, be perfectly ﬂat.
For BAPI, the reported experimental average angle at 293 K is 155˝, while for MAPI is 180˝
[56]. It is important to notice that the angle considered is always the one smaller or equal to
180˝, as illustrated in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Deﬁnition of the Pb-I-Pb angles, θ, in the structure for two pairs of neighbouring
octahedra.
The distributions are reported below, in Figure 3.7. The average Pb-I-Pb angle increases from
146˝ to 149˝ when the temperature goes from 250 K to 375 K, while staying almost the same
between 375 K and 450 K. This gradual increase with the temperature is in agreement with
the computational study carried out for lower temperatures (50 K to 300 K) in Ref. [67].
The standard deviation, as it can be noticed by the width of the distributions, also rises with
the temperature since the atoms move more. The increase in the average angle would suggest
less tilting at higher temperatures, which is consistent with the experimental average structures
shown before in Figure 3.1. The average tilting is in fact decreased, but the octahedra are now
moving more. The angle is slightly underestimated compared to the measured experimental
one. Similarly to the overestimated distances, this deviation can again be attributed to the
accuracy of the simulations. From these results, it is possible to conclude that the lattice is
ﬂexible, with the octahedra tilting over time at all temperatures but more signiﬁcantly at 375
K and 450 K. It is more diﬃcult to get an insight into the anharmonicity of the material from
the Pb-I-Pb angle, as its relation to the displacements of the atoms is not straightforward.
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Structural Dynamics
35
Figure 3.7: Distributions of the Pb-I-Pb angles in BAPI at the three diﬀerent temperatures.
The dashed line represents the Gaussian ﬁtting curve. For all three temperatures,
the distributions are well represented by the Gaussian ﬁttings.
3.1.3 Displacements
The displacement of atoms in the structure is computed compared to the experimental positions,
as it can be assumed that they are the equilibrium positions if the material is harmonic. I
will refer to these positions as experimental or equilibrium positions interchangeably, although
equilibrium is usually meant for harmonic displacements.
The goal of this analysis is to have a more in-depth investigation of the movement of the
atoms in the structure, which the bond distance cannot capture. For the displacements, two
aspects can reﬂect the presence of anharmonicity in the material. First, as before, there is the
shape of the distribution. A Gaussian distribution means that the displacements are harmonic.
Secondly, the average displacement is also helpful in understanding if the displacements are
anharmonic. If the average is diﬀerent from zero, it means that the atom tends to stay in a
position diﬀerent from the expected equilibrium one.
The results in the following sections are calculated as time average of a single atom in
the structure. Due to the ergodicity, this can be considered as a statistical sample of all
atoms. This approach was chosen to simplify the calculations, especially when changing the
coordinate system, and to maintain reasonable computational times. I have also computed the
displacements for other atoms individually, and they have shown similar behaviors, proving the
ergodicity.
Then, the displacements can be used to calculate the energy environment along the direction
of the displacement using the Boltzmann inversion method. This is based on Boltzmann
distribution, which relates the probability distribution to the potential energy,
Ppuq 9 e
Upuq
kBT .
(3.1)
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Results
The potential can then be calculated by inverting this relation,
Upuq “ ´kBT lnpPpuqq ` C.
(3.2)
The relation is quadratic if the displacements are Gaussian distributed since it means that the
displacements are harmonic. It is, therefore, particularly interesting to investigate the energy
environment when the distribution deviates from a Gaussian curve. I have therefore calculated
this for the distributions that show signiﬁcant deviations to illustrate how this aﬀects the
potential energy.
Displacements of I atoms
When looking at the displacements of I atoms, the distinction between ip and oop atoms, as it
was deﬁned in Figure 3.4, is necessary since their chemical environment is diﬀerent and can
determine how they move.
For in-plane atoms, the displacement is analyzed along the Pb-Pb axis and the two orthogonal
directions, shown in Figure 3.8. The axis perpendicular to the Pb-Pb bond on the 2D plane
will be denoted as orth1, while the one perpendicular along the vertical direction will be orth2.
Based on these axes, the longitudinal plane is deﬁned by the Pb-Pb and the orth1 axes, i.e.
the horizontal plane where the PbI6octahedra are. The transversal plane is perpendicular to
the Pb-Pb axis, as illustrated in Figure 3.8. The two planes allow for a better visualization
and understanding of the displacements. The 1D distributions on the three axes separately
are all reported in the Appendix, Section A.2, as they can help visualize more precisely the
displacements and especially the shapes of the distributions.
Figure 3.8: Deﬁnition of the new axes and the relevant planes considered for ip I displacements.
The Pb-Pb and the orth1 axes deﬁne the longitudinal plane horizontally. The
transversal plane is vertical and deﬁned by orth1 and orth2.
The histograms of the displacements of the ip atoms at the three temperatures in the two
planes are shown below in Figure 3.9.
==PAGE:49==
3.1 Structural Dynamics
37
(a) 250 K, longitudinal plane
(b) 350 K, longitudinal plane
(c) 450 K, longitudinal plane
(d) 250 K, transversal plane
(e) 375 K, transversal plane
(f) 450 K, transversal plane
Figure 3.9: 2D histograms of the displacements of the ip I atoms in BAPI at the three
analyzed temperatures. The histograms in blue are for the longitudinal planes,
while those in orange are for the transversal ones. Notice that the scale for the
colourmap is diﬀerent for the temperatures to ensure the visibility of the data
points in all three cases.
At 250 K, the atoms show little displacements from the experimental position.
This is
demonstrated by the average displacements, which are almost zero along all three axes, and
the low standard deviations of approximately 0.15 Å. The distribution is slightly skewed to
the right along the vertical orth2 axis, with ˜µ3 = 0.19. As it can be seen in Figure 3.10, it
is clear that the quadratic curve fails to capture the behavior of the energy as a function of
displacement, conﬁrming that the relationship along this axis is not harmonic.
At 375 K, the displacements become more signiﬁcant, as can be noticed by the larger area of the
histogram. The average displacement on the two horizontal axes is around ´0.1 Å, and on the
vertical one is 0.33 Å. The preferred position of the atoms is approximately the experimental
one on the longitudinal plane, but it is shifted vertically. This can be considered an indicator
of anharmonicity since there is a constant shift compared to the experimental position, but it
could also be due to the inaccuracy of the ML-FF MD simulations.
It needs to be noticed that the atom in its equilibrium position is not perfectly aligned with
the Pb-Pb bond. As illustrated in Figure 3.11, it is moved of 0.74 Å along orth1 and of ´0.12 Å
along orth2. This means that with the average displacement of ´0.1 Å along the orth1 axis, the
atom is now closer to the Pb-Pb bond. Similarly, the average displacement of 0.33 Å vertically
along orth2 means that the atom is 0.21 Å above the longitudinal plane.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: (a) Distribution of the displacements along the orth2 axis at 250 K with loga-
rithmic scaling and (b) Potential energy as function of the displacements from
the Boltzmann inversion method.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11: Schematic representation of the experimental equilibrium position at high
temperatures (375 K and 450 K) of the ip I atom considered in these results, as
compared to the position that would be perfectly aligned with the Pb atoms,
shown for (a) the longitudinal plane and (b) the transversal plane.
At 375 K, the standard deviations are 0.24 Å, 0.34 Å and 0.40 Å for the Pb-Pb, the orth1 and
the orth2 axis respectively. As expected, there is a considerable increase compared to the 250 K
displacements. On the longitudinal plane, the distributions are now slightly skewed to the left,
with ˜µ3 = -0.33 and ˜µ3 = -0.17 on the Pb-Pb and the orth1 axis respectively, also displaying
the presence of anharmonicity. Along the orth2 direction, the distribution is instead slightly
right-skewed, with ˜µ3 = 0.09. As before, the energy as function of the displacement is now
relevant for the skewed distributions. In Figure 3.12, I have reported it for the distribution
along the Pb-Pb axis, and here, as it was for the curve at 250 K, the quadratic ﬁt does not
provide a good description of the relation between energy and displacement. The diﬀerent
direction of the skewness compared to the 250 K curve leads to a bending of the curve in
opposite directions.
==PAGE:51==
3.1 Structural Dynamics
39
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: (a) Distribution of the I displacements along the Pb-Pb axis at 375 K with
logarithmic scaling (b) Potential energy as function of the displacement from
the Boltzmann inversion method
Finally, at 450 K, along the Pb-Pb axis, the displacement is almost perfectly Gaussian and
centered at zero. The displacements show a double well behavior along the orth1 axis. There is
no deﬁned preferred single position, but the I atoms seem to move between two diﬀerent ones,
which are at ´1.64 Å and 0.38 Å. The center of the double well is precisely along the Pb-Pb
bond because of the shift in the experimental position. Anharmonicity is now clearly present
in the I displacements, as this double well behavior is characteristic of anharmonic materials.
In the orth2 direction, the average position is shifted by 0.18 Å compared to the initial one,
meaning it is now almost aligned with the Pb-Pb bond. The distribution is also skewed to the
right, suggesting a certain degree of anharmonicity along this direction too.
It is particularly interesting to compare how the energy environment changes along the orth1
axis with temperature, as it is where the double well appears.
At 250 K, the energy is well-represented by a quadratic function, as seen in Figure 3.13a,
conﬁrming that the displacements are harmonic in this direction. The quadratic ﬁt is less
accurate at 375 K, as it cannot capture the curvature correctly, Figure 3.13b. While a 4th-
order polynomial would provide an almost perfect description, it would also add unnecessary
complexity, given that the 2nd-order ﬁt still provides a reasonable approximation. The mean
square errors (MSE) are 25.5 eV2 and 10.3 eV2 for the quadratic and quartic ﬁt respectively.
Analyzing the energy as a function of the displacements at 450 K allows us to ﬁnd the energy
barrier between the two positions in the double well. The energy as a function of the displacement
can be ﬁtted with a 4th-order polynomial, shown in Figure 3.14. The calculated energy barrier
is approximately 36 meV, which is right below the thermal energy kBT « 38 meV at 450 K.
This conﬁrms that the ion eﬀectively oscillates spontaneously between the two positions.
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13: Potential energy as a function of the displacement along the orth1 axis, obtained
with the Boltzmann inversion method, at (a) 250 K and (b) 375 K.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.14: (a) Distribution of the ip I displacements at 450 K along the orth1 axis. (b)
Potential energy as a function of the displacement along the orth1 axis, obtained
with the Boltzmann inversion method.
For out-of-plane atoms, the displacement will be investigated along the Pb-I bond and the two
perpendicular directions, illustrated in Figure 3.15. The two orthogonal axes will be denoted
orth1 and orth2. As for the ip atoms, it is signiﬁcant to distinguish between the displacements
on the longitudinal and the transversal plane. The Pb-I axis and the ﬁrst orthogonal vector
deﬁne the longitudinal plane, while the transversal plane is parallel to the 2D layer.
The displacements along the two planes are shown in Figure 3.16.
Similarly to the displacements of the ip atoms, the oop I atoms are also well localized at 250 K,
with small displacements along all three axes. The displacements are centered at zero. Only
along the orth2 axis their distribution is skewed to the left, with ˜µ3 = -0.23.
==PAGE:53==
3.1 Structural Dynamics
41
Figure 3.15: Deﬁnition of the axes and the planes for the oop I atoms. The longitudinal
plane is vertical, and deﬁned by the Pb-I and the orth1 axes. The transversal
plane is horizontal, deﬁned by orth1 and orth2.
At 375 K, the displacements are larger and not anymore centred at zero, so the preferred
position is not the experimental one. The average displacements are 0.18 Å, ´0.15 Å and 0.10 Å
for the Pb-I, orth1 and orth2 axis respectively. The distribution is signiﬁcantly skewed only
along the orth2 axis, with ˜µ3 = 0.19.
At 450 K, the displacements are slightly oﬀ-centered of approximately 0.1 Å along all three
axes. The magnitude of the displacements has increased with the temperature and now the
standard deviations are 0.30 Å, 0.39 Å and 0.54 Å. The displacements on the longitudinal plane
are now skewed, with ˜µ3 = 0.12 on the Pb-I axis and ˜µ3 = -0.13 on the orth1 axis. Along the
orth2 axis, the skewness is small, approximately 0.02.
As for the ip I atoms, I have calculated the energy relation to the displacement for the most
relevant distributions, to investigate their anharmonicity. For the oop atoms, these are the
ones along the orth2 axis at 250 K and 375 K, and along orth1 at 450 K. The three curves are
shown below, in Figure 3.17. At 250 K and 375 K, the quadratic function is not able to describe
the relation precisely. At 450 K, where the displacement distribution also deviates less, so the
quadratic ﬁtting is better. For all three temperatures, the data is more noisy so an accurate
ﬁtting is more diﬃcult to obtain.
Interestingly, from this investigation, it appears that the oop I atoms display more harmonic
displacements than the ip ones, which is the opposite of what would be expected from the
distance distributions. It could be that calculating the distance between the two atoms leads to
a higher anharmonicity than it is captured by the displacements, as it depends on the motion
of the Pb atom relative to the I one.
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Results
(a) 250 K, longitudinal plane
(b) 375 K, longitudinal plane
(c) 450 K, longitudinal plane
(d) 250 K, transversal plane
(e) 375 K, transversal plane
(f) 450 K, transversal plane
Figure 3.16: 2D histograms of the displacements of the oop I atoms in BAPI at the three
analyzed temperatures. The histograms in blue are for the longitudinal planes,
while those in orange are for the transversal ones. Notice that the scale for the
colormap is diﬀerent for the temperatures to ensure the visibility of the data
points in all three cases.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.17: Energy as function of the displacement from the Boltzmann inversion method
for the axes on which the displacement distributions deviate the most, (a) 250 K,
orth2 axis, (b) 375 K, orth2 axis and (c) 450 K, orth2 axis.
==PAGE:55==
3.1 Structural Dynamics
43
Pb atoms
Figure 3.18: Lone pair expression where the
delocalized electrons lead to a
lattice distortion. Figure from
Ref. [68].
In HaPs, the Pb atom has a ns2 electron lone
pair, which can aﬀect the crystal symmetry
[68]. This is due to the antibonding interac-
tion of the Pb 6s and I 2p orbitals, mediated
by the unoccupied Pb 6p orbitals. This basi-
cally results in a hybridization between the 6s
and 6p orbitals, causing the lone pair charge
distribution to shift from the symmetrical
position. This asymmetrical electron density
can lead to distortions in the crystal structure,
such as octahedra distortions or tilting, as in
Figure 3.18 [68]. It can, therefore, be interesting to analyze the displacements of the Pb atoms
to see if they are anharmonic or not. In this case, I have used the xyz coordinate systems, and
the planes of the displacements are the horizontal xy plane and the vertical yz plane. The
top view of the inorganic layer is shown in Figure 3.19, to provide a better explanation of the
location of the I atoms with respect to the Pb atoms.
Figure 3.19: Schematic top view of the xy-plane where the inorganic layer is located. Pb
atoms are in black and I atoms in purple.
The displacements in the two planes can be seen in Figure 3.20. Similarly to the I atoms,
the temperature aﬀects the displacements, with the atoms moving more as the temperature
increases. At all three temperatures, the average displacements are approximately 0 Å along all
three axes, meaning that the preferred position is the experimental one. At 250 K, along all
three axes, the standard deviation is approximately 0.15 Å and the skewness is below 0.10 Å,
conﬁrming that the motion at this temperature is approximately harmonic. At this temperature,
the deviations are comparable in size to the ones of the I atoms. At 375 K, the standard
deviations are 0.23 Å, 0.27 Å and 0.29 Å. The diﬀerence between the axes could be because of
a slight asymmetry in the Pb motion, but since it is very small, it could also just be due to the
accuracy of the simulations. The motion along the y-axis is skewed to the left, with ˜µ3 = -0.21.
At 450 K, the standard deviations increase to 0.27 Å, 0.43 Å, 0.33 Å for the x,y and z-axis,
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Results
respectively. As observed in Figure 3.20.c and d, this leads to an asymmetric displacement
of the Pb atom, which moves more along the y-axis. Moreover, the skewness along this axis
is -0.47, so the motion is also anharmonic. This could be aﬀected by the charge distribution,
as mentioned before, or the interplay with the motion of the other atoms. The double well
motion of the I atom could impact this. However, it does not explain why the displacement on
the x-axis is diﬀerent since the environment from the inorganic layer is the same along the x
and y-axis. The diﬀerence could be due to the position and motion of the organic spacer.
Both at 375 K and 450 K, the I atoms show larger displacements since they are lighter.
(a) 250 K, horizontal plane
(b) 375 K, horizontal plane
(c) 450 K, horizontal plane
(d) 250 K, vertical plane
(e) 375 K, vertical plane
(f) 450 K, vertical plane
Figure 3.20: 2D histograms of the displacements of the Pb atoms in BAPI at the three
analyzed temperatures. The histograms in blue are for the horizontal xy-planes,
while those in orange are for the vertical yz-ones. Notice that the scale for the
colormap is diﬀerent for the temperatures to ensure the visibility of the data
points in all three cases.
3.1.4 Summary
The main takeaways from the structural dynamics of BAPI that are important when considering
electronic couplings include several key points. Firstly, the distributions of the Pb-I distances
are non-Gaussian, a characteristic that becomes more apparent as the temperature increases.
The Pb-I distances in BAPI are approximately 0.1 Å larger than those in MAPI, consistent
with the experimental measurements. The out-of-plane Pb-I distances are larger and more
skewed compared to the in-plane ip distances.
Furthermore, the displacements of the iodine atoms show anharmonic behavior and are oﬀ-
centered relative to their equilibrium positions. At high temperatures, a double-well behavior
==PAGE:57==
3.1 Structural Dynamics
45
emerges in the displacement of the in-plane iodine atom, speciﬁcally in the direction perpen-
dicular to the Pb-Pb bond. The displacements of Pb atoms also show slight anharmonicity,
particularly at higher temperatures.
However, it is challenging to directly relate the anharmonicity in atomic displacements to
what is observed in the Pb-I distances. This is because the atomic movements appear to be
disordered, meaning that some trends, such as the double-well behavior seen at 450 K, are not
fully captured by the distance measurements alone.
Now that the presence of anharmonicity in BAPI has been shown and analyzed, we can
investigate the electronic couplings in the structure, to see if and how they are aﬀected by it.
==PAGE:58==
46
3 Results
3.2 Electronic Couplings
The orbitals that contribute to VBM and CBM of MAPI and BAPI, as mentioned in sections
2.7.1 and 2.7.2, are the p-orbital of I, and the s and p-orbitals of Pb. The couplings between these
orbitals are, therefore, interesting for gathering information on the transport and properties of
the materials. The three hopping elements are sp-σ, pp-σ, and pp-π, as shown in Figure 3.21.
The organic layer for BAPI is insulating, and therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the
charge carrier transport happens only along the 2D inorganic layer. A more realistic but
complex model would include hopping from the inorganic layer to the organic molecules.
Figure 3.21: Possible hoppings between the relevant orbitals of I and Pb in MAPI and BAPI.
The hoppings are calculated with the exponential ﬁttings obtained for MAPI. For each time
step considered, the exponential functions are applied to the Pb-I distances in the structure.
The diﬀerent curvatures and magnitudes of these relations are diﬀerent for the three hoppings,
as shown in Figure 3.22, and will determine their distributions. The sp-σ hoppings start from
a high value and decay quickly. The pp-σ hoppings instead have a less steep decline. Finally,
pp-π hoppings have a smaller magnitude and decrease quite fast.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.22: Exponential mappings from the distance for the three hoppings (a) sp-σ, t “
69¨e´1.31¨d´0.22 (b) pp-σ, t “ 18¨e´0.55¨d´1.51 and (c) pp-π, t “ 39¨e´1.41¨d´0.13
==PAGE:59==
3.2 Electronic Couplings
47
The data from the three hoppings distributions at the diﬀerent temperatures are reported in
Table 3.2 for easier comparison. The distributions share some common features. Firstly, the
standard deviation increases with the temperature as it was for the distances. The main change
always happens between 250 K and 375 K, while it is minor when the temperature goes from
375 K to 450 K. Moreover, the couplings are always weaker in BAPI compared to MAPI, which
is consistent with the larger distances and smaller orbital overlaps.
sp-σ
pp-σ
pp-π
µ rÅs
σ rÅs
˜µ3
µ rÅs
σ rÅs
˜µ3
µ rÅs
σ rÅs
˜µ3
3D, 250 K
1.119
0.235
-0.060
1.908
0.238
-0.471
0.419
0.107
-0.019
2D, 250 K
0.801
0.165
0.077
1.518
0.208
-0.216
0.286
0.072
0.117
2D, 375 K
0.784
0.209
-0.030
1.490
0.272
-0.479
0.279
0.091
0.056
2D, 450 K
0.785
0.226
-0.023
1.488
0.295
-0.505
0.280
0.098
0.082
Table 3.2: Mean value, standard deviation, and skewness of the hoppings distributions in
MAPI (3D) and BAPI (2D) for diﬀerent hopping types and temperatures.
The distributions of the sp-σ hoppings are shown in Figure 3.23. The average value is 0.80 eV
at 250 K and 0.78 eV at 375 K and 450 K. This change with the temperature is very small, and
it corresponds to an increase of the standard deviation from 0.16 eV to 0.21 eV since the Pb-I
distances ﬂuctuate more. The distributions deviate slightly from a Gaussian distribution, with
the distribution at 250 K being right-skewed, and at 375 K and 450 K left-skewed. These last
two distributions display a larger width compared to the Gaussian curve, an eﬀect that is not
described by the skewness. The low degree of the deviation can be due to the geometry of the
s-orbital and its rotational invariance, which decreases the impact of the dynamic disorder.
The couplings are 0.3 eV weaker than for MAPI, consistently with the smaller Pb-I distances.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.23: Distributions pptq of the sp-σ hoppings t (a) with normal scaling (b) with
logarithmic scaling to highlight the deviations from the Gaussian curve. The
dashed curves represent the Gaussian ﬁttings.
==PAGE:60==
48
3 Results
The pp-σ hoppings are the strongest in the structure, with an average value of 1.51 eV at
250 K and 1.49 eV at 375 K and 450 K. The pp-σ hoppings distributions deviate signiﬁcantly
from a Gaussian curve, as seen in Figure 3.24. The distributions are skewed to the left, and
the skewness increases with the temperature. The main increase is between 250 K and 375 K,
where ˜µ3 goes from -0.216 to -0.479. The distributions at 375 K and 450 K are instead very
similar, with the hoppings at higher temperatures only slightly more anharmonic. They are
approximately 0.4 eV weaker than the hoppings in MAPI but with a similar skewness at higher
temperatures.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.24: Distributions pptq of the pp-σ hoppings t (a) with normal scaling and (b) with
logarithmic scaling. The dashed curves represent the Gaussian ﬁttings.
Finally, the distributions of pp-π hoppings are shown below, in Figure 3.25. These are the
weakest couplings, with an average value of approximately 0.28 eV for all three temperatures.
The distributions are slightly right-skewed, with ˜µ3 which is approximately 0.1. Surprisingly,
the deviation is in the opposite direction of pp-σ and of MAPI, and the hoppings seem to be
slightly stronger instead of weaker.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.25: Distributions pptq of the pp-π hoppings t (a) with normal scaling and (b) with
logarithmic scaling. The dashed curves represent the Gaussian ﬁttings.
As it was done for the distances, it is possible to distinguish between the hoppings with in-plane
and out-of-plane I atoms. The diﬀerences between in-plane and out-of-plane hoppings are
==PAGE:61==
3.2 Electronic Couplings
49
similar across the three types of hoppings. For conciseness, I have presented here the results for
pp-σ in Figure 3.26, while the other distributions are provided in the Appendix, section A.3.
The ip hoppings are stronger than the oop ones, with a diﬀerence of approximately 0.05 eV,
consistent with the larger distances. For sp-σ and pp-π, the skewness is minimal, and the
distributions are nearly perfectly Gaussian. The pp-σ hoppings are left-skewed, with the oop
hoppings showing larger deviations from the Gaussian curves than the ip ones.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.26: Distributions of the pp-σ hoppings between Pb and ip and oop I atoms, at the
three temperatures studied.
Overall, the distributions of electronic couplings are anharmonic, especially for the pp-σ
hoppings, which are weaker than they would be predicted by a harmonic distribution. The
sp-σ hoppings have a wider distribution than the Gaussian prediction, which is not captured
by the skewness. The pp-π couplings instead appear stronger than predicted. Consistently
with the ip and oop distances, the couplings with ip and oop I atoms are diﬀerent, and the ip
hoppings are stronger.
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
4 Discussion
First of all, this study shows that anharmonicity is present in 2D perovskites, aﬀecting their
electronic properties. This is clearly visible from the atomic displacements, the skewed Pb-I
distances, and hoppings distributions.
The atomic displacements provide an understanding of how anharmonicity is present in the
structure at the three diﬀerent temperatures. The temperature strongly impacts the motion of
the atoms, which becomes more anharmonic as the temperature increases. At 250 K, before
the phase transition, the displacements are less signiﬁcant, but a low degree of anharmonicity
is still present since the lattice is still ﬂexible, and the structure has a degree of disorder. After
the phase transition at 274 K, the displacements become more considerable and disordered,
consistently with Ref. [62]. This is visible for both I and Pb atoms in diﬀerent measures. The
Pb atoms are overall less mobile, and the displacements are less anharmonic. Their motion
seems to be asymmetric, with a larger and more skewed displacement along one of the axes
in the horizontal plane. This might be related to the motion of the organic spacers, and so
further investigations would be needed to explain why this is the case. The I atoms show
more signiﬁcant displacements, especially because they are lighter. At 375 K, the atoms move
asymmetrically around the experimental position. Moreover, the average position is shifted
compared to the experimental one, which might be a sign of slight anharmonicity, although it
could also be due to the model not accurately describing the motion. At 450 K, the ip I atoms
show a double well behavior along the axis perpendicular to the Pb-Pb bond direction. The
transition between the two positions happens spontaneously as the energy required is below
the thermal energy at 450 K. As the displacements of I atoms increase compared to the 375 K,
the I atoms may now reach two more stable positions which before were not accessible. Since
with smaller displacements and lower temperatures, they do not reach these positions, and the
double well behavior is not detected. This double well behavior is expected for the tilting of
the octahedra after the phase transition [62]. This would be more related to the movement of
the oop atoms, for which a double well is not detected. A double well behavior was detected in
the tilting of 3D perovskites [69], and in the case of CsPbI3 in the high-temperature phase, for
the displacement of I in the direction perpendicular to the Pb-Pb bond [70]. This behavior
detected in BAPI should, therefore, be investigated more in detail by analyzing the tilting
angles, octahedra distortions, and the motion of the atoms relative to each other. It could also
be relevant to study at what temperature it starts appearing, if it is related to the motion of
the organic molecules, and what the timescale of this behavior is.
The Pb-I distances also detect the anharmonicity of the lattice, and their distributions are
right-skewed. This means that the bond lengths are more frequently stretched than compressed,
indicated by the right-skewness of the distribution. This leads to weaker pp-σ couplings, which
are the most dominant in the structure, as reﬂected by the left-skewness in their distribution.
The other two couplings, sp-σ and pp-π, also deviate from a Gaussian distribution. The sp-σ
hoppings have a wider distribution, and very small skewness. At 250 K, the hoppings are
right-skewed, which is unexpected given the left-skewness of the Pb-I distance distribution and
the results for MAPI. At higher temperatures, the hoppings are instead slightly left-skewed, so
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Discussion
the couplings are weaker. The larger width of the distribution compared to the Gaussian ﬁt is
more complicated to understand. Overall, the deviation is small, and this is probably related
to the symmetry of the s-orbital, which is rotationally invariant and is less aﬀected by the
anharmonicity of the distances. The strength of the coupling can also have an inﬂuence on this.
The distributions of the pp-π hoppings are interestingly right-skewed at all three temperatures,
the opposite of the results for MAPI. Further analysis would be needed to understand these
results better.
It is complicated to relate the anharmonicity detected in the displacements exactly with skewness
in the Pb-I distances, as the atoms move simultaneously and in a disorderly manner. For
example, the double well behavior cannot be recognized from the Pb-I distances. Disentangling
the eﬀects of the motion of the diﬀerent atoms and understanding how they each inﬂuence the
electronic couplings then becomes very complicated.
When comparing the results to 3D HaPs, we can observe that the bond lengths are larger,
leading to smaller orbital overlaps and weaker bonds. The weaker couplings mean that the
charge carriers are more localized on the atoms. This would correspond to higher eﬀective
masses and less dispersive energy bands, which agrees with the studies on the electronic
structure of BAPI [60].
These results can provide some insights on the charge carrier transport in 2D perovskites,
by comparison with the studies carried out for 3D HaPs. Firstly, the anharmonicity of the
material is directly related to the presence of dynamic disorder, which reduces the charge carrier
transport [37]. The mobility can be expected to decrease with the temperature, following a
T ´x law. This is the case for materials where the charge carrier scattering is primarily due
to lattice vibrations and not charged defects [10]. For MAPI, x is found to be approximately
1.5-2 [71, 72]. It was also shown that to predict the correct value of x, it is essential to include
anharmonicity, as models based on the harmonic approximation fail to describe the correct
behavior [73]. We can expect that including anharmonicity is needed to accurately describe
the mobility for 2D perovskites as well.
With respect to 3D HaPs, the weaker couplings make the transport of the charge carriers
less eﬃcient than in 3D perovskites. This means that they have a lower mobility, which is
experimentally well known [74]. Still, from these results, it seems that it is not only due to the
lower dimensionality and conﬁnement eﬀects, as it has been most commonly explained [74],
but also to the diﬀerent structural characteristics and dynamics. At 250 K, BAPI displays less
anharmonicity than MAPI, but after the phase transition, it is the opposite case. Then, both
MAPI and BAPI are at a higher temperature phase, where the tilting of the octahedra takes
place, and their dynamics are more similar to each other. This is consistent with the analysis
in Ref. [62].
The TB model considers the charge carriers as independent, which is not the case for 2D
perovskites, as excitons are stable on longer time scales. However, the Mott-Ioﬀe-Regel limit is
violated for exciton transport in 2D HaPs [75, 76], meaning that the mean free path of the
charge carrier becomes smaller than its wavelength. This limit is probably also violated for
the transport of free charge carriers because of the similarity to 3D HaPs and the increase in
dynamic disorder due to the organic spacers. Thus, it is possible to suppose that the insights
on free charge carrier transport from the MS-DD model are valid for 2D perovskites as well. In
==PAGE:65==
53
turn, the gained knowledge of the free charge carrier transport in 2D HaPs could then help to
understand the excitonic transport.
By analyzing and studying these results, it is important to remember that ML-FF MD might not
describe the system fully accurately. The simulations on CsPbBr3 showed that the distributions
of the displacements are similar between AIMD and ML-FF MD, but it would be good to
examine this more in detail. ML-FF MD is a novel method and, therefore, not as extensively
implemented and studied as AIMD. Finalizing the optimization of the ML model, which is
computationally expensive, could improve the simulations, although some issues might remain
because of the incompleteness of the SOAP descriptor.
Moreover, the MD simulations for MAPI and BAPI are obtained using two diﬀerent methods,
FFMD and ML-FF MD, respectively, which can aﬀect the meaning of the comparison between
the two structures. The accuracy of the FFMD simulations for MAPI was also not proven, and
it would be useful to investigate that more in detail as well. If optimized and trained correctly,
MLFF-MD can be a suitable option for MAPI too.
Finally, the calculations of the hoppings are based on the exponential mapping rule calculated
for 3D perovskites, which might not be precise for 2D perovskites. While the overall trends
can be expected to be similar, the exact values of the hopping parameters might be diﬀerent.
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
5 Conclusion and Outlook
In this thesis, I have investigated the structural and electronic dynamics of a prototypical 2D
perovskite, BA2PbI4, comparing them with its 3D counterpart, MAPbI3, using ML-FF MD
together with tight binding. The analysis has shown that BAPI is an anharmonic material
with a very ﬂexible lattice, impacting the electronic couplings in the structure. Consequently,
the charge carrier transport would be decreased compared to what would be predicted by the
harmonic approximation because of the strong phonon-electron scattering. Compared to MAPI,
the bond lengths are increased, and with that, the orbital overlap diminishes, weakening the
electronic couplings.
By investigating the displacement of the I atoms in more detail, it was possible to see that a
certain degree of anharmonicity is present at all temperatures. However, it increases signiﬁcantly
after the phase transition at 274 K. As the temperature goes from 375 K and 450 K, the I
atoms show a double well behavior in the direction perpendicular to the Pb-Pb bond, with an
energy barrier of 36 meV. The Pb atoms have small and almost harmonic displacements at
250 K, while at higher temperatures, they are more mobile along one of the directions in the
horizontal plane compared to the other two directions. Together with the skewness detected
in their motions, these results indicate that the motion of the Pb atoms is also anharmonic.
Nevertheless, the anharmonicity is at a lower degree than for the I atoms because of the heavier
Pb mass.
This study can be considered as a starting point for understanding the dynamics of BAPI,
which would need to be investigated further. There are several next steps that can be done to
achieve a more complete picture of the behavior of this material.
First of all, it is possible to improve the method used in this thesis. As mentioned in the
discussion, it would be useful to run ML-FF MD simulations on 3D perovskites to make the
comparison more meaningful. At the same time, the ML-FF MD simulations carried out for
BAPI need to be studied further to ensure their validity, and if necessary, the model should
be improved by, for instance, completing its optimization or changing descriptor. Then, the
exponential ﬁtting can be calculated for 2D perovskites with DFT and the Wannier90 projection
scheme, so the hopping parameters in the TB matrix are more accurate. This would allow us
to have a better insight into the electronic couplings of 2D perovskites, as their dependence
on the Pb-I bond length is likely diﬀerent than the one for 3D HaPs. The onsite energies can
then also be computed to obtain a complete TB matrix, and the transport properties of the
material can be calculated using the DD-MS model. The complete TB matrix would also allow
us to study the density of states and band gap changes in the structure, providing a more
comprehensive understanding of the electronic properties of BAPI and their dependence on
structural dynamics. Moreover, these properties can be investigated experimentally, which can
help to evaluate the accuracy of the model.
Investigating the dynamics of the organic spacers would also help better understand the lattice
dynamics. As these are more complex molecules, multiple aspects can be studied. Between
these, the penetration depth of the NH3 group and the rotation of the molecules were reported
to be particularly relevant [8, 67].
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Conclusion and Outlook
It would be interesting to extend the model to capture the transport and dynamics excitons,
as they are stable in 2D perovskites. The current model still allows us to make predictions
on the transport properties of 2D perovskites, but a more precise description of the exciton
behavior could help us understand their properties.
BAPI is a good starting point for understanding the behavior of 2D perovskites because of
its simple structure and high stability. A natural next step would be to expand the study
to other layered perovskites to see how the dynamics diﬀer. Firstly, it can be interesting
to investigate how diﬀerent organic spacers aﬀect the dynamics, as well as how they change
with the increasing number of layers. DJ and ACI perovskites can then also be addressed, as
the interactions between the layers and the spacers will diﬀer. However, the system might
become signiﬁcantly more complex to understand, especially for the ACI phase. The highest
PCE in 2D perovskites was reached with an ACI perovskite [77], and therefore it can be more
relevant to solar applications. The charge carrier transport and PCE of 2D perovskites can be
improved by including conducting molecules instead of insulating ones. This would mean that
the charge carriers can move in all 3 dimensions, with the conducting molecules still stabilizing
the structure. The introduction of conducting molecules has shown feasible experimentally, but
the synthesis is more challenging [78]. Once the ML-FF MD and TB model is well established
for 2D perovskites, these would be an interesting class of materials to investigate.
Finally, the most studied perovskite materials contain Pb, as they are very stable and easy to
synthesize. However, Pb is a toxic element, and it would limit the scalability of perovskite-based
solar cells. It is, therefore, important to switch from Pb-based materials. So far, lead-free
perovskites have shown poorer performance than their Pb-containing counterparts. Sn is the
most suitable replacement for Pb, and Sn-based perovskites have smaller band gaps and higher
conductivity than the Pb-based ones, which is particularly promising for 2D perovskites [5]. It
would be interesting to study the structural and electronic dynamics of Sn-based 2D HaPs to
understand their properties better.
Overall, developing a model that accurately and eﬃciently computes the dynamic properties of
perovskites can signiﬁcantly improve our understanding of their behavior, helping the progress
of new materials for solar cells. This approach can begin with simpler materials, such as
BAPI, and move to more complex systems as the model is optimized. The work presented in
this thesis oﬀers initial insights into the interplay between structural and electronic dynamics
of 2D perovskites, highlighting the importance of investigating it further.
By improving
our understanding of their behaviors, we can accelerate the development of novel perovskite
materials, which can lead to improved performance in solar energy applications.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1] William Shockley and Hans Queisser. Detailed balance limit of eﬃciency of p–n junction
solar cells. In Renewable energy, pages Vol2_35–Vol2_54. Routledge, 2018.
[2] Sven Rühle. Tabulated values of the shockley–queisser limit for single junction solar cells.
Solar energy, 130:139–147, 2016.
[3] Sangmo Kim, Hoang Van Quy, and Chung Wung Bark. Photovoltaic technologies for
ﬂexible solar cells: beyond silicon. Materials Today Energy, 19:100583, 2021.
[4] Francisca Werlinger, Camilo Segura, Javier Martínez, Igor Osorio-Roman, Danilo Jara,
Seog Joon Yoon, and Andrés Fabián Gualdrón-Reyes. Current progress of eﬃcient active
layers for organic, chalcogenide and perovskite-based solar cells: A perspective. Energies,
16(16), 2023.
[5] Carmen Ortiz-Cervantes, Paulina Carmona-Monroy, and Diego Solis-Ibarra.
Two-
dimensional halide perovskites in solar cells: 2d or not 2d? ChemSusChem, 12(8):1560–1575,
2019.
[6] Armin G. Aberle. Thin-ﬁlm solar cells. Thin Solid Films, 517(17):4706–4710, 2009. 4th
International Conference on Technological Advances of Thin Films and Surface Coatings.
[7] National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). Best research-cell eﬃciency chart, 2024.
Accessed: 2024-10-11.
[8] Sushant Ghimire and Christian Klinke. Two-dimensional halide perovskites: synthesis,
optoelectronic properties, stability, and applications. Nanoscale, 13:12394–12422, 2021.
[9] Yani Chen, Yong Sun, Jiajun Peng, Junhui Tang, Kaibo Zheng, and Ziqi Liang. 2d
ruddlesdenpopper perovskites for optoelectronics. Advanced Materials, 30(2):1703487,
2018.
[10] David A. Egger, Achintya Bera, David Cahen, Gary Hodes, Thomas Kirchartz, Leeor
Kronik, Robert Lovrincic, Andrew M. Rappe, David R. Reichman, and Omer Yaﬀe. What
remains unexplained about the properties of halide perovskites?
Advanced Materials,
30(20):1800691, 2018.
[11] Oliver T. Unke, Stefan Chmiela, Huziel E. Sauceda, Michael Gastegger, Igor Poltavsky,
Kristof T. Schütt, Alexandre Tkatchenko, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Machine learning
force ﬁelds. Chemical Reviews, 121(16):10142–10186, 2021.
[12] Jie Pan. Scaling up system size in materials simulation. Nature Computational Science,
1(2):95, 2021.
[13] Emil Prodan and Walter Kohn. Nearsightedness of electronic matter. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 102(33):11635–11638, 2005.
==PAGE:70==
58
Bibliography
[14] M. Born and W. Heisenberg. Zur Quantentheorie der Molekeln, pages 216–246. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1985.
[15] David S Sholl and Janice A Steckel. Density functional theory: a practical introduction.
John Wiley & Sons, 2022.
[16] Richard M Martin. Electronic structure: basic theory and practical methods. Cambridge
university press, 2020.
[17] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys. Rev., 136:B864–B871,
Nov 1964.
[18] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham. Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation
eﬀects. Phys. Rev., 140:A1133–A1138, Nov 1965.
[19] D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder. Ground state of the electron gas by a stochastic method.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 45:566–569, Aug 1980.
[20] Jochen Heyd, Gustavo E. Scuseria, and Matthias Ernzerhof. Hybrid functionals based on
a screened Coulomb potential. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 118(18):8207–8215, 05
2003.
[21] G. Kresse and J. Hafner. Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Phys. Rev. B,
47:558–561, Jan 1993.
[22] G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller. Eﬃciency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and
semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Computational Materials Science, 6(1):15–50,
1996.
[23] Neil W. Ashcroft, N. David Mermin, and Sergio Rodriguez. Solid State Physics. American
Journal of Physics, 46(1):116–117, 01 1978.
[24] G. Czycholl. Solid State Theory, Volume 1: Basics: Phonons and Electrons in Crystals.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2023.
[25] Felix Bloch. Über die quantenmechanik der elektronen in kristallgittern. Zeitschrift für
Physik, 52(7):555–600, 1929.
[26] PerOlov Löwdin. On the NonOrthogonality Problem Connected with the Use of Atomic
Wave Functions in the Theory of Molecules and Crystals. The Journal of Chemical Physics,
18(3):365–375, 03 1950.
[27] Cesare Franchini, Michele Reticcioli, Martin Setvin, and Ulrike Diebold. Polarons in
materials. Nature Reviews Materials, 6(7):560–586, 2021.
[28] Luigi Martiradonna. Riddles in perovskite research. Nature Materials, 17(5):377, 2018.
[29] Frederico Simões. Structural anharmonicity of 3d and 2d perovskites using machine
learning force ﬁelds. Master Thesis in Applied and Engineering Physics, 2024.
[30] González, M.A. Force ﬁelds and molecular dynamics simulations. JDN, 12:169–200, 2011.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
59
[31] Albert P. Bartók, Risi Kondor, and Gábor Csányi. On representing chemical environments.
Phys. Rev. B, 87:184115, May 2013.
[32] Albert P. Bartók and Gábor Csányi. Gaussian approximation potentials: A brief tutorial
introduction. International Journal of Quantum Chemistry, 115(16):1051–1057, 2015.
[33] Volker L. Deringer, Albert P. Bartók, Noam Bernstein, David M. Wilkins, Michele Ceriotti,
and Gábor Csányi. Gaussian process regression for materials and molecules. Chemical
Reviews, 121(16):10073–10141, 2021.
[34] Ryosuke Jinnouchi, Ferenc Karsai, and Georg Kresse. On-the-ﬂy machine learning force
ﬁeld generation: Application to melting points. Phys. Rev. B, 100:014105, Jul 2019.
[35] Matthew Z. Mayers, Liang Z. Tan, David A. Egger, Andrew M. Rappe, and David R.
Reichman.
How lattice and charge ﬂuctuations control carrier dynamics in halide
perovskites. Nano Letters, 18(12):8041–8046, 2018.
[36] Giovanni Pizzi, Valerio Vitale, Ryotaro Arita, Stefan Blügel, Frank Freimuth, Guillaume
Géranton, Marco Gibertini, Dominik Gresch, Charles Johnson, Takashi Koretsune, Julen
Ibañez-Azpiroz, Hyungjun Lee, Jae-Mo Lihm, Daniel Marchand, Antimo Marrazzo, Yuriy
Mokrousov, Jamal I Mustafa, Yoshiro Nohara, Yusuke Nomura, Lorenzo Paulatto, Samuel
Poncé, Thomas Ponweiser, Junfeng Qiao, Florian Thöle, Stepan S Tsirkin, Małgorzata
Wierzbowska, Nicola Marzari, David Vanderbilt, Ivo Souza, Arash A Mostoﬁ, and
Jonathan R Yates. Wannier90 as a community code: new features and applications.
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, 32(16):165902, jan 2020.
[37] Maximilian J. Schilcher, David J. Abramovitch, Matthew Z. Mayers, Liang Z. Tan, David R.
Reichman, and David A. Egger. Correlated anharmonicity and dynamic disorder control
carrier transport in halide perovskites. Phys. Rev. Mater., 7:L081601, Aug 2023.
[38] J. Paul Attﬁeld, Philip Lightfoot, and Russell E. Morris. Perovskites. Dalton Trans.,
44:10541–10542, 2015.
[39] Perovskite Info. Introduction to perovskites, 2024. Accessed: 2024-08-06.
[40] Maximilian Schilcher. Multi-Scale Tight Binding Model for Optoelectronic Properties of
Hybrid Halide Perovskites. PhD thesis, TUM School of Natural Sciences, 2024.
[41] Lata Chouhan, Sushant Ghimire, Challapalli Subrahmanyam, Tsutomu Miyasaka, and
Vasudevanpillai Biju.
Synthesis, optoelectronic properties and applications of halide
perovskites. Chem. Soc. Rev., 49:2869–2885, 2020.
[42] Lukas Schmidt-Mende, Vladimir Dyakonov, Selina Olthof, Feray Ünlü, Khan Moritz Trong
Lê, Sanjay Mathur, Andrei D. Karabanov, Doru C. Lupascu, Laura M. Herz, Alexander
Hinderhofer, Frank Schreiber, Alexey Chernikov, David A. Egger, Oleksandra Shargaieva,
Caterina Cocchi, Eva Unger, Michael Saliba, Mahdi Malekshahi Byranvand, Martin Kroll,
Frederik Nehm, Karl Leo, Alex Redinger, Julian Höcker, Thomas Kirchartz, Jonathan
Warby, Emilio Gutierrez-Partida, Dieter Neher, Martin Stolterfoht, Uli Würfel, Moritz
Unmüssig, Jan Herterich, Clemens Baretzky, John Mohanraj, Mukundan Thelakkat,
==PAGE:72==
60
Bibliography
Clément Maheu, Wolfram Jaegermann, Thomas Mayer, Janek Rieger, Thomas Fauster,
Daniel Niesner, Fengjiu Yang, Steve Albrecht, Thomas Riedl, Azhar Fakharuddin, Maria
Vasilopoulou, Yana Vaynzof, Davide Moia, Joachim Maier, Marius Franckeviius, Vidmantas
Gulbinas, Ross A. Kerner, Lianfeng Zhao, Barry P. Rand, Nadja Glück, Thomas Bein,
Fabio Matteocci, Luigi Angelo Castriotta, Aldo Di Carlo, Matthias Scheﬄer, and Claudia
Draxl. Roadmap on organicinorganic hybrid perovskite semiconductors and devices. APL
Materials, 9(10):109202, 10 2021.
[43] T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Kondo, and A. Nakao. Electronic structures of lead iodide
based low-dimensional crystals. Phys. Rev. B, 67:155405, Apr 2003.
[44] Joseph S. Manser, Jeﬀrey A. Christians, and Prashant V. Kamat. Intriguing optoelectronic
properties of metal halide perovskites. Chemical Reviews, 116(21):12956–13008, 2016.
PMID: 27327168.
[45] Jacky Even, Laurent Pedesseau, Jean-Marc Jancu, and Claudine Katan. Importance of
spinorbit coupling in hybrid organic/inorganic perovskites for photovoltaic applications.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 4(17):2999–3005, 2013.
[46] Michal Baranowski and Paulina Plochocka. Excitons in metal-halide perovskites. Advanced
Energy Materials, 10(26):1903659, 2020.
[47] Wei Li, Andrey S. Vasenko, Jianfeng Tang, and Oleg V. Prezhdo. Anharmonicity extends
carrier lifetimes in lead halide perovskites at elevated temperatures. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry Letters, 10(20):6219–6226, 2019. PMID: 31556621.
[48] A. Poglitsch and D. Weber. Dynamic disorder in methylammoniumtrihalogenoplumbates
(II) observed by millimeterwave spectroscopy.
The Journal of Chemical Physics,
87(11):6373–6378, 12 1987.
[49] Rituraj Sharma, Zhenbang Dai, Lingyuan Gao, Thomas M. Brenner, Lena Yadgarov,
Jiahao Zhang, Yevgeny Rakita, Roman Korobko, Andrew M. Rappe, and Omer Yaﬀe.
Elucidating the atomistic origin of anharmonicity in tetragonal ch3nh3pbi3 with raman
scattering. Phys. Rev. Mater., 4:092401, Sep 2020.
[50] Omer Yaﬀe, Yinsheng Guo, Liang Z. Tan, David A. Egger, Trevor Hull, Constantinos C.
Stoumpos, Fan Zheng, Tony F. Heinz, Leeor Kronik, Mercouri G. Kanatzidis, Jonathan S.
Owen, Andrew M. Rappe, Marcos A. Pimenta, and Louis E. Brus. Local polar ﬂuctuations
in lead halide perovskite crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett., 118:136001, Mar 2017.
[51] Michael Sendner, Pabitra K. Nayak, David A. Egger, Sebastian Beck, Christian Müller,
Bernd Epding, Wolfgang Kowalsky, Leeor Kronik, Henry J. Snaith, Annemarie Pucci,
and Robert Lovrini. Optical phonons in methylammonium lead halide perovskites and
implications for charge transport. Mater. Horiz., 3:613–620, 2016.
[52] Maximilian J. Schilcher, Paul J. Robinson, David J. Abramovitch, Liang Z. Tan, Andrew M.
Rappe, David R. Reichman, and David A. Egger. The signiﬁcance of polarons and dynamic
disorder in halide perovskites. ACS Energy Letters, 6(6):2162–2173, 2021.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
61
[53] Changyong Lan, Ziyao Zhou, Renjie Wei, and Johnny C. Ho. Two-dimensional perovskite
materials: From synthesis to energy-related applications. Materials Today Energy, 11:61–82,
2019.
[54] Fan Hu, Yan-Hui Lou, and Zhao-Kui Wang. Functional 2d phases in mixed dimensional
perovskite photovoltaics. Advanced Functional Materials, 33(45):2304848, 2023.
[55] Xiaotong Li, Justin M. Hoﬀman, and Mercouri G. Kanatzidis. The 2d halide perovskite
rulebook: How the spacer inﬂuences everything from the structure to optoelectronic device
eﬃciency. Chemical Reviews, 121(4):2230–2291, 2021. PMID: 33476131.
[56] Constantinos C. Stoumpos, Duyen H. Cao, Daniel J. Clark, Joshua Young, James M.
Rondinelli, Joon I. Jang, Joseph T. Hupp, and Mercouri G. Kanatzidis. Ruddlesdenpopper
hybrid lead iodide perovskite 2d homologous semiconductors. Chemistry of Materials,
28(8):2852–2867, 2016.
[57] Kenichiro Tanaka, Takayuki Takahashi, Takashi Kondo, Tsutomu Umebayashi, Keisuke
Asai, and Kazuhiro Ema. Image charge eﬀect on two-dimensional excitons in an inorganic-
organic quantum-well crystal. Phys. Rev. B, 71:045312, Jan 2005.
[58] Michael Seitz, Alvaro J. Magdaleno, Nerea Alcázar-Cano, Marc Meléndez, Tim J. Lubbers,
Sanne W. Walraven, Sahar Pakdel, Elsa Prada, Rafael Delgado-Buscalioni, and Ferry Prins.
Exciton diﬀusion in two-dimensional metal-halide perovskites. Nature Communications,
11(1):2035, 2020.
[59] Guangbao Wu, Rui Liang, Zhipeng Zhang, Mingzheng Ge, Guichuan Xing, and Guoxing
Sun. 2d hybrid halide perovskites: Structure, properties, and applications in solar cells.
Small, 17(43):2103514, 2021.
[60] Liang Ma, Jun Dai, and Xiao Cheng Zeng. Two-dimensional single-layer organicinorganic
hybrid perovskite semiconductors. Advanced Energy Materials, 7(7):1601731, 2017.
[61] Ehsan Elahi, Ghulam Dastgeer, Abdul Subhan Siddiqui, Supriya A. Patil, Muham-
mad Waqas Iqbal, and Pradeep Raj Sharma. A review on two-dimensional (2d) perovskite
material-based solar cells to enhance the power conversion eﬃciency. Dalton Trans.,
51:797–816, 2022.
[62] Matan Menahem, Zhenbang Dai, Sigalit Aharon, Rituraj Sharma, Maor Asher, Yael
Diskin-Posner, Roman Korobko, Andrew M. Rappe, and Omer Yaﬀe.
Strongly an-
harmonic octahedral tilting in two-dimensional hybrid halide perovskites. ACS Nano,
15(6):10153–10162, 2021. PMID: 34003630.
[63] Steve Plimpton. Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics. Journal of
Computational Physics, 117(1):1–19, 1995.
[64] A. Mattoni, A. Filippetti, M. I. Saba, and P. Delugas. Methylammonium rotational
dynamics in lead halide perovskite by classical molecular dynamics: The role of temperature.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 119(30):17421–17428, 2015.
==PAGE:74==
62
Bibliography
[65] Tomoyuki Hata, Giacomo Giorgi, Koichi Yamashita, Claudia Caddeo, and Alessandro
Mattoni. Development of a classical interatomic potential for mapbbr3. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry C, 121(7):3724–3733, 2017.
[66] P. S. Whitﬁeld, N. Herron, W. E. Guise, K. Page, Y. Q. Cheng, I. Milas, and M. K.
Crawford. Structures, phase transitions and tricritical behavior of the hybrid perovskite
methyl ammonium lead iodide. Scientiﬁc Reports, 6(1):35685, 2016.
[67] Magnus B. Fridriksson, Sudeep Maheshwari, and Ferdinand C. Grozema. Structural
dynamics of two-dimensional ruddlesdenpopper perovskites: A computational study. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 124(40):22096–22104, 2020. PMID: 33072237.
[68] Yongping Fu, Song Jin, and X.-Y. Zhu. Stereochemical expression of ns2 electron pairs in
metal halide perovskites. Nature Reviews Chemistry, 5(12):838–852, 2021.
[69] Donat J. Adams and Sergey V. Churakov. Classiﬁcation of perovskite structural types
with dynamical octahedral tilting. IUCrJ, 10(3):309–320, May 2023.
[70] Arthur Marronnier, Heejae Lee, Bernard Geﬀroy, Jacky Even, Yvan Bonnassieux, and
Guido Roma. Structural instabilities related to highly anharmonic phonons in halide
perovskites. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 8(12):2659–2665, 2017.
[71] Alexander Biewald, Nadja Giesbrecht, Thomas Bein, Pablo Docampo, Achim Hartschuh,
and Richard Ciesielski. Temperature-dependent ambipolar charge carrier mobility in
large-crystal hybrid halide perovskite thin ﬁlms. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces,
11(23):20838–20844, 2019. PMID: 31099235.
[72] Melike Karakus, Søren A. Jensen, Francesco DAngelo, Dmitry Turchinovich, Mischa
Bonn, and Enrique Cánovas. Phononelectron scattering limits free charge mobility in
methylammonium lead iodide perovskites. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters,
6(24):4991–4996, 2015. PMID: 26619006.
[73] Andrey S. Mishchenko, Lode Pollet, Nikolay V. Prokof’ev, Abhishek Kumar, Dmitrii L.
Maslov, and Naoto Nagaosa. Polaron mobility in the “beyond quasiparticles” regime. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 123:076601, Aug 2019.
[74] Naveen Kumar Tailor, Yukta, Rahul Ranjan, Sudhir Ranjan, Tejasvini Sharma, Anand
Singh, Ashish Garg, Kanwar Singh Nalwa, Raju Kumar Gupta, and Soumitra Satapathi.
The eﬀect of dimensionality on the charge carrier mobility of halide perovskites. J. Mater.
Chem. A, 9:21551–21575, 2021.
[75] Jonas D. Ziegler, Jonas Zipfel, Barbara Meisinger, Matan Menahem, Xiangzhou Zhu,
Takashi Taniguchi, Kenji Watanabe, Omer Yaﬀe, David A. Egger, and Alexey Chernikov.
Fast and anomalous exciton diﬀusion in two-dimensional hybrid perovskites. Nano Letters,
20(9):6674–6681, 2020. PMID: 32786939.
[76] Yiyang Gong, Shuai Yue, Yin Liang, Wenna Du, Tieyuan Bian, Chuanxiu Jiang, Xiaotian
Bao, Shuai Zhang, Mingzhu Long, Guofu Zhou, Jun Yin, Shibin Deng, Qing Zhang,
Bo Wu, and Xinfeng Liu. Boosting exciton mobility approaching mott-ioﬀe-regel limit in
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
63
ruddlesdenpopper perovskites by anchoring the organic cation. Nature Communications,
15(1):1893, Feb 2024.
[77] Tao Luo, Yalan Zhang, Zhuo Xu, Tianqi Niu, Jialun Wen, Jing Lu, Shengye Jin,
Shengzhong (Frank) Liu, and Kui Zhao. Compositional control in 2d perovskites with
alternating cations in the interlayer space for photovoltaics with eﬃciency over 18%.
Advanced Materials, 31(44):1903848, 2019.
[78] Avija Ajayakumar, Chinnadurai Muthu, Amarjith V. Dev, Johnpaul K. Pious, and
Chakkooth Vijayakumar. Two-dimensional halide perovskites: Approaches to improve
optoelectronic properties. Chemistry An Asian Journal, 17(1):e202101075, 2022.
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
A Appendix
A.1 AIMD and ML-FF MD for CsPbBr3
A.1.1 Br Displacements
(a) x-axis
(b) y-axis
(c) z-axis
A.1.2 Br-Pb Distances
(a) x-axis
(b) y-axis
(c) z-axis
==PAGE:78==
66
A Appendix
A.2 1D Displacement Distributions
A.2.1 I displacements, in-plane
(a) 250 K, Pb-Pb
(b) 250 K, orth1
(c) 250 K, orth2
(d) 375 K, Pb-Pb
(e) 375 K, orth1
(f) 375 K, orth2
(g) 450 K, Pb-Pb
(h) 450 K, orth1
(i) 450 K, orth2
Figure A.3: Displacements along the 3 axes for the ip I atoms at the 3 diﬀerent temperatures.
The dashed lines are the Gaussian ﬁts.
==PAGE:79==
A.2 1D Displacement Distributions
67
A.2.2 I displacements, out-of-plane
(a) 250 K, Pb-I
(b) 250 K, orth1
(c) 250 K, orth2
(d) 375 K, Pb-I
(e) 375 K, orth1
(f) 375 K, orth2
(g) 450 K, Pb-Pb
(h) 450 K, orth1
(i) 450 K, orth2
Figure A.4: Displacements along the 3 axes for the oop I atoms at the 3 diﬀerent temperatures.
The dashed lines are the Gaussian ﬁts.
==PAGE:80==
68
A Appendix
A.2.3 Pb displacements
(a) 250 K, x-axis
(b) 250 K, y-axis
(c) 250 K, z-axis
(d) 375 K, x-axis
(e) 375 K, y-axis
(f) 375 K, z-axis
(g) 450 K, x-axis
(h) 450 K,y-axis
(i) 450 K, z-axis
Figure A.5: Displacements along the x,y, and z axis for the Pb atoms at the 3 diﬀerent
temperatures. The dashed lines are the Gaussian ﬁts.
==PAGE:81==
A.3 Hoppings
69
A.3 Hoppings
(a) 250 K, sp-σ
(b) 375 K, sp-σ
(c) 450 K, sp-σ
(d) 250 K, pp-π
(e) 375 K, pp-π
(f) 450 K, pp-π
Figure A.6: Distributions of the sp-σ and pp-π hoppings with the ip I atoms and oop I atoms
in BAPI. The dashed line is the Gaussian ﬁt.
