==PAGE:1==
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology
for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a
Successor Full-Stack Developer
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation
as a Successor Full-Stack Developer
Master Thesis
November, 2024
By
Yongzhi Song
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Computer Science and Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Yongzhi Song - s212585
Signature
Date
ii
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis develops a full-stack prototype that integrates Human Digital Twin (HDT) tech-
nology to support personalized stroke rehabilitation within the ReHyb Project. The work
combines previously isolated components—including therapist, patient, and third-party
dashboards, as well as a central backend and database—into a unified, functional sys-
tem. Key challenges addressed included inconsistencies in technology stacks, incom-
plete integration of functionalities, and mismatches in data structure. By employing Agile
methodology, specifically Scrum, the project benefited from continuous feedback and it-
erative improvements, resolving issues related to frontend-backend communication and
enhancing system responsiveness. While performance bottlenecks and integration chal-
lenges remain, the prototype establishes a strong foundation for future development. This
groundwork supports the ultimate goal of creating a responsive, scalable HDT-based re-
habilitation system to enhance stroke recovery for both patients and healthcare providers.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
John Paulin Hansen, Professor Supervisor
Martin Wolfgang Lauer-Schmaltz, PhD Student Supervisor
Alparslan Ari, Preceding developer of the ReHyb System
Petr Kubes, Preceding developer of the ReHyb System
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to John and Martin for their invaluable assis-
tance throughout the course of this project and the writing of this paper. Their suggestions
and edits were instrumental in refining the arguments and improving the overall coherence
of the text. Particularly, Martin, whose management of the overall framework and pace of
the project provided a clear direction, was pivotal. He adeptly clarified my logic whenever
I grappled with unclear concepts.
Furthermore, my sincere thanks are due to Alparslan and Petr, whose seminal work laid
the groundwork for my project. Access to their papers and code was crucial in enabling
me to quickly familiarize myself with various technological stacks and the content of the
project during its initial phase. In particular, Alparslan deserves special mention for his
patience in thoroughly explaining and emphasizing the critical aspects of the project code
at the outset.
iv
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The ReHyb project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Stroke and Rehabilitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Human Digital Twins and their potential to revolutionize rehabilitation . . . .
3
2.3
Full-Stack Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
3D Avatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
Review of Prior Theses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Learning Approach of New Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Development Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Implementation and Result
20
4.1
Initial State of the System at Starting Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.2
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Database Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Development of Backend Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.5
Development of Therapist Dashboard
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.6
Development of Patient Dashboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.7
Development of Third-Party Dashboard
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5
Performance Evaluation
56
5.1
Frontend
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.2
Backend Server
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6
Discussion
61
7
Conclusion
64
Bibliography
65
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Stroke is a critical health condition which necessitates rehabilitation due to its significant
impact on mortality and disability rates globally. A stroke occurs when the blood supply
to part of the brain is interrupted or reduced, preventing brain tissue from getting oxygen
and nutrients. This can result in brain cells beginning to die within minutes, leading to
lasting brain damage, long-term disability, or even death[1]. Rehabilitation is essential for
recovering lost functions and improving quality of life after a stroke. However, the rising
number of incidences, driven by an aging population, coupled with an increasing short-
age of rehabilitation capacity, poses a severe challenge. This shortfall in rehabilitation
resources threatens to result in insufficient rehabilitation services in the future, potentially
aggravating the long-term impacts on stroke survivors[2].
To overcome these challenges, it is essential to develop more advanced technological
support tools. At present, these tools are mainly confined to specific devices like robotic
exercise equipment and serious games, which are designed to incorporate therapeutic
exercises within engaging gameplay contexts, thus making rehabilitation more engaging
and motivating[3]. Additionally, Human Digital Twins represent a promising technology,
offering dynamically updated patient models that can monitor patient progress in real time
and provide vital decision support for therapists. However, the isolated operation of these
devices and technologies hinders their potential to function effectively as an integrated
rehabilitation system[4]. Consequently, a comprehensive full-stack solution is required
that merges all these technologies into a coherent system.
This thesis proposes a full-stack development approach to create an integrated Human
Digital Twin-based stroke rehabilitation system. It focuses on familiarizing with existing
system facets, filling gaps within the database and dashboards, and ensuring seamless
integration for a fully-connected prototype.
1.2
The ReHyb project
The ReHyb project is dedicated to the creation of a hybrid upper-limb exoskeleton, which
incorporates cutting-edge sensing and actuation technologies to construct a digital twin
of the user[5]. The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) is entrusted with several key
responsibilities within the ReHyb project. These include the design of three specialized
dashboards tailored for different stakeholders in the rehabilitation process—therapists,
patients, and caregivers. Each dashboard is thoughtfully engineered to enhance the re-
habilitation experience by offering functionalities that cater specifically to the needs and
roles of each user group. Furthermore, the development of the necessary backend in-
frastructure to effectively collect, integrate, and manage the data generated from these
diverse interactions is also a critical task.
This thesis builds upon modules partly developed by previous developers, which include
partially designed dashboard prototypes, an HDT database, and a basic backend system
laying the foundation for implementing necessary endpoints[6]. However, while these
components provide a preliminary framework, each component requires significant up-
dates and refinement to meet the evolving requirements within the ReHyb project and to
ensure they are integrated into a cohesive, operational system.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Research Questions
This thesis presents an exhaustive technical analysis of the ReHyb system, emphasiz-
ing the concept of full-stack development along with the challenges and resolutions en-
countered throughout the development phase. Accordingly, the research questions are
articulated in a progression from specific to abstract as follows:
1. How can the resulting system be objectively tested with regard to performance?
2. What are the key bottlenecks in the resulting system and how could they be im-
proved in the future?
3. How should a project successor handle the inconsistency in the tech stack between
different subsystems within a complete full-stack development project, caused by
the varying skills and preferences of previous developers?
2
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical Background
This chapter first offers a comprehensive overview of the theoretical foundation that sup-
ports the entire project, followed by an introduction to the fundamental concepts of the
technical frameworks utilized in the development process.
2.1
Stroke and Rehabilitation
Stroke, medically referred to as a cerebrovascular accident, is a severe medical condition
resulting from the interruption of blood supply to part of the brain, either through a block-
age or a rupture of blood vessels. This event causes immediate brain tissue damage
and significant long-term implications for survivors[1]. Globally, stroke remains a leading
cause of disability and is the second leading cause of death, with ischemic strokes com-
prising about 87% of all cases[7]. The epidemiological trends show an increasing burden,
especially in aging populations.
Post-stroke rehabilitation refers to a series of planned treatments and training aimed at
helping stroke patients regain physical functions, improve quality of life, and minimize dis-
abilities[8]. Rehabilitation is crucial because it effectively restores motor, language, and
cognitive functions, reducing the long-term negative impacts of a stroke[8]. Additionally,
it significantly enhances the patient’s quality of life by helping them regain independence
and reducing dependency on others. Rehabilitation strategies involve a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary approach that includes physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech
therapy, psychological support and cognitive training, and social support tailored to indi-
vidual patient needs[9].
2.2
Human Digital Twins and their potential to revolutionize
rehabilitation
Human Digital Twins (HDTs) represent an innovative evolution from traditional Digital
Twins (DTs), transitioning the concept from engineering domains to applications focused
on human-centric representations. Originally, DTs were developed to create real-time,
data-driven virtual models of physical assets, mainly within industries like manufactur-
ing, aerospace, and urban planning[10][11]. Their primary function was to monitor, pre-
dict, and optimize physical systems using virtual simulations. As technology advanced
and human-centered fields—such as healthcare and personalized wellness—demanded
more nuanced digital solutions, the concept of HDTs emerged.
Unlike traditional digital models that often remain static or only monitor external metrics,
HDTs are dynamic, multi-layered models designed for continuous, bidirectional interaction
with their physical counterparts. They gather and process a wide array of real-time data,
from physical indicators like movement and muscle activity to less tangible factors, such
as emotional well-being[4]. This unique blend of data allows HDTs to provide both de-
scriptive and predictive insights, supporting informed decision-making and personalized
interventions. Furthermore, HDTs differ significantly from simple digital representations
or digital shadows, which lack depth in analyzing internal states or feeding back into the
system[11]. With three primary layers—data collection, data processing and storage, and
interfaces—HDTs form a comprehensive digital model, offering a transformative poten-
tial for various applications, especially in fields where real-time insights and user-specific
adjustments are critical[12].
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
3
==PAGE:12==
For example, in the industrial domain, a group of researchers from Tsinghua University ex-
plore the integration of HDT technology with parallel systems in the context of automated
driving testing. Their work aims to enhance the reliability and efficiency of testing proto-
cols by leveraging real-time data and simulation models to create dynamic, responsive
testing environments. The study concludes that such integration significantly improves
the predictive accuracy and operational safety of automated driving systems, offering a
robust framework for further development in automated vehicle testing[13].
Likewise, in the industrial field, HDT is being explored to enhance workplace ergonomics
and safety. For instance, a research group in University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli has
developed an HDT model focused on monitoring worker ergonomics in real-time within
production settings. By utilizing sensor data and motion analysis, this model can dynam-
ically assess ergonomic risks, providing immediate insights into strain levels and recom-
mending adjustments to optimize workers’ postures and movements. The study reveals
that such an integration of HDT in the workplace can significantly improve not only oper-
ational efficiency but also worker health and safety[14].
On the other hand, in the domain of healthcare, a group from the University of Naples
Federico II details an architectural framework for HDTs. Their study emphasizes the role
of HDTs in managing social distancing for virus containment in work environments during
the COVID-19 pandemic. This architectural framework integrates physical and digital el-
ements to allow real-time monitoring and optimization of health-related processes. Their
research underscores the transformative potential of HDTs to enhance operational effi-
ciency and healthcare delivery by utilizing precise, real-time data [15].
Similarly, in the healthcare field, a study[16] illustrates how HDT can be effectively em-
ployed for personal fitness management. This research focuses on developing a per-
sonalized HDT that continuously tracks an individual’s fitness metrics—including diet,
physical activity, and sleep patterns—through IoT devices. The data are stored in the
cloud and analyzed to generate personalized health and fitness recommendations. The
findings demonstrate HDT’s potential to transform personal health management, offering
users actionable insights for optimizing their well-being.
In addition, a promising future application of HDTs is their role in personalizing rehabili-
tation processes for patients with physical impairments. In the context of rehabilitation,
HDTs have the potential to revolutionize traditional therapeutic approaches by offering per-
sonalized, adaptive support tailored to the unique and often fluctuating conditions of each
patient. Using real-time data from sensors, wearable devices, or exoskeletons, HDTs
can accurately monitor a patient’s range of motion, endurance, and fatigue levels[17][18].
This data enables HDTs to adjust therapy tasks dynamically, provide customized feed-
back, and optimize support plans to improve outcomes. Acting as an interactive digital
companion or coach, HDTs enhance patient engagement and motivation, fostering com-
mitment to the rehabilitation process—critical factors for achieving effective recovery.
However, realizing these advancements requires that HDTs be integrated within compre-
hensive, full-stack systems that combine hardware, software, data processing, and user
interfaces seamlessly. To achieve this, HDTs must operate harmoniously alongside other
emerging technologies, such as serious games, IoT devices, and exoskeletons, within an
integrated ecosystem. A full-stack approach would enable these components to function
cohesively, allowing the HDT to serve as a central hub for real-time monitoring, decision
support, and personalized interventions, thereby optimizing both the efficacy and experi-
ence of rehabilitation.
4
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Full-Stack Development
Full-stack development represents the holistic process of designing and implementing
both the client-side (front-end) and server-side (back-end) components of web appli-
cations, making it a key approach in modern software engineering. The term “stack”
refers to the comprehensive suite of technologies used across various levels of devel-
opment to build, manage, and maintain a cohesive software application. This includes
front-end technologies, which handle the user interface and interaction elements, and
back-end technologies, responsible for data processing, application logic, and interac-
tion with the database and server infrastructure. Additionally, a full-stack encompasses
databases and, when needed, the server and network infrastructure that support the ap-
plication(Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1: The basic architecture of a full-stack web application
2.3.1
Differentiation in Technology Stacks
In full-stack development, each layer of the stack plays a unique and critical role, and
the integration of these layers is essential to ensure they work collaboratively as a uni-
fied system. This layering approach reflects the interconnected nature of modern web
applications, where client and server components interact seamlessly to create a smooth
user experience. The importance of a well-integrated stack is underscored by the need
for consistent communication, data transfer, and functional harmony across the front end,
back end, and database systems[19].
These technology stacks often have specific named combinations, such as:
• MERN Stack: MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, Node.js
• MEVN Stack: MongoDB, Express.js, Vue.js, Node.js
• LAMP Stack: Linux, Apache, MySQL/MongoDB, PHP/Perl/Python
• LEMP Stack: Linux, Engine-X(Nginx), MySQL/MongoDB, PHP/Perl/Python
• JAM Stack: JavaScript, APIs, Markup
• Ruby on Rails Stack: Ruby, Rails, PostgreSQL / MySQL
• Flutter & Firebase Stack: Flutter, Firebase
In full-stack development, there is rarely a universally optimal choice of stack, as each
has strengths and weaknesses depending on project requirements, scalability consider-
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
5
==PAGE:14==
ations, and the specific expertise of the development team. Generally, opting for widely-
used stacks is advisable because they tend to have more comprehensive libraries, doc-
umentation, and active developer communities, which offer support and resources when
challenges arise[19][20]. This project, however, is unique in that it involves extending the
work of previous students rather than initiating a new build from scratch. Therefore, rather
than reinventing the technological foundation, I have chosen to adopt the existing frame-
work they established, namely the MERN Stack, which has served as the fundamental
technology choice throughout the system’s lifecycle.
However, MERN Stack here serves as only the foundational technological layer of the sys-
tem, providing the basic, shared elements across various system modules. Building upon
this foundation, previous student developers, based on their preferences and expertise,
opted for different higher-level technology stacks for the specific modules they were re-
sponsible for(e.g., the various dashboards mentioned earlier in Section 1.2). This flexible
approach has undoubtedly allowed each developer to tailor their work to their strengths,
contributing to the modular richness of the system. However, it has also created a seem-
ingly fragmented and inconsistent technological landscape, presenting unique integration
and maintenance challenges.This inconsistency in the tech stack will be analyzed in depth
in the following chapter, where I will discuss the implications and propose strategies to
mitigate these challenges.
In the following subsections, I will introduce each of these differentiated technology stacks,
analyzing their specific roles within the respective modules on a general level.
2.3.2
Frontend
In the context of full-stack development, “frontend” refers to the portion of the applica-
tion or system that interacts directly with the users. The role of frontend development
is critical for several reasons. Firstly, it serves as the bridge for human-computer inter-
action, rendering backend functionalities accessible and operable through graphical and
interactive interfaces. This ensures that complex backend operations are presented in a
user-friendly manner. Secondly, frontend development significantly enhances user en-
gagement by providing an intuitive and responsive user experience, which is essential for
retaining users and fostering repeated use of the application[21].
As previously explained in Section 2.3.1, the system incorporates various technology
stacks across different system modules during the development process. In terms of the
front-end, although the three dashboards are aligned at an architectural level, the Thera-
pist dashboard utilizes a distinct technology stack, while the Patient and Third-Party dash-
boards share an alternative stack. Figure 2.2 illustrates this situation with interconnected
dependencies among the technologies.
6
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: The layered structure of technology stacks for the frontend, starting from foun-
dational technologies (HTML, CSS, JavaScript) to higher-level frameworks and libraries
(React, Next.js, MUI) used for building interactive and efficient user interfaces. Note that
this is not a system architecture diagram but rather a diagram illustrating the dependency
relationships among various technologies used in the frontend.
In modern front-end development, such interdependent relationships among different tech-
nologies are quite common. This can be understood as a layered ecosystem, where each
layer builds upon existing technologies to add specific features, creating a “foundation-
extension-application” dependency chain. This structure contributes to improved devel-
opment efficiency, modularity and flexibility.
2.3.2.1
The most basic technologies
Frontend development typically involves technologies such as HTML, CSS, and JavaScript,
which are the most basic web technologies employed in our MERN stack as previously
mentioned:
• HTML or HyperText Markup Language, is the fundamental language used to create
and structure content on the web. It is not a programming language but a markup
language that defines the structure of our content. HTML consists of elements that
we use to enclose, or wrap, different parts of your content to make it appear or act
in a certain way. For example, to mark up a paragraph, we use the <p> tag, which
tells web browsers to display the enclosed text as a paragraph[22].
• CSS or Cascading Style Sheets, is a stylesheet language used to define the pre-
sentation of documents written in HTML or XML. It controls how elements are dis-
played on screens, in print, in speech, or on other media. CSS is crucial for web
development as it allows developers to separate content from design, enhancing
accessibility and maintaining style consistency across multiple webpages[23, 24].
• JavaScript is a versatile and widely-used lightweight interpreted programming lan-
guage primarily known for adding interactivity to web pages. It operates as both a
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
7
==PAGE:16==
client-side and server-side scripting language, enabling dynamic content, real-time
updates, and asynchronous communication on websites[25, 26].
Here, “most basic” means that even without using the “ready-to-use convenience tools”
shown in Figure 2.2, it would still be possible to develop dynamic, real-time responsive
web pages using only these three components. However, doing so would significantly
increase the code volume, and seasoned developers today would avoid this approach.
After all, reinventing the wheel from scratch offers little practical value.
2.3.2.2
React
In the front-end technologies of the Rehyb System, React library serves as the corner-
stone. All other subsequent libraries and frameworks utilized in the dashboards imple-
mentation are part of the React ecosystem, which is obvious in Figure 2.2.
React is a widely recognized open-source JavaScript library that was created by Facebook
in May 2013. It’s primarily used for building user interfaces, especially for single-page ap-
plications where you need to manage fast interactions and data updates without reloading
the page[27].
One of the key features of React is its component-based architecture. This means that de-
velopers can build encapsulated components that manage their own state, then compose
them to make complex user interfaces. The library also utilizes a virtual DOM (Document
Object Model), which significantly improves the performance by calculating the minimal
changes needed in the real DOM, based on user interactions, and applying them in the
most efficient way[27][28].
The following example illustrates a basic React component:
1
import React, { useState } from 'react';
2
3
function DisplayPatientName({dashboardName}) {
4
const [name, setName] = useState('');
5
const [show, setShow] = useState(false);
6
7
const handleShowName = () => {
8
// Set the patient's name
9
setName('John Doe');
10
// Set show to true to display the name
11
setShow(true);
12
};
13
14
return (
15
<div>
16
<p> Welcome to {dashboardName} !</p>
17
<button onClick={handleShowName}>Show Patient Name </button >
18
{show && <p>Patient Name: {name}</p>}
19
</div>
20
);
21
}
22
23
export default DisplayPatientName;
Listing 2.1: Basic React Component to Diaplay Patient’s Name
As we can see in Listing 2.1, a React component is a JavaScript function that receives
an object as the argument and returns markup. We initializes a state variable name in the
component to store the patient’s name, and show is a boolean to control whether the name
is displayed or not. The function handleShowName is triggered when the button is clicked.
It sets the patient’s name and changes the show state to true so the name is displayed.
8
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:17==
The component would only re-render the parts that are affected by the modified states,
which makes updates quite efficient. This mechanism is implemented by the useState
hook function, which is one of the most fundamental and crucial functions in the React
library. The term is quite illustrative, indicating that they allow developers to ”hook into”
essential React features, such as state management, lifecycle handling, and context, di-
rectly within functional components.
2.3.2.3
TypeScript
TypeScript is a programming language developed by Microsoft that extends JavaScript by
adding static type definitions. Its main benefits come from its ability to perform type check-
ing at compile time, which means errors can be caught early in the development process,
rather than at runtime. This static type checking helps developers catch common typing
errors, making the codebase more reliable and easier to debug. TypeScript is a superset
of JavaScript, meaning any valid JavaScript code can be converted into valid TypeScript
code, making it easy for developers to adopt and integrate into existing projects[29].
2.3.2.4
Vite
Vite is a modern build tool and development server optimized for front-end development.
It significantly enhances the development experience by leveraging modern JavaScript
standards like ES modules, which are directly supported in browsers, thus eliminating the
need for pre-bundling during development. This approach allows Vite to offer fast refresh
rates through Hot Module Replacement (HMR), which allows changes made in the code to
be immediately reflected in the browser without needing a full page reload. This provides
developers with immediate feedback on their changes, making the process of tweaking
and debugging much faster and more efficient[30, 31].
2.3.2.5
Tailwind CSS
Tailwind CSS is a utility-first CSS framework designed to facilitate rapid UI development by
allowing developers to compose and customize styles directly within their HTML markup.
This approach eliminates the need to write custom CSS by providing a vast set of pre-
defined classes that can be applied to HTML elements to control layout, typography, col-
ors, and other design elements[32, 33].
Besides, Tailwind includes built-in responsive modifiers, allowing developers to easily ad-
just styles based on the screen size directly in the class names (e.g., md:text-center).
This feature simplifies creating responsive designs without the need for complex CSS
media queries[33].
Compared with Traditional CSS, Tailwind CSS offers the following advantages:
- Conciseness: Directly embeds responsive and styling utilities in the HTML, making
the codebase smaller and easier to maintain.
- Speed: Speeds up development by reducing the time spent toggling between HTML
and CSS files.
- Consistency: Utilizes a consistent naming scheme that can be easier to remember
and apply across different projects.
2.3.2.6
Next.js
Next.js is a popular React framework that simplifies web application development by of-
fering features like server-side rendering (SSR) and static site generation (SSG), making
it especially advantageous for applications focused on search engine optimization (SEO),
faster page load times, and efficient server-side data handling[34].
A notable advantage of Next.js is its hybrid rendering capability, which allows pages to
be rendered on either the server or the client, depending on the application’s needs. This
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
9
==PAGE:18==
flexibility enhances both performance and user experience[34]. This feature is primarily
enabled by two key functions: getServerSideProps for server-side rendering (SSR) and
getStaticProps for static site generation (SSG).
With SSR, the getServerSideProps function fetches data from an API on the server each
time a page is requested, ensuring the page is rendered with the most current data. Exe-
cuting on the server, this function enables the page to deliver fully rendered HTML to the
client, making the content readily accessible to search engines for indexing.
In contrast, getStaticProps fetches data at build time, which is optimal for pages that do
not require frequent updates. By using SSG, load times are improved, and server load
is reduced. This efficient approach makes SSG ideal for content that remains relatively
static.
2.3.2.7
MUI
MUI, formerly known as Material-UI, is an open-source React component library that im-
plements Google’s Material Design principles. The library includes a wide range of pre-
built components such as buttons, text fields, tables, alerts, and tooltips, which adhere to
the Material Design guidelines.
Just like aforementioned Tailwind in Section 2.3.2.5, MUI has its own unique styling sys-
tem tailored specifically for React development, which uses a CSS-in-JS solution, pri-
marily through the @mui/system package, which allows for styling components using
JavaScript rather than separate CSS files. This approach enables dynamic styling based
on props or state without involving the traditional CSS cascade, specificity, or global
namespace issues.
2.3.3
Backend
In the context of full-stack development, “backend” refers to the server-side component
of a website or application. Backend development primarily focuses on the following as-
pects[35]:
• Data Operations: Creating, reading, updating, and deleting data according to cor-
responding requirements of the frontend, ensuring its security and integrity.
• Application Logic Handling: This includes user authentication and business rule
processing, ensuring the correct execution of application logic.
• API Development: Creating Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) that define
how the frontend communicates with the backend.
• Performance Optimization: Enhancing application performance through database
query optimization and caching mechanisms.
• Security Maintenance: Preventing data breaches and other vulnerabilities to pro-
tect the application from attacks.
• Server and Network Management: Managing server, network, and hosting con-
figurations to ensure the application’s stable operation and availability.
Similar to front-end development, a variety of technologies and frameworks are utilized in
back-end development. The primary ones involved are as shown in Figure 2.3
10
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: The layered structure of technology stack for the backend server. Note that
this is not a system architecture diagram but rather a diagram illustrating the dependency
relationships among various technologies used in the backend.
2.3.3.1
Node.js
Node.js is a powerful JavaScript runtime environment that allows developers to run JavaScript
code outside of a web browser. This environment is built on Chrome’s V8 JavaScript en-
gine and uses an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model, making it efficient and suitable
for data-intensive real-time applications that run across distributed devices[36].
Given that JavaScript is our primary programming language for the whole full-stack devel-
opment, and considering its excellent compatibility with numerous backend frameworks
and databases—including Express.js and MongoDB, which will be discussed later—we
have chosen to base the entire backend development environment on Node.js.
2.3.3.2
REST API
In the context of full-stack development, the currently popular API approaches mainly
include the following: REST, GraphQL, SOAP and gRPC.
REST API (Representational State Transfer API) is a widely used design style for web ser-
vice interfaces that offers several distinct advantages compared to other types of APIs[37,
38]:
• Simplicity and Readability: REST APIs use standard HTTP methods such as GET,
POST, PUT, and DELETE, making them easy to understand and implement. Since
REST is resource-based, each API URL represents a specific resource, providing
an intuitive structure that developers can quickly grasp.
• Statelessness: REST is stateless, meaning each request must contain all the nec-
essary information independent of other requests. This design reduces the coupling
between server and client, ensuring that each request can be self-contained, which
enhances the stability and scalability of the API.
• Cachability: Responses from REST APIs can be marked as cacheable. If the re-
source has not changed, clients can use locally cached data instead of reissuing a
request. This can significantly reduce server load and improve application perfor-
mance.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
11
==PAGE:20==
• Universality: REST APIs typically use standard HTTP and data formats like JSON
or XML, meaning nearly any client capable of sending HTTP requests can interact
with a REST service without needing additional libraries or tools. This universality
makes REST APIs highly suitable for cross-platform and cross-language applica-
tions.
• Resource-Based Routing: In REST architecture, each API URL corresponds to a
resource in the system, simplifying routing design.
• Flexibility: As REST APIs are based on HTTP standards, they can seamlessly in-
tegrate with other protocols and technologies, offering greater flexibility. Developers
can easily add or modify API behaviors as needed.
Compared to other API types such as SOAP and gRPC, which have their specific use
cases and strengths, they also come with their own complexities and limitations. For in-
stance, SOAP provides more complex transaction handling and security features but its
heavyweight and strict specifications may lead to higher development and maintenance
costs[39]. gRPC is ideal for internal service communication, especially in microservices
architectures requiring high performance and low latency, but its reliance on binary pro-
tocols and HTTP/2 can add to the complexity of implementation[40]. GraphQL allows
clients to request precisely the data they need, reducing data transfer, but it requires
more complex server-side implementations to handle this flexibility[41].
Therefore, the entire ReHyb system are implemented using the approach of REST API.
Additionally, to facilitate data transmission and ensure compatibility with REST architec-
tural style and MongoDB database, we use JSON as the data interchange format.
2.3.3.3
Express.js
Express.js is a minimal and flexible Node.js web framework that provides robust features
for building web and mobile applications. It is known for its performance and minimalistic
structure, providing a robust set of features for web and mobile applications. Express.js
simplifies the server creation process by handling HTTP requests with middleware and
routing[42].
In the native Node.js, routing is manually handled by checking req.url and req.method,
which can become cumbersome as the application grows. Express.js, on the other hand,
simplifies routing through its app.get, app.post, etc., methods, making the code far more
intuitive and flexible, allowing for complex routing with minimal code, and supports param-
eters, which are essential for building scalable applications.
Express.js also enhances flexibility and maintainability through its middleware functions.
They allows developers to easily add, remove, or modify functionalities like logging, re-
quest body parsing, and user authentication without substantial changes to the core ap-
plication logic.
We can effortlessly use the next() function, which facilitates the se-
quential execution of middleware functions, ensuring that request handling progresses
smoothly through the middleware stack. Besides, middleware can be reused across dif-
ferent routes, ensuring a cleaner and more organized codebase.
2.3.3.4
JWT
In the ReHyb system, whenever the frontend sends an HTTP request to a specific URL,
the backend employs JWT to authenticate the user’s identity within the aforementioned
Express.js middleware.
JSON Web Token (JWT) is an open standard (RFC 7519) that defines a compact and
self-contained method for securely transmitting information between parties as a JSON
object. This standard is designed to be space-efficient, making it suitable for use in URL
12
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:21==
parameters, HTTP headers, and query strings. JWTs can be used for various purposes,
but they are most commonly implemented for authentication and authorization in web
applications and APIs[43].
A JWT consists of three parts: the header, the payload, and the signature. The header
typically contains the type of token (JWT) and the signing algorithm being used, such as
HMAC SHA256 or RSA. The payload contains the claims, which are statements about
an entity (typically, the user) and additional data. Claims can be registered (standard),
public, or private. The signature is created by taking the encoded header, the encoded
payload, a secret, and the algorithm specified in the header, and signing them together.
This ensures the integrity and authenticity of the token, confirming that the data has not
been tampered with[43][44]. In the ReHyb system, the secret is stored in the .env file in
the backend.
Figure 2.4: JWT structure
As we can see in Figure 2.4, the structure of a JWT string is remarkably clear. On the left
side under the ‘Encoded’ section, the red segment represents the Header string trans-
formed using the Base64URL algorithm, the purple segment corresponds to the Payload
string similarly transformed by the Base64URL algorithm, and the blue segment indicates
the string signed with the HMAC SHA256 algorithm.
2.3.3.5
MongoDB
In the context of full-stack development, the two primary types of databases currently in
mainstream use are: NoSQL (also referred to as “not only SQ” or “non-SQL”) databases
and SQL (Structured Query Language) databases.
• NoSQL:
- NoSQL databases can operate without a fixed schema, supporting more flex-
ible data models. This includes key-value stores, document stores, column
stores, and graph databases. They are typically used for managing large sets
of distributed data and for handling unstructured or semi-structured data.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
13
==PAGE:22==
- Excellent scalability, flexible handling of various data types and structures, suit-
able for big data and real-time web applications[45][46].
- Lack of a unified query language, transaction support not as comprehensive as
SQL databases, might require more complex data consistency models[45][46].
- Typical: MongoDB, Cassandra, Redis and Neo4j.
• SQL:
- SQL databases, also known as relational databases, primarily use a table-
based model where data is stored in rows and columns. Each table has a fixed
schema that defines the structure of the data, including the types of data in
each column.
- Strong transactional support, good data consistency and integrity, supports
complex queries[45][46].
- Limited scalability, challenges in large-scale distributed scenarios[45][46].
- Typical: MySQL, PostgreSQL, Microsoft SQL Server and Oracle Database.
In the ReHyb system, we selected MongoDB (specifically, MongoDB Atlas) due to its
high-performance, scalability, flexibility, and alignment with the structure of JSON data.
Additionally, the AI-assisted query feature integrated into MongoDB’s desktop application
(MongoDB Compass) is particularly user-friendly for beginners who are not familiar with
its query language.
In MongoDB, cluster, database, collection, and document are important data structure
concepts that represent different levels of the data hierarchy[47]:
• Cluster: A cluster is a group of database instances designed for distributed storage,
data replication, and high availability. MongoDB clusters consist of multiple servers
to ensure data redundancy and fault tolerance. The MongoDB Atlas used in the
ReHyb system is a cluster-level managed cloud service.
• Database: A database is a standalone data storage unit, similar to a database in
relational database systems. A MongoDB cluster can contain multiple databases,
each of which can store multiple collections.
• Collection: A collection in MongoDB is similar to a table in relational databases; it is
a grouping of documents. Collections do not enforce a fixed schema, so documents
within a collection can have different structures.
• Document: A document is the smallest data unit in MongoDB, similar to a row in
relational databases, but it is more flexible. Documents are stored in JSON-like
format (BSON in MongoDB) and consist of key-value pairs, known as fields, where
each field represents a specific piece of data within the document. This structure
allows for nested sub-documents and arrays, providing a highly flexible data format.
We have opted to deploy our ReHyb system backend on an Ubuntu system hosted on
AWS due to that it provides robust scalability options, allowing us to dynamically adjust
our resources to meet varying load demands efficiently. Furthermore, other non-backend
developers involved in the project can also connect to the backend server, enabling them
to carry out their own development tasks.
14
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:23==
2.4
3D Avatar
In the rehabilitation process for stroke patients, assessing the range of motion in the up-
per limb is a crucial metric. The ReHyb system focuses specifically on key indicators,
including vertical and horizontal shoulder flexion/extension, shoulder internal and exter-
nal rotation, and elbow flexion/extension.
To provide a realistic and precise representation of these movements, a 3D avatar is uti-
lized as the patient’s Human Digital Twin. Developed using the Avaturn platform [48], this
avatar features advanced customization capabilities that allow us to create a detailed, life-
like model tailored to the patient’s unique physical dynamics, enabling accurate tracking
of their range of motion during rehabilitation.
To integrate this avatar into the dashboards, previous students used the Three.js library[49].
Three.js is a powerful JavaScript library that simplifies the creation and manipulation of 3D
graphics in the browser, making it suitable for rendering complex models like the Human
Digital Twin in an interactive format. It supports various functionalities, such as camera
control, lighting effects, and texture mapping, which enhance the visual experience of the
3D avatar on the dashboard.
2.5
Review of Prior Theses
The entire ReHyb system, from design to implementation and integration, spans a con-
siderable period of time, during which many students have been involved in related work.
2.5.1
Design
The initial conceptual design of dashboards for therapists, patients, and caregivers was
developed by Jing Zhang[50]. Utilizing a user-centered design approach, Jin conducted
in-depth research with each user group to understand their specific needs and challenges.
This led to dashboards that improved accessibility, streamlined patient monitoring, and
boosted patient motivation. Through iterative prototyping, the design incorporated digital
twin technology, creating an engaging, data-driven interface that supports rehabilitation.
Marco Puteo[51] later revised the prototype, focusing on functionality and practical us-
ability based on user feedback. His updates included detailed progress visualizations,
enabling patients to clearly track their rehabilitation stages and set meaningful goals. Ad-
ditionally, Puteo enhanced the help section by integrating therapist photos and status
indicators, along with a directory of specialists for tailored support. He also redesigned
the exercise modules to provide pre-exercise guidance and tool requirements, ensur-
ing ease of use. These targeted improvements made the dashboards more structured,
personalized, and supportive, helping users stay engaged and informed throughout their
rehabilitation journey.
Their design also led to stylistic differences in the overall UI of the three dashboards in
the subsequent implementation. The Therapist dashboard’s style resembles the former,
while the Patient and Third-Party dashboards are more aligned with the latter.
2.5.2
Implementation
After the design was completed, Benedek Földvári[52] and Gábor Máté Gulyás[53] each
implemented initial versions of their respective dashboards based on the outlined designs.
As these were the first iterations, many features evolved over subsequent iterations—
some were added, others removed, and many were refined. Petr Kubes[54] and Zhengfu
Shu[55] played a central role in these changes, with Petr focusing on the therapist dash-
board and Zhengfu on the patient dashboard. Petr, in particular, rewrote most of the
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
15
==PAGE:24==
Therapist dashboard’s implementation, with his codebase becoming the foundation for
future developers and setting a benchmark for subsequent work.
Simultaneously, a divergence in the technology stacks used across the various dash-
boards began to emerge, as each developer applied different technical approaches based
on their preferences and specific requirements. This inconsistency introduced poten-
tial risks for later developing and integrating, complicating efforts to achieve a cohesive,
seamlessly integrated system. The lack of a unified technology stack not only posed
challenges for code maintainability and interoperability but also became a substantial in-
tegration hurdle for future development efforts.
Apart from the dashboard, Weijun Huang[56] developed the entire backend using the Rust
programming language. The system utilizes a REST API architecture, built with the Axum
framework in Rust, which provides a lightweight and asynchronous foundation for efficient
handling of concurrent requests and high-performance API delivery.
Meanwhile, Ejaz and Martin[57] designed and implemented a badminton-themed serious
game, which is also available as an exercise option within the Patient dashboard. In this
game, the player’s Human Digital Twin is not merely a passive data repository, but also
designed as a virtual opponent that mirrors the player’s performance. This game does
not require further development from my side but is an integral part of the ReHyb System
that I will incorporate.
2.5.3
Integration
Alparslan[6] initially handled the integration, which involved linking the various dashboards
on the frontend to the backend server and the database. Due to the high complexity asso-
ciated with Rust, he faced several challenges in achieving a seamless connection across
these components. Rust’s steep learning curve and intricate setup requirements added
significant overhead to the integration process, making it difficult to develop and maintain
endpoints efficiently. This complexity ultimately led to a reconsideration of the technol-
ogy stack, where shifting to a Express.js-based backend was proposed to streamline the
process and improve development speed. With Express.js, Alparslan could more easily
manage the integration between the frontend dashboards and the backend, thus ensur-
ing a smoother data flow and reducing the technical barriers for future development and
maintenance.
Due to time constraints, Alparslan was unable to complete all the integration work. How-
ever, the overall system framework and the necessary technology stack have been fully
determined. The work of Alparslan and all previous designers and developers has greatly
contributed to a better understanding of the entire system’s functions and framework when
the author took over.
16
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:25==
3
Methodology
3.1
Learning Approach of New Technologies
As mentioned earlier in Section 2.3.1, the technology stacks used across different mod-
ules in this project are not uniform. For the entire system to be fully integrated, I cannot
focus solely on the technologies relevant to a specific module, such as a dashboard,
nor rely exclusively on familiar technologies. Instead, I must have a comprehensive un-
derstanding of all technologies utilized throughout the system. Therefore, an effective
learning approach would be highly beneficial.
Considering the diversity of the project’s technology stack and the extensive volume of
associated development documentation, a standard structured learning approach, pro-
gressing from basic to advanced, would be too time-consuming.
Thus, I opted for a
Project-Based Learning.
Project-Based Learning (PBL) is a learning approach centered on completing real-world
projects to facilitate the understanding and application of knowledge [58]. In the PBL
model, learners engage with one or more specific projects, integrating theoretical knowl-
edge with hands-on practice and deepening their understanding of complex concepts
through experiential learning.
From the perspective of a developer seeking to learn new technologies, a “project” does
not necessarily have to be large-scale like the ReHyb Project. In fact, if I want to imple-
ment a specific function using a certain technology, there are many small related projects
available online where I can review the source code. By directly analyzing the code in
these small projects and making adjustments as needed, I find this approach far more
efficient for understanding the technology than reading through extensive technical doc-
umentation.
3.2
Development Approach
Software development methodology refers to the adoption of specific guidelines and meth-
ods in organizing and managing development activities in the software development pro-
cess to improve efficiency and quality. The most common approach models in software
development include the Waterfall model and Agile model[59].
Agile and Waterfall represent two distinct approaches to project management and soft-
ware development, each with unique strengths and limitations.
In Agile development, flexibility is paramount. This iterative methodology allows teams to
respond swiftly to changes, making it ideal for projects where requirements are fluid or
undefined. Regular customer involvement in Agile cycles provides consistent feedback,
enabling adjustments that keep the project aligned with client expectations. However,
Agile requires a high level of team collaboration and self-management, and its focus on
producing working software over documentation can complicate later stages of mainte-
nance. Thus, Agile is particularly effective for dynamic, evolving projects where rapid
adaptation and close customer engagement are essential[60].
In contrast, the Waterfall model operates on a linear, structured approach, progressing
through fixed stages from requirements gathering to deployment. This methodology ben-
efits projects with stable, well-defined requirements, allowing for a comprehensive plan,
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
17
==PAGE:26==
rigorous documentation, and clear timelines. Waterfall’s structured framework simplifies
management and tracking but makes the model less adaptable to unexpected changes,
with adjustments often requiring significant rework. Additionally, without iterative feed-
back, issues may not surface until later stages, increasing the risk of costly revisions.
Waterfall is therefore best suited for projects with clear, unchanging specifications and
predictable timelines[61].
For this project, I adopted the Agile methodology, specifically using Scrum[62], due to its
adaptability, iterative feedback loops, and focus on continuous improvement. Scrum em-
phasizes collaboration and incremental progress through short development cycles called
sprints, which allowed me to integrate feedback quickly and adapt to evolving project
needs as Figure 3.1 illustrated.
Figure 3.1: Scrum lifecycle[63]
Scrum defines three main roles: Product Owner, Scrum Master and Development Team[62].
Throughout the project, I worked directly with my main supervisor, who effectively as-
sumed both the Product Owner and Scrum Master roles. As Product Owner, he repre-
sented stakeholder(here they are the therapists, patients and caregivers) interests, man-
aged the product backlog, and prioritized tasks based on value. As Scrum Master, he
ensured alignment with Scrum practices, facilitated weekly review meetings, and helped
address any obstacles impacting progress. My role encompassed the responsibilities of
the Development Team, focusing on executing the development tasks.
This arrangement may not appear entirely realistic, as ideally, the actual therapists, pa-
tients, and caregivers should serve as the Product Owners. However, as mentioned ear-
lier, this project had already undergone numerous design and development iterations be-
fore I joined. From a user requirements perspective, my main supervisor had developed
a thorough understanding of their needs. As a result, aside from one academic confer-
ence he attended in Germany, I had limited opportunities to interact directly with the actual
stakeholders.
The project’s tasks were divided into 1-week sprints, with each sprint cycle beginning on
Friday. At the end of each week, we held a review session to evaluate progress, set
goals, and define the objectives and tasks for the following sprint. During these sessions,
I reported on the week’s achievements and discussed any challenges encountered. My
18
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:27==
supervisor then provided clear, constructive feedback to guide the next steps and enhance
project outcomes. This iterative cycle fostered a productive workflow, highly reliant on
open communication and collaboration between us to ensure continuous improvement.
In summary, the methodological framework for this project was tailored to meet the unique
challenges posed by a complex, multi-component system with a varied technology stack.
The adoption of Project-Based Learning enabled efficient, targeted technology acquisi-
tion, while Agile development using Scrum fostered flexibility and adaptability in a dynamic
project environment. Weekly review sessions provided structured feedback loops, essen-
tial for refining the development process and aligning with project goals. Together, these
approaches ensured that the project progressed systematically, leveraging both practical
learning and iterative improvement to achieve a cohesive, fully integrated rehabilitation
system.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
19
==PAGE:28==
4
Implementation and Result
4.1
Initial State of the System at Starting Point
As I mentioned in Section 2.5.3, Alparslan had only partially completed the integration
of the frontend, backend, and database when concluding his work. Additionally, since
earlier students did not use a unified backend REST API for development (each used
their own mock server), the current need to unify the database into a single MongoDB has
introduced discrepancies in data structures between their own mock databases and the
current one. This misalignment has caused functions that previously operated smoothly
within each individual dashboard to fail.
Therefore, in general, the state of the entire system was as follows when I took over this
project:
• Frontend: The layouts and interface styling of the three dashboards had been es-
tablished. However, the data in these dashboards was mostly hardcoded or sim-
ulated, lacking real-time interaction with the backend. This limitation hindered the
dashboards from dynamically updating patient progress, reducing the interactivity
and accuracy of the system. Furthermore, due to the transition from individual mock
databases to a unified MongoDB, along with iterative modifications to the data struc-
ture in the new database, many functions that previously worked well on their re-
spective dashboards were no longer operational. Additionally, integration with the
Serious Game had not yet been implemented.
• Backend: As previously mentioned in Section 2.5.3, Alparslan replaced the Rust
backend server with a new backend implemented in Express.js. The overall back-
end framework had been established and was operational. However, much of the
API design remained inadequate. Aside from certain APIs completed for the Thera-
pist Dashboard, the APIs for the Patient Dashboard and the Third-Party Dashboard
had yet to be implemented.
• Database: When I began this project, the database was the most complete com-
ponent, with the overall structure and most of the data structures already designed.
Only a few fields within certain collections required adjustment. The primary issue
with the database, however, is that the various data structures within it have not
been utilized by the frontend.
4.2
System Architecture
Figure 4.1 illustrates the overall architecture of the ReHyb system, showing how the var-
ious modules communicate and exchange data.
The frontend includes three dashboards and a serious game (specifically, the Badminton
game) implemented by Martin[57]. In theory, there should be multiple games available
as exercises for patients, but currently, this is the only game within the system prototype.
The game can be parallel with the dashboards as part of the frontend because, apart from
being launched via the Patient dashboard, it also interacts directly with the backend for
data exchange(see Figure 4.19).
Overall, the frontend retrieves JSON-formatted data from the backend through HTTP re-
quests. Meanwhile, the backend performs CRUD operations on MongoDB, facilitating
20
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:29==
data transformation or mapping between the data structure in the database and the sys-
tem’s data model.
Figure 4.1: The overall architecture of ReHyb system
4.3
Database Design
Table 4.1: Data Collections in ReHyb_DigitalTwin and ReHyb_System Databases
Database
Data Collections
Description
ReHyb_DigitalTwin
OnlineVariables
To store data about the patient’s training
sessions and assessments.
StateVariables
To store data about the patient’s overall
rehabilitation level.
UserModels
To store information about the patient’s
medical conditions and static physical sta-
tus.
ReHyb_System
Appointments
To store patients’ appointments with their
respective therapists.
CaregiverProfiles
To store profiles of caregivers responsible
for certain patients.
Prescriptions
To store prescriptions for training ses-
sions assigned by therapists to certain pa-
tients.
RehybProtocols
To store information about the games pa-
tients can play during their training ses-
sions.
PatientProfiles
To store profiles of patients.
TherapistProfiles
To store profiles of therapists.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
21
==PAGE:30==
The structure of the ReHyb system’s database is presented in the Table 4.1. For security
purposes, it is segmented into two databases, ensuring that if one is compromised through
hacking or data leakage, the other remains secure. While the overall structural design
was primarily undertaken by my main supervisor and Alparslan[6], my contributions were
limited to adjusting certain fields within specific collections. Consequently, the design
schema will not be further elaborated upon in this section.
One notable adjustment I made was the addition of the AvatarFile field in the UserModels
collection, which is designed to store the avatar model files associated with each patient,
and its basic structure is outlined as follows:
1
{
2
Other fields ,
3
...,
4
AvatarFile:{
5
Filename: String
6
FileMD5: String
7
Data: Binary
8
}
9
}
Listing 4.1: Avatar field in the UserModels collection
In Listing 4.3, the FileMD5 field is used to store the MD5 hash of the file, which acts as a
digital fingerprint to ensure the file’s integrity and authenticity. The MD5 hash helps verify
that the file has not been altered or corrupted during transmission or storage by comparing
the computed hash with the original one. This is particularly useful when dealing with large
files, such as avatar model file.
Meanwhile, the Data field contains the original binary file, which has been encoded in
Base64 format. Base64 encoding is commonly used to represent binary data in a text-
based format, making it easier to store or transmit over systems that handle text data. This
encoding ensures compatibility across various platforms and protocols while maintaining
the integrity of the file’s content during transmission, for example, when transmitting an
avatar model file from the JavaScript-implemented backend to the C#-implemented Bad-
minton Game.
4.4
Development of Backend Server
4.4.1
Task Identification
Regarding the backend tasks, my main supervisor did not discuss specific details with me
at the start of the project, since these tasks essentially involve implementing the corre-
sponding API endpoints in the backend based on the frontend tasks we identified. Here,
endpoint is a specific implementation point of an API(since API is a set of predefined
rules and protocols that allows different software systems to communicate and exchange
data), representing the actual communication point where the frontend can interact with
the server.
These tasks are intended, for example, to retrieve data from the database, submit data to
the database, and handle authentication. Broadly, they include the following:
1. Completing the unfinished endpoints in the Therapist Dashboard.
2. Refine or revise improperly implemented endpoints.
3. Defining routes for the Patient Dashboard, Third-Party Dashboard and Badminton
Game and completing their endpoints.
22
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:31==
4. Finalizing the partially implemented authentication system using JWT.
4.4.2
Code Contribution
As outlined in the previous section, I implemented all endpoints required by the frontend
for task completion, provided that the corresponding frontend functionality was also imple-
mented, resulting in a total of 72 endpoints. Additionally, I largely completed the backend’s
JWT authentication functionality. This contributed to an total of approximately 5000 lines
of code in the backend.
4.4.3
Implementation and Result
Figure 4.2 illustrates a typical processing flow for handling requests sent from the frontend
to the backend. Upon receiving a request, the backend performs CORS validation(see
Listing 4.2), routing, user authentication, business logic processing, database operations,
and response formatting before sending back the response. If CORS validation or user
authentication fails, the request is rejected.
Figure 4.2: Backend request processing flow
4.4.3.1
Cross-origin resource sharing
Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) is a security feature implemented by browers that
restrict web pages from making request to a domain different from the one that served
the web page. This restriction, known as the “same-origin policy,” prevents potentially
harmful interactions between websites, such as unauthorized data access.
However, in many web applications, there is a need to allow these cross-origin requests,
especially when a frontend application hosted on one domain needs to access an API
hosted on a different domain. CORS provides a controlled way to make these requests
securely, specifying which origins (domain) are allowed to access resources on the server.
In the backend of the ReHyb system, a Node.js package called cors, is employed to
implement this mechanism:
1
import cors from "cors";
2
const app = express();
3
4
// List of allowed origins
5
let allowedOrigins = [
6
"http://localhost:5173", //Therapist Dashboard
7
"http://localhost:8080", //Patient Dashboard
8
"http://localhost:8081", //Badminton Game
9
"http://localhost:3456", //ThirdParty Dashboard
10
];
11
const corsOptions = {
12
origin: (origin , callback) => {
13
if (!origin || allowedOrigins.indexOf(origin) !== -1) {
14
callback(null, true);
15
} else {
16
callback(new Error("Not allowed by CORS"));
17
}
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
23
==PAGE:32==
18
},
19
credentials: true,
20
//This is a new option that allows credentials to be sent across origins
21
};
22
app.use(cors(corsOptions));
Listing 4.2: The code snippet of CORS mechanism in the backend server
In this code snippet, CORS allows four specific origins corresponding to four localhost
ports: 5173, 8080, 8081, and 3456. These ports are used as the addresses for each of
the dashboards and the Badminton Game when they are run locally.
4.4.3.2
Overall structure of the server
As shown in Figure 4.3, according to Alparslan’s design[6], the server structure comprises
four primary folders: config, middlewares, models, and routers. They also correspond
to the implementation of functionalities other than CORS in the processing flow shown in
Figure 4.2. The main file, index.js, operates the server and manages all code related to
API functionalities.
Figure 4.3: The structure of the server folder
Within the config folder, two files exist. The db_connections.js establishes the server’s
24
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:33==
connection to the MongoDB cluster via the Mongoose library, which is crucial for exe-
cuting any CRUD operations(Create, Read, Update, Delete) on the stored data. The
loadEnvironment.js is intended to load environment variable files in a production envi-
ronment; however, it is not utilized in the current prototype development environment.
The middlewares folder provides authentication functionality, validating user actions upon
login and controlling access for users who are not logged in. This authentication is achieved
through the JWT library, enabling the backend server to safeguard against unauthorized
access. Only users with valid tokens and registered accounts can access the system’s
interfaces. Additionally, tokens add a layer of security by preventing perpetual access for
logged-in users, minimizing potential misuse by unauthorized entities. Figure 4.4 illus-
trates the JWT authentication process within the system.
Figure 4.4: JWT authentication process diagram
The models folder contains initial schema of the MongoDB document structures used to
define database entities such as patient, caregiver and therapist. Utilizing these models
when creating corresponding database entities ensures the existence of certain fields
even when they lack actual values. For example, consider the following object of new
patient information:
1
const newPatientInfo = {
2
PatientID: "PAT -12345",
3
age:50,
4
Email: undefined
5
}
Listing 4.3: New patient Information to be inserted
If I directly insert this object into the database using the INSERT operation, the Email field
of the new patient entity will not exist in the database, as it is undefined in JavaScript.
However, when utilizing the schema of entity model, MongoDB will automatically assign
a value of null to the Email field. This behavior occurs due to the Email field being pre-
defined as a required field within the initial schema of the document structure. This is
crucial for maintaining the consistency of the data structure within the database.
In Alparslan’s original design and implementation, the routers folder was the most com-
plicated component of the backend. It comprises three main subfolders: authentication,
digital_twin_routers, and system_routers(see Figure 4.5). The authentication folder
contains endpoints necessary for registering therapists and patients and facilitating their
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
25
==PAGE:34==
login with user credentials. The digital_twin_routers and system_routers folders cor-
respond to the previously described database structure, with each collection having an
associated routing file that contains all relevant endpoints.
However, as I began the integration work, I realized that this design was impractical. The
original approach assumed an idealized structure in which each routing file’s endpoints
corresponded exclusively to a single data collection in the database. In reality, many
frontend requests require a single endpoint to interact with multiple data collections. For
example, uploading a patient’s exercise data from a training session requires simultane-
ous operations on both the OnlineVariables and StateVariables collections.
Additionally, in these overly detailed routing files, he created all CRUD operation endpoints
for each data collection, but many of them were unnecessary and ultimately unused in
the actual integration process since similarly, it is uncommon for a single endpoint to
correspond to only one data collection.
Consequently, when writing endpoints for the Patient Dashboard and Third-Party Dash-
board, I organized them by dashboards themselves rather than by data collection in the
database(see red boxes in Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.5). For the remaining endpoints in the
Therapist Dashboard, I followed Alparslan’s approach, adding or modifying them within
the existing routing files.
Figure 4.5: The structure of the router folder of all the endpoints
26
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:35==
Specific to a particular routing file—using crudPatientDashboard.mjs as an example,
as shown in the Listing 4.4—combined with the base route(/PatientDashboard) and the
JWT authentication middleware, this approach not only enables user authentication for
endpoints under the same base route but also allows the addition of endpoints with dif-
ferent subpaths to distinguish specific resources or operations.
1
import verifyPatientToken from "./src/middlewares/authPatient.js";
2
import patientDashboardRouter from "./src/routers/PatientDashboard/
crudPatientDashboard.mjs";
3
app.use("/PatientDashboard", verifyPatientToken , patientDashboardRouter);
Listing 4.4: The code snippet of handling the routing file of Patient Dashboard
4.4.3.3
Implementation of specific endpoints
HTTP requests include several key methods, each serving a different purpose:
• GET: Retrieves data from the server without modifying it, commonly used to request
information, such as when loading a webpage.
• POST: Sends data to the server, typically to create or submit data, like when sub-
mitting a form. The data is included in the request body.
• PUT: Updates a resource, usually at a specific URL, replacing the content of the
resource with the provided data. PUT requests include data in the request body.
• DELETE: Deletes a specified resource from the server, allowing clients to request
the removal of a resource.
As mentioned previously, a single routing file contains numerous endpoints under the
same base route, and a single endpoint may need to interact with multiple data collections
in MongoDB. The following section presents sample endpoints of GET and POST methods
to demonstrate their functionality in the Patient Dashboard. The PUT and DELETE methods
are similar to POST; in fact, many POST endpoints also incorporate PUT and DELETE actions,
differing only in whether the function body performs an insert, update, or delete operation.
Thus, PUT and DELETE examples are omitted here.
• GET: The following code snippet locates the corresponding document of user model
in the UserModels collection using PatientID as the query parameter. It then re-
trieves all caregivers associated with this patient by accessing the Contacts field
within this document to find relevant entries in the CaregiverProfiles collection.
Finally, the required data is formatted according to frontend specifications and re-
turned.
1
router.get("/UserModel/:PatientID", async (req, res) => {
2
const usermodelCollection = dbDT.collection("usermodels");
3
const caregiverCollection = dbSys.collection("CaregiverProfiles");
4
const query = { PatientID: req.params.PatientID };
5
const usermodel = await usermodelCollection.findOne(query, {
6
projection: { AvatarFile: 0 },
7
});
8
if (!usermodel) res.status(404).send({ Message: "Not found" });
9
else {
10
// Based on the Contacts property of the usermodel (an array of
CaregiverID strings),
11
// find the corresponding contact information in the
caregiverCollection
12
const caregivers = await caregiverCollection
13
.find({ CaregiverID: { $in: usermodel.Contacts } })
14
.toArray();
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
27
==PAGE:36==
15
// Convert usermodel.Contacts property to an array of objects
16
usermodel.Contacts = caregivers.map((caregiver) => {
17
const { CaregiverID , Name, Email, Photo, Gender } = caregiver;
18
return { CaregiverID , Name, Email, Photo, Gender };
19
});
20
res.send(usermodel).status(200);
21
}
22
});
Listing 4.5: Endpoint: “GET /PatientDashboard/UserModel/:PatientID”
• POST: The following code snippet demonstrates the endpoint required for the fron-
tend functionality where a patient rates an exercise after completing a training ses-
sion.
In this instance, query parameters are included in the request body (since GET re-
quests do not have a request body, URL path parameters are used instead). First,
the PatientID and SessionID are used to locate the corresponding training session
in the OnlineVariables data collection. Then, the rating value from the request
body is used to update the SessionInfo.PatientRating field.
1
router.post("/updateRating", async (req, res) => {
2
try {
3
const onlineVariablesCollection = dbDT.collection("OnlineVariables");
4
const { patientID , sessionID , rating } = req.body;
5
await onlineVariablesCollection.updateOne(
6
{
7
Type: "Session",
8
PatientID: patientID ,
9
SessionID: sessionID ,
10
Prescription: true,
11
},
12
{
13
$set: {
14
"SessionInfo.PatientRating": rating ,
15
},
16
}
17
);
18
res.send({ Message: "Rating updated" }).status(200);
19
} catch (e) {
20
console.log(e);
21
res.status(500).send("Internal Server Error");
22
}
23
});
Listing 4.6: Endpoint: “POST /PatientDashboard/updateRating”
28
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:37==
4.5
Development of Therapist Dashboard
4.5.1
Task Identification
Regarding the Therapist Dashboard, Petr Kubes[54] had largely completed its develop-
ment from a functional perspective. However, as mentioned earlier, with the need to unify
the backend and database across the entire system, many functionalities that previously
worked with a mock backend became nonfunctional. Additionally, as the data structures
in the database evolved in later iterations, numerous features that were initially finalized
required modifications.
At the outset of this project, the Therapist Dashboard was the first module I engaged with.
It is the most complex and feature-rich dashboard in the entire system. Using functionali-
ties previously implemented by Petr[54] as a reference, my main supervisor and I outlined
a highly detailed and technical list of tasks, totaling over a dozen. Every task targets a
specific functionality, such as the expected response when a button is clicked, the graphs
to be displayed, and the data to be visualized. Generally speaking, in conjunction with
Figure 4.6 below, my tasks primarily cover the following ones:
Figure 4.6: Page hierarchy of Therapist Dashboard
1. Revise the Login page and complete the “Create account” functionality.
2. On the Home page, complete the “Patient activities” and “Overview of all your pa-
tients” components.
3. On the List of Patients page, revise the “Add patient,” “Edit patient,” and “Archive
patient” functionalities.
4. On the List of Exercises page, complete the “Patients rating” functionality.
5. On the Patient's Overview page, revise all relevant components.
6. On the Patient's Data page, revise the display of various graphs.
7. On the Exercise Plan page, complete the “Exercise Recommendation,” “Exercise
Dragging,” and “Exercise Scheduling” functionalities.
8. All of the above functionalities and components require integration with the backend.
4.5.2
Code Contribution
Regarding the identified tasks above, they were all completed. That means my work on
the Therapist Dashboard includes cases where I completely reimplemented certain func-
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
29
==PAGE:38==
tionalities, as well as cases where I modified, added, deleted, and debugged code based
on prior implementations. Combined with the dashboard’s extensive functionalities, this
has led to a scattered distribution of code contributions, making it challenging to system-
atically quantify the exact amount I authored. In fact, if I had rewritten all the code from
scratch, quantifying my contributions would be straightforward—I would simply count the
total lines of code. Sadly, this was not feasible in practice.
However, as a general reference, two aspects can be considered for estimation.
First, the total code volume for the dashboard can be approximated using the “Statistic”
plugin available in the IDE, WebStorm. Figure 4.7 illustrates the statistic of the source
files in the Therapist Dashboard. Here, the “Lines CODE” column shows a combined
total of approximately 20,000 lines for files in the .ts and .tsx formats, which are also
the source code file formats for the Therapist Dashboard. However, around 7,000 lines of
the .ts files contain only mock data from previous developers, rather than actual source
code, which can be easily verified. Thus, the estimated total lines of source code in the
Therapist Dashboard are approximately 13,000.
Figure 4.7: Statistic of the source files of Therapist Dashboard
Second, using GitHub’s “Comparing Changes” feature, I can compare the differences in
the codebase from when I first took over this project to the present. The results show
that, compared to the initial version, approximately 2,000 lines of code were added, while
about 1,000 lines were deleted, resulting in an overall change of around 3,000 lines.
Considering these two aspects, my code contribution to the Therapist Dashboard is esti-
mated to be around 3,000 lines.
4.5.3
Implementation and Result
As previously mentioned, my work on the therapist dashboard focused primarily on re-
implementing or revising specific functionalities and integrating them with the backend to
enable dynamic data updates. I did not develop the dashboard from scratch; therefore,
aspects such as page structure, code organization, and interface layout design were not
within my scope (although I made some adjustments based on the existing setup). As
such, I will not elaborate on those elements here.
Beyond this, although the dashboard includes numerous functionalities that needed revi-
sion or implementation, most of these features follow a similar logic. The core approach
leverages React’s mechanisms by storing data retrieved from the backend into a compo-
nent’s state variable within the page. Once this state variable changes, the component
30
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:39==
automatically re-renders, reflecting the updated data in real time. While some functional-
ities require hundreds of lines of code to implement, their fundamental logic is essentially
the same as the example provided in Section 2.3.2.2.
Therefore, in this section, I will only explain my implementation of the key functionalities I
consider most significant.
4.5.3.1
Implementation of Reachability Visualization
On the Patient's Data page, “Reachability visualization” is a 3D illustration of the pa-
tient’s upper limb movement range (see Figure 4.14). In this point cloud graph, the max-
imum movement range of the upper limb is represented by the spacial area that the pa-
tient’s hand can reach in 3D space. However, since the position of the hand is influenced
by both shoulder and arm movement, forward kinematics is applied to accurately model
these dependencies and ensure realistic representation of the hand’s possible positions.
Using the right arm as an example, the overall calculation process is as follows:
1. Set up the horizontal flexion/extension (horizontalFE), vertical flexion/extension
(verticalFE), and shoulder internal/external rotation (shoulderIE) angles in radians
and apply them to the shoulder joint.
2. Defined the rotation matrix for the shoulder joint:
Rshoulder = Ry
(
horizontalFE −π
2
)
×Rz
(
verticalFE −π
2
)
×Rx
(
−shoulderIE + π
2
)
Here Rx,Ry,Rz represent rotations about the X, Y, and Z axes, respectively. The
addition and subtraction of 90 degrees, as well as the use of inverse values, are
necessary due to the misalignment between the coordinate system of the exoskele-
ton (from which I obtain real-world data) and the coordinate system of the 3D avatar
displayed on the dashboard. Calibration is required to reconcile these differences.
3. The elbow position relative to the shoulder is calculated as:
Pelbow = lu × Rshoulder
Here lu is the upper arm length.
4. Set the elbow flexion/extension angle (elbowFE) and construct the elbow rotation
matrix:
Relbow = Ry(elbowFE)
5. The forearm’s end position relative to the elbow is calculated as:
Pforearm = lf × Relbow × Rshoulder
Here lf is the forearm length
6. Adding the world position of the shoulder Pshoulder to the calculated elbow and fore-
arm positions gives the final hand position:
Phand = Pshoulder + Pelbow + Pforearm
Here Pshoulder can be directly obtained by utilizing Three.js’s built-in functions with
the avatar model itself.
4.5.3.2
Implementation of Recommended Exercises
On the Exercise Plan page, the dashboard provides a selected list of exercises tailored
to the patient’s specific therapeutic needs(see Figure 4.17).
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
31
==PAGE:40==
Three factors determine the recommendation list here: the state variable for the specific
body part targeted by the exercise, the patient’s interests, and the patient’s past ratings
for the exercise.
Figure 4.8: Flowchart of generating the recommended exercises
As shown in Figure 4.8, the process of generating recommended exercises involves sev-
eral filtering and sorting steps based on patient-specific data retrieved from the backend.
Initially, all exercises available in the system are considered. The recommendation pro-
cess begins by comparing these exercises with the patient’s state variables, identifying
the most relevant variables critical to the patient’s current condition. This comparison fil-
ters the list, selecting only the exercises that match the patient’s specific state variables,
ensuring that they are relevant to the patient’s therapy needs.
Next, the filtered exercises are further refined by incorporating the patient’s recorded in-
terests. This additional filtering step narrows the list down to exercises that match both
the patient’s state variables and their interests, providing a more personalized recommen-
dation.
Finally, the remaining exercises are sorted based on the patient’s past ratings, prioritizing
those exercises that the patient previously rated highly. This sorting process results in a
final list of recommended exercises that are tailored to the patient’s physical condition,
preferences, and engagement history, thereby optimizing the therapeutic experience and
supporting targeted rehabilitation efforts.
4.5.3.3
UI Result
The Therapist Dashboard is one of the most complex components in the entire system,
as it incorporates a wider range of elements and a higher level of complexity than the
other dashboards. Designed to assist with planning patient exercises, tracking rehabili-
tation progress, evaluating training outcomes, and performing numerous other functions,
this dashboard plays a central role in a therapist’s workflow. Therefore, in this section,
I will illustrate its functionality as encountered in a typical workflow from the therapist’s
perspective, as this approach offers a more direct and intuitive understanding.
32
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.9: Login page
Login page
Initially, upon launching the local server for the therapist dashboard, enter-
ing the server’s IP address in the browser directs the user to the Login page, as shown
in Figure 4.9. On this page, the therapist can also create new user accounts by clicking
the “Create an account” button.
Figure 4.10: Home page when therapists logged in
Home page
Upon logging into the therapist dashboard, the Home page (see Figure 4.10)
displays the therapist’s basic profile information, including their name and profile picture.
Within the “Your Patients” panel, therapists are able to review each patient’s status. In
the “Patient Activities” panel, therapists can view the rehabilitation exercises scheduled
for each patient on a given day and track the completion status of those exercises.
The purpose of the “Events” panel is to import external calendar files, which, in con-
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
33
==PAGE:42==
junction with the appointment scheduling feature of the “Schedule” panel, displays the
scheduled appointments for the day within the “Patients Today” panel. However, due to
unclear specifications regarding appointment requirements and backend data structures,
this functionality has not been fully implemented.
Another critical feature on this page is the option to toggle between two distinct modes: “In-
Clinic” and “Home-Based.” The choice of mode significantly influences the content and
layout across all subsequent pages. The “In-Clinic” mode is simpler, while the “Home-
Based” mode is more complex. However, my tasks did not encompass implementing the
pages for the “In-Clinic” mode; therefore, the subsequent pages default to the ”Home-
Based” mode.
Figure 4.11: List of Patients page
List of Patients page
On the List of Patients page(see Figure 4.11), therapists can
view all active patients associated with them. Each patient entry includes a color-coded
indicator representing the timing of their most recent exercise session: a green indicator
signifies exercise within the last 3 days, yellow indicates the last session was 3-7 days
ago, red signals that over a week has passed since the patient’s last exercise. A blue
indicator shows that the patient has been assigned exercises but has never completed
any, while black denotes a new patient with no existing data.
Additionally, on this page, therapists can add new patients, edit existing patients, or
archive patients who will no longer be performing exercises. Patients can also be sorted
in ascending or descending order by name.
34
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.12: List of Exercises page
List of Exercises page
On the List of Exercises page(see Figure 4.12), therapists
can view all exercises available in the ReHyb system, including details on the primary
physical metrics each exercise targets, the types of interests these exercises cater to,
and the ratings provided by patients. Additionally, therapists can use the search bar to
locate specific exercises by keywords.
Patient’s Overview page
The Patient’s Overview page, shown in Figure 4.13, pro-
vides a comprehensive overview of the patient’s health information and therapy progress.
On the left side, the “Patient Info” panel shows key details, including type of stroke, af-
fected limb, personal interests, and the default ReHyb system setup. Below this is a
“Contact People” panel, listing individuals involved in the patient’s care, with options to
view, edit, or remove each contact.
To the right, the “Exercise Completion Rate” widget displays the rate of completed exer-
cises over different time frames (week, month, all time), visualized with a circular progress
chart. Below, “Today’s Exercises” indicates the current status of exercises scheduled for
the day, with color codes for finished, in-progress, scheduled, and skipped activities.
In the center, the “Patient Current Condition” panel displays the patient’s progress towards
their therapy goals, represented through physical and cognitive scores. The physical con-
dition score is calculated based on real data, while the cognitive condition score currently
relies on mock data due to the lack of actual data sources. An overall score is shown
graphically, allowing for an easy assessment of how closely the patient’s current condi-
tion aligns with the goals set by the therapists. The “Therapy Goals” panel outlines both
long-term and short-term goals for the patient’s therapy, which can be customized by the
therapist to suit the patient’s needs.
Further to the right, the “Patient Mood” widget provides an overview of the patient’s emo-
tional state, categorized into positive, neutral, and negative moods over time.
The “Activity Time” bar chart at the bottom tracks the patient’s active periods throughout
the day. The intensity of the green color at each time point indicates the frequency of
training exercises performed by the patient at that time. A darker green suggests a higher
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
35
==PAGE:44==
number of exercises, highlighting the patient’s preference for training during those specific
time periods.
Lastly, there is a “Notes” panel, where therapists can add and view personalized notes
about the patient’s progress and interactions.
All of the functionalities of the components mentioned above, except for the “Cognitive
Score” panel (which still uses mock data), have been fully implemented, including both
their functionalities and integration with the backend. Each component is operational,
allowing real-time data retrieval and interaction, ensuring that the page accurately reflects
the patient’s current status and progress based on live backend data.
Figure 4.13: Patient’s Overview page
Patient’s Data page
The Patient’s Data page, as shown in Figure 4.14, presents a
variety of visualizations that are essential for tracking and analyzing the general progress
of patient rehabilitation, offering therapists critical data to support informed treatment de-
cisions. The “General Movement Quality” graph at the top left inversely reflects the extent
of patient’s movement compensation during training exercises (with higher values on the
y-axis indicating a lower degree of compensation, and the two values summing to 1), offer-
ing insight into the accuracy and control of patient movements and thus the effectiveness
of rehabilitation.
36
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:45==
Additionally, the “Patient Condition Progress” chart at the bottom left is derived from
the therapy goals set on the Patient’s Overview page and displays the rehabilitation
progress across different body parts, essentially serving as a more detailed version of
the “Patient Current Condition” panel on the Patient’s Overview page. Here, the bar
chart represents the overall progress on the y-axis, with different colors corresponding
to specific body parts, including the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and hand. The progress of
each individual color block is calculated by combining four key metrics: range of motion,
endurance, spasticity, and strength.
Figure 4.14: Patient’s Data page
If the therapist switch the time-frame label in the upper-right corner to the “Month”, the
Patient Condition Progress visualization will switch from a detailed bar chart to a line
chart, allowing for a clearer view of monthly trends (see Figure 4.15).
On the right side, the “Reachability Visualization” provides a 3D depiction of the patient’s
upper limb movement range. The gray area represents the target range set in the therapy
goals, while the green area indicates the patient’s current upper limb movement range.
This contrast helps therapists visualize the gap between the achieved range and the tar-
get, enabling them to pinpoint movement limitations and tailor the rehabilitation process
to the patient’s needs.
Therapists can manually adjust the 3D avatar’s angle to examine different perspectives of
the reachability range, allowing for a more comprehensive assessment of movement ca-
pability. Additionally, a timeline slider above the avatar enables therapists to view reacha-
bility data over different dates, facilitating temporal analysis of the patient’s progress. This
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
37
==PAGE:46==
interactive functionality supports a detailed and dynamic approach to understanding and
optimizing patient rehabilitation outcomes.
Figure 4.15: “Patient Condition Progress” chart in one month
Figure 4.16: Data visualization of shoulder in Patient’s Data page
38
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:47==
When therapists select “Shoulder” from the dropdown menu in the top-left corner, the
page customizes the displayed data to focus exclusively on metrics related to the patient’s
shoulder function, facilitating targeted analysis(see Figure 4.16). This view presents de-
tailed visualizations across several key aspects of shoulder movement and strength, al-
lowing therapists to monitor specific areas of progress or concern.
In the “Range of Motion” section, three graphs track the horizontal flexion/extension, ver-
tical flexion/extension, and internal/external rotation of the shoulder joint over time, mea-
sured in degrees. Each graph provides insights into the patient’s joint flexibility and range
across multiple time points, supporting therapists in identifying trends or limitations in
shoulder movement.
The “Muscle Strength” graph illustrates variations in the patient’s shoulder strength, ex-
pressed in Newton-meters (N∙m), for distinct movement types. By tracking these values
over time, therapists can assess improvements or declines in muscular power, essential
for evaluating therapy progress.
Additionally, the “Spasticity” visualization, with its three-dimensional perspective, depicts
torque across different angles and speeds (fast, moderate, slow). This representation
helps therapists evaluate the degree of spasticity, a common symptom in post-stroke pa-
tients, enabling them to gauge muscle resistance and its impact on movement.
The “Endurance” chart measures the patient’s shoulder endurance, represented as “Time
to Fatigue” in minutes. This data allows therapists to assess the patient’s stamina and
ability to sustain shoulder movements over time.
Similarly, selecting “Elbow” in the top-left corner switches the view to visualizations related
to the elbow, which will not be elaborated here. All the data visualizations shown above
have been fully developed and integrated with the backend. However, at this stage, the
project only has access to actual data for the elbow, so all data displayed in the shoulder-
related visualizations were manually added to the database for demonstration purposes.
Exercise Plan page
Finally, the Exercise Plan page, as illustrated in Figure 4.17, pro-
vides an interactive interface for scheduling and managing a patient’s rehabilitation exer-
cises. The main section of the page displays the “Exercise Schedule”, allowing therapists
to assign and organize exercises across a weekly timeline. Each day’s schedule is color-
coded to indicate the status of each exercise: Finished, Unfinished, Skipped, Pending,
and Editable. This visual differentiation helps therapists quickly assess the patient’s
adherence to the therapy plan and modify it as needed.
On the right, the “Drag to add new exercise” panel is organized into two columns: Recommended
and All Exercises. The Recommended column provides a selected list of exercises tai-
lored to the patient’s specific therapeutic needs. This list is generated based on data
from the patient’s therapy records, including metrics across various dimensions of rele-
vant body parts, as well as the patient’s interests and their previous ratings recorded in
the system . This personalized recommendation helps therapists easily identify exercises
that align closely with the patient’s rehabilitation goals and preferences. The second col-
umn, All Exercises, provides a complete list of all exercises available in the system,
similar to the content on the List of Exercises page.
The “Free to Play” section at the bottom, as the name suggests, includes exercises that
patients can perform on their own without guidance from the therapist. These activities
are available for patients to engage in freely, encouraging them to take an active role in
their rehabilitation outside of scheduled therapy sessions.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.17: Exercise Plan page
40
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:49==
4.6
Development of Patient Dashboard
4.6.1
Task Identification
Regarding the Patient Dashboard, identifying my tasks is relatively straightforward. Com-
pared to the Therapist Dashboard, the Patient Dashboard’s layout and functionality are
much simpler, making it easier to identify which features are missing. My tasks primarily
include the following:
1. Replace the existing avatar model to match the style of the other two dashboards.
2. Fix the avatar orientation and correct the angles displayed during arm movements
to accurately show the range of motion.
3. Implement the missing pages and adjust the navigation order of the pages.
4. Add audio prompts to the avatar.
5. Complete integration with the Badminton Game and backend.
4.6.2
Code Contribution
All the tasks defined above have been completed. Since the Patient Dashboard is much
simpler than the Therapist Dashboard, I ended up rewriting nearly all of the code, aside
from maintaining the original technology stack and interface style. In practice, rewriting the
code was easier than modifying someone else’s work, as I didn’t need to interpret previous
students’ logic, especially given that the code had passed through multiple hands. This
allowed me to implement it in my own way without needing to adapt to legacy approaches.
Excluding unused comments and some residual files that haven’t been removed, my code
contribution amounts to approximately 4,500 lines.
4.6.3
Implementation and Result
4.6.3.1
Patient Dashboard Navigation and Workflow
In Figure 4.18, this flowchart illustrates the sequence of pages and decision points a pa-
tient navigates through in the dashboard interface. Starting from the Login Page, the
patient proceeds to complete assessments, mood surveys, and training exercises. Each
decision point, such as completing an assessment or finishing a training exercise, deter-
mines the subsequent page. This structured flow ensures that required activities, includ-
ing feedback and exercise ratings, are completed before ending the session or advancing
to free-to-play exercises.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.18: Navigation flowchart for the Patient Dashboard
4.6.3.2
Implementation of Adding the Audio
In the Patient Dashboard, the addition of audio functionality is primarily implemented using
a library called “Howler.js.” Below is a simple example code:
1
import { Howl } from "howler";
2
class AudioManager {
3
constructor() {
4
this.sounds = [];
5
}
6
addSound(src) {
7
const sound = new Howl({
8
src: [src],
9
onplay: () => {
10
this.sounds = this.sounds.filter((s) => {
42
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:51==
11
if (s !== sound && s.playing()) {
12
s.stop();
13
s.unload();
14
return false;
15
}
16
return true;
17
});
18
},
19
});
20
this.sounds.push(sound);
21
return sound;
22
}
23
clearSounds() {
24
this.sounds.forEach((s) => {
25
if (s.playing()) {
26
s.stop();
27
}
28
s.unload();
29
});
30
this.sounds = [];
31
}
32
}
33
const audioManager = new AudioManager();
34
const newSound = audioManager.addSound("/path/to/sound.wav");
35
newSound.play();
Listing 4.7: The code snippet of the AudioManager
This code snippet defines an AudioManager class that manages multiple audio instances
using the “Howler.js” library. The AudioManager class includes methods for adding and
managing sounds, ensuring only one sound plays at a time. When a new sound is added
through the addSound method, it stops and unloads any currently playing sounds, prevent-
ing overlap. The clearSounds method stops and unloads all sounds, clearing the sound
list.
On the Patient Dashboard, although the audio functionality has been implemented, it is
limited by the fact that the audio files are hardcoded into the source files. Ideally, the
audio should be generated dynamically based on the patient’s name and gender to create
a personalized avatar audio experience. I attempted to achieve this using a tool called
Resemble.ai[64], which offers a convenient API suited to this purpose. However, due to
its cost, full implementation was not feasible.
4.6.3.3
Integration of the Badminton Game
Integrating with the Badminton Game is actually the most challenging aspect of the entire
Patient Dashboard, and I have had extensive discussions with my main supervisor on
this topic. It can be said that this integration was a joint effort between the two of us.
Additionally, in my view, it also represents the most significant issue within the ReHyb
System. The details of these issues will be discussed in the Discussion chapter; here, I
will first explain its implementation.
To begin with, we utilized a lightweight server built with Electron as the central integra-
tion point—a popular open-source framework that enables cross-platform desktop appli-
cations using web technologies like JavaScript, HTML, and CSS. At its core, Electron
combines the Chromium rendering engine with the Node.js runtime, allowing web-based
applications to run seamlessly in a desktop environment.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.19: Block diagram showing the integration of Patient Dashboard, Badminton
Game, and Exoskeleton Control and their data streams during runtime. (Graph originally
created by Martin Lauer-Schmaltz; Reproduced with permission via personal communi-
cation.)
Since the integration involves the Patient Dashboard and Badminton Game, it naturally
also requires incorporating Exoskeleton Control, as the patient wears the Exoskeleton
during the game, using its sensors to collect relevant data. The development and data
acquisition of the Exoskeleton are not within my scope of work, so I will not elaborate
on these aspects here. However, its role as an essential component in the integration is
clear.
The integrated structure is illustrated in Figure 4.19. While it appears quite complex, the
process can be summarized as follows:
• The system initiates by running main.js, which launches the Patient Dashboard,
Badminton Game, and other modules. Each component has its own WebSocket
(WS) port for message exchange, facilitating inter-module communication.
• The Exoskeleton and EMG sensors collect control and muscle data, which is pro-
cessed through the Exo Control module and sent to other components, such as
44
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:53==
Fatigue Prediction and Compensation Detection, to assess the patient’s condition,
including fatigue levels and compensatory movements.
• WebSocket (WS) messages enable real-time communication, such as start/stop
signals and readiness notifications.
• UDP messages transmit specific data, like feedback from the Exoskeleton, to com-
ponents such as Prediction modules.
• The Patient Dashboard retrieves necessary data from the database before the game
starts to access patient-specific configuration parameters required for the session.
• The Patient Dashboard manages interactions with the Badminton Game, controlling
the game’s start and end states via WS messages.
• The role of MessageHandler.py is to route messages between different system mod-
ules, ensuring real-time data synchronization and log recording.
• Once all relevant log files from the patient’s Badminton Game session are ready,
they are aggregated and sent to the database for further processing.
4.6.3.4
UI Result
Figure 4.20: Front Page
The Front Page(see Figure 4.20) showcases a digital twin-based rehabilitation platform
aimed at enhancing patient engagement and user experience. On the left is an image in-
tended to represent the therapist. While initially planned as an interactive therapist avatar,
this feature has not been fully implemented, highlighting a limitation in the current design.
The avatar’s speech bubble provides instructions to guide the patient, encouraging inde-
pendent use and understanding of core features.
In the center, a real-time patient avatar is displayed, capable of demonstrating movements
based on the patient’s upper-limb range of motion data. This feature offers patients a
clear visualization of their movements, facilitating a better understanding of exercise per-
formance.
On the right, prominent buttons provide easy access to essential functionalities, including
“My Progress” for progress tracking, “Settings” for personalization, and “Logout” to exit
the dashboard. The clear and accessible button layout is designed to enhance usability
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
45
==PAGE:54==
for patients. Notably, the “Settings” page is currently empty, requiring future development
to define its functionalities.
Figure 4.21: Assessment Page
After clicking “Start” on the Front page, if the patient has not yet completed today’s as-
sessment, they are directed to the Assessment page(see Figure 4.21). In a real scenario,
the patient would wear an exoskeleton to perform an elbow flexion/extension assessment,
with the patient’s avatar mirroring the movement. This is accompanied by a semi-circular
gauge displaying the elbow’s angle, allowing the patient to visually monitor their range of
motion in real time. On the right, a toggle indicates the paretic side, allowing the patient to
specify which limb is affected, and a “Next” button enables progression to the subsequent
exercise step.
Figure 4.22: Assessment Feedback Page
Following the range of motion assessment, this page(see Figure 4.22) provides feedback
on the patient’s performance. The virtual therapist prompts the patient to proceed with
their daily mood assessment by selecting “Next” On the right, the “ROM Feedback” panel
46
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:55==
displays key metrics, including the maximum and minimum angles achieved today com-
pared to the last session, allowing the patient to track progress in their range of motion
over time.
Figure 4.23: Mood Survey Page
The Mood Survey page(see Figure 4.23) allows the patient to record their current emo-
tional state as part of the assessment process. The virtual therapist instructs the patient to
select an emoji that best matches their mood and confirm by clicking “Next”. This simple
selection interface provides an intuitive way for patients to communicate their feelings,
adding a subjective measure to complement their physical rehabilitation data.
Figure 4.24: Exercise Page
The Exercise page(see Figure 4.24) displays the exercise selection interface for the day’s
rehabilitation session. The virtual therapist prompts the patient to choose an exercise
to begin. The new Exercise, “Badminton Game,” is shown with its duration and status.
A toggle in the upper right allows the patient to switch between exercise modes, from
today’s prescribed training exercises to free-to-play options. And the “End the session”
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
47
==PAGE:56==
button offers an option to conclude the training. This layout supports flexibility in exercise
choice, allowing patients to navigate their rehabilitation activities independently.
If the patients click “End the Session” while there are unfinished exercises on the Exercise
page, they will be directed to the Skip Reason page. Similarly, if they exit before com-
pleting an exercise, they will be directed to the Abort Reason page. These two are very
similar; here, I only present one of them(see Figure 4.25). On Skip Reason page, the vir-
tual therapist prompts the patient to indicate their choice, with options including “I am not
feeling well today,” “I don’t have enough time,” “I don’t like some exercises,” and “other.” If
”other” is selected, the patient can manually enter their reason. This feature helps capture
relevant feedback on patient adherence and barriers to completing exercises, supporting
a personalized approach to rehabilitation.
Figure 4.25: Skip Reason Page
After completing the game, the Exercise Rating page(see Figure 4.26) appears, prompt-
ing the patient to rate their experience with the “Badminton Game.” The virtual therapist
encourages the patient to select either the thumbs-up or thumbs-down icon to indicate
whether they liked or disliked the exercise. This feedback helps customize future rehabil-
itation activities based on patient preferences, for example, the recommended exercises
in the Therapist Dashboard.
48
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.26: Exercise Rating Page
Upon completing the exercise session, the Exercise Result page(see Figure 4.27) dis-
plays the patient’s performance in all exercises they attempted. The virtual therapist in-
structs the patient to review their score and click “Finish” to return to the main page. The
score section shows “Unfinished” if the session was incomplete, along with the patient’s
best score achieved so far. This summary provides feedback on progress, encouraging
the patient to strive for improvement in future sessions.
Figure 4.27: Exercise Result Page
4.7
Development of Third-Party Dashboard
4.7.1
Task Identification
For the third-party dashboard, although it ranks second in complexity among the three
dashboards, the fact that it does not require integration with the Badminton Game means
that the identified tasks are actually simpler than those in the Patient Dashboard. The
main tasks include the following:
1. Adjust the layout issues on various pages.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
49
==PAGE:58==
2. Replace the placeholder images for displaying the range of motion of each avatar
body part with a dynamic avatar.
3. Complete the single exercise overview page by replacing the placeholder image of
the avatar’s video with an actual dynamic video.
4. Finalize the reward points page and avatar accessorization.
5. Complete the integration with the backend.
4.7.2
Code Contribution
Similar to the Patient Dashboard, since the overall complexity of the Third-Party Dash-
board is quite lower than that of the Therapist Dashboard, I chose to rewrite portions of
the functionalities for the identified tasks rather than spending extensive time analyzing
others’ code, which allowed for easier tracking of my own contributions. Additionally, due
to the relative simplicity of the tasks, my code contribution for this dashboard is approxi-
mately 1,300 lines.
4.7.3
Implementation and Result
Regarding the implementation of this dashboard, it is worth elaborating the fourth identi-
fied task, as the remaining tasks are largely similar to those on the first two dashboards.
4.7.3.1
Implementation of the reward points and avatar accessorization
Upon attempting training exercises on the Patient Dashboard, patients are awarded re-
ward points on the Third-Party Dashboard, which caregivers can then use to modify the
patient’s avatar’s appearance as a form of incentive.
Based on the completion status of each exercise, a “Finished” status awards 10 points,
“Unfinished” awards 5 points, and “Skipped” awards 0 points(see Figure 4.28).
Figure 4.28: Reward points of different completion status
The customization of the avatar’s appearance is primarily achieved through Three.js’s
SkinnedMesh feature. SkinnedMesh is a specialized mesh type that allows a skeletal struc-
ture to be attached to a 3D model, enabling dynamic transformations in the model’s shape
and position through an animation system. The core functionality of SkinnedMesh lies in
the binding of skeletons to mesh geometry, allowing the model to deform naturally with
skeletal movements.
In the follwoing simplified example(see List 4.8), the accessoryType controls which shoe
type is displayed. When accessoryType is 0, the code uses nodes.avaturn_shoes_0.geometry
and materials.avaturn_shoes_0_material for the first shoe type. Otherwise, it switches
to nodes2.avaturn_shoes_0.geometry and materials2.avaturn_shoes_0_material for
the second shoe type. This example demonstrates the essential principle of accessory
switching in a SkinnedMesh.
50
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:59==
1
import { useGLTF } from "@react -three/drei";
2
import { useRef } from "react";
3
import * as THREE from "three";
4
5
export const DemoAvatar = ({ accessoryType = 0 }) => {
6
const group = useRef();
7
const { nodes, materials } = useGLTF("/model.glb");
8
const { nodes: nodes2 , materials: materials2 } = useGLTF("/model2.glb");
9
10
return (
11
<group ref={group} dispose={null} scale={[1, 1, 1]}>
12
<skinnedMesh
13
geometry={
14
accessoryType === 0
15
? nodes.avaturn_shoes_0.geometry
16
: nodes2.avaturn_shoes_0.geometry
17
}
18
material={
19
accessoryType === 0
20
? materials.avaturn_shoes_0_material
21
: materials2.avaturn_shoes_0_material
22
}
23
skeleton={nodes.avaturn_shoes_0.skeleton}
24
/>
25
</group>
26
);
27
};
Listing 4.8: Simplified example of switching the SkinnedMesh
Essentially, this approach involves switching appearances between two avatar model files
that have distinct looks but share the same skeletal structure. In other words, the avatar
model files are hardcoded. This does not align with the ideal requirements of this task,
which would ideally involve implementing a fully customizable UI using the web SDK pro-
vided by the avatar source site, Avaturn[48]. However, due to the cost associated with
using the web SDK, this implementation was ultimately not pursued.
4.7.3.2
UI Results
The Figure 4.29 illustrates the Front page of the Third-Party Dashboard:
• User and Patient Selection: The top left displays caregiver information and a drop-
down menu to select patients, allowing for easy navigation between cases.
• Navigation Panel: The sidebar includes options for viewing patient Progress, Exercises,
Calendar, Messages, and Settings, organized to streamline access to core func-
tionalities.
• Patient Avatar and Progress Indicators: The central area features a 3D avatar
of the selected patient, alongside a progress bar showing therapy progress. This
visual feedback supports real-time monitoring of patient adherence, which is sim-
ilar to the Patient Current Condition feature on the Therapist Dashboard, only
simpler(see Figure 4.13). Additionally, a counter displays the specific number of
exercises completed by the patient for the current day, fostering an actionable un-
derstanding of daily activity.
• Session History and Log Out: At the bottom, the last completed session date and
the next planned session are displayed, helping caregivers track session timelines.
A log-out button ensures secure access management.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.29: Front Page
When navigating to the Progress page(see Figure 4.30), the dashboard initially displays
metrics under the Physical tab focused on the patient’s elbow rehabilitation. The main
metrics include:
Figure 4.30: Progress Page of Physical Tab
• Range of Motion: This dynamic metric visualizes the degree to which the patient
can flex and extend the elbow, initially displaying the range at the start of therapy
(e.g., 55° - 95°). Caregivers can adjust the timeline slider below to view changes
in the range over time, allowing them to track flexibility improvements as therapy
progresses.
• Muscle Strength: This metric assesses the patient’s ability to lift and rotate the arm,
rated on a scale from 1 to 5. A higher score indicates greater lifting capability, with
progress shown relative to the starting level of therapy.
• Fatigue Level: Fatigue is measured to indicate how quickly the patient experiences
muscle weakness or discomfort during activity. Lower scores reflect quicker onset
of fatigue, with comparisons to previous sessions helping to track endurance gains.
52
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.31: Range of Motion of Shoulder
When switching to the Shoulder tab(see Figure 4.32) within the Progress page, the
dashboard primarily updates the Range of Motion section to reflect metrics specific to
the shoulder, including horizontal flexion/extension, vertical flexion/extension, and exter-
nal/internal rotation, while other sections remain consistent with the elbow metrics de-
scribed earlier.
Figure 4.32: Progress Page of Cognitive Tab
Similarly, Caregivers can also switch to the Cognitive tab(see Figure 4.32); however, due
to the lack of a real data source, the data here is hardcoded.
Upon clicking the Exercises button from the navigation panel, the dashboard directs care-
givers to the Exercises page(see Figure 4.33). This page displays a series of training
exercises assigned to the patient in chronological order. Each exercise, represented vi-
sually (e.g., Badminton Game), includes the completion date and the respective status—
Finished, Unfinished, or Skipped. A corresponding point system rewards patients based
on their completion status. These points serve as motivational incentives, allowing pa-
tients to earn rewards for consistent engagement. Caregivers can access the patient’s
reward points by clicking on the option at the top right, which leads them to the Reward
Points page.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.33: Exercises Page
When selecting a specific exercise, caregivers are navigated to the Exercise Overview
Page, where detailed information about the exercise is provided. This includes the Exercise
Description, Performance, and a video showcasing the patient’s upper limb movements
throughout the exercise.
Figure 4.34: Exercise Overview Page
If caregivers navigate from the Exercises Page to the Reward Points Page(see Figure
4.35), they can use the reward points earned from completed exercises to modify the
patient’s avatar appearance(see Figure 4.36).
54
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.35: Reward Points Page
Figure 4.36: New Avatar Appearance
Regarding Messages and Setting pages, they were placeholder images when I took over
and were not included in the scope of identified tasks, thus they are not presented here. In
general, the Third-Party Dashboard can be viewed as a simplified version of the Therapist
Dashboard, with similar corresponding features found in the Therapist Dashboard, except
for the reward points functionality.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
55
==PAGE:64==
5
Performance Evaluation
5.1
Frontend
In frontend projects, particularly those developed with React, a common concern involves
the potential performance impact of generating web pages via JavaScript rather than di-
rectly serving HTML. This approach can result in slower performance, as the browser must
first load and execute the JavaScript to render the HTML and CSS, introducing additional
latency. To maintain an optimal user experience, performance evaluation becomes es-
sential. One effective method for assessing website performance is through Google’s
Lighthouse tool, which simulates page loading, conducts multifaceted analyses, and pro-
vides scores across dimensions such as Performance, Accessibility, Best Practices, and
Search Engine Optimization.
The first two dimensions, Performance and Accessibility, are relatively self-explanatory
by their names. In contrast, Best Practices focuses primarily on evaluating code quality,
security measures, and overall adherence to industry standards that enhance reliability
and maintainability. SEO centers on assessing how well the website’s content and struc-
ture are optimized to improve visibility in search engine results, ensuring that users can
easily find and access the site.
Except for Performance, the other three categories—Accessibility, Best Practices, and
SEO—are more relevant to production environments. Since the Rehyb system is still in
the prototype stage, my focus is solely on Performance.
The performance score in Lighthouse is calculated directly from these metrics:
1. First Contentful Paint: The time at which the first text or image is painted
2. Largest Contentful Paint: Time at which the largest text or image is painted
3. Total Blocking Time: Sum of all time periods between FCP and time it takes for the
page to become fully interactive
4. Cumulative Layout Shift: Measure the movement of visible elements within the view-
port
5. Speed Index: Show how quickly the contents of a page are visibly populated
5.1.1
Therapist Dashboard
Page
Score
Login
73
Home
71
List of Patients
69
List of Exercises
71
Patient’s Overview
67
Patient’s Data
67
Exercise Plan
64
Average
69
Table 5.1: Page Scores of Therapist Dashboard
56
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.1: Performance Results of Therapist Dashboard
Based on the Lighthouse report analysis, the main direct reasons why the Therapist Dash-
board scores around 70 and has not achieved a higher rating can be summarized as
follows:
• Poor Loading Performance: According to the report, both the “First Contentful
Paint” and “Largest Contentful Paint” times are relatively long, generally ranging
from 2.4 to 3.3 seconds. This indicates delays in content display, likely due to large
images, JavaScript, or CSS load times.
• Lack of Image and Resource Optimization: The Lighthouse report shows that
page loading speed is hindered, possibly because image files aren’t compressed,
the number of resource requests is high, or file sizes are large.
• Long First Meaningful Paint: The time for the first meaningful content to appear
on the page typically exceeds 2.5 seconds.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
57
==PAGE:66==
5.1.2
Patient Dashboard
Page
Score
Front
73
Assessment
84
Assessment Feedback
100
Mood Survey
100
Exercise
100
Skip Reason
100
Exercise Rating
100
Exercise Result
100
Average
95
Table 5.2: Page Scores of Patient Dashboard
Figure 5.2: Performance Results of Patient Dashboard
Based on the Lighthouse report analysis, the main direct reasons the Patient Dashboard
generally scores higher in performance can be summarized as follows:
• Fast Loading Times: The patient dashboard has excellent scores in “First Content-
ful Paint” and “Largest Contentful Paint,” with most pages loading the first content
in under 0.3 seconds and the largest content within 0.5 seconds.
• Optimized Resource Usage: Resources such as images and scripts are optimized
for the patient dashboard, which minimizes load times and improves interactivity.
• Simplified Design: The layout and interactions in the patient dashboard are more
straightforward, with fewer complex animations or heavy data operations, which
58
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:67==
helps reduce loading and processing demands.
5.1.3
Third-Party Dashboard
Page
Score
Front
65
Progress
65
Exercises
76
Exercise Overview
65
Reward Points
94
Average
73
Table 5.3: Page Scores of Third-Party Dashboard
Figure 5.3: Performance Results of Third-Party Dashboard
Based on the Lighthouse report analysis, the main direct reasons the Third-Party Dash-
board generally scores around 70 in performance can be summarized as follows:
• Extended Loading Times: The Third-Party Dashboard has relatively high loading
times for “First Contentful Paint” and “Largest Contentful Paint.” Key metrics reveal
that several pages take around 1.9 seconds or longer for the initial content to appear
and over 4 seconds for the largest content.
• Complex Interactivity: Pages with interactive elements, such as the Exercise
Overview page, include numerous JavaScript functions and resource-heavy ele-
ments, increasing processing time.
• Insufficient Resource Optimization: Like the Therapist Dashboard, some images
and scripts are large or non-compressed, leading to prolonged load times.
5.2
Backend Server
As previously mentioned, my work on the backend server focused primarily on adding,
deleting, and modifying endpoints, as well as introducing routing files for the ThirdParty
Dashboard and PatientDashboard, and enhancing JWT authentication functionality. I did
not reimplement the server at a foundational level, nor did I make any changes to im-
prove performance. Additionally, since backend server performance is highly hardware-
dependent, and Alparslan[6] has already conducted concurrency testing on a personal
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
59
==PAGE:68==
laptop for this server, no further experiments are conducted here, as the results would not
yield new insights.
60
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:69==
6
Discussion
Research Question 1
How can the resulting system be objectively tested with regard to performance?
To objectively evaluate the frontend performance of the resulting system, I utilized Google’s
Lighthouse tool, which is designed to provide comprehensive performance metrics across
critical aspects of web applications. The tool’s analysis focuses on multiple dimensions
that directly impact system interaction, offering a standardized way to assess the effi-
ciency and responsiveness of the dashboards. By using Lighthouse, I measured five
primary metrics that collectively provide a holistic view of the dashboards performance.
1. First Contentful Paint (FCP): This measures how quickly something first appears
on the page. A faster FCP means users don’t have to wait long to start seeing
content, which is important for engagement. If FCP was slow, it showed that certain
parts of the page could be optimized to load faster.
2. Largest Contentful Paint (LCP): This tells us when the main part of the page (like
images or big blocks of text) is fully visible. Quick LCP times make the page feel
faster to load. When LCP was delayed, it suggested ways to improve loading for
these key parts.
3. Total Blocking Time (TBT): TBT shows the time during which the system was
unresponsive to user actions. Lower TBT is better because it means the system
can quickly react to user clicks or scrolls. High TBT scores indicated areas where
JavaScript could be reduced or streamlined for faster response.
4. Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS): CLS evaluates whether the layout shifts unex-
pectedly during loading, which can disrupt the user’s experience. Reducing CLS
improves the visual stability of the page as it loads, leading to a smoother and more
reliable interaction.
5. Speed Index: This metric indicates how quickly content loads and becomes visible
to users. A lower Speed Index creates a faster feel for the page. When the score
was high, optimization focused on speeding up the loading process by adjusting
resource sizes and loading order.
These metrics together help provide a clear view of the resulting system’s frontend per-
formance and areas for improvement.
To address how the backend server of the resulting system can be objectively tested for
performance, I can draw insights from Alparslan’s[6] testing methodology. Although I did
not perform these tests myself, his approach offers a clear, systematic way to evaluate
backend performance in a way that could be replicated or adapted for future testing.
1. Concurrency Testing: This helped measure how the server handles different levels
of user requests. By gradually increasing the number of concurrent users, it became
clear at which point the server started slowing down, showing delays or errors, which
helped identify the server’s concurrency limits.
2. Latency and Error Rates: Key metrics like average response time (latency) and
error rates were tracked to see how the server performs under load. Higher latency
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
61
==PAGE:70==
or more errors suggested areas that may need optimization to handle real-world
user traffic.
3. Scalability Analysis: Alparslan tested the server on different hardware setups to
see how performance scaled with more powerful CPUs. This showed how the server
could handle more load if deployed on better infrastructure, which is helpful when
considering cloud deployment options.
4. Performance Benchmarks: Setting clear targets, like maximum response times
and acceptable error levels, allows for an objective way to check if the server meets
performance standards. By comparing test results with these benchmarks, we can
see if the server is ready for production.
Research Question 2
What are the key bottlenecks in the resulting system and how could they be im-
proved in the future?
From my perspective, the key bottlenecks in the resulting system can be summarized as
follows:
Firstly, the backend structure lacks sufficient layering detail. As shown in Figure 4.2, while
some structural refinements like CORS validation and user authentication have been im-
plemented, the service layer (business logic) and data layer (database access) remain in-
tertwined. This lack of separation can lead to maintainability challenges, making it harder
to modify or update individual components. It also limits scalability, as it becomes difficult
to optimize specific parts of the system independently. Additionally, testing and security
are impacted, as mixing business logic with data access complicates isolated testing and
may expose sensitive data handling processes.
Secondly, the design for integrating the Patient Dashboard and Badminton game is flawed
(see Figure 4.19). Using an Electron server to launch the integrated modules (including
the Patient Dashboard) and then sending data to the database through it is impractical. In
a real-world scenario, the Patient Dashboard should initiate the game, allowing the game
to upload data to the database in real-time while the patient is playing. It is inefficient and
unrealistic for the Electron server to handle data transmission to the database only after
the game is completed.
Thirdly, as I’ve repeatedly mentioned, the inconsistency in the technology stacks across
different dashboards will create significant challenges for future developers. This incon-
sistency complicates code maintenance and integration, as each dashboard may require
different libraries, frameworks, and configurations. It also increases the learning curve, as
new developers need to familiarize themselves with multiple tech stacks to work across
the system effectively. Additionally, this lack of uniformity can lead to compatibility issues
and make debugging more time-consuming, ultimately slowing down development and
risking potential errors during updates or feature expansions.
For the first issue, the solution would naturally be to redesign the backend structure, sep-
arating business logic from database access. As for the second issue, the best solution
at this time would be to find a way to implement games like the Badminton Game directly
within the web application. Unfortunately, after discussing this with my main supervisor,
we determined that implementing this solution would be challenging and would require a
significant time investment from future developers. Regarding the third issue, it is closely
related to Research Question 3 and will be addressed within that context.
62
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:71==
Research Question 3
How should a project successor handle the inconsistency in the tech stack between
different subsystems within a complete full-stack development project, caused by
the varying skills and preferences of previous developers?
From the perspective of a project successor, handling a project with inconsistent tech
stacks begins with a thorough system assessment to understand each subsystem’s tech-
nology choices and the rationale behind them. This involves analyzing each subsystem’s
architecture, dependencies, integration methods, and historical context, which allows the
successor to determine which parts can remain as they are and which require adjustments
or refactoring for better compatibility and cohesion within the system.
After the initial assessment, the project successor can focus on standardizing interfaces
and implementing modular design principles to enhance interoperability among different
subsystems. Even with varied tech stacks, standardized APIs and communication proto-
cols ensure that the subsystems interact seamlessly. By defining common data formats
and interface protocols, the successor can minimize friction between technologies. For
sections with significant incompatibilities, introducing middleware to manage data flow and
protocol bridging can provide smooth system-wide interactions without extensive refac-
toring of each subsystem.
Finding a balance between technology stack uniformity and diversity is another essential
challenge. If some subsystems depend on outdated or difficult-to-maintain technologies,
the successor could consider gradually transitioning them to align with the primary tech
stack. However, if this diversity does not pose substantial issues for performance or main-
tainability, retaining it may be a viable choice—provided that compatibility is maintained.
To support long-term maintainability, the successor should focus on creating thorough
documentation and clear coding standards, encouraging team members to follow these
guidelines. Detailed documentation of each module’s structure, functions, and interfaces
will make future maintenance and updates easier. Regular code reviews can also help
keep the development style consistent across the team, reducing issues that may arise
from a varied tech stack. These practices will help the system stay stable in the short term
and build a strong foundation for future improvements and scalability.
However, implementing these strategies demands a considerable amount of time and re-
sources, which may not be realistic within the constraints of a student project, highlighting
a challenge that is difficult to fully resolve in this context.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
63
==PAGE:72==
7
Conclusion
This thesis advances the application of Human Digital Twin (HDT) technology in stroke
rehabilitation by creating a cohesive, full-stack prototype that integrates several previ-
ously isolated components. Through the development and refinement of dashboards for
therapists, patients, and third-party stakeholders, as well as a central backend server
and database, this work offers a unified, functional system. The project addressed chal-
lenges arising from technology stack inconsistencies, incomplete integration efforts, and
outdated or incompatible data structures, establishing a foundational system to support
HDT-driven personalized rehabilitation.
The primary contributions of this project are threefold: implementing new API endpoints
for improved data flow between components, bridging gaps between varied technology
choices, and enhancing interactivity across dashboards. The Agile methodology, specif-
ically Scrum, enabled iterative refinement and continuous feedback, proving vital in tack-
ling unforeseen issues, particularly in synchronizing frontend-backend communication
and optimizing system performance.
Nevertheless, the project has some limitations. Foremost, performance bottlenecks were
identified in data retrieval speeds and system responsiveness, especially under heavy
simulated loads. Additionally, the current prototype’s modular inconsistencies, stemming
from the varied technology stacks used across components, introduce integration chal-
lenges that may impede future scalability and adaptability. Addressing these bottlenecks
may require re-evaluation of the current backend configuration and data handling prac-
tices.
To extend this work, future developers could focus on optimizing the database and back-
end architecture to accommodate larger datasets and higher user loads without compro-
mising performance. Further, implementing a unified tech stack across all modules could
simplify integration, improve code maintainability, and reduce learning overhead for new
developers.
In conclusion, this thesis not only advances the practical integration of HDT in stroke
rehabilitation but also provides a structured foundation that future developers can build
upon, ultimately contributing to a more seamless, responsive, and scalable rehabilitation
system for stroke patients and therapists alike.
64
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About Stroke. Accessed: 2024-10-24.
Oct. 2024. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/stroke/about/index.html.
[2]
Mayo Clinic Staff. Stroke rehabilitation: What to expect as you recover. 2024. URL:
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/stroke/in-depth/stroke-rehabilitation/
art-20045172.
[3]
Angie Pino, Marcela Múnera, and Carlos A. Cifuentes. “Serious Games in Robot-
Assisted Rehabilitation Therapy for Neurological Patients”. In: Interfacing Humans
and Robots for Gait Assistance and Rehabilitation. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2022, pp. 309–329. ISBN: 978-3-030-79630-3. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3-
030-79630-3_12. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79630-3_12.
[4]
Lauer-Schmaltz M. W. et al. “Designing Human Digital Twins for Behaviour-Changing
Therapy and Rehabilitation: A Systematic Review”. In: Proceedings of the Design
Society 2 (2022), pp. 1303–1312. DOI: 10.1017/pds.2022.132.
[5]
ABOUT THE REHYB PROJECT. 2024. URL: https://rehyb.eu/.
[6]
Alparslan Barbaros Ari. Full-Stack Development for a Human Digital Twin-based
stroke rehabilitation system. Technical University of Denmark. 2024. URL: https:
//findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/6615d8c75107471a24ecec64.
[7]
GBD 2019 Stroke Collaborators. “Global, regional, and national burden of stroke
and its risk factors, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of
Disease Study 2019”. In: The Lancet Neurology 20.10 (2021), pp. 795–820. DOI:
10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00252-0. URL: https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laneur/
article/PIIS1474-4422(21)00252-0/fulltext.
[8]
Christian Grefkes and Gereon R. Fink. “Recovery from stroke: current concepts
and future perspectives”. In: Neurological Research and Practice 2.1 (2020), p. 17.
ISSN: 2524-3489. DOI: 10.1186/s42466-020-00060-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s42466-020-00060-6.
[9]
L. Brewer et al. “Stroke rehabilitation: recent advances and future therapies”. In:
QJM: An International Journal of Medicine 106.1 (2013), pp. 11–25. ISSN: 1460-
2725. DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcs174. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/qjmed/hcs174.
[10]
Barbara Rita Barricelli, Elena Casiraghi, and Daniela Fogli. “A Survey on Digital
Twin: Definitions, Characteristics, Applications, and Design Implications”. In: IEEE
Access 7 (2019), pp. 167653–167671. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2953499.
[11]
Aidan Fuller et al. “Digital Twin: Enabling Technologies, Challenges and Open Re-
search”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 108952–108971. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2020.2998358.
[12]
Martin Wolfgang Lauer-Schmaltz et al. Towards the Human Digital Twin: Definition
and Design – A survey. 2024. arXiv: 2402.07922 [cs.HC]. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2402.07922.
[13]
Yuping Liu, Kai Zhang, and Zhiheng Li. “Application of Digital Twin and Parallel
System in Automated Driving Testing”. In: 2021 IEEE 1st International Conference
on Digital Twins and Parallel Intelligence (DTPI). 2021, pp. 123–126. DOI: 10.1109/
DTPI52967.2021.9540143.
[14]
Alessandro Greco et al. “Digital Twin for Monitoring Ergonomics during Manufac-
turing Production”. In: Applied Sciences 10.21 (2020). ISSN: 2076-3417. DOI: 10.
3390/app10217758. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/10/21/7758.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
65
==PAGE:74==
[15]
Alessandra De Benedictis et al. “Digital Twins in Healthcare: An Architectural Pro-
posal and Its Application in a Social Distancing Case Study”. In: IEEE Journal of
Biomedical and Health Informatics 27.10 (2023), pp. 5143–5154. DOI: 10.1109/
JBHI.2022.3205506.
[16]
Barbara Rita Barricelli et al. “Human Digital Twin for Fitness Management”. In: IEEE
Access 8 (2020), pp. 26637–26664. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2971576.
[17]
Yo-Ping Huang et al. “Monitoring and Assessment of Rehabilitation Progress on
Range of Motion After Total Knee Replacement by Sensor-Based System”. In: Sen-
sors 20.6 (2020), p. 1703. ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10.3390/s20061703. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/6/1703.
[18]
Yilun Chen et al. “Digital-Twin-Based Patient Evaluation during Stroke Rehabilita-
tion”. In: Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 14th International Conference on Cyber-
Physical Systems (with CPS-IoT Week 2023). ICCPS ’23. San Antonio, TX, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, pp. 22–33. ISBN: 9798400700361.
DOI: 10.1145/3576841.3585923. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3576841.3585923.
[19]
Marko Katrašnik. “What is a Tech Stack, and How to Choose the Best One?” In:
BioSistemika Blog (Aug. 2023). URL: https://biosistemika.com/blog/what-is-a-tech-
stack/.
[20]
Judy L. Wynekoop and Diane B. Walz. “Investigating traits of top performing soft-
ware developers”. In: Information Technology People 13.3 (2000), pp. 186–195.
DOI: 10.1108/09593840010377626. URL: https://doi.org/10.1108/09593840010377626.
[21]
Julia Mitsiakina. Importance of Front-End Development for Business Success. XB
Software Blog. Dec. 2022. URL: https : / / xbsoftware . com / blog / importance - of -
frontend-for-business-success/.
[22]
Introduction to HTML. MDN Web Docs. Mar. 2024. URL: https://developer.mozilla.
org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML.
[23]
Flavio Copes. The CSS Handbook: A Handy Guide to CSS for Developers. Apr.
2019. URL: https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-css-handbook-a-handy-guide-
to-css-for-developers-b56695917d11/.
[24]
CSS: Cascading Style Sheets. MDN Web Docs. 2024. URL: https://developer.
mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS.
[25]
MDN Web Docs Contributors. JavaScript. July 2024. URL: https://developer.mozilla.
org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript.
[26]
Flavio Copes. The Complete JavaScript Handbook. Mar. 2020. URL: https://www.
freecodecamp.org/news/the-complete-javascript-handbook-f26b2c71719c/.
[27]
Mohit Thakkar. “Introducing React.js”. In: Building React Apps with Server-Side
Rendering: Use React, Redux, and Next to Build Full Server-Side Rendering Ap-
plications. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2020, pp. 41–91. ISBN: 978-1-4842-5869-9. DOI:
10.1007/978-1-4842-5869-9_2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-5869-9_2.
[28]
Pratik Sharad Maratkar and Pratibha Adkar. “React JS - An Emerging Frontend
JavaScript Library”. In: Iconic Research And Engineering Journals 4.12 (June 2021),
pp. 99–102. ISSN: 2456-8880. DOI: 10.29121/irej.v4.i12.2021.1702778. URL: https:
//www.irejournals.com/paper-details/1702778.
[29]
Harshil Agrawal and David Fateh. What is TypeScript and Why Should You Use
It? Contentful Blog. Mar. 2024. URL: https://www.contentful.com/blog/what-is-
typescript-and-why-should-you-use-it/.
[30]
Why Vite | Vite. 2023. URL: https://vitejs.dev/guide/why.
[31]
Codemotion. ViteJS: A Modern and Powerful Frontend Optimization Tool. Aug. 2023.
URL: https://www.codemotion.com/magazine/frontend/web-developer/vitejs-guide/.
66
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:75==
[32]
Documentation for Tailwind CSS v2.0. Tailwind CSS. 2021. URL: https://v2.tailwindcss.
com/docs.
[33]
Material Tailwind. 7 Reasons Why You Should Use Tailwind CSS Right Now. June
2023. URL: https://www.material-tailwind.com/blog/7-reasons-why-you-should-use-
tailwind-css.
[34]
Alex Libby. Practical Next.js for E-Commerce: Create E-Commerce Sites with the
Next.js Framework. 1st ed. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2023. ISBN: 978-1-4842-9612-7.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4842-9612-7. URL: https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-
1-4842-9612-7.
[35]
GUVI. Backend Development: Roles, Responsibilities, Skills, and Salary - A Com-
plete Guide. July 2024. URL: https : / / www . guvi . in / blog / guide - on - backend -
development/.
[36]
Ioannis K. Chaniotis, Kyriakos-Ioannis D. Kyriakou, and Nikolaos D. Tselikas. “Is
Node.js a viable option for building modern web applications? A performance eval-
uation study”. In: Computing 97.10 (2015), pp. 1023–1044. DOI: 10.1007/s00607-
014-0394-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00607-014-0394-9.
[37]
Yasoob Khalid. What are the 6 characteristics of a REST API? ScrapingBee Blog.
Jan. 2023. URL: https://www.scrapingbee.com/blog/six-characteristics-of-rest-api/.
[38]
MuleSoft. Top 3 Benefits of REST APIs. Accessed: 2024-07-08. July 2024. URL:
https://www.mulesoft.com/resources/api/top-3-benefits-of-rest-apis.
[39]
Festim Halili and Erenis Ramadani. “Web Services: A Comparison of Soap and Rest
Services”. In: Modern Applied Science 12 (Feb. 2018), p. 175. DOI: 10.5539/mas.
v12n3p175.
[40]
Martin Johansson and Olivos Isabella. “Comparative Study of REST and gRPC
for Microservices in Established Software Architectures”. Accessed: 2024-07-08.
Bachelor’s thesis. Linköping University, Department of Computer and Information
Science, 2023. URL: https://www.diva- portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2:
1772587.
[41]
Gbadebo Bello. GraphQL vs. REST. Postman Blog. Dec. 2023. URL: https://blog.
postman.com/graphql-vs-rest/.
[42]
Besant Technologies. What is Express.js? Why should you use Express.js? Ac-
cessed: 2024-07-08. 2024. URL: https://www.besanttechnologies.com/what- is-
expressjs.
[43]
Michael B. Jones, John Bradley, and Nat Sakimura. JSON Web Token (JWT). Re-
quest for Comments 7519. Accessed: 2024-07-11. May 2015. URL: https://www.
rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7519.
[44]
Massimo Nardone and Carlo Scarioni. “JSON Web Token (JWT) Authentication”. In:
Pro Spring Security. Apress, Berkeley, CA, 2023, pp. 239–279. DOI: 10.1007/979-
8-8688-0035-1_9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-0035-1_9.
[45]
Amparo Daniela Díaz Erazo et al. “Comparative Analysis of performance for SQL
and NoSQL Databases”. In: 2022 17th Iberian Conference on Information Sys-
tems and Technologies (CISTI). 2022, pp. 1–14. DOI: 10.23919/CISTI54924.2022.
9820292.
[46]
Kosovare Sahatqija et al. “Comparison between relational and NOSQL databases”.
In: 2018 41st International Convention on Information and Communication Technol-
ogy, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO) (2018), pp. 0216–0221. URL: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:49556981.
[47]
Introduction to MongoDB. MongoDB, Inc. Oct. 2024. URL: https://www.mongodb.
com/docs/manual/introduction/.
[48]
Avaturn. Avaturn | Realistic 3D avatar creator. 2024. URL: https://avaturn.me/.
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
67
==PAGE:76==
[49]
Introduction to React Three Fiber. React Three Fiber Documentation. July 2023.
URL: https://docs.pmnd.rs/react-three-fiber/getting-started/introduction.
[50]
Jing Zhang. Design of interactive dashboards for therapists and patients with re-
spect to optimal user experience during rehabilitation. Technical University of Den-
mark. 2022. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/62f59a4471b2f903a4f71342.
[51]
Marco Puteo. Analysis of the interaction behavior and evaluation of the dashboard
interface of the Re-Hyb novel rehabilitation system for stroke patients and thera-
pists. Technical University of Denmark. 2023. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
64068ecc153d773c966605e2.
[52]
Benedek Földvári. Implementation of interactive dashboards for therapists and pa-
tients with respect to optimal user experience in digital twin-based stroke therapy.
Technical University of Denmark. 2022. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
62f59a46e8bcde03a4f5a479.
[53]
Gábor Máté Gulyás. Implementation of interactive progress- and performance mon-
itoring web dashboard for digital twin-based stroke therapy. Technical University of
Denmark. 2023. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/63ed825bf453ae91f772f8ce.
[54]
Petr Kubes. Implementation of dashboards for rehabilitation systems. Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark. 2023. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/64ea942e05fd4f2052cb3967.
[55]
Zhengfu Shu. Design and implementation of adaptable patient dashboard for Rehyb
Project. Accessed: 2024-11-07. May 2023. URL: https://drive.google.com/drive/
folders/1eeR17nsyoSy0GIPyMHDZKEyxTTXXXnHf.
[56]
Weijun Huang. Design and Implementation of a NoSQL Database for a Human
Digital Twin-based stroke rehabilitation system. Technical University of Denmark.
2023. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/64d9711bde6b8620526ba692.
[57]
Martin Wolfgang Lauer-Schmaltz, John Hansen, and Kathrin Kirchner. ““Beat me
if I can!” – A Case Study on Human Digital Twin-based Opponents in Rehabilita-
tion Gaming”. In: Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on PErvasive
Technologies Related to Assistive Environments. PETRA ’24. Crete, Greece: Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, 2024, pp. 277–284. ISBN: 9798400717604. DOI:
10.1145/3652037.3652063. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3652037.3652063.
[58]
John W. Thomas. “A Review of Research on Project-Based Learning”. In: (Mar.
2000). URL: https://www.pblworks.org/sites/default/files/2019-01/A_Review_of_
Research_on_Project_Based_Learning.pdf.
[59]
Tuhin Bhatt. 5 Most Popular Software Development Models In 2024. Intelivita Blog.
Jan. 2024. URL: https://www.intelivita.com/blog/popular-software-development-
models/.
[60]
Kent Beck et al. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. 2001. URL: https://
agilemanifesto.org.
[61]
W. W. Royce. “Managing the development of large software systems: concepts and
techniques”. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Software Engi-
neering. ICSE ’87. Monterey, California, USA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1987,
pp. 328–338. ISBN: 0897912160.
[62]
Ken Schwaber and Jeff Sutherland. The Scrum Guide. 2020. URL: https://scrumguides.
org/scrum-guide.html.
[63]
Tokay Korkut. Excelling in Software Development with Scrum Methodology Part 2.
Stackademic Blog. Aug. 2023. URL: https://blog.stackademic.com/excelling- in-
software-development-with-scrum-methodology-part-2-e2d0b29437ce.
[64]
Resemble AI. AI Voice Generator with Text to Speech and Speech to Speech. 2024.
URL: https://www.resemble.ai/.
68
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
==PAGE:77==
Advancing Human Digital Twin Technology for Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation as a Successor
Full-Stack Developer
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
