==PAGE:1==
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Allison Tammy Busa
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build-
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Compute, at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and machine
learning.
Allison Tammy Busa - s220284
Signature
Date
ii
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Time series analysis is crucial to fields across many disciplines. Treating time series
predictions probabilistically adds additional, valuable insight, whereas exploiting correla-
tions between multiple concurrent time series allows for richer and most robust predic-
tions. In this thesis, we proposed two novel probabilistic models for correlated signals:
Time-Dependent Normalizing Flows (TDNF) and Flow-Transformed Gaussian Processes
(FTGP). While the former was incapable of learning latent behavior, the latter is, albeit
unstably. We investigate the nature of how they are working and what influences their
behavior through a series of posed experiments.
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Allison Tammy Busa, MSc Mathematical Modelling, DTU
Thank you to Kristoffer Stensbo-Smidt for your help and guidance throughout the project.
Thank you to my partner Aiden for your support and care.
iv
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Autoregressive Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Traditional Machine Learning and Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Gaussian Processes and Multi-Output Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Normalizing Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theoretical Background
5
3.1
Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Normalizing Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Presentation of Time-Dependent Normalizing Flows
11
4.1
Benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Potential Downsides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Presentation of Flow-Transforming Gaussian Processes
13
5.1
Deriving the FTGP Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2
Algorithm Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
6
Methodology
15
6.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.2
Hyperparameter and Parameter Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6.3
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
6.4
Comparison Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.5
Analysis Set Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
7
Results
21
7.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
7.2
Baseline Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
7.3
Ablation Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7.4
Time-Dependent Normalizing Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7.5
Flow-Transformed Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
8
Future Work
37
9
Conclusions
38
Bibliography
39
10 Appendix
41
10.1 Baseline Comparison Model Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
10.2 Additional Baseline Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
10.3 FTGP Randomized Search Heatmaps and Correlation Plots . . . . . . . . . 46
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
v
==PAGE:8==
10.4 Additional Parallel Coordinate Plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
10.5 Accompanying Plots to Alternating Optimizer Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
10.6 Additional Ratio Plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
vi
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Time series modeling is fundamental to many disciplines, and many industries and lines of
study- such as social sciences, economics, biology, and engineering- rely on time series
modeling. [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] Nevertheless, time series analysis can be challenging and time-
consuming. Not only is available data increasing exponentially, real-world data exhibits
noise and complex behavior. Furthermore, the world especially in this day and age, is
quite interconnected. Many processes and signals are not isolated, but are influenced by
and influence others.[6, 5] Therefore, many analyses are enriched by or even incomplete
until the correlations between relevant signals are described in analysis. [1, 6, 7] The field
of jointly predicting tasks (also referred to as realizations, vectors, etc), so to improve on
individual task predictions by exploiting their interactions is known as multi-task learning.
In light of the difficulty of accurately modeling interconnected time series and of their im-
portance, quantifying the uncertainty of predictions is valuable. For this reason, we can
turn to a probabilistic framework. Probabilistic modeling can be described as modeling
where all the uncertain unobserved quantities in a model are given by probability distribu-
tions. [8].
By following this trail of reasoning, we conclude that a useful but challenging modeling
opportunity is to describe and predict multivariate time series such as to leverage the
correlations between them, preferably in a probabilistic way. In Section 2, we see that
this field of study has been ongoing, with methods such as deep neural networks, multi-
output Gaussian processes and graphical models being applied.
In this thesis, we propose two novel algorithms for modeling correlated time series signals:
Time-Dependent Normalizing Flows (TDNF) and Flow-Transformed Gaussian Processes
(FTGP). TDNF is a straightforward, inherently deterministic expansion on Normalizing
Flows, which aims to make it equipped to analyze time series. FTGP is a more complex
model, which expands on TDNF with the use of Gaussian Processes.
The goal of this thesis is to develop the novel models, to investigate their properties and
conditions under which they perform well, and finally to contextualize their performance
against other competing models.
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
Our objective is to improve accuracy, explainability, and performance of modeling of con-
current, correlated signals, using the proposed FTGP algorithm. In this section, we will
explore different solutions which are used in this discipline.
The problem of multi-task time series modeling is well-studied and approached in a variety
of ways. Therefore, the reader will find the below literature review divided into categories
of solutions.
2.1
Autoregressive Methods
ARIMA is a type of autoregressive model for univariate time series. It is one of the most
prominent univariate time series models, in part due to its statistical properties and flexi-
bility. [5] For our purposes, its largest downsides are that it cannot model multivariate time
series nor uncertainty of predictions. Furthermore, it cannot explicitly model the interac-
tions between two sources [5], features need to be hand-tuned [6] , and it is rarely used
for high dimensional multivariate time series forecasting due to its high computational cost
[5].
Vector autoregression (VAR) is considered the most widely used model in multivariate
time series. [5] Its largest benefit is its simplicity, however, its computational complexity
grows linearly with time and quadratically over number of variables, making it prone to
overfitting for long-term patterns. [5]
2.2
Traditional Machine Learning and Deep Learning
Linear methods are a common starting point in modeling, due to their simplicity and the
large amount of high quality off-the-shelf solvers; however, they struggle with capturing
the complex non-linear relationships of multivariate signals. [5]
Neural networks, on the other hand, are universal estimators capable of capturing com-
plexity. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) such as LSTM are popular for this use case, as
they can easily add in variables of interest, extract features automatically and can forecast
points or probability distributions. [6]
One specific non probabilistic deep learning model of interest i the LSTNet proposed by Lai
et al. [5] It is an algorithm designed for multivariate time series- specifically for a mixture of
short-term and long-term patterns . The model combines an RNN, a convolutional neural
network (CNN) and an autoregressive model, to learn short term signals, long term trends
and to adjust for the neural network scaling issue, respectively.
2.3
Gaussian Processes and Multi-Output Gaussian
Processes
When we consider probabilistic approaches to time series analysis, GPs are among the
most common.[7] GPs are modular, tractible, and interpretable. they can easily construct
non linear models, which makes them an attractive plug-and-play option [7, 9, 10]
There exists Single-Output Gaussian Processes (SOGPs), which do not fit our objec-
tive, since they only consider single time series and do not consider correlations between
time series. Then, there are Multi-Output Gaussian Processes (MOGPs). MOGPs are
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
3
==PAGE:12==
designed to use the same power of GPs and leverage the information of correlations be-
tween signals [3] These algorithms have a rich twenty year history [7, 3], are known and
highly used in the geostatistic community, and overlap with the fields of multi-task learning
and transfer learning[3]
There is a plethora of MOGPs that exist that can capture correlations, if they are fixed
(ie signal 1 always affects signal 2 in the same way). [11] One of the first approaches
developed, known as linear model of coregionalization (LMC),is among the mostly widely
used.[11] There are then many approaches based off of the LMC. For example, the in-
trinsic coregionalization model (ICM) is a simpliefied version of the LMC that is much
more restrictive, since it assumes that each of the internal components, the covariances,
contributes equally. [11]
One series of MOGP approaches transform to the spectral domain for efficiency. This has
been the subject of the more modern papers on MOGP, and the majority of the available
datasets on MOGTK use it. [12]
However, the benefits of all GP approaches come at the cost of high computational com-
plexity [5] For straightforward GP approaches for multivariate time series, due to neces-
sary matrix inversion, one can expect runtime to grown cubically with number of obser-
vations and the number of dimensions, and memory to growth quadratically with these
terms as well. [5, 7]
Furthermore, it is noted in the field that GPs can fail for a mix of long term and short term
signals [5], possibly because GP kernels can describe one type of behavior, and the user
has to intentionally add kernels together to achieve a combination of different behaviors.
There are a number of modern adaptions to MOGPs which aim to overcome these limi-
tations. For example, the GPAR algorithm, proposed by Requeima et al, aims to capture
dependencies between outputs in an effective and Bayesian manner. [7] They do this
by using the product rule to decompose the distribution of the outputs into a set of one
dimensional conditional distributions. Analogous to our algorithm, GPAR transforms a
high-dimensional data modeling problem into a set of single output modeling problems,
which are tackled with single output Gaussian Processes.
2.4
Normalizing Flows
A major component of our proposed algorithm consists of Normalizing Flows (NF), a gen-
erative family of models based on learning the transformation from one distribution to an-
other. Time series analysis is not among the common uses of Normalizing Flows, which
are generally considered to be image and video generation, noise modelling, graph gen-
eration and reinforcement learning, to name a few.[13]
However, Normalizing Flows algorithms for time series analysis have been considered
and proposed. For example, Rasul et al propose a novel Normalizing Flows algorithm
following the same line of reason as our own: to model the full joint distribution at each
time step of the correlation between time series. [6] Instead of combining with Gaussian
Process regression, they combine the Real NVP Normalizing Flows model with an RNN,
modeling the conditional joint distribution at time t of all time series. Their claim is that
through this process, they are able to adapt to many underlying data distributions while
being highly efficient due to the parallel nature of attention layers.
4
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:13==
3
Theoretical Background
In these sections, we will discuss the theoretical background needed to understand the
FTGP model, similar algorithms of interest, and knowledge needed to evaluate them.
3.1
Gaussian Processes
According to Rasmussen, a Gaussian Process is defined as a collection of random vari-
ables, any finite number of which have a joint Gaussian distribution [9].
Gaussian processes are commonly used to represent functions. For instance, we see the
following joint Gaussian probability of function values fi, .., fk is by definition represented
by its joint Gaussian distributions, defined by their mean and covariance. Here a function
fi represents the value of a function at a particular input, f(xi), where xi is a vector variable
with scalar entries.
p(fi, fj, fk, . . .) = N







m(xi)
m(xj)
m(xk)
...

,


k(xi, xi)
k(xi, xj)
k(xi, xk)
· · ·
k(xj, xi)
k(xj, xj)
k(xj, xk)
· · ·
k(xk, xi)
k(xk, xj)
k(xk, xk)
· · ·
...
...
...
...







(3.1)
[2]
A Gaussian Process can be fully described by its mean and covariance functions
f(x) ∼GP(m(x), k(x, x′))
(3.2)
Covariance Functions
A covariance function, also called a covariance kernel, specifies the covariance between
pairs of random variables [9]:
cov(fi, fj) = k(xi, xj)
(3.3)
Note that the covariance between the output, f, is written as a function of the inputs, x.
The exact form of the covariance function is specified by the user, who will usually pre-
select from a wide array of well-known function forms that obey the necessary conditions
of being symmetric and positive semi-definite. [14, 15]
A common example of a covariance kernel is the squared exponential (SE) function, which
is defined as cov(f(xp), f(xq)) = k(xp, xq) = σ2 exp(−|xp−xq|2
2l2
). There are many other
kernels defined, and more can be created by adding or multiplying kernels together. One
can choose a kernel based on the specifics of the problem at hand, for example a periodic
kernel for time series with high periodicity. In this paper, we will be focusing on the SE
function.
Covariance Optimization
We will start by observing the SE function equation. First we
note that the input variables are given in the kernel by their difference, as xp −xq. Thus,
the kernel is stationary, meaning that it is unaffected by translation and only depends on
the relative difference between variables. Because the difference is exponentiated, the
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
5
==PAGE:14==
influence of two variables decays as the distance between the variables grows. That
rate of decay is determined by the lengthscale l. Additionally, we have a scaling term
σ; because it multiplied by the difference between inputs, the covariance between two
variables increases with increased distance.
σ and l are known as the hyperparameters in this equation; they are tune-able values
which we can optimize with training to create Gaussian processes that best describe the
underlying functions describing the training data. Note that we denote these variables
as hyperparameters instead of parameters, because they are properties which govern
the model (ie they are the quantities that describe the functions realized from a Gaussian
process) instead of the quantities that the model functions are estimating.
3.1.1
Gaussian Process Regression
Relevant questions regarding time series analysis can be answered using regression.
Mainly, using a dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1 to predict y∗for some unseen x∗.
The most common approach which would be to solve for the parameters of a prede-
termined function mapping. For example, one could use machine learning to solve the
parameters for a linear model yn = ϕ(xn)T θ+en, where en represents noise, ϕ represents
a predetermined nonlinear transformation and θ are linear scaling parameters.
This mode of solution lacks information about certainty. Therefore, we can shift this into
a Bayesian paradigm. To do so, we can encapsulate our prior information about θ as
p(θ) and improve it with new data, resulting in a posterior distribution for θ according to
Bayesian inference.
p(θ | y) = p(y | θ) p(θ)
p(y)
(3.4)
Now, instead of only considering particular parameters θ, we can use Gaussian Processes
to iterate over function space to more easily describe and adapt to the shape of our ob-
served data.
We can define a prior over a function f ∼(0, k(x, x′), so that the prior is a zero-mean
Gaussian Process with its covariance given by a covariance function of our choosing.
Next, we can adding knowledge from our training data by forming a joint distribution be-
tween our observed data and a new data point x∗. Again, the distributions are given as
Gaussian Processes such that their covariance are matrices with each entry describing
the covariance of each pair, calculated using a predetermined kernel function.
 f
f∗

∼N

0,
 K(X, X)
K(X, X∗)
K(X∗, X)
K(X∗, X∗)

(3.5)
To make predictions, we can compute the conditional distribution of f∗, given the observed
data. The resulting mean and covariance are:
µ∗= K(x∗, X)K(X, X)−1f(X)
(3.6)
X
∗
= K(x∗, x∗) −K(x∗, X)K(X, X)−1K(X, x∗)
(3.7)
6
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:15==
Marginal Likelihood
We motivated our use of Gaussian Process Regression from a
Bayesian perspective; we can also introduce marginal likelihood, a common Gaussian
Process Regression objective function, in this framework.
The marginal likelihood is the integral of the likelihood times the prior
p(y | X) =
Z
p(y | f, X)p(f | X) df
(3.8)
For a Gaussian process model, the log marginal likelihood is given as
log p(y | X) = −1
2y⊤(K + σ2
nI)−1y −1
2 log |K + σ2
nI| −n
2 log 2π
(3.9)
Note that it is composed of three terms.
n
2 log 2π is constant for a given dataset, since
the number of data points n is not changing. 1
2y⊤(K + σ2
nI)−1y and 1
2 log |K + σ2
nI| are the
data-fit and complexity terms, respectively.
The data-fit term measures how well the model explains the observed data. y⊤(K +
σ2
nI)−1y measures the distance between the prediction and the observed data. The com-
plexity term contains only the covariance function |K + σ2
nI|. If the covariance function is
more complex, this term grows, and vice versa.
The inclusion of these two terms invokes Occam’s razor, which favors simpler models
for the same level of data explanation. Thus, the trade-off between data-fit and model
complexity is automatic, and the model automatically prevents overfitting.
3.1.2
Multi-Output Gaussian Processes
Up until now we have considered how to do Gaussian Process Regression for scalar
outputs. That is to say, learning one time series using only realizations from said time
series. A natural extension is then of course to use realizations from multiple, correlated
time series to learn the latent behavior of the functions. This is the driving idea behind
Multi-Output Gaussian Processes (MOGPs). [11]
Suppose we have a training set Sd = (Xd, Yd) = (xd,1, yd,1), .., (xd,Nd, yd,Nd), so that we
have N realizations, each with dimension D.
With MOGPs, we can define the prior distribution of the vector f(X) as a multivariate
distribution where the mean is given as a vector of the individual means of the time series
and the covariance matrix is given as a block matrix, where along the diagonal we have
the intra-time series covariances and otherwise we have the covariances of elements
between different time series:
K(X, X) =


(K(X1, X1))1,1
· · ·
(K(X1, XD))1,D
(K(X2, X1))2,1
· · ·
(K(X2, XD))2,D
...
...
...
(K(XD, X1))D,1
· · ·
(K(XD, XD))D,D


(3.10)
We can then use the same Gaussian Process Regression equations to arrive at a predic-
tive distribution, adjusting them to account for additional dimensionality.
Multi-Output Spectral Mixture
One popular MOGP approach is the Multi-Output Spectral Mixture (MOSM) kernel. We
also use an algorithm based on this kernel as a baseline in this thesis.
The MOSM begins with the Spectral Mixture (SM) kernel, which utilizes Bochner’s The-
orem to first design power spectral density (PSD) of the given input in the Frequency
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
7
==PAGE:16==
Domain, and then uses the inverse Fourier Transform to transform it into a covariance
function. [16] Using Cramer’s Theorem and algebraic manipulation, the SM kernel can
be elevated to the multi-dimensional case.
3.2
Normalizing Flows
Normalizing flows models are models that learn to transform a real, continuous random
variable u from a known probability distribution pu(u) to a continuous random variable x,
which can be expressed as:
x = T(u) where u ∼pu(u)
(3.11)
The distribution pu(u) is known as the base distribution. Both T and pu have their own
parameters, which can be expressed as ϕ and ψ, respectively.
The transformation T is required to be a diffeomorphism, meaning an differentiable, invert-
ible transformation whose inverse is differentiable as well. This requirement then leads to
two main structural components of the Normalizing Flows formulation.
Second, diffeomorphic transformations are composable, meaning that the composition
of two diffeomorphic transformations are likewise invertible and differentiable, meaning
(T2 ◦T1)−1 = T −1
1
◦T −1
2 - which is important to the mechanism of normalizing flows.
There are many different variations on normalizing flows, depending on use case. In
general, the normalizing flows process for modeling and inference is as follows: the user
inserts x into a normalizing flow, which is expressed as a series of flow transformations
chained together (possible due to composability) and transformed to u, evaluated based
on pu(u).
We train this type of normalizing flow using KL-divergence. We minimize the forward
KL-divergence between the target distribution px∗(x) and the model px(x; ψ, ϕ).
L(θ) = DKL [p∗
x(x) ∥px(x; θ)]
(3.12)
= −Ep∗x(x) [log px(x; θ)] + const.
(3.13)
= −Ep∗x(x)

log pu
 T −1(x; ϕ); ψ

+ log (|det (JT −1(x; ϕ))|)

+ const.
(3.14)
Through these steps, we see the KL-divergence between px∗(x) and px(x; ψ, ϕ) is given
as the expectation of the log likelihood of x in the target distribution, where now the target
distribution is pu. Based on our definition, we know that this is equal to the transformed x
under the known distribution, accounting for change of variables.
3.2.1
Autoregressive Flows
Earlier we mentioned there were many variations of normalizing flows. Here, we will
explore the specific form of autoregressive flows, as it is the form we use in this thesis.
Autoregressive flows, like autoregressive functions, represent transformations that use
previous predictions to inform current predictions. Given the input zi, the output z′
i is
given as
z′
i = τ(zi; hi) where hi = ci(z<i)
(3.15)
8
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:17==
where τ is a construct named the transformer and ci is the i-th conditioner. The transformer
is a strictly monotonic (and therefore invertible) function which describes how the flow
transforms the input, using parameters that the conditioner generates. The transformer
and conditioner are themselves design choices that we can adapt to our needs. That is
to say, we can choose different constructs for the transformer and conditioner.
3.2.2
Affine Transformations
In our work, we use the affine transformation:
τ(zi; hi) = αizi + βi where hi = αi, βi
(3.16)
τ −1(zi; hi) = zi −βi
αi
(3.17)
In essence, affine transformers represent scaling and shifting operations on the input.
In practice, we can instead take τ(zi; hi) = exp αizi+βi and τ −1(zi; hi) = exp −αi(zi−βi).
By exponentiating the scaling factor, αi = 0 will apply no scaling to the input, enabling
initializing the model weights to zero.
3.2.3
Coupling Layers
Autoregressive flows use previous values to predict current predictions, however, we must
efficiently ensure that the model is not overfitting to learn only the behavior of its current
dimension (ie time series) or from only one other one. One way this is done is to implement
the transformations in a set structure named coupling layers.
In essence, a D-dimensional input to a coupling layer is split in two, not necessarily lin-
ear halves, so that input dimensions 1, .., zd become inputs to the conditioner that then
conditions inputs d + 1, .., D. Then, in the next layer, the values associated with input
dimensions d + 1, .., D condition on the rest.
In the reverse direction, the same alternating conditioner logic applies, with the only dif-
ference being that we use the inverse transformer rather than the forward one.
Diagrams of both forward and inverse coupling layers can be found in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of autoregressive coupling layers in a Normalizing Flow, for forward
and inverse transformations, from [17]; z vectors represent inputs into the coupling layer,
F represents the conditioners and τ represents the transformers
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:19==
4
Presentation of Time-Dependent
Normalizing Flows
In Section 3.2, we introduced Normalizing Flows, which learns the transformation of sam-
ples between a known distribution and an unknown distribution. As we can see from
Equation 3.12, the model considers the set of samples in their entirety, with no inclusion
of a time component. While such a model could implicitly learn periodic behavior by ob-
serving a trend along its input dimensions, there is no mechanism by which to predict a
value for a given time step.
The Time-Dependent Normalizing Flows (TDNF) algorithm is an addition to the Normaliz-
ing Flows algorithm that takes in a corresponding timestamp as an argument. Specifically,
the timestamp is added to the conditioner of each coupling layer, as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of i-th step of a Time-Dependent Normalizing Flow with autore-
gressive conditioners
That is to say, in the conditioner layer, which produces the scaling and shifting variables
hi = αi, βi as given in Equation 3.15, is now dependent on time and input value: hi(z<i, ti).
Practically, we now treat time as an input to the conditioner. When transforming our ob-
served data to samples of a known distribution, this could be an actual [ N, 1] time vector
associated with the data, or the index for each data point. When transforming samples
from a known distribution to the observed data distribution, we create a vector of either
indices or timestamps corresponding to the times we want to predict for and append them
to the samples indiscriminately.
4.1
Benefits
Compared to the NF, the TDNF has access to more information in a structured way, and is
now time-aware. This now makes the NF a model that is capable of time series analysis,
without the need for much additional infrastructure, compared to the model proposed by
Rasul et al, which requires an RNN. [6] Compared to Gaussian Processes, this model
requires less user input, as it does not require informed initial values.
4.2
Potential Downsides
As mentioned, in TDNF, the conditioners are now functions of both sample value and
time, hi(z<i, ti). When training the model, we are passing from the observed distribution
to the known distribution, and thus having both pieces of information facilitates learning
the behavior. For instance, if similarly valued samples are close together in time, this is
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
11
==PAGE:20==
an insight the model could learn the rate of change over time. The model will also see
similar values for different time stamps, and thus could learn the periodicity of the latent
functions.
When we are generating samples from the known distribution and transforming them into
the observed space, we are generating values and randomly attributing time indices to
them. Therefore, we entertain the possibility that we could pair a time index with a value
from the known distribution that the model has not seen before. Therefore, we would be
requesting the model to generate predictions out-of-distribution, for which the model will
make a less informed decision.
12
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:21==
5
Presentation of Flow-Transforming
Gaussian Processes
In Time-Dependent Normalizing Flows, described in Section 4, we insert a time-dependency
into the conditioners of a Normalizing Flow, to enable the Normalizing Flows to predict
time series. In Flow-Transforming Gaussian Processes (FTGP) we now move the time-
dependency from the conditioner to the base distribution, which we choose to model with
Gaussian Processes.
Below, we derive the FTGP objective function, and then go on to describe its implemen-
tation.
5.1
Deriving the FTGP Algorithm
From Section 3.2, we know the objective function for fitting a normalizing flow to a target
distribution p∗
x(x) is given as
L(θ) = −Ep∗x(x)

log pu
 T −1(x; ϕ); ψ

+ log |det JT −1(x; ϕ)|

+ const.
(5.1)
which is the log likelihood of the normalizing flow output under the distribution pu param-
eterized by ψ, penalized by the log Jacobian determinant. For simplicity, we rewrite the
normalizing flow output T −1(x, ϕ) as ˜yϕ.
The log marginal likelihood for zero-mean, d-dimensional multivariate Gaussian distribu-
tions is given in Rasmussen [9] as
log p(˜yϕ|x) = −1
2˜yT
ϕ(K + σ2
nI)−1˜yϕ −1
2 log |K + σ2
nI| −n
2 log(π)
(5.2)
where K + σ2
nI represent the covariance and noise and will be henceforth simplified to K
Consider the case where the multivariate distribution p˜y is composed of D separate distri-
butions, where D is the number of dimensions of X . In this case, the log probabilities act
on each dimension of ˜y separately and thus their joint log likelihood is given as the sum
of their individual components
log p(˜yϕ) =
D
X
d=1
−1
2 ˜yT
:,d(Kd)−1˜y:,d −1
2 log |Kd + σ2
nI| −n
2 log(π)

(5.3)
This equation will give us the probability of seeing ˜y in the distribution p˜y. We can optimize
this equation with respect to the parameters for the distributions, ψ, or Kd∀d ∈{1, 2, ..D}
. This is equivalent to the marginal log likelihood and is used to find optimal hyperparam-
eters for a function distribution in Gaussian Process Regression (see Section 3.1.1).
By substituting equation 5.3 into the original Normalizing Flows loss function, equation
5.1 , we can optimize over hyperparameters and parameters:
arg min
θ,K L(θ, K) =
D
X
d=1
[ −1
2 ˜yT
:,d(Kd)−1˜y:,d−1
2 log |Kd+σ2
nI|−n
2 log(π)]+log |det JT −1(x; ϕ)|+const.
(5.4)
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
13
==PAGE:22==
Now, we can optimize both the normalizing flows transformation of samples into a given
distribution, and the distribution itself.
5.2
Algorithm Implementation
The reader can find the pseudocode to the algorithm implementation at Algorithm 1 and
a description of its components below.
Algorithm 1 FTGP Algorithm
1: class FTGP
2: procedure init
3:
modelList.append(NormalizingFlow(width, depth))
4:
modelList.append(concurrentSOGPs(kernel_initialization))
5: procedure forward(X, y)
6:
NF_output, log_determinant = self.NormalizingFlow(y)
7:
GP_predictions = self.concurrentSOGPs(transposed(X), transposed(NF_output))
8:
return NF_output, GP_predictions, log_determinant
9: procedure loss
10:
mll = self.concurrentSOGPs.mll()
11:
return -(mll + log_determinant)
12: procedure sample
13:
GP_samples = self.concurrentSOGPs.sample()
14:
for GP_sample in GP_samples do
15:
FTGP_sample = self.NormalizingFlow(GP_sample)
16:
return FTGP_samples
5.2.1
Sampling
FTGP is a probabilistic method, so the output is generative. To create predictions, we first
sample the Gaussian Processes and then use those as samples from a known distribution
to then transform into observed space using the Normalizing Flows submodel. The result
is a tensor with dimensions [ N, D, S] , where S is the number of samples we chose
to generate from the Gaussian Processes. We can then assess the samples for every
unique time step and channel as samples from the model’s predictive distribution. Even
though the samples are originally from Gaussian distributions, because we passed the
predictions through Normalizing Flows, which is nonlinear, we can no longer assume the
distribution is normally distributed. Thus, to describe its shape, we take the median of the
samples, instead of the mean. We can also approximate the variance using the 2nd and
97th percentiles, which correspond to two standard deviations in a normal distribution.
[18]
14
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:23==
6
Methodology
The main way in which we experimented as to the behavior and performance of our mod-
els was to train and test a series of models with randomized hyperparameters and param-
eters. Each model was trained with 50 random hyperparameter and parameter combina-
tions, with each combination being trained 5 times for 5 different generator seeds each.
This was conducted three times, for three datasets. Afterwards, the data from training
as well as testing were saved to files for subsequent analysis. Below we highlight the
specifics of these tests, including the datasets, hyperparameter and parameter selection,
evaluation metrics, comparison baselines, and how the data was set up for analysis.
6.1
Datasets
All datasets are synthetic datasets generated by us. They consist of 450 equally spaced
points between x = (−0.25, 1.25). The datasets are all standardized so they have mean
0 and a standard deviation of 1. The following ranges are used for training, interpolation
and extrapolation:
Range
Category
-0.25, 0
Extrapolation
0, 0.4
Training
0.4, 0.6
Interpolation
0.6, 1
Training
1, 1.25
Extrapolation
Table 6.1: Ranges and corresponding categories.
All noise ϵ is randomly sampled ∼N(0, 0.05)
Datasets are figured on 6.1
(a) GPAR
(b) Short Term Functional
(c) Short and Long Term
Functional
Figure 6.1: Three synthetic datasets used; y1, y2, y3 are given in blue, orange, green,
respectively
GPAR Dataset
We reimplemented the synthetic dataset described in the GPAR paper. [7] The dataset is
described below.
y1(x) = −sin(10π(x + 1))
2x + 1
−x4 + ϵ1,
y2(x) = cos2(y1(x)) + sin(3x) + ϵ2,
y3(x) = y2(x) · y2
1(x) + 3x + ϵ3,
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
15
==PAGE:24==
Synthetic Datasets with Short Term and Long Term Correlations
In addition to GPAR, we have constructed two of our own datasets. We did this in order
to prevent overfitting to GPAR and highlight our algorithm’s unique features more promi-
nently.
Synthetic Dataset with Short Term Correlations: Functional S
Our first dataset con-
sists of a series of three time series with short term trends correlated with latent functions:
f1(x) = sin
 2πx
0.15

,
f2(x) =

x +
1
2x + 1

f1(x),
f3(x) = f2
1 (x),
y1(x) = −x4 + 0.4f3
1 (x) + ϵ1,
y2(x) = cos4(4x) + 0.6f2(x) + ϵ2,
y3(x) = 3x + 0.5f3(x) + ϵ3,
These datasets were created using trial and error, with the following requirements: there
is a series of latent functions determining the short term behavior only, the functions from
which the data is generated have different forms, and the resulting behavior of the three
datasets is clearly visually different with prominent short term behavior.
These criteria were chosen because our algorithm is designed to capture both long and
short term trends in correlated signals. Furthermore, we wanted to test our algorithm’s
robustness to different forms of data with our distinct function forms and be able to have
visual indication that our model is working. See the section below for further explanation
on the choice of correlating only short term behavior.
We will refer to this dataset as Functional S, for convenience.
Synthetic Dataset with Short and Long Term Correlations: Functional B
The syn-
thetic dataset with short and long term correlations differs in that there are two sets of
latent functions: one set which controls the correlations in the short term data, and one
which controls the correlations in the long term data. The functions for this dataset are
given below:
f1(x) = sin
 2πx
0.15

,
f2(x) =

x +
1
2x + 1

f1(x),
f3(x) = f2
1 (x),
g1(x) = sin(x),
g2(x) = exp(g1(x)),
g3(x) = cos(g1(x)),
y1(x) = cos(4g1(x)) + 0.2f1(x) + ϵ1,
y2(x) = 0.5g2(x) −0.3f2(x) + ϵ2,
y3(x) = f2
3 (x) + 0.5f3(x) + ϵ3,
16
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:25==
Our algorithm is learning long term behavior with SOGPs, which do not account for correla-
tion. Therefore, we expect that our algorithm will behave worse in this scenario compared
to the former. This dataset serves to test this point.
We will refer to this dataset as Functional B, for convenience.
6.1.1
Explanation Behind Design Decisions
Number of data points
We decided to sample well above the Nyquist frequency to
ensure that the behavior in the functions is caught. [19] The highest frequency term in
all the datasets is f1(x) = sin( 2πx
0.15) with Nyquist frequency ≈13 cycles/x. On the other
hand, an 450-point evenly spaced vector between -0.25 and 1.25 has sampling interval
=
Interval Length
Number of Points−1 = 1.5
450 ≈0.003 and thus sampling frequency = sampling interval−1 ≈
300 cycles/x.
Noise
The noise must of course be normally distributed with mean 0 to represent ran-
dom, uncorrelated additions to the data. We chose variance to be 0.05, as it was the
variance used in the GPAR paper and an order of magnitude smaller than the trends in
our data.
Standardizing the data
Standardizing the data allows us to choose hyperparameters
more easily.
Ranges for Training and Testing
The range (0, 1) was chosen as a starting point for
training. (0.4, 0.6) was chosen for interpolation because it captures at least one whole
period of each short term trend and because it is 20% of the datapoints between (0, 1).
(−0.25, 0) was chosen as an additional extrapolation range given that some of the func-
tions’ behavior radically changes after x = 1.
6.2
Hyperparameter and Parameter Selection
Here we highlight ranges we choose to sample hyperparameters and parameters from.
We divide the section on novel algorithm.
6.2.1
TDNF
Hyperparameters & Parameters
Range
Sampling Method
Learning Rate
[ 10−4, 10−1]
Uniform (Log Scale)
Conditioner Depth
[ 2, 10]
Discrete Uniform
Conditioner Width
[ 8, 32]
Discrete Uniform
Number of Flow Layers
[ 2, 20]
2× Discrete Uniform
Table 6.2: Hyperparameter & Parameter Ranges and Sampling Methods.
Table 6.2 shows the variables we varied, the distributions we sampled them from, and
the start and end points of the sampling range. The learning rate is sampled in log scale
because for learning rate we are interested in differences between orders of magnitude.
The number of flows multiplies the random number times 2, because our Normalizing
Flows code is set up in pairs, so that the random dimensions chosen for the conditioner
in the first flow layer are exactly the ones not being conditioned on in the second layer.
6.2.2
FTGP
Table 6.3 shows the FTGP sampled variables and the distributions they came from. Note
that for the embedded NF we decided to vary to search over the same variables as for
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
17
==PAGE:26==
Hyperparameter
Range
Sampling Method
NF Learning Rate
[ 10−4, 10−1]
Uniform (Log Scale)
GP Learning Rate
[ 10−4, 10−1]
Uniform (Log Scale)
GP Lengthscale
[ 0.01, 1.5]
Uniform
GP Outputscale
[ 0.01, 1.5]
Uniform
GP Likelihood
[ 10−3, 1.5]]
Uniform (Log Scale)
Conditioner Depth
[ 2, 10]
Discrete Uniform
Conditioner Width
[ 8, 32]
Discrete Uniform
Number of Flow Layers
[ 2, 20]
2× Discrete Uniform
Table 6.3: Hyperparameter Ranges and Sampling Methods.
TDNF. This way, the two tests would be separate from each other, and we can account
for the embedded NF behaving differently due to the setup in a different model.
The GP lengthscale determines the periodicity of the latent GP function; we varied it from
0.01 to 1.5 to try initially setting a varying high frequency GP and one with a period of the
whole data length. Similarly, the output scale is the multiplicative term in the exponent
of the RBF kernel, and thus measures how big an affect distance between points has
on prediction. Since the data is standardized, setting the higher end of the range to 1.5
makes it so the initial output scale is slightly larger than the range of the data. Finally, the
likelihood describes how much of the data is explained by noise. By setting it between
0.01 and 1.5, we explore none of the data being explained by noise (even the noise itself
is 0.05) to all of the data being explained by noise.
6.3
Evaluation Metrics
In this section, we will present the metrics we will be using in the thesis. Observed values
yi are given as the function outputs for a time step i, unless otherwise specified.
Root Mean Square Error
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is a metric which measures the point differences be-
tween observed values and predictions. It is given as
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(6.1)
RMSE penalizes outliers more heavily, due to its squared term.
For TDNF, the RMSE is straigthforward; since the output of the model is a point estimate,
we input that value into the function directly. For the generative FTGP, we input the median
of the samples generated at time step i.
Mean Absolute Error
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) is another point difference metric given as
MAE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
(6.2)
As opposed to RMSE, all errors are penalized the same. The formulation of MAE for our
two models is the same as for RMSE.
18
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:27==
Negative Log Predictive Density
Negative Log Predictive Density (NLPD) measures the mean log probability of the predic-
tions matching the observation, given the inputs xi, for all time steps i:
NLPD = −1
N
N
X
i=1
log p(ˆyi = yi|xi)
(6.3)
It is assessing both the error of the predictions and the model’s uncertainty quantification
at once. The latter is due to the probability. First we note that prediction which matches will
get a high probability. We also see that as the probability distribution’s variance increases
(ie as the uncertainty increases),
For FTGP, we first calculate the NLPD in transformed space, and then convert it to ob-
served space using the log determinant.
Frequency Distance (FD)
The three previous metrics answer different, specific questions about the predictions.
RMSE and MAE answer how close each prediction point is to the true value, and NLPD
answers how confident the model is about its predictions. I have created the following
metric to answer the question: how closely does the model learn the latent periodic be-
havior of the observed data?
To do this, I am measuring the MAE between the point estimates of FTGP and TDNF in
the Frequency Domain. That is to say, I am taking the MAE between the Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) of the predictions and observed data.
Because the FFT of observed data describes oscillations of which frequencies are present
in the data- and to what extent they are present- the MAE between the FFTs will describe
how closely related the true oscillations present and the predicted ones are.
This is useful for our specific use case of learning both long and short term periodic be-
havior, since the magnitude of the short term oscillations- which are equally as important
as long term oscillations to us- are a factor of 10 lower than the long term oscillations.
Therefore, in addition to this metric being set up specifically to answer our question of
interest, it also overcomes the issue of the short term behavior being lost due to its scale.
6.4
Comparison Baselines
Single-Output Gaussian Process Regression
Single-output Gaussian Processes are not only models which do not consider correla-
tions, but are also a fundamental building block of our proposed algorithm. Therefore,
including them as a baseline serves to show the improve our algorithm has towards non-
correlation aware methods and quantify how much supplementing the SOGPs with a Nor-
malizing Flow bolsters its performance.
This baseline was created using the same code used to create the FTGP. Mainly, a two-
level Pytorch custom class. The first level is a custom Gaussian Process Regression
class, where we code the forward pass ourselves using the algorithm pseudocode pro-
vided in Algorithm 2.1 in Rasmussen. [9] The algorithm uses gpytorch kernel and likeli-
hood objects as the data structures representing their mathematical equivalents. Next, we
create a custom higher level function, which takes in a list of kernels and likelihoods, and
runs the base Gaussian Process Regression class methods on each of them separately.
Multi-Output Gaussian Process Regression
Improving and expanding upon MOGP is a major motivator behind this work. There-
fore, we have included a MOGP baseline in the form of the Multi Output Spectral Mixture
(MOSM) implemented in the mogptk python package. [12]
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
19
==PAGE:28==
6.5
Analysis Set Up
All testing was done on DTU’s High Performance Computing (HPC) system, except for
baseline testing which was done on a personal computer due to time and resource con-
straints.
20
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:29==
7
Results
7.1
Introduction
Our two novel algorithms do not work as intended. While Time-Dependent Normalizing
Flows does not work, Flow-Transformed Gaussian Processes can work but is highly vari-
able with regards to the initial conditions.
In the following sections, we will compare the performance to baselines and explore the
way the model fails, and the potential reasons.
7.2
Baseline Comparison
In this section, we compare our novel algorithms’ performance to baselines, to set a con-
text in which to frame the results of our experiments.
The baselines used are Single-Output Gaussian Processes (SOGPs) and Multi-Output
Gaussian Processes (MOGPs), as described in Section 6.4. The baseline models were
run on 20,000 epochs with seed 0. After testing, the baseline models seemed to be
invariant to torch and numpy seeds, and were not further included.
Due to the instability of our models, we decided to create a small comparison of one set of
hyperparameters and parameters for each model. Thus, a general overview between the
model behaviors suffices. Therefore, for SOGP, we chose our set of hyperparameters with
domain knowledge, as one would approach an applied use case of SOGP. Our chosen
hyperparameters can be found in Table 10.2 and the corresponding plot can be found
as Figure 10.3. For MOGP, we utilized mogptk’s built in hyperparameter estimator, a
Bayesian non-parametric spectral estimation (BNSE) method. We trained the model with
a learning rate of 10−3 using a Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimizer.
For our novel algorithms, we chose our hyperparameter set based on the lowest mean
training FD error, across all seeds. We did this once for each dataset. We chose to
evaluate the training error as per industry standard, and the FD metrics as it appears to
be more robust than NLPD metric, by the analysis in Section 7.5.3, and it is answering a
question more in line with our analysis, as described in Section 6.3. The plots of these
selected models are given in Figures 10.1 and 10.2 and their hyperparameters are given
in Appendix Tables 10.1 and 10.3.
In Tables 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4 we see the performance of the given models for each metric
and each region of testing on the Functional S dataset.
The first thing we notice is that there are no NLPD values for MOGP in Table 7.3. This
is due to the fact that in the mogptk package, the predict function which gives prediction
results returns the values of the lower and upper predictions of uncertainty- given at two
standard deviations- but it does not return the variance itself. [20] There may be another
way to access the variance using the mogptk package, however we were not able to find
such a method. Therefore, we could not implement our NLPD metric for this model.
Otherwise, overall we see that the TDNF dataset has values noticeably higher than the
baselines and other novel algorithm for all metrics except NLPD, which will discuss here-
after. These high values, which signify worse performance, show the model’s poor per-
formance. This can also be seen from the representative TDNF plot.
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
21
==PAGE:30==
Moreover, except for NLPD, FTGP performs on par or better than the two baselines.
The NLPD values for the FTGP are multiple orders of magnitude larger than the rest. This
either tells us that the model was not able to learn the latent distribution of the data, or
there was an error in how NLPD was implemented for this model. Due to time restraints,
this was not further explored during the project.
The behavior shown in these four tables is representative of all datasets. One exception
is that MOGP metrics are as of yet inexplicably high for the GPAR dataset, which would
be further investigated with more time. All remaining tables can be found in Section 10.2
Table 7.1: RMSE for Dataset Functional S
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
0.479
0.811
1.172
MOGP
0.162
0.339
0.473
FTGP
0.098 ± 0.012
0.37 ± 0.18
0.49 ± 0.36
TDNF
1.199 ± 0.023
1.150 ± 0.119
2.335 ± 0.296
Table 7.2: MAE for Dataset Functional S
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
0.346
0.646
0.942
MOGP
0.139
0.277
0.387
FTGP
0.073 ± 0.009
0.22 ± 0.065
0.30 ± 0.18
TDNF
1.023 ± 0.023
0.958 ± 0.062
1.851 ± 0.312
Table 7.3: NLPD for Dataset Functional S
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
-0.615
0.182
0.834
MOGP
-
-
-
FTGP
1177 ± 271
1214 ± 289
20914 ± 39467
TDNF
0.718 ± 0.027
0.667 ± 0.146
2.762 ± 0.736
Table 7.4: FD for Dataset Functional S
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
0.317
1.003
1.467
MOGP
0.481
1.075
1.248
FTGP
0.14 ± 0.01
0.43 ± 0.18
0.55 ± 0.31
TDNF
1.303 ± 0.143
1.515 ± 0.173
2.367 ± 0.291
7.3
Ablation Study
With instable and incorrect model results, the first thing to investigate is implementation.
Since these are novel algorithms, we do not have a baseline output or mode of learning
to compare ours to. However, both our novel algorithms are composed of well-known and
robust algorithms: Normalizing Flows and Gaussian Process Regression. Therefore, we
will conduct an ablation study by way of isolating these components and assessing them
individually.
22
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:31==
Figure 7.1: Gaussian Process Regression on the three GPAR functions
We tested the Normalizing Flows and Single-Output Gaussian Process components using
visual inspection and our knowledge of the algorithm’s behaviors.
7.3.1
Single-Output Gaussian Process Ablation Test
To check the Single-Output Gaussian Processes, we trained it on our three datasets us-
ing initial conditions informed by trial and error and our knowledge of the periodicity and
magnitude of the functions. For all datasets tested, we used RBF covariance functions
initially set to have lengthscale and likelihood magnitudes of 1 and a outputscale of 0.5.
Training on 5000 epochs, for GPAR, we get the predictions shown in Figure 7.1. Here, we
see the true data plotted with the mean and variance of the Gaussian Process Regres-
sion prediction at each time step. As expected, the SOGPs which received a single RBF
kernel of a long-scaled magnitude are able to learn the long-term behavior, but not the
short-term trends. Furthermore, it performs better on seen, training data than test data.
7.3.2
Normalizing Flows Ablation Test
To check NF, we also trained it on our three datasets. We constructed a NF with a flow
depth of 6 coupling layers and a flow width of 16 nodes per coupling layer in the condi-
tioner. Because a NF requires a base distribution, we tested transforming from both a
three-dimensional zero-mean, standard deviation Gaussian distribution and a more com-
plex three-dimensional multivariate Gaussian distribution, hereafter denoted known dis-
tribution 2. given by the mean and covariance: s. We tested the later distribution as well
to determine if our algorithm is able to transform from a non-trivially-simple distribution to
another non-simple distribution.
In Figure 7.2, we see the original samples and their flow-transformed counterparts pro-
jected afterwards onto two dimensions using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for
ease of plotting. On the left we see the samples from known distribution 2 along with the
flow-transformed samples from the complex distribution, and on the right we see the sam-
ples from the complex distribution along with the flow-transformed samples from known
distribution 2. Because the flow-transformed samples follow the shape of their counter-
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 7.2: GPAR and its NF samples plotted in 2D space using PCA
part samples without perfectly mapping to the sample, we can conclude that the NF was
able to learn the transformation. Given that samples were generated separately from
each distribution, we expect that they do not correspond to the exact same points in their
respective distributions. Therefore, the fact that the mapping was not perfectly to the
samples tells us that that NF did not overfit to learn the positions of the samples.
7.3.3
FTGP test
Although the expected behavior of the FTGP is yet unknown to us, we can test there
are no implementation errors by suppressing one of the algorithms and comparing the
behavior of the other to what we found in the above tests.
For example, we implemented an identity flow NF. We did this by creating a custom identity
layer class to replace the coupling layer. The identity layer class always returns x and a
vector of 0 for the s, t parameters. This acts as an identity due to the affine functions for
the forward and backward passes: x2 exps +t, (z2−t) exp−s. Since exp0 = 1, both inputs
are multiplied by 1 and added with 0, resulting in the original input.
Like before we tested our FTGP implementation with the NF replaced with a identity NF,
on all datasets. We found that the model returns the same output as the SOGPs, which
we expected. If there would be a difference, then that would mean there would be a factor
acting on the data other than what we expected in the FTGP.
7.4
Time-Dependent Normalizing Flow
Here we will present the output of the TDNF algorithm
Figure 7.3 shows the mean and standard deviations of predictions of one TDNF model
across five seeds, along with the true data. The two plots show two representative be-
haviors across all datasets and models.
The left shows a model which predicts a linear line, regardless of training or testing be-
havior. The right shows a model which predicts with variance greater than the range of
the data itself. This could be due to the variance between seeds, the predictions being off
or a combination of both. In both cases, the model is completely unusable for prediction.
24
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:33==
(a) TDNF model with 2 flow layers and condi-
tioner depth and width of 8 and 16, respectively
(b) TDNF model with 2 flow layers and condi-
tioner depth and width of 3 and 17, respectively
Figure 7.3: Two representative plots of data with TDNF predictions from two models,
averaged across seeds
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
25
==PAGE:34==
7.4.1
Analysis of Training Plots
We analyze how the model behavior changes over the training period to gleam insight on
what could be failing in the model.
(a) TDNF model given in Figure 7.3a
(b) TDNF model given in Figure 7.3b
Figure 7.4: Corresponding training plots for the two representative TDNF models
For example, in Figure 7.4a we see the objective, model complexity given by the log de-
terminant, RMSE, and log likelihood as a function of training epochs across the five seeds
of a model with 2 flow layers and conditioner depth and width of 8 and 16, respectively.
First, we see that the behavior of at least one model changes drastically mid-training for
at least one seed. We also see specific epochs where the log likelihood jumps orders of
magnitude lower. Both of these indicate that the model has not stabilized. It also indicates
that there can be high variation between seeds. Otherwise, the behavior aligns with our
expectations: the objective and RMSE are first decreasing rapidly and then plateauing,
the negative log likelihood is rapidly increasing and plateauing around 0, and the model
complexity is decreasing. For the latter, we would expect the complexity to first increase
slightly while the model is exploring its options and then decrease since we are penalizing
complexity using the log determinant term in the objective function, given in Equation 5.4.
We can also observe that the model can settle on high complexity models with desirable
log likelihoods, as given in Figure 7.4b. Once again, this is a clear indication that the
model is not learning correctly.
These issues either be due to the model being stuck in a local minima given by ill-suited
parameters, to an ill-posed objective, an implementation error or an issue with the model
design, since it is a novel algorithm. We can infer that the first issue is unlikely given we
conducted a random search. Similarly, in Section 7.3, we showed that a standard Normal-
izing Flow is able to transform both in the forwards and backwards transformations, using
26
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:35==
the same objective. This weakens the argument for an ill-posed objective or the standard
Normalizing Flows part of the implementation being incorrect. That leaves us with either
the time-dependent component being incorrectly implemented or there being an issue with
the algorithm not related to implementation. In Section 4.2, we discussed the possibility
of generating time-dependent samples from the known distribution being an issue since
the time indices are randomly assigned, potentially causing the conditioners to encoun-
tering pairings of time indices and values it has not seen before. More experimentation is
needed to find which of these two causes is responsible for the model’s performance. Due
to time constraints, we did not do this experimentation during this thesis, but we explain
how we would conduct it in Section 8.
7.5
Flow-Transformed Gaussian Processes
We have seen that the FTGP algorithm has the capacity to learn behavior on par with
our baselines, but we have stated that this is not always the case. Here, we present the
different modes of FTGP behavior.
In Figure 7.5 we are able to observe the output of both major internal components of the
FTGP. Recall that FTGP first transforms observations into distributions using Normalizing
Flows, and then learns base distributions to the model using Single-Output Gaussian Pro-
cesses on that transformed data. Therefore, in these plots, in the left columns, we see the
transformed observations and the estimated Gaussian Processes. In the right column, we
see the original data, plotted along with some summary statistics of the model’s samples,
which are calculated according to Section 5.2.1. Specifically, we see the median of the
samples, and a ribbon representing the difference between the 2nd and 97th percentiles.
The testing data is marked with a gray background.
The left plot shows a FTGP model which is able to follow the behavior of the data in
observed space, both during the training and testing ranges. We see that it captures both
the long term trends in the data and the small oscillations. In both the transformed and
observed spaces, the variance is so small as to be almost imperceptible- we will discuss
this further in Section 7.5.4. The transformed space plots, on the other hand, reveal
what was learned by each submodel. Because the NF transformed observations do not
contain the short term oscillations for two of the three channels, we can conclude that the
NF submodel learned that aspect of the data’s behavior. In the middle channel, the GP
seems to be learning some of the short term trends. Furthermore, the transformed data
matches for the most part with the long term behavior. This could possibly be indicating
that the NF and GP have mostly split the two aspects of the data between themselves,
except for the middle channel where they are recreating the trends together.
The right plot shows a FTGP which was not able to learn the behavior of the data. From
the observed space plots, we see that the median model samples are sometimes an order
of magnitude or more incorrect. We also see in the transformed space that for the first two
channels, the GPs are learning a flat line with very high variance. For the last channel, the
GP behavior noticeably differs in the testing range, especially in the interpolation range.
This could be due to the NF not handling unseen data well. We also see that for this
channel, the GP is confident in the behavior it learned, since the variance is small, but
in the observed space, the variance is large. This could also indicate that the NF is not
predicting consistently.
From the figure as a whole, we can conclude from visual inspection that there are cases
where the model works and where the model doesn’t work. Here, we also note that the
following number of models failed to finish training in GPAR, functional s and functional
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) FTGP model with visually good performance
(b) FTGP model with visually poor performance
Figure 7.5: Two representative plots of data with FTGP predictions from two models, in
both transformed and observed space
28
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:37==
b datasets respectively: 17,19, 16. We do not include any results from these failed runs
going forward, but note that it is also indicative of the instability of the model. Therefore,
we will further investigate the stability and potential issues with it.
7.5.1
Relationship between Hyperparameters and Parameters and
Capacity to Learn
Here, we investigate the dependence of the model’s performance on specific parame-
ters or hyperparameters. Because the model is instable between hyperparameter and
parameter sets, here we check if there is a set of hyperparameters and parameters that
are driving this instability, ie if there is a set of parameters which affect the instability more
than others. We also check the performance between the seeds, for if some seeds are
performing noticeably better than others, then FTGP is instable in regards to minute ini-
tializations. We also hypothesize that since the GP component of FTGP is acting on a
transformed space, the hyperparameters that explain the behavior are different than those
for SOGP alone, and we can see that one range of GP hyperparameters performs better
than the rest.
We first calculated Pearson’s correlation coefficient between each hyperparameter and
parameter with each metric. However, the behavior of the pairings can be non-linear,
the models could potentially perform best in the middle of a range of input values, and
correlations are unsuitable for a categorical variable like seed. Therefore, we then chose
to fit a polynomial of degree 3 to each combination of hyperparameter and parameter
input to metric. We then calculated a weighted R2 score of the fit to describe the influence
of each input on the performance. We chose a polynomial of degree 3 to account for
nonlinear behavior without being too high of a degree to overfit, and a weighted R2 score
to account for the fact that some parameter ranges were more represented than others.
We found these methods to be unrepresentative of the information we sought to convey,
due to an uneven spread in the variance of the metrics for different ranges of inputs as well
as the uneven spread of the parameters and hyperparameters themselves, which could be
due to the quantity of models unable to finish training as well as the GP hyperparameters
converging to different sets of values during training. The reader can refer to Appendix
10.3 for R2 heatmaps as well as selected scatter plots showcasing how this metric fails
to describe the relationships accurately.
Instead, we evaluate these sets of relationships using Parallel Coordinate plots, which
displays said relationships without relying on methods contingent on underlying data dis-
tributions. In Figure 7.6, we see a Parallel Coordinate plot portraying the relationship
between the GP hyperparameters at the end of training and the log training RMSE for the
functional s dataset, across all runs which successfully finished training and produced a
plottable log value. Each vertical scale on the plot corresponds to one hyperparameter, as
given by their titles to the top. The horizontal lines across the scales represent one model,
so that following a horizontal line from right to left will tell you the values of each of the
model’s hyperparameters as well as its log RMSE at the end. The lines are also colored
in accordance to the log RMSE, so that models with lower RMSE and thus better perfor-
mance, are more green while worse performing ones are more red. In a situation where
one variable controls the output variable, RMSE, we would see that all the green lines
would pass through one region of that variable’s scale, while the red would not. However,
in Figure 7.6 we see there is in fact no such distinct trend for any of the hyperparameters-
or combination of hyperparameters- suggesting that the values of these hyperparameters
have no strong influence on the success of the model. This negates our hypothesis that
one range of values could be performing worse due to the transformed space on which
the SOGPs act.
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 7.6: Parallel coordinate plot of a representative FTGP model’s GP hyperparame-
ters and log RMSE value for the functional s dataset
In Figure 7.7, we see the same plot of the log training RMSE for the functional s dataset,
with the remaining hyperparameters. Once again, we see the same, weakly correlated
behavior. This is inconclusive for us in all respects except for the seed. Here, the model’s
dependence on the seed being weak aligns with what we hoped to see. This shows us
that the model is not so unstable as to be reliant on small variations such as this. We
take these figures’ behavior to be representative of the behavior of the model across all
datasets and metrics, for no other relationships emerge across these as well. The reader
may find the remaining Parallel Coordinate plot figures in Appendix 10.4.
Figure 7.7: Parallel coordinate plot of a representative FTGP model’s non-GP hyperpa-
rameters, parameters, and log RMSE value for the functional s dataset
7.5.2
Relationship between Model Balance and Capacity to Learn
If a single parameter or hyperparameter by itself is not sufficient to explain the perfor-
mance of the model, perhaps the performance is contingent on balance within the model.
30
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:39==
FTGP is composed of two self-standing models which are only implicitly working together,
by the fact that the output of one feeds the output of another, and they are both influenced
by the same loss function. Therefore, we entertain the possibility that the FTGP could
fall into a mode of behavior where it aims to explain all the behavior with NF or GP. For
instance, one failure mode could be that the NF defaults to an identity flow and the GPs
learn all of the behavior. This could give us good fits for training data, but because the
GPs inherently do not consider other channels, correlations between the data are lost.
From Section 1, we know that correlations provide rich insights, and thus performance
on unseen data could suffer. For that reason, we hypothesis when the FTGP model con-
verges to a good fit, the complexity terms of its two subcomponents will be balanced. This
can indicate that the models are sharing the learning tasks equally among themselves,
and that thus gives stable, well-performing results. In this section, we consider the effect
of balance between the models on model performance.
Figure 7.8: Log Marginal Likelihood vs the ratio of submodel complexities for all FTGP
models for the functional s dataset
In Figure 7.8, we have plotted the Log Marginal Likelihood (LML) of the predictions as a
function of the ratio of the submodel complexities, GP complexity
NF complexity . The GP complexity term
is the complexity term in the LML function, whereas the NF complexity term is the log
determinant which acts as a regulizer in the NF objective, as given in Section 3.2.
Figure 7.9: Log Marginal Likelihood vs the ratio of submodel learning ratios for all FTGP
models for the functional s dataset
Figure 7.9 shows LML once again, but with the x axis describing the ratio between the
GP learning rate to the NF learning rate. Both plots show the data from only the GPAR
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
31
==PAGE:40==
dataset, as it is representative of the behavior throughout the datasets. The plots for the
other two datasets can be found in Appendix 10.6.
Once again we do not see any apparent trends in these graphs, meaning that the balance
of complexities between submodels nor the balance of learning rates between submodels
has an effect on the model’s ability to learn the data.
7.5.3
Performance with an Alternating Optimizer
In the last section, the evidence suggested that the balance between FTGP’s subcompo-
nents is not the factor responsible for the model’s wide range of performance. Another
competing idea is that the models are acting independently and their mechanisms are
entirely different; therefore, perhaps they are working on different orders of magnitude
and should not be considered equally.
To take this line of reasoning one step further, we can consider the fact that the models
individually learn at different speeds. We hypothesize that the FTGP model will converge
faster when the more complicated model, Normalizing Flows, begins learning before the
Gaussian Processes. We also hypothesize that the FTGP model will converge faster
when the model alternates between training the Gaussian Processes for a short time and
the Normalizing Flows for a substantially longer time.
To test our hypothesis, we devised an experiment where we test the effect of having the
submodels learn separately, as well as having one submodel learn for a significant portion
of the epochs first, before the other learns at all. To do this, we decided on the following
hyperparameters and parameters to keep constant while varying what the optimizer acts
on. We trained only using the functional s dataset on seed 0, with 20,000 epochs for each.
Data was tested with only one seed, due to time and resource constraints.
Specifically, the types of optimizers that we tested are given in the Model column of the
tables, including Table 7.5. Joint optimization refers to optimizing both submodels at the
same time, and it serves as the baseline. Then, we conducted three tests where we varied
which submodel was being optimized, in a 100 epoch cycle. We tested first training GP
for 50 epochs, 10 epochs, and 90 epochs, then NF for 50 epochs,90 epochs, and 10
epochs, respectively. Fially we tested training only NF or only GP for the first 1000 epochs
of 20,000 epochs, then training jointly.
Table 7.5: GPAR results
Model
GPAR
RMSE
MAE
NLPD
FD
Joint Optimization (Baseline)
0.843
0.692
137.597
1.233
Alternating 50 epochs GPs, 50 epochs NF
1.189
0.797
-329.355
1.533
Alternating 10 epochs GPs, 90 epochs NF
0.313
0.234
255.391
0.441
Alternating 90 epochs GPs, 10 epochs NF
0.154
0.106
-6.356
0.216
Only NF for 1000 epochs, then joint
2.848
1.645
1310.681
3.229
Only GP for 1000 epochs, then joint
0.418
0.288
94.698
0.593
Tables 7.5, 7.6, 7.7 shows these tests, and the resulting metrics of those tests for the train-
ing set. In Appendix 10.5, there is also a supplementary set of plots showing predictions
along with true data.
Let us first consider Table 7.5. Recall that for all these metrics, a lower value corresponds
to a lower performance. Thus, the best performing model is training 90 epochs of GP
then 10 epochs of NF. It scores the lowest for all metrics except NLPD, for which the
32
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:41==
Table 7.6: Functional S results
Model
Functional S
RMSE
MAE
NLPD
FD
Joint Optimization (Baseline)
0.7740
0.5740
248.0131
1.1311
Alternating 50 epochs GPs, 50 epochs NF
0.478
0.350
-396.974
0.473
Alternating 10 epochs GPs, 90 epochs NF
8.780
5.106
-234.032
11.617
Alternating 90 epochs GPs, 10 epochs NF
0.510
0.356
263.419
0.474
Only NF for 1000 epochs, then joint
0.476
0.343
481.604
0.688
Only GP for 1000 epochs, then joint
0.453
0.330
138.307
0.658
Table 7.7: Functional B results
Model
Functional B
RMSE
MAE
NLPD
FD
Joint Optimization (Baseline)
0.761
0.559
940.119
1.102
Alternating 50 epochs GPs, 50 epochs NF
0.743
0.530
620.941
0.572
Alternating 10 epochs GPs, 90 epochs NF
0.728
0.539
1218.026
0.621
Alternating 90 epochs GPs, 10 epochs NF
0.752
0.553
270.110
0.616
Only NF for 1000 epochs, then joint
0.745
0.529
526.787
1.087
Only GP for 1000 epochs, then joint
0.715
0.530
668.164
1.071
50-50 method scores the lowest. However, the 50-50 method scores -329.355, which is
unreasonably negative, and it has some of the highest other metrics. If we look at Figure
7.10, which shows the predictions of this method, we see they are not close. Therefore,
there is an error with NLPD which needs to be further explored. We also see that starting
with optimizing NF and giving the NF more time to train than the GP in an optimization
cycle shows the worst performing behavior.
For the Functional S dataset, given in Table 7.6, we see that the GP first optimizer has the
lowest RMSE, MAE, and non-negative NLPD, but not the lowest FD. On the other hand,
for the Functional B dataset, given in Table 7.7, we see the 90-10 epoch cycle alternating
optimizer having the lowest NLPD and FD, with the GP first optimizer having the lowest
RMSE and NF first optimizer having the lowest MAE. For one, we highlight the downside
to testing with only run and one seed, since the difference between the two lowest MAEs
in this dataset are only different by 0.01, and therefore we cannot rule out the possibility
that these results may change with more or different data.
We note from these tables is that the behavior differs between datasets, the differences
between some of these metrics are comparatively small to the scale of the metrics, and
we have some inherent suspicion of the metrics, as for Table 7.5. However, it seems that
alternating the optimizers in a cycle with 10 epochs of GP and 90 of NF, or starting with
NF, have the worst performance. This goes against or hypothesis, that since NF is more
complicated, it requires more optimization. This could in turn indicate that the NF should
play a smaller role in the FTGP. In spite of that, the aforementioned difficulties with this
data lead us to conclude that more experimentation is needed to give definite results.
7.5.4
Analysis of Training Plots
With the above hypotheses on what could be causing instability met with inconclusive
results, we turn to analyzing the before during training. Analyzing this behavior can let
us determine if the model is learning in line with our expectations, and how the training
behavior varies between runs.
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 7.10: Predictions for the GPAR dataset using an optimizer with a strategy of cycling
through 50 epochs of optimizing NF, and 50 of optimizing GP
Figure 7.12b shows the training plot corresponding to a model with undesireable behavior.
The GP hyperparameters correspond with this narrative. Two of the GP likelihoods are
on the order of thousands, and one output scale is above 30. Given that the training data
has been standardized, both are orders of magnitude above what these values feasibly
could be. We also see the lengthscales converge towards zero. Since the lengthscale
tells us how far away points can be and still influence one another, this is also indicating
that the model has determined the data points to be essentially independent from one
another. Because GP are based on leveraging these correlations to create predictions, a
lengthscale approaching zero means it loses much of its predictive power.
On the right-hand side of the plot, we see the stochastic terms in the LML as well as the
NF regularizer for the FTGP objective. We see the initial values for these start at a much
less optimal condition than the better model, given by the equivalent plots in Figure 7.12a.
This is due to GP data term being two orders of magnitude more negative, when we aim
to maximize this value. This could perhaps indicate the effect of initial conditions on the
model. In the other hand, after the starting conditions, we do see that the behavior jumps
significantly in a relatively short period of time, given the whole training period. To explore
it more, perhaps one could plot the final training metrics as a function of the initial objective
or GP data term function.
In Figure 7.12a, we see the training behavior of the representative good run. On the
right-hand side, we see the NF log determinant slowing its rate of change, but still not
having plateaued after 20,000 epochs. We also see that before the 5,000 epoch mark,
there was a significant jump, since the log determinant and GP complexity term change
suddenly. We are only using a weight decay on our optimizer and not otherwise controlling
the change in learning rate. Therefore, we would not expect such a jump and it being there
34
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:43==
Figure 7.11: Predictions for the GPAR dataset using an optimizer with a strategy of cycling
through 90 epochs of optimizing NF, and 10 of optimizing GP
could indicate instability, as well.
On the left-hand side, we see two of the likelihoods converging to zero. This is lower than
we expect, since we added noise to data with variance of 0.05. Therefore, the model’s
certainty exceeds the actual noise in the data, and therefore must be overfitting. We also
see the third channel’s lengthscale suddenly start increasing at a higher rate after 15,000
epochs. Finally, we see the second channel’s output scale rising steadily throughout the
whole training, with the other two channels’ output scales also increasing, but at a slower
rate. We would expect the variable to plateau and for those values to not exceed one.
This particular behavior of the output scale increasing steadily or being a large numerical
value is representative of the data. Therefore, even for an FTGP model with good visual
behavior, we see that the internal behavior is not stable and may be indicative of a larger
issue with the model.
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) FTGP model given in Figure 7.5a
(b) FTGP model given in Figure 7.5b
Figure 7.12: Corresponding training plots for the two representative FTGP models
36
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:45==
8
Future Work
Because both proposed novel models have not been successful, the most pertinent next
steps for this thesis is to continue exploring how the models fail, why they fail, and how to
improve them. It is similarly important to ensure that environment in which testing occurs
is more robust. That is to say, ensuring the metrics are representative and that enough
testing is done across seeds and runs to draw conclusions from the data.
That being said, the first step I would take is to debug the metrics further in depth. That
would involve looking at specific cases where the results are higher or lower than ex-
pected, given the plots. It would also involve inspecting negative NLPD values. The
dimensions being as expected and aligned with documentation requirements has already
been tested, but further testing could be done that the metric functions are handling di-
mensions correctly.
With more time, the next step I would take would be to integrate a scheduled optimizer
for both models, such as the Pytorch Cosine Scheduler. [21] Schedulers such as cosine
schedulers vary the learning rate of the optimizers, for example in a oscillatory way. In this
way, the optimizer can converge to solutions, while still exploring different areas of the so-
lution space. We would implement this scheduler, run all randomized search experiments
again, and observe any changes.
Otherwise, for TDNF, we would aim to answer is if it is capable of learning behavior or not.
That would entail exploring deeper as to what the model is learning- whether it is trapped
in a local minima that is not representative, and whether it is exploring the space of the
global optima but honing in on it. If the former proves correct, then better initial conditions
can improve it, and if the latter proves to be correct, then the scheduler optimizer should
improve it as well.
For FTGP, the first thing to check would be fixing the output scale. From Section 7.5.4, we
know that even with visually well preforming models, the output scale increases linearly.
Instead, we can fix the output scale to 1. We can do this because there could be a
symmetry between the output scale and the NF regularization term, the log determinant.
This relationship would be explored further.
Furthermore, we can devise new ways of exploring the differences between models that
perform well and ones that do not. For example, we can use dimensionality reduction like
PCA to see if well performing models have high variance across the dimensions, or low.
We can also include the models which did not finish training back into the analysis, and
focus on what those models had in common.
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
37
==PAGE:46==
9
Conclusions
The two proposed models- Time Dependent Normalizing Flows (TDNF) and Flow-Transformed
Gaussian Processes (FTGP) - proved to not predict well nor reliably to varying degrees,
during the timespan of this project. Both models were tested on three synthetic datasets.
50 random sets of hyperparameters and parameters were chosen for each dataset and
each model to be tested five times, for five different random seeds. The results of said
tests were then analyzed with plots and four chosen metrics: root-mean squared error,
mean absolute error, negative log predictive density, and a metric we customly made for
the nature of our model, which we have termed frequency distance.
We conducted initial comparisons as to chosen FTGP and TDNF models performance
to the baselines of a series of Single-Output Gaussian Processes and a Multi-Output
Gaussian Process. These results suggested that TDNF performs poorly, but FTGP is
able to perform on par with the baselines.
The visual inspection of the runs from the randomized search on Time-Dependent Normal-
izing Flows confirms our baseline comparison- the model cannot learn the latent behavior
of the data. From a representative subset of the training plots, we see that the objec-
tive, complexity and log likelihood values change drastically through the 20,000 epochs
of training. This implies that the model is not converging. We also see from the predic-
tion plots and training plots that the behavior differs significantly between seeds from a
given run, implying that the model is sensitive to setup. The extent of TDNF’s inability to
learn the latent behavior of the data makes it infeasible to currently use. More research
is needed to determine whether the issue stems from an error of implementation, model
sensitivity, or feasibility of the model overall.
Applying the same visual inspection on the randomized search of Flow-Transformed Gaus-
sian Processes, we see the model is able to learn and predict the behavior well in some
cases, while not in others. We therefore conducted a series of experiments to test our
assumptions about the model and how it was failing. We tested whether its ability was
tied to the value of one of its hyperparameters or parameters, or if it is contingent on the
balance between parameters between its submodels. We were not able to detect a notice-
able effect from these experiments. We also tested the effect of alternating the optimizer
to act on the model’s two subcomponents in varied ways. We compared optimizing the
subcomponents jointly, to three ways of alternating between the models in a 100 epoch
cycle, and initially optimizing only one subcomponent then jointly. Inside the results of
each dataset, the behavior between the metrics varied, so that there was not a clearly
superior method that produced the most optimal value between the metrics. Similarly,
which method scored highest or lowest for which metric differed between the datasets.
Thus, the model behavior overall was instable and we were not able to determine factors
driving its performance. Nonetheless, compared to TDNF, the propensity of the model to
learn latent behavior occasionally is promising.
38
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Mauricio A Álvarez. “Multiple-output Gaussian processes”. en. In: ().
[2]
Roger Frigola-Alcalde. “Bayesian Time Series Learning with Gaussian Processes”.
en. In: ().
[3]
Haitao Liu, Jianfei Cai, and Yew-Soon Ong. “Remarks on multi-output Gaussian
process regression”. en. In: Knowledge-Based Systems 144 (Mar. 2018), pp. 102–
121. issn: 09507051. doi: 10.1016/j.knosys.2017.12.034.
[4]
Kian Ming Adam Chai. “Multi-task Learning with Gaussian Processes”. en. In: ().
[5]
Guokun Lai et al. “Modeling Long- and Short-Term Temporal Patterns with Deep
Neural Networks”. en. In: The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Re-
search & Development in Information Retrieval. Ann Arbor MI USA: ACM, June
2018, pp. 95–104. isbn: 978-1-4503-5657-2. doi: 10.1145/3209978.3210006. url:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3209978.3210006.
[6]
Kashif Rasul et al. “Multivariate Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting via Condi-
tioned Normalizing Flows”. en. In: arXiv:2002.06103 (Jan. 2021). arXiv:2002.06103
[cs, stat]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06103.
[7]
James Requeima et al. “The Gaussian Process Autoregressive Regression Model
(GPAR)”. en. In: arXiv:1802.07182 (Feb. 2019). arXiv:1802.07182 [stat]. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1802.07182.
[8]
Zoubin Ghahramani. “Probabilistic machine learning and artificial intelligence”. en.
In: Nature 521.7553 (May 2015), pp. 452–459. issn: 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi:
10.1038/nature14541.
[9]
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian processes for
machine learning. en. 3. print. Adaptive computation and machine learning. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2008. isbn: 978-0-262-18253-9.
[10]
Wessel P. Bruinsma et al. “Autoregressive Conditional Neural Processes”. In: arXiv:2303.14468
(Mar. 2023). arXiv:2303.14468 [cs, stat]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14468.
[11]
Mauricio A. Alvarez, Lorenzo Rosasco, and Neil D. Lawrence. “Kernels for Vector-
Valued Functions: a Review”. In: arXiv:1106.6251 (Apr. 2012). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
1106.6251. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1106.6251.
[12]
mogptk API documentation. url: https://games-uchile.github.io/mogptk.
[13]
Ivan Kobyzev, Simon J. D. Prince, and Marcus A. Brubaker. “Normalizing Flows:
An Introduction and Review of Current Methods”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 43.11 (Nov. 2021). arXiv:1908.09257 [cs, stat],
pp. 3964–3979. issn: 0162-8828, 2160-9292, 1939-3539. doi: 10 . 1109 / TPAMI .
2020.2992934.
[14]
lecture4 - 02477 Bayesian machine learning Spring 23.
[15]
S. Roberts et al. “Gaussian processes for time-series modelling”. In: Philosophi-
cal Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences 371.1984 (Feb. 2013), p. 20110550. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2011.0550.
[16]
Gabriel Parra and Felipe Tobar. “Spectral Mixture Kernels for Multi-Output Gaussian
Processes”. en. In: ().
[17]
George Papamakarios et al. “Normalizing Flows for Probabilistic Modeling and In-
ference”. en. In: ().
[18]
Normal Distribution. Feb. 2022. url: https://www.mathsisfun.com/data/standard-
normal-distribution.html.
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
39
==PAGE:48==
[19]
Digital Audio Chapter Five: Nyquist Frequency. url: https://cmtext.indiana.edu/
digital_audio/chapter5_nyquist.php.
[20]
url: https://github.com/GAMES-UChile/mogptk/blob/8bd5793ae6846aec7cb690acf1526af7836825d3/
mogptk/model.py#L608.
[21]
CosineAnnealingLR — PyTorch 2.4 documentation. url: https://pytorch.org/docs/
stable/generated/torch.optim.lr_scheduler.CosineAnnealingLR.html.
40
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:49==
10
Appendix
10.1
Baseline Comparison Model Parameters
Table 10.1: Chosen Hyperparameters and Parameters for FTGP Baseline Analysis
Datasets
Selected Model Parameters
GPAR
Functional S
Functional B
NF Learning Rate
0.00882
0.000409
0.000778
GP Learning Rate
0.00145
0.00023
0.00037
GP Lengthscale
0.700
1.318
0.130
GP Outputscale
0.162
0.790
1.110
GP Likelihood
0.004
0.037
0.025
Depth of NF Conditioner
4
3
3
Width of NF Conditioner
22
26
23
Number of Flow Layers
6
16
10
Table 10.2: Chosen Hyperparameters and Parameters for SOGP Baseline Analysis
Datasets
Selected Model Parameters
GPAR
Functional S
Functional B
NF Learning Rate
1e-4
1e-4
1e-4
GP Learning Rate
1e-4
1e-4
1e-4
GP Lengthscale 1
1.0
1.0
1.0
GP Lengthscale 2
0.1
0.1
0.05
GP Outputscale
0.5
0.5
0.5
GP Likelihood
1.0
1.0
1.0
Table 10.3: Chosen Hyperparameters and Parameters for New Baseline Analysis
Datasets
Selected Model Parameters
GPAR
Functional S
Functional B
NF Learning Rate
0.0009
0.004
0.004
Depth of NF Conditioner
4
9
9
Width of NF Conditioner
28
20
20
Number of Flow Layers
4
10
10
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 10.1: Example of seed from chosen FTGP model for Functional S dataset
42
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:51==
Figure 10.2: Example of seed from chosen TDNF model for Functional S dataset
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 10.3: Example of chosen SOGP model for Functional S dataset
10.2
Additional Baseline Comparisons
Table 10.4: RMSE for Dataset GPAR
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
0.182
1.246
0.989
MOGP
1.871 ± 0
1.83
1.73
FTGP
0.213 ± 0.112
1.88 ± 0.54
0.87 ± 0.24
TDNF
1.214 ± 0.021
1.142 ± 0.051
1.721 ± 0.177
Table 10.5: MAE for Dataset GPAR
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
0.136
1.030
0.741
MOGP
1.32 ± 0
1.40
1.24
FTGP
0.165 ± 0.081
1.34 ± 0.38
0.59 ± 0.16
TDNF
1.053 ± 0.031
1.010 ± 0.024
1.456 ± 0.136
44
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:53==
Table 10.6: NLPD for Dataset GPAR
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
-1.143
1.393
0.493
MOGP
-
-
-
FTGP
72 ± 157
3749 ± 5871
121 ± 158
TDNF
0.737 ± 0.025
0.653 ± 0.060
1.494 ± 0.323
Table 10.7: FD for Dataset GPAR
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
0.189
1.214
1.344
MOGP
10.783 ± 0
8.39
10.73
FTGP
0.31 ± 0.16
2.47 ± 0.68
1.05 ± 0.28
TDNF
1.313 ± 0.138
1.535 ± 0.141
1.912 ± 0.283
Table 10.8: RMSE for Dataset Functional B
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
0.852
0.936
0.844
MOGP
0.184
0.357
0.187
FTGP
0.098 ± 0.012
0.77 ± 0.13
0.72 ± 0.08
TDNF
1.214 ± 0.021
1.142 ± 0.051
1.721 ± 0.177
Table 10.9: MAE for Dataset Functional B
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
0.657
0.760
0.669
MOGP
0.153
0.279
0.157
FTGP
0.522 ± 0.034
0.54 ± 0.06
0.50 ± 0.02
TDNF
1.053 ± 0.031
1.010 ± 0.024
1.456 ± 0.136
Table 10.10: NLPD for Dataset Functional B
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
-0.132
0.300
0.163
MOGP
-
-
-
FTGP
2071 ± 167
2082 ± 176
2063 ± 159
TDNF
0.737 ± 0.025
0.653 ± 0.060
1.494 ± 0.323
Table 10.11: FD for Dataset Functional B
Model
Interpolation [0.4, 0.6]
Extrapolation [-0.25, 0]
Extrapolation [1, 1.25]
SOGP
0.469
1.096
0.771
MOGP
0.626
1.212
0.907
FTGP
1.03 ± 0.03
1.15 ± 0.15
1.07 ± 0.05
TDNF
1.313 ± 0.138
1.535 ± 0.141
1.912 ± 0.283
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
45
==PAGE:54==
10.3
FTGP Randomized Search Heatmaps and Correlation
Plots
Figure 10.4: Example of Correlation Plots
Figure 10.5: GPAR Randomized Search Heatmap
46
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:55==
Figure 10.6: Functional S Randomized Search Heatmap
10.4
Additional Parallel Coordinate Plots
Figure 10.7: Parallel Coordinates Plot for GPAR based on NLPD using Non-GP variables
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 10.8: Parallel Coordinates Plot for GPAR based on NLPD using GP variables
Figure 10.9: Parallel Coordinates Plot for Functional S based on RMSE using Non-GP
variables
48
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:57==
Figure 10.10: Parallel Coordinates Plot for Functional S based on RMSE using GP vari-
ables
Figure 10.11: Parallel Coordinates Plot for Functional B based on RMSE using Non-GP
variables
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 10.12: Parallel Coordinates Plot for Functional B based on RMSE using GP vari-
ables
10.5
Accompanying Plots to Alternating Optimizer Tests
Figure 10.13: Predictions for the GPAR dataset using an optimizer with a strategy of the
first 1000 epochs optimizing only GP
50
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:59==
10.6
Additional Ratio Plots
Figure 10.14: Log Marginal Likelihood vs the ratio of submodel complexities for all FTGP
models for the GPAR dataset
Figure 10.15: Log Marginal Likelihood vs the ratio of submodel learning ratios for all FTGP
models for the GPAR dataset
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 10.16: Log Marginal Likelihood vs the ratio of submodel complexities for all FTGP
models for the Functional B dataset
Figure 10.17: Log Marginal Likelihood vs the ratio of submodel learning ratios for all FTGP
models for the Functional B dataset
52
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
==PAGE:61==
Probabilistic Modelling of Correlated Signals
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
