==PAGE:1==
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for
Molecular Properties
Master Thesis
Paul Seghers
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
Master Thesis
November, 2024
By
Paul Seghers
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Søltofts Plads
228A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.kt.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared at the Department of Chemical and Biochemical engineer­
ing at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Mas­
ter of Science in Computer Science and Engineering ( study line: ”Artificial Intelligence
& Algorithms”). The project was conducted under the supervision of Associate professor
Jens Abildskov and Postdoctoral researcher Adem Rosenkvist Nielsen Aouichaoui from
the center of process systems engineering (PROSYS).
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Declaration of the use of generative AI tools
During the preparation of this work the author used the free versions of ChatGPT 3.5 and 4
to improve the readability and language of the manuscript (OpenAI 2024). After using this
tool, the author reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for
the content of the published article. No new content or ideas were generated using any
generative artificial intelligence tools. Suggestions given by the AI tools were carefully
reviewed and edited, since the AI can generate output that can be incorrect, incomplete,
or biased. This also follows the decision of DTU to open for the use of AI in teaching.
Paul Seghers ­ s191675
Signature
Date
ii
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:5==
Abstract ­ English
This thesis investigates the application of hybrid Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for molec­
ular property prediction, with a focus on heat capacity. It develops and evaluates hybrid
modeling frameworks combining mechanistic and data­driven methods. Fragment­based
GNN architectures such as GroupGAT and AGC, are introduced and benchmarked under
various configurations. After identifying and investigating different hybrid modeling con­
figurations, key findings demonstrate that a Hybrid configuration that directly integrates
the heat­capacity equation layer into a Graph Neural Networks layers exhibited very good
performance. Attempts to observe the phenomenon of grokking—profound model gener­
alization after extended training—was inconclusive, underscoring challenges in applying
this concept to real­world datasets. The work provides robust code and methodologies
for future research in computational chemistry.
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstrakt ­ Dansk
Dette speciale undersøger anvendelsen af Graf Neurale Netværk (GNN) til forudsigelsen
af molekylære egenskaber, med fokus på varmekapacitet egenskabet. Der udvikles og
evalueres hybride modelleringsrammer, som kombinerer mekanistiske og datadrevne
metoder. Fragmentbaserede GNN­arkitekturer som GroupCAT og AGC introduceres og
benchmarkes i forskellige konfigurationer. Vores vigtigeste resultater viser, at en hybrid­
konifiguration som direkte integrerer varmekapacitetslignings i et GNN­lag udviser meget
ydeevne. Forsøg på at observere fænomenet grokkning (dyb modelgeneralisering efter
udvidet træning) var ikke entydigt, hvilket understreger udfordringerne for anvendelsen af
dette koncept til ikke syntetisk data. Arbejdet giver robust kode og metodologi for fremtidig
forskning i komputerbaseret kemi.
iv
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Adem R. N. Aouichaoui, Postdoctoral researcher, PROSYS
For his guidance and invaluable help.
Matthias Hasler
For his deep knowledge of Pytorch.
My Parents
For motivating me and teaching me that good things lie on the other side of hard work.
Romain, Casper, and Jonah
For being there when it mattered.
Le monde est composé de flèches et de molécules, et d’électricité, comme le Big­Bang
tu vois? Et tout ça ensemble, ça forme l’Univers.
Jean­Claude Van Damme 1
1This was part of what a famous Belgian once said when asked in an interview to give his understanding
of modern science and the universe. Although he was known more for his contributions to the field of martial
arts and bodybuilding than to that of science, there is perhaps some hidden knowledge in this cryptic quote,
which can roughly be translated to ”The world is composed of arrows and molecules, of electricity, just like
the Big Bang, you see? And all that, together, forms the Universe”
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract ­ English
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
Hybrid Modeling in Chemical Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Graph Neural Networks for Property Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Hybrid Graph Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Data & Methods
9
3.1
Property Selection & Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Hybrid modelling Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
GNN Architecture and Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Reproduceability and Usability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Training and Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.6
Grokking Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Results and Discussion
27
4.1
Comparison of Hybrid modeling patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Grokking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Practicalities and roadblocks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Code & Qualitative results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.5
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Conclusions and Perspectives
39
5.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Bibliography
41
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Molecules are the fundamental building blocks that compose everything in our physical
world, from the air we breathe to the materials we use in our daily lives. Our modern soci­
ety’s advancement and maintenance heavily depend on our understanding and utilization
of these molecular structures. The discovery and development of new molecules have
become increasingly crucial in addressing some of humanity’s most pressing challenges,
such as climate change and global pandemics. Whether it’s developing new renewable
energy materials or discovering novel pharmaceutical compounds, our ability to identify
and create molecules with specific properties is fundamental to scientific progress.
The discovery of new molecules is inherently tied to our ability to identify compounds with
desired properties. In chemical engineering and process simulation, these properties
span a wide range of characteristics: from thermodynamic properties like heat capacity,
vapor pressure, and critical points, to transport properties such as viscosity and ther­
mal conductivity, to environmental properties like toxicity and biodegradability. Additional
properties of interest include solubility parameters, partition coefficients, and surface ten­
sion, which are crucial for process design and optimization.
However, determining these properties through laboratory experiments for each molecule
of interest is increasingly impractical. As highlighted by Reymond et al. (2015) [1], the
known chemical space contains over 166 billion small organic molecules with up to 17
atoms of C, N, O, S, and halogens, making exhaustive experimental investigation virtually
impossible. This vast chemical space, combined with the time and resource intensity of
laboratory measurements, necessitates the development of reliable predictive models,
specifically Quantitative Structure­Property Relationships (QSPR).
In chemical engineering, QSPR models have traditionally relied on group contribution
methods. These methods operate by breaking down molecules into functional groups
and assuming that each group contributes additively to the target property. For instance,
group contribution methods have been successfully applied to predict properties such as
normal boiling points, critical properties, and standard enthalpies of formation. The ap­
proach has proven particularly valuable for its interpretability and relatively straightforward
implementation in process simulators.
However, group contribution methods face significant limitations when dealing with prop­
erties that are functions of temperature, such as heat capacity and saturated vapor pres­
sure. The relationship between these properties and intensive variables is often highly
non­linear, making it difficult for traditional group contribution approaches to capture these
dependencies accurately. This limitation has left a significant gap in our predictive capa­
bilities for these crucial properties.
Recent advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence have opened new avenues
for property prediction. Particularly, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a
promising approach, offering the ability to learn directly from molecular structures without
requiring the elaboration of explicit descriptors. These models can capture complex, non­
linear relationships between molecular structure and properties, potentially overcoming
some limitations of traditional methods.
However, this brings us to a fundamental question in molecular property prediction: can
we combine the best aspects of both data­driven and mechanistic approaches? Data­
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
1
==PAGE:12==
driven methods offer powerful pattern recognition capabilities but may lack physical con­
sistency, while mechanistic models provide theoretical rigor but sometimes struggle with
complex relationships. A hybrid approach could potentially leverage the strengths of both
paradigms.
ML­based models thrive when data are abundantly available. However, this is not always
the case in chemical engineering applications. An intriguing concept that could be par­
ticularly relevant to this hybrid approach is that of ”grokking”. The term was first coined
by Robert A. Heinlein’s in his science fiction novel ”Stranger in a Strange Land,” where it
described an alien species’ ability to thoroughly understand objects by physically consum­
ing them. The term was subsequently adopted by computer science culture, particularly
among programmers, to describe a deep, intuitive understanding of a subject that goes
beyond mere technical knowledge. In the context of machine learning, grokking refers
to a phenomenon where neural networks transition from simple memorization to genuine
comprehension of underlying patterns, demonstrating an ability to generalize beyond their
training data in meaningful ways. This concept is especially pertinent to our research, as it
suggests the possibility of neural networks developing a more fundamental understanding
of physical and chemical principles, rather than merely fitting data points. In the context
of molecular property prediction, a model that has ”grokked” the underlying physical rela­
tionships might be better equipped to maintain physical consistency while leveraging the
pattern­recognition capabilities of modern machine learning approaches. This could be
particularly valuable in bridging the gap between pure data fitting and meaningful physical
understanding in our hybrid modeling approach.
Given these considerations, this thesis aims to investigate the following research question:
Can we provide a framework to quantitatively identify which hybrid modeling approach
works best for the heat capacity problem, and can the resulting hybrid model benefit from
grokking?
Since the goal is to facilitate chemical research, we also aim to provide code which is easy
to use or build upon, to this end, we aim to make the hybrid modelling frameworks to be
developed a part of the GraPE python package, which has been developed by 3 Master
students at DTU under the supervision of Postdoctoral researcher Adem R. N. Aouichaoui.
This package is intended to be distributable and maintainable as any common python
package.
This will be acheived according to the following project plan:
• Investigate the literature for the different realization of hybrid modelling in QSPR
modelling
• Develop the pipeline for training Hybrid­GNN models
• Identify the various hybrid modeling configurations (single/multi­task & coupled/de­
coupled) and benchmark them across datasets and models
• Investigate the phenomenon of grokking in pure data­driven models and in hybrid
models
• Delivering easy­to­maintain and documented code
• Document findings in a final thesis report
2
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.1: Gantt Chart for this project
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
In this section, we review relevant aspects of previous work that has been conducted and
achieves results regarding the use of Graph Neural Networks in Chemical Modeling, the
principles of Hybrid Modeling for Chemical Applications, and the emergence of Hybrid
Graph Neural Networks in Chemical Modeling. We are particularly interested in modeling
problems that involve temperature­dependent properties.
2.1
Hybrid Modeling in Chemical Engineering
Hybrid modeling, which is the idea of combining mechanistic and data­driven models, in
an attempt to enjoy the desireable properties of both, has been widely reviewed in the
literature [2, 3] and has existed as a robust framework since at least the early 1990s [4].
Such models benefit from integrating models based on physical laws ”White­boxes” (i.e.
that we can explain) with the adaptability of machine learning (ML) models to account
for complex and nonlinear behaviors not captured by traditional methods. Despite their
advantages, models resulting from the training of ML algorithms are often referred to as
”Black Boxes”, after the fact that they are hard to interpret, and their mathematical logic
is hard to link back to domain knowledge of the problem they are being applied to.
An example of a hybrid ML application in chemical thermodynamics is presented in [5],
which introduces the ML­SAFT framework. This approach employs ML techniques to pre­
dict parameters for the Perturbed Chain Polar Statistical Associating Fluid Theory (PCP­
SAFT) equation of state, which is a mechanistic model used for phase equilibria calcu­
lations. The paper provides a framework in which various ML architectures can then be
integrated to train on the parameters fit by regression tasks on a mechanistic model, to
which experimental data is provided. Such work illustrate the strength of hybrid models
in leveraging data­driven insights to enhance traditional mechanistic approaches. In this
example, the mechanistic and data­driven tasks are de­coupled, i.e. the mechanistic task
produces a dataset, on which a datadriven approach is then trained.
Another work describes an alternative approach to combine domain­knowledge with Neu­
ral Networks, such as training for a physical property that is expected to be easier to learn,
on which another physical property depends or is linked with [6] . In this case, boiling point
and vapor pressure.
A common first step to most Data­driven approaches in chemical property prediction is
converting the SMILES [7] notation of a molecule into an object that can be taken as an
input by a machine learning model.
2.2
Graph Neural Networks for Property Prediction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for molecular prop­
erty prediction, leveraging graph representations of chemical structures.
GNN­based
pipelines begin by transforming molecular SMILES strings into graph representations.
These graphs encode atomic and bond­level features as input data for the GNN.
Prominent GNN architectures such as the Directed Message Passing Neural Network
(DMPNN), Chemprop, and Attentive Fingerprint (AFP) all are well suited for performing
computations based of a molecular graph, including tasks such as property prediction.
Both of these NN architectures can make good use of featurization methods to represent
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
5
==PAGE:16==
chemical information on a molecule’s graph [8]. A common characteristic among these
models is the use of multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) as a final component in their pipelines,
where the GNN­generated outputs are fed input into linear MLP layers in order to produce
numerical predictions.
Recent work highlights the utility of GNNs for predicting temperature­dependent activity
coefficients of solutes in ionic liquids [9]. By addressing limitations in mechanistic models
like COSMO­RS and UNIFAC, this GNN­based approach demonstrates superior gener­
alizability, making it particularly effective for observations not included in the training data,
which was a common drawback of previous non­ML QSPR methods for the same prob­
lem.
Another notable work is the attempt to develop thermodynamics­consistent GNNs [10].
These models use the excess Gibbs free energy as a basis for predicting activity coef­
ficients. By incorporating fundamental thermodynamic relations into the network archi­
tecture, the models achieve both high accuracy and intrinsic thermodynamic consistency
without the need for additional loss terms.
Finally, two models which will be very relevant to us are the ones built on top of the At­
tentiveFP architecture, which run the graph attention mechanism on different ”views” or
representations of a molecule and combine their outputs. The main examples of this are
PUFFIN [6] and FraGAT [11] which in turn gave rise to GroupGAT and AGC [12, 13].
2.3
Hybrid Graph Neural Networks
Hybrid graph neural networks incorporate domain knowledge into ML pipelines to improve
predictions and enforce physical consistency. One approach involves embedding equa­
tions into the loss function. For example, Gibbs–Duhem­informed GNNs [14] include the
Gibbs–Duhem equation as a regularization term, allowing the model to maintain thermo­
dynamic consistency while preserving ML flexibility. This approach also extends to hybrid
architectures combining GNNs and matrix completion methods (MCMs).
An application of hybrid GNNs to activity coefficient prediction is described in [8], which
introduces a fingerprint­based approach to predict infinite dilution activity coefficients. The
model compares favorably to mechanistic methods, demonstrating that GNN ensembles
trained on residuals of mechanistic predictions achieve high accuracy. Additionally, the in­
clusion of temperature­dependent features further enhances the predictive performance.
The Gibbs–Helmholtz Graph Neural Network (GH­GNN) [15] extends this framework by
incorporating the Gibbs–Helmholtz equation to capture the temperature dependence of
activity coefficients at infinite dilution. This model predicts coefficients for a mechanistic
equation and achieves superior accuracy compared to popular methods.
Transfer learning is also explored in a modified GH­GNN for polymer solutions [16]. By
reusing pretrained model components, the authors achieve improved performance on
polymer­specific activity coefficient predictions, showcasing the adaptability of hybrid GNN
approaches across different domains.
In general, the work on Gibbs­Helmholtz By training on temperature­dependent data, the
GH­GNN outperforms models restricted to isothermal datasets.
Together, these studies highlight the strengths of hybrid GNNs in combining the inter­
pretability of mechanistic principles with the predictive power of ML, paving the way for
more accurate and generalizable chemical property predictions.
6
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:17==
In both the purely data­driven GNN and Hybrid­modeling approaches involving GNN,
there is not much work that has been done for the Heat Capacity of molecules. A scopus
search at this link (clickable) reveals the same thing. This shows that currently there is a
knowledge gap in methods to compute a molecule’s heat capacity using only its structure
that are both:
• thermodynamically well­founded
• accurate and susceptible to be able to learn complex relationships between structure
and Cp’s numerical value.
One takeaway that can be made from these works is that transfer learning can play a big
role in hybrid modelling for chemical property prediction. A more important takeaway is
that different ways of performing hybrid modelling, i.e. the way the mechanistic and data­
driven parts of a model are integrated with each other are suited for different problems,
depending on the target property, the available data, and the model choice. Quantita­
tively and empirically exploring the different configurations of hybrid modeling for a given
problem and dataset is thus a sound step to undertake when devising a hybrid­model for
a given chemical property prediction problem, and dedicating work towards doing this is
thus worthwhile.
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
7
==PAGE:18==
8
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:19==
3
Data & Methods
In this chapter an overview of the data as well as the various methods used is presented.
3.1
Property Selection & Data
The concept of hybrid modelling requires the presence of some mechanistic insight into
the phenomena in question. As such, various thermodynamic properties have been mod­
elled through either first principles or semi­empirical correlation. In this work, the concept
will be applied and demonstrated through the ideal gas heat capacity (ICP) or organic
compounds. Various correlations exists that require fluid­specific compounds and the
temperature as input in order to produce the temperature dependence of the ICP. In this
work, the correlation by [17] is used due to the fact that they reason that the developed
correlation constants contain a physical meaning that corresponds to different character­
istic temperatures and energy levels in the molecules. as such, these could potentially be
correlated to the structure of the molecule. the correlation is shown below
Cp = A + B


C
T
sinh C
T


2
+ D


E
T
sinh E
T


2
This equation is a perfect example that can be used to showcase the possible integration
of GNNs in a hybrid modeling pattern.
In this work, 1909 organic compounds were considered from the DIPPR (Design Institute
for Physical Properties) database. This database is maintained by the American Institute
of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) and contains critically evaluated experimental data for
various pure component properties [18]. For these 1909 compounds, 22962 measure­
ments were made, at different temperatures. Statistics over the data can be seen below
along with a distribution plot.
Figure 3.1: Distribution plots over the target property (heat capacity) and temperatures at
which observations were made
For all the present compounds, the A,B,C,D and E parameters were determined using dif­
ferential evolution algorithm [19]. This was done in a previous and related work [20]. The
parameter fitting yielded a coefficient of determination of 0.99 (R2), a mean absolute error
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
9
==PAGE:20==
(MAE) of 0.96 J/mol­K, and a mean absolute relative error of 0.43% (MRE or MARE). This
underlines that the property can be succcefully modeled using the developped correlation
in [17] and that the correlation has a wide range of applicability.
3.2
Hybrid modelling Patterns
When devising a hybrid modelling pattern for such a problem as coefficient prediction for
a Domain­knowledge based equation such as the Heat Capacity problem, two choices
can be made: Firstly, whether or not the data­driven part be trained on data that was fit
to the domain­knowledge (or mechanistic) model, and secondly whether or not a single
instance of a GNN should be used to predict all coefficients, or if a separate instance
should be trained for each coefficient.
From these questions, four distinct hybrid modeling patterns or configurations were de­
vised, for a given GNN and problem, in addition to purely data­driven approaches. Each
pattern has varying degrees of computational complexity.
As a convention, we will call patterns where a dataset of coefficients based on fitting a
regression to the mechanistic model is already known as de­coupled, and the case where
such a dataset is not used as coupled, because in this case the fitting of coefficients is
”coupled” to the model’s training from molecular structure. We will refer to ”single­task”
the configuration where multiple models which each produce a singleton output are used,
and ”multi­task” the cases where a single model learns a vector of all coefficients.
In this section we will showcase these 4 hybrid modeling patterns. Disclaimer in the dia­
grams shown below, the Neural­Networks parts (blue areas) are for illustrative purposes,
and to highlight the fact that two common components will always be present in the GNNs
that we will use in these hybrid modelling configurations: a way to go from a Molecule’s
Graph Structure to one or more embeddings that are suited for machine learning tasks,
and some Deep Neural Network layers to produce a prediction based on the embedding.
Details on the Actual Graph Neural Networks that were use and their implementations will
be covered in a later section.
Decoupled single­task
In the first class of configurations, a dataset is produced by non data­driven approaches:
either through experimental determination of the coefficients in the mechanistic model,
or by fitting a regression to them. Then, this dataset is used to train a GNN which takes
molecular structure into account. Once the dataset of coefficients is produced, we are
performing a data­driven training, which is why this approach is called de­coupled: the
structure of molecules and mechanistic physics informed layer are taken into account
separately.
10
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: Decoupled Single­task GNN and embedding diagrams are for illustrative pur­
poses only
The first decoupled approach we consider involves training a single GNN instance for
each coefficient (the grey boxes in the blue section), with independent weights, hyper
parameters, and training/evaluation loops to learn each coefficient. In this case, an ele­
ment of the dataset we train on will be of the form (Molecule, Coefficients) and the model
predicting the i­th coefficient (Molecule, Coefficientsi) will take
Decoupled multitask
Figure 3.3: Decoupled Multitask
In the second de­coupled approach, it is also possible to load all coefficients for a given
observation into a single vector, and train a model to learn all of these at the same time.
A single element of the dataset on is thus of the form (Molecule, Coefficients), and loss is
then computed over the entire vector.
Coupled multitask
In the coupled cases, there is no regression­based task: The mechanistic model is inte­
grated directly as the final layer of the data­driven task. These coefficients are learned
and then plugged into the final layer and loss is computed directly based on the Cp value.
In our case where we are working on predicting a temperature­dependent property, this
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
11
==PAGE:22==
means the temperature at which a Cp observation from the training set was made also
needs to be provided to the model. An element of the dataset is then (Molecule, T, Cp)
where T is the temperature.
Disclaimer: in the diagrams shown below, the computation for Cp is a placeholder to
signify that the equation for a mechanistic model can be inserted into the training loop of
models, and is not the actual expression of the heat capacity equation.
Figure 3.4: Coupled Multitask
Coupled single­task
As in the de­coupled case, a separate model can also be trained for each coefficient. In
this case gradients need to be propagated from the loss computed on the Cp­layer.
Figure 3.5: Coupled Multitask
3.2.1
Gradients in the Coupled single­task case
If we are computing with a loss function such as MSE Loss defined as
12
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:23==
Loss = 1
N
N
X
i=1

ˆCp,i −Cp,i
2
where: ­ ˆCp,i is the predicted Cp value for the i­th sample, calculated by the ‘CpLayer‘. ­
Cp,i is the ground truth Cp value for the i­th sample.
During the backward pass, gradients are computed for each parameter of the sub­models
based on the MSE loss. The chain rule in backpropagation ensures that each sub­model
receives appropriate gradients through ‘CpLayer‘.
Partial Derivative of Loss w.r.t. Cp
∂Loss
∂ˆCp
= 2
N
N
X
i=1

ˆCp,i −Cp,i

Propagation through Nonlinear Components in Cp Gradients with respect to each sub­
model output (B, C, D, E, and F) are computed via the chain rule: ­ For instance, the
partial derivative with respect to B is:
∂Loss
∂B
= ∂Loss
∂Cp
· 1
­ For C, D, and E, the chain rule takes into account the additional nonlinear terms, such
as sinh and cosh, leading to:
∂Loss
∂C
= ∂Loss
∂Cp
·
 
D
T
sinh
  D
T

!2
Each sub­model (e.g., self.models['A']) is a subclass of torch.nn.Module. By inher­
iting from torch.nn.Module, these sub­models automatically register their parameters
(e.g., weights and biases) for gradient computation. The operations inside the CpLayer,
such as D/T, sinh, and cosh, use PyTorch tensor methods (torch.div, torch.sinh, etc.)
that are autograd­enabled. PyTorch tracks these operations to construct the computation
Graph.
For example: ­ Division D/T creates a node in the graph linking the tensors D and T. ­
sinh and cosh add nonlinear transformations to the graph, preserving their derivatives for
backpropagation. Each model’s parameters are updated based on the gradients back­
propagated from Cp, allowing the ensemble to optimize towards the physical behavior
encoded in the formula.
PyTorch ensures proper gradient propagation through its computational graph, which is
automatically constructed during the forward pass. The key functionalities of PyTorch that
enable gradients to propagate correctly include the use of the torch.nn.Module class to­
gether with PyTorch’s autograd features. PyTorch uses automatic differentiation via the
‘torch.autograd‘ module. During the forward pass, PyTorch builds a dynamic computa­
tional graph that tracks all operations involving tensors with requires_grad=True. Py­
Torch can then ”follow” this graph to compute gradients during the backward pass using
the chain rule. More about autograd can be read in the paper ”Automatic Differentiation
in PyTorch” by Paszke et al. [Citation].
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
13
==PAGE:24==
­ ‘torch.nn.Module‘ ensures all parameters (e.g. weights in sub­models’ layers) are regis­
tered and accessible to the optimizer.
θ ←θ −η · ∂Loss
∂θ
where η is the learning rate.
Moreover, to not get exploding gradients, we were required to clamp the sinh and coh func­
tions. If this wasn’t done, many initializations and hyperparameter combinations would
very quickly lead to numerical overflows. This means the C_p layer looks like this:
1
class CpLayer(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self):
3
super(CpLayer , self).__init__()
4
5
def forward(self, A, B, C, D, E, T):
6
epsilon = 1e-7
7
T = T.unsqueeze(1) + epsilon
8
9
# Clamp C_over_T and E_over_T to prevent extreme values
10
C_over_T = torch.clamp(C / T, min=-20, max=20)
11
E_over_T = torch.clamp(E / T, min=-20, max=20)
12
13
# Safe computations for sinh and cosh
14
def safe_sinh(x):
15
return torch.where(
16
# ... code base on torch.clamp()
17
)
18
19
def safe_cosh(x):
20
return torch.where(
21
# ... code base on torch.clamp()
22
)
23
24
sinh_term = safe_sinh(C_over_T) + epsilon
25
cosh_term = safe_cosh(E_over_T) + epsilon
26
27
Cp = A + B * ((C_over_T / sinh_term) ** 2) + D * ((E_over_T /
cosh_term) ** 2)
28
return Cp
The forward method is called on attributes of the main Neural Network’s class, and since
it is itself a torch.nn.Module, gradients can be propagated over its attributes. The code
for this can be seen in src/grape_chem/models/coupled_ensemble_module.py from the
root of the GraPE project.
Learning rate ­ particularly in the coupled multitask case ­ influenced a lot wether the
model converged or not, a high learning rate explored areas of the search space where
the values were too high causing numerical overflow problems and the loss taking the
value NaN which is a state that a training loop cannot recover from.
3.3
GNN Architecture and Implementation
In this section we will look at the two Graph Neural Network models we implemented
and used to perform experiments with our hybrid modelling configurations. These are
GroupGAT and AGC (TODO: cite papers and give full name Attentive Group Contribution
and GroupGraph Attention Network). As their names suggest, they are both based on a
14
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:25==
technique called the Graph Attention Mechanism, and more importantly on the Attentitve
Finger­print (or AttentiveFP) model which implements this mechanism in the context of
molecular structure. We will first introduce AttentiveFP, the Attention Mechanism, and the
preprocessing required for both GNN models, then we will showcase the architecture of
each model, and go over notable details of our own implementation.
For this section, the reader is invited to take a look at the code repository GraPE: Graph­
based Property Estimation, which can be found at this link or:
https://github.com/aerte/GraPE
3.3.1
The Graph Attention Mechanism
In the context of GNNs, attention is the mechanism by which a model can learn to as­
sign varying levels of importance (weights) to different parts of the input data or features,
allowing focus on the most relevant information for a specific task. (Cit. Attention is all
you need) The Graph Attention Mechanism is a way to capture the importance of struc­
tural relationships and feature relevance between nodes in a graph. The Graph Attention
mechanism works as follows, for a Node i whose set of neighbors is denotes N(i)
Each node’s feature vector is linearly transformed:
h′
i = Whi
where hi is the input feature vector for node i, and W is a shared weight matrix.
Then, for each of between node i and its neighbor j an attention score eij is computed
The attention coefficients αij are obtained by applying the softmax function over all neigh­
bors of node i:
αij = softmaxj (eij) =
exp(eij)
P
k∈N(i) exp(eik)
Node i then aggregates information from its neighbors:
hi = σ

X
j∈N(i)
αijh′
j


where σ is a non­linear activation function.
We can also have Multi­Head Attention, where multiple attention mechanisms are run
in parallel, with different initializations of attention matrices. For K attention heads, the
aggregated features are concatenated:
hi =
K
k=1σ

X
j∈N(i)
αk
ijW khj


where αk
ij and W k are the attention coefficients and transformation matrix for the k­th
head, respectively. The models we present below are based on the AttentiveFP model
[21]. AttentiveFP generates 1D embeddings of molecular graphs by iteratively updating
node feature vectors through graph attention layers. To obtain a single, 1D graph­level
embedding, the model employs a ”supernode” strategy, aggregating all node embeddings
—via e.g. summation or mean pooling— while retaining the most critical contributions
through attention. The implementation of AFP that we use in this work is a modified
version of the one provided in the Pytorch Geometric package, and uses summation.
Before describing how AFP was used to create more complex molecular structure GNN
models, we have to introduce the concept of the Junction Tree decomposition of Graphs.
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
15
==PAGE:26==
3.3.2
Preprocessing Algorithms
3.3.3
The Junction Tree decomposition Algorithm
The Junction Tree decomposition Algorithm is a common Graph Processing Algorithm. It
can be understood as producing a ”Graph of subgraphs” where information on connectivity
is preserved both between and within subgraphs. More formally for a Graph G = (V, E)
where E is its set of edges and V its set of nodes, a Junction Tree of G is defined as
T = (C, E), where each element or cluster in C is a subset of nodes from G, and each
edge in E represents a relationship between these clusters. For such a tree to be a valid
junction tree it is moreover required that
• The clusters collectively cover all vertices and edges in G:
[
C∈C
C = V,
[
C∈C
E(C) = E,
where E(C) denotes the edges in G induced by the vertices in C.
• and for any two clusters Ci, Cj ∈C, the intersection Ci ∩Cj must be contained in
every cluster on the path between Ci and Cj in T:
Ci ∩Cj ⊆Ck
∀Ck on the path between Ci and Cj.
Which is how information on connectivity is preserved. The Paper ”Junction Tree Varia­
tional Autoencoder for Molecular Graph Generation” [22] extends the junction tree concept
to molecular graphs by enforcing that the clusters in a junction tree need to be chemically
coherent subgraphs of the molecule, i.e. fragments. This is achieved by allowing rules to
be used to define them, which the paper calls vocabulary of patterns that can be matched
by a subgraph. Below is an illustration taken from that paper which aids in visualizing
what a junction tree decomposition produces.
Figure 3.6: Visual representation of an example of Junction tree decomposition on a
molecule [22]
In the above example, a lot of the subgraphs would be singletons of a single atom. We
will see later how these subgraphs can be identified.
Featurization
Featurization was already implemented by other maintainers of the GraPE package. Molec­
ular Graphs are one­hot encoded based off chemical properties of the atoms (nodes in
the graph) or bonds (edges in the graph), which are computed deterministically by the
RdKit package. The features used are summarized in the tables below
16
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:27==
Feature Description
Code Name
Size
One­hot encoding of the bond
type
bond_type_one_hot
4
Bond conjugation (true/false)
bond_is_conjugated
1
Bond in a ring (true/false)
bond_is_in_ring
1
One­hot encoding of bond
stereo configuration
bond_stereo_one_hot
6
Table 3.1: Bond features and their sizes (total size: 12)
Feature Description
Code Name
Size
One­hot encoding of atom
type
atom_type_one_hot
10
One­hot
encoding
of
total
number of H atoms
atom_total_num_H_one_hot
5
One­hot
encoding
of
total
atom degree
atom_total_degree_one_hot
6
One­hot encoding of explicit
valence
atom_explicit_valence_one_hot6
One­hot encoding of atom hy­
bridization
atom_hybridization_one_hot
6
Atom is aromatic (one­hot en­
coding)
atom_is_aromatic
2
Atom is a chiral center (one­
hot encoding)
atom_is_chiral_center
2
One­hot encoding of atom
chirality type
atom_chirality_type_one_hot 2
One­hot encoding of atom
chiral tag
atom_chiral_tag_one_hot
4
Formal charge of the atom
atom_formal_charge
1
Table 3.2: Atom features and their sizes (total size: 44)
3.3.4
GroupGAT: a Group Aware fragment GNN
The main GNN architecture that was focused used this work is called GroupGAT [13],
which is itself based on FraGAT: a fragment­oriented multi­scale graph attention model
for molecular property prediction [11]. Both models have the structure described in the
following diagram, taken from the paper that establishes GroupGAT ([13]):
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.7: Diagram of the structure of the GroupGAT model. The Encoder blocks corre­
spond to an instance of AFP
Embeddings are produced using the graph attention mechanism at 3 ”levels” of a given
molecule:
• The entire molecule’s graph
• Each of the fragments produced by the junction tree decomposition which are as­
sociated to a node in the junction tree.
• The Molecular Graph’s junction tree
Then, the resulting embeddings of each layer are concatenated, and a multilayer per­
ceptron comprising of trainable linear layers is used to generate a numerical prediction
based off the resulting embeddings. The AttentiveFP instances and final MLP layers’
weights are all trainable parameters of the model. While the size of the embeddings are
hyperparameters.
GroupGAT and FraGAT differ in the way they generate fragments: FraGAT uses a bond­
breaking algorithm to identify fragments dynamically by breaking all acyclic single bonds
in the molecule, exploring the possible substructures resulting from this. GroupGAT em­
ploys predefined functional groups which are chemically meaningful substructures that
leverage domain knowledge to split the molecule into more interpretable fragments. The
aggregation in the middle layer is also performed differently: In the case of FraGAT the
embeddings of all fragments are concatenated, whereas in GroupGAT they are summed.
3.3.5
AGC
We also implemented AGC, or Attentive Group Contribution, a lighter version of Group­
GAT with the following architecture:
18
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.8: Diagram of the architecture of the AGC model. The Encoder blocks corre­
spond to an instance of AFP Source: [13]
AGC only uses the Junction­tree embedding. This does however mean that the fragment
embeddings are computed as they are needed to produce the junction­tree encoding (3.8).
This means the Attentive FP instance which produces the fragment level embeddings is
also part of the trainable parameters of AGC. [12]
3.3.6
Implementation
Our own implementations of GroupGAT and AGC were performed using the pytorch and
Pytorch Geometric python packages. The were closely based on the implementation from
[12] and [13] which used an older package for performing geometric deep learning called
Deep Graph Library (DGL). Pytorch geometric is what the GraPE and HyPE packages are
built upon. It differs from DGL mainly in the fact that its types and their methods provide
less abstraction from the underlying pytorch tensors and datatypes that compose them.
At the time of writing, this also makes it somewhat computationally faster than DGL, par­
ticularly when using cuda­enabled GPUs. Apart from design changes due to translating
dgl­based code to pytorch geometric, our implementation of GroupGAT and AGC also
have some additional features which we will describe here. Not all of them were directly
used in this work: the GraPE package, of which our implementation of these models is a
part of is meant to be flexible and able to handle different chemical property datasets; and
it is with this in mind that some of the changes produced during this project were done.
All changes, however, can be used in conjunction with hybrid modeling patterns.
The first additional feature is support for Global features: i.e. numerical values on which
a property being computed depends. In our case, this will always be the temperature. If
such features are provided, they get appended to the concatenation of embeddings from
which a prediction is made, like so:
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.9: explanation of how a global feature (in this case temperature) can be inte­
grated to GroupGAT or AGC
This way of handling global features is tested in the [20] paper where a purely data­driven
approach is used to predict Cp values. In that paper it is referred to a state variable, as it
is a variable that is state­dependent and not dependent on only the molecule itself, but we
refer to them as global features for consistency with previous work that had been done in
the GraPE package.
For this work, we will only be interested in the case where a single global feature is pro­
vided, however, support for multiple global features has also been implemented.
To be able to use the models in the Multitask Hybrid modelling pattern, support for the
output to be a vector instead of a singleton was also added. This also involved adding
support for an interesting case: when not all the values for a given observation are pro­
vided. This can arise, for example, when experimental data is being used for training,
and an experiment has not been performed for some of the values of an element of the
dataset. When this is the case, support for masking has been implemented: a ”mask” is
applied to the values, so only the present ones contribute to the training of the model, and
the loss from this observation is then not take into account in the training of the model.
This guarantees that no data is being thrown away, while still keeping the training loop
consistent. It can be particularly important when there are few data, or in the case of ex­
perimental data which might have been resource­intensive to obtain. This was achieved
by using the tensor masking functionality of pytorch, which still propagates the contribution
of those elements of an observation which are present into the model.
JIT
Another quite important feature we added to our implementation of the models was mak­
ing them jittable. JITting or Just­in­Time compiling is a feature of pytorch for additional
performance and portability of models. To understand how it works, some context about
programming languages has to be kept in mind. Python is a dynamic and interpreted
language: when a python program is being run, there is another piece of software called
20
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:31==
the python interpreter which takes each instruction and the data it contains, and converts
it into a low­level programming language, which will then be compiled into machine code
that the ”lower levels” (hardware) of a computer can run. This means that when encoun­
tering an instruction, the interpreter needs to search for the appropriate lower­level func­
tions given the runtime conditions of the program. For example if performing an operation
on two numbers without knowing beforehand whether they are floating point numbers or
integers, the interpreter would have to wait to have this information before fetching the ap­
propriate functions in a lower­level language with strong types. This is one of the reasons
python is commonly considered slower than other static and compiled languages, as the
ability to compile code before running it also allows for a lot of memory­ and CPU­ level
optimizations, such as storing data which are commonly accessed together in the same
place, preloading instructions before they are needed, or combining operations which can
be performed simultaneously.
Jitting offers a solution to these problems in python, by essentially running a few iterations
of a piece of code (such as training a model) to get information about which exact lower­
level functions are needed, then compiling the model’s code to use these functions, so
each call will not require interpretation like a regular python call would. This allows faster
calls to the model. Pytorch’s implementation of jitting compiles pytorch code to TorchScript
objects. Torchscript objects have all the same methods and attributes as pytorch models
do, but they run at a lower level of abstraction and are platform agnostic, meaning they
can be interacted with by more than just a python program, which is provides a very
large advantage when it comes to portability. In theory a jit­compiled model in Torchscript
can be run a platform that uses a different version of pytorch and python, or even on a
platform that runs something else than python altogether. This second point was another
large motivation to include jittable models in GraPE, in the perspective that it should be
flexible package to support computationl chemical research. However, portability to other
platforms of the models as jit scripts was not tested.
Our implementation of GroupGAT and AGC were made to be jittable. When using jit
and Torchscript, only pytorch­native operations are allowed. This means no numpy or
dictionary comprehensions, for example. More importantly, it means pytorch geometric
datatypes and their methods are not supported in jit scripts. Pytorch geometric is in the
process of adding support for jittability, but it was not yet fully the case in the timeline of
this project. Moreover, things like optional arguments for functions, or functions that can
produce outputs of different shapes based off runtime conditions are also not permitted
in jit. This meant the logic and design of the code had to be rethought a bit for to be able
to use jit, as all of these programming patterns were present in GroupGAT. The training
and validation functions also had to be rewritten to be able to use different signatures for
the __init__() and forward() methods of the models in the jittable case: they had to
be less verbose and explicitly pass everything in.
This lack of verbosity meant that code­wise, developing new features was more cum­
bersome for the jittable versions of each models or improving their training loop. Even
though the jittable models were twice as fast when ran as TorchScripts than their ”classi­
cal” python counterparts, the non­jittable ones ended up being used for development, as
they were simply easier to debug and work with.
DataLoading
Dataloading was done using the Pytorch Geometric torch_geometric.loader.dataloader
class, which is very similar to Pytorch DataLaoder. The Dataloader is a very important
component of Pytorch Geometric (PyG), as it is one of the pillars that it owes its speed to.
To be able to train using fragment graphs and junction tree graphs, as well as global fea­
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
21
==PAGE:32==
tures, these all had to be organized into objects that could be loaded into a torch geometric
dataloader. This was a hurdle, as PyG’s dataloader only supports PyG Data objects, and
doesn’t by default support Data objects which contain other Graph Data objects in dat­
aloaders. This is due to the fact that the batching of elements of dataloaders happens in
a specific way to guarantee speed to the computations that the batches in a dataloader
will be used involved in. An aggregation function ahndles that part, and PyG does not let
the user modify this function’s behavior. A property of the GraPE package was of help
for this: GraPE has a built­in DataSet which exposes data in a wat that can be loaded by
a PyG dataloader. When creating a DataLoader from a DataSet object, the collation and
aggregation functions call the __getitem__ method of that object. The PyG dataloader in
turn attempts to do some memory optimizations based on the objects in this dataset (usu­
ally nodes, edges, their feature vectors, and information on their connectivity). For nested
graphs, this is not possible as the aggregation function doesn’t go ”deep enough” to be
able to perform this optimization. Inside the getitem method for the GraPE dataset class,
we added a call to a recusrive function which breaks down the graphs until they are ob­
jects that are valid inputs to the collation (aggregation) function of Pytorch’s dataloaders,
thus bypassing this restriction while still maintaining the speed of PyG.
3.4
Reproduceability and Usability
For the sake of reproduceability, and to ensure we can compare our results with previ­
ous work, particularly [13], unit tests were written for the Junction Tree computation and
featurization, where some outputs of the previous implementations which produced the
paper were hard­coded in dgl, and we wrote test functions which translated them to com­
pare them with the PyG graphs produced by our implementation. The test functions were
in turn also tested on determined examples, for correctness. This way we could trust
our preprocessing and rule it out from being the source of errors or discrepancies in the
models, which depend heavily on it. This also helps with future maintainability of these
functions, as future implementers will be able to know if their changes are harming the
ability of these functions to produce sound results.
3.5
Training and Optimization
For training, the data was scaled by normalizing it around its mean, as this is a well­
documented [23] way to ensure more stability in training neural networks, with no cost in
precision as long as metrics are computed properly.
MSE Loss was used as the loss function, and metrics for the performance of the model
were computed on de­standardized data. The metrics we focus on are R2, MAE, and
MARE in %. MAE’s dimension is the unit of the dataset.
3.5.1
Hyperparameter optimization
Hyperparameter optimization was the most computationally intensive part of this work.
It is the process of finding the best hyperparameters for a given model architecture and
dataset. If a model’s runtime has a running time complexity of O(n), where n is the size
of the dataset, hyperparameter optimization can have a runtime of up to O(n · gh), if the
model has h hyperparameters on which g combinations are desired. If we have a dozen
hyperparameters, and want to evaluate a few hundred samples of the hyperparameter
search space, we quickly end up with a problem that has a greater runtime complexity
than O(n2). Thus, algorithms need to be applied to reduce the hyperparameter search
(or choice) space, or quickly restrict the search to promising areas of it. One such al­
gorithm is BOHB: Bayesian OPtimization with Hyperband. [24]. Bayesian optimization
is a technique that involves fitting a relatively smooth function to the otherwise generally
22
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:33==
very complex hyperparameter optimization function, in order to eliminate some of the risk
of getting stuck in very local minima, thus making the optimization problem somewhat
easier.
Hyperband
Hyperband [25] is based on the principle of allocating computational resources proportion­
ally to the performance of candidate configurations. It uses a multi­armed bandit strategy
(a strategy which balances exploration and exploitation of resources or processes, the
”multi­armed” part meaning it evaluates multiple processes concurrently) with a reduc­
tion factor, progressively narrowing down the set of configurations by discarding under­
performing ones after limited evaluations, allowing more resources to be dedicated to
promising candidates. This makes it an ideal choice for running hyperparmeter optimiza­
tions in environments where compute is limited, at the expense of potentially discarding
good hyperparameters too early. We suspect his in fact happened in our case, and we
discuss this in a later chapter.
BOHB
Bayesian Optimization with hyperband combines the probabilistic modeling of Bayesian
Optimization with Hyperband’s early stopping mechanism. It uses Bayesian Optimization
to model the performance of hyperparameters probabilistically and prioritize promising
configurations, while Hyperband determines how resources (e.g., epochs or data) are
allocated, pruning poor­performing configurations early to save computational effort.
In practice
Hyperparameter optimization was performed using the RayTune python package which
provides an implementation of Hyperband, and run on an Nvidia shared A100 GPU and a
V100 GPU on which we had access to a fraction of the memory (8 GiB) and cuda cores,
as well as on an nVidia GTX 1070. MSE and MAE were both experimented with as the
metric to be reported to the hyperparameter optimizer, which decides which point(s) in
the hyperparameter search space should be evaluated. MAE would be preferred as it is
less sensitive to outliers. However, MSE gives a smoother gradient and could thus solve
some of the issues we suspect we were having of getting stuck in local minima.
This is the list of hyperparameters that were explored: L1_dropout, L1_hidden_dim,
L1_layers_atom, L1_layers_mol, L2_dropout, L2_hidden_dim , L2_layers_atom , L2_layers_mol,
L3_dropout, L3_hidden_dim, L3_layers_atom, L3_layers_mol, MLP_layers, depth, dropout,
final_dropout, hidden_dim, initial_lr, lr_reduction_factor, num_heads, num_layers_atom,
num_layers_mol, weight_decay
which controlled sizes, number of layers and attention heads, and regularization for the
AttentiveFP embedding in each level (original molecule, fragments, and junction tree) of
the model, size and depth of the final MLP, as well as overall regularization, and training
loop parameters.
3.5.2
Validation
The metrics presented are the result of running the training and evaluation scripts 10× with
different randomly selected initial conditions which gives us more statistical certainty in our
metrics. The metric computed for the models is thus the average of the metrics computed
for each of the 10 initializations. Equal weight has been given to each initialization.
3.6
Grokking Methodology
3.6.1
The Grokking phenomenon
To date, there is no methodology which can categorically be said to lead a model to grokk a
given dataset, nor are there any established quantitative criteria that a model and dataset
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
23
==PAGE:34==
have to fit to guarantee that the grokking phenomenon can be observed for them. The
general idea behind it comes from looking at the loss landscape for a given model. [26]
The Loss Landscape
For a given non­degenerate machine learning model, dataset, split, and hyperparamaters,
the Loss function over training epochs usually follows what is called the ”L­U” mechanism
[27] because the training and validation loss curves form a ”L” or ”U” shape respectively.
For some specific datasets, it has been observed that if training for long enough, the val­
idation loss then begins to decrease again, to the point that it is even below the value it
had before overfitting. This is what was found in the original paper that showed findings
of the grokking phenomenon [28]. The potential for observing grokking for a certain ma­
chine learning problem seems to be related to the structure of the dataset being trained
on, as well as model initialization [26]. The textbook example of grokking happened for
”algorithmic” datasets: datasets in which any element could be described by a finite set
of formal rules, and it appears the models involved in those findings ended up learning
an encoding of those rules in their weights. For most ”real” datasets, no such rules exist.
One paper OMNIGROK: GROKKING BEYOND ALGORITHMIC DATA [27] devises the
Omnigrok methodology, an acheives some grokking on non­algorithmic datasets.
Omnigrok
The omnigrok paper suggests that the L2 norm of a model’s weights, also called weight­
norm and denoted ||w||2 =
qP
i w2
i has a value wc for which
• Training Loss (L­shaped): Decreases as ||w||2 approaches or exceeds wc
• Test Loss (U­shaped): Increases if ||w||2 exceeds wc, forming a U­shape with a
minimum near wc.
I.e. underfiiting occurs when w < wc and overfitting occurs when w > wc.
One proposed approach to observe grokking is thus to start the model with an initial weight
norm w0 that is quite large, in the hopes that we are above wc, by scaling all initial weights
with a parameter α, such that the model begins in an overfitting state, and training will
let it escape this state, and potentially get to an even better loss than regular training
would have. We will attempt this both with random initialization, and also by following the
following approach:
• train the model with a ”normal” (non­scaled) weight initialization until validation loss
begins increasing
• pick an epoch in the region where the model begins to overfit. This was both done
by using the epoch where the early stopping cutoff the training, but also ”manually”
by simply looking at the curve of Loss vs epochs.
• train a new instance of the model again up to this epoch, with the same initialization
as before, and freeze it there.
• use the weights of this frozen model as the w0 to initialize a model and scale its
weight using a scaling parameter before beginning training:
for param in model.parameters():
param.data *= alpha
This, along with tuning of the weight decay parameter of the model, allowed some grokking
to be observed on the QM9 dataset, which has input data which is structurally similar to
ours (smiles that get mapped to molecular structure).
24
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:35==
Grokfast
Another very novel grokking methodology that was built on top of Omnigrok and enhanced
the findings of it is Grokfast: Accelerated Grokking by Amplifying Slow Gradients [29]. The
paper suggests that the phenomenon of grokking (where the validation loss decreases
again, after a long time of overfitting) arises because generalization­inducing components
of the gradient updates are slow to develop. The solution proposed for this,is to perform
a spectral decomposition of the gradient, and boost the parts of the gradient which are
changing slowly, and mute the parts of it which are changing often (either frequently, or
by a lot). The supporting motivation is that the former would be due to learnable trends in
the training data, while the former would be due to details or artefacts in the training set.
This is how it happens:
During training, the gradients of the loss function with respect to model parameters can
be treated as a discrete­time signal:
g(t),
t = 0, 1, 2, . . . , T
where g(t) represents the gradient at training epoch t and T=max_epoch.
Using the discrete Fourier transform, the dual representation of the gradient signal g(t)
can be computed, and the parts of this representation corresponding to only low­frequency
signals can be written as:
G(ω) =
T
X
t=0
g(t)e−iωt,
where ω denotes the frequency.
• components with (ω small): Capture slow, smooth variations in the gradient signal.
• components with (ω large): Capture rapid fluctuations in the gradient signal.
To enhance the low­frequency components and suppress high­frequency noise, a low­
pass filter h(t) is applied to the gradients. This is done by taking the original gradient’s
signal g(t), combining it with h(t) then adding that value to it again to get a new gradient
ˆg(t) that can be plugged into the optimizer.
ˆg(t) = g(t) + h(t) ∗g(t)
Where ”∗” is the convolution operator. Two filtering possibilities are discussed, and their
implementation is provided in the paper’s github repository.
• Moving Average (MA): Averages gradients over a window of size w:
h(t) = λ
wΠ
 t
w −1
2

=
(
λ/w,
if 0 ≤t < w
0,
otherwise.
Where Π denotes the Heaviside Pi function.
• Exponential Moving Average (EMA): Weighs recent gradients more heavily while
smoothing the signal:
h(t) = λ(1 −α)
t
X
τ=0
ατδ(t −τ) = λαt(1 −α)
where λ controls the amount by which gradients are amplified, and α controls the
decay, or penalty for gradients from epochs further from the current one.
code­wise the following modification needs to be added to a model’s training loop:
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
25
==PAGE:36==
1
...
2
loss.backward()
# Calculate gradients.
3
#If EMA:
4
grads = gradfilter_ema(model, grads=grads, alpha=0.98, lamb=5.0)
5
#If MA:
6
grads = gradfilter_ma(model, grads=grads, window_size=h, lamb
=5.0)
7
optimizer.step()
# Update parameters.
Grokfast improved the results of omnigrok [29], and also managed to deliver observations
of grokking on non­algorithmic datasets.
We extended the training loop function that we created in the model utils in GraPE with
a ”grokking loop” which was a training loop that performed the grokfast algorithm. Ex­
periments were performed both where we combine Omnigrok initalizations with Grokfast
gradient amplification, as well as only with grokfast.
26
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:37==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Comparison of Hybrid modeling patterns
coeffs like the performance in [20]
4.1.1
Results
The table below shows the metrics achieved by the best instances of each model we were
able to train given the dataset and hyperperameter optimization, under the different hybrid
modeling patterns. The hybrid configuration names have been abbreviated as follows:
• DST: Decoupled Single­Task
• DMT: Decoupled Multitask
• CMT: Coupled Multitask
• CST: Coupled Single­task
• PDD: Purely Data­driven
Test
Validation
Overall
Method
Model
R2
MAE
MARE
R2
MAE
MRAE
R2
MAE
MARE
DST
GroupGAT
0.923
53619.0
12.6%
0.952
31041.8
11.3%
0.953
37609.8
11.6%
AGC
0.938
53195.8
12.7%
0.930
33838.6
12.3%
0.951
36912.9
11.7%
DMT
GroupGAT
0.991
27924.7
9.0%
0.968
25617.7
10.1%
0.984
23610.3
8.1%
AGC
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
CMT
GroupGAT
0.958
19571.25
8.3%
0.970
18242.73
9.5%
0.969
18627.05
10.7%
AGC ∗
2
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
CST
GroupGAT
0.991
9445.68
5.3%
0.993
9260.72
5.8%
0.991
9092.52
5.9%
AGC ∗
2
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
PDD
GroupGAT ∗
1
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
AGC
0.948
18676.56
10.1 %
0.959
17362.88
10.7%
0.960
17769.54
11.86%
Table 4.1: Performance Metrics for Different Methods and Models
∗
1Discrepancy in performance between AGC and GroupGAT in the Data­driven case: The
Hyperparameter optimization for GroupGAT likely didn’t find good hyperparameters, while
AGC seemingly was better suited for the hyperparameter script used for the purely data­
driven case. Manually fitting some hyperparameters yielded a better performance for
GroupGAT.
∗
2 The Hyperparameter optimizations for the coupled cases for AGC did not terminate, and
did not provide good hyperparameters.
4.1.2
Parity plots
Below are some select parity plots of some of the configurations which terminated, to
give an additional visualization of the results and performance of each configuration. In
the decoupled cases, since the model’s actual ”prediction” was the coefficients of the Cp
equation, we provide first its predictions for these, and then the results of plugging them
into the equation. Interpretation and comment on the plots will be done in the discussion
section below.
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
27
==PAGE:38==
4.1.3
The Decoupled Case
Let us begin by looking at the parity plots for the coefficients that were fit in the decoupled
case, before plugging them into the Cp model’s equation, as this gives a good idea of how
the machine learning task performed.
AGC Decoupled Singletask
Figure 4.1: AGC decoupled singletask coefficients parity plot
28
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:39==
GroupGAT Decoupled singletask
Figure 4.2: Parity plots for the coefficients for GroupGAT in the decoupled single­task
case
GroupGAT Decoupled Multitask
Figure 4.3: Parity plots for the coefficients for GroupGAT in the decoupled multitask case
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
29
==PAGE:40==
Decoupled cases: actual Heat capacity prediction performance
Let us now look at how the decoupled single­task cases performed when the coefficients
predicted were plugged in to the Cp equation to actually produce a physically significant
result. These are the predictions that performance metrics for the decoupled approaches
were computed on.
(a) GroupGAT
(b) AGC
Figure 4.4: Parity plots of the Cp predictions made with the coefficients found by AGC
and GroupGAT in the decoupled singletask case. We can observe ”arcs” in both parity
plots that seem to have the same convexity and be linearly dependent from one model to
the other. It also looks like the observations whose predictions compose these arcs are
responsible for a large part of the models’ error
The parity plot for the coefficients fitted by the coupled multitask seen below, case shows
slightly better performance, particularly on the testing set, however the arc­like structures
are still present.
30
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.5: GroupGAT decoupled multi task parity plot
These plots suggest that in the decoupled case we are still greatly limited by the param­
eters fit by the regression, that we are training on: errors in those will propagate to errors
in the prediction.
4.1.4
the Coupled case
In the coupled case, there are no intermediate predictions to be computed, so we only
show the parity plots. At the time of producing this report, optimal hyperparameters for
AGC in the coupled cases are unavailable so plots for it are not included.
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.6: GroupGAT coupled multi task parity plot
32
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.7: GroupGAT coupled single task parity plot
4.1.5
Interpretation
The results provided above show that The coupled cases perform better than the decou­
pled ones. This is likely due to the fact that the de­coupled cases are still greatly limited
by the coefficients fit to the mechanistic model. A look at the coefficient parity plots of
the de­coupled cases seems to confirm this: despite model and architecture changes,
the coefficients which are predicted accurately or struggled with are the same: A; B, and
D are generally well­predicted, while C and E are generally poorly predicted. The shape
of the mis­predictions is also generally the same between all models and approaches,
suggesting that the models learned some inaccuracies in the fitted coefficients.
4.2
Grokking
Grokking was not observed for any of the models, on the full ICP dataset, nor on any
subsets of a reasonable size (100s of observations). In these cases, the model overfit,
and both losses plateau’d.
We were able to create it on a dataset of just 80 observations from ICP, where we were
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
33
==PAGE:44==
able to observe the test loss go down marginally again after 90 000 epochs, before
plateau’ing once again at a value which was still very high.
However, this was only
achieved for some weight initializations and random splits of the data. Taking random
subsets of the ICP datasets and training a model on them with grokfast, or changing the
weight initialization to begin the grokking loop generally does not produce grokking. Fur­
thermore, when evaluating the model trained on the single instance for which we managed
to exhibit a little bit of grokking on larger Subsets of ICP, or the entire subset, the perfor­
mance was far too poor for the resulting model to be of any use. A possible explanation
for this was that the subset for which this worked contained relatively similar molecules,
though a quantitative look at them does not reveal in which way they are similar.
A potential improvement or further research on the work done here would be to gener­
ate a large amount of such random splits until some for which at least some grokking
is observed are found, then to thoroughly investigate the similarities in structure of the
molecules present in those particular subset. This could potentially lead to a better under­
standing of the role that learning molecular structure plays in the ”grokk­ability” of datasets.
Given the time­frame of this project, and the focus on delivering results and tools that
could be used in future computational chemistry research, the choice was made not to
dedicate additional focus to exploring the grokking artifact, though some potential future
approaches will be proposed in the Perspectives section of this report.
4.3
Practicalities and roadblocks
4.3.1
Available Compute and Hyperparameter optimization
Hyperparameter optimization didn’t always complete because of GPU memory issues, or
maintenance with the DTU LSF 10 cluster on which they were running. The Ray tune code
has functionality to pick create checkpoints in the case of ”clean” termination, i.e. when
the process executing the optimization gets the signal to terminate. This is called graceful
termination, where termination is an ”expected” behavior, requested by the system or a
user. However, sometimes the maintenance on the cluster would not provide this, instead
shutting off access to the computational resources that the code needed, without termi­
nating the main process, meaning the code would not get the signal to terminate, and
would keep running with errors as it constantly tried to get access to the accelerators.
Moreover, Since the GPUs are shared resources, sometimes there would be other jobs
running on them, and some runs within our jobs would run out of memory. Recalling how
hyperband and BOHB work from Chapter 3, a failed run does not terminate the hyperpa­
rameter search. Since the runs that went on for longer were the ones that typically failed,
and these are also the ones which the highest chance of producing good hyperparam­
eters, we suspect that a lot of potentially good hyperparameters were not permitted to
be run with until their actual best metrics were reached. Because of the way BOHB in
conjunction with ray tune works, this means that the overall best hyperparameters and
metric for the entire hyperparameter optimization run is lower than what the exact same
run could have acheived on less restrictive compute.
GPU memory issues were more frequent with larger batch sizes, as larger batch sizes
gives cuda less control over how much data should be moved to the GPU at once. Fixes
to this included hard clearing the cuda cache often in the runs, but more importantly: re­
ducing the hyperparemeter search space to smaller batch sizes. The added stochasticity
of smaller batches in turn meant some of the results are maybe not as good. This suspi­
cion comes from a qualitative observation of the learning curves for different models and
hybrid patterns: a smaller batch size made it more ”jagged”, especially in the start, which
34
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:45==
we suspect could lead Hyperband to discard runs for hyperparameters that were shaky
in the start but would have converged to a good loss later. This phenomenon has been
extensively studied in other machine learning problems, most notably in this paper: [30].
This is a potential explanation as to why AGC and AGC­based hybrid setups typically
lent itself better to hyperparemeter optimization: AGC embeds the molecules in a less
granular way, which leaves less room for small local details of a molecule to make an
impact on a prediction.
A potential improvement to the work in this report would be to perform more thorough
profiling on the hyeprparemeter optimizations, as well as attempt different hyperparemeter
optimzation algorithms.
4.3.2
Development practices
Another challenge we encountered was the balance between developing a shareable
python package, and producing our own results. New features or adaptations we needed
to carry out often required modifications to the GraPE package code. This slowed down
the development and experimenting of the machine learning solutions. On the other hand,
to save time or not have to constantly context­switch, some functions or modifications
were added inline to the machine learning workflow scripts, which caused a divergence
with the GraPE package, and means some features are not a part of the GraPE package.
Examples of this include the way configuration files and Hyperparameter dictionaries are
loaded in.
4.4
Code & Qualitative results
The GraPE package we extended now offers a framework for hybrid ML tasks on molec­
ular property datasets to be performed. The implementation of models as well as pre­
processing tasks like computing the fragment and junction graphs of molecules ran faster
than on previous DGL­based implementations of the same tasks. A Broad range of con­
figurations for datasets are accommodated for such as multi or single output, missing
outputs, and varying amounts of global features.
Support for different model­agnostic machine learning tasks such as transfer learning,
grokking, and hypoerparameter optimization have either been added to GraPE, or a base­
line upon which to implement them has been created and showcased.
Documentation for maintaining or understanding the code has been added where rele­
vant, or extended when it was already present. A basic unit testing framework was also
setup for the GraPE project.
On the same machine where producing the junction tree embedding of a few thousand
molecules used took minutes with the previous DGL implementation, it now takes seconds
with the PyG based implementation. The Pytorch models run in reasonable time, although
they are not yet memory optimzaed for GPUs.
4.5
Discussion
The comparative analysis of hybrid modeling patterns in this study reveals that coupled
models the Coupled Single­Task (CST) model achieved the highest overall R2 of 0.991
and the lowest Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) of 5.9%, highlighting the efficacy
of integrated approaches. In contrast, decoupled models, both single­task (DST) and
multitask (DMT), were limited by their reliance on regression­fitted mechanistic model
coefficients. Parity plots indicated that while coefficients A, B, and D were accurately
predicted, coefficients C and E consistently exhibited poorer performance across various
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
35
==PAGE:46==
models, suggesting inherent limitations in the decoupled approach. The fact that the
decoupled models learned some inaccuracies in the fitted coefficients makes sense, as
in the decoupled case, even a well­optimized machine learning model with plentiful data
is at risk of propagating errors from the initial parameter fitting if such errors are present in
the parameter data. Previous work [20] on the same data showcased identifiably issues.
The increased degrees of freedom in these models correlate with enhanced performance,
as it can be suspected that correct structurally dependent parameters are identified by the
graph neural networks.
The investigation into the grokking phenomenon yielded limited observations. Grokking,
characterized by a sudden improvement in generalization after extensive training, was
largely absent across most experiments conducted on the full ICP dataset and reason­
ably sized subsets. Models predominantly exhibited overfitting, with both training and
validation losses plateauing without demonstrating the characteristic grokking behavior.
A minor instance of grokking was observed on a very small subset of 80 observations,
but this behavior was inconsistent and did not generalize to larger datasets. This sug­
gests that grokking may be contingent on specific structural similarities within the data,
warranting further investigation.
Practical challenges significantly impacted the study, particularly in hyperparameter op­
timization. GPU memory limitations and unexpected maintenance interruptions on the
DTU LSF 10 cluster frequently hindered the optimization process, leading to incomplete
searches and suboptimal performance metrics. Shared GPU resources often resulted in
memory overflows, especially with larger batch sizes. To mitigate these issues, the hy­
perparameter search space was reduced to smaller batch sizes, and frequent clearing
of the CUDA cache was implemented. However, these adjustments introduced greater
stochasticity in training, potentially causing Hyperband to prematurely discard promising
configurations. The observed advantage of AGC­based hybrid setups in hyperparame­
ter optimization may stem from their more robust embedding strategies, which reduce
sensitivity to local molecular features.
Additionally, balancing the development of a shareable Python package with the need to
produce bespoke results posed challenges. Modifications to the GraPE package were
often necessary to accommodate new features, slowing down the iterative development
process. Inline additions to machine learning workflow scripts led to divergence from the
main GraPE codebase, complicating maintenance and feature consistency. Future efforts
should prioritize modular development practices and comprehensive version control to
streamline collaboration and code integration.
Despite these challenges, significant advancements were made in enhancing the GraPE
package. Transitioning from DGL­based to PyG­based implementations markedly re­
duced preprocessing times, enabling faster generation of junction tree embeddings for
thousands of molecules. The package now supports a broader range of configurations,
including multi­output, single­output, missing outputs, and varying global features. More­
over, the integration of model­agnostic tasks like transfer learning and hyperparameter
optimization into GraPE provides a robust foundation for future computational chemistry
research.
In summary, coupled hybrid modeling patterns outperformed their decoupled counterparts
for predicting heat capacity given the datasets and underlying GNN architectures that were
worked with in this project. Addressing the identified computational and developmental
challenges, along with exploring advanced strategies for model enhancement, will further
strengthen the applicability and performance of hybrid models for predicting heat capacity,
36
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:47==
but also potentially for other Molecular property prediction problems.
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
37
==PAGE:48==
38
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:49==
5
Conclusions and Perspectives
5.1
Conclusions
We have developed a method that enables direct prediction of properties from molecular
structures without the need for coefficient fitting, while still preserving the robustness of
a physics­informed layer. We have demonstrated that this approach can improve the
accuracy of structure­based property prediction deep learning models, and have applied
it to an area where such methods have not been previously utilized.
Our literature review and research indicated that prior to our work, there was no existing
model for heat capacity prediction that was both thermodynamically constrained and ca­
pable of leveraging Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to learn complex structure­property
relationships. The literature also suggests that both de­coupled and coupled hybrid mod­
eling configurations can yield good results in predicting molecular properties.
Given the prior work we reviewed, it was not possible to determine a priori which hybrid
modeling configuration would perform best. We explored four hybrid modeling patterns for
different models, based on two binary choices identified for a hybrid modeling approach,
and systematically compared these four approaches to evaluate which yielded the best
results. After establishing methods for training, validation, and hyperparameter optimiza­
tion, we found that the coupled single­task approach, in which an individual model is
trained for each parameter, performed best. This approach achieved an R2 score above
0.99 for both the testing and overall sets, and a Mean Average Percentage Error of 5.9%.
We also established that for this problem, the de­coupled approach was more sensitive
to the parameters it was trained on than to the GNN model architecture used. Even when
training using four different GNN topologies (two models in two configurations), common
patterns were observed in the way coefficients were fitted.
We attempted to determine whether the models would exhibit grokking by implement­
ing methods that can enhance the likelihood of grokking occurring in a model—methods
that have previously yielded positive results on another molecular property dataset using
GNNs. However, no grokking was observed in our experiments.
The main hurdles encountered were computational, including memory issues when run­
ning with accelerators, numerical overflow errors due to the expression of the heat capac­
ity formula, and very jagged loss and hyperparameter optimization functions. There were
also operational challenges stemming from the dual nature of the task, which involved
both producing results and developing the code framework necessary to achieve them.
The code for testing the models we implemented under the different hybrid modeling
pipelines has been added to the GraPE (Graph­based Property Estimation) Python pack­
age. This modular package can, in principle, be used in its current state to test hybrid
modeling for other models and datasets.
To support this, we have implemented a series of tools and features in the GraPE package
that could be relevant for future work involving the investigation or construction of hybrid­
GNN models for molecular property prediction. These enhancements include unit tests,
support for just­in­time compilation, transfer learning capabilities, support for global fea­
tures and multi­dimensional outputs, and hyperparameter optimization scripts, in addition
to the many utilities already provided by GraPE.
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
39
==PAGE:50==
5.2
Perspectives
5.2.1
Improvements to the GraPE package
One major area for improvement is the unit testing of the machine learning components.
For example, whenever changes are made, baseline datasets—potentially synthetic—
could be used where specific results or bounds on metrics are expected. Running these
tests when changes are performed would help ensure stability and correctness.
Another potential improvement involves the visualization of the impact of molecular groups
on the attention weights. Previous works, upon which our implementations of GroupGAT
and AGC were based, offered support for this feature. While our implementation of AFP
supports such visualization, it was not fully implemented in GroupGAT and AGC. Extend­
ing this capability to these models would be a natural progression of the work presented
in this report and would enhance the functionality of the GraPE package.
5.2.2
Perspectives on the Hybrid modeling and grokking
Future work could focus on better hyperparameter optimization. Investigating the molec­
ular structures by performing clustering or filtering based on common structural features
may reveal factors contributing to certain model behaviors. Within the parity plots, some
arc­like structures are apparent; it could be worthwhile to investigate their causes and
determine whether specific model modifications could address them, as they seem to ac­
count for a significant portion of the average error. The observation that these arc­like ar­
tifacts appear under all hybrid modeling configurations decreases the likelihood that they
are due to non­physical aspects of the data, especially compared to purely data­driven
models, since the hybrid model is constrained by a sound physical layer.
Identifying the molecules that form arcs or branches could reveal whether there is a quan­
titative property of the structure—such as the count of a certain feature—that the model
learns as a simple function.
Linking molecular structures to results could also facilitate the exploration of grokking,
by determining whether restricting the dataset to certain types of molecules or structures
could lead to the emergence of grokking.
Since the coupled single­task approach proved to be the best hybrid modeling config­
uration, this raises the question of employing different models for each parameter in a
single­task hybrid modeling problem. This opens the door to combining hybrid model­
ing with Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [31]. Even with just the model architectures
described in this paper or literature review, hybrid NAS problems could be formulated to
further optimize model performance.
40
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Jean­Louis Reymond. “The Chemical Space Project”. In: Accounts of Chemical Re­
search 48.3 (2015). PMID: 25687211, pp. 722–730. DOI: 10.1021/ar500432k. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1021/ar500432k. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/ar500432k.
[2]
Carina L Gargalo et al. “Navigating Industry 4.0 and 5.0: The Role of Hybrid mod­
elling in (Bio) chemical Engineering’s Digital Transition”. In: Frontiers in Chemical
Engineering 6 (2024), p. 1494244.
[3]
Artur M. Schweidtmann, Dongda Zhang, and Moritz Von Stosch. “A review and per­
spective on hybrid modeling methodologies”. en. In: Digital Chemical Engineering
10 (Mar. 2024), p. 100136. ISSN: 27725081. DOI: 10.1016/j.dche.2023.100136.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2772508123000546 (visited on
11/18/2024).
[4]
Dimitris C. Psichogios and Lyle H. Ungar. “A hybrid neural network￿first principles
approach to process modeling”. en. In: AIChE Journal 38.10 (Oct. 1992), pp. 1499–
1511. ISSN: 0001­1541, 1547­5905. DOI: 10.1002/aic.690381003. URL: https://
aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aic.690381003 (visited on 11/09/2024).
[5]
Kobi C. Felton et al. “ML­SAFT: A machine learning framework for PCP­SAFT pa­
rameter prediction”. en. In: Chemical Engineering Journal 492 (July 2024), p. 151999.
ISSN: 13858947. DOI: 10.1016/j.cej.2024.151999. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S1385894724034867 (visited on 11/25/2024).
[6]
Vinicius Viena Santana et al. “PUFFIN: A path­unifying feed­forward interfaced net­
work for vapor pressure prediction”. en. In: Chemical Engineering Science 286 (Mar.
2024), p. 119623. ISSN: 00092509. DOI: 10.1016/j.ces.2023.119623. URL: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S000925092301179X (visited on 11/09/2024).
[7]
David Weininger. “SMILES, a chemical language and information system. 1. Intro­
duction to methodology and encoding rules”. In: Journal of Chemical Information
and Computer Sciences 28.1 (1988), pp. 31–36. DOI: 10.1021/ci00057a005. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00057a005.
[8]
Edgar Ivan Sanchez Medina et al. “Graph neural networks for the prediction of infi­
nite dilution activity coefficients”. en. In: Digital Discovery 1.3 (2022), pp. 216–225.
ISSN: 2635­098X. DOI: 10.1039/D1DD00037C. URL: https://xlink.rsc.org/?DOI=
D1DD00037C (visited on 11/25/2024).
[9]
Jan G. Rittig et al. “Graph neural networks for temperature­dependent activity coeffi­
cient prediction of solutes in ionic liquids”. en. In: Computers & Chemical Engineer­
ing 171 (Mar. 2023), p. 108153. ISSN: 00981354. DOI: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.
2023.108153. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0098135423000224
(visited on 11/09/2024).
[10]
Jan G. Rittig and Alexander Mitsos. “Thermodynamics­consistent graph neural net­
works”. en. In: Chemical Science 15.44 (2024), pp. 18504–18512. ISSN: 2041­
6520, 2041­6539. DOI: 10.1039/D4SC04554H. URL: https://xlink.rsc.org/?DOI=
D4SC04554H (visited on 11/25/2024).
[11]
Ziqiao Zhang, Jihong Guan, and Shuigeng Zhou. “FraGAT: a fragment­oriented
multi­scale graph attention model for molecular property prediction”. en. In: Bioin­
formatics 37.18 (Sept. 2021). Ed. by Jonathan Wren, pp. 2981–2987. ISSN: 1367­
4803, 1367­4811. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab195. URL: https://academic.oup.
com/bioinformatics/article/37/18/2981/6189082 (visited on 11/09/2024).
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
41
==PAGE:52==
[12]
Adem R.N. Aouichaoui et al. “Application of interpretable group­embedded graph
neural networks for pure compound properties”. en. In: Computers & Chemical Engi­
neering 176 (Aug. 2023), p. 108291. ISSN: 00981354. DOI: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.
2023.108291. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0098135423001618
(visited on 11/09/2024).
[13]
Adem R. N. Aouichaoui et al. “Combining Group­Contribution Concept and Graph
Neural Networks Toward Interpretable Molecular Property Models”. en. In: Journal
of Chemical Information and Modeling 63.3 (Feb. 2023), pp. 725–744. ISSN: 1549­
9596, 1549­960X. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.2c01091. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/
10.1021/acs.jcim.2c01091 (visited on 11/17/2024).
[14]
Jan G. Rittig et al. “Gibbs–Duhem­informed neural networks for binary activity coef­
ficient prediction”. en. In: Digital Discovery 2.6 (2023), pp. 1752–1767. ISSN: 2635­
098X. DOI: 10.1039/D3DD00103B. URL: https://xlink.rsc.org/?DOI=D3DD00103B
(visited on 11/25/2024).
[15]
Edgar Ivan Sanchez Medina et al. “Gibbs–Helmholtz graph neural network: cap­
turing the temperature dependency of activity coefficients at infinite dilution”. en.
In: Digital Discovery 2.3 (2023), pp. 781–798. ISSN: 2635­098X. DOI: 10.1039/
D2DD00142J. URL: https://xlink.rsc.org/?DOI=D2DD00142J (visited on 11/25/2024).
[16]
Edgar Ivan Sanchez Medina, Sreekanth Kunchapu, and Kai Sundmacher. “Gibbs–
Helmholtz Graph Neural Network for the Prediction of Activity Coefficients of Poly­
mer Solutions at Infinite Dilution”. en. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 127.46
(Nov. 2023), pp. 9863–9873. ISSN: 1089­5639, 1520­5215. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpca.
3c05892. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jpca.3c05892 (visited on
11/25/2024).
[17]
Fouad A. Aly and Lloyd L. Lee. “Self­consistent equations for calculating the ideal
gas heat capacity, enthalpy, and entropy”. In: Fluid Phase Equilibria 6.3 (1981),
pp. 169–179. ISSN: 0378­3812. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-3812(81)85002-
9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0378381281850029.
[18]
R.I. Rowley, W.V. Oscarson, and N.F. Giles. DIPPR data compilation of pure chem­
ical properties. 2019.
[19]
Rainer Storn and Kenneth Price. “Differential Evolution – A Simple and Efficient
Heuristic for global Optimization over Continuous Spaces”. en. In: Journal of Global
Optimization 11.4 (1997), pp. 341–359. ISSN: 1573­2916. DOI: 10.1023/A:1008202821328.
[20]
Adem R.N. Aouichaoui, Simon Müller, and Jens Abildskov. “Towards Self­Consistent
Graph Neural Networks for Predicting the Ideal Gas Heat Capacity, Enthalpy, and
Entropy”. en. In: Computer Aided Chemical Engineering. Vol. 53. Elsevier, 2024,
pp. 2833–2838. ISBN: 978­0­443­28824­1. DOI: 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 443 - 28824 -
1.50473-7. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780443288241504737
(visited on 11/23/2024).
[21]
Zhaoping Xiong et al. “Pushing the Boundaries of Molecular Representation for
Drug Discovery with the Graph Attention Mechanism”. en. In: Journal of Medici­
nal Chemistry 63.16 (Aug. 2020), pp. 8749–8760. ISSN: 0022­2623, 1520­4804.
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.9b00959. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.
jmedchem.9b00959 (visited on 11/17/2024).
[22]
Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Junction Tree Variational Au­
toencoder for Molecular Graph Generation. en. arXiv:1802.04364 [cs]. Mar. 2019.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.04364 (visited on 11/09/2024).
[23]
M. Shanker, M.Y. Hu, and M.S. Hung. “Effect of data standardization on neural net­
work training”. In: Omega 24.4 (1996), pp. 385–397. ISSN: 0305­0483. DOI: https:
42
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:53==
//doi.org/10.1016/0305-0483(96)00010-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0305048396000102.
[24]
Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. BOHB: Robust and Efficient Hy­
perparameter Optimization at Scale. en. arXiv:1807.01774 [cs]. July 2018. DOI:
10.48550/arXiv.1807.01774. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.01774 (visited on
11/26/2024).
[25]
Lisha Li et al. Hyperband: A Novel Bandit­Based Approach to Hyperparameter Op­
timization. en. arXiv:1603.06560 [cs]. June 2018. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1603.06560.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.06560 (visited on 11/26/2024).
[26]
Ziming Liu et al. “Towards Understanding Grokking: An Effective Theory of Repre­
sentation Learning”. en. In: NeurIPS (2022).
[27]
Ziming Liu, Eric J. Michaud, and Max Tegmark. Omnigrok: Grokking Beyond Algo­
rithmic Data. en. arXiv:2210.01117 [cs]. Mar. 2023. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.
01117 (visited on 11/17/2024).
[28]
Alethea Power et al. Grokking: Generalization Beyond Overfitting on Small Algorith­
mic Datasets. 2022. arXiv: 2201.02177 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.
02177.
[29]
Jaerin Lee et al. Grokfast: Accelerated Grokking by Amplifying Slow Gradients. en.
arXiv:2405.20233 [cs]. June 2024. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20233 (visited
on 11/17/2024).
[30]
Elad Hoffer, Itay Hubara, and Daniel Soudry. Train longer, generalize better: closing
the generalization gap in large batch training of neural networks. en. arXiv:1705.08741
[stat]. Jan. 2018. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.08741 (visited on 11/17/2024).
[31]
Colin White et al. Neural Architecture Search: Insights from 1000 Papers. 2023.
arXiv: 2301.08727 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.08727.
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
==PAGE:55==
Grokking Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Molecular Properties
45
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.kt.dtu.dk
