==PAGE:1==
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Plat-
form for Chemical Property Prediction
Master Thesis
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
Master Thesis
November, 2024
By
Thomas Swagerman
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Søltofts
Plads 228A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
http://www.kt.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Autonomous Systems.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Declaration of generative AI in scientific writing Statement: During the preparation of this
work the author used the free versions of ChatGPT 3.5 and 4 to improve the readability and
language of the manuscript (OpenAI 2024). After using this tool, the author reviewed and
edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the content of the published
article. No new content or ideas were generated using any generative artificial intelligence
tools. Suggestions given by the AI tools were carefully reviewed and edited, since the AI
can generate output that can be incorrect, incomplete, or biased. This also follows the
decision of DTU to open for the use of AI in teaching.
Thomas Swagerman - s222977
ii
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Danish
Forudsigelse af molekylære egenskaber er en essentiel opgave inden for kemisk og
biokemisk ingeniørarbejde med anvendelser, der spænder fra lægemiddeludvikling til ma-
terialeforskning. Grafneuronale netværk (GNN’er) er blevet et kraftfuldt værktøj til dette
formål, da de udnytter molekylers strukturelle information til at levere præcise forudsigelser.
Denne afhandling præsenterer forbedringer, der er designet til at strømline udvikling, test-
ning, validering og implementering af grafneuronale netværksmodeller i værktøjskassen
GraPE-Chem (Graph-based Property Estimation for Chemistry), eller kort GraPE, en Python-
pakke til støtte for forudsigelse af kemiske egenskaber.
Nye implementeringer i GraPE inkluderer ensembleteknikker, der kombinerer forudsigelser
fra flere modeller for at forbedre nøjagtighed og robusthed. Disse teknikker udnytter styrk-
erne ved forskellige modeller og skaber en mere pålidelig og robust ramme for forudsigelser.
Derudover understøtter GraPE multi-target forudsigelse, hvilket muliggør omfattende anal-
yser ved at kombinere forskellige informationskilder.
De væsentlige forbedringer inkluderer eksperiment-logning via MLflow, hyperparameter-
tuning med Ray Tune og containerisering ved brug af Docker. Disse funktioner sikrer en
sikker, effektiv og reproducerbar arbejdsgang, der adresserer almindelige udfordringer i
modeludvikling og implementering.
Desuden vil udfordringer vedrørende reproducerbarhed og genbrug af modeller blive
diskuteret, og løsninger foreslås for at sikre konsistente og pålidelige forudsigelser. Resul-
taterne understreger vigtigheden af detaljerede eksperimentelle opsætninger og behovet
for en fleksibel og brugervenlig platform til at fremme udviklingen inden for forudsigelse
af molekylære egenskaber.
En sammenligning med det eksisterende værktøj ’Chemprop’ blev udført for at validere
ydeevnen af GraPE’s Directed Message Passing Neural Network (DMPNN) og Atten-
tion Fingerprint (AFP) modeller. Selvom GraPE viste sig nyttigt, var det ikke konkur-
rencedygtigt med Chemprop. De rapporterede ydeevnemålinger for Chemprop blev suc-
cesfuldt reproduceret ved brug af samme værktøj. Imidlertid var præstationen af GraPE’s
modeller ikke på højde med Chemprop. Specifikt var de forudsagte resultater fra GraPE’s
DMPNN- og AFP-modeller mindre præcise, hvilket fremhæver områder, hvor GraPE har
behov for yderligere forbedringer for at matche Chemprop’s standard.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
iii
==PAGE:6==
English
Predicting molecular properties is an essential task in chemical and biochemical engi-
neering, with applications ranging from drug discovery to materials science. Graph Neu-
ral Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for this purpose, leveraging the
structural information of molecules to make accurate predictions. This thesis presents
enhancements designed to streamline the development, testing, validation, and deploy-
ment of Graph Neural Network models to a toolbox called GraPE-Chem (Graph-based
Property Estimation for Chemistry) or short GraPE, a python package to support Chemi-
cal property prediction.
Novel implementations introduced in GraPE include ensemble techniques that combine
predictions from multiple models to improve accuracy and robustness. These techniques
leverage the strengths of different models, providing a more reliable and robust prediction
framework. Additionally, GraPE supports multi-target prediction, allowing for comprehen-
sive analysis by combining different sources of information.
Key enhancements include experiment-logging through MLflow, hyperparameter tuning
with Ray Tune, and containerization using Docker. These features ensure a secure, effi-
cient, and reproducible workflow, addressing common challenges in model development
and deployment.
Furthermore challenges of reproducibility and model reusability will be discussed. Propos-
ing solutions to ensure consistent and reliable predictions. The findings underscore the
importance of detailed experimental setups and the need for a flexible, user-friendly plat-
form in advancing the field of molecular property prediction.
A comparison with the existing tool ’Chemprop’ was conducted to validate the perfor-
mance of GraPE’s Directed Message Passing Neural Network (DMPNN) and Attention
Fingerprint (AFP) models. While GraPE proved useful, it was not competitive with Chemprop.
The performance metrics reported for Chemprop were reproduced successfully, using the
same tool. However, the performance of GraPE’s models fell short of the benchmark set
by Chemprop. Specifically, the predicted results from GraPE’s DMPNN and AFP models
were less accurate, highlighting areas where GraPE needs further refinement to match
Chemprop’s standard.
iv
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Thomas Swagerman, MSc Autonomous Systems, DTU
I would like to express my gratitude to the following individuals for their support and guid-
ance throughout the course of my MSc thesis at DTU:
Adem Rosenkvist Nielsen Aouichaoui, Postdoc, DTU
For his invaluable supervision, insightful feedback, and constant encouragement during
the development of this thesis. His knowledge and guidance were invaluable in shaping
the direction and quality of my research. He has always been a thoughtful and supportive
mentor, and I truly appreciate the opportunity to work with him.
Paul Seghers, MSc student, DTU
For the engaging conversations, collaborative efforts, and insightful discussions that pro-
vided me with some new perspective on the challenges of this research. His assistance
with high-performance computing resources was especially helpful.
Thanks to my friends and family for their guidance and belief in me throughout my aca-
demic journey.
Lastly, I would like to express my gratitude to Milda for her support and patience, especially
during the final stages of this work. Her understanding and encouragement, even as I
spent countless hours confined to a room, have meant a great deal to me. I appreciate
and cherish her presence throughout this journey.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Existing Packages and Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Research Question/Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5
Outline of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Methodology
12
2.1
Data Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3
Advanced Analytics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4
Multi-target prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.5
Platform Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
2.6
Experiment Tracking in Docker image with MLflow and Hyperparameter
Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3
Results
38
3.1
GraPE: Before and After . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.2
Data Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.3
Case Study 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.4
Case Study 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.5
Challenges in Reproducing Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4
Conclusion and Perspective
60
4.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4.2
Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
References
63
A Appendix
67
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Importance of Molecular Property Prediction
The ability to accurately predict molecular properties is vital in the field of chemical en-
gineering, where it plays an important role in the efficient and cost-effective screening of
process alternatives. The wide variety of properties of interest and the enormous chem-
ical design space make it impractical to conduct experiments for each combination (A.
Aouichaoui et al. 2022). This necessitates the use of predictive models that can help
reduce the search space. These models fall under the class of Quantitative Structure–
Property Relationship (QSPR). QSPRs are mathematical models that aim to predict the
target property based on the structural information of the molecule. The quality of a QSPR
depends on the quality of data used, the descriptor chosen and the mathematical correla-
tion to relate these two. However, a key challenge is the selection of appropriate molecular
descriptors as this will greatly influence the correlation that can be used.
Over the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have made big strides in fields such
as natural language processing and computer vision, revolutionizing how insights are
gained from data. Similar progress in chemical property prediction might not have been
feasible without the development of frameworks like Message Passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs) (Gilmer et al. 2017). By aggregating local node and edge information across
the graph, MPNNs provide a powerful method for supervised representation learning on
graph data. This has enabled the prediction of molecular properties directly from graph
representations and thus eliminating the need for intricate feature engineering to develop
an appropriate descriptor (Gilmer et al. 2017).
In 2005, graph neural networks (GNNs) were introduced. GNNs operate based on the
concept of message passing. Extending the back-propagation algorithm to graph-structured
data, which enabled neural networks to be trained on graphs (Scarselli et al. 2005). This
has since been leveraged to conduct inductive and representation learning on tasks re-
lated to molecules. This was made possible by representing a molecule as a graph, with
nodes representing atoms and edges representing chemical bonds.
Accurate molecular property prediction facilitates in-silico screening, significantly reducing
the time and cost associated with experimental testing. Leveraging the latest advances
in GNNs and MPNNs, tools can be developed to enhance the ability of domain experts to
perform rapid and efficient real-life experiments (A. R. N. Aouichaoui et al. 2023).
This work proposes the development of a flexible computer-aided tool that integrates
these machine learning techniques and provides easy access to develop such models.
This tool aims to empower domain experts by providing a versatile library for molecu-
lar property prediction, thereby streamlining the experimental process and advancing the
field of chemical engineering.
1.1.2
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a class of neural networks designed to perform infer-
ence on data represented as graphs. Unlike traditional neural networks, which operate
on vectorized data, GNNs capture the relationships and interactions of any system that
can be represented as nodes connected by edges in a graph. GNNs have been applied
successfully to various domains, including social network analysis, recommendation sys-
tems, and the prediction of molecular properties in chemistry. One of the key advantages
1
==PAGE:12==
of GNNs is their ability to work with graph-based representations, allowing them to capture
complex structural information. By learning from the molecular graph, GNNs can extract
relevant features that contribute to improved predictive performance (Gilmer et al. 2017).
An analysis of published literature using keywords GNNs, chemistry, and molecules re-
veals an interesting trend. The first significant publications combining these concepts
appeared around 2020, approximately three years after Gilmer’s initial work. Since then,
the field has seen steady growth, with approximately 10 articles published annually on
the topic. Notably, 2022 marked a peak in research output, with 16 articles published,
indicating a growing interest and maturity in applying GNNs to molecular systems.
This timeline suggests a typical lag between the introduction of a novel method and its
adoption in the scientific community. The increasing number of publications also reflects
the growing recognition of GNNs’ potential in addressing complex challenges in molecu-
lar property prediction and related fields. As researchers continue to explore and refine
GNN architectures for molecular applications, we can expect further advancements and
innovations.
In 2005 the research by Scarselli et al. (2005) introduced the concept of Graph Neural Net-
works (GNNs). Kipf and Welling (2017) further advanced the field by developing Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs), which significantly enhanced the capability of GNNs in
semi-supervised learning tasks on graph data. Building on these advancements, later
that same year, Gilmer et al. (2017) developed the Message Passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs) framework. As mentioned before, this framework demonstrated substantial im-
provements in predictive performance by directly operating on graph representations of
molecules.
In recent years there has been a surge of research aimed at advancing GNN architectures
for molecular representation learning. Various techniques were explored, such as self-
supervised learning and pre-training on large datasets.
Both Rong et al. (2020) and Hu et al. (2020) employ self-supervised pre-trained GNN
models like GROVER to extract implicit molecular features, significantly improving predic-
tion accuracy across vast chemical spaces. The research by Rong et al. (2020) demon-
strated improved performance on molecular classification tasks, including blood-brain
barrier penetration, toxicity (Tox21, ToxCast), and adverse drug reactions (SIDER), as
well as regression tasks such as solubility (ESOL) and quantum mechanical properties
(QM7, QM8). Rong et al. (2020) emphasized that there are complexities to overcome
when combining chemistry and current GNN models. Namely, insufficient labeled data
for molecular tasks and poor generalization capability of models in the enormous chem-
ical space. Therefore they designed a self-supervised pre-trained GNN model called
GROVER to extract implicit information from massive unlabelled molecules (Rong et al.
2020). GROVER was pre-trained with 100 million parameters on 10 million unlabeled
molecules, afterwards task specific fine tuning was performed to report an average im-
provement of about six percent on eleven benchmarks. The work performed by Hu et al.
(2020) focused on binary classification datasets, including blood-brain barrier penetra-
tion, toxicity (Tox21, ToxCast), and adverse drug reactions (SIDER), further showcasing
the effectiveness of GNNs in molecular property benchmarks. Hu et al. (2020) introduce a
model that offers a novel approach to pre-training GNNs, integrating both node-level and
graph-level pre-training simultaneously. It introduces innovative self-supervised methods,
such as Context Prediction and Attribute Masking, to capture domain-specific knowledge
and structural similarities within graph data.
Another study, performed by Yang et al. (2019), explores neural networks for molecular
2
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:13==
fingerprints and graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) for graph-based molec-
ular representations. They stress the importance of hyperparameter optimization and
ensembling. Their hybrid GCNN, combining convolutions and fixed descriptors, outper-
formed many existing models. Research by Sun et al. (2020) uses a semi-supervised
technique to try to take advantage of the fact that in the real world datasets are often par-
tially labelled. The method was dubbed Deep Infomax and is a method that maximizes
the mutual information content between the input data and the learned representation.
This model outperformed state-of-the-art models at the time utilizing several graph clas-
sification datasets ranging from seven to nineteen discrete labels and QM9 dataset which
was also used by Gilmer et al. (2017). In another study, Su et al. (2022) discusses a
molecular multi-modal foundation model, namely MoMu, to bridge molecular graphs and
natural language descriptions of molecules.
A persistent issue with GNN, and many other DL-based models, is the lack of interpretabil-
ity. Several studies have attempted to address this limitation. For instance Yuan et al.
(2020) proposes a novel approach for model-level interpretations of GNNs by generating
graph patterns that maximize certain predictions. This method formulates graph genera-
tion as a reinforcement learning problem, training a graph generator to produce explana-
tory subgraphs that provide insights into the GNN’s decision-making process. Similarly
Ying et al. (2019) developed GNNExplainer, which is a model-agnostic approach for pro-
viding interpretable explanations for predictions of any GNN-based model on graph-based
machine learning tasks. It identifies a compact subgraph structure and a small subset of
node features crucial for a GNN’s prediction, formulating the explanation as an optimiza-
tion task that maximizes mutual information between the GNN’s prediction and distribution
of possible subgraph structures. A. R. N. Aouichaoui et al. (2023) addresses novel graph
neural network models using prior knowledge by integrating expert knowledge in the form
of chemical fundamentals using the concept of functional group as subgraphs.
Representing Molecules as Graphs
Molecules can be naturally represented as graphs
illustrated in figure 1.1, where nodes correspond to atoms and edges represent chemical
bonds (Gilmer et al. 2017). Each node and edge can be featurized with relevant infor-
mation such as atom types, bond orders, and spatial coordinates, allowing the molecular
structure to be encoded as a graph. The Kekulé diagram is a 2D structural representation
of molecules to depict atoms as letters and chemical bonds as lines.
Additionally, fixed molecular descriptors such as fingerprints encode structural features as
binary vectors, while SMILES (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System) notation pro-
vides a linear text representation of molecular structures. Among these, SMILES strings
are particularly useful for deep learning models. To read a SMILES string:
1. Atoms are represented by their atomic symbols.
2. Bonds between atoms are represented by symbols (e.g., single bond = no symbol
or ‘-’, double bond = ‘=’, triple bond = ‘#’).
3. Branches are shown with parentheses.
For example, the SMILES string for ethanol is “CCO”, where ‘C’ represents carbon atoms
and ‘O’ represents the oxygen atom. By combining these representations, it is possible to
enhance predictive accuracy and efficiency in tasks like molecular property prediction and
drug discovery. An added benefit of such representation is the unification of molecular
tags as the names used can be different based on the convention used as well as the
language.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.1: Illustration of a small molecule and various representations of information
(Deng 2021).
Graph Neural Network Architectures
One of the core ideas behind GNNs is to itera-
tively update the node representations by aggregating and transforming information from
their neighboring nodes and edges (Gilmer et al. 2017), a process known as message
passing. After repeated rounds of message passing, a readout or pooling operation is
applied to obtain a graph-level representation, which can then be mapped to the target
molecular property using a neural network regression model (Scarselli et al. 2005). The
main difference in published architectures reside in the mathematical operations associ-
ated with these aforementioned processes. To illustrate this process more formally, we
can use the generic formulation of Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer
et al. 2017):
m(t+1)
v
=
∑
w∈N(v)
Mt(h(t)
v , h(t)
w , evw)
h(t+1)
v
= Ut(h(t)
v , m(t+1)
v
)
ˆy = R({h(T)
v
|v ∈G})
Where h(t)
v
is the hidden state of node v at time step t, evw is the edge feature between
nodes v and w, Mt is the message function, Ut is the update function, N(v) is the set of
neighbors of node v, R is the readout function, T is the total number of message passing
steps, and ˆy is the predicted output.
The specific implementations of these functions vary across different GNN architectures:
• Message functions (Mt): These can range from simple concatenation or summa-
tion of node features to more complex operations like attention mechanisms (e.g.,
Graph Attention Networks (Veličković et al. 2018))
• Update functions (Ut): Common choices include Gated Recurrent Units (GRU),
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) cells, or simple feed-forward neural networks.
4
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:15==
• Readout functions (R): These operations aggregate node-level representations
into a graph-level representation. Common approaches include:
– Simple summation:
R =
∑
v∈G
h(T)
v
(1.1)
– Mean pooling:
R =
1
|V |
∑
v∈G
h(T)
v
(1.2)
– Max pooling:
R = max
v∈G h(T)
v
(1.3)
– Attention-based pooling:
R =
∑
v∈G
αvh(T)
v
,
where αv are learned attention weights
(1.4)
– Set2Set (Vinyals, Bengio, and Kudlur 2016): A more complex pooling operation
that uses attention and LSTM to capture complex set interactions
The choice of these operations significantly influences the GNN’s ability to capture differ-
ent aspects of molecular structure and properties, leading to the diversity of architectures
in the literature.
Figure 1.2: Schematic representation of the message passing process in Graph Neural
Networks. (Itoh, Kubo, and Ikeda 2021)
1.2
Existing Packages and Tools
Tools have been designed to tackle the challenges of accurately modeling chemical struc-
tures. While our focus is on expanding and improving GraPE, it is necessary to investigate
established tools in the field and assess how GraPE can be improved.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
5
==PAGE:16==
1.2.1
DGL-LifeSci
DGL-LifeSci, developed by NYU, NYU Shanghai, AWS Shanghai AI Lab, and the AWS
MXNet Science Team, is a Python package built on top of the Deep Graph Library (DGL)
for graph-based machine learning applications in life sciences (M. Li et al. 2021). It pro-
vides implementations of various graph neural networks tailored specifically for molecular
property prediction tasks. DGL-LifeSci offers a range of pre-built models and datasets,
making it a versatile tool for researchers in cheminformatics.
At the time of writing the DGL-LifeSci paper M. Li et al. (2021), published in 2021, has
been referenced 147 times, with the majority of those citations occurring from 2023, indi-
cating a growing interest and adoption of the framework in the research community. This
increasing usage reflects the relevance of DGL-LifeSci in advancing the field of molecular
representation learning and its potential to facilitate new discoveries in drug design and
related areas.
Table 1.1: Pros and Cons DGL-LifeSci
Pros
• Comprehensive Toolset: Provides a variety of pre-built models
and datasets tailored for molecular property prediction.
• Integration with Deep Graph Library (DGL): Leverages DGL’s
capabilities for graph-based machine learning, offering a unified
framework for various molecular graph tasks.
• Rich Molecular Featurization: Includes a wide range of molec-
ular featurization methods, supporting diverse approaches to rep-
resent chemical structures.
Cons
• Limited Customization: Some users may find the pre-built mod-
els less customizable for specific needs.
• Potential Performance Trade-offs: Pre-configured models may
not always be optimized for unique or niche applications.
• Limited Recent Maintenance: As of our last check, the project
has seen no maintenance activity in the last year on GitHub, po-
tentially leading to compatibility issues with newer versions of de-
pendencies or delayed bug fixes.
• Performance Issues: Generally slower compared to PyTorch
Geometric (PyG), which can be a significant drawback for large-
scale applications or when computational efficiency is crucial.
1.2.2
Chemprop
Chemprop is an open-source tool for molecular property prediction using message pass-
ing neural networks (MPNNs).
Developed at MIT Yang et al. (2019), Chemprop has
gained attention in the field due to its strong performance on various benchmark datasets.
It utilizes a directed MPNN architecture and offers both command-line and Python inter-
faces for model training and prediction. The impact of Chemprop in the scientific commu-
nity becomes clear from its citation history. As of 2024, the original paper by Yang et al.
has been cited over 160 times, demonstrating its influence. The adoption and application
of Chemprop have shown a remarkable upward trend since its introduction. Publication
data reveals a steady increase in research utilizing or referencing Chemprop, with the
number of publications growing from 5 in 2019 to 88 in 2023. This exponential growth in
6
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:17==
publications (5 in 2019, 5 in 2020, 15 in 2021, 19 in 2022, 32 in 2023 and 88 in 2024)
underscores the tool’s increasing relevance and adoption in the scientific community, par-
ticularly in recent years.
Table 1.2: Pros and Cons Chemprop
Pros
• Directed MPNN Architecture: Focused implementation that im-
proves performance on molecular property prediction tasks.
• Strong Benchmark Performance: Demonstrates strong perfor-
mance on various datasets, enhancing reliability.
• Strong Benchmark Performance:
Consistently high perfor-
mance across various molecular property prediction datasets.
Cons
• Limited Flexibility: Primarily focused on D-MPNN, which may
not be optimal for all types of molecular learning tasks.
• Complexity in Usage: Requires careful setup and understanding
of its architecture to fully utilize its capabilities. Effective use re-
quires a good understanding of both chemistry and machine learn-
ing.
1.2.3
DeepChem
DeepChem, developed by Ramsundar et al. (2019), is a Python library for deep learning
in drug discovery, materials science, quantum chemistry, and biology. It provides a wide
array of tools for molecular featurization, model building, and evaluation. DeepChem
supports numerous types of neural networks, including graph-based models, making it
a versatile choice for molecular property prediction tasks. DeepChem provides imple-
mentations of several key architectures, such as Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs),
MEGNet, Weave, and Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs). These models can
effectively capture the topological structure of molecules, leading to improved predictive
performance on a wide range of tasks. Moreover, there are multitask variations of some
of these models available.
Table 1.3: Pros and Cons DeepChem
Pros
• Wide Array of Tools: Offers a broad range of functionalities for
molecular featurization and model building.
• Versatility:
Supports various neural network types, including
graph-based models.
Cons
• Performance Variability: Model performance can vary depend-
ing on the choice of algorithms and settings.
• Complex Integration: Can be challenging to integrate with other
tools and frameworks due to its broad scope.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
7
==PAGE:18==
1.2.4
RDKit
RDKit Landrum (2010) is an open-source cheminformatics software widely used in the
field. While not primarily a machine learning tool, RDKit provides essential functionality
for molecular manipulation, fingerprinting, and descriptor calculation. It serves as a foun-
dation for many molecular property prediction pipelines such as Chemprop and GraPE
and is often used in conjunction with machine learning libraries.
Table 1.4: Pros and Cons RDKit
Pros
• Industry Standard: Widely adopted in both academia and indus-
try for cheminformatics tasks.
• Comprehensive Molecular Operations: Excellent for molecular
manipulation, fingerprinting, and descriptor calculation.
• Interoperability: Easily integrates with other Python-based ma-
chine learning libraries.
Cons
• Not ML-Focused: Lacks built-in advanced machine learning ca-
pabilities.
• Performance Bottlenecks: Some operations can be slow for
very large datasets.
Felix Oscar Ærtebjerg, a master’s student at the Technical University of Denmark, de-
veloped a Python package named GraPE-Chem (Graph-based Property Estimation for
Chemistry) (Aertebjerg 2024). This package leverages PyTorch and PyTorch Geometric
to predict chemical properties using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). The project aims
to provide a flexible pipeline for passing molecular descriptors (SMILES) into GNNs, with
customization options to make predictions on all kinds of molecule attributes.
A review was done on the mathematical foundations of various GNN models essential for
chemical property prediction, including MPNN, Weave, D-MPNN, MEGNet, and Atten-
tive FP. He presents their history, algorithmic structures, and their implementation within
GraPE-Chem. The package is designed to facilitate streamlined and effective property
prediction, and it is publicly available on GitHub, with comprehensive documentation and
demonstrations.
The development of GraPE-Chem involved a comprehensive review of several key GNN
models crucial for chemical property prediction. These include Message Passing Neu-
ral Networks (MPNN), Weave, Directed Message Passing Neural Networks (D-MPNN),
Materials Graph Network (MEGNet), and Attentive Fingerprint (Attentive FP). Ærtebjerg’s
work not only presents the historical context and algorithmic structures of these models
but also details their implementation within the GraPE-Chem framework.
Beyond model architectures, GraPE-Chem addresses the entire machine learning pipeline
for chemical property prediction. This includes crucial preprocessing steps such as data
filtering and featurization, efficient data handling mechanisms, and implementation of
naive classification and clustering methods. The package is designed with a focus on
accessibility and usability, being publicly available on GitHub with comprehensive doc-
umentation and demonstrations to guide users. A key aspect of Ærtebjerg’s work is the
emphasis on machine learning operations (MLOps). This project showcases the potential
of GNNs in automating drug discovery and personalized medicine, emphasizing the need
for robust MLOps practices in developing and deploying machine learning models in the
8
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:19==
field of chemistry and bio-science.
GraPE will benefit from model deployment and experiment logging. Trained models need
to be made available to end users and end users need to be able to experiment with
hyper-parameters while providing them with an organized and easy to use solution to
track results. Moreover, ensemble techniques and multi target learning will be explored,
discussed and implemented.
1.3
Problem Statement
Despite significant advancements in developing and applying GNNs for molecular prop-
erty prediction, challenges remain in compartmentalizing models for reproducibility and
deployment. Many existing platforms lack flexibility, making it difficult to efficiently evalu-
ate, compare, and deploy different models. This creates a need for a centralized, stream-
lined platform that integrates the entire GNN development lifecycle, from training to de-
ployment.
1.3.1
Project plan
A divide and conquer strategy will be applied in order to create the desired tool. Previous
work has been done on creating a python package called GraPE Aertebjerg (2024). An
extensive literature study needs to be conducted in order to fully grasp the functionality
of this and similar existing packages. The desired architecture of the tool needs to be
established, the tool needs a functional MLops pipeline. The different tasks will be divided
in subproblems and an overview will be provided in the form of a Gannt chart.
Task 0: Project problem Establishing tasks and the scope of the project.
Task 1: Literature study This task is expected to extend throughout the entire project.
Research needs to be done on current tools, different GNN architectures and on the de-
mands from the industry regarding everything related to the platform, such as model train-
ing, testing, validation and eventual deployment. Providing a foundation for the work and
informing decisions at different stages. subtasks of the literature study:
a. Review relevant literature
b. Comparative analysis of existing tools and GNN architectures
c. Identification of relevant tech stack to implement steps of the model development.
Task 2: Design The most important part, next to the actual value of the tool, is that
the tool is easily setup and people can use it out of the box. Extensive MLops design
choices need to be made and applied. Think of continuous integration and deployment of
the package. Not only will this ease user experience, it will also enhance reproducibility.
Hence, potentially the tool needs to be containerized and deployed using Docker. The
tool requires
a. Conceptualization of platform in the form of a high-level design outlining the archi-
tecture. Including CI/CD pipeline and containerization plan.
b. Execution of architecture design.
Task 3: Development and Integration Implementation of GraPE core functionalities and
integration with supporting technologies.
a. Development of main GraPE features and functionalities
b. Creation of a pipeline for model training and validation
c. Integration of MLflow for experiment tracking and logging
d. Optimization of code for improved performance
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
9
==PAGE:20==
Task 4: Containerization Ensure deployability of the tool and provide usage guidance.
a. Implementation of Docker containerization for easy deployment
b. Creation of Jupyter notebooks demonstrating basic tool usage
c. Development of a simple README file with setup instructions
d. Preparation of code comments to aid in understanding the codebase
Task 5: Ensuring deployment Deploy the toolbox in a production environment, ensuring
it is accessible and maintainable.
a. Deployment plan design
b. Potentially deliver a containerized version of the toolbox using Docker
1.3.2
Gantt chart
Writing of the thesis will be done throughout the project. The open period at the end of
the Gannt chart is meant for extending the toolbox with potential extra functionalities that
might arise during research and finalizing writing and other tasks that might not have been
finished in time.
Figure 1.3: This Gantt chart illustrates the timeline of the work.
1.4
Research Question/Objective
This research aims to address the following question: How can we build a streamlined
platform that facilitates the development, testing, validation, and deployment of GNN mod-
els for molecular property prediction?
Moreover a comparison with an existing tool is required and Chemprop Yang et al. (2019)
stands out due to its reported success and its focused implementation of the Directed Mes-
sage Passing Neural Network (DMPNN) architecture. By comparing GraPE’s DMPNN
implementation with Chemprop, we aim to validate our approach and identify areas for im-
provement. This comparison also allows us to assess the relative performance of GraPE’s
Attention Fingerprint (AFP) model against the DMPNN architecture, providing insights into
the strengths and potential applications of different graph-based approaches in property
prediction.
Chemprop was chosen for a comparison study due to its reported performance in a study
by Marques and Müller (2024). The work was obtained through personal communication
with the authors.
The primary objectives of this work are:
10
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:21==
1. Identify suitable tech stacks and MLOps practices for the development and deploy-
ment of GNN models.
2. Survey existing tools and their capabilities in supporting GNN-based molecular prop-
erty prediction.
3. Develop a flexible and user-friendly software platform that facilitates the entire life-
cycle of GNN model development and deployment.
4. Establish guidelines and best practices for the effective use of GNN models in
molecular property prediction.
1.5
Outline of Thesis
This thesis is structured into five main chapters. The Introduction establishes the impor-
tance of molecular property prediction and introduces Graph Neural Networks as a solu-
tion, reviewing existing tools. The Methodology chapter outlines the research approach,
detailing models, data sources, and enhancements to the GraPE platform. The Results
section presents findings on ensemble techniques, compares GraPE against Chemprop,
and showcases predictions on critical datasets. Finally, the Conclusion summarizes key
findings, highlighting the platform’s strengths and areas for future development.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
11
==PAGE:22==
2
Methodology
The elements and processes involved in the development and evaluation of the pro-
posed system are discussed in this chapter. Organized into several key components,
the methodology includes details on data handling, and a discussion of models, uncer-
tainty estimation techniques, multi task learning, platform design, experiment tracking,
model interactiveness, and hyperparameter optimization.
2.1
Data Preprocessing
The data can be provided in CSV format, which is loaded using a custom data extraction
function integrated into GraPE model utils the load_dataset_from_csv. GraPE was al-
ready equipped with a similar function to read excel files. This CSV function also allows to
provide multiple csv files and it will merge the dataframes into one dataframe. This func-
tion extracts the SMILES, target and global feature properties from the dataframe and cre-
ates a Dataset object. The dataframe is created using the extract_data_from_dataframe
function, which handles data encoding, removes rows with missing target values, and pro-
cesses the relevant features for prediction tasks. Then combines the dataframes if multi-
ple datasets were provided. These steps ensure that the datasets are ready for training
and evaluation with minimal preprocessing overhead for subsequent modeling tasks.
The preprocessing steps are crucial for ensuring the quality and consistency of the data
used for training and evaluation. By removing rows with missing target values, we ensure
that the model is trained on complete and reliable data, which is essential for accurate
predictions. The standardization of target values using the mean and standard deviation
of the training dataset helps in normalizing the data, making it easier for the model to learn
and generalize.
The ability to merge multiple datasets into one dataframe allows for a more comprehen-
sive analysis by combining different sources of information. This is useful for multi-target
predictions where observations from different datasets need to be combined. The aim
is to increase model robustness by allowing the model to train on multiple targets on the
same SMILES.
For molecular graph-based analysis, additional atom and bond features are extracted.
Atom features include atom type, atomic mass, hybridization, aromaticity, and presence
in ring structures, while bond features include bond type, conjugation, ring presence, and
stereochemistry.
The extracted features provide a rich representation of the molecular structures and their
properties. This detailed representation is essential for the model to capture the underly-
ing patterns and relationships in the data, leading to more accurate predictions.
Overall, the data preprocessing steps not only prepare the data for modeling but also
enhance reliability of the analysis. By ensuring that the data is clean, standardized, and
comprehensive, we can achieve more accurate and robust predictions, which are critical
for applications in research and industry.
12
==PAGE:23==
Preprocessing of the datasets includes the following steps:
• Read SMILES, targets and possibly global features from target file.
• If necessary, combine multiple files for multi task learning. This is particularly impor-
tant for multi-task learning, where the model needs to learn from multiple sources
of data.
• Removal of rows with NaN values in the target column.
• Split the data in three subsets, train, validation and test.
• Create Dataset object and scale the subsets based on training data.
The datasets are split into training, validation, and test sets using an 80-10-10 split ratio.
This ensures a balanced evaluation of model performance across different subsets of the
data. To ensure reproducibility of the results with the same CSV files the split needs to
be logged. There are several types of splits available in GraPE. Random (randomly as-
signs data points), Consecutive (Splits data in order of top to bottom), Scaffold (groups
molecules by scaffold structures), Stratified (preserves target variable distribution), Butina
(uses clustering to group similar molecules), and Custom (user-defined criteria). Stan-
dardization of target values follows the split using the mean and standard deviation of the
training dataset.
By offering multiple splitting methods, GraPE ensures robust and reliable model evalua-
tion across different types of datasets and scenarios.
2.2
Models
This subsection provides an overview of the models used in this research. The focus is
on the implementation and application of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for molecular
property prediction.
2.2.1
Directed Message Passing Neural Network (D-MPNN)
This section reviews the Directed Message Passing Neural Network (D-MPNN), devel-
oped by Yang et al. (2019).
Figure 2.1: Visualization of bond-level message passing in D-MPNN. (a) Messages from
the orange directed bonds update the hidden state of the red directed bond, unlike tradi-
tional MPNNs where messages are passed between atoms. (b) The green bond message
updates the hidden state of the purple directed bond. (c) Update function for the hidden
state of the red directed bond from (a). Yang et al. (2019).
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
13
==PAGE:24==
D-MPNNs, first introduced by Yang et al. (2019) operate on molecular graphs where nodes
represent atoms and edges represent bonds. The model consists of two main phases:
the message passing phase and the readout phase. Figure 2.1 illustrates the bond-level
message passing in D-MPNN.
In part (a), messages from the orange directed bonds update the hidden state of the red
directed bond, unlike traditional MPNNs where messages are passed between atoms,
potentially creating loops. Part (b) shows the green bond message updating the hidden
state of the purple directed bond. Part (c) illustrates the update function for the red directed
bond from (a).
The readout phase, which is not depicted in this figure, aggregates the final hidden states
of all bonds to produce a graph-level representation. This representation is then used for
making predictions about the molecular properties.
Message Passing Phase
In the message passing phase, information is transmitted
across the molecular graph to build a neural representation of the molecule. This phase
involves T steps, where at each step t, hidden states ht
v and messages mt
v associated
with each vertex v are updated using a message function Mt and a vertex update function
Ut. The message functions M, vertex update functions U, and readout function R are all
learned differentiable functions (Gilmer et al. 2017). The updates are defined as follows:
mt+1
vw =
∑
k∈N(v)/w
Mt(xv, xk, ht
kv)
ht+1
vw = Ut(ht
vw, mt+1
vw )
Here, N(v) denotes the set of neighbors of v in the graph G, and evw represents the edge
features between nodes v and w.
Readout Phase
In the readout phase, a readout function R is used to make property
predictions based on the final hidden states:
ˆy = R({hT
v |v ∈G})
Applications and Advancements
D-MPNNs can be used for a variety of molecular
property prediction tasks, leveraging their ability to learn molecular representations di-
rectly from data. This allows the model to capture more nuanced and complex features of
the molecules, making it suitable for tasks such as toxicity prediction, solubility estimation,
and bioactivity prediction.
While other models, such as generic Message‘ Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs), also
learn molecular representations from data, D-MPNNs offer several distinct advantages:
• Learned Representations: D-MPNNs operate directly on molecular graphs, where
nodes represent atoms and edges represent bonds. This direct approach allows the
model to learn intricate molecular structures and relationships without relying on pre-
computed descriptors or fingerprints Yang et al. (2019). D-MPNN uses messages
associated with directed edges(bonds) (Yang et al. 2019)
14
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:25==
• Performance: Extensive experiments demonstrate that D-MPNNs consistently match
or outperform baseline models, including those using fixed descriptors. (Yang et al.
2019)
• Flexibility: The D-MPNN architecture remains consistent across different datasets,
simplifying its application to new datasets. (Yang et al. 2019)
• Handling Small Datasets: D-MPNNs incorporate global molecular features to counter
the limitations posed by small datasets, improving generalization (Yang et al. 2019).
Additionally, they can be adapted to handle imbalanced datasets by incorporating
techniques such as ensembling and hyperparameter optimization
Liu and Song (2021) demonstrated the robust performance of DMPNNs by combining both
node and edge representation using DMPNNs to enhance the substructure representation
learning for unsupervised node classification. Another study highlights DMPNN’s potential
in the discovery of novel and effective human ether-a-go-go-related gene (hERG) blockers
Shan et al. (2022). They achieved excellent performance using DMPNN, reporting an
AUC-ROC of 0.956 under random split.
2.2.2
Attentive FP (AFP)
This section reviews the Attentive FP (AFP), developed by Xiong et al. (2020).
Figure 2.2: Visualization of overview of the Attentive FP network architecture.(Xiong et al.
2020).
Attentive FP (AFP), introduced by Xiong et al. (2020), leverages graph attention mecha-
nisms to enhance the prediction of molecular properties. This model addresses several
limitations of previous graph-based models by incorporating attention mechanisms at both
the atom and molecule levels, allowing it to capture intricate properties of chemical struc-
tures. One of the key limitations of previous models, such as Neural FP, is the averaging
effect of neighbor impacts. This can dilute the influence of important neighbors (Xiong
et al. 2020). The paper highlights the challenge of capturing non-local intramolecular in-
teractions. Furthermore, the introduction of the graph attention mechanism in Attentive
FP allows the model to focus on task-related information from neighborhoods, filtering out
unrelated information during the iteration process (Xiong et al. 2020).
AFP operates on two distinct levels: node-level embedding and graph-level embedding.
Node-Level Embedding
At the node level, the attentive layer processes each node
along with its immediate neighbors (k=1). The initial hidden state of the node is derived
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
15
==PAGE:26==
from the original atomic information. The attention mechanism in AFP involves three key
operations: alignment, weighting, and context (A. R. N. Aouichaoui et al. 2023).
evu = leakyReLU(W · [hi, hj])
where W is a trainable weight matrix, evu is the output of allignment. (Xiong et al. 2020)
Weighting Operation: This step calculates the importance coefficients for the neighbor-
ing nodes using a softmax normalization function to produce normalized attention scores
αvu. These coefficients are used to weight the neighboring nodes’ contributions (Xiong
et al. 2020). This operation is defined as:
αvu = softmax(evu) =
exp(evu)
∑
u∈N(v) exp(evu)
Context Operation: The context message is then generated by applying a linear transfor-
mation on the neighboring state vectors and combined with a weighted sum and a linear
activation function. (Xiong et al. 2020)
mi =
∑
j∈N(i)
αijWhj
where N(i) denotes the set of neighbors of node i
The hidden state of the node is updated using the context message constructed in the
previous step (Xiong et al. 2020). A Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) can be used to update
the node embedding, which can be formulated as:
h(t+1)
i
= GRU(h(t)
i , mi)
Here, h(t)
i
and h(t+1)
i
represent the hidden states of node i at times t and t+1, respectively,
and mi is the context message.
Graph-Level Embedding
The graph embedding process mirrors the node-level atten-
tive layers, treating the entire graph as a supernode connected to all nodes within the
molecule. The initial hidden state of this supernode is obtained by summing the hidden
states of all nodes in the molecule, and it is updated similarly to the node-level embedding
(A. R. N. Aouichaoui et al. 2023).
Components of AFP
AFP consists of two main components: the graph attention layers
and the readout function.
• Graph Attention Layers: These layers apply attention mechanisms to the nodes
(atoms) and edges (bonds) of the molecular graph. The attention mechanism as-
signs different weights to different nodes and edges based on their importance,
allowing the model to focus on the most relevant parts of the molecule. This is
particularly useful for capturing subtle substructure patterns such as intramolecular
hydrogen bonding and aromatic systems.
16
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:27==
• Readout Function: After the attention layers, a readout function aggregates the
information from all nodes to produce a fixed-size representation of the molecule.
This representation is then used for property prediction tasks. (Xiong et al. 2020)
hk
v = GRUk−1 (
Ck−1
v
, hk−1
v
)
Improvements and Advantages
• Attention Mechanisms: The use of attention mechanisms at both the atom and
molecule levels is a significant advancement over previous models like GCNs and
MPNNs, which treat all nodes and edges equally. This allows AFP to capture more
nuanced interactions within the molecule.
• Interpretability: One of the key advantages of AFP is its improved interpretability.
By examining the attention weights, chemists can gain insights into which parts of
the molecule are most relevant for a given property prediction. This helps bridge the
gap between the ”black box” nature of deep learning models and the need for scien-
tific understanding. this attention assigns a coefficient to the nodes (all coefficients
sum up to unity), which can be visualized.
• Performance: AFP has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on a variety of
molecular property prediction tasks. For example, it outperforms other models on
10 out of 12 tasks in the QM9 dataset (Xiong et al. 2020), indicating its ability to
implicitly learn 3D conformation-related information.
• Feature Visualization: AFP’s ability to visualize learned features provides addi-
tional insights into the model’s predictions. For instance, it can highlight atoms in-
volved in aromatic systems or distinguish molecules with adversarial modifications
that affect aromaticity.
The training process involves several key steps to ensure the model’s performance and
reliability. Initially, data preprocessing is performed handling data encoding, removing of
rows with missing target values, and processes relevant features for prediction tasks.
2.2.3
Hyperparameter Tuning
For hyperparameter tuning, Ray Tune (Liaw et al. 2018) is employed to explore a broad
search space efficiently. A specialized hyperparameter function sets up a scheduler for
early stopping and runs the tuning process with a specified number of samples, returning
the best configuration found. The hyperparameter scheduler can be equipped with all
kinds of search algorithms, such as ASHA (Asynchronous Successive Halving Algorithm),
random search, or grid search. These algorithms are crucial for efficiently navigating the
hyperparameter space and finding the optimal configuration. Here is a brief overview of
each algorithm:
ASHA (Asynchronous Successive Halving Algorithm) (L. Li et al. 2020): ASHA is an ef-
ficient hyperparameter optimization method that allocates more resources to promising
configurations while quickly terminating underperforming ones. This approach improves
the optimization process by focusing computational effort on the most promising trials,
making it well-suited for large search spaces. By leveraging early stopping, ASHA prunes
unpromising trials early on, thus speeding up the process and reducing computational
costs. Its scalability makes it particularly effective when working with a large number of
trials, making it an ideal choice for extensive hyperparameter tuning tasks.
Random Search Random search is a simple yet effective hyperparameter optimization
technique. It randomly samples hyperparameters from a defined search space without
making any assumptions about their distribution. This approach is easy to implement and
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
17
==PAGE:28==
can provide a good exploration of the search space. Although it does not rely on prior
knowledge or a structured search strategy, random search can be surprisingly effective,
particularly when combined with early stopping mechanisms to eliminate underperforming
configurations early, reducing unnecessary computations.
Grid Search Grid search is a more exhaustive approach, where every possible combina-
tion of hyperparameters within predefined ranges is evaluated. This systematic, deter-
ministic method ensures a thorough search of the hyperparameter space, reducing the
risk of missing the optimal configuration. However, grid search can become computa-
tionally expensive as the search space increases, as it requires evaluating all possible
combinations, making it less efficient for large or complex search spaces.
Using one of these search algorithms, the hyperparameter scheduler in Ray Tune effi-
ciently navigates the search space to identify the optimal hyperparameters. This is im-
portant because it ensures that the model achieves the best possible performance by
leveraging the most suitable configuration of hyperparameters.
During training, the model is initialized based on the configuration, and MLflow is used
for logging metrics, parameters, and artifacts. The model is trained using a specified
optimizer and learning rate scheduler. The training process involves iterating over the
dataset, updating model weights to minimize the loss function. It is evaluated on validation
and test sets. Metrics such as training, validation, and test losses, as well as the best
epoch and corresponding validation loss, are logged to MLflow.
As stated before a portion of the dataset is set aside as a validation set to evaluate the
model’s performance during training. This helps in tuning hyperparameters and prevent-
ing overfitting. Metrics such as validation loss are monitored to determine the best epoch
and corresponding model parameters. The training process includes early stopping based
on validation performance to avoid overfitting and ensure the model generalizes well to
unseen data.
This comprehensive approach ensures that the model is trained, tuned, and validated
effectively, providing a robust framework
2.3
Advanced Analytics
2.3.1
Uncertainty Estimation
Statistical variance is a critical metric, as it quantifies the spread of a set of predictions
(Wasserman 2010; A. Aouichaoui et al. 2022). This measure provides insights into the
confidence of the model’s outputs. A higher variance indicates greater disparity among
predictions, suggesting potential uncertainty and lack of confidence in the model’s results.
In contrast, a low variance indicates that predictions are closely clustered around the
mean, suggesting greater confidence in the model’s predictions.
Uncertainty estimation is essential in engineering practice, especially in fields such as
chemical property prediction, where decisions based on model outputs can have sig-
nificant consequences especially in process design, risk assessment and process op-
timization. Accurately understanding and quantifying uncertainty helps in assessing the
reliability of predictions, which can also guide experimental designs to explore less pop-
ulated areas of the chemical design space. Therefore, it is important to prioritize further
investigation of uncertain predictions (Whiting, Tong, and Reed 1993). The importance of
managing uncertainties in chemical engineering has been highlighted by several studies
(Dohrn and Pfohl 2001; Bjørner, G. Sin, and Kontogeorgis 2016). Which have examined
18
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:29==
its effects on the design and operation of various unit processes, including distillation,
liquid-liquid extraction, and flash processes.
2.3.2
Applications in Chemical Property Prediction
Ensemble techniques have been successfully applied in several studies for chemical prop-
erty prediction and uncertainty estimation.
Heid, McGill, et al. (2023) demonstrated the application of ensemble methods in predicting
molecular properties such as solubility and binding affinity. They showed that ensemble
methods consistently outperformed single models in terms of prediction accuracy and
provided reliable uncertainty estimates.
In a study by Seyedian et al. (2024), ensemble techniques were applied to improve the
reliability of compound channel discharge prediction. While not directly related to chemical
properties, this study showcases the versatility of ensemble methods in handling complex,
nonlinear relationships and providing robust uncertainty estimates.
A. R. N. Aouichaoui et al. (2023) developed interpretable graph neural network (GNN)
models by integrating the concept of group contributions (GC). The study focused on two
models: attentive group-contribution (AGC) and group-contribution-based graph attention
(GroupGAT). These models highlighted substructures with the highest attention weights in
the latent representation of molecules, providing insights into the important substructures
for specific properties. Their study demonstrated the effectiveness of these methods in
providing reliable uncertainty estimates for thermodynamic properties.
Other studies have further explored the application of uncertainty estimation methods in
deep neural network (DNN)-based molecular property prediction. For instance, a study by
Scalia et al. (2019) quantitatively compared scalable techniques for uncertainty estimation
in Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNNs). They found that Deep Ensembles
and bootstrapping consistently outperformed MC-dropout, highlighting the importance of
understanding aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in relation to dataset features.
Furthermore, Ryu, Kwon, and W. Kim (2019) introduced a Bayesian Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) for reliable prediction of molecular properties with uncertainty quantifica-
tion. This study demonstrated that Bayesian inference enables more reliable predictions
with quantitative uncertainty analysis, particularly under data-deficient conditions.
Hirschfeld et al. (2020) systematically evaluated several uncertainty quantification meth-
ods for neural networks in the context of regression tasks. Their experiments showed that
no single method was unequivocally superior, emphasizing the need for further research
in this area.
A. Aouichaoui et al. (2022) applied graph-based models to predict critical properties such
as temperature, pressure, and volume, using techniques like bootstrap, ensemble, and
dropout to quantify prediction uncertainty. Their results suggested that graph-based mod-
els perform better compared to traditional property modeling techniques, while also pro-
viding reliable uncertainty estimates.
A novel GNN ensemble model was proposed by Lin et al. (2024), leveraging a GCN,
GraphSAGE and GAT, three classical GNN models. Their proposed ensemble model
outperformed single models in node classification tasks.
Recent research in chemical engineering has highlighted the effectiveness of ensemble
techniques, particularly for enhancing prediction accuracy and providing reliable uncer-
tainty estimates in complex scenarios (A. Aouichaoui et al. 2022; Heid, McGill, et al. 2023;
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
19
==PAGE:30==
Heid, Greenman, et al. 2024; Shengli Jiang et al. 2024). However, their applicability ex-
tends beyond chemical engineering, with successful implementations reported across all
kinds of domains. These studies underscore the versatility and robustness of ensemble
methods in tackling diverse and complex predictive challenges.
Yildiz, Aker, and Yaslan (2021) proposed the use of neural networks with embedding
initialized weights for next item prediction in recommendation systems. This approach
can be extended to incorporate ensemble methods, where multiple models with differ-
ent initializations could be combined to enhance recommendation accuracy and estimate
uncertainty.
Furthermore, Pan et al. (2021) introduced GuideBoot, a method that combines guided
exploration with bootstrap techniques for deep contextual bandits in online advertising.
This approach effectively addresses the exploration-exploitation dilemma, illustrating how
ensemble methods can be adapted for complex, real-time decision-making scenarios.
Within chemical engineering, Parhizgar Keradeh and Mohammadi Khanghah (2024) em-
ployed machine learning modeling to predict the effects of diethylenetriaminepentaacetic
acid agents on sandstone rock wettability. While their study did not explicitly utilize ensem-
ble methods, it highlights the potential for such techniques in complex chemical property
predictions.
2.3.3
Types of Uncertainty
Uncertainty in machine learning models (as well as any modelling task) is typically catego-
rized into two main types: aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty Heid, McGill, et al. (2023).
Aleatoric uncertainty represents the inherent randomness in the data and is considered
irreducible. Epistemic uncertainty, on the other hand, stems from the model’s lack of
knowledge and can be reduced with more data or improved model architecture (Heid,
McGill, et al. 2023).
Different techniques for uncertainty estimation can be related to these two types of un-
certainties. Bootstrap Bagging and Jackknife Ensemble primarily address aleatoric un-
certainty by leveraging variations in the data (Heid, McGill, et al. 2023) (Rubin 1981)
(Breiman 1996). Random Weight Initialization Ensemble and Bayesian Bootstrap, on the
other hand, can capture both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties(Rubin 1981). Random
Weight Initialization does so by exploring different model initializations, while the Bayesian
Bootstrap provides a probabilistic interpretation of uncertainty, which is particularly useful
for limited datasets and reflects the model’s belief about the underlying uncertainty. To
extend the capabilities of GraPE, the framework has been updated to include functional-
ities that perform uncertainty analysis of model predictions. This extension allows users
to better understand the confidence levels associated with their predictions, thus facilitat-
ing more informed decision-making. The implementation covers four primary techniques
for uncertainty estimation: Bootstrap Bagging (Breiman 1996), Random Weight Initializa-
tion Ensemble (Schmidt, Kraaijveld, Duin, et al. 1992), Jackknife Ensemble (Efron 1979),
and Bayesian Bootstrap (Clyde and Lee 2000). These techniques provide a robust frame-
work for evaluating and interpreting the uncertainty in molecular property predictions using
GNNs, as discussed in the subsequent sections.
2.3.4
Implementation in GraPE
Uncertainty estimation helps in understanding the confidence levels associated with pre-
dictions, which is essential for making informed decisions, prioritizing experimental vali-
dations, and developing robust models.
GraPE implements four primary techniques for uncertainty estimation:
20
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:31==
• Bootstrap Bagging: This technique involves creating multiple subsets of the train-
ing data by sampling with replacement. Each subset is used to train a separate
model, and the predictions are aggregated to estimate uncertainty. (Breiman 1996;
A. Aouichaoui et al. 2022; Heid, McGill, et al. 2023)
• Jackknife Ensemble: Similar to Bootstrap Bagging, this method involves training
multiple models on different subsets of the data. However, this data is generated
synthetically from a reference model. The synthetic data is generated by adding
randomly sampled errors to the reference model predictions. (Efron 1979)
• Random Weight Initialization Ensemble: This technique involves training multiple
models with different random initializations of the weights. (Schmidt, Kraaijveld,
Duin, et al. 1992)
• Bayesian Bootstrap: Unlike traditional Bootstrap methods, the Bayesian Bootstrap
incorporates a probabilistic framework.(Rubin 1981) This method provides a prob-
abilistic interpretation of uncertainty by generating multiple bootstrap samples and
fitting a model to each sample without explicit data duplication (Rubin 1981). This
distribution reflects the model’s belief about the underlying uncertainty, offering a
”posterior predictive” uncertainty. (Clyde and Lee 2000) Bayesian Bootstrap uses
probabilistic weights for a Bayesian-based uncertainty estimate, while Bootstrap
Bagging leverages sampling to reduce variance. (Rubin 1981)
2.3.5
Bootstrap Bagging
Bootstrap aggregation, also known as bagging, is a technique used to improve the stability
and accuracy of machine learning algorithms by reducing variance and mitigating overfit-
ting. First introduced by Breiman (1996), bagging works by generating multiple datasets
from the original dataset through sampling with replacement. Each of these bootstrap
samples is used to train a separate model, and the ensemble of these models provides
an aggregate prediction. Figure 2.3 shows the process of bagging.
Start
Generate multiple
bootstrap samples
from the dataset
Train individual
models on each
bootstrap sample
Aggregate predictions
from all models
Final prediction
Bootstrap Bagging
Figure 2.3: Bootstrap Bagging Process
Mathematical Formulation
Given the original dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, we create B
bootstrap samples D(b), where each sample is generated by sampling with replacement
from D. Let f(b)(x) denote the model trained on D(b).
The ensemble prediction for a new input x is computed as:
ˆyensemble(x) = 1
B
B
∑
b=1
f(b)(x)
The theoretical foundation of bagging lies in its ability to reduce variance by averaging
multiple estimates. It is particularly effective when the base models have high variance
and low bias. The bootstrap sampling introduces diversity in the training data, which helps
in creating models that capture different aspects of the underlying distribution. (Breiman
1996) The statistical explanation for this lies in the concept of resampling with replace-
ment, which allows for the generation of multiple bootstrap samples from the original
dataset. Each of these samples is used to train a separate model, and the ensemble
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
21
==PAGE:32==
of these models provides an aggregate prediction. This process reduces the variance of
the final model by averaging out the errors of individual models.(Rubin 1981).
Algorithm 1 Bootstrap Bagging Implementation
Require: Original dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, Number of bootstrap samples B
Ensure: Ensemble model ˆyensemble(x)
for b = 1 to B do
D(b) ←Bootstrap sample from D
▷Sampling with replacement
f(b) ←Train GNN model on D(b)
▷Training
end for
ˆyensemble(x) ←1
B
∑B
b=1 f(b)(x)
▷Prediction and Aggregation
Advantages and Considerations
Bootstrap bagging offers several advantages and
considerations that should be taken into account:
One of the primary advantages of bagging is its ability to reduce variance and overfitting,
providing a more robust estimation of uncertainty. By combining multiple models, bagging
improves overall prediction accuracy and is particularly effective in handling complex,
nonlinear relationships in data.
However, the effectiveness of bagging depends on the diversity of the bootstrapped sam-
ples. If the samples are not diverse enough, the benefits of bagging may be limited.
Additionally, bagging can be computationally expensive, especially for large datasets or
complex models, as it requires training multiple models. Finally, bagging may not perform
well if the base models are highly biased, as averaging biased models will still result in a
biased ensemble.
2.3.6
Random Weight Initialization Ensemble
The ”Random Weight Initialization Ensemble” technique involves training multiple models
on the same dataset, each with different random initializations of the model weights. This
approach aims to capture the variance and uncertainty arising from the neural network’s
sensitivity to initial conditions, enhancing model robustness. As detailed in work done by
textciteschmidt1992feed , random weights can provide a valuable basis for forming mul-
tiple model perspectives, leveraging the stochastic nature of neural networks to explore
diverse solution landscapes. Figure 2.4 illustrates the process of the ensemble technique.
Start
Initialize mod-
els with different
random weights
Train each model
independently
Aggregate predictions
from all models
Final prediction
Random Weight Initialization
Figure 2.4: Random Weight Initialization Ensemble Process
Mathematical Formulation
Let θ(r) represent different random initializations, and f(x; θ(r))
be the model prediction with the r-th initialization. Training R models on the same dataset
yields:
The ensemble prediction:
ˆyensemble(x) = 1
R
R
∑
r=1
f(x; θ(r))
22
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:33==
The theoretical basis for this method lies in the non-convex nature of neural network opti-
mization. Different initializations can lead to different local optima, providing a diverse set
of predictions that capture various aspects of the underlying function (Heid, McGill, et al.
2023).
Algorithm 2 Random Weight Initialization Ensemble Implementation
Require: Original dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, Number of models R
Ensure: Ensemble model ˆyensemble(x)
for r = 1 to R do
θ(r) ←Random weight initialization
▷Initialization
f(r) ←Train GNN model on D with θ(r)
▷Training
end for
ˆyensemble(x) ←1
R
∑R
r=1 f(x; θ(r))
▷Prediction and Aggregation
Advantages and Considerations
The Random Weight Initialization Ensemble offers
several advantages and considerations that should be taken into account:
One of the primary advantages of this technique is its simplicity, as it does not require
multiple datasets or samples. It captures uncertainty arising from the optimization process
itself and can reveal the sensitivity of the model to initial conditions.
However, the uncertainty captured is limited to the variability due to different initializations.
This method may not fully represent model uncertainty if all initializations converge to simi-
lar optima. Additionally, it requires training multiple models, which can be computationally
expensive.
2.3.7
Jackknife Ensemble
The Jackknife Ensemble technique provides a method for generating synthetic datasets
and estimating uncertainty by training multiple models on these datasets. The key idea is
to create synthetic data by assuming the errors are independent and identically distributed
(iid) (Efron 1979). Figure 2.5 illustrates the consecutive steps taken during the ensemble
technique.
Start
Train a refer-
ence model on
the train dataset
Generate syn-
thetic datasets
by resampling
Train models on each
synthetic dataset
Aggregate predictions
from all models
Final prediction
Jackknife Ensemble
Figure 2.5: Jackknife Ensemble Process
Mathematical Formulation
Train a reference model fref on the original dataset D to
obtain predictions ˆyref,i = fref(xi). Calculate the residuals ϵi = yi −ˆyref,i. Create synthetic
datasets by adding resampled residuals to the reference predictions with replacement:
˜y(j)
i
= ˆyref,i + ϵ(j)
i ,
ϵ(j)
i
∼Resample(ϵ1, ϵ2, . . . , ϵN)
Train new models f(j) on these synthetic datasets.
The ensemble prediction is:
ˆyensemble(x) = 1
J
J
∑
j=1
f(j)(x)
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
23
==PAGE:34==
The theoretical basis of the jackknife method lies in its ability to estimate the bias and
variance of a statistic. In the context of machine learning, it helps in understanding the
model’s sensitivity to individual data points and can be used to identify influential samples
(Efron 1979).
Algorithm 3 Jackknife Ensemble Implementation
Require: Original dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, Number of synthetic datasets J
Ensure: Ensemble model ˆyensemble(x)
fref ←Train reference GNN model on D
▷Reference Model Training
ˆyref,i ←fref(xi) for i = 1 to N
ϵi ←yi −ˆyref,i for i = 1 to N
▷Residual Calculation
for j = 1 to J do
ϵ(j)
i
←Resample residuals ϵ1, ϵ2, . . . , ϵN with replacement
˜y(j)
i
←ˆyref,i + ϵ(j)
i
for i = 1 to N
▷Synthetic Data Generation
f(j) ←Train new GNN model on synthetic dataset {(xi, ˜y(j)
i )}N
i=1 ▷Model Training
end for
ˆyensemble(x) ←1
J
∑J
j=1 f(j)(x)
▷Prediction and Aggregation
Advantages and Considerations
The Jackknife Ensemble offers several advantages
and considerations that should be taken into account:
One of the primary advantages of this technique is its ability to produce a large number of
synthetic datasets, providing a comprehensive view of uncertainty. It is particularly useful
in situations where conducting additional experiments is costly or impractical. Additionally,
it helps identify influential data points and assess model stability.
However, the method assumes that residuals are iid, which might not hold in all scenarios.
It can also be computationally intensive, especially for large datasets. Furthermore, it may
underestimate uncertainty if the reference model is overfitted.
2.3.8
Bayesian Bootstrap
Bayesian Bootstrap is a resampling technique that provides a probabilistic interpretation of
uncertainty textciteBayesianBootstrap.Thismethodisparticularlyusefulwhendealingwithlimiteddata, asitgen
Start
Generate Bayesian
weights for the dataset
Create weighted
samples using
Bayesian weights
Train individual
models on each
weighted sample
Aggregate predictions
from all models
Final prediction
Bayesian Bootstrap
Figure 2.6: Bayesian Bootstrap Process
Mathematical Formulation
Given the original dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, the Bayesian
Bootstrap generates B bootstrap samples using weights drawn from a Dirichlet distribu-
tion. Let π(b) = (π(b)
1 , π(b)
2 , . . . , π(b)
N ) ∼Dirichlet(1, 1, . . . , 1) represent the weights for the
b-th bootstrap sample.
The ensemble prediction for a new input x is computed as:
ˆyensemble(x) = 1
B
B
∑
b=1
N
∑
i=1
π(b)
i f(b)(xi)
24
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:35==
The Bayesian Bootstrap provides a probabilistic interpretation of uncertainty by treating
the weights as random variables. This approach allows for a more nuanced representation
of uncertainty, especially in cases where data is limited (Clyde and Lee 2000).
Algorithm 4 Bayesian Bootstrap Implementation
Require: Original dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, Number of bootstrap samples B
Ensure: Ensemble model ˆyensemble(x)
for b = 1 to B do
π(b) ←Draw weights from Dirichlet distribution
▷Weight Generation
D(b) ←Generate weighted bootstrap sample using π(b)
▷Weighted Sampling
f(b) ←Train GNN model on D(b)
▷Training
end for
ˆyensemble(x) ←1
B
∑B
b=1
∑N
i=1 π(b)
i f(b)(xi)
▷Prediction and Aggregation
Advantages and Considerations
The Bayesian Bootstrap offers several advantages
and considerations that should be taken into account:
One of the primary advantages of this technique is its utility with limited data, maximizing
the use of available information. It provides a comprehensive probabilistic interpretation
of uncertainty and allows for flexible weighting of data points, capturing more nuanced
uncertainties.
However, the method can be computationally intensive due to the need to train multiple
models on weighted datasets. Its effectiveness depends on the appropriate choice of the
Dirichlet distribution parameters. Additionally, it may be sensitive to outliers or influential
data points.
2.3.9
Comparison
Figures 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6 show block diagrams to visualize the comparison of the
four techniques. Each of these techniques offer benefits and have specific assumptions
that must be considered when estimating uncertainty. Bootstrap Bagging and Jackknife
Ensemble leverage variations in data to assess uncertainty, while Random Weight Ini-
tialization Ensemble focuses on the uncertainty inherent in model training. The Bayesian
Bootstrap provides a probabilistic interpretation, particularly useful for limited datasets.
The choice of technique may depend on several factors:
• Data Availability: Bootstrap methods are particularly useful when data is limited,
while Random Weight Initialization can be effective with larger datasets.
• Computational Resources: Methods requiring multiple model trainings (like Boot-
strap and Jackknife) can be computationally expensive.
• Model Complexity: For complex models like GNNs, Random Weight Initialization
can capture uncertainty due to optimization challenges.
• Interpretability Requirements: Bayesian methods provide a probabilistic interpre-
tation, which can be valuable in certain applications.
2.4
Multi-target prediction
In the paradigm of modern computational chemistry and materials science multi-task
learning (MTL) has been used to predict multiple relevant outcomes simultaneously. The
ability to predict multiple properties or activities of molecules simultaneously can signifi-
cantly enhance the efficiency and accuracy of computational models (Shunqin Jiang et al.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
25
==PAGE:36==
2024). This chapter gets into the methodologies and applications of multi-task learning in
the realm of graph neural networks (GNNs), drawing insights from recent advancements
and research studies.
Multi-task learning, or multi-target prediction is a machine learning technique in which
a model is trained to perform multiple tasks simultaneously. This approach leverages
shared representations and commonalities among tasks to improve the generalization and
performance of the model. In the context of GNNs, multi-task learning can be particularly
beneficial due to the inherent complexity and interrelated nature of molecular properties.
In GraPE, multi-target prediction is achieved using the attentive FP model. This model
leverages attention mechanisms to focus on relevant parts of the molecular graph, en-
abling it to make accurate predictions for multiple properties at once. The idea is that by
training a single model to predict multiple targets, GraPE can efficiently utilize the avail-
able data and improve overall prediction performance.
The results of multi-target predictions are compared with single-target predictions to show-
case the capabilities of GraPE in handling complex, multi-dimensional datasets. This
comparison highlights the potential advantages of multi-target learning in enhancing the
predictive power and robustness of computational models in chemistry and materials sci-
ence.
2.4.1
Applications in Molecular Property Prediction
Recent studies have demonstrated the efficacy of MTL in predicting various molecular
properties (Biswas et al. 2023; Ju et al. 2023; Brozos et al. 2024). Gurnani et al. (2023)
developed a multi-task GNN framework for polymer informatics, which significantly im-
proved the prediction accuracy of multiple polymer properties by leveraging shared infor-
mation across tasks. Similarly, Ai et al. (2022) proposed a multi-task FP-GNN model to
predict the inhibitory activity of molecules against four different PARP isoforms, achieving
state-of-the-art performance.
The integration of MTL with GNNs has further enhanced their predictive capabilities. For
example, Queen et al. (2023) utilized a polymer graph neural network for multitask prop-
erty learning, demonstrating significant improvements in the prediction of various polymer
properties. Wang et al. (2022) developed a multitask GNN-based interpretable model for
the discovery of selective JAK inhibitors, highlighting the model’s ability to provide insights
into the molecular mechanisms underlying the predictions.
Attention mechanisms have been incorporated into multi-task GNNs to enhance their
interpretability and performance. Shunqin Jiang et al. (2024) introduced an attention-
based multi-task interpretable graph convolutional network for Alzheimer’s disease anal-
ysis, which effectively identified critical molecular features associated with the disease .
The use of attention mechanisms allows the model to focus on the most relevant parts
of the molecular graph, thereby improving the accuracy and interpretability of the predic-
tions.
Brozos et al. (2024) developed a GNN model for the multi-property prediction of surfac-
tants, focusing on critical micelle concentration (CMC) and surface excess concentration.
Their study demonstrated that the simultaneous use of data from highly correlated proper-
ties can improve the predictability of surfactant properties, even when only a small amount
of experimental data is available.
Self-supervised learning has also been explored in the context of multi-task GNNs. Ju
et al. (2023) proposed a multi-task self-supervised GNN framework that enables stronger
task generalization. Their approach leverages self-supervised tasks to enhance the model’s
ability to generalize across different molecular properties, leading to improved perfor-
26
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:37==
mance.
The integration of multi-task learning with graph neural networks has shown great promise
in the field of molecular property prediction. By leveraging shared representations and
incorporating advanced techniques such as attention mechanisms and self-supervised
learning, these models can achieve high performance and provide insights into the un-
derlying molecular mechanisms. As the field continues to evolve, further advancements
in multi task predictions and GNNs are expected to drive significant progress in compu-
tational chemistry and materials science.
Multi-task learning is particularly advantageous for several reasons:
1. Multi-task learning allows models to leverage shared representations across different
tasks, which can lead to improved generalization and performance. (Biswas et al. 2023),
(Ju et al. 2023), (Gurnani et al. 2023)
2. Multi-task learning acts as a form of regularization, helping to prevent overfitting by
sharing information across tasks. This is particularly useful in low-data regimes where
individual tasks may not have enough data to train robust models independently. (Yang
et al. 2019)
3. Multi-task learning can provide deeper insights into the underlying molecular mech-
anisms by capturing relationships and patterns that are common across different tasks.
(Brozos et al. 2024)
This work will expand GraPE to allow for multi target predictions solely on the attention fp
model and focuses its results on multi target predictions with regards to the three critical
property datasets of volume, pressure and temperature and compare the obtained metrics
with the separate single target predictions in order to showcase the capabilities of GraPE
with regards to multi target predictability.
2.4.2
Implementation of multi-dimensional global features in GraPE
GraPE has been extended to support multi-dimensional global features (Na, H. W. Kim,
and Chang 2020), enabling the inclusion of molecular-level data, such as temperature and
molecular weight and in principle any other property related to the molecule, into the la-
tent representation. This modification was made to align GraPE’s DMPNN implementation
with the Chemprop model (Heid, Greenman, et al. 2024) (Yang et al. 2019). While both
this implementation and Chemprop produced similar latent representations, challenges
were encountered in adding multiple global features simultaneously. GraPE’s original de-
sign did not support passing global features as multi-dimensional arrays, which led to the
adaptation of the dataset preparation process and modification of the DMPNN and AFP
forward calls to correctly handle and process multiple global features as n-dimensional
arrays. Biswas et al. (2023) developed a machine learning model that predicts critical
properties and acentric factors using a D-MPNN layer to learn molecular representa-
tions. Their model employs a multitask training scheme to predict properties, including
critical temperature, pressure and density achieving state-of-the-art accuracies on both
random and scaffold splits. This approach highlights the potential of incorporating ad-
ditional atomic and molecular features and multitask training to optimize model perfor-
mance. A. R. Aouichaoui, Cogliati, et al. (2023) explores state-dependent graph neural
networks, which extend GNN models to temperature-dependent properties. This work
emphasizes the importance of adding relevant features and extending GNN models to
handle temperature-dependent properties. these findings align with the enhancements
made in GraPE to support multi-dimensional global features.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
27
==PAGE:38==
2.5
Platform Design
The GraPE platform is designed as a modular and scalable solution for molecular property
prediction. The platform architecture consists of several key components, each responsi-
ble for a specific part of the workflow. The platform has been expanded with experiment
logging through MLflow (Zaharia et al. 2018), hyperparameter tuning through a library
called Ray Tune and containerization using Docker Merkel (2014). These enhancements
aim to streamline the workflow for training, tuning, and deploying machine learning models
in a secure and efficient manner.
The architecture shown in Figure 2.7 is introduced and discussed in detail in this section.
Figure 2.7: Visualization of designed MLops architecture
2.5.1
Model Interactiveness
To make the models accessible without requiring the entire dataset, a ’dataset dictionary’
is saved for the AFP and DMPNN models in the save_checkpoint function. This allows
Previously, making predictions required access to the original dataset used during training.
Requiring the saved mean and std from the dataset to rescale predictions from the model.
Since the saved model did not save any data information, just weight initialization. The
model contained a dictionary called the state_dict. But now the new implementation
still saves the model’s state dictionary containing the weight initialization, but it also saves
a new dictionary that contains the model parameters, which for example includes the
featurizers used and the mean and standard deviation of the data used to train. The
mean and standard deviation can be saved to a numpy array as a scalar or, if there are
28
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:39==
multiple targets, to a vector. The model_dict holds all the required information to ensure
consistency in the model’s behavior and preventing inconsistencies while also providing
the user with reproducibility.
An instance of the dataset is recreated based on specific information saved with the best-
trained model using torch.save. To make predictions on SMILES, a new small instance of
the dataset is created with the correct mean, standard deviation, allowed atoms, feature
list, bond features, number of layers molecules, atoms and hidden layers. It depends
on the model architecture which attributes get saved. This approach avoids saving the
entire dataset object, requiring only the necessary values to predict on SMILES. Ensuring
correct rescaling of predictions and targets and it adds an extra measure of reproducibility
by saving information about the model directly in a dictionary inside the model. See figure
2.8 for a visual clarification of this process and the model distribution using Docker.
Figure 2.8: Visualization of model interaction and distribution
The train_model function now saves both the model’s state, which contains the weight
initialization and essential parameters in a checkpoint, which includes all the information
needed to recreate the model architecture and dataset object. The load_model function
restores the model and dataset from this checkpoint, enabling easy inference without
retraining.
Deployment involves making the model available to end users in a way that is efficient,
scalable, and secure. This typically involves setting up an API or a web service which
can take in new molecular descriptors (SMILES) and return predicted properties or allow
smooth hyper-parameter tuning. With the new changes made to GraPE, inference can
be done in Python and the predictions are both available in MLflow logs and the python
output. This allows for integration with Docker to simply combine everything in one image
and make that available to the user. No need for a separate web service with MLflow
working in a docker image.
By leveraging Docker, we can create containerized environments that encapsulate the en-
tire machine learning pipeline, including the trained models, dependencies, and MLflow
server. This approach ensures that users can download pre-trained models and run pre-
dictions out of the box, without worrying about setting up the environment or dependen-
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
29
==PAGE:40==
cies. Docker images can be easily distributed and deployed, making it convenient for
users to utilize the models.
2.5.2
Experiment Tracking in Docker image with MLflow and
Hyperparameter Tuning
Experiment tracking is essential for managing and analyzing machine learning experi-
ments. It ensures reproducibility, facilitates collaboration, and provides insights into model
performance and training progress. When choosing the infrastructure/tool/services to per-
form experiment logging, it is important to consider data privacy and potential legal issues
(confidential data). In GraPE, we focused on the need that our logging solution does
not expose sensitive information. In this version of GraPE, experiment tracking is imple-
mented using Docker and MLflow. Docker is used to create containerized environments
that encapsulate the entire machine learning pipeline, including the trained models, de-
pendencies, and MLflow server. By leveraging Docker, we can create a consistent and
isolated environment for our experiments, eliminating issues related to dependency man-
agement and ensuring that different models and their dependencies do not interfere with
each other. Additionally, Docker’s portability allows our models to run on any system that
supports Docker, making it easy to distribute and deploy our models.
MLflow is used for logging experiments, tracking parameters, and storing model artifacts.
The selection of MLflow was based on several criteria, including integration and flexibility,
collaboration features, visualization and analysis capabilities, scalability and performance
and data handling.
By leveraging MLflow’s experiment tracking capabilities and secure data handling fea-
tures, GraPE ensures that the experiment logging process is both comprehensive and
compliant with data privacy requirements. The ability to self-host MLflow allows full con-
trol over sensitive datasets, making it the optimal choice for the project.
Criteria for Selecting an Experiment Tracking Tool
The selection of an experiment
tracking tool was based on several criteria:
• Integration and Flexibility: Compatibility with existing ML/DL frameworks and sup-
port for various programming languages.
• Collaboration: Features facilitating teamwork, such as user management and project
sharing.
• Visualization and Analysis: Robust visualization capabilities for easy interpreta-
tion of results.
• Scalability and Performance: Ability to handle large datasets and numerous ex-
periments efficiently.
• Cost and Budget: Availability of free tiers or trials and cost-effectiveness for ex-
tended use.
• Data Handling: Ensuring that all data remains secure and private, with options for
self-hosting to maintain full control over sensitive information.
30
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:41==
Figure 2.9: Logos of the different experiment tracking tools that were considered (top left
Weights & Biases, top right TensorBoard, middle MLflow, lower left ClearML, lower right
Comet)
Comparative Analysis of Experiment Tracking Tools
MLflow Zaharia et al. (2018) is an open-source platform offering extensive tracking, model
management, and deployment capabilities. It integrates with popular ML frameworks and
supports both local and remote logging. MLflow can be self-hosted, allowing users to
maintain full control over their data, ensuring data privacy and security. This makes it
suitable for handling sensitive data while integrating seamlessly with existing tools and
workflows.
ClearML ClearML (2020) also allows for self-hosting, providing control over data privacy
and customization options. However, setting up ClearML is more complex, and despite
helpful developers, the community support is not as extensive as MLflow. ClearML was
considered for its high degree of customization, but ultimately, MLflow was deemed the
better option between these two open source products.
TensorBoard TensorBoard (2016), primarily for TensorFlow users, provides powerful vi-
sualization tools for tracking training progress and model performance. It is limited in
scalability and lacks comprehensive collaboration features, making it more suitable for
individual users or small-scale projects.
Weights & Biases Weights&Biases (2020) offers extensive experiment tracking, version-
ing, and visualization capabilities. It integrates with all major ML frameworks and supports
collaborative workflows. However, W&B primarily operates as a cloud-based service,
which may pose data privacy concerns for sensitive datasets, as it does not provide a
fully self-hosted option.
Comet Comet (2020) is a cloud-based platform for tracking experiments, versioning data,
and model management. It supports multiple programming languages and offers strong
collaboration tools. However, it is a commercial platform, and certain features require a
paid subscription.
Decision and Justification
After a thorough evaluation, MLflow was selected as the
optimal experiment tracking tool. This can be quickly deducted from table 2.1.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
31
==PAGE:42==
Table 2.1: Comparison of Experiment Tracking Tools
Requirement
MLflow
ClearML
TensorBoard
Weights & Biases
Comet
Self-hosting capability





Data privacy and security





Ease of setup





Community support





Visualization tools





Scalability





Collaboration features





Comprehensive experiment tracking





Hyperparameter tuning support





Data Privacy and Compliance
A crucial factor in this decision is that MLflow can be self-hosted, ensuring that our data
remains within our secure environment. By self-hosting MLflow, we maintain full control
over data storage and access, addressing our data privacy requirements. This approach
ensures that sensitive information is never exposed to external servers or third-party ser-
vices.
W&B was not chosen because it requires data to be sent to their cloud. Despite W&B
offering a Private W&B Server that can be connected to a user’s own cloud bucket, it is
not 100% foolproof in ensuring data privacy. Therefore, the decision was made to go with
MLflow for its more secure and controlled data management capabilities.
Sensitive Data Handling
For projects involving sensitive datasets, self-hosting MLflow provides several advan-
tages:
• Self-Hosted Server: Deploying MLflow on our own secure servers ensures that
data never leaves our controlled environment. This setup allows us to leverage
MLflow’s tracking capabilities while maintaining data privacy and security.
• Local and Remote Logging: MLflow supports both local and remote logging, of-
fering flexibility in how we manage and store our experimental data.
Advantages of Using MLflow
• Comprehensive Experiment Tracking: MLflow provides extensive logging of pa-
rameters, metrics, system metrics, and output files. This helps in maintaining a
comprehensive record of all experiments, making it easier to reproduce results and
track progress over time.
• Secure Data Management: By self-hosting, we ensure that sensitive data is pro-
tected with our security protocols. This includes encrypted storage and strict access
controls, suitable for projects with stringent data privacy requirements.
32
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:43==
• Collaboration and Visualization: MLflow offers powerful tools for collaboration
and visualization, allowing team members to share results and insights easily. Vi-
sualizations such as plots, graphs, and tables help in better understanding the per-
formance of models and in making informed decisions.
• Scalability and Flexibility: MLflow is designed to handle large-scale machine learn-
ing projects, providing the scalability needed for extensive experimentation. Its flex-
ible integration with various ML frameworks and tools makes it adaptable to different
workflows and requirements.
Disadvantages MLflow
While MLflow is a robust and widely used experiment tracking tool, it does have some
general disadvantages:
• Limited Built-In Visualizations: MLflow’s built-in visualization capabilities are rel-
atively basic compared to for example clearML.
• Manual Logging Requirements: While MLflow provides APIs for logging, it re-
quires manual setup to capture all relevant metrics, parameters, and artifacts.
• Limited Hyperparameter Tuning Support: While MLflow can be integrated with
hyperparameter optimization libraries, it does not provide extensive built-in support
for hyperparameter tuning. Which makes it necessary to add additional libraries in
order to allow this functionality.
All in all, these disadvantages are deemed manageable, but need to be overcome.
Implementation Plan
To integrate MLflow into our workflow while ensuring data secu-
rity, the following implementation plan is proposed:
• Set Up a Self-Hosted MLflow Server: Deploy a self-hosted MLflow server within
our secure environment. This server will handle all experiment logging and man-
agement tasks, ensuring that our data never leaves our secure environment.
• Setup hyperparameter tuning with Ray Tune: Ensure that the disadvantage of
MLfLow is mitigated by implementing hyperparameter tuning through Ray Tune.
• Ensure easy deployability: Implement docker images with trained models such
that users can download and work with models out of the box.
2.5.3
Hyperparameter Tuning with Ray Tune
Ray Tune is a scalable hyperparameter tuning library that integrates seamlessly with
MLflow. It allows for efficient exploration of the hyperparameter space, optimizing model
performance. By using Ray Tune, we can automate the process of hyperparameter opti-
mization, ensuring that our models achieve the best possible performance.
Advantages of Ray Tune
• Scalability: Ray Tune can scale to thousands of trials, making it suitable for large-
scale hyperparameter optimization.
• Integration with MLflow: Ray Tune integrates seamlessly with MLflow, allowing
for easy tracking and logging of hyperparameter tuning experiments.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
33
==PAGE:44==
• Support for Various Search Algorithms: Ray Tune supports a wide range of
search algorithms, including random search, grid search, and Bayesian optimiza-
tion.
• Ease of Use: Ray Tune provides a simple API for defining and running hyperpa-
rameter tuning experiments, making it easy to use.
Implementation of Ray Tune
To implement Ray Tune in our workflow, we define a
search space for the hyperparameters and use Ray Tune to explore this space. The best
hyperparameters are then logged. This process ensures that our models are optimized
for performance, leveraging the power of Ray Tune for efficient hyperparameter tuning.
2.5.4
Containerization with Docker
Docker is a containerization platform that allows us to package our applications and their
dependencies into a single container. By using Docker, we can create containerized en-
vironments that encapsulate the entire machine learning pipeline, including the trained
models, dependencies, and MLflow server.
Advantages of Docker
• Portability: Docker containers can run on any system that supports Docker, making
it easy to distribute and deploy our models.
• Consistency: Docker ensures that the environment is consistent across different
systems, eliminating issues related to dependency management.
• Isolation: Docker containers are isolated from each other, ensuring that different
models and their dependencies do not interfere with each other.
• Ease of Deployment: Docker makes it easy to deploy our models, as users can
simply download the Docker image and run it without worrying about setting up the
environment.
Implementation of Docker
To implement Docker in our workflow, we create Docker
images that encapsulate the entire machine learning pipeline, including the trained mod-
els, dependencies, and MLflow server. These Docker images can be distributed to users,
who can run them to make predictions out of the box. This approach ensures that our
models are easy to deploy and use, leveraging the power of Docker for containerization.
2.6
Experiment Tracking in Docker image with MLflow and
Hyperparameter Tuning
To ensure a consistent environment for our experiments, we use a Docker image that
contains all necessary dependencies, including MLflow and Ray Tune. The setup process
involves the following steps:
1. Install Docker Desktop on your system.
2. Pull the pre-built Docker image from the repository.
3. Run the Docker container, ensuring port 5000 is exposed for the MLflow UI.
4. Access the MLflow UI by navigating to http://localhost:5000 in your web browser.
34
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:45==
Alternatively run your experiments directly in the GraPE repository, this requires the user
to run the MLflow server in a terminal using the following command: ’mlflow server –
backend-store-uri sqlite:///mlflow.db –default-artifact-root ./mlruns –host 0.0.0.0 –port 5000’
and install all dependencies.
2.6.1
MLflow Setup
MLflow is used for experiment tracking and model management. A setup function is cre-
ated to initialize MLflow within our Python scripts. This function sets the tracking URI and
creates an experiment. Both MLflow and hyperparameter tuning depend on a config file.
A
Ray Tune is used for efficient hyperparameter tuning. We’ve created a function to stream-
line the process of defining the search space and running the tuning process. Ray Tune
is set to find the combination of parameters with the lowest validation loss.
The hyperparameter_tuning A function takes care of:
• Setting up the scheduler for efficient early stopping.
• Running the tuning process with the specified number of samples.
• Returning the best configuration found.
Obtaining results
Hyperparameter tuning enabled exploration of a broad search space
to identify optimal parameters. Ray Tune was configured to automatically generate mul-
tiple parameter combinations, leveraging both tune.loguniform for sampling values within
specified bounds and tune.choice to select from predefined options. The following settings
were used as a starting point for both the AFP and DMPNN hyperparameter tuning. The
number of runs varied, most runs were in the range of thirty to fifty hyperparameter combi-
nations up to three hundred. This was also dependent on the size of the dataset. Larger
datasets requir longer training times. After the tuning the search space was narrowed
down based on the output of the RayTune hyperparameter feedback and the process
was repeated until reasonable results were obtained.
Table 2.2: Initial hyperparameter settings for single and multi target predictions
Parameter
Value
Epochs
1000
Batch size
Dataset length, limit possible
Hidden dimension
32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024
Dropout
Between 0.0 to 0.1
Early stopping patience
50
Scheduler patience
10
Learning rate
Between 1e−4 to 1e−2
Weight decay
Between 1e−7 to 1e−3
Scheduler reduction factor
0.8
MLP layers
2, 3, 4, 5
Atom layers
2, 3, 4, 5
Molecular layers
2, 3, 4, 5
2.6.2
Model Training and Evaluation
The main training function, train_model_experiment, encapsulates the entire process of
training and evaluating a model. Here’s an overview of its functionality:
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
35
==PAGE:46==
1. Sets up MLflow for logging.
2. Loads and preprocesses the data.
3. Initializes the model based on the configuration.
4. Trains the model using the specified optimizer and learning rate scheduler.
5. Evaluates the model on validation and test sets.
6. Logs metrics, parameters, and artifacts to MLflow.
7. Saves the trained model locally in the form of a dictionary containing model param-
eters and another dictionary containing the final weights.
2.6.3
Logging and Artifacts
Throughout the training process, several metrics and artifacts are logged to MLflow:
• Training, validation, and test losses
• Best epoch and corresponding validation loss
• Model parameters and hyperparameters
• Parity plots for visualizing model performance
These logs and artifacts provide a comprehensive view of each experiment, allowing for
easy comparison and analysis of different runs.
2.6.4
Running Experiments
To run an experiment, the main function should:
1. Make sure to perform data preprocessing, validating the presence of smiles, targets
and potential global features. One can use helper functions such as "load_dataset_from_csv"
or "load_dataset_from_excel" to ensure proper dataset objects, but the files them-
selves need to contain the aforementioned columns.
2. Ensure the config file contains the following information, experiment_name (string),
smiles (string), target (string), global_features (list of strings), data_files (list of strings),
data_labels (list of strings), model_name (string), run_name (string), save_path
(string).
3. Set a random seed for reproducibility.
4. Load the base configuration from a YAML file.
5. Define the search space for hyperparameters.
6. Call the hyperparameter_tuning function to start the tuning process.
7. Call the setup_mlflow function to log to the server.
8. Load the data, load the model using built in GraPE functions
9. Train and test the model using built in GraPE functions
This setup allows for flexible experimentation, where the user can modify the search space
or base configuration to explore different model architectures, training strategies, ensem-
ble techniques or switch between multi target predictions and single target predictions
during training validating and model saving.
By following these instructions, the user can efficiently track experiments, tune hyperpa-
rameters, and manage models in a reproducible manner, whether working locally or on a
remote HPC environment.
36
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:47==
Key Enhancements and Techniques
GraPE integrates MLflow for comprehensive experiment tracking. This includes logging
training, validation, and test losses, best epoch and corresponding validation loss, model
parameters, hyperparameters, and parity plots. This ensures a detailed record of each
experiment, facilitating easy comparison and analysis.
To optimize model performance, GraPE incorporates Ray Tune for hyperparameter tun-
ing. The search space for hyperparameters is defined, and the hyperparameter_tuning
function is used to explore different configurations. This allows for efficient optimization
of model parameters.
GraPE uses Docker for containerization, ensuring a consistent and reproducible envi-
ronment for model training and deployment. This enhances the ease of setup and use,
making the platform accessible out of the box.
GraPE introduces advanced ensemble techniques to improve prediction accuracy and
robustness. These include:
• Bootstrap Bagging: Creates multiple subsets of the training data by sampling with
replacement, training separate models on each subset, and aggregating the predic-
tions.
• Jackknife Ensemble: Trains multiple models on different subsets of the data gener-
ated synthetically from a reference model by adding randomly sampled errors.
• Random Weight Initialization Ensemble: Trains multiple models with different ran-
dom initializations of the weights to capture variance and uncertainty.
• Bayesian Bootstrap: Generates multiple bootstrap samples with probabilistic weights
for a Bayesian-based uncertainty estimate.
GraPE now supports multi task learning for the attentive FP model. This is particularly
useful for comprehensive analysis and increasing model robustness by training on multi-
ple targets on the same SMILES.
Adaptations to the DMPNN architecture include modifications to the DMPNN layers and
atom and bond featurizers. These adjustments align GraPE’s DMPNN with the architec-
ture and features of Chemprop.
GraPE saves a ’dataset dictionary’ for the AFP and DMPNN models, allowing for predic-
tions without requiring the entire dataset. This includes saving the mean and standard
deviation of the data used to train, ensuring correct rescaling of predictions and targets.
The enhancements implemented in GraPE represent advancements in the development
of GNN-based tools. By integrating experiment logging, hyperparameter tuning, con-
tainerization, ensemble techniques, and multi-target prediction, GraPE attempts to offer
a robust and efficient solution for researchers and practitioners in the field.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
37
==PAGE:48==
3
Results
3.1
GraPE: Before and After
The development of GraPE constituted a significant portion of the time allocated for this
thesis. Therefore, it is essential to provide a concise overview of the original features of
GraPE and highlight the key extensions and improvements made during the course of this
work.
3.1.1
GraPE Before
The primary features of the initial version included:
• Setup of inital package and the foundation of the GraPE The foundation of the
toolbox, the structure of Dataset objects and models were introduced in the original
work.
• Model Architectures: Implemented various GNN models such as MPNN, Weave,
D-MPNN, MEGNet, and Attentive FP.
• Preprocessing Pipeline: Included crucial preprocessing steps like data filtering on
specific datasets and featurization.
• Machine Learning Operations: Addressed classification and clustering methods.
• Accessibility and Usability: Designed with a focus on accessibility, being publicly
available on GitHub.
The original work laid a solid foundation, providing a great starting point for further en-
hancements and expansions.
3.1.2
GraPE Now
This work will focus on new implementations in GraPE. Which include the following key
enhancements:
• Ensemble Techniques: Introduction of ensemble techniques Bootstrap Bagging,
Jackknife, Random Weight Initialization, and Bayesian Bootstrap to provide the use
with a overview of the models’ variance and uncertainty. (Breiman 1996) (Efron
1979) (Clyde and Lee 2000) (Rubin 1981) (Schmidt, Kraaijveld, Duin, et al. 1992)
• Multi-Task Learning: Support for multi-task learning for the Attentive FP model,
enabling multi task tailored analysis and potentially increasing model robustness by
training on multiple targets on the same SMILES. (Biswas et al. 2023)
• Adaptations to DMPNN Architecture: Modifications to the DMPNN layers and
atom and bond featurizers to align GraPE’s DMPNN with the architecture and fea-
tures of Chemprop. (Yang et al. 2019)
• Model Saving and Inference: Capability to save a model’s state, including weight
initialization and essential parameters, in a checkpoint. This allows for making in-
ferences with the saved model without needing access to the original dataset used
during training, ensuring consistency and reproducibility. (Paszke et al. 2019)
• Experiment Tracking with MLflow: Integration of MLflow for logging of training,
validation, and test losses, best epoch and corresponding validation loss, model
parameters, hyperparameters, and parity plots. (Zaharia et al. 2018)
38
==PAGE:49==
• Hyperparameter Tuning with Ray Tune: Incorporation of Ray Tune for efficient
hyperparameter tuning, allowing systematic exploration of different configurations
to optimize model performance. (Liaw et al. 2018)
• Containerization with Docker: The possibility of easily distributing the package
utilizing Docker for containerization, ensuring a consistent and reproducible envi-
ronment for model training and deployment. (Merkel 2014)
These are the contributions of this work in the development of GraPE as a comprehensive
user friendly GNN-based toolbox. By integrating experiment logging, hyperparameter
tuning, containerization, ensemble techniques, and multi-target prediction, GraPE offers
a streamlined workflow for researchers and practitioners attempting to advance research
and applications in chemistry and bio-science. At the time of writing, the specific branch
containing the latest updates can be accessed on GitHub.
3.2
Data Types
This work analyzed and two types of datasets. these are described in the following.
Critical properties The datasets used include critical temperature (Tc) in Kelvin, criti-
cal pressure (Pc) in megapascals, critical volume (Vc) in m3/kmol, and a temperature-
dependent solvation dataset, where temperature in Kelvin is treated as a global feature
and the target value is the solvation energy, which refers to the change in Gibbs free en-
ergy when an ion or molecule transitions from the vacuum or gas phase into a solvent
(Minkin 1999).
The Tc, Pc, and Vc datasets were chosen due to their relevance for phase behavior anal-
ysis and P–V–T (Pressure-Volume-Temperature) calculations.(A. R. Aouichaoui, Fan, et
al. 2023; Frutiger et al. 2019) The pressure dataset, originally measured in megapas-
cals (MPa), was converted to bar to facilitate the joint visualization of the three datasets.
This conversion was deemed necessary to mitigate discrepancies in scale and ensure
comparability across the datasets, enabling a more effective analysis and interpretation
of the results. In hindsight a similar conversion should have been applied to the volume
dataset as well to minimize the gap in factor between each dataset. These datasets,
collected from the AIChE DIPPR 801 Database (Wilding et al. (2017)), represent three
fundamental constants used in pure component analysis. As these constants are piv-
otal in predicting other thermo-chemical properties, precise predictions are essential for
applications in research and industry.
The datasets are structured similarly but vary in size. The Vc dataset contains 251 ob-
servations, the Pc dataset consists of 371 observations, and the Tc dataset with another
491 observations. When combined the three datasets contain 520 unique observations.
The columns present in all three datasets are as follows:
-Name: The name of the compound.
-CNAM, CASN, INAM: Identifiers such as chemical names and CAS registry numbers.
-Formula: The molecular formula of the compound.
-Family: The category or group the compound belongs to.
-SMILES: A representation of the molecular structure using the Simplified Molecular Input
Line Entry System (SMILES) format.
-PropertyID: Identifier for the specific property being measured.
-Const_Value: The target variable in each dataset (critical volume, pressure, or temper-
ature).
-Data_Type: Indicates whether the data is experimental or calculated.
-Acceptance, Error_Source, Error: Metadata indicating data quality and possible error
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
39
==PAGE:50==
estimates.
The target variable, Const_Value, is the primary focus of the prediction tasks for each
dataset.
Since the Const_Value represents critical properties such as volume, pres-
sure, and temperature, it is essential that these values are accurately predicted during
model evaluation. To make multi target predictions these datasets are combined based
on unique SMILES identifiers, ensuring that any missing target values are represented
as NaN and later masked on each individual forward call and batch prediction. This pro-
cess enables the model to learn from both complete and incomplete records, improving
robustness in multi-target prediction.
Temperature dependent self-solvation energy
The dataset used in this study combines data from the DIPPR and Yaws databases (Wild-
ing et al. 2017; Sibul et al. 2000; Yaws 2012; Marques and Müller 2024). Resulting in a
comprehensive collection of 5420 pure compounds and 71,656 data points. The dataset
spans a wide range of temperatures, addressing the limitations of standard temperature
conditions typically used in solvation studies. This expansive dataset enables the de-
velopment of predictive models for self-solvation energies, improving the accuracy and
applicability of predictions across different thermal conditions.
Figure 3.1: Schematic of workflow GNN (A. R. Aouichaoui, Cogliati, et al. 2023)
The dataset contains ’SMILES’, the target variable ’Energy’ and the global feature ’Tem-
perature’. The molecular graph in figure 3.1 is constructed from the corresponding SMILES
representation. The graph is then processed by the GNN, where global features are con-
catenated with the molecule’s latent representation. The model’s output subsequently
aims to predict the true target value.
The data processing pipeline included the creation of new atom and bond featurizers.
These featurizers are critical in representing molecular structures, capturing both atomic-
level and bond-level information that is necessary for graph neural network (GNN)-based
models. This step was crucial for adapting Chemprop’s prediction process for molecular
properties, as it emulates the embedding process, ensuring the structural information of
each molecule is represented in a format suitable for GNN architectures.
40
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:51==
3.3
Case Study 1
3.3.1
Single Task Learning (STL)
Comparison of the attentive FP model treating the critical properties as single task and
multi task. Both with a random 80/10/10 split per dataset and a random 80/10/10 split on
a concatenation of the datasets. See tables 3.1 and 3.2 for the hyperparameters found
for each individual model. Batch size is not mentioned in these tables, because it is equal
to the dataset length.
Table 3.1: Hyperparameters for the crititcal properties Pc, Tc, Vc with random 80/10/10
split
Hyperparameter
Pc
Tc
Vc
epochs
1000
1000
1000
early stopping patience
50
50
50
scheduler patience
10
10
10
dropout
3.8e−2
1e−2
3.7e−2
Initial Learning Rate
8.9e−4
4.6e−4
1.4e−3
hidden dimensions
128
512
128
Initial Weight Decay
1.6e−5
3.7e−7
1.0e−5
Number of MLP
4
4
2
Number of atom layers
2
3
2
Number of molecule layers
3
2
2
Table 3.2: Hyperparameters for the datasets Pc, Tc, Vc, and Multi Target predictions with
same 80/10/10 split for both single and multi task learning
Hyperparameter
Pc
Tc
Vc
Multi Target
epochs
1000
1000
1000
1000
early stopping patience
50
50
50
50
scheduler patience
10
10
10
10
dropout
7.4e−2
8.7e−3
7.4e−2
1.8e−2
Initial Learning Rate
6.9e−3
2.8e−4
3.5e−3
1.5e−3
hidden dimensions
128
512
128
512
Initial Weight Decay
1.5e−7
3.7e−7
4.3e−4
5.2e−4
Number of MLP
2
2
3
2
Number of atom layers
4
4
5
4
Number of molecule layers
3
4
4
5
Table 3.3: Split sizes to match multi task split
Dataset
Pc
Tc
Vc
Multi Target
Train
306
397
214
416
Validation
34
43
19
52
Test
31
51
17
52
Total
371
491
250
520
Figure 3.2 shows the parity plots per condition after training on the best hyperparameters
found on a random 80/10/10 split. N denotes the number of observations per dataset.
The results displayed in figure 3.2 present the effectiveness of the Attentive FP model in
predicting the critical properties of Pc, Tc, and Vc individually. The R² shows the good-
ness of fit, how targets and predictions align. Particularly for the Vc and Tc datasets,
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
41
==PAGE:52==
suggesting that the model captures the underlying relationships effectively. The varying
hyperparameters, as outlined in Table 3.1, illustrate a tailored approach to optimizing per-
formance for each critical property. The good R² performance metric for both validation
and test datasets indicates that the models for Tc and Vc generalize well to new data. The
performance metrics on Pc indicate the hyperparameters found do not optimally support
the AFP model to predict on this dataset.
Figure 3.2: Single target training, Parity plots for AFP on Pc (top), Tc (middle), and Vc
(bottom) random 80/10/10 split (left: training, middle: validation, right: testing) for the
best hyperparameters found per condition
In order to make a fair comparison between single task learning and multi task learning
a decision was made to split the single task datasets in exactly the same fashion as the
multi task split. In total there are 520 unique SMILES across the three critical property
datasets. These 520 observations are first split in 80/10/10 train, validation, test before
removing from the dataset all the missing rows of the single target property of interest.
This results in the split sizes shown in table 3.3.
42
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.3: Single task learning using the same multi task learning 80/10/10 split as figure
3.4, Parity plots for AFP on Pc (top), Tc (middle), and Vc (bottom) (left: training, middle:
validation, right: testing) for the best hyperparameters found per condition
The parity plots in Figure 3.3 reveal clear signs of overfitting, with validation performance
metrics consistently worse than those of the test datasets for both Pc and Tc. The scat-
tered distribution around the true prediction axis on the parity plots underscores the model’s
inability to generalize well on these splits. A comparison between Figure 3.3 and Figure
3.2 highlights the suboptimal predictions on this particular split when using the chosen
hyperparameters. Notably, predictions for the validation datasets of Pc and Tc are signifi-
cantly less accurate compared to the train and test datasets. This disparity suggests that
the model has overfit the training data. While the reasonable performance on the test set
might initially seem encouraging, it is likely due to hyperparameters coincidentally favor-
ing the specific test data rather than representing true generalization. Predictions for Vc,
however, remain more consistent and within acceptable bounds.vGiven the small size of
the datasets, the risk of overfitting was always a concern. The nearly 300,000 learnable
parameters in the model far exceed the number of data points per dataset (see Table
3.3), providing the model with excessive flexibility to memorize training data rather than
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
43
==PAGE:54==
capturing generalizable patterns. Too many degrees of freedom compared to the dataset
sizes. To address this, implementing techniques like weight and bias pruning could have
been a valuable strategy. Pruning would reduce the model’s complexity by systematically
removing less significant parameters, thereby limiting overfitting tendencies and encour-
aging better generalization. Additionally, the initial hyperparameter search space may
have been overly broad, which could have contributed to the model’s susceptibility to
overfitting. Additionally, despite the scaling, some property values exhibit different scales
and as such, the multi-objective optimization might have favored the larger scaled data
compared to the lower scale data such as the Pc dataset. An investigation into the weights
associated would be a viable future direction.
Interestingly, these datasets were chosen precisely because models are expected to gen-
eralize well on critical property datasets (A. Aouichaoui et al. 2022; Biswas et al. 2023).
This makes the observed overfitting particularly surprising and raises questions about the
influence of model complexity, data splits, or the hyperparameter optimization process on
performance.
3.3.2
Multi-Task Learning (MTL)
Figure 3.4: Multi task training with the same split as figure 3.3, Parity plots for Pc (top),
Tc (middle), and Vc (bottom) (left: training, middle: validation, right: testing) for the best
AFP models per condition
44
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.4 illustrates a trend similar to Figure 3.3: validation performance metrics for both
Pc and Tc again lag behind test performance metrics, indicating overfitting. The parity
plots reveal that the models’ predictions for validation data scatter more widely, another
sign that the obtained model architecture actually does not generalize well to new data.
This suggests that the hyperparameters identified for the multi-task model similarly fail to
generalize, repeating the issues observed in the single-task configuration for this specific
split.
Metric
Tc (Kelvin)
Pc (bar)
Vc (m3/kmol)
AFP
AFP STL
AFP MTL
AFP
AFP STL
AFP MTL
AFP
AFP STL
AFP MTL
RMSE
16.4
18.86
19.67
2.38
3.86
4.40
0.023
0.033
0.038
MAE
12.83
15.28
15.00
1.75
2.42
2.96
0.016
0.021
0.028
R²
0.96
0.94
0.94
0.95
0.93
0.91
0.99
0.97
0.95
Table 3.4: Performance metrics for Tc, Pc, and Vc across the three different approaches.
In table 3.4 AFP denotes the AFP model trained on the random 80/10/10 split whereas the
AFP STL refers to the model trained on the same split as the multi task model. The table
shows that the random 80/10/10 split provided the best performance metrics. Specifically,
it resulted in the lowest RMSE and MAE values, while maximizing the R² values, which
is sought to approach 1 for optimal predictive accuracy. A possible explanation could
be that because the original random 80/10/10 split contained slightly more values in the
validation and test compared with the train dataset, that it provided a more representative
evaluation of the data’s distribution. Although the difference in subset size is minimal.
3.3.3
Ensemble Model Performance
The trained models described in the previous section will be used to construct an ensem-
ble using each of the four described techniques, Bootstrap Bagging, Random Weight Ini-
tialization, Jackknife and the Bayesian Bootstrap. Each model in the ensemble is trained
using the same hyperparameters but vary due to differences in implementation. Predic-
tions are averaged across the ensemble to improve accuracy and reduce variance.
These analyses aim to provide an evaluation of the model’s predictive performance and
uncertainty estimation capabilities across all ensemble runs on the test dataset. By sys-
tematically analyzing uncertainty, these efforts offer valuable insights into the model’s
reliability and potential areas for improvement. Additionally, this work aims to provide a
comprehensive guide to utilizing the GraPE framework’s ensemble techniques, highlight-
ing their applications and benefits for molecular property prediction.
• Confidence Interval Plots: Separate plots will be generated for Tc, Pc, and Vc.
These plots display predicted values alongside confidence intervals, illustrating the
model’s certainty for each prediction and providing insights into its reliability.
• Moment Analysis Plot: Maximum-to-Sum (MS) plot visualizes the contribution of
maximum values in a sample to a given moment. Derived using the RMSE distribu-
tion of each ensemble. The plot can be used to identify inputs that contribute to the
variability in output behavior (Gürkan Sin 2024). It provides insights into the distri-
bution characteristics and the consistency of predictions within the ensemble. Since
a lower RMSE value indicates better performance, the analysis focuses on the left
tail of the distribution (k, u α ± 95 %CI), which visually represents the desirable
prediction outcomes. This visualization helps assess how effectively the ensemble
captures the underlying data patterns while minimizing prediction errors.
• Error vs. Uncertainty Plot: This plot examines the relationship between predic-
tion error and the model’s uncertainty estimates. Ideally, larger uncertainties should
correspond to higher errors, indicating that the model is well-calibrated.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
45
==PAGE:56==
(a) Pc
(b) Tc
(c) Vc
Figure 3.5: Confidence interval comparison on each ensemble technique over all three
critical properties (Pc, Tc, Vc) with observation index on the x-axis and property values on
the y-axis.
46
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:57==
Confidence Interval
In order to compute the confidence interval(CI) of the predictions the 2.5 % and 97.5 %
quantiles are determined. This results in the 95 % CI. Figure 3.5 shows the CI for all four
ensemble techniques related to the corresponding critical property dataset.
Figure 3.5 demonstrates that all four ensembles show more uncertainty when it concerns
the critical temperature (Tc) property, as evidenced by the wide uncertainty. Compared
to a relatively narrower uncertainity for both Vc and Pc, this indicates variability in the
model’s predictions.
This observation can be contextualized by examining figure 3.3 again, which highlights
poor generalization in the Tc validation performance for the single-task Tc model. Conse-
quently, it is unsurprising that the ensemble model using the Tc specific hyperparameters
shows greater challenges with Tc predictions compared to Pc and Vc and their respective
hyperparameter combination.
Furthermore, the Random Weight Initialization ensemble demonstrates significantly nar-
row uncertainties compared to the other ensemble techniques. This reduced uncertainty
can be attributed to the ensemble’s design, which focuses on variability introduced by
different initial weight configurations while keeping the data consistent. Since the dataset
remains unchanged across ensemble members, the uncertainty primarily reflects the op-
timization dynamics rather than variability in the data. Consequently, this approach tends
to yield more confident predictions, particularly for datasets with lower aleatoric uncer-
tainty. In contrast, the Bayesian Bootstrap Ensemble shows wider uncertainty for the
critical volume Vc and critical pressure Pc compared to other methods.
Moment Analysis
The moment analysis in figure 3.6 reveals fast convergence in the plots for both Vc and Pc,
suggesting low variance in predictions for these properties. This indicates that the models
consistently generate predictions with limited deviation across the ensemble runs, high-
lighting a low uncertainty for Vc and Pc.
The Tc plots, however, present a more interesting case. The Tc moment analysis demon-
strates slower convergence across all four ensemble techniques, reflecting greater vari-
ability in the predictions. This behavior aligns with the challenges previously discussed
regarding Tc, including its broader uncertainty ranges and higher prediction errors. The
slower convergence suggests that the models encounter more difficulty in capturing the
underlying patterns for Tc, possibly due to the dataset’s complexity.
This observation underscores the importance of analyzing moment distributions to under-
stand the predictive behavior and reliability of models across different target properties.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
47
==PAGE:58==
(a) Pc
(b) Tc
(c) Vc
Figure 3.6: Moment analysis comparison on each ensemble technique over all three crit-
ical properties.
48
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:59==
(a) Pc
(b) Tc
(c) Vc
Figure 3.7: Relationship between prediction error and uncertainty for each ensemble tech-
nique over all three critical properties.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
49
==PAGE:60==
Relationship Between Prediction Error and Uncertainty
The relationship between model error and uncertainty in figure 3.7 across all test datasets
for Pc, Tc, and Vc is explored under the assumption that prediction errors follow a Gaus-
sian distribution. According to this assumption, approximately 68% of prediction errors
are expected to fall within one standard deviation (std) from the mean prediction, and
95% should fall within two standard deviations (std) from the mean prediction (Shengli
Jiang et al. 2024).
For the ensemble models, we observe a high percentage of data points within the two
standard deviation limits. However, the error range spans from -100 K to +50 K, indicat-
ing a disparity in the predicted error distribution. While the uncertainty estimates for this
dataset are stable, they are also notably inaccurate. The predictions, while consistent,
do not align well with the actual values, suggesting that the model’s uncertainty estimates
are not reliable.
When examining the individual properties, the trends diverge. For Pc, we see that the
uncertainty estimate is not conservative enough. The percentage of data points falling
within the Gaussian limits (1 std and 2 std) is lower than expected, indicating that the
model may not be capturing the full range of uncertainty. This could be due to a number
of factors, including model biases.
For Vc, the behavior is even more pronounced. A significant portion of the data points falls
outside the two standard deviation range, and the predictions are less reliable. Random
weight initialization performs especially poor in this context, suggesting that the model’s
initialization process has an impact on the prediction accuracy for Vc.
Additionally, the Jackknife ensemble method shows poor performance for Vc, with only
5% of the data points falling within one standard deviation from the mean. This suggests
that the Jackknife technique struggles to estimate uncertainty accurately for this dataset.
The limited size of the Vc test dataset likely contributes to this issue. Smaller datasets
tend to be susceptible to overfitting, making it more difficult to generate reliable uncer-
tainty estimates. The jackknife technique generates synthetic data from the sample data,
it relies on the available data. In the case of a small dataset, this approach may not ef-
fectively capture the underlying variability in the data, leading to inaccurate uncertainty
estimates. This issue highlights the sensitivity of the Jackknife method to dataset size.
Ensemble Multi Task Learning
The same ensemble plots to visualize the uncertainty estimation were generated for the
multi task learning ensemble run.
Confidence Interval
Figure 3.8 demonstrates that all four ensembles show more uncertainty when it concerns
the critical temperature (Tc) property, just like for the single task comparison. Thi can be
attained from the widee uncertainty area. Compared to a relatively narrower uncertainity
for both Vc and Pc, this indicates variability in the model’s predictions.
This observation can again be contextualized by examining the parity plots. From figure
3.3 we can deduce poor generalization for Tc. The validation performance for the multi-
task model is significantly lower than that of its corresponding train and test subsets.
Consequently, it is unsurprising that the ensemble model using the Tc specific hyperpa-
rameters shows greater challenges with Tc predictions compared to Pc and Vc and their
respective hyperparameter combination.
50
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:61==
(a) Pc
(b) Tc
(c) Vc
Figure 3.8: Confidence interval comparison for each ensemble technique across three
critical properties (Pc, Tc, Vc) with observation index on the x-axis and property values on
the y-axis.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
51
==PAGE:62==
(a) Pc
(b) Tc
(c) Vc
Figure 3.9: Moment analysis comparison across all three critical properties (Pc, Tc, Vc)
for each ensemble technique.
52
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:63==
Moment Analysis
The moment analysis depicted in Figure 3.9 reflects the issues observed in the confi-
dence interval. All ensembles except Jackknife converge fast and smooth for all three
critical properties.
The moment analysis further confirms that Vc and Pc predictions benefit from low vari-
ability and consistent performance, whereas Tc predictions face slower convergence and
higher error rates, aligning with its broader uncertainty intervals. This behavior reinforces
the importance of tailored hyperparameter tuning and data preprocessing to address the
unique challenges that arise by specific target properties.
Relationship Error and Uncertainty
Figure 3.10a illustrates the variance observed in the individual ensemble techniques. It
can be observed that the Jackknife ensemble errors are the only ones that remain within
two standard deviations. This aligns with expectations, given the broader error range as-
sociated with the Jackknife method. Consistent with the moment analysis, the Jackknife
ensemble exhibited slower convergence and demonstrated greater uncertainty as a wider
area in Figure 3.8a, particularly within the first third of the observations. This behavior un-
derscores the inherent variability of the Jackknife ensemble during the initial stages of
prediction. It is noteworthy that very few of the errors for the other ensemble techniques
fall within one or two standard deviations. This discrepancy suggests that these models
might not be fully capturing the uncertainty in their predictions, potentially indicating model
misspecification or overconfidence in the predictions.
Figure 3.10b illustrates the variance observed in the individual ensemble techniques for
predicting Tc. Similar to the Pc results, the Jackknife ensemble errors generally remain
within two standard deviations, albeit with relatively high error ranges. This behavior is
consistent with the inherent variability and slower convergence of the Jackknife method.
Many data points across the other ensemble techniques also fall within the two standard
deviation range, suggesting a better representation of uncertainty for Tc predictions. But
comparing the error ranges of the Tc plots to Pc and Vc tells us why the datapoints fall
within the two standard deviations. The error ranges are larger than for Pc and Vc.
Figure 3.10c depicts the variance observed in the ensemble techniques for predicting
Vc. In this case, a notable divergence is observed, as many errors fall outside the two
standard deviation range for the majority of ensemble methods, except Jackknife. This
discrepancy highlights the variance in predictions from these ensembles.
The ensemble analysis showcases the connection between model accuracy, model ar-
chitecture and uncertainty estimation techniques. The critical temperature (Tc) dataset
consistently exhibits greater uncertainty and variability across all ensemble techniques.
Among the ensemble techniques, Random Weight Initialization demonstrates narrow un-
certainty intervals, indicating stable predictions driven by consistent data use and opti-
mization dynamics. However, this method’s reduced uncertainty may mask underlying
data variability, which could limit its effectiveness in applications requiring robust uncer-
tainty quantification. The Bayesian Bootstrap ensemble provides broader uncertainty es-
timates, particularly for critical volume (Vc) and pressure (Pc), reflecting its capacity to
capture variability from data sampling but at the expense of potential overestimation for
smaller datasets.
There is large uncertainty visible for the Jackknife method during the multi-target task,
see figure 3.8. The reason for this is not entirely clear, since the other three methods do
not seem to be affected as much as Jackknife is. A guess is that the residuals used when
generating synthetic datasets are not independent. Perhaps due to the multiple targets
implementation, potentially there is some interaction between them that is affecting the
results.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
53
==PAGE:64==
(a) Pc
(b) Tc
(c) Vc
Figure 3.10: Relationship between prediction error and uncertainty comparison across all
three critical properties (Pc, Tc, Vc) for each ensemble technique.
54
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:65==
The analysis of prediction error versus uncertainty reveals that while the Gaussian distri-
bution assumption holds for most cases, deviations for properties like Vc show limitations
in certain ensemble techniques, such as Jackknife, especially with small datasets. This
highlights the critical role of dataset size and diversity in uncertainty estimation and the
necessity for carefully chosen techniques to balance accuracy and reliability.
Table 3.5: Comparison of GraPE’s AFP for critical properties with existing models.
Property
Reference
No. data
Metric
Pc (bar)
Current work. GraPE AFP
371
MAE: 1.75
A. R. Aouichaoui, Fan, et al. (2023)
386
MAE: 1.1
Biswas et al. (2023)
782
MAE: 1.31
Tc (K)
Current work. GraPE AFP
491
MAE: 12.83
A. R. Aouichaoui, Fan, et al. (2023)
507
MAE: 2.30
Biswas et al. (2023)
888
MAE: 7.6
Vc (m3/kmol)
Current work. GraPE AFP
271
MAE: 0.016
A. R. Aouichaoui, Fan, et al. (2023)
253
MAE: 0.001
It is evident from table Table 3.5 that the current best performance metrics found with
GraPE do not compete with previously mentioned literature on similar datasets. This
can be explained by dataset size and by the different techniques implemented in other
studies. For example, Biswas et al. (2023) used a transfer learning approach in their
model architecture design.
3.4
Case Study 2
3.4.1
Temperature dependent dataset solvation
Hyperparameter tuning for this extensive dataset was conducted on the DTU HPc. While
it is technically feasible to run experiments remotely and track them through an MLflow
server hosted locally on a public IP address, this approach proved time-consuming. One
potential solution to streamline this process would involve setting up a Dynamic DNS
(DDNS) service to manage changing IP addresses, or alternatively, configuring a static
IP. Either approach would support smoother and more reliable tracking of remote experi-
ments in MLflow.
3.4.2
Analysis of parity plots and model performance
It is interesting to see that for both models in figure 3.11 the training performance metrics
are not better than the performance metrics computed from train datasets. Especially for
the AFP model. for the training dataset the model converges nicely along the true predic-
tion from around minus 100 kcal mol−1. The model does not predict well on lower values
resulting in worse performance metrics overall. A closer examination of the validation and
test sets reveals that the majority of the data points lie above the minus 100 mark, where
the model performs better. This imbalance in the data distribution could explain why the
training metrics are not significantly higher than those for validation and test datasets.
Additionally, this suggests that the model has limited generalization for extreme values.
This could indicate that the model’s capacity to learn patterns in sparse regions of the
data space is insufficient or that these regions are underrepresented in the training data.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
55
==PAGE:66==
Table 3.6: Hyperparameters for the datasets Pc, Tc, Vc, and Multi Target predictions
Hyperparameter
AFP
DMPNN
epochs
1000
1000
batch size
4096
4096
early stopping patience
50
50
scheduler patience
10
10
dropout
0
0
Initial Learning Rate
1.1e−3
3.2e−3
hidden dimensions
256
256
Initial Weight Decay
1.1e−5
4.7e−7
Number of MLP
2
3
Number of atom layers
2
4
Number of molecule layers
4
2
The resulting lack of predictive accuracy in these regions disproportionately impacts the
training performance.
Figure 3.11: Parity plots of both DMPNN (top) and AFP (bottom), train validation and test
datasets (From left to right.)
3.4.3
Comparison study GraPE vs. Chemprop
A small benchmark study was conducted to compare the performance of GraPE with that
of Chemprop, focusing on the prediction of the target property, self solvation energy. This
study details the steps taken to enhance GraPE’s platform design, enabling it to achieve
results comparable to Chemprop.
In a recent, yet unpublished study obtained through personal communication, the effec-
56
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:67==
tive use of global features in target prediction on the solvation dataset Minkin (1999) was
demonstrated by Marques and Müller (2024). This study reported an average relative
deviation of 2.2% and performance metrics including an R² of 0.992, an MAE of 0.09 kcal
mol−1, see Marques and Müller (2024). These metrics set a high bar for this benchmark-
ing study.
Initially, reproducing these results was challenging. Discrepancies stemmed from misin-
terpretation of the dataset structure, improper data handling, and differences in feature en-
coding between GraPE and Chemprop. However, through iterative refinements in model
architecture, data splitting, and feature engineering, reasonable results were achieved.
Results obtained from the Chemprop v1 command-line interface were systematically com-
pared with those generated using GraPE via its Python library integration. The compari-
son aims to evaluate consistency, performance, and usability across the two approaches.
The outcomes of this analysis are presented in Table 3.7.
The experiments revealed challenges in reproducing the originally reported results for this
extensive dataset. At first it proved difficult with GraPE and Chemprop to achieve the re-
ported performance metrics. But through multiple attempts at optimization and alignment
it was possible to obtain reasonable results.
Table 3.7: Performance Comparison on Solvation Dataset
Model
R²
MAE
RMSE
GraPE DMPNN
0.95
1.3
1.99
GraPE AFP
0.97
0.95
1.63
Chemprop v1 CLI
0.99
0.82
0.67
3.5
Challenges in Reproducing Results
Reproducing the results reported by our collaborators using Chemprop proved to be a
complex and time-consuming process. Several key challenges emerged, ranging from
misinterpretations of the data structure to issues with model configuration and data split-
ting. These difficulties extended the timeline of the investigation and complicated efforts
to replicate the highly successful performance metrics achieved by our collaborators, par-
ticularly the R² values of around 0.992, MAE of 0.38, and MSE of 0.67 on the solvation
dataset. The following subsections outline the main difficulties encountered, the steps
taken to address them, and the lessons learned along the way.
3.5.1
Difficulty in Reproducing Desired Results
The most immediate obstacle was reproducing the high metric results reported by our
collaborators. Early attempts to replicate the results using GraPE on the solvation dataset
consistently produced poor outcomes, despite following the same general approach. This
gap in performance persisted for a significant amount of time and proved to be a major
setback in the investigation.
Misinterpretation of the Data Structure
One of the primary causes of this discrepancy was a misunderstanding of the dataset
structure used by Marques and Müller (2024). Initially, I assumed that they had trained on
80% of the 71,000 molecules and reserved the remaining 20% for testing and validation.
However, it later became clear that this assumption was incorrect. The dataset used for
predictions consisted of 48,000 molecules, but this was just one sheet in a larger dataset.
After consulting with our collaborators, I discovered that they had used all the available
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
57
==PAGE:68==
data, applying an 80/10/10 split for training, validation, and testing within Chemprop’s
command-line interface (CLI).
This misinterpretation led to several wasted attempts at replicating the results. I had
been manually splitting the data, which inadvertently excluded important information that
could have enhanced the model’s ability to generalize to unseen data. In contrast, our
collaborators allowed Chemprop to handle the data splitting automatically, ensuring that
the training set remained representative and inclusive of all relevant data. Chemprop
allows for multiple different types of splitting options, to name a few; stratified splitting,
random split and cross validation. Once the dataset structure and splitting procedure
were corrected, the performance of GraPE improved, but achieving the desired results
took additional effort.
Issues with Model Training and Testing Procedure
After clarifying the dataset structure, I encountered further difficulties in configuring Chemprop
correctly to replicate the training and testing procedure used by our collaborators. My ini-
tial attempts at using Chemprop’s CLI to train a model on the pre-split dataset and test it
on a separate 20% holdout set produced significantly worse results than expected. For
instance, metrics such as the MAE of 9.58, MSE of 184,665, and R² of 0.27 were far from
the expected R² of 0.99.
By manually removing 20% of the data before training, I had unintentionally deprived the
model of valuable information, which hindered its ability to generalize and resulted in poor
performance. This issue was resolved by following the automated data splitting process
in Chemprop, which led to a more appropriate training and testing setup and ultimately
improved the performance metrics.
3.5.2
Ensuring Alignment Between GraPE and Chemprop
Aligning GraPE’s DMPNN implementation with Chemprop for a fair comparison posed ad-
ditional challenges. While GraPE offers flexibility in model design and feature engineering,
this flexibility made it difficult to ensure comparability with Chemprop’s more specialized
setup.
Featurization and Model Architecture
One of the most significant issues encountered was ensuring that GraPE’s atom and bond
featurization matched that of Chemprop. Differences in how chemical features were en-
coded had a more substantial impact on model performance than initially anticipated.
Misalignment in the encoding of molecular features led to performance discrepancies,
requiring multiple iterations to resolve. The incorporation of global features, such as tem-
perature, into GraPE’s DMPNN architecture also presented challenges. Despite efforts,
initial attempts to integrate these global features did not yield the expected performance
improvements, which prompted further investigation and refinement of GraPE’s model
design.
3.5.3
Investigation into Performance Discrepancies
Steps taken to improve GraPE performance To address the previous performance gap,
several steps were taken to improve GraPE:
1. Hyperparameter matching: Default hyperparameters from Chemprop were copied
to GraPE.
2. Architecture similarity: The GraPE model architecture was adjusted to more closely
resemble Chemprop’s.
3. Atom and Bond featurizers were designed to copy Chemprop’s featurizers.
4. Batch normalization was added to the DMPNN forward call.
58
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:69==
5. GraPE standardized atom and bond descriptors using the numpy library. Chemprop
uses Sklearn StandardScalar. Copying the StandardScalar implementation from
Chemprop into GraPE turned out to make no difference in performance.
Adjustments to match Chemprop architecture and features
Specific adjustments
included:
1. Modified GraPE DMPNN layers to mimic Chemprop v2 The Linear layers in the feed
forward network are split up in two sequential layers.
2. Other architecture varibales such as atom and bond layers were matched with Chemprop
to achieve the same amount of learnable parameters.
3. Matched atom and bond featurizers, incorporating the 8 features used by Chemprop:
• Atomic number
• Degree
• Formal charge
• Chiral tag
• Number of hydrogens
• Hybridization
• Aromaticity
• Atomic mass
4. Added multi dimensional global features.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
59
==PAGE:70==
4
Conclusion and Perspective
4.1
Conclusion
This study explored multiple aspects of graph neural networks (GNNs) and their applica-
tion in a machine learning workflow, incorporating uncertainty estimation techniques, ex-
periment tracking tools, and a comparative study of GraPE and Chemprop. While promis-
ing advances have been made, challenges in reproducibility and interpretability remain.
Incorporating uncertainty estimation techniques into the workflow enhances the reliability
and interpretability of the GNN model predictions. By quantifying uncertainty, researchers
gain insights into the limitations of models, enabling more informed decision-making, prior-
itization of experimental validation, and the development of robust models. The ensemble
methods analyzed Bootstrap Bagging, Random Weight Initialization, Jackknife Ensemble,
and Bayesian Bootstrap demonstrated unique strengths in quantifying uncertainty. Their
application, and the analysis they allow, improves the reliability of a well performing model.
As a method for reliable uncertainty estimation, the Bootstrap Bagging technique appears
to be the most dependable. It does not exhibit overconfidence in its predictions and pro-
vides a balanced uncertainty estimate. In contrast, it does not demonstrate the same
behavior observed in the Jackknife technique during the multi-task learning (MTL) en-
semble, where significantly larger uncertainties were observed. This suggests that while
Bootstrap Bagging offers more consistent and controlled uncertainty estimates, the Jack-
knife method may be more sensitive to variations in the data, especially within the context
of multi-task learning.
A comparison between single-task learning (STL) and multi-task learning (MTL) revealed
that single-target predictions exhibited lower variability and, in general, performed better in
terms of performance metrics. While the literature suggests that MTL has the potential to
generalize better by identifying complex interdependencies between multiple targets, this
study did not substantiate this claim. Several factors could contribute to this discrepancy,
particularly the small size of the dataset employed in this study. Furtheremore, most
studies use MTL in conjucntion with TL, which was not the case in this study.
Interestingly, Biswas et al. (2023) reported results that support the advantages of MTL,
particularly in terms of generalization. See table 3.5. However, their study incorporated
transfer learning, a technique not utilized in the present study. Transfer learning could be
a valuable path forward for future research to investigate, as it may enhance MTL’s ability
to capture intricate patterns and improve performance in smaller datasets.
This study also compared the performance of GraPE and Chemprop in predicting self
solvation energy. Despite initial challenges in reproducing the reported results, iterative
improvements in GraPE’s model architecture, data handling, and feature engineering en-
abled us to achieve reasonable performance. Key issues included misinterpretation of
dataset structure, incorrect data splitting, and discrepancies in feature encoding. These
challenges emphasized the importance of aligning data processing and model config-
urations across platforms. Ultimately, GraPE was able to produce reasonable results.
Demonstrating its potential for competitive performance.
Regarding the extensions to the toolbox, MLflow proved useful in ensuring comprehen-
sive experiment tracking and secure data management. Its ability to self-host experiments
60
==PAGE:71==
provided a springboard to create an organized workspace. MLflow also facilitated com-
pliance with data privacy requirements while maintaining control over sensitive datasets.
The integration of MLflow into the project streamlined logging, visualization, and analysis
of experimental results.
Future efforts should continue leveraging MLflow’s capabilities, expanding its functionality
to manage large-scale experiments.
4.2
Future Directions
Building on the insights gained from this study, future research should focus on imple-
menting transfer learning pipelines to enable pre-trained models to adapt efficiently to
new molecular datasets, thereby improving predictive accuracy. Integrating global fea-
tures into the multi-target learning approach, with features linked to respective targets,
could further enhance performance. Additionally, extending GraPE to support transfer
learning and fine-tuning capabilities would make it a more versatile tool. Lastly, enabling
secure remote access to the self-hosted MLflow server through trusted channels, such as
port forwarding, would facilitate collaboration while maintaining data privacy.
To enhance experimental reproducibility, it is essential to establish robust reporting prac-
tices. While MLflow tracking effectively logs parameters, metrics, and plots, a standard-
ized experiment setup is critical for consistent comparisons across experiments. This
project introduces standardized scripts to streamline experiment design and execution.
These scripts, while developed specifically for this study, provide a framework for repro-
ducibility and consistency in future research efforts.
This work demonstrates the potential of graph neural networks while emphasizing the
importance of uncertainty estimation and reproducibility. By addressing these challenges,
the field can move toward more reliable, interpretable, and scalable solutions.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
61
==PAGE:72==
62
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:73==
References
Aertebjerg, Felix Oscar (2024). GraPE. Q2.
Ai, Daiqiao et al. (2022). “A multi-task FP-GNN framework enables accurate prediction of
selective PARP inhibitors”. In: Frontiers in Pharmacology 13. ISSN: 1663-9812. DOI:
10.3389/fphar.2022.971369.
Aouichaoui, Adem et al. (Mar. 2022). “Uncertainty estimation in deep learning￿based
property models: Graph neural networks applied to the critical properties”. In: AIChE
Journal 68. DOI: 10.1002/aic.17696.
Aouichaoui, Adem R. N. et al. (2023). “Combining Group-Contribution Concept and Graph
Neural Networks Toward Interpretable Molecular Property Models”. In: Journal of Chem-
ical Information and Modeling 63.3, pp. 725–744. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.2c01091.
Aouichaoui, Adem R.N., Alessandro Cogliati, et al. (2023). “S-GNN: State-Dependent
Graph Neural Networks for Functional Molecular Properties”. In: Computer Aided Chem-
ical Engineering 33rd European Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engineering.
Elsevier, pp. 575–581. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-443-15274-0.50091-3.
Aouichaoui, Adem R.N., Fan Fan, et al. (2023). “Application of interpretable group-embedded
graph neural networks for pure compound properties”. In: Computers & Chemical Engi-
neering 176, p. 108291. ISSN: 0098-1354. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.
2023.108291.
Biswas, Sayandeep et al. (2023). “Predicting Critical Properties and Acentric Factors of
Fluids Using Multitask Machine Learning”. In: Journal of Chemical Information and Mod-
eling 63.15. PMID: 37487557, pp. 4574–4588. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.3c00546. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.3c00546.
Bjørner, M. G., G. Sin, and G. M. Kontogeorgis (2016). “Uncertainty analysis of the CPA
and a quadrupolar CPA equation of state - With emphasis on CO2”. In: Fluid Phase
Equilibria 414, pp. 29–47.
Bowman, Dale (1998). “Bayesian Bootstrap Procedures in Dose-Response Assessment”.
In: Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and Environmental Statistics 3.4. Cited by: 1,
pp. 370–382. DOI: 10.2307/1400571.
Breiman, Leo (1996). “Bagging predictors”. In: Machine learning 24, pp. 123–140.
Brozos, Christoforos et al. (2024). “Graph neural networks for surfactant multi-property
prediction”. In: Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects
694, p. 134133. ISSN: 0927-7757. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2024.134133.
ClearML (2020). ClearML: Your entire MLOps suite in one open-source tool. Software
available from clear.ml. URL: https://clear.ml/.
Clyde, Merlise and Herbert Lee (Dec. 2000). “Bagging and the Bayesian Bootstrap”. In.
Comet (2020). Comet: Experiment Tracking for Machine Learning. Software available
from comet.ml. URL: https://www.comet.ml/.
Deng, Jianyuan (2021). “Artificial Intelligence in Drug Discovery: Applications and Tech-
niques”. In: ResearchGate. Figure retrieved from ResearchGate.
Dohrn, R. and O. Pfohl (2001). “Thermophysical properties—Industrial directions”. In:
Fluid Phase Equilibria 185. Accessed: 2024-08-03, pp. 293–302.
Efron, B. (1979). “Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife”. In: The Annals of
Statistics 7.1, pp. 1–26. URL: https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1176344552.
Frutiger, Jérôme et al. (2019). “Computer-aided molecular product-process design under
property uncertainties – A Monte Carlo based optimization strategy”. In: Computers &
Chemical Engineering 122. 2017 Edition of the European Symposium on Computer
63
==PAGE:74==
Aided Process Engineering (ESCAPE-27), pp. 247–257. ISSN: 0098-1354. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2018.08.021.
Gilmer, Justin et al. (Aug. 2017). “Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry”. In:
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by Doina
Precup and Yee Whye Teh. Vol. 70. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR,
pp. 1263–1272.
Gurnani, Rishi et al. (2023). “Polymer Informatics at Scale with Multitask Graph Neu-
ral Networks”. In: Chemistry of Materials 35.4, pp. 1560–1567. DOI: 10 . 1021 / acs .
chemmater.2c02991. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c02991.
Heid, Esther, Kevin P. Greenman, et al. (2024). “Chemprop: A Machine Learning Package
for Chemical Property Prediction”. In: Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling
64.1. PMID: 38147829, pp. 9–17. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.3c01250. eprint: https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.jcim.3c01250. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.3c01250.
Heid, Esther, Charles J McGill, et al. (2023). Characterizing Uncertainty in Machine Learn-
ing for Chemistry. eng.
Hirschfeld, Lior et al. (2020). “Uncertainty Quantification Using Neural Networks for Molec-
ular Property Prediction”. In: Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 60.8. PMID:
32702986, pp. 3770–3780. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00502. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
1021/acs.jcim.0c00502. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00502.
Hu, Weihua et al. (2020). Strategies for Pre-training Graph Neural Networks. arXiv: 1905.
12265 [cs.LG].
Itoh, Takeshi, Takatomi Kubo, and Kazushi Ikeda (Nov. 2021). “Multi-level attention pool-
ing for graph neural networks: Unifying graph representations with multiple localities”.
In: Neural Networks 145. DOI: 10.1016/j.neunet.2021.11.001.
Jiang, Shengli et al. (2024). “Uncertainty quantification for molecular property predictions
with graph neural architecture search”. In: Digital Discovery 3 (8), pp. 1534–1553. DOI:
10.1039/D4DD00088A.
Jiang, Shunqin et al. (2024). “Attention based multi-task interpretable graph convolutional
network for Alzheimer’s disease analysis”. In: Pattern Recognition Letters 180, pp. 1–8.
ISSN: 0167-8655. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2024.02.016.
Ju, Mingxuan et al. (2023). Multi-task Self-supervised Graph Neural Networks Enable
Stronger Task Generalization. arXiv: 2210.02016 [cs.LG].
Kipf, Thomas N. and Max Welling (2017). Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Con-
volutional Networks. arXiv: 1609.02907 [cs.LG].
Landrum, Greg (2010). RDKit. Q2. URL: https://www.rdkit.org/.
Li, Liam et al. (2020). “A System for Massively Parallel Hyperparameter Tuning”. In: Pro-
ceedings of Machine Learning and Systems. Ed. by I. Dhillon, D. Papailiopoulos, and
V. Sze. Vol. 2, pp. 230–246.
Li, Mufei et al. (2021). “DGL-LifeSci: An Open-Source Toolkit for Deep Learning on Graphs
in Life Science”. In: ACS Omega.
Liaw, Richard et al. (2018). “Tune: A Research Platform for Distributed Model Selection
and Training”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.05118.
Lin, Ke-Ao et al. (2024). “Ensembling Graph Neural Networks for Node Classification”. In:
Journal of Network Intelligence 9.2. Cited by: 0, pp. 804–818.
Liu, Xin and Yangqiu Song (2021). Graph Convolutional Networks with Dual Message
Passing for Subgraph Isomorphism Counting and Matching. arXiv: 2112.08764 [cs.LG].
Marques, Hugo and Simon Müller (Nov. 2024). “Self-Solvation Energies: Extended Open
Database and GNN-based Prediction”. Unpublished manuscript, personal communica-
tion.
64
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:75==
Merkel, Dirk (2014). “Docker: lightweight linux containers for consistent development and
deployment”. In: Linux journal 2014.239, p. 2.
Minkin, V. I. (1999). In: Pure and Applied Chemistry 71.10, pp. 1919–1981. DOI: doi:
10.1351/pac199971101919.
Na, Gyoung S., Hyun Woo Kim, and Hyunju Chang (2020). “Costless Performance Im-
provement in Machine Learning for Graph-Based Molecular Analysis”. In: Journal of
Chemical Information and Modeling 60.3. PMID: 31928003, pp. 1137–1145. DOI: 10.
1021/acs.jcim.9b00816. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00816. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00816.
OpenAI (2024). ChatGPT (Version 3.5 4). https://chat.openai.com/.
Pan, Feiyang et al. (2021). “GuideBoot: Guided bootstrap for deep contextual banditsin
online advertising”. In: GuideBoot: Guided bootstrap for deep contextual banditsin on-
line advertising, pp. 2314–2323. DOI: 10.1145/3442381.3449987.
Parhizgar Keradeh, Mahsa and Amir Mohammadi Khanghah (2024). “Experimental inves-
tigation and machine learning modeling of diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid agents in
sandstone rock wettability alteration: Implications for enhanced oil recovery processes”.
In: Journal of Molecular Liquids 404. DOI: 10.1016/j.molliq.2024.124959.
Paszke, Adam et al. (2019). “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learn-
ing Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., pp. 8024–8035.
Queen, Owen et al. (2023). “Polymer graph neural networks for multitask property learn-
ing”. In: npj Computational Materials 9.1, p. 90. ISSN: 2057-3960. DOI: 10.1038/s41524-
023-01034-3.
Ramsundar, Bharath et al. (2019). Deep Learning for the Life Sciences. O’Reilly Media.
Rong, Yu et al. (2020). Self-Supervised Graph Transformer on Large-Scale Molecular
Data. arXiv: 2007.02835 [q-bio.BM].
Rubin, Donald B. (1981). “The Bayesian Bootstrap”. In: The Annals of Statistics 9.1,
pp. 130–134. DOI: 10.1214/aos/1176345338.
Ryu, Seongok, Yongchan Kwon, and Woo Kim (July 2019). “A Bayesian graph convolu-
tional network for reliable prediction of molecular properties with uncertainty quantifica-
tion”. In: Chemical Science 10. DOI: 10.1039/C9SC01992H.
Scalia, Gabriele et al. (2019). Evaluating Scalable Uncertainty Estimation Methods for
DNN-Based Molecular Property Prediction. arXiv: 1910.03127 [cs.LG].
Scarselli, Franco et al. (2005). “A new model for learning in graph domains”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2005 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. Vol. 2. IEEE,
pp. 729–734.
Schmidt, Wouter F, Martin A Kraaijveld, Robert PW Duin, et al. (1992). “Feed forward neu-
ral networks with random weights”. In: International conference on pattern recognition.
IEEE Computer Society Press, pp. 1–1.
Seyedian, Seyed Morteza et al. (2024). “Improving the Reliability of Compound Channel
Discharge Prediction Using Machine Learning Techniques and Resampling Methods”.
In: Water Resources Management 38.12, pp. 4685–4709. DOI: 10.1007/s11269-024-
03883-z.
Shan, Mengyi et al. (2022). “Predicting hERG channel blockers with directed message
passing neural networks”. In: RSC Advances 12.6. Cited by: 8; All Open Access, Gold
Open Access, Green Open Access, pp. 3423–3430. DOI: 10.1039/d1ra07956e.
Sibul, H.M. et al. (2000). Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Pure Chemicals:
DIPPR: Data Compilation: Core + Supplements 1-10. Taylor & Francis. ISBN: 9781560328957.
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
65
==PAGE:76==
Sin, Gürkan (2024). “Global sensitivity analysis using Monte Carlo estimation under fat-
tailed distributions”. In: Chemical Engineering Science 294, p. 120124. ISSN: 0009-
2509. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2024.120124.
Su, Bing et al. (2022). A Molecular Multimodal Foundation Model Associating Molecule
Graphs with Natural Language. arXiv: 2209.05481 [cs.LG].
Sun, Fan-Yun et al. (2020). InfoGraph: Unsupervised and Semi-supervised Graph-Level
Representation Learning via Mutual Information Maximization. arXiv: 1908.01000 [cs.LG].
TensorBoard (2016). TensorBoard: TensorFlow’s Visualization Toolkit. Software available
from tensorflow.org. URL: https://www.tensorflow.org/tensorboard.
Veličković, Petar et al. (2018). Graph Attention Networks. arXiv: 1710.10903 [stat.ML].
Vinyals, Oriol, Samy Bengio, and Manjunath Kudlur (2016). Order Matters: Sequence to
sequence for sets. arXiv: 1511.06391 [stat.ML].
Wang, Yimeng et al. (2022). “A multitask GNN-based interpretable model for discovery of
selective JAK inhibitors”. In: Journal of Cheminformatics 14.1, p. 16. ISSN: 1758-2946.
DOI: 10.1186/s13321-022-00593-9.
Wasserman, Larry (2010). All of statistics : a concise course in statistical inference. New
York: Springer. ISBN: 9781441923226 1441923225.
Weights&Biases (2020). Experiment Tracking with Weights and Biases. Software avail-
able from wandb.com. URL: https://www.wandb.com/.
Whiting, Wallace B., Ting Man Tong, and Michael E. Reed (1993). “Effect of uncertainties
in thermodynamic data and model parameters on calculated process performance”. In:
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 32.7, pp. 1367–1371.
Wilding, W. Vincent et al. (2017). DIPPR® Data Compilation of Pure Chemical Properties.
Design Institute for Physical Properties, AIChE.
Xiong, Zhaoping et al. (2020). “Pushing the Boundaries of Molecular Representation for
Drug Discovery with the Graph Attention Mechanism”. In: Journal of Medicinal Chem-
istry 63.16, pp. 8749–8760. ISSN: 1520-4804. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jmedchem.9b00959.
Yang, Kevin et al. (2019). “Analyzing Learned Molecular Representations for Property
Prediction”. In: Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 59.8. PMID: 31361484,
pp. 3370–3388. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00237. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jcim.9b00237. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00237.
Yaws, C. L. (2012). Yaws’ Critical Property Data for Chemical Engineers and Chemists.
Knovel.
Yildiz, Cagri Emre, Mustafa Aker, and Yusuf Yaslan (2021). “Next item prediction us-
ing neural networks with embedding initialized weights”. In: Next item prediction us-
ing neural networks with embedding initialized weights, pp. 338–342. DOI: 10.1109/
EUROCON52738.2021.9535591.
Ying, Rex et al. (2019). “GNNExplainer: Generating explanations for graph neural net-
works”. In: vol. 32. Cited by: 849.
Yuan, Hao et al. (2020). “XGNN: Towards Model-Level Explanations of Graph Neural Net-
works”. In: Cited by: 230; All Open Access, Bronze Open Access, Green Open Access,
pp. 430–438. DOI: 10.1145/3394486.3403085.
Zaharia, Matei et al. (2018). “MLflow: A Platform for Managing the Machine Learning
Lifecycle”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML). Software available from mlflow.org. URL: https://mlflow.org/.
66
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:77==
A
Appendix
Listing A.1: Configuration file for Ray Tune experiment setup
1 experiment_name: "Ray Molecular Property Prediction Training"
2 smiles: "SMILES"
3 target: "Const_Value"
# Energy # Const_Value
4 global_features: [] #['Temperature', 'Pressure', 'pH', 'Concentration']
5
6 # Change the data_files and data_labels to match the number of targets in the dataset
7 data_files: ["../data/Tc.csv"] # List of dataset paths
8 data_labels: ["Tc"]
# Corresponding labels for targets in datasets / Needs to be as many as there are
9
10 model_name: "AFP"
11 run_name: "Model Training"
12 model_path: "."
13 # allowed_atoms: ['H', 'He', 'Li', 'Be', 'B', 'C', 'N', 'O', 'F', 'Ne', 'Na', 'Mg', 'Al', 'Si', 'P', '
14 # atom_feature_list: ["chemprop_atom_features"]
15 # bond_feature_list: ["chemprop_bond_features"]
16 pip_requirements: "../requirements.txt"
17 split_type: "consecutive" #['consecutive', 'random', 'molecular weight', 'scaffold', 'stratified', 'bu
18 save_splits: True
19 seed : 42
20 # Ray tune will use these resources per trial
21 cpu: 1
22 gpu: 1
Here’s a brief example of how to use the setup function:
Listing A.2: MLflow Setup Function
1 def setup_mlflow(config):
2
mlflow.set_tracking_uri('http://localhost:5000')
3
mlflow.set_experiment(config['experiment_name'])
4
return mlflow.start_run(run_name=config['run_name'])
5
6 with setup_mlflow(config):
7
% implement training
Listing A.3: Ray Tune Setup Function
1 def hyperparameter_tuning(train_model_experiment , config, num_samples=10):
2
scheduler = ASHAScheduler(max_t=100, grace_period=10, reduction_factor=2)
3
4
analysis = tune.run(
5
tune.with_parameters(train_model_experiment),
6
metric="val_loss",
7
mode="min",
8
config=config,
9
num_samples=num_samples ,
10
scheduler=scheduler,
11
storage_path=config['storage_path'],
12
trial_dirname_creator=custom_trial_dirname_creator ,
13
)
14
15
print("Best hyperparameters found: ", analysis.best_config)
16
return analysis.best_config
17
18 search_space = search_space = {
19
'epochs': tune.choice([1000]),
20
'batch_size': tune.choice([None]),
21
'hidden_dim': tune.choice([32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024]),
22
'dropout': tune.uniform(0.0, 0.1),
23
'patience': tune.choice([50]),
24
'patience_scheduler': tune.choice([10]),
25
'learning_rate': tune.loguniform(1e-4, 1e-2),
67
==PAGE:78==
26
'weight_decay': tune.loguniform(1e-7, 1e-3),
27
'schedule_factor': tune.choice([0.8]),
28
'mlp_layers': tune.choice([2, 3, 4, 5]),
29
'num_layers_atom': tune.choice([2, 3, 4, 5]),
30
'num_layers_mol': tune.choice([2, 3, 4, 5]),
31 }
32
33 config = {**base_config , **search_space}
34
35 hyperparameter_tuning(train_model_experiment , config, num_samples=100)
Figure A.1: Metric comparison Pc
Figure A.2: Metric comparison Tc
68
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.3: Metric comparison Vc
Development of a Streamlined Modelling Platform for Chemical Property Prediction
69
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
http://www.kt.dtu.dk/
