==PAGE:1==
Consciousness in AI
Towards scientific ethics
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute, KU SUND
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Consciousness in AI
Towards scientific ethics
Master’s Thesis
November, 2024
By
Daniel Pedrosa Martin
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Salvador Dalí, Desintegración de la persistencia de la memoria, 1954
Published by:
DTU, Richard Petersens Plads, 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, and at the Department of Public
Health, at the University of Copenhagen, KU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology.
Daniel Pedrosa Martin ­ s213270
Signature
Date
ii
Consciousness in AI
1/dec/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a novel form of technology with controversial regulatory out­
looks. This project aims to establish an unbiased, fact­based ethical framework by ex­
ploring the possibility of consciousness in machine­based AI and inferring risks related
to the phenomenon. An extensive literature review process yielded three major theo­
ries of consciousness: integrated information theory (IIT), enactivism and Orchestrated­
Objective Reduction (Orch­OR). IIT provides a mechanistic and quantitative approach to
consciousness, which appears to correlate with emergent properties, potentially prob­
lematic in machine­based systems; enactivism refers to the process of autopoiesis as the
cause for value and norm acquisition in cognitive entities, which certain ANNs already
embody; and Orch­OR points towards quantum effects in brain microtubules underlying
human understanding. This project identified two risks (undesired emergence and ac­
quisition of values in machines) and proposes a mitigation strategy, the constrained­by­
construction approach, as an addition to the European Union AI Act regulatory scheme.
Consciousness in AI
iii
==PAGE:6==
A mi padre, por enseñarme la tabla periódica
iv
Consciousness in AI
==PAGE:7==
Table of contents
1. Introduction........................................................................................................................ 1
2. Literature review protocol................................................................................................. 3
3. Literature review of consciousness................................................................................. 7
3.1. The human nervous system........................................................................................7
3.2. Integrated information theory.....................................................................................11
3.3. Complexity and emergence.......................................................................................14
3.4. Orchestrated-Objective Reduction............................................................................ 16
3.5. Enactivism.................................................................................................................18
4. Literature review of AI..................................................................................................... 20
4.1. Regulatory affairs...................................................................................................... 22
4.2. Artificial neural networks........................................................................................... 32
5. Analysis and discussion................................................................................................. 35
5.1. Conscious, emergent AI............................................................................................36
5.2. Autopoietic AI............................................................................................................ 39
5.3. The constrained-by-construction approach...............................................................39
6. Conclusion........................................................................................................................41
==PAGE:8==
1.
Introduction
The human mind has captivated scholars and thinkers since the earliest writings were
produced by our species. Ancient Indian texts explain the connection of the self with the
totality of the universe, where the illusion of individuality is just, precisely, an illusion. The
Greeks soon caught up—Plato’s Allegory of the Cave studies the vulnerability of the mind to
bias, seeking a methodology to reach purity in its highest expression. Centuries of
Philosophy, Natural Science and Engineering later, humankind has come up with ChatGPT.
Far from primitive progress, artificial intelligence (AI) combines principles of Neuroscience
and Computer Engineering to replicate, or even enhance, human cognitive capabilities.
Current AI algorithms can detect certain human pathologies years before trained doctors
(Deepa et al., 2023), predict complex systems like the weather and climate (Pathak et al.,
2022; Rolnick et al., 2019) and even allow for automated justice (Rubim Borges Fortes,
2020). Revolutionary by “nature”, AI also entails lethal autonomous weapons (Wyatt, 2021),
fake propaganda (Goldstein et al., 2024), and discriminatory data analysis (Nivedhaa
Nagarajan, 2024). Not all of AI’s potentials are necessarily utopian.
There is an urgency to regulate the technology, but institutions face a number of
challenges in doing so: in the first place, tight local restriction will discourage developers to
invest in the region, moving financial and technical activity to unregulated territories; in the
second place, limiting development might hamper the discovery of unknown potentials; and
lastly, only global coordination will ensure the efficacy of regulatory labour. Despite the
difficulties, the European Union has laid down harmonised rules on AI for all its member
states (European Council, 2024) but, as we will argue further in the text, it may be
insufficient for the real prospects of the technology and its relationship with consciousness.
This Master’s thesis aims to provide a (bio)scientific background to the potential risks of
the development of AI in an attempt to reach ethical and regulatory consensus. We will first
review the mechanisms of consciousness in the human brain; afterwards, we will delve into
the information processing techniques in AI technologies, in particular artificial neural
networks (ANNs); and lastly, we will compare both mechanisms to infer similarities and risks
of unregulated development. This project is a combination of biological and technical
knowledge, typically expected of a graduate in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology (and
perhaps, too, of a philosopher).
In accordance with the paragraph above, this thesis adopts the following research questions:
a) What is consciousness?
b) Can AI be conscious?
c)
How can we develop a potentially conscious technology ethically?
To answer a, we will carry out a literature review of consciousness from biological,
philosophical and mechanistic perspectives. In the process, we will realise how discordantly
academia has been dealing with consciousness—there exists no consensus.
1
==PAGE:9==
To answer b, we will apply the most relevant, contemporary theories of consciousness to
the function and mechanism of AI, in particular ANNs.
To answer c, we will infer risks of AI being conscious, such as that of emergent properties or
acquired values and norms. We will also take a look at current AI regulations to check for
their adequacy to the risks we will cover.
Prior to the beginning of the text, the reader may find in the table below the list of
abbreviations used in it.
Table 1: Abbreviations used in the thesis and their full expression
Abbreviation
Full expression
ANN
Artificial neural network
AI
Artificial intelligence
EI
Effective information
MIP
Minimum information partition
IIT
Integrated information theory
Orch-OR
Orchestrated-Objective Reduction
2
==PAGE:10==
2.
Literature review protocol
DTUFindIt was employed in the literature search of all the fields of interest.
Table 2: Literature review protocol summary
Field of interest
Search term
Section of
review
Filters applied
Results
History of AI
(AI OR ML OR
"Artificial
Intelligence" OR
"Machine
Learning") AND
title:history
NA
Last 5 years,
sorted by
relevance
410
Metaphysics of AI
(AI OR “Artificial
Intelligence” OR
ML OR “Machine
Learning” OR DL
OR “Deep
Learning”) AND
("metaphysics" OR
"philosophy" OR
"theoretical
aspects" OR
"ontological" OR
"epistemological")
NA
Last 5 years,
sorted by
relevance
33730
Development of AI
("artificial
intelligence" OR
"AI" OR "machine
learning" OR
"neural networks"
OR "deep
learning") AND
("theoretical
development" OR
"theoretical
foundations" OR
"theoretical
review" OR
"theoretical
principles" OR "AI
theory" OR "AI
models") AND
("review" OR
"survey" OR
"overview")
4.2
Last 5 years,
sorted by
relevance
40518
3
==PAGE:11==
Complexity,
emergence and
self-organisation
("emergence" OR
"self-organisation"
OR
"self-assembly"
OR "complex
systems" OR
"emergent
behaviour" OR
"pattern formation"
OR "spontaneous
order") AND
("complexity
theory" OR
"nonlinear
dynamics" OR
"systems biology"
OR "evolutionary
processes" OR
"thermodynamics"
OR "collective
behavior" OR
"network theory")
3.3
Last 5 years,
sorted by
relevance
42968
Consciousness
("consciousness")
AND
(“neuroscience”
OR "metaphysics"
OR "philosophy"
OR "ontological"
OR
"epistemological")
3, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3,
3.4, 3.5
Last 5 years,
sorted by
relevance
32530
Second law of
Thermodynamics
("second law of
thermodynamics"
OR "entropy
increase" OR
"thermodynamic
irreversibility" OR
"heat transfer" OR
"energy
dissipation" OR
"Carnot cycle" OR
"thermal
equilibrium" OR
"entropy
production")
Appendix 1
Last 5 years,
sorted by
relevance
221042
Evolution
("Darwinian
evolution" OR
"natural selection"
OR "theory of
evolution" OR
"Darwinism") AND
("Boltzmann" OR
Appendix 1
Last 5 years,
sorted by
relevance
54
4
==PAGE:12==
"mechanistic
evolution" OR
"statistical
mechanics" OR
"entropy" OR
"thermodynamics"
OR "Boltzmann
entropy") AND
("evolutionary
theory" OR
"evolutionary
dynamics" OR
"biological
evolution" OR
"thermodynamic
principles in
evolution")
Assembly theory
("Assembly
Theory" OR
"molecular
assembly" OR
"compositional
complexity" OR
"molecular
complexity" OR
"synthetic
assembly" OR
"evolutionary
assembly") AND
("origin of life" OR
"complexity
theory" OR
"evolutionary
theory" OR
"information
theory" OR
"abiogenesis" OR
"chemical
evolution")
Appendix 1
Last 5 years,
sorted by
relevance
64
It should be noted that the concepts that are not reviewed in the main body of the text
(second law of Thermodynamics, evolution and assembly theory) were set aside in Appendix
1 to alleviate the theoretical complexity of the project.
Due to the vast amount of retrieved information and the limited scope of the project, a
maximum of 50 publications per search term was assessed.
The assessment of the potential contribution of the search hits was carried out in a two-step
process:
5
==PAGE:13==
a) A first-step exclusion, based on title and abstract. First-step included publications
were subject to further assessment.
b) A second-step exclusion, based on full-text documents. Second-step included
publications were employed in the elaboration of the text.
Excluded publications were discarded due to one or several of the following reasons:
a) Publication not related to the topic in question: literature yielded by searches but of
scope foreign to the intended concept.
b) Publication not related to state of the art (SOA): literature related to the topic but with
no substantial contribution to the status of current knowledge of it.
c)
Scope of study not relevant: literature related to the topic with either too narrow or too
broad research scope, thus irrelevant for the limited discussional frame of the thesis.
d) Duplication: literature that was retrieved on several occasions throughout the search
process.
The publications that passed the two-step assessment process were classified according to
their contribution to the text:
a) Foundational: substantial and basic contribution.
b) Discussional: supporting or argumentative contribution.
c)
Academic contextualisation: situational contribution to the SOA but no critical
information extracted.
Additional sources of literature were also contemplated: independent author retrieval and
supervisor contribution.
For a detailed profile of the literature selection process, please refer to Appendix 2.
Those sections in the literature review not contemplated in the initial literature search, in
particular those related to human nervous physiology and AI regulatory affairs, were
addressed by the consultation of human physiology textbooks and institutional regulatory
guidelines, respectively.
6
==PAGE:14==
3.
Literature review of consciousness
The study of consciousness has existed for thousands of years. Already around 375 B.C,
Plato introduced his Theory of Forms in the Allegory of the Cave (Plato, 375 C.E.): the
shaded shapes, metaphorically understood as impure concepts, to which the prisoners
would have access to, would be indirect and corrupted representations of the real Forms
from the World of Ideas. It would only be through intellectual enlightenment and reasoning
that the prisoners could gain access to the real Forms, which go beyond sensory
experience. Even though it was not mentioned explicitly, Plato’s Theory of Forms constitutes
one of the earliest explorations of the nature of consciousness in humans.
Ancient Indian philosophy brings an interesting perspective, too. Manuscripts from between
300 B.C.E. and 700 B.C, the Upanisads, highlighted the unified existence of the self (Atman)
and the universe (Brahman). Atman would then be the portion of Brahman that each human
embodies, which makes Hinduism a monist philosophical doctrine. Realising the unity
between Atman and Brahman is considered the highest form of knowledge, and it leads to
moksha, the liberation from the cycle of birth and death (samsara) (Sridhar, 2021).
While we recognise the relevance of ancient and spiritual approaches to consciousness,
this work aims to be scientific in accordance with DTU’s principles for good scientific
conduct. In consequence, our approach to consciousness will be empirical, with the
human nervous system as a starting point. After a brief discussion of neurological
physiology, we will delve into complex systems, which are those that present convoluted
relationships among their components, making them hard to model and compute precisely
and deterministically. Complexity in a system, as we will learn, can lead to the fascinating
phenomenon of emergence, which explains how reason and thought can arise from
individual neurons, for example. Afterwards, we will present three of the most acclaimed
theories of consciousness today: integrated information theory (IIT), Orchestrated-Objective
Reduction (Orch-OR) and enactivism.
3.1. The human nervous system
The elementary unit of the human nervous system is a neuron: a specialised cell that can
transmit a nervous signal rapidly and efficiently (Hall et al., 2021).
A neuron is structured in the following parts:
a) Dendrites. Projections of the cell body that receive signals from other neighbouring
neurons.
b) Cell body. Region of the neuron that contains the nucleus and other essential
organelles.
c)
Axon hillock. Connection of the cell body with the axon. This is where the action
potential is generated.
7
==PAGE:15==
d) Axon. Long extension of the cell that specialises in signal transmission towards the
adjacent, postsynaptic cell. The axon usually branches out into more projections, at
the end of which there is a bulb-shaped structure that can release neurotransmitters
or ions, capable of triggering a response in the postsynaptic cell.
e) Synapse. The spatial region between the axon of the presynaptic cell and the
dendrite of the postsynaptic one. This is where the chemical or electrical connection
takes place.
The structure of a neuron is maintained by a molecular scaffold formally called the
cytoskeleton. A neural cytoskeleton is composed of three main components:
Figure 1: a) Representation of the cytological structure of a neuron; b) fluorescence micrography of an
axon terminal; c) representation of the cytoskeletal structure of a neuron; e) microtubule; f) intermediate
filaments; g) actin (red) and troponin (green). Image from (Nature Education, 2014)
Microtubules are straw-like structures that facilitate the transport of material between the
body of the cell and the axon terminals. They consist of 13 protofilaments of tubulin dimers
that assemble in a process called rescue, and disassemble in a process called catastrophe.
8
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2: Molecular biology of microtubules. Image from (Bowne‐Anderson et al., 2013)
Intermediate filaments usually work collectively with microtubules and their function is
rather structural than dynamic as they are more rigid. In a neural axon, they support the
microtubules by forming a stable cytoskeletal matrix.
Actin is usually found below the membrane cortex to give shape to specialised regions of
cells, such as microvilli in the gastrointestinal tract, the contractile ring in cell division and
axon terminals in neurons, as well as in skeletal muscle to promote contraction.
Figure 3: Different locations of actin in specialised cells. Image from (Nature Education, 2014)
For a nervous signal to be transmitted from the presynaptic cell (A) to the postsynaptic one
(B), B needs to receive the signal in its dendrites, which needs to travel through the cell body
to the axon hillock. If the signal at this point is strong enough, the nerve impulse will continue
its transmission along the axon to the next synapse.
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 4: Representation of the transmission of the nervous impulse across two neurons. Image
produced by the author
The cell membrane separates the inside of the neuron from the outside. When a neuron is
resting, the outside has a more positive charge than the inside—we say the membrane has
a resting potential (- 70 mV, typically). When a nerve impulse occurs, this voltage is altered:
positive ions (mainly sodium, Na+) flow through membrane channels into the cytoplasm,
making the inside more positive than the outside in a process called depolarisation.
Figure 5: Travel of the action potential throughout the axon
For a neuron to trigger depolarisation, the input received from the dendrites needs to be
strong enough to flow through the cell body and get to the axon hillock. Once there, it should
be higher than—55 mV for depolarisation to cascade in the axon.
10
==PAGE:18==
Figure 6: Voltage progression of an action potential
After the excitatory impulse, the membrane shall go back to its previous voltage by a
process called repolarisation.
3.2. Integrated information theory
The most quantitative theory of consciousness to this date was proposed by Giulio Tononi in
2004. IIT explains consciousness as the degree of information integration a system can
exhibit (Oizumi et al., 2014; Tononi, 2012, 2015; Tononi et al., 2016) and it is perfectly
suitable to the logic of the human nervous system.
The concept of information integration relates to how correlated the components of a system
are. Imagine two roads intersecting: when the traffic lights of road A are green, those of road
B should be red and the other way around—the state of component A influences the
state of component B. In this case, IIT posits that the information of each component is
integrated in the system.
In nature, there exist systems with more than two components which also exhibit information
integration. One of the most complex examples we have documented is the human brain—a
collection of 80 billion components (neurons) functioning in coordination to produce human
consciousness.
IIT measures the degree of consciousness of a system by computing
, which consists of
ϕ
the following steps:
11
==PAGE:19==
A. Identify a causal system
A causal system is the logical architecture any conscious entity should be based on in IIT’s
framework. This englobes identifying the following:
-
Components of the system. For a system with n basic constituents, these are given
by:
𝐶1,  𝐶2,  ...,  𝐶𝑛
-
Microstates. The mode in which a component exists at a given time is a
microstate—for instance, on or off modes of a binary component. The collection of all
microstates of an entire system at a given time is a macrostate. For a system with n
components, the macrostate at time t can be represented as:
𝑆(𝑡) =  (𝐶1(𝑡),  𝐶2(𝑡),  ...,  𝐶𝑛(𝑡))
-
Causal relationships. In a conscious system, the components influence each other
to a certain extent. The so-called causal relationships define how a microstate at time
t can affect other microstates at time t + 1. The magnitude of a causal relationship is
given by the causal strength
, representing how strongly
influences
.
𝑤𝑖𝑗
𝐶𝑖
𝐶𝑗
-
A directed graph representation. Each node corresponds to a component of the
system; each directed edge represents the causal relationship between two nodes;
and each edge weight represents the strength of the causal relationship.
B. Compute cause and effect repertoires
This step will shed light on the probability distribution of past and future macrostates to the
current one we are analysing. In other words, we will examine how likely it is for each
possible past or future macrostate to have taken place/take place given the current one in
the system.
Cause repertoire
Given the current macrostate of the system, S, we will identify all possible past states (P1,
P2, … Pn) that could have caused S.
For each possible past state Pi, we compute how likely it is for it to lead to S:
𝑃(𝑆|𝑃𝑖)
Using Bayes’ theorem and the prior probabilities,
, of each cause state, we compute the
𝑃(𝑃𝑖)
posterior probability:
𝑃(𝑃𝑖|𝑆) =
𝑃(𝑆|𝑃𝑖)·𝑃(𝑃𝑖)
𝑃(𝑆)
Effect repertoire
12
==PAGE:20==
The same procedure applies, but for all future states (
,
, …,
) instead.
𝐹1 𝐹2
𝐹𝑛
The likelihood would look like:
𝑃(𝑆|𝐹𝑖)
And the posterior:
𝑃(𝐹𝑖|𝑆) =
𝑃(𝑆|𝐹𝑖)·𝑃(𝐹𝑖)
𝑃(𝑆)
C. Calculate effective information
The effective information (EI) measures how deterministic a system is: how much the current
state of a system reduces uncertainty about the cause (past) or effect (future) states.
EI makes use of mutual information, a value in probability theory that quantifies the mutual
dependence between two random variables. Therefore:
𝐸𝐼 (𝑐𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒) = 𝐼(𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒; 𝑃𝑎𝑠𝑡 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒)
𝐸𝐼 (𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡) = 𝐼(𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒; 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒)
Where:
𝐼(𝑋; 𝑌) =  
𝑥ϵ𝑋
∑
𝑦ϵ𝑌
∑𝑃(𝑥,  𝑦) · 𝑙𝑜𝑔 
𝑃(𝑥, 𝑦)
𝑃(𝑥)·𝑃(𝑦)  
And eventually:
𝐸𝐼 = 𝐸𝐼(𝑐𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒) + 𝐸𝐼(𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡)
2
D. Partition the network
Cut connections between different parts of the system to check how much the system’s
ability to integrate information is affected. For algebraic simplicity, we will only deal with
cases of bipartitions in which only one split is done on the system.
The goal of this step is to find the minimum information partition (MIP)—the split that causes
the least loss of integrated information compared to the whole system.
𝑝
𝑀𝐼𝑃= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑝𝑚𝑖𝑛( 𝐸𝐼(𝑐𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒) + 𝐸𝐼(𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡)
2·𝑁𝑝
)
Where
is the partition with the least information loss; and
is the number of parts of
𝑝
𝑀𝐼𝑃
𝑁𝑝
the partition.
Once
is elucidated, the EI values for both its parts are calculated as in step 3.
𝑝
𝑀𝐼𝑃
E. Compute integrated information
13
==PAGE:21==
We can finally compute the degree of integrated information, or consciousness, of our
system:
ϕ = 𝐸𝐼(𝑤ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑒)—𝐸𝐼(𝑀𝐼𝑃)
The logical structure on which IIT operates was designed to accommodate the human
nervous system. It reached, however, a considerable level of abstraction that allows for its
application on other systems with mechanistic similarities. In chapter 5. Analysis and
discussion, we will aim to export the framework to deep learning algorithms to show they can
also exhibit a non-zero value of
—in other words, that they can be conscious according to
ϕ
IIT.
3.3. Complexity and emergence
Complex systems surround human beings: the ecology of a forest, the atmosphere and even
one’s own body are just a few examples. But they also transcend nature, especially in a
globalised society: political systems, factories and the Internet are as well cases of complex
systems.
Despite the easy intuition of them, it is convenient, for conceptual and theoretical alignment,
to provide some definitions. Please note that the upcoming explanations were inspired by a
number of publications from the literature search (Kengne, 2019; Macau, 2019; Medina,
2021; Tranquillo, 2019).
In the first place, a system is a collection of entities that interact or connect. By defining a
system, the universe is divided into two parts: inside and outside of it. Nevertheless, no real
system exists in complete isolation from the universe (in which case it would be called a
closed system), so the idea of these is merely theoretical. Alternatively, open systems are
permeable to matter, energy and/or information.
The way the parts of a system correlate is called structure and it can be visualised by means
of networks. In Systems Biology, particularly in omics, this is a common approach that shows
the highly interconnected, or complex, structure of crowded biological systems (Herring,
2019; Hütt, 2019).
An important thing to note is that complexity does not imply structural disorder. In fact,
most complex systems in nature show a high degree of organisation (Kauffman, 2011)
though often invisible to the bare human eye. Metabolic networks, for instance, are intricate
systems of physiological regulation that result in the energetic existence of an organism:
thousands of hormonal, enzymatic and genetic regulatory checkpoints are triggered when a
human digests food, but, despite the complexity, the system manages to integrate the
nutrients elegantly (J. E. Hall et al., 2021, chapters 62-71)—usually (Heindel et al., 2017).
The spontaneous assembly of a complex system, without external guidance or intervention,
is called self-organisation.
However, knowing the individual behaviour of components in a complex system is
often not enough to explain its behaviour. A cell biologist might recognise the
14
==PAGE:22==
microscopic features of brain cells in depth, but this will not suffice to explain cognition—an
individual neuron can not produce thought. Similarly, an individual water molecule can not
produce wetness, an individual ant can not produce colony sustainability and an individual
person can not produce social hierarchies. All of these are properties that emerge when the
components of a system function collectively, which is explained by the principle of
computational irreducibility (Zwirn, 2013). Emergent properties, as they are called, are often
defined by a macroscopic existence and a microscopic absence—classically, the whole is
more than the sum of its parts.
Most of the studies on emergence are qualitative and little quantitation is found in literature
(Broad, 2014; Hoel et al., 2013). Some of the authors of IIT, however, bring in an interesting
proposal: to quantify integrated information at the micro-level versus the macro-level (Hoel et
al., 2016). According to the authors, if the latter is greater than the former, emergence is said
to have occurred in the system.
is computed orthodoxically as shown in section 3.1.2.
, on the other hand,
ϕ𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
requires the identification of irreducible macroscopic units that maximise the parameter. Let
us go through the logic:
A. Coarse-grain
microcomponents
into
macrocomponents.
This
is
done
by
grouping the different microcomponents into subunits or macrocomponents. All the
possible combinations should be explored algorithmically.
Figure 7: a, b, c and d: microscopic elements of a system; α and β: macroscopic subunits; dotted arrow:
causal relationships to be accounted for in the computation of
; bold arrow: causal relationships to
ϕ𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜
be accounted for in the computation of
. Image produced by the author
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
B. Map microstates,
, to macrostates,
, such that:
. This step is
𝑆𝑚
𝑆𝑀
𝕄 : 𝑆𝑚 →𝑆𝑀 
aimed at defining the state of each subunit beyond individual microstates. For
example, in a system of four binary elements (a, b, c and d) and two subunits (α,
comprising a and b; and β, comprising c and d), one can define the macrostate of
15
==PAGE:23==
each subunit in function of its elements, such that microstates 00, 01, 10 map to
macrostate 0, and microstates 11 map to 1.
Figure 8: Definition of macrostates in accordance with microstates. Black: off; green: on—following this
definition, only the bottom-left macrocomponent is on. Image produced by the author
C. Compute
. Per each combination of subunits,
should be computed as
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
ϕ
defined in 3.1.2, treating subunits as legitimate components.
D. Find
. The maximum value of
could be found in either microscopic or
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑥
ϕ
macroscopic dimensions. If
is found in the latter, for the very system, the whole
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑥
would be more than the sum of its parts—or, as the authors mention, the macro
beats the micro—and emergence is said to have occurred.
3.4. Orchestrated-Objective Reduction
Even though the whole is more than the sum of its parts, certain properties of the smallest
particles we know—the quantum ones—have implications in the macroscopic behaviour of
certain systems. And the human brain seems to be one of these.
Quantum mechanics is the realm of Physics that deals with the properties of quantum
particles. Such entities are inherently stochastic, meaning that we can not predict outcomes,
but probabilities of their behaviour1 (Einstein et al., 1935; Verma et al., 2023). Let us illustrate
this with an example.
In classical mechanics, it is possible to know the exact position of a classical system—say, a
basketball. When energy (in the form of force) is applied on the ball, it will travel a certain
trajectory and end at a certain position in space. These certainties can be calculated by the
laws of classical mechanics, but this is not the case for quantum systems.
1 Note that the epistemology of quantum measurements is, still today, controversial in Science
(Myrvold, 2022).
16
==PAGE:24==
Now imagine the ball becomes an electron. When energy is applied to it, no law has been
found that describes its certain trajectory or position, so quantum physicists talk about
probable spaces where the electron can be contained instead—the so-called orbitals. No
defined position can be predicted of a quantum particle—at least, until it is measured.
It turns out that quantum systems are, literally, random in essence: they can pass through
physical barriers (tunnelling), alternate between wave and particle forms (duality) and even
link and coordinate with quantum particles metres apart (entanglement—Einstein’s spooky
action at a distance), among many other exciting properties that regular basketballs can only
dream of.
A few paragraphs back we pointed out that quantum particles are the building blocks of
(mostly) everything in the universe, so one may wonder how the randomness of the
quantum level becomes certainty when assembled into classical systems2. This is
explained by the phenomenon of decoherence: when a quantum system interacts with its
environment, it loses its quantum effects to behave in classical terms. In other words, the
randomness turns into predictability.
Roger Penrose proposed that consciousness is due to the maintenance of quantum
coherence in the human brain, which was initially controversial considering how much of a
crowded and decoherence-prone environment a human brain can be. The author’s main
argument is that human understanding is non-computable3, so something inside the human
brain needs to perform non-computably—through quantum mechanics (Penrose, 1986).
Together with Stuart Hameroff, Penrose proposed that quantum effects are present in the
microtubules of brain cells in a theory called Orch-OR (Penrose, 1995). As a matter of
fact, evidence is growing that microtubules maintain quantum coherence (Babcock et al.,
2024; Sahu et al., 2013; Sahu et al., 2013), pointing towards a quantum, stochastic nature of
human consciousness.
Furthermore, in ‘The primacy of doubt’, Tim Palmer states that the energetic requirement of
the human brain is about 20 W chronically. He also supports that human cognitive thinking
(decision making) can be described in a binary fashion: systems 1 and 2, as described by
Daniel Kahneman in ‘Thinking: Fast and Slow’ (Kahneman, 2013). Palmer points out the
need for quantum effects for system 1 to happen under such a tight energetic constraint
(Palmer, 2022).
According to Palmer, system 1 is a fast and chaotic mechanism by which the electrical brain
power is spread throughout a wide selection of neurons, and, in short, it is associated with
relaxation and creativity. System 2, on the contrary, is characterised by a concentration of
the electrical signal in a reduced number of neurons, and it is believed to be employed when
careful and analytical decision-making takes place.
3 Penrose’s idea of non-computability stems from the human capacity to make intuitive judgements
and understand truths holistically without following a logical step-by-step path, which a computer is
not capable of performing.
2 Considering the literary journey we have covered so far, the idea of emergence might seem
appealing, but this is not the case (officially).
17
==PAGE:25==
System 1 is extremely energetically efficient as the brain keeps on making numerous
decisions—often unawarely—under the same power. It implies a more relaxed state of mind:
as Kahneman described, many great creative discoveries in human history were reported to
arise in situations of such mental ease.
The brain activity in system 1 is noisy and unpredictable. The source of this stochasticity is
believed to be quantum effects inside the neurons. Should Palmer’s statement be right, the
modus operandis of human cognition would require quantum stochasticity.
Most AI systems developed today are based on digital computers which operate in classical
terms: the stochasticity in these systems is pseudorandom, as they generate deterministic
sequences of numbers starting from a given seed. The output might appear random, but
should the seed be the same, the result will be identical.
Both Orch-OR and Palmer’s notes then bring an interesting perspective with regards to
conscious AI—our second research question. AI algorithms which are based on digital
hardware would not be considered conscious under this framework as they would not have
the quantum stochasticity required for it. Nevertheless, quantum computers and quantum
field-effect transistors might challenge our understanding of the human psyche from an
existential position—can it be reproduced outside the seemingly quantum human brain, or
does it require the molecular structure of microtubules to take place?
3.5. Enactivism
Enactivism is a philosophical current rooted in the idea of cognitive embodiment. Although a
variety of ramifications exist, the core principle of enactivism is the dynamic interaction
between an organism and its environment (Varela et al., 1993).
In The Embodied Mind, Rosch, Thompson and Varela refer to cognition as the interaction(s)
an organism carries out with its environment to navigate and understand it. The so-called
cognisers,
the
organisms
embodying
the
phenomenon,
would
actively
shape
the
environment and vice versa when interacting with it.
Several branches have emerged from the original theory which emphasise and reinterpret
different aspects of it. Autopoietic enactivism is of special interest to our scope of study: it
emphasises an organism’s urge to maintain and reproduce itself as its driving force to
interact with the environment (Maturana & Varela, 1980; Pace Giannotta, 2021; Varela et
al., 1993). For example: a human being can maintain themself if they gather enough
nutrients from the environment—consequently, the human’s actions in the environment will
be directed towards nutrition.
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 9: Simplified flowchart of the autopoietic implications according to enactivism. Image produced
by the author
In the autopoietic phenomenon, an organism creates goals and norms by which its actions
will operate. For the nutritional case, the goal (nourishment) directs the actions (fruit
gathering, hunting, farming, earning an income to buy food) of the human being.
Autopoietic enactivism offers an interesting lens to look at AI through. Self-replicating and
self-maintaining AI models have already been reported (Shvartzman & Ram, 2024;
Silver et al., 2016), which corresponds with the definition of autopoiesis in the enactivist
approach, opening the door to technological goals and norms being acquired by
machines and decoupled from the human ones. If we create a technology capable of a)
making sense of its environment by perceiving it (cognition); and b) self-maintenance and
self-replication (autopoiesis), can we be sure this particular AI model’s actions will be
directed towards human wellbeing?
19
==PAGE:27==
4.
Literature review of AI
Given the ethical inclination of this work, as well as the disparity of interpretations of the
concept AI in literature, we will study the definitions of the term provided by the most
influential regulatory institutions today. In total, six definitions from eight international
authorities were retrieved (Chinese authorities, 2023; Danish Ministry of Finance, 2019;
Digitaliseringsstyrelsen, 2024; European Council, 2024; G7, 2023, 2023; OECD, 2019; The
White House, 2023; United Nations, 2024):
Table 3: Diverse definitions of AI adopted by regulatory or institutional authorities
Institution
Document
AI (system) definition
European Union
(EU)
Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the
European Parliament and of the Council
(EU AI Act)
A key characteristic of AI
systems is their capability to
infer. This capability to infer
refers to the process of
obtaining the outputs, such
as predictions, content,
recommendations, or
decisions, which can
influence physical and
virtual environments, and to
a capability of AI systems to
derive models or algorithms,
or both, from inputs or data.
The techniques that enable
inference while building an
AI system include machine
learning approaches that
learn from data how to
achieve certain objectives,
and logic- and
knowledge-based
approaches that infer from
encoded knowledge or
symbolic representation of
the task to be solved. The
capacity of an AI system to
infer transcends basic data
processing by enabling
learning, reasoning or
modelling.
United Nations
(UN)
Governing AI for Humanity Report
Use of OECD’s definition:
An AI system is a
machine-based system that,
for explicit or implicit
objectives, infers, from the
input it receives, how to
generate outputs such as
predictions, content,
20
==PAGE:28==
recommendations, or
decisions that can influence
physical or virtual
environments. Different AI
systems vary in their levels
of autonomy and
adaptiveness after
deployment.
G7
Hiroshima Process International
Guiding Principles for Organizations
Developing Advanced AI Systems
No definition provided
Organisation for
Economic
Co-operation
and
Development
(OECD)
Recommendation of the Council on
Artificial Intelligence
An AI system is a
machine-based system that,
for explicit or implicit
objectives, infers, from the
input it receives, how to
generate outputs such as
predictions, content,
recommendations, or
decisions that can influence
physical or virtual
environments. Different AI
systems vary in their levels
of autonomy and
adaptiveness after
deployment.
The US White
House
Executive Order on the Safe, Secure
and Trustworthy Development and Use
of Artificial Intelligence
A machine-based system
that can, for a given set of
human-defined objectives,
make predictions,
recommendations, or
decisions influencing real or
virtual environments.
Artificial intelligence
systems use machine- and
human-based inputs to
perceive real and virtual
environments; abstract such
perceptions into models
through analysis in an
automated manner; and use
model inference to formulate
options for information or
action.
Danish Ministry
of Finance and
Ministry of
Industry,
Business and
Financial Affairs
Danish National Strategy for Artificial
Intelligence
Systems based on
algorithms (mathematical
formulae) that, by analysing
and identifying patterns in
data, can identify the most
appropriate solution. The
21
==PAGE:29==
vast majority of these
systems perform specific
tasks in limited areas, e.g.
control, prediction and
guidance. The technology
can be designed to adapt its
behaviour by observing how
the environment is
influenced by previous
actions.
Danish Agency
for Digital
Government
Guide for companies on the responsible
use for generative artificial intelligence
(in Danish)
Simulation of human
intelligence in computers
and other machines,
intended to develop systems
and technologies that can
perform tasks that otherwise
require human intelligence.
Chinese
authorities
Interim Measures for the Management
of Generative Artificial Intelligence
Services
(Of generative AI) models
and relevant technologies
that have the ability to
generate content such as
texts, images, audio, or
video.
In order to minimise disparity, we will use a natural language model (GPT-4o) to produce a
harmonised definition combining all the interpretations above with the following prompt: Unify
these definitions of AI systems into a coherent definition. The result is as follows:
An AI system is a machine-based system designed to achieve explicit or implicit
human-deﬁned objectives by processing inputs and generating outputs such as predictions,
recommendations, decisions, or content that can inﬂuence physical or virtual environments.
These
systems
leverage various techniques, including machine learning, logic-based
approaches, and knowledge-based methods, to infer patterns from data or encoded
knowledge. AI systems can learn, reason, and model information autonomously to adapt their
behaviour over time. While most AI systems are specialised for speciﬁc tasks within limited
domains, some advanced models, particularly generative AI, can create content like text,
images, audio, or video.
Which becomes the adopted deﬁnition of AI in this text.
4.1. Regulatory affairs
There currently exist numerous guidelines but only a few legislations are in place.
Institutionally, the United States is of special interest given the high government investment
(328 thousand US dollars in the past five years (AIPRM, 2024)) and lack of solid legislative
regulation. Even though there exists an Executive Order issued by the Biden Administration
with directives for different stakeholders (see table X), its prospects are uncertain with the
22
==PAGE:30==
upcoming governmental shift. In the 2024 Republican Party Platform, the incoming leader
stated his will to “repeal Joe Biden’s dangerous Executive Order that hinders AI innovation,
and imposes Radical Leftwing ideas on the development of this technology” (Republican
Party Platforms, 2024).
An overview of the most relevant ethical and regulatory guidelines and legislations can be
consulted
below
(Chinese
authorities,
2023;
Danish
Ministry
of
Finance,
2019;
Digitaliseringsstyrelsen, 2024; European Council, 2024; G7, 2023, 2023; OECD, 2019; The
White House, 2023; United Nations, 2024).
23
==PAGE:31==
Table 4: Summary of the content and implications of the selected legislations and/or guidelines regarding the use and/or development of AI
Document
Issuing
entity
Effective date
Scope
Highlights
Obligations and
responsibilities
EU AI Act
European
Commission
Different dates
according to
classification:
2/February/2025:
unacceptable risk
AI regulations.
2/August/2025:
providers of
general purpose
AI models.
2/February/2026:
post-market
monitoring.
2/August/2026:
high-risk AI
regulations.
2/August/2027:
high-risk AI (as a
safety
component)
regulations.
To establish
quality standards
and obligations
for stakeholders
within the EU in
relation to AI
systems.
First comprehensive AI
regulation in the world.
Classification criteria of AI
systems based on safety
risks/potential violation of EU
fundamental rights and values.
Prohibition of
development and
deployment of
unacceptable-risk
systems (with specific
exceptions).
High-risk systems to run
a conformity assessment
procedure prior to
marketing and use in the
EU.
Limited risk systems to
specify the involvement of
AI in the procedure to the
user.
Governing AI for
Humanity Report
United
Nations (UN)
December 2023
To address the
main AI
governance gaps
(representation,
coordination and
implementation).
Extensive consultations were
made to create the document.
Seven recommendations are
drawn up:
1. An international scientific
panel of AI. By providing
impartial knowledge, this
Recommendation-based
report—no obligations
imposed, but with effects
within the institution.
24
==PAGE:32==
Document
Issuing
entity
Effective date
Scope
Highlights
Obligations and
responsibilities
institution would be a global
authority regarding risks and
potentials of the technology.
2. A policy dialogue on AI
governance. Intergovernmental
and multi-stakeholder
contribution to promote
understanding of AI’s potentials
and sharing issues and
challenges.
3. An AI standards exchange. To
establish a common ground of
definitions and measurements to
evaluate AI systems.
4. An AI capacity development
network. UN-affiliated centres
would share expertise, guidance
and training data to key actors,
with a focus on Global South
countries.
5. A global fund for AI. Aimed at
facilitating access to AI to
developing countries.
6. A global AI data framework. To
establish principles regarding AI
training data governance in
accordance with international
agreements on human rights,
intellectual property and
sustainability.
7. An AI office within the UN
25
==PAGE:33==
Document
Issuing
entity
Effective date
Scope
Highlights
Obligations and
responsibilities
Secretariat. To coordinate the
implementation of the
recommendations and ensure a
coherent approach to AI in the
UN.
Hiroshima Process
International Guiding
Principles for
Organizations
Developing
Advanced AI
Systems
G7
Released
30/October/2023
Promotion of
safe, secure and
trustworthy AI
worldwide and
guidance for
developers and
users of
advanced AI
systems.
A series of principles were
established:
1. Pre- and post-development
and marketing vigilance to
identify, evaluate and mitigate
risks.
2. Monitoring of
vulnerabilities, incidents,
emerging risks and misuse
patterns after deployment.
3. Public report of advanced AI
systems’ capabilities, limitations
and domains of appropriate and
inappropriate use.
4. Responsible information
sharing and reporting of
incidents. This includes
evaluation reports, intended and
unintended capabilities, etc.
5. Development, implementation
and disclosure of AI governance
and risk management policies.
6. Robust physical security and
cybersecurity.
7. Reliable content
Guideline—no obligations
imposed
26
==PAGE:34==
Document
Issuing
entity
Effective date
Scope
Highlights
Obligations and
responsibilities
authentication and provenance
mechanisms, such as
watermarking, to enable users to
identify AI-generated content.
8. Research focused on the
mitigation of societal, safety and
security risks.
9. Promotion of research within
the world’s greatest challenges,
such as the climate crisis, global
health and education.
10. International technical
standards.
11. Data input measures and
protections for personal data and
intellectual property.
Recommendation of
the Council on
Artificial Intelligence
OECD
Adopted
22/May/2019
A human-centric
approach to
trustworthy AI,
that promotes
research,
innovation, and
applies to all
stakeholders.
The document focuses on
establishing principles for
responsible stewardship of
trustworthy AI (inclusive growth,
sustainable development and
well-being; human-centred
values and fairness;
transparency and explainability;
robustness, security and safety;
and accountability)
and facilitating policy
recommendations for national
and international cooperation for
trustworthy AI (investing in AI
Recommendation—no
obligations imposed
27
==PAGE:35==
Document
Issuing
entity
Effective date
Scope
Highlights
Obligations and
responsibilities
research and development; ii)
fostering a digital ecosystem for
AI; iii) shaping an enabling policy
environment for AI; iv) building
human capacity and preparing
for labour market transformation;
and v) international co-operation
for trustworthy AI).
Executive Order on
the Safe, Secure and
Trustworthy
Development and
Use of Artificial
Intelligence
The US
White House
30/October/2023
National
management of
AI and promotion
of innovation,
safety, privacy,
equity and
domestic and
international
collaboration.
The Executive Order contains a
number of directives to federal
agencies, private companies and
other stakeholders. Some of
these are:
Safety and Security Directives;
Civil Rights and Anti-Bias
Directives;
Privacy and Data-Protection
Directives;
and Research and Innovation
Directives.
1. Risk management and
reporting. Applicable to AI
developers.
2. Testing and evaluation.
Applicable to The
National Institute of
Standards and
Technology (creation of
guidelines); and high-risk
AI developers (quality
evaluation prior to
deployment).
3. Civil rights and bias
mitigation.
4. Data privacy and
protection.
5. Workforce and
economic deployment.
28
==PAGE:36==
Document
Issuing
entity
Effective date
Scope
Highlights
Obligations and
responsibilities
Danish National
Strategy for Artificial
Intelligence
Danish
Ministry of
Finance and
Ministry of
Industry,
Business and
Financial
Affairs
March 2019
Danish
leadership in the
responsible
development and
use of AI.
The strategy has several focus
areas:
1. Responsible foundation for
AI. The goal is to become an
influential actor, both
domestically and internationally,
regarding ethical and responsible
AI, promoting progress whilst
respecting individuals and
institutions.
2. More and better data. There is
a need to favour the
development of Danish-based AI
systems due to the
unattractiveness for developers
to use small languages.
3. Strong competences and new
knowledge. The strategy
mentions a shortage of IT
specialists, in particular of AI, in
Danish businesses. Denmark is
to intensify AI training and
research.
4. Investment in AI. Denmark
lacks behind in terms of
investment in AI. Only a few
private and public entities had
strategic priorities for AI at the
time of the document.
The strategy has the following
priority areas: healthcare, energy
Strategic national
roadmap—no obligations
imposed
29
==PAGE:37==
Document
Issuing
entity
Effective date
Scope
Highlights
Obligations and
responsibilities
and utilities, agriculture and
transport.
Guide for companies
on the responsible
use for generative
artificial intelligence
(in Danish)
Danish
Agency for
Digital
Government
Released
11/March/2024
and continuously
updated. No
effective date as
no obligations
are imposed.
Responsible use
of generative AI
by companies in
Denmark.
The guide suggests a three-step
process:
1. Definition of company’s
approach to generative AI.
Identifying needs and scope of
the technology in the project
and/or company.
2. Creation of internal usage and
definition guidelines. These
would typically involve risk
identification protocols, quality
assurance and legal and
regulatory compliance,
considering factors like personal
data protection, confidential
information protection and
intellectual property rights.
3. Creation of an organisational
framework and strategy.
Delegation of roles and
responsibilities in the
organisation to promote a
responsible use of AI.
Guidelines—no
obligations imposed
Interim Measures for
the Management of
Generative Artificial
Intelligence Services
Chinese
authorities
15/August/2023
Management of
providers of
generative AI
services to the
public in China.
Focus on healthy technological
development, national security
and rights of citizens.
1. Lawful use.
Compliance with legal
frameworks in the
processing of data.
2. Data labelling. To
30
==PAGE:38==
Document
Issuing
entity
Effective date
Scope
Highlights
Obligations and
responsibilities
promote accuracy and
appropriateness of labels
assigned to data, and to
ensure alignment with
official values, the data
labelling procedure
should be oversighted by
humans.
3. Data training.
Legitimate sourcing of
training data, respecting
intellectual property rights
and personal information.
4. Content moderation.
Illegal content removal,
model optimisation and
reporting to authorities.
5. Reporting mechanism.
Providers of generative AI
systems should make
available a mechanism to
provide complaints or
reports from the public to
consider in the
improvement and
optimisation of the
system.
31
==PAGE:39==
4.2. Artificial neural networks
An ANN is a machine learning algorithm inspired by the human nervous system. ANNs
consist of layers of mathematical functions that connect in a certain logic to process
information (Richie, 2024; Saha et al., 2023).
The ultimate goal of an ANN is to produce an output, based on which a decision can be
made. For example, imagine the decision of whether to adopt a cat (1) or not (0) The input to
our ANN could be the answers to the following three questions:
a)
: do I like cats? (Yes: 1; no: 0)
𝑥1
b)
: am I allergic to cats? (Yes: 0; no: 1)
𝑥2
c)
: can I afford a cat? (Yes: 1; no: 0)
𝑥3
Let us assume the following variables:
𝑥1 = 1;  𝑥2 = 0;  𝑥3 = 1
The next thing to do is to assign weights to each of these answers. Weights measure the
importance of a certain variable—you might be allergic to cats but willing to take
antihistamines, so question b does not really weigh as much.
Let us assume the following weights for each of the variables:
𝑤1 = 5;  𝑤2 = 2;  𝑤3 = 4
Next up, we need a mathematical function that combines the answers (or variables) with the
importance (or weights) of each—the summed activation:
;
𝑓(𝑥) =  𝑥1𝑤1 + 𝑥2𝑤2 + 𝑥3𝑤3 + 𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠
Note that a bias component is added to establish a threshold value. In our example, this
could mean a positive or negative inclination towards pet adoption. Assuming bias =—5, our
case would look like:
;
𝑓(𝑥) =  (1·5) + (0·2) + (1·4) −5 = 3
The result of the summed activation is then fed to the activation function, which will
determine the eventual output of the node. Several activation functions exist (e.g., ReLU,
Tanh, sigmoid), but let us pick a simple, binary one for the sake of simplicity:
if
;
if
(activation function)
𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡= 1
𝑓(𝑥) >  0 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡= 0
𝑓(𝑥) < 0
In our example:
32
==PAGE:40==
adopt a cat
𝑓(𝑥) = 3 >  0  ⇒  𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡= 1 ⇒
As we can see, the right decision to make in this example is to adopt a feline—as per usual.
ANNs usually consist of more than one node, enabling them to process information much
more complex than pet adoption prospects. Often, ANNs contain several nodes structured in
the following layers: input, hidden and output.
Figure 10: Representation of input, hidden and output layers in an ANN. Image produced by the author
Input layer. The number of nodes usually depends on the amount of features of the data to
analyse.
Hidden layer. No strict rule regarding the number of hidden layers and/or nodes in them. It
is common practice to use layers with 2/3 nodes of the input layer, and up to twice as many
as the output one. Tuning the number of layers and size of these is usual, based on
performance.
Output layer. Depending on the task, there will be one (for regression problems or binary
classification
with
sigmoid
function),
two
(for
binary
classification with softmax) or
one-per-class (for multi-class classification with softmax) nodes.
Different kinds of ANNs exist, depending on the complexity and information dynamics across
nodes. Some of the most common types are:
a) Perceptrons. A simple and shallow (i.e., no hidden layers) model consisting of one
layer of input nodes and another one of output. They were the first ANN to be
invented, by Frank Rosenblat (Rosenblatt, 1958).
b) Multilayer perceptron. Model complexity increases and one hidden layer is added.
c)
Feed-forward ANNs. These algorithms pass information unidirectionally, meaning
that it can not travel back to previous layers.
33
==PAGE:41==
d) Recurrent ANNs. The output of a layer can influence the input of previous ones.
e) Modular ANNs. Modularity involves using separate models that communicate at the
output layer. In this case, the different models act as modules, each solving a specific
problem of the data analysis, making the overall process more efficient, improving
scalability and easing debugging.
34
==PAGE:42==
5.
Analysis and discussion
In this chapter we will apply IIT and enactivism to AI to envision whether the technology can
exhibit consciousness (IIT) or cognitive autopoiesis (enactivism). Once each theory is
covered, we will derive risks related to the theoretical insight.
The identified risks will be addressed by a proposed mitigation strategy in 4.3. The
constrained-by-construction approach. To finalise, we will examine the EU AI Act to check for
adequacy of the risks identified and propose an amendment to account for the risks
identified and encompass our mitigation strategy.
The logical process we will follow is depicted in the following flowchart:
Figure 11: Flowchart of chapter 5. Analysis and discussion. Image produced by the author
35
==PAGE:43==
5.1. Conscious, emergent AI
A summary of this section can be consulted below.
Table 5: Summary of section 5.1
Conscious, emergent AI
Argument
ANNs can exhibit
> 0; should
=
, ANNs would exhibit
ϕ
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑥
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
emergence.
Risk
AI may acquire advanced emergent properties, which may pose ethical
challenges regarding the metaphysical status of the technology.
IIT relates consciousness to the degree of integration a system can integrate. Recall that the
amount of information is given by the number of possible macrostates, and integration, to
how interconnectedly the microstates operate.
To verify whether IIT’s framework is applicable to deep learning algorithms, such that an
ANN can have a non-zero value of consciousness, we will simply implement the computation
of phi to the specific case of an ANN logical structure.
Assuming binary values for the input and output nodes:
A. Identify a causal system
-
Components of the system: nodes.
-
Microstates: depending on the activation level of each node, this is typically given by
a number between 0 and 1, indicating how active the node is.
-
Macrostate: the collection of all microstates.
-
Causal relationships: given by the weighted connections between nodes.
-
A directed graph representation: for our example, see below.
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 12: Directed graph representation of an ANN. Image produced by the author
B. Cause and effect repertoire
Cause repertoire
The likelihood:
𝑃(ℎ1, ℎ2|𝑥1, 𝑥2) =  𝑃(ℎ1|𝑥1, 𝑥2) · 𝑃(ℎ2|𝑥1, 𝑥2) 
Where:
 𝑃(ℎ1|𝑥1, 𝑥2) =  σ(𝑤11𝑥1 + 𝑤21𝑥2)
 𝑃(ℎ2|𝑥1, 𝑥2) =  σ(𝑤12𝑥1 + 𝑤22𝑥2)
And the posterior, using Bayes’ theorem:
𝑃(𝑥1, 𝑥2|ℎ1, ℎ2) =  
𝑃(ℎ1,ℎ2|𝑥1,𝑥2)·𝑃(𝑥1,𝑥2)
𝑃(ℎ1,ℎ2)
Which is the probability distribution for the four possible cause states.
Effect repertoire
 𝑃(𝑦𝑘= 1|ℎ1, ℎ2) =  σ(𝑤1𝑘ℎ1 + 𝑤2𝑘ℎ2)
 𝑃(𝑦𝑘= 0|ℎ1, ℎ2) =  1 − 𝑃(𝑦𝑘= 1|ℎ1, ℎ2)
C. Calculate effective information
For cause states
𝐸𝐼 (𝑐𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒) = 𝐼(𝑆; 𝑃𝑖)
𝐼(𝑃𝑖; 𝑆) =  
𝑃𝑖
∑𝑃(𝑆,  𝑃𝑖) · 𝑙𝑜𝑔 
𝑃(𝑆, 𝑃𝑖)
𝑃(𝑆)·𝑃(𝑃𝑖)  
37
==PAGE:45==
Since P(S) = 1:
𝐼(𝑃𝑖; 𝑆) =  
𝑃𝑖
∑𝑃(𝑃𝑖|𝑆) · 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑃(𝑃𝑖|𝑆)
𝑃(𝑃𝑖)  
Which, in the previous notation, results in the following for the four possible cause states:
𝐼(𝑥1, 𝑥2; ℎ1, ℎ2) =  
𝑥1
∑
𝑥2
∑𝑃(𝑥1, 𝑥2|ℎ1, ℎ2) · 𝑙𝑜𝑔 
𝑃(𝑥1,𝑥2|ℎ1,ℎ2)
𝑃(𝑥1,𝑥2)
For effect states
𝐸𝐼 (𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡) = 𝐼(𝑆; 𝐹𝑖)
𝐼(𝐹𝑖; 𝑆) =  
𝐹𝑖
∑𝑃(𝐹𝑖|𝑆) · 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑃(𝐹𝑖|𝑆)
𝑃(𝐹𝑖)  
In the previous notation:
𝐼(𝑦; ℎ1, ℎ2) =  
𝑦
∑𝑃(𝑦|ℎ1, ℎ2) · 𝑙𝑜𝑔 
𝑃(𝑦|ℎ1,ℎ2)
𝑃(𝑦)
 
So the total effective information would be:
𝐸𝐼= 1
2 [
𝑥1
∑
𝑥2
∑𝑃(𝑥1, 𝑥2|ℎ1, ℎ2) · 𝑙𝑜𝑔 
𝑃(𝑥1,𝑥2|ℎ1,ℎ2)
𝑃(𝑥1,𝑥2)
] + [
𝑦
∑𝑃(𝑦|ℎ1, ℎ2) · 𝑙𝑜𝑔 
𝑃(𝑦|ℎ1,ℎ2)
𝑃(𝑦)
]
D. Partition the network
The MIP should be found by minimising the effective information:
𝑝
𝑀𝐼𝑃= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑝𝑚𝑖𝑛( 𝐸𝐼(𝑐𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒) + 𝐸𝐼(𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡)
2·𝑁𝑝
)
E. Compute integrated information
ϕ = 𝐸𝐼(𝑤ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑒)—𝐸𝐼(𝑀𝐼𝑃)
In conclusion, in IIT’s framework, ANNs can integrate information and have a non-zero value
of Φ, which would make them conscious. Should a combination of macrocomponents be
found such that
=
, the ANN in question would be considered emergent.
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑥
The measurement of Φ provides a mechanistic approach to understand the phenomenon of
emergence mathematically. However, little information was found regarding the exact
computation of emergent properties related to human cognition. Some of these, such as
speech and reasoning, have already been reported in AI (Schaeffer et al., 2023; Srivastava
et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022). We argue that the acquisition of more advanced human-like
38
==PAGE:46==
attributes, such as agency and intentionality, by machines would pose an ethical problem to
humankind. Should such an emergent AI, then, have rights? Should we not exploit the
technology given its humane status? Should we let it overpower us?
Despite the speculative nature of this scenario, we recognise the need to avoid it at all costs.
The mitigation strategy we will soon propose is therefore aimed at preventing such an ethical
conflict in emergence-prone AI systems.
5.2. Autopoietic AI
Find below a summary of this section.
Table 6: Summary of section 5.2
Autopoietic AI
Argument
Self-replication, self-maintenance give rise to goals and norms that
direct actions in the enactivist approach; Self-replicating,
self-maintaining ANNs have already been reported.
Risk
AI may acquire goals and norms that may go against human morals
and ethics.
In the enactivist approach, the ability of a system to replicate and maintain itself confers
goals and norms that dictate the system’s actions by a phenomenon called autopoiesis. The
authors initially applied this view to biological systems, in particular human beings, who
acquire values upon which they act.
In this paper, we argue that the enactivist approach can be generalised to AI systems, too,
due to the fact that autopoiesis has already been reported in AI algorithms: self-replicating,
self-trained ANNs have been made (Silver et al., 2016) and some models have been
designed to even reproduce evolutionary dynamics (Shvartzman & Ram, 2024).
Should the enactivist approach be right that autopoietic systems develop values that direct
their actions, and considering that artificial autopoiesis has been already reported, a major
ethical problem arises: that of acquired values in autonomous, autopoietic AI systems – we
can not ensure such unsupervised values will be aligned with human ethics and morals.
5.3. The constrained-by-construction approach
In this section we will propose an independent regulatory framework oriented to mitigate the
two identified risks: emergence and autopoiesis in AI systems. Lastly, we will analyse the
adequacy of the EU AI Act to the identified issues.
The constrained-by-construction approach is a regulatory framework aimed at minimising the
risk of the identified undesirable features in AI systems (cognitive emergence and
autopoietic value creation). This proposal is preventive in the way that it does not allow for
39
==PAGE:47==
emergence nor unsupervised execution of ethically autonomous AI systems by the way they
are constructed.
The constrained-by-construction approach is to be implemented at the development phase
of AI systems:
Table 7: The constrained-by-construction approach, with the risks it tackles and the proposed mitigation
strategies for these
Risk
Mitigation strategy
Ethically problematic emergent properties
due to
=
in ANNs
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑥
Enforce
<
in ANNs by
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑥
monitoring and measuring the parameter
Value creation by AI systems with
independence of human ethics due to
autopoiesis
Enforce human authorisation in the
execution of action in self-replicating and
self-trained AI systems
The EU AI Act considers the ability to self-replicate a systemic risk of general purpose AI
models, a risk category that does not require human oversight upon operation. As seen in
the preamble (110):
General-purpose AI models could pose systemic risks which include, but are not limited to:
(...) risks from models of making copies of themselves or ‘self-replicating’ or training other
models.
Recall that self-replication and self-training or self-maintenance are the two requirements for
autopoiesis to take place in a given system according to the enactivist theory.
The obligations laid out for providers of autopoietic AI systems fall under a category
(general-purpose AI models with systemic risks) that does not require human oversight upon
operation (see articles 53, 54 and 55 for the obligations), which is deemed insufficient
considering the ethical risks derived from artificial value acquisition presented in section 4.2
of this project. Therefore, we pledge for the inclusion of self-replicating and self-trained
models in the high-risk category of the EU AI Act so they would require, at least, human
oversight, as laid out in article 14, to mitigate such an ethical risk, and, ideally, human
authorisation upon action execution.
40
==PAGE:48==
6.
Conclusion
This project began with the establishment of three research questions: a) What is
consciousness?; b) Can AI be conscious?; and c) How can we develop a potentially
conscious
technology
ethically?
Arguably,
these
have
been
answered
successfully
throughout the document:
a) What is consciousness?
Despite the literary controversy, we identified two robust scientific definitions of
consciousness: the first one, from IIT, refers to the ability of a system to integrate
information
throughout
its
components,
which
can
potentially
lead
to
the
phenomenon of emergence, according to the same authors; the second one, from
Orch-OR, supports that the stochasticity inherent to quantum effects in the molecular
architecture of neurons accounts for consciousness in the human psyche. Enactivism
deserves a special mention: even though they do not use the term consciousness,
they refer to cognition as the process by which a system makes sense of its
environment by interacting with it.
b) Can AI be conscious?
Using the definitions from the previous answer, we examined the logical and physical
architecture of AI systems, in particular ANNs, to search for consciousness in the
technology. We showed that computing a non-zero
value is possible for ANNs,
ϕ
which can potentially translate into emergence should the macroscopic level be more
conscious than the microscopic one (
=
). Regarding Orch-OR, we argued
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑥
that pseudostochastic digital systems, on which most AI technologies are currently
based on, do not operate quantum coherence, hence the lack of consciousness, as
defined by Sir Roger Penrose, in these machines. And lastly, according to
enactivism, the seed to cognition, autopoiesis, has already been reported in AI
systems, previously exclusive to biological organisms. The application of these
perspectives to AI yielded the identification of two risks related to the development of
the technology: in the first place, the acquisition of undesired, ethically problematic
emergent
properties
by
AI systems; and in the second place, the gain of
human-independent values and norms in autopoietic algorithms.
c) How can we develop a potentially conscious technology ethically?
After reviewing the most influential regulatory guidelines and legislations, we
developed a mitigation strategy that addresses the two identified risks. The
constrained-by-construction approach proposes: a) to constrain the macroscopic
value of consciousness,
, to always be lower than the microscopic one,
,
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
ϕ𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜
so that emergence, as described by (Hoel et al., 2016), does not take place in an
ANN; and b) to enforce explicit human authorisation upon execution by autopoietic AI
algorithms. We concluded that the regulation in place for EU member states, to which
Denmark apparteins, might be insufficient with regards to the risks identified, and
proposed an amendment of the text to encompass the constrained-by-construction
approach.
41
==PAGE:49==
Despite the partial success in answering the questions, we should also recognise the
limitations encountered when bringing the project into reality. To begin with, several of the
terms studied (consciousness, emergence and even AI) do not have a consensual and
rigorous definition, so different sources often study different parts of reality, with different
methodologies and different results. In that way, we refer to Ludwig Wittgenstein’s critique to
the inaccurate use of language: it shapes (and therefore limits) our understanding, so
abstracting from it should be desirable (Wittgenstein, 1921). In the case where it is strictly
necessary to employ in—say, in Science—we should aim for clarity and precision in our
definitions. The literature of consciousness and emergence should therefore establish
rigorous definitions of all the diverse things it handles.
So we had to infer risks in accordance with non-consensual definitions. Consequently, the
proposed mitigation strategies, compiled in the constrained-by-construction approach, are
not sufficiently supported to formally request an amendment of the EU AI Act.
Then, the scope of this project was too limited to embrace all the research possibilities it
allowed.
It
would
have
been
nourishing,
for example, to delve deeper into other
mathematical interpretations of emergence, or to compute
,
and
in a
ϕ𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
ϕ𝑚𝑎𝑥
real-world ANN, but this would have prolonged a research process that has so far taken
more time than any Master’s project of 35 ECTS should have in the first place. Nevertheless,
we have opened the door to some exciting future research:
The study of emergence in connection with consciousness and complexity, facilitated by
today’s computational tools, appears exciting to fields like Physics and Biology. As pointed
out by Sabine Hossenfelder, we are currently experiencing a plateau in fundamental Science
development as physical models from the past century are still being used today (Sabine
Hossenfelder, 2024). The advanced computational tools we are developing, such as the
object of this thesis, might, however, provide relevant insight into the complexity of life that
physicists have long been ignoring.
While quantitation is already revolutionising Biology, we argue that it is time for Philosophy
and Ethics to catch up. There are a number of benefits in abstracting from human-made
qualitative descriptions of reality: bias becomes more easily detectable, and patterns can be
observed where the human eye did not even look. This thesis aimed to be proof of such.
Technological revolutions are often accompanied by cultural shifts, too. In the age of
information,
post-truth
and
environmental
crisis, an abstraction from human-centred
paradigms becomes imperative. Perhaps a mechanistic view of consciousness will allow us
to perceive the true relationship of humankind with the rest of nature. At the end of the day,
the whole is more than the sum of its parts.
42
==PAGE:50==
ॐ
43
==PAGE:51==
7.
References
AIPRM. (2024, January 11). AI Statistics 2024 · AIPRM. https://www.aiprm.com/ai-statistics/
Babcock, N. S., Montes-Cabrera, G., Oberhofer, K. E., Chergui, M., Celardo, G. L., & Kurian,
P. (2024). Ultraviolet Superradiance from Mega-Networks of Tryptophan in Biological
Architectures.
The
Journal
of
Physical
Chemistry
B,
128(17),
4035–4046.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.3c07936
Bowne‐Anderson, H., Zanic, M., Kauer, M., & Howard, J. (2013). Microtubule dynamic
instability: A new model with coupled GTP hydrolysis and multistep catastrophe.
BioEssays, 35(5), 452–461. https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201200131
Broad,
C.
D.
(2014).
The
Mind
and
its
Place
in
Nature.
Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315824147
Chinese authorities. (2023, July). 生成式人工智能服务管理暂行办法_中央网络安全和信息化
委员会办公室. https://www.cac.gov.cn/2023-07/13/c_1690898327029107.htm
Danish Ministry of Finance, D. M. of I., Business and Financial Affairs. (2019, March). Danish
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence.
Deepa, R., Arunkumar, S., Jayaraj, V., & Sivasamy, A. (2023). Healthcare’s new Frontier:
AI-driven early cancer detection for improved well-being. AIP Advances, 13(11),
115331. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0177640
Digitaliseringsstyrelsen. (2024, January). Guide til offentlige myndigheder om ansvarlig
anvendelse af generativ kunstig intelligens.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., & Rosen, N. (1935). Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of
Physical Reality Be Considered Complete? Physical Review, 47(10), 777–780.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.47.777
European
Council.
(2024,
June).
Regulation—EU—2024/1689—EN—EUR-Lex.
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj
G7. (2023, October). Hiroshima Process International Guiding Principles for Organizations
Developing Advanced AI Systems.
Goldstein, J. A., Chao, J., Grossman, S., Stamos, A., & Tomz, M. (2024). How persuasive is
44
==PAGE:52==
AI-generated
propaganda?
PNAS
Nexus,
3(2),
pgae034.
https://doi.org/10.1093/pnasnexus/pgae034
Hall, J. E., Hall, M. E., & Guyton, A. C. (2021). Guyton and Hall textbook of medical
physiology (14th edition). Elsevier.
Heindel, J. J., Blumberg, B., Cave, M., Machtinger, R., Mantovani, A., Mendez, M. A., Nadal,
A., Palanza, P., Panzica, G., Sargis, R., Vandenberg, L. N., & Vom Saal, F. (2017).
Metabolism disrupting chemicals and metabolic disorders. Reproductive Toxicology,
68, 3–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.2016.10.001
Herring, E. (2019). Emergence in biology: From organicism to systems biology. Routledge
Handbook of Emergence, 352–362. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315675213-29
Hoel, E. P., Albantakis, L., Marshall, W., & Tononi, G. (2016). Can the macro beat the micro?
Integrated
information
across
spatiotemporal
scales.
Neuroscience
of
Consciousness, 2016(1), niw012. https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niw012
Hoel, E. P., Albantakis, L., & Tononi, G. (2013). Quantifying causal emergence shows that
macro can beat micro. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(49),
19790–19795. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1314922110
Hütt, M. T. (2019). Modular organization and emergence in systems biology. Emergence and
Modularity in Life Sciences, 37–49. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-06128-9_2
Kahneman, D. (2013). Thinking, Fast and Slow.
Kauffman, S. A. (2011). The origins of order: Self-organization and selection in evolution
(Nachdr.). Oxford Univ. Pr.
Kengne, J. (2019). Nonlinear Dynamics and Entropy of Complex Systems with Hidden and
Self-excited
Attractors
(p.
1
Online-Ressource
(290
p.)
(unknown)).
MDPI—Multidisciplinary
Digital
Publishing
Institute.
https://doi.org/10.3390/books978-3-03897-899-2
Macau, E. E. N. (2019). A mathematical modeling approach from nonlinear dynamics to
complex systems (pp. viii, 228 Seiten (unknown)). Springer International Publishing.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the
45
==PAGE:53==
Living (Vol. 42). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-009-8947-4
Medina, M. (2021). An empirical nonlinear dynamics approach to analyzing emergent
behavior
of
agent-based
models.
Aip
Advances,
11(3),
035133.
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0023116
Myrvold, W. (2022). Philosophical Issues in Quantum Theory. In E. N. Zalta & U. Nodelman
(Eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2022). Metaphysics Research
Lab,
Stanford
University.
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2022/entries/qt-issues/
Nature
Education.
(2014).
Nature
Education.
https://www.nature.com/scitable/content/neurons-have-elaborate-cytoskeletal-structur
es-14673315/
Nivedhaa Nagarajan. (2024). A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF AI’S DEPENDENCE ON
DATA. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.27033.63840
OECD. (2019). Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence, OECD/Legal/0449.
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/oecd-legal-0449
Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., & Tononi, G. (2014). From the Phenomenology to the
Mechanisms
of
Consciousness:
Integrated
Information
Theory
3.0.
PLoS
Computational
Biology,
10(5),
e1003588.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003588
Pace Giannotta, A. (2021). Autopoietic Enactivism, Phenomenology, and the Problem of
Naturalism:
A
Neutral
Monist
Proposal.
Husserl
Studies,
37(3),
209–228.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10743-021-09286-x
Palmer, T. (2022). The Primacy of Doubt: From climate change to quantum physics, how the
science of uncertainty can help predict and understand our chaotic world. Oxford
University Press.
Pathak, J., Subramanian, S., Harrington, P., Raja, S., Chattopadhyay, A., Mardani, M., Kurth,
T.,
Hall, D., Li, Z., Azizzadenesheli, K., Hassanzadeh, P., Kashinath, K., &
Anandkumar, A. (2022). FourCastNet: A Global Data-driven High-resolution Weather
46
==PAGE:54==
Model
using
Adaptive
Fourier
Neural
Operators
(Version
1).
arXiv.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2202.11214
Penrose, R. (1986). The emperor’s new mind: Concerning computers, minds and the laws of
physics (Revised impression as Oxford landmark science). Oxford University Press.
Penrose,
R.
(1995).
Shadows
of
the
mind: A search for the missing science of
consciousness. Vintage.
Plato. (375 C.E.). The republic. Harvard university press W. Heinemann.
Republican Party Platforms. (2024). 2024 Republican Party Platform | The American
Presidency
Project.
https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/2024-republican-party-platform
Richie, R. C. (2024). Basics of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Modeling. Journal of Insurance
Medicine (New York, N.y.), 51(1), 35–40. https://doi.org/10.17849/insm-51-1-35-40.1
Rolnick, D., Donti, P. L., Kaack, L. H., Kochanski, K., Lacoste, A., Sankaran, K., Ross, A. S.,
Milojevic-Dupont, N., Jaques, N., Waldman-Brown, A., Luccioni, A., Maharaj, T.,
Sherwin, E. D., Mukkavilli, S. K., Kording, K. P., Gomes, C., Ng, A. Y., Hassabis, D.,
Platt, J. C., … Bengio, Y. (2019). Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning
(Version 2). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1906.05433
Rosenblatt, F. (1958). The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information storage and
organization
in
the
brain.
Psychological
Review,
65(6),
386–408.
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0042519
Rubim Borges Fortes, P. (2020). Paths to Digital Justice: Judicial Robots, Algorithmic
Decision-Making, and Due Process. Asian Journal of Law and Society, 7(3),
453–469. https://doi.org/10.1017/als.2020.12
Sabine Hossenfelder. (2024, November). The crisis in physics is real: Science is failing.
http://backreaction.blogspot.com/2024/11/the-crisis-in-physics-is-real-science.html
Saha, N., Swetapadma, A., & Mondal, M. (2023). A Brief Review on Artificial Neural
Network: Network Structures and Applications. 2023 9th International Conference on
Advanced
Computing
and
Communication
Systems
(ICACCS),
1974–1979.
47
==PAGE:55==
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICACCS57279.2023.10112753
Sahu, S., Ghosh, S., Ghosh, B., Aswani, K., Hirata, K., Fujita, D., & Bandyopadhyay, A.
(2013). Atomic water channel controlling remarkable properties of a single brain
microtubule: Correlating single protein to its supramolecular assembly. Biosensors
and Bioelectronics, 47, 141–148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2013.02.050
Sahu, S., Ghosh, S., Hirata, K., Fujita, D., & Bandyopadhyay, A. (2013). Multi-level
memory-switching properties of a single brain microtubule. Applied Physics Letters,
102, 123701. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4793995
Schaeffer, R., Miranda, B., & Koyejo, S. (2023). Are Emergent Abilities of Large Language
Models
a
Mirage?
(arXiv:2304.15004).
arXiv.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.15004
Shvartzman, B., & Ram, Y. (2024). Self-replicating artificial neural networks give rise to
universal evolutionary dynamics. PLoS Computational Biology, 20(3), e1012004.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012004
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., Van Den Driessche, G.,
Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., Dieleman, S.,
Grewe, D., Nham, J., Kalchbrenner, N., Sutskever, I., Lillicrap, T., Leach, M.,
Kavukcuoglu, K., Graepel, T., & Hassabis, D. (2016). Mastering the game of Go with
deep
neural
networks
and
tree
search.
Nature,
529(7587),
484–489.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16961
Srivastava, A., Rastogi, A., Rao, A., Shoeb, A. A. M., Abid, A., Fisch, A., Brown, A. R.,
Santoro, A., Gupta, A., Garriga-Alonso, A., Kluska, A., Lewkowycz, A., Agarwal, A.,
Power, A., Ray, A., Warstadt, A., Kocurek, A. W., Safaya, A., Tazarv, A., … Wu, Z.
(2023). Beyond the Imitation Game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of
language
models
(arXiv:2206.04615).
arXiv.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.04615
The White House. (2023, October 30). Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and
Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence. The White House.
48
==PAGE:56==
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2023/10/30/executive-
order-on-the-safe-secure-and-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-artificial-intelligen
ce/
Tononi, G. (2012). Integrated information theory of consciousness: An updated account.
Archives
Italiennes
De
Biologie,
150(2–3),
56–90.
https://doi.org/10.4449/aib.v149i5.1388
Tononi,
G.
(2015).
Integrated
information
theory.
Scholarpedia,
10(1),
4164.
https://doi.org/10.4249/scholarpedia.4164
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., & Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information theory: From
consciousness to its physical substrate. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 17(7),
450–461. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.44
Tranquillo, J. (2019). Thermodynamics of Complex Systems. An Introduction To Complex
Systems, 215–252. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02589-2_7
United Nations. (2024, September). Governing AI for Humanity: Final Report. United Nations
Publications.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1993). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and
human experience (14. print.). MIT Press.
Verma, D. S., Kumar, J., & Chauhan, P. (2023). 1—Review of quantum physics and atomic
theory. In S. K. Sharma, C. Jacinto da Silva, D. J. Garcia, & N. Shrivastava (Eds.),
Modern Luminescence from Fundamental Concepts to Materials and Applications
(pp.
3–31).
Woodhead
Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-89954-3.00006-5
Wei, J., Tay, Y., Bommasani, R., Raffel, C., Zoph, B., Borgeaud, S., Yogatama, D., Bosma,
M., Zhou, D., Metzler, D., Chi, E. H., Hashimoto, T., Vinyals, O., Liang, P., Dean, J., &
Fedus, W. (2022). Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models (arXiv:2206.07682).
arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.07682
Wittgenstein, L. (1921). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.
Wyatt, A. (2021). The Disruptive Impact of Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems Diffusion:
49
==PAGE:57==
Modern Melians and the Dawn of Robotic Warriors. Routledge.
Zwirn, H. (2013). Computational Irreducibility and Computational Analogy (arXiv:1304.5247).
arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1304.5247
50
