==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore 
winds and GPM IMERG precipitation 
data for wind energy in the North Sea
Denitsa Diyanova Dimitrova
DTU Wind-M-0858
November 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0858
November 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Krystallia Dimitriadou
Jakob Mann
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Denitsa Diyanova Dimitrova
Title:
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR 
offshore winds and GPM IMERG 
precipitation data for wind energy 
in the North Sea
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for
wind energy in the North Sea
Master Thesis
November, 2024
By
Denitsa Diyanova Dimitrova
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
DTU Wind
Published by:
DTU, DTU Wind and Energy Systems, DTU Risø Campus, Frederiks-
borgvej 399, 4000 Roskilde Denmark
https://wind.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Wind and Energy
Systems, DTU Wind, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Denitsa Diyanova Dimitrova - s220250
Signature
Date
ii
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Assessing offshore wind energy potential in the North Sea requires a detailed understand-
ing of wind speeds and precipitation patterns, particularly given the impact of the rain
on the turbine performance. This project utilizes Sentinel-1 SAR wind speed and GPM
IMERG precipitation data to analyze the North sea area from the years 2019 to 2023. For
validation, seven buoys providing in situ measurements are used.
SAR wind speeds and IMERG precipitation are collocated to the buoy locations. The
precipitation data is used to separate the locations on dry and wet, based on the mean
annual rainfall in the North Sea, and to categorize the observations of the wind speeds
based on rain intensity.
The analysis finds that with increased rainfall intensity the uncertainty on SAR-derived
wind speed increases. Compared to conditions of no rain, the analysis shows an in-
crease in root mean squared error (RMSE) of SAR wind speeds compared to buoy data
from 2.51 m/s for no rain to 4.81 m/s for heavy rain. Moderate and heavy rain gener-
ally occur for higher winds speeds than of no rain conditions. SAR-derived wind speeds
show strong correlation to the in situ wind-speed measurements under dry conditions but
indicate higher deviation from them during periods of heavy rainfall. Final results show
that SAR-derived wind speeds and IMERG precipitation datasets when integrated offer
a comprehensive method for evaluating wind resources for offshore wind farm planning.
The thesis underscores the value of SAR and IMERG data for optimal site selection and
maintenance planning, supporting sustainable offshore wind development in the North
Sea.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Denitsa Diyanova Dimitrova, MSc in Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Krystallia Dimitriadou, Researcher, DTU Wind
Supervisor
Jakob Mann, Professor, DTU Wind
Co-supervisor
Special thanks to:
Charlotte Bay Hasager, Professor, DTU Wind
iv
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Focus and background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research objectives and hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Instruments
4
2.1
Sentinel-1 mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Buoys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Study area
9
4
Data
10
5
Methods
12
5.1
SAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.2
IMERG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.3
Buoys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.4
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
6
Results
17
6.1
Results on winds from SAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6.2
Results on precipitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.3
Results on winds and precipitation for each buoy location . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.4
Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.5
Implication for wind energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7
Discussion
45
7.1
Wind and rain patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.2
Assessment of the research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
7.3
Hypothesis validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
8
Conclusion
54
Bibliography
55
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Wind power refers to the process of capturing the wind’s kinetic energy and converting it
into electricity using wind turbines. Wind turbines harness this energy by transforming the
wind motion into mechanical power, which a generator converts into electricity. Turbines
are often collected in groups to exploit the wind in a particular area: such complexes,
called wind farms, can be placed both onshore or offshore. Wind is created by the un-
even heating of the Earth’s atmosphere by the sun, the rotation of the Earth, and surface
irregularities, and as such, is a fully renewable and clean source of power that produces
no greenhouse gases or air pollutants. Wind energy is seen as an alternative to fossil
fuels, helping reduce carbon emissions and supporting a sustainable energy future [1].
According to the European Commission (EC) [2], offshore wind energy is key to Europe’s
carbon-neutral future. The International Energy Agency (IEA) defined wind power gener-
ation as the predominant energy source, alongside solar, to reach the Net Zero Emission
target [3]. Currently, offshore wind covers 1.5% of the electricity demand. However, the
EC estimates that by 2050, that number can increase to 30% [4]. It is expected that 85%
of this capacity will be developed in the North Seas (the Atlantic off France, Ireland, and
the UK, the North Sea, the Irish Sea, and the Baltic Sea). The reason is that the region
has good wind resources and high demand. To achieve this with current technology, a
total area of 76 000 km2, or 2.8% of the North Seas, will be needed. However challenges
exists, and today at least 60 % of the North Seas is off-limits for wind farms due to en-
vironmental or space restrictions, and future site allocation will also depend on resolving
these exclusion zones.
Currently, there are a lot of big areas in the North Sea that are under development or
in early planning for wind farms, as shown in fig. 1.1 [5]. There are also zones that are
under construction or fully commissioned and already in use. The zones already in use are
mainly around the coast of the United Kingdom, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Denmark.
The areas that are about to be developed are mainly in the middle of the North Sea, in
open waters, and near the coast of Norway.
Figure 1.1: Current state of the wind farms in the North Sea [5].
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
1
==PAGE:10==
To optimize production, it is important to know which areas are subjected to the correct
amount of wind to justify the placement of a wind farm. Placement is also important when
considering the negative effects of leading edge erosion. This is the phenomenon of
degradation of the leading side of the turbine’s blades due to the impact with raindrops
[6]. This degradation leads to diminished overall efficiency of the turbine and increased
maintenance costs. To avoid this, it is crucial to identify what areas are subject to a mix of
heavy precipitation and strong winds, which together are the main cause of leading edge
erosion.
1.1
Focus and background
The primary focus of this thesis is to investigate the use of Sentinel-1 data [7] and Global
Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Integrated Multi-satellitE Retrievals for GPM (IMERG)
[8] in assessing wind characteristics for offshore wind energy applications. While tradi-
tional methods for offshore wind measurement often rely on in situ data, this project aims
to explore satellite remote sensing technologies as an alternative and complementary
source of wind data.
SAR is a high resolution imaging radar that measures the power backscatter from the
surface of the Earth. When it is over the ocean, the backscatter power is a measure of the
roughness of the sea surface [9]. In Bragg scattering theory, radar backscatter depends
on the surface waves, called Bragg waves. At radar frequencies, like the ones used by
SAR, Bragg waves are capillary waves with a wavelength up to few centimeters, which
are directly related to the local surface wind stress [9] . The relation is usually described
with a Geophysical Model Function (GMF). GMF describes the relationship between the
backscatter, incidence angle, relative wind direction, and wind speed at 10 m height above
the mean sea level [10].
There are several advantages, which show the benefits of using SAR data:
• SAR data can cover vast areas simultaneously, providing wide spatial coverage [11];
• SAR is unaffected by weather conditions, including cloud cover [12], though rain
may impact its performance [13];
• Despite the high initial cost associated with launching SAR satellites, they require
minimal maintenance and have low running costs relative to the extensive area they
cover [14].
The SAR data is analyzed under conditions with and without rainfall to evaluate its perfor-
mance and reliability in different weather scenarios [15]. With the help of IMERG, these
scenarios are established, and thus, the North Sea is divided into wet and dry regions.
In particular, the investigation focuses on the relation between rain and data quality as the
impact of raindrops on the water surface results in three main effects:
1. The water surface becomes rougher due to the creation of rain waves [16];
2. Turbulence is introduced into the upper water layer, which can actually reduce the
overall roughness of the sea surface [16];
3. The raindrops produce splash formations such as craters, crowns, and secondary
droplets that are ejected from the water[16].
According to Bragg scattering theory, which applies to radar incidence angles between
20 and 70 degrees, an increase or decrease in sea surface roughness leads to corre-
sponding changes in radar backscatter, represented as changes in the normalized radar
2
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:11==
cross-section (NRCS). This effect shows up in SAR images as variations in brightness
or intensity [16]. Other physical conditions that during rain, might affect the SAR-derived
wind speed retrieval:
• The radar signal could be modified in the atmosphere by the falling hydrometeors
[17];
• As the wind direction is used a priori in the wind retrieval process, it may cause un-
certainties in the SAR-derived wind speeds. The reason is that the global numerical
weather model is less accurate during rain than in dry conditions [18], [19].
1.2
Research objectives and hypothesis
The objective of this thesis is twofold: to investigate the feasibility and performance of
SAR data and to evaluate the resilience of SAR data under rainy conditions with IMERG
data.
In this thesis, the following questions will be addressed:
• How does the Sentinel-1 CMOD5.N wind speed data compare to buoy wind speed
data during precipitation in the North Sea?
• How much and how often does it rain in the North Sea?
• Does the wind speed distribution differ between dry and rainy conditions in the North
Sea?
Together with that, the thesis looks into the hypothesis that SAR-derived wind speeds are
of lower quality during rainy conditions than those derived in dry conditions.
The project aims to enhance the scientific understanding of atmospheric processes and
ocean-atmosphere interactions in the North Sea region. By comparing SAR data and buoy
measurements, especially under different weather conditions, this thesis determines the
accuracy and reliability of SAR for wind speed measurement. Wind speed data with high
spatial resolution is crucial for optimizing wind power projects and can contribute to the
development of more green energy projects. Also, understanding the rain probability and
strong winds in the North Sea may give insights into the life of the turbine blades in wind
farms placed there. By demonstrating the benefits of using SAR data for offshore wind,
this thesis aims to support the adoption of advanced satellite remote sensing technologies
in the wind energy sector.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Instruments
The data used in this project are collected by satellites and buoys, providing a compre-
hensive view of offshore wind fields and precipitation. There are three datasets that have
been used: NASA’s Integrated Multi-Satellite Retrievals for GPM (IMERG) data [8], Satel-
lite Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data [20] and in-situ buoy measurements [21].
2.1
Sentinel-1 mission
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) captures surface features by transmitting microwave sig-
nals at an angle and then measuring the portion of these signals that scatter back to the
sensor. This backscattered signal is quantified by the Radar Cross Section (RCS), which
is the ratio of the received to incident signal intensity [22]. Interpreting the RCS values
can be complex, as they are influenced by both scene characteristics and the sensor’s
parameters. Key factors in RCS include surface roughness, which determines how much
radar energy is reflected back, and the dielectric properties of the surface material, which
affect signal penetration. Since these parameters depend on the radar’s wavelength and,
to some extent, its polarization, the sensor’s characteristics play a critical role in how SAR
images of real-world objects are analyzed and understood [22].
Satellite SAR data comes from the Sentinel-1 mission of the Copernicus program. The
mission is a constellation of two identical satellites (Sentinel-1 A and B, fig. 2.1) with a
future plan to launch two more (C and D). Sentinel-1A was launched on 3 April 2014, and
Sentinel-1B was launched on 25 April 2016 [23]. The mission ended for Sentinel 1-B on
23 December 2021 when the satellite experienced a problem with the power supply and
couldn’t deliver data anymore [24]. The satellites from Sentinel-1 are sun-synchronous,
polar-orbiting, and have an orbital plane with 180° phase difference. Their altitude is 693
km with an inclination of 98.2°. The repeat cycle of one satellite is 12 days with 175 orbits
per cycle, and the two-satellite constellation offers a 6-day exact repeat cycle [23]. They
operate during the day and night, performing C-band SAR imaging, which allows them to
deliver data regardless of the weather.
2.1.1
Polarization and scanning modes
SAR emits coherent microwave signals that are either vertically (V) or horizontally (H) po-
larized. SAR generates images representing the normalized radar cross-section (NRCS,
or σ0) by measuring the backscattered signal in these polarizations. When the radar
transmits and receives using the same polarization (either VV or HH) the resulting im-
age is termed ”co-polarized”. In contrast, ”cross-polarized” images are formed when the
transmission and reception polarization are different (VH or HV) [10]. The frequency of
the C band is 5.405 GHz (which corresponds to a wavelength of around 5.55 cm), with
dual polarization (HH+HV, VV+VH, VV, HH), and the radar can operate in four modes
with different resolutions [25], [23]. For each of the four modes, it is possible to produce
outputs at three levels of processing: Level 0, 1 and 2 [26].
The way of imaging of the four acquisition modes is shown in fig. 2.2 and can be summa-
rized as:
• Stripmap (SM) - used to image small islands and in exceptional cases only, to sup-
port emergency management actions. It has swatch width of 80 km, incidence angle
range between 18.3° and 46.8°, operates in dual and single polarization [27].
4
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:13==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: Sentinel-1 spacecrafts and orbital paths [23].
• Interferometric Wide Swath (IW) - primary mode over land with VV + VH polarization.
It has swath width of 250 km, incidence angle range between 29.1° and 46.0°, and
can operate in dual and single polarization [27].
• Extra-Wide Swath (EW) - primary mode over selected seas and Ocean areas, mainly
for sea-ice monitoring. It has swatch width of 410 km, incidence angle range be-
tween 18.9° and 47° and can operate in dual and single polarization [27].
• Wave (WV) - used over open ocean with VV polarization. The data from this mode
consists of several vignettes in single polarization (VV or HH). WV acquires vignettes
of 20 km by 20 km, at 5 m by 5 m spatial resolution, every 100 km. The images are
acquired on two different incidence angles, and the vignettes on the same incidence
angle are separated by 200 km. The incidence angles ranges are 21.6° to 25.1° and
34.8° to 38.0° [27].
Each of these modes can produce products at SAR Level-0, Level-1, and Level-2 [25].
• Level 0: Contains compressed unfocused SAR raw data from the unprocessed In-
strument Source Packets (ISP). These products are foundational datasets and pro-
vide valuable information for further analysis and processing [28].
• Level 1: Two types of level 1 data:
– Level 1 SLC: Single Look Complex (SLC) products consist of focused SAR
data, which are georeferenced through the orbit and altitude data from the
satellite, and corrected [28], [27].
– Level 1 GRD: Ground Range Detected (GRD) products consist of focused SAR
data that has been projected to the ground using an Earth ellipsoid model and
is corrected using the terrain height [28].
• Level 2 OCN (Ocean) products consist of geolocalized geophysical products de-
rived from Level-1. It is a product for wind, wave and currents applications, and it
contains 3 components Ocean Wind Field (OWI), which estimates the wind speed
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
5
==PAGE:14==
and direction at 10 m above the surface; Ocean Swell Spectra (OSW), estimating
the wind speed and direction per swell spectrum; and Surface Radial Velocity (RVL)
which is provides the surface radial velocity component [28].
The SAR data in this thesis is Level 2 data sourced from DTU Wind Global Wind Atlas
[20], in IW mode with VV polarization [29].
Figure 2.2: Sentinel-1 imaging modes [30].
2.1.2
From NRCS to wind data
The function that relates the radar observations of co-polarized NRCS values to the near
surface wind is called Geophysical Model Function (GMF) [10]. The SAR wind data in
this thesis is derived through the GMF CMOD (C-band MODel), version 5.N. The CMOD
functions provide a relation in which the dependency of normalized backscatter σ0 on wind
speed v, wind direction χ, and incidence angle θ is described with the following equation
[31]:
σ0 = CMOD(c, v, ϕ, θ) = B0(c0, v, θ) [1 + B1(c1, v, θ) cos(ϕ) + B2(c2, v, θ) cos(2ϕ)]p ,
(2.1)
where ϕ = χ −α is the angle between the wind direction and the spectrometer azimuth
look angle (both measured from the North), coefficients ci make the terms Bi, and p is a
parameter.
The resolution of the wind speed is 500 m. The function N gives the equivalent neutral
wind at 10 m height above sea level. The wind direction corresponding to the SAR wind
speed is taken from the Global Forecasting System (GFS) model.
6
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM)
Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) is an international satellite mission that provides
precipitation measurements for global data products [32], [8]. The constellation consists
of geosynchronous weather satellites equipped with several passive microwave (PMW)
radiometers and infrared (IR) sensors. The constellation of satellites as of 2019 can be
seen in fig. 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Visualization of the GPM satellite constellation as of early 2019 [33].
The high-quality precipitation data derived from PMW sensors are supported by precipi-
tation estimates from infrared (IR) data captured by geosynchronous weather satellites.
While these IR data are generally less accurate, they serve as a valuable backup when
PMW data is unavailable for several hours in a given location [33].
As of April 2019, the constellation consists of 12 satellites that provide MW data, and 5
providing IR data [33]. The output of these two types of sensors is then elaborated by the
Precipitation Processing System (PPS) to obtain the resulting precipitation data. This data
is named ”Integrated Multi-satellitE Retrievals for GPM” (IMERG) and reaches a spatial
resolution of 0.1° × 0.1° and a 30-minutes temporal resolution. The IMERG dataset offers
three separate datasets characterized by varying latencies: Early run (4 hours), Late
run (12 hours), and Final run (3.5 months). Early and Late Runs deliver near-real-time
estimates without gauge calibration, whereas the Final Run is calibrated using the monthly
Global Precipitation Climatology Center (GPCC) dataset. The Final Run is regarded as
highly accurate and is specifically intended for scientific research applications [34]. This
thesis uses IMERG version 7, Final Run datasets [32], [35]. The data provided my IMERG
is Level 3, which is Level 2 data that have been mapped on a uniform space and time grid,
and have been averaged over space and time [8].
2.3
Buoys
The buoy observations are shared by Copernicus Marine Services: In Situ Thematic As-
sembly Center [21] and are collected both by national providers and industry. The moored
buoys are anchored at a fixed location for which they provide time series of different vari-
ables. An example of a moored buoy is shown in fig. 2.4. Not all buoys provide wind
speed and wind direction for the full time period. For that purpose, all the buoys in the
selected area have been observed and only the ones with the best data coverage have
been chosen to continue further [21]. From the selected buoys, 3 are provided by the
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
7
==PAGE:16==
German Federal Maritime and Hydrographic Agency, and 4 are from private industries
from the United Kingdom. All buoys’ sensor modules are placed 4m above sea level.
Figure 2.4: Fixed mooring buoy [36]
To measure wind speed, buoys typically use cup anemometers placed on the windward
side of the buoy tower for unobstructed airflow. These anemometers have rotating parts,
with their rotation speed directly proportional to wind speed. Wind speed data is collected
using a generator activated by the cups’ motion. Over time, however, components like
the turbine blades may degrade due to corrosion, or interference from birds, impacting
performance, especially at low wind speeds. To improve precision, some buoys incorpo-
rate sonic anemometers, which measure wind speed based on the travel time of sound
pulses between sensors. Although highly accurate and suited for fine measurements,
sonic anemometers may face reduced accuracy under precipitation and airflow distor-
tion [37]. The wind data from the in situ buoys measurements is 10-minutes averaged at
anemometer height levels (4 m) [38], [29]. All available observations are quality checked
and have a flag showing the data quality [38].
8
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:17==
3
Study area
The study focuses on the area defined by the region between 1°E and 9°E longitude and
52°N and 60°N latitude. This covers the most part of the North Sea. The reason for choos-
ing this area is that there are many wind farms, and some are currently in development,
as shown in fig. 1.1 [5]. That makes the place important for wind energy purposes.
Figure 3.1: Map of the selected area in the North Sea with the buoy locations and the
average annual rainfall for the years 2019-2023 based on IMERG data.
The area for which the thesis is done is presented in fig. 3.1, showing also the average
rainfall for the whole area. The 7 locations indicated are the locations corresponding to
the buoys used in this work. Those are locations of buoys which wind observations are
used for comparison with the SAR-derived wind speeds.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
9
==PAGE:18==
4
Data
The data used in the thesis is downloaded for the period of five years, from 2019 to 2023.
For the purpose of seasonal analysis, the last month of 2018 has been added to the
datasets. The retrieved data sources are:
• Sentinel-1 Level 2 SAR-derived wind speed data is downloaded from the science
global wind atlas archive [20]. The data format is netCDF. The data is mapped
onto latitude/longitude with a 500-meter cell spacing. There are four observation
per day (at around 06:00 and 17:00 UTC) until the end of 2021 when Sentinel-1 B
stopped working. After that the observations are twice per day. Each data sample
file contains the acquisition time in Julian seconds since 01 January 2000, latitude
in decimal degrees, longitude in decimal degrees, SAR-derived wind speed at 10 m
height neutral stability in meters per second, NRCS derived as an non-dimensional
value and incidence angle in degrees from nadir [20], [18].
• GFS wind speed data from the science global wind atlas archive [20]. The GFS data
is available as interpolated wind speed in meters per second and wind direction in
degrees from North for each SAR wind map. The model data is available at 3-
hourly intervals with resolution of 28 km latitude and longitude resolution and they
were interpolated spatially to match the SAR data [29].
• GPM IMERG precipitation data is obtained from NASA [8]. The data is Level 3. The
spatial resolution of the data is 10 km (0.1°), and the temporal resolution is 30 min-
utes. The data is provided in netCDF files [35]. Each file contains time in seconds
since 01 June 1980, longitude in degrees, latitudes in degrees, merged microwave-
infrared (gauge-adjusted) precipitation estimate in millimeters per hour, probability
of liquid precipitation in percent, and non-dimensional variable precipitation quality
index. The probability of liquid precipitation is connected to the likelihood that the
recorded precipitation is in liquid state: higher values mean greater chance of liquid
precipitation. Specifically, a probability of > 75% indicates liquid state, 50% −75%
points to mixed precipitation and a probability < 50% means solid state precipitation
[39]. The precipitation quality index is a qualitative indicator for how good the data
is. Data with quality index between 0.6 and 1 is indicated as good [32]. All the used
data in the thesis is filtered by that index.
• Ocean buoy wind speed data from Copernicus Marine Services: In Situ Thematic
Assembly Center [21]. The data is Level 2. All buoys observations are taken at 4 m
above sea level. The measures are done every 10 minutes, however the registered
data does not cover some of the locations [38]. The data is provided in netCDF files.
Among the variables provided in the files, the extracted data consists of latitude
in degrees, longitude in degrees, wind speed values in meters per second, wind
direction values in degrees from North, quality check for wind speed in values from
0 to 9, and quality check for wind direction in values from 0 to 9. Good data is
marked with value 1, and that is the data used in the thesis [38].
For this thesis seven buoy locations in the North Sea area have been chosen, corre-
sponding to the highest number of high quality observations for the period. The locations
of these buoys is presented on Table 4.1.
All available data from SAR, IMERG and buoys is presented in Table 4.2.
10
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:19==
Buoy ID
Latitude
Longitude
6200144
53.4
1.7
6200146
57.2
2.1
6200165
54.0
1.1
6300110
59.5
1.5
6200086
55.0
6.5
6200087
54.7
6.8
6202114
54.2
6.4
Table 4.1: Buoy locations with their latitude and longitude
Buoy
Number samples:
Number samples:
Number samples:
ID
SAR
IMERG
Buoy
6200144
999
89135
345128
6200146
1244
89135
292872
6200165
1015
89135
341160
6300110
1239
89135
345256
6200086
1425
89135
12584
6200087
1451
89135
3656
6202114
1430
89135
472
Table 4.2: Summary of number of samples from SAR, IMERG, and buoy data for each
buoy ID
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
11
==PAGE:20==
5
Methods
The thesis investigates offshore 10-m wind speeds and precipitation patterns in the North
Sea using satellite data and in situ measurements from buoys. It focuses on analyz-
ing SAR-derived wind speeds under dry and rainy conditions, classified by IMERG data,
while also examining the yearly distribution of wind and rainfall across seven locations in
the North Sea. Additionally, the study statistically compares SAR-derived wind speeds
to in situ buoy measurements and explores the relationship between normalized radar
cross-section (NRCS) values and wind speeds derived from SAR data across varying
rain intensities.
5.1
SAR
After downloading the netCDF file of the SAR data, they are spatially collocated around
each buoy. Around each buoy location, all values are extracted and averaged with a
resolution of 5 by 5 km. For that purpose, the resolution taken ± around the location is
2.5 km (0.023°). These files are used for plots and wind roses showing the SAR-wind
speed distribution on the location. Those file have been further used for collocation with
the IMERG precipitation in the same locations and for temporal collocation with the buoy
measurements. It is important to note that each SAR file also has the wind speed from
the GFS model. These values are used further in the comparison and statistics.
To show the distribution of the SAR-derived wind speed values for each location a prob-
ability density function f(v) is used [40]. This is the Weibull distribution which gives the
probability of observing a specific wind speed v. The function corresponds to the Weibull
distribution usually applied in wind data analysis as it can effectively capture the variability
of wind speed values. The distribution can be obtained as:
f(v) = k
c
(v
c
)k−1
e−( v
c)
k
(5.1)
where k represents the shape parameter, c [m/s] the scale and f(v) the probability of
observing wind at speed v [40]. To be noted that if k > 3 the distribution approaches
Gaussian.
The shape and the scale parameters can be derived using the Gamma function Γ, the
mean wind speed value vm and the standard deviation of the dataset σ using the method
of moments [41]:
k = ( σ
vm
)−1.086
(5.2)
c =
vm
Γ
(
1 + 1
k
)
(5.3)
Once these parameters are derived, the Weibull probability density function can be cal-
culated and plotted [40][41].
Power Production
The wind probability density function f(v), coupled with the specific power curve of a wind
turbine:
P(v) = 1
2Aρv³
(5.4)
12
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:21==
is used to compute the power distribution of that wind turbine in an area characterized by
that wind distribution [41]. In the thesis, those computations are done using the Power
calculator from ”The Swiss Wind Power Data Website” [42].
5.2
IMERG
IMERG precipitation is acquired over a 5-year period. Data is filtered to contain only high-
quality values based on the Quality Index, one of the dataset’s features. Data is selected
only for Quality Index higher than 0.6 [32].
All precipitation data (solid and liquid) is collocated to the seven locations for further anal-
ysis. It is
1. Maps in the North Sea. Data are filtered to contain only liquid precipitation, rain
(IMERG liquid probability greater than 75%). This data is separated by years, and
maps are plotted for the whole area. A land mask is applied to leave only the pre-
cipitation over the sea. Yearly maps are made using Python’s cartopy library and
maps showing the average annual precipitation for the period.
2. Precipitation data is collocated with buoy coordinates within a box of 10 km. That
is done by taking 5 km (0.05°) from each side of the location and extracting those
values. The mean value of precipitation is taken as the mean value inside the grid
box.
3. The annual liquid precipitation in these seven locations is separated into ’wet’ (’rainy’)
and ’dry’ locations. If the annual precipitation for 2019-2023 is higher than the mean
annual precipitation value for the entire area, the location is classified as ’wet,’ and
if it is lower, it is classified as ’dry.’ The output of this section is seven IMERG-buoy
collocated datasets (one for each buoy)
4. Data is separated depending of the chance for liquid precipitation as in [39]:
• up to 50 % is considered solid precipitation and will be referred to as snowfall,
or just snow
• over 50% and up to 75% is considered mixed precipitation between liquid and
solid-state and it will be referred to as mixed precipitation
• over 75% is liquid precipitation and will be referred to as rainfall, or just rain
Plots are made for the distribution of the different types of precipitation.
5. Combined data from spatially collocated SAR and IMERG files is used for plots
showing the annual and seasonal liquid precipitation (rain) and wind speed on each
location.
6. Temporal collocation of SAR and IMERG data. The time step used is 30 minutes. If
there is no SAR observation in this time span, the IMERG observation is ignored and
no entry is added to the collocated file. If there is more than one file, only the near-
est in time is taken and used. This is to allow the comparison between each SAR
and IMERG observation. The data is further separated into ’no precipitation’ (pre-
cipitation = 0 mm/h), ’light precipitation’ (precipitation values higher than 0 and less
than 0.5 mm/h), ’moderate precipitation’ (values between 0.5 mm/h and 4 mm/h)
and ’heavy precipitation’ (values over 4 mm/h) [39]. Plots are made to compare the
SAR wind speed and the precipitation intensities.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
13
==PAGE:22==
7. Using the collocated files from Step 6, the performance of the NRCS values from
SAR and the derived wind speed values is investigated in different precipitation
intensities.
5.3
Buoys
The observations of the selected seven buoys are downloaded. The observations were
filtered and only high quality data is saved and used further.
1. Extrapolation of buoy wind data from 4 m to 10 m. To rescale them, the wind speed
values are subjected to a logarithmic wind profile equation based on the Monin-
Obukhov similarity theory [43]. This method allows for adjusting wind speed mea-
surements taken at one height to estimate what they would be at another height.
The formula used is as follows:
v(z2, t) = v(z1, t)(z2
z1
)α,
(5.5)
where t indicates the time instant and z1, z2 are source and output heights respec-
tively.
2. Temporal collocation of the buoy measurements with SAR data with a time win-
dow of 30 minutes. If there is no observation in this span, the observation is dis-
carded. If there is more than one file, only the closest one in time is taken and used.
That makes the two observations comparable and usable for further analysis. Plots
comparing wind derived from SAR and measured from the buoys are made and
analyzed. This step produces seven collocated SAR-buoy datasets (one for each
buoy).
3. The resulting files from the previous step are then collocated temporally again with
the IMERG precipitation files from step 2 of the IMERG section. The span is again
30 minutes. The resulting dataset contains information obtained from SAR, buoys,
and IMERG. All observations obtained in this step are in the same location and in
the span of 30 minutes.
4. The triple collocated files from the previous step are separated on observations dur-
ing ’no precipitation,’ ’light precipitation,’ ’moderate precipitation’, and ’heavy pre-
cipitation’ as explained in IMERG step 6. This data is further used in statistics to
investigate the correlation between these observations.
5.4
Statistics
To compare the data are performed statistical techniques. The statistics used are:
• Average value
• Mean bias error
• Standard Deviation
• Mean Absolute Error
• Root Mean Square Error
• Principal Component Analysis
These statistical tools are used in this thesis to investigate and analyze the difference
between each of the available datasets (SAR wind speeds, buoy wind speeds and model
wind speeds) as shown in table 6.7. PCA however, is applied to both wind and rain
analysis. Follows a brief explanation of each tool.
14
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:23==
5.4.1
Average value µ
Straightforwardly, this looks at the average value of a certain dataset. Given a set of
samples {xi, i = 1, . . . , N}, the average value of the set is given by:
µ =
∑N
i=1 xi
N
(5.6)
This is applied to both wind and precipitation to represent their yearly and seasonal trends.
5.4.2
Mean Bias Error (MBE)
The Mean Bias Error (MBE) estimates the tendency of a model or dataset to over or
underestimate in comparison to another model or dataset. A positive (negative) MBE
indicates a tendency of the first dataset to estimate higher (lower) values compared to
a second dataset, hence the term ”bias”. Since this error measure is mathematically a
mean, it is calculated as in section section 5.4.1:
MBE =
∑N
i=1(xi −yi)
N
(5.7)
where {xi, i = 1, . . . , N} and {yi, i = 1, . . . , N} are the observations from the two datasets
or models to compare.
5.4.3
Standard Deviation σ
Standard deviation is a measure of how much a certain variable changes with respect to
its mean value [44]. With respect to a dataset {xi, i = 1, . . . , N}, it can be calculated with
the following equation:
σ =
√∑N
i=1(xi −µ)2
N −1
(5.8)
In the scope of the thesis, the standard deviation is used to show the deviation of each
two datasets from each other: SAR-derived wind speed, model wind speed and buoy
measurements of wind speed.
5.4.4
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
Mean Absolute Error is used to compare two different time series or datasets and consists
of the Manhattan Distance divided by the number of samples [45]. Given two sets: {xi, i =
1, . . . , N} and {yi, i = 1, . . . , N}:
MAE =
∑N
i=1 ∥yi −xi∥
N
(5.9)
MAE is often used in forecasting and gives an idea of the error significance independently
of positive or negative forecasting error [45].
In the thesis, MAE is used for comparing the datasets with wind speed values from SAR,
model, and buoys.
5.4.5
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
Root Mean Square Error represents the standard deviation (σ) of the prediction errors,
or residuals. In forecasting, it is used as a measure of the difference between predicted
and actual values [46]. Since RMSE is essentially a standard deviation applied to the
residuals, its equation is akin to eq. (5.10); given a set {xi, i = 1, . . . , N} and its predictions
{ˆxi, i = 1, . . . , N}:
RMSE =
√∑N
i=1(xi −ˆxi)2
N
(5.10)
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
15
==PAGE:24==
In the scope of the thesis, RMSE is used for the comparison of the SAR-wind speed with
the model wind speed, SAR wind speed with the buoy wind speed and model wind speed
with the buoy wind speed.
5.4.6
Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
Principal Component Analysis is a multivariate analysis tool with several applications:
dimensionality reduction and finding correlation between data attributes. PCA dimen-
sionality reduction acts on a dataset {xi, i = 1, . . . , N} of dimensionality RP and aims
at transforming it to a lower dimensional space RQ with Q < P [47]. This is useful for
computational reasons, as fewer data attributes mean lighter computations. In addition,
once PCA is completed, the Principal Components (PC) vectors are found. These can
then be used to explain the variance of the dataset and identify those attributes that most
represent the dataset.
There are two methods for PCA computation: through the covariance matrix and by ap-
plying Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). As the method used later from the sklearn
Python library is the latter, that is what is explained here [48].
Any data matrix X, where rows correspond to features and columns to samples, it can be
decomposed using SVD. First, the data is standardized around the mean:
˜X = X −µ
σ
(5.11)
then SVD can be applied:
˜X = UΣV T
(5.12)
where Σ contains the singular values of the data matrix and U and V contain, respectively,
the left and right singular vectors of those singular values. The right singular vectors also
describe the principal components. It can be demonstrated that the singular values cor-
responding to the principal components explain the variance of the dataset in descending
order. The variance explained by the P first principal components can be obtained as:
Var Explained =
∑P
i=1 σ2
i
∑Q
i=1 σ2
i
(5.13)
Dimensionality reduction is obtained when P < Q at the cost of a variance loss. A thresh-
old for this cutoff is decided empirically.
Covariance and correlation
Part of PCA analysis is to compute the covariance matrix of the data. The covariance
from two datasets of variables X and Y both of size n can be calculated as:
Cov(X, Y ) =
∑N
i=1(xi −¯x)(yi −¯y)
n
(5.14)
where ¯x and ¯y are the means of the respective datasets. By calculating the covariance
between each feature of a dataset, the covariance matrix is obtained.
If the data is first standardized (subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard devia-
tion), then the computed covariance matrix corresponds to the correlation matrix. Thus,
when applying eq. (5.14) to standardized data, the correlation matrix is obtained. This ma-
trix is particularly useful as it explains and gives insights about the relationship between
features. A high positive (negative) value of an entry Corri,j indicates strong positive
(negative) correlation between features i and j. Low values on the other end represent
weak correlation, the two features do not influence each other.
16
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:25==
6
Results
6.1
Results on winds from SAR
This chapter presents the analysis of SAR-derived wind speed data from 2019-2023 cov-
ering the North Sea area, which can give the overall insight and better understanding of
wind distribution in this region during the study period.
Figure 6.1: Mean SAR-derived neutral winds at 10 m above the ocean surface for the
2019-2023 period based on Sentinel-1.
The spatial distribution of wind speed is shown on fig. 6.1. It illustrates the spatial dis-
tribution of mean wind speed at 10 m above the ocean surface derived from SAR data.
The range shown is adjusted to exclude higher values resulting from backscatter from
landmass (mainly near coasts), wind farms, and ships; in addition, as can be seen in
fig. 6.4, mean wind SAR values tend to be in the shown range. The map reveals a distinct
gradient with higher wind speeds (8-10 m/s) observed predominantly in the northern and
northeastern parts of the region, near the coastlines. In contrast, southern and coastal ar-
eas exhibit lower mean wind speeds, ranging between 6 and 8 m/s. This spatial variation
is likely influenced by the regional atmospheric circulation patterns.
On fig. 6.1 certain spots with anomaly high values of SAR-derived wind speed appear
around the North Sea. These localized anomalies, which show significantly higher wind
speeds than the surrounding sea surface, are caused by the presence of offshore wind
turbines and passing ships. These structures act as a hard targets with high backscat-
tering values that interfere with the SAR signal, producing artificially elevated wind speed
estimates in these regions.
Lastly, fig. 6.1 shows regular diagonal bands of lower wind speed, indicating potential data
variations in SAR sampling due to satellite coverage limitations. A better explanation for
that can be inferred from fig. 6.2, which shows the frequency of SAR samples across
the North Sea region. Sampling density is variable, with the higher number of samples
concentrated along narrow diagonal bands reaching up to 1346 samples for 2019-2023.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
17
==PAGE:26==
These bands correspond to the orbital paths of the SAR satellites, where repetitive ob-
servations occurred, creating overlaps in the data. On the other hand, there are places
where the samples drop below 400 for the five-year period. This wide variation in sam-
pling frequency can influence the reliability of the derived wind speed averages, as areas
with higher sampling frequency may provide a more robust representation of the wind
conditions compared to areas with lower sampling density.
Figure 6.2: Number of SAR samples for the North Sea in the period 2019-2023 for
Sentinel-1.
To investigate further the wind speed in the North Sea, the SAR-data is collocated with
respect to the seven buoy locations presented in chapter 4. The SAR-derived wind speed
distribution at the buoy locations is shown on fig. 6.3 and fig. 6.4.
Figure 6.3 shows the probability of occurrence of each SAR-wind speed value for the
different locations. The trendline is presented as Weibull fit calculated using eq. (5.1).
The plots show the characteristic shape of the Weibull distribution, where the probability
of occurrence is highest for moderate wind speeds while very low wind speeds are less
common and the high wind speeds values are slowly decreasing. The shape parameter
k varies between 1.90 to 2.55, indicating the usual look of a non symmetrical bell curve.
The scale c varies between 6.62 m/s to 9.56 m/s, defining the general spread of each
curve: lower values of c indicate less spread while higher values show wider spread of
the SAR-derived wind speed values.
Each box plot from fig. 6.4 summarizes the distribution of wind speeds at these points
over the period of 2019-2023, showing the median values (red line), mean values (black
dashed line), interquartile ranges (blue box), and outliers (small circles). Across all buoy
locations, the median wind speeds range approximately from 5 m/s to 7 m/s, with most
observations falling within the interquartile range of 4 m/s to 11 m/s. Additionally, all lo-
cations show a number of outliers with wind speeds exceeding 17 m/s and 18 m/s and,
in most cases, reaching above 20 m/s. These outliers represent high wind speed events,
which are critical in the context of offshore wind energy. The relatively consistent median
values across buoys suggest a broadly homogeneous wind environment in open waters
of the North Sea. The mean values span 2.7 m/s with a minimal value of 5.8 m/s (location
ID 6200165) and a maximum of 8.5 m/s (location ID 6300110). However, the presence
of outliers reflects localized and temporal variations in wind speed that can occasionally
can reach higher extremes.
18
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:27==
(a) 6200144
(b) 6200146
(c) 6200165
(d) 6300110
(e) 6200086
(f) 6200087
(g) 6202114
Figure 6.3: Distribution of the SAR-derived wind speed values at 10 m height of each buoy
location. The red curve represents the Weibull fit of the data. For each plot are shown
the shape k and the scale c parameters based on Sentinel-1.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 6.4: SAR-derived wind speed distribution at 10 m height on the seven locations.
The red lines in each box stand for the median value, and the dashed black lines show
the mean value of the wind speeds based on Sentinel-1.
The SAR-derived wind speed distribution presented on fig. 6.4 follows a distribution pat-
tern that aligns with the Weibull distribution. The Weibull distribution is commonly used to
model wind speeds because it effectively captures the asymmetry and variability typical
of wind data [49]. The mean wind speed at each buoy location, as shown in the boxplots,
falls within a range where the Weibull distribution would predict the highest frequency of
occurrence. Additionally, the distribution of data points around these values, particularly
the longer tails extending towards higher speeds, reflects the skewness typical of the
Weibull distribution, where extreme values are possible but less likely. The mean and the
median values of each locations are presented on table 6.1.
Buoy ID
SAR-derived mean wind speed (m/s)
SAR-derived median wind speed (m/s)
6200144
7.4
7.2
6200146
7.9
7.4
6200165
5.8
5.3
6300110
8.5
7.9
6200086
7.0
7.1
6200087
5.8
5.5
6202114
6.4
6.4
Table 6.1: Buoy IDs with SAR-derived mean and median wind speeds
This Weibull-consistent pattern is crucial for wind resource assessment and forecasting.
It confirms that SAR-derived wind speed measurements can be used reliably to estimate
wind power potential, which depends on an accurate representation of the typical wind
speed distribution over time.
More details on SAR-derived wind speeds are presented on fig. 6.5, showing the an-
nual mean wind speeds in the seven locations. Each color in the bar chart corresponds
to a specific year, allowing for an inter-annual comparison of wind speed trends across
20
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:29==
Figure 6.5: Average annual SAR-derived wind speed at 10 m height in the seven locations
based on Sentinel-1.
the buoy locations. Most locations experience annual average wind speed variations of
a maximum of 1 m/s. The locations corresponding to buoys 6200144, 6200146, and
6300110 exhibit consistently higher wind speeds when compared to other locations with
average annual values above 7 m/s. In contrast, at the location of buoy 6200165, lower
wind speeds are observed as their annual speed never exceeds 6 m/s. The spatial dispar-
ity may be due to topographic influences and local atmospheric conditions. Examining the
year-over-year changes from fig. 6.5, 2020 and 2019 appear to have had slightly higher
average wind speeds at the locations mentioned above. This could reflect meteorological
events in those years that led to a slight increase in wind activity across the North Sea
region. Overall, from the data shown, it suggests that while there are minor inter-annual
variations in wind speed, the spatial distribution of SAR-derived wind speeds remains
consistent across locations.
Wind rose plots are used to present the distribution of wind speed and direction. Figure 6.6
presents the wind roses over the studied period in the North Sea locations. The data user
for visualization is 10 m SAR-derived wind speed data overlaid with model-derived wind
direction. The wind speed classes are presented in m/s displayed in color bands, and
directional frequencies are represented in radial distribution.
The wind roses reveal a dominant wind direction across the different buoy locations,
with winds primarily originating from the southwest (SW), west (W), and northwest (NW).
The pattern aligns well with the prevailing wind patterns observed in the North Sea re-
gion, where southwesterly and westerly winds are expected. The only location with a
slightly more different distribution of wind directions is the most northern location: Buoy
ID 6300110. There, the majority of winds are from the south (S). The frequency distribution
of wind speeds reveals that wind speeds between 5 m/s and 10 m/s are most common
across all locations, represented as darker blue shades in the wind roses, followed by
the winds between 10 m/s and 15 m/s, distributed on all locations mainly between SW,
W, and NW. Higher wind speeds above 15 m/s occur less frequently but are significant
in specific locations: Buoy ID 6200146 and 6300110, noticeably both northern than the
other locations. These considerations give an insight into wind behavior over the North
Sea, which is essential to understand operational conditions in the region.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) 6200144
(b) 6200146
(c) 6200165
(d) 6300110
(e) 6200086
(f) 6200087
(g) 6202114
Figure 6.6: Wind roses at 10 m height from SAR-derived wind speed based on Sentinel-1
and model input direction from GFS.
22
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:31==
(a) 2019
(b) 2020
(c) 2021
(d) 2022
(e) 2023
Figure 6.7: Annual rainfall in the North Sea from 2019 to 2023 based on IMERG.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
23
==PAGE:32==
6.2
Results on precipitation
The following analysis step involves the IMERG precipitation data collected over the North
Sea. It is essential to know that the precipitation data includes rain and other kinds of
precipitation, such as snow and hail.
As this area is predominantly rainy and this thesis aims to investigate the impact of liquid
precipitation, the maps have been made showing only data with IMERG probability of
liquid precipitation over 75%. That assures that the remaining IMERG precipitation data
consists only of rain.
Year
Mean Rainfall (mm)
2019
2058
2020
1810
2021
1635
2022
1601
2023
2152
For the whole period
1851
Table 6.2: Mean annual rainfall for the observed area of the North Sea from 2019 to 2023
based on IMERG.
Maps (fig. 6.7) for the period 2019–2023 indicate that rainfall patterns were not uniformly
distributed and the North Sea. The average annual rainfall map for the whole period is
presented on fig. 3.1. From it, is calculated the mean value for the whole area, which
is 1851 mm. From this value two regions can be established experiencing higher than
average rainfall. This regions can be observed also through the years from the maps in
fig. 6.7. In particular, these two regions have received more rainfall than the mean value
(1851 mm) for the period, and have received higher than the mean annual rainfall during
most of the years (shown in table 6.2):
• The coastal area near the northern parts of the Netherlands and northwestern Ger-
many, extending into the adjacent sea,
• The southern Norwegian coast, especially the southwestern parts.
In contrast, a relatively drier region (with annual rainfall for the whole period less than
1851 mm) is observed east of the English coast, stretching into the central North Sea.
This region stays as dryer also during the observed years, with less rainfall than the mean
annual rainfall for the area (table 6.2).
The rainfall patterns from 2019 to 2023 reveal several notable trends across the North
Sea region. There’s often a gradual increase in rainfall from SW to NE, with the En-
glish coast area receiving the least rainfall and the Norwegian coast receiving the most.
This pattern likely reflects the dominant weather system and the weather masses mov-
ing across the North Sea from west to east, picking up moisture as they travel over the
water and sending more rainfall as they encounter land and higher elevations. Another
interesting observation is that some years, such as 2019 and 2020, show very localized
areas of higher rainfall, particularly near the Norwegian coast. These concentrated areas
are most likely due to the result of specific meteorological events. The central part of the
North Sea shows the most variability between years, sometimes appearing as an exten-
sion of the drier region near England and other times showing moderate rainfall levels.
This variability indicates the dynamic nature of the region.
24
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:33==
The rainfall patterns seem strongly influenced by coastal topography, particularly near
Norway. The interaction between land and sea, together with the mountainous coast
of Norway, enhances rainfall through orographic lifting, which occurs when moist air is
forced upwards by the terrain, cooling as it rises and leading to increased condensation
and rainfall.
As mentioned in section 5.2, data is collocated to the seven buoys locations and separated
depending on the chance for liquid precipitation.
The next step of the analysis is to gather the rainfall data recorded at the seven selected
buoys located in the North Sea and categorize them into wet and dry locations. The
wet/dry classification is based on the average annual rainfall received at each buoy com-
pared to the mean value for the entire region during the period 2019-2023. The mean
annual rainfall for the region is 1851 mm, and buoys exceeding this threshold are clas-
sified as wet, while those below are considered dry. The buoys and their locations are
presented in fig. 3.1. The locations are classified as presented in Table 6.3.
Buoy ID
Average annual
Classification
rainfall (mm)
6200144
1540
Dry
6200146
1613
Dry
6200165
1498
Dry
6300110
1912
Wet
6200086
2097
Wet
6200087
2128
Wet
6202114
2167
Wet
Table 6.3: Classification of the locations for wet and dry and average annual rainfall for
years 2019-2023 based on IMERG.
Liquid precipitation at buoys locations
The year with the most rainfall for 6 out of the 7 locations is 2023, followed by 2019, which
can be seen on fig. 6.8. The mean annual rainfall value for each location are as shown
on table 6.3.
Almost all locations experienced an increase in rainfall in 2019 and 2023, with range
between 119 mm and 534 mm higher than the mean yearly rainfall for the location. For
2019, a difference is made by location 6300110 which has lower value than its mean
yearly average rainfall by 84 mm, and for 2023, location 6200146 similarly shows lower
value than its yearly average rainfall by 47 mm.
The only year in which all locations experience decrease from their average annual value
of rainfall is in 2022. The locations registered on average 205 mm less rainfall in that year.
The distinction between wet and dry areas stays through all years as all dry locations
receive less than the mean rainfall while all the wet areas receive higher than the mean
rainfall.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 6.8: Figure 6.8a shows the rainfall presented year by year for each buoy location.
The total rainfall for the whole period is the sum of all the years and it is the full column
for each buoy. Figure 6.8b shows the average annual rainfall for each location with error
bars showing the deviation of the mean value.
26
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:35==
Mixed precipitation at buoys locations
Mixed precipitation experiences the same distribution on the locations as the in rainfall
section: the average mixed precipitation is higher on the 4 wet locations, and lower on the
3 dry locations (fig. 6.9). The average mixed precipitation for each location are presented
on table 6.4.
Buoy ID
Average annual
Classification
mixed precipitation (mm)
6200144
6
Dry
6200146
7
Dry
6200165
8
Dry
6300110
15
Wet
6200086
16
Wet
6200087
14
Wet
6202114
14
Wet
Table 6.4: Average annual mixed precipitation for each location for years 2019-2023
based on IMERG.
However, the yearly distribution is different. The year with the most mixed precipitation in
all of the locations is 2021. During 2021 the locations received on average 22 mm more
mixed precipitation compared to their average annual mixed precipitation.
The other year in which all locations received mixed precipitation is 2023, as the values
are less than 2021 and differ between 1 and 13 mm through the locations.
Through all the years all locations had mixed precipitation with the only difference being
2022, when only two of the locations (the northernmost ones: 6200146 and 6300110) had
mixed precipitation.
Solid precipitation at buoys locations
The snowfall is low across all years, with peaks in 2021 for all buoy location, followed
by 2023 (fig. 6.10). The average annual snowfall for each location is presented on ta-
ble 6.5. During 2021 the locations received on average 23 mm more snowfall compared
to their average snowfall values. During 2023 only two locations did not register snowfall
(6200144 and 6200165), while the other locations have registered snowfall between 1
and 4 mm.
The year with the least snowfall is 2020 when only the northernmost location 6300110
received snow, equal to 1 mm. That makes this location, the only one receiving snowfall
through all the years.
The average snow precipitation is indicating that there are only two locations with sig-
nificantly higher snowfall: 6200086 by 9 mm and 620087 by 10 mm; however, that is
mainly due to the year 2021, while in the rest of the years these locations almost did not
experience any snow.
Overall, the mixed precipitation and the snowfall are accounting for less than 1% of the
total precipitation over all buoy locations, making the rainfall 99% of the precipitation on
all of the locations. That could be the reason for the discrepancy between dry and wet
classification of the locations and the average annual snowfall.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.9: Figure 6.9a shows the mixed precipitation presented year by year for each
buoy location. The total mixed precipitation for the whole period is the sum of all years
and it is the full column for each buoy. Figure 6.9b shows the average annual mixed
precipitation for each location with error bars showing the deviation of the mean value.
28
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:37==
Figure 6.10: Figure 6.10a shows the solid precipitation (snowfall) presented year by year
for each buoy location. The total snowfall for the whole period is the sum of all years and
it is the full column for each buoy. Figure 6.10b shows the average annual snowfall for
each location with error bars showing the deviation of the mean value.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
29
==PAGE:38==
Buoy ID
Average annual
Classification
snowfall (mm)
6200144
3
Dry
6200146
5
Dry
6200165
7
Dry
6300110
7
Wet
6200086
9
Wet
6200087
10
Wet
6202114
7
Wet
Table 6.5: Average annual snowfall for each location for years 2019-2023 based on
IMERG.
Seasonal analysis The seasonal analysis is presented only for the rainfall on fig. 6.11.
The mean seasonal rainfall follows the same trend through all locations: maximum during
the autumn (between 479 mm for location 6200144 and 800 mm for location 6200087)
and minimum during the spring (between 251 mm at location 6200165 and 362 mm at
location 6202114). An outlier is the northernmost location 6300110, where the maximum
rainfall is during the winter, however the difference with the autumn is only 17 mm.
One reason could be the influence of the lower temperatures and the higher impact of
ocean streams at the northernmost location.
Figure 6.11: Mean seasonal rainfall for all buoy locations for 2019-2023 based on IMERG
data.
30
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:39==
6.3
Results on winds and precipitation for each buoy location
Using all data from SAR and from IMERG on the seven buoy locations can show the
trends through the years in the North Sea.
6.3.1
Annual analysis
On fig. 6.12 are shown plots representing the data from each buoy location. Each subplot
shows the annual IMERG derived rainfall (blue bars, left y-axis) and SAR-derived wind
speed (red line, right y-axis) over a five-year period from 2019 to 2023.
Both categories (dry and wet) do not show significant trend of increase or decrease of
the SAR-derived wind speed with the rainfall through the years. The only year in which
all locations experienced increase of the annual wind speed compared to the annual (ta-
ble 6.1) mean is 2020, and the year which experienced decrease compared to the mean
is 2021, both years without extreme rainfall values (as analyzed in section 6.2).
In 2020 the increase of the wind speed in the dry locations is between 0.3 m/s and 0.6
m/s, while in the wet locations it is 0.1 m/s everywhere except the northernmost location
6300110, showing a 0.5 m/s increase.
In 2021 the decrease in the SAR-derived wind speed on the dry locations is 0.2 m/s on
6200144 and 6200165 and 0.4 m/s on 6200146, while the wet locations have more diverse
decrease between 0.1 m/s and 0.4 m/s.
From this annual data it cannot be extrapolated a strong correlation between changes
in the average values of rainfall and wind speed. The overall stability in both variables
across multiple locations and years suggests a consistent climatic pattern within the North
sea.
6.3.2
Seasonal analysis
After the annual analysis did not show strong correlation between the rainfall and SAR-
derived wind speed, a seasonal analysis is made to seek further patterns.
On fig. 6.13 are presented plots of the average rainfall and SAR-derived wind speed per
season for each of the buoy locations. A clear pattern is seen on all of the locations - the
highest wind speed is in the winter and the lowest wind speed is in the summer. Those
seasons are also the seasons with more moderate rainfall, as the maximum rainfall is in
the autumn (except for location 6300110), and the minimum rainfall is during the spring
(as explained in section 6.2).
The dry locations experience increase from their mean wind speed during the winters
with average of 1.4 m/s, while the wet locations have increase of 0.9 m/s for all locations
except the northernmost location 6300110 which has increase of 1.7 m/s.
During summer, the dry and the wet locations experience decrease from the mean wind
speed between 1.0 m/s and 1.2 m/s. A difference makes location 6300110, experiencing
decrease of 1.9 m/s from it’s mean wind speed value.
It is important to notice that during the autumns, even if the winds are not with the strongest
speeds, there is higher than average wind speed values (presented on table 6.1) for all
of the locations.
The seasonal analysis of the two datasets suggests consistent seasonal variations through
the North Sea. The seasons with moderate rainfall receive higher wind speeds. In gen-
eral, during the colder seasons (autumn and winter) the wind speeds are higher, as well
as the average rainfall, while during the warmer seasons (spring and summer) the wind
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) 6200144
(b) 6200146
(c) 6200165
(d) 6300110
(e) 6200086
(f) 6200087
(g) 6202114
Figure 6.12: Yearly average IMERG rain and SAR wind speed at 10 m from Sentinel-1
for each location
32
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:41==
(a) 6200144
(b) 6200146
(c) 6200165
(d) 6300110
(e) 6200086
(f) 6200087
(g) 6202114
Figure 6.13: Seasonal average IMERG-rainfall and SAR-derived wind speed data for
each location for 2019-2023.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
33
==PAGE:42==
speeds and the rainfall are lower for all locations. The location with the highest deviations
from its mean values is 6300110.
6.3.3
Analysis by rain intensity
To dig deeper into the connection between rain and wind speed, the data is collocated: all
SAR-derived wind speeds are collocated to the corresponding observations from IMERG
precipitation. The collocated data is filtered to eliminate observations having precipitation
other than rain. Rain intensity is classified into light rain (under 0.5 mm), moderate rain
(between 0.5 and 4 mm) and heavy rain (over 4 mm). Due to the fact that there are not
enough observations for heavy rain, the moderate and heavy rain are presented together.
Figure 6.14 displays box plots of SAR-derived wind speeds categorized by rain intensity
for the seven buoy locations. The box plots illustrate the mean (with a black dashed line),
the median (with a red line), the interquartile range, and potential outliers (with circles),
providing insights into the variability and central tendency of wind speeds. The following
rain intensity impact can be noticed:
• No Rain: Generally, wind speeds are lower with a tighter distribution, indicating less
variability.
• Light Rain: Wind speeds tend to increase slightly, with some increase in variability.
• Moderate and Heavy Rain: Wind speeds are typically higher and show similar and
a slightly higher variability to Light Rain conditions, suggesting that heavier rain
intensity is associated with higher detected wind speeds.
The mean and the median values shown on the box plots are generally increasing with
rain intensity across most of the buoys. That also indicates a trend of stronger winds with
heavier rain.
To summarize, even if the results from section 6.3.1 suggest that the annual amount of
rainfall may not have a significant connection with the annual wind speed values, the rain
intensities show a consistent pattern of increasing the wind speeds with the intensity of
the rain. This suggested a strong link between rain intensity and wind dynamics can have
implications for understanding weather patterns in the North Sea and can give insights for
a better understanding of the SAR-derivation of wind speed.
In most locations, wind speeds exceed 20 m/s, raising the questions of whether the accu-
racy of SAR-derived wind speed values varies across different rain intensities and whether
all SAR-derived wind speed values can be considered reliable (even at wind speeds over
20 m/s).
As these wind speeds are calculated using eq. (2.1), it is evident that each value depends
on the normalized radar cross-section (NRCS, σ0). Figure 6.15 presents trend-lines that
illustrate the distribution of SAR-derived wind speed values in relation to NRCS values
(dB), which are shown within the range of -40 dB to 3 dB, as per the DTU Wind filtering
standards. The figure displays three trend-lines corresponding to varying rain intensities.
The data indicate a positive correlation between wind speed and NRCS, where NRCS
values increase with wind speed under all conditions, thereby demonstrating a consistent
relationship between wind speed and radar backscatter across different rain intensities.
This consistency implies that rain has no substantial impact on the accuracy of SAR-
derived wind speeds. Further, across all conditions, the sensitivity to wind speed (slope
steepness) is highest between 0 m/s and 15 m/s. Between 15 m/s and 20 m/s, trend-line
slopes begin to level off, with a minimal increase observed beyond 20 m/s, suggesting
34
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:43==
(a) 6200144
(b) 6200146
(c) 6200165
(d) 6300110
(e) 6200086
(f) 6200087
(g) 6202114
Figure 6.14: SAR-derived wind speed observations separated on no rain, light rain, and
moderate + heavy rain, for each location. The red line in the boxes shows the median
value and the black dashed line shows the mean value of the wind speed. The circles
indicate outliers.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
35
==PAGE:44==
that trend lines approach a plateau around -10 dB. However, it must be noted that there
are not many values observed over 20 m/s.
Figure 6.15: Correlation between NRCS values and SAR wind speed in different rain
intensities. The trendline is a logarithmic fit for the SAR wind speed in no rain, light rain
and moderate and heavy rain based on Sentinel-1.
Based on this analysis, it seems that SAR-derived wind speed values are reliable, irre-
spective of rain intensity and wind speed. All curves present significant slope in the 0-20
m/s range, reflecting the reliability of NRCS data in dry and rainy conditions.
6.4
Correlations
Number of collocated observations
Buoy ID
No Rain
Light Rain
Moderate Rain
Heavy Rain
Total
6200144
475
384
55
1
915
6200146
602
293
51
5
951
6200165
632
247
42
2
923
6300110
674
330
93
6
1103
6200086
18
15
1
0
34
6200087
11
3
0
0
14
6202114
3
0
0
0
3
Total
2415
1272
242
14
3943
Table 6.6: Number of collocated data points (SAR, IMERG and buoy) for different rainfall
categories. Visibly, higher intensity rain is less common in every location.
The observations from SAR and IMERG are collocated with observations from the buoys.
SAR data is taken for 2.5 km around the buoy and averaged, IMERG is taken at 5 km
around the buoy. The temporal resolution is ± 30 minutes. Each of these observation is
classified by rain intensity (No Rain, Light Rain, Moderate Rain and Heavy Rain). The re-
sulted numbers of observations per each of the buoy locations are presented in Table 6.6.
36
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:45==
Figure 6.16: Comparison of the mean wind speeds derived from SAR, estimated from the
model and measured by the buoy, for the data rich four buoy locations.
Due to necessity of a rich dataset, only the 4 buoys with more observations (6200144,
6200146, 6200165, and 6300110) are considered to analyze the mean wind speeds. The
mean wind speed of the three datasets providing it (SAR-derived, model estimated and
buoy measurements) is calculated and presented on Figure 6.16 for comparison. This
comparison provides insights into the consistency and accuracy of SAR relative to model
data and to in-situ buoy measurements, as well as variations in wind speed among differ-
ent locations.
For most buoys, SAR and model mean wind speeds are close in value, typically differing
by only a small margin, while buoy measurements tend to show higher values than both.
Results by buoy:
• Location ID 6200144 shows relatively similar mean values for SAR (7.50 m/s) and
model (7.49 m/s), with buoy data being slightly higher at 7.78 m/s. It is the one
location where the three values agree most.
• Location ID 6200146 shows good agreement between SAR and model (7.91 m/s
and 7.82 m/s respectively) but the buoy measurement is noticeably higher (8.97
m/s).
• Location ID 6200265 has recorded significantly lower SAR-derived wind speed (5.85
m/s) than both model (7.46 m/s) and buoy (7.90 m/s).
• Location ID 6300110, classified as wet as it received more rainfall than the other
three locations in this analysis, shows the SAR wind speed and the model wind
speed in good agreement (8.50 m/s and 8.48 m/s respectively); however, both are
lower than the buoy measurement (9.17 m/s).
In summary, the analysis highlights that while SAR and model data are generally aligned
and provide reasonable estimates of mean wind speed, there is a tendency for underes-
timation compared to buoy measurements.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
37
==PAGE:46==
6.4.1
Statistics and comparisons
Comparison between the datasets and calculated statistical values are further presented
and investigated using plots and tables.
Linear regression analysis
Linear regression analysis of the relationship of SAR-derived wind speeds with buoy-
measured wind speeds under different raining conditions is presented on fig. 6.17. Each
plot shows a regression line (in red) and confidence interval (in dimmed red color around
the regression line), representing the general trend of SAR wind speeds relative to buoy
measures.
The first plot, showing observations in no rain condition, SAR-derived wind speeds align
more closely with buoy wind speeds, as can be seen by the relatively narrow spread
of points around the regression line. The trend shows a positive correlation, meaning
that as the buoy wind speeds increase, the SAR wind speeds increase with the same
proportion. The plot suggests that in the absence of rain, SAR-derived wind speeds are
closely matching in-situ buoy measurements.
The second plot, under light rain conditions, shows a higher data dispersion compared to
the first plot, indicating an increase in the variability of the measurements. Slightly greater
spread suggests that light rain introduces some discrepancies.
Under moderate to heavy rain conditions (third plot) dispersion increases further com-
pared to no rain and light rain conditions. The regression line maintains a positive slope,
but with bigger confidence interval, suggesting higher deviation between the two data
sets.
Statistical values
The comparison between wind speeds measured by SAR, model data, and buoy obser-
vations during different rainfall conditions was analyzed using various error metrics. The
full table with the statistic is shown on table 6.7.
Statistic
No Rain
Light Rain
Moderate Rain
Heavy Rain
SAR Wind vs. Model Speed
Mean Bias Error (m/s)
-0.27
-0.55
-0.70
-0.32
Standard Deviation (m/s)
1.88
2.11
2.35
3.16
Mean Absolute Error (m/s)
1.32
1.53
1.75
2.05
Root Mean Squared Error (m/s)
1.90
2.18
2.45
3.06
SAR Wind vs. Buoy Wind
Mean Bias Error (m/s)
-0.89
-1.41
-1.34
-0.82
Standard Deviation (m/s)
2.35
2.84
3.22
4.92
Mean Absolute Error (m/s)
1.78
2.29
2.65
3.67
Root Mean Squared Error (m/s)
2.51
2.89
3.48
4.81
Model Speed vs. Buoy Wind
Mean Bias Error (m/s)
-0.63
-0.86
-0.64
-0.50
Standard Deviation (m/s)
1.75
2.12
2.78
3.46
Mean Absolute Error (m/s)
1.35
1.68
2.13
2.40
Root Mean Squared Error (m/s)
1.86
2.29
2.84
3.37
Table 6.7: Statistics for SAR wind, buoy wind, and model wind speed comparisons across
different rainfall conditions.
38
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:47==
(a) No rain
(b) Light rain
(c) Moderate and heavy rain
Figure 6.17: Comparison between in situ measurements of wind speeds and SAR-derived
wind speeds during different raining events. Dots represent compared data points, redline
is the fitted linear regression
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
39
==PAGE:48==
Mean bias error
As mentioned in section 5.4.2, the mean bias error is the mean of the differences between
the wind speed values between SAR and the model, SAR and the buoys and the model
and the buoys. The mean error shows the typical error value and gives an indication of
the central tendency of the data, as it is calculated from the mean values of each two
datasets that are compared. Negative MBE values when comparing dataset/model A to
dataset/model B mean that the mean value of the first data set is lower than the mean
value of the second one. It follows then, thanks to the consistent negative values, that the
highest absolute values are those of the buoy wind speeds, while the lowest are those
of SAR derived wind speeds. This remains consistent with what shown in the previous
section.
Noticeably, both ”SAR vs Buoy winds” and ”Model vs Buoy winds” show the highest ab-
solute value during light rain and the smallest value is during heavy rain. However, that
may be due to less data points in the higher rain intensities.
Standard Deviation
The Standard Deviation indicates the variability of errors around the mean (section 5.4.3).
It has a larger value under rainy conditions compared to no rain. For SAR against the buoy
wind speed, the standard deviation is lowest at 2.35 m/s in no rain and grows from 2.84
m/s for slight rain to 4.92 m/s during heavy rain. This increased variability suggests that
SAR wind measurements are less consistent in rainy conditions, possibly due to the radar
signal being distorted by rain.
Model vs buoy wind speed also has shows error variability increasing with rainfall.
At no rain, the standard deviation is 1.75 m/s, to then rise from 2.12 m/s (slight rain) to
3.46 m/s (heavy rain). A similar increase is observed for the standard deviation of the
difference between SAR vs model wind speeds. The standard deviation is 1.88 m/s for
no rain and then increases from 2.11 m/s to 3.16 m/s (heavy rain). This implies that
the differences between the SAR and the model values are smaller than the differences
between the buoy and model values. However, the highest deviation is observed between
SAR and buoy observations.
Mean Absolute Error
As in section 5.4.4, the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) quantifies the average absolute dif-
ference between two datasets, representing the magnitude of error without regard to di-
rection (positive or negative).
MAE provides a clearer view of the typical error size without the influence of positive or
negative bias. In addition, its values give an indication of the typical size of the deviations
between each pair of datasets across different rain intensities.
Throughout all wind speeds the value of MAE increases, from lowest at no rain to highest
at heavy rain. The values of MAE of SAR wind vs Buoy winds are the highest between
the three pairs (1.78 m/s to 3.67 m/s). The higher MAE values for SAR vs. buoy and SAR
vs. model comparisons indicate that SAR-derived wind speeds are more sensitive to rain
interference.
RMSE
The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE, section 5.4.5), which accounts for both the mag-
nitude and distribution of errors, shows an increasing trend with rain intensity.
For SAR vs buoy wind speeds, RMSE for no rain is 2.51 m/s. It then increases from 2.89
m/s for slight rain to 4.81 m/s during heavy rain. This increase indicates that SAR-derived
wind speeds become less accurate as rain intensity increases, likely due to interference
40
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:49==
from rain affecting the radar signal.
The model wind vs buoy wind also shows larger RMSE values as rain intensity increases,
with values equal to 1.86 m/s for no rain and rising from 2.29 m/s for slight rain to 3.37
m/s in heavy rain. Similar to the standard deviation, the differences between the SAR vs
model are similar to those between the model and buoy wind speeds, but the deviation is
smaller. For no rain, it is 1.89 m/s, and it increases with rain from 2.18 m/s to 3.06 m/s.
To summarize, the plots on fig. 6.17 and the Table 6.7 highlights the accuracy of SAR-
derived wind speeds when compared to buoy measurements. In absence of rain, SAR-
derived wind speeds align best to the buoys, suggesting high accuracy. However, as the
rain intensity increases, the measurements show more variability and deviations. The
trend supports the statistical findings where errors increase with higher rain intensities.
6.4.2
Principal Component Analysis and Correlation heatmap
The collocated variables are used to investigate further the relationship between them.
A Principal Component Analysis (section 5.4.6) is made for the following features: ”Pre-
cipitation”, ”Liquid chance”, ”SAR-derived wind speed”, ”Model wind speed” and ”Buoy
wind speed”. The analysis shows the contribution of each feature to the principal compo-
nents (PC1, PC2 and PC3). Together, these three principal components are enough to
explain 94.2% of the data. The explained variance ratio for each PC indicates how much
of the dataset’s variability is captured by each component:
• PC1 explains 55.8%
• PC2 explains 20.8%
• PC3 explains 17.6% .
These three PC have high enough values to indicate that they capture the majority of the
information in the dataset. The first principal component is dominated by the wind features
(SAR, model and buoy), while the second and third are driven by the ”Precipitation” and
”Liquid Chance” features.
Correlation Heatmap
Through the PCA, a correlation matrix can be obtained. The correlation matrix is shown
as heatmap on fig. 6.18, illustrating the relationship between features, how they influence
each other. As expected, the highest values of correlation are between the datasets and
models, as they represent the same value (wind speed). The heatmap shows that:
• Wind speeds - There is high positive correlation between the observations of wind
speeds. The highest correlation of 0.90 is between model wind speed and in situ
buoy wind speed. The SAR-derived wind speeds and model wind speeds have
correlation of 0.86, and the correlation between the SAR and the buoy wind speed
is the lowest between the three pairs accounting for 0.81.
• Precipitation - There is a moderate positive correlation between the Precipitation and
the Liquid chance, indicating that higher precipitation is generally associated with a
higher probability of liquid precipitation, meaning that most precipitation is rainfall.
There is weak positive correlation between Precipitation and the wind speeds, as
the highest of them is between the model derived wind speed of 0.24, and the lowest
pf 0.20 with the buoy measurements.
• Liquid chance - There is moderate positive correlation with the Precipitation, and
very weak almost near-zero correlations with the wind speeds.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.18: Correlation matrix heatmap of Precipitation, Liquid chance, SAR-derived
wind speed, Model-derived wind speed and Buoy measurement of wind speed
In summary, the two heatmaps reveal that wind speed measurements from SAR, model
and buoy are very well related, with slightly better correlation between SAR-derived wind
speed and the wind speed from the model, rather than the correlation between SAR-
derived wind speed and wind speed from buoy measurements. It is shown that the Pre-
cipitation and the wind speeds also have a moderate positive correlation. Finally, Liquid
chance is primarily influenced by Precipitation, as high precipitation is associated with
precipitation of high liquid chance.
6.5
Implication for wind energy
To investigate the potential for wind energy at the seven selected locations, the Swiss
Federal Office of Energy provides an online calculator [42]. Given a certain mean wind
speed at 100 m, it calculates and plots the power production distribution and the power
curve for a selected turbine. For this projection Vestas V136 (4.2 MW) is selected [50].
To obtain an estimate of mean wind speed at 100 m, first all the SAR wind speeds are
extrapolated to that height using eq. (5.5). Then the mean wind speed is computer at
each buoy location.
Table 6.8 presents the mean of the SAR-derived wind speed at 100 m at each buoy lo-
cation, the yearly power production per location and the capacity factor of the location.
The capacity factor represents the relation of the wind turbine’s annual production and the
maximum possible production of a wind turbine [42]. The resulted plots from the webpage
are shown on fig. 6.19.
Based on the analysis, the location with the highest wind speed and thus best power
production and highest capacity factor is 6300110. However, this location is one of the
’wet’ locations, experiencing more rainfall than the average for the area. This may lead to
42
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:51==
(a) 6200144, at 10.4 m/s
(b) 6200146, at 11.0 m/s
(c) 6200165, at 8.0 m/s
(d) 6300110, at 11.8 m/s
(e) 6200086, at 9.7 m/s
(f) 6200087, at 8.0 m/s
(g) 6202114, at 9.0 m/s
Figure 6.19: Wind speed distribution (blue), power production distribution (green) and
power curve (red) at buoy locations. Simulated using [42], mean wind value at 100 m and
a Vestas V136 turbine.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 6.8: Wind Speed, Power Production, and Capacity Factor by Buoy ID
SAR Wind Speed
Power
Capacity
Classification
Buoy ID
at 100 m (m/s)
Production (GW/year)
Factor (%)
for wet and
dry location
6200144
10.4
23.1
62.7
Dry
6200146
11.0
24.0
65.3
Dry
6200165
8.0
17.9
48.7
Dry
6300110
11.8
24.9
67.6
Wet
6200086
9.7
21.9
59.4
Wet
6200087
8.0
17.9
48.6
Wet
6202114
9.0
20.2
54.9
Wet
problems connected to leading edge erosion, which can decrease the life expectancy of
a wind turbine placed in that location. In that case, another choice could be 6200146. It
is a ’dry’ location, it has a power production 24.0 GW/year and a capacity factor of 65.3%,
only 2% less than the location 6300110. It is interesting that both locations are the two
northernmost locations in the area. Another very good candidate could be considered
6200144, which is also dry and has capacity factor of 62.7%. This location is near the
coast of United Kingdom.
It is important to add that all these locations have high capacity factor (over 48%), in-
dicating that overall the whole North Sea is a good place for wind energy investment.
However, one should pay attention for the wet areas, which can have good possibility for
wind energy but the high rainfall may increase maintenance costs.
44
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:53==
7
Discussion
The following section presents a discussion of the findings on the patterns of wind and
rain across the North Sea as well as the validation of SAR-derived wind speed data. The
discussion evaluates SAR data accuracy and assesses whether the research hypothesis
is validated.
7.1
Wind and rain patterns
The results demonstrate a clear pattern from the wind and precipitation in the North Sea.
The SAR-wind speed and IMERG precipitation data analysis presented here align with
previous studies.
A study from 2010 [51] investigates the wind speed in the North Sea at 10 m with data
derived from National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCR), its updated version NCR2
and ECMWF Re-Analysis-40 (ERA-40) provided by European Center for Medium-Rance
Weather Forecasts (ECMWF); based on this, for the period 1980-2000 it identifies that the
mean wind speed varies between 6 m/s and 10 m/s (fig. 7.1). Specifically, the ERA-40
data shows very similar distribution of the wind speed data from this research as presented
on fig. 6.1, which shows values between 7 m/s and 10 m/s. NCR and especially NCR2
show more uniformly distribution of the values.
Results from SAR-derived wind speeds are presented in [52], collected by Envisat Ad-
vanced SAR (ASAR) mission between 2002 and 2012 and Sentinel-1 mission from 2014
to 2018. The study involves the whole European region, however only the North Sea
section will be used for comparison: the distribution of wind speeds at 10 m in the North
Sea ranges from 7 m/s at SW to 10 m/s at North and NE, as shown on fig. 7.2. Similarly,
fig. 6.1 from chapter 6 presents a similar trend: wind speeds around 7 m/s in the S and
SW part of the North Sea, that exceed to 10 m/s at North and NE.
Furthermore, according to the study the mean wind speed in the North Sea varies between
5 m/s and 11 m/s depending on the season (fig. 7.3); the N and NE parts are always
experiencing higher wind speeds than the S and SW parts. This agrees with the seasonal
analysis from the seven locations presented in section 6.3.2. The locations in the S and
SW have SAR-derived wind speeds between 5.8 m/s and 7.4 m/s. The two northern
locations show higher mean values, 7.9 m/s and 8.5 m/s. Lastly, it presents a predominant
Figure 7.1: Mean wind speed values at 10 m in m/s for the period 1980-2000 [51].
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 7.2: Mean wind speed at 10 m derived from combined data from Sentinel-1 and
Envisat ASAR [52].
46
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:55==
wind direction from SW, which also agrees with the wind roses from section 6.1. As
observed in the thesis, there is change of the wind direction from S in the northernmost
parts of the North Sea.
Regarding the seasonal distribution of the wind speed, during winter the North Sea re-
ceives the highest wind speeds (with average of 10.5 m/s), while during the summer the
lowest wind speeds (with average of 7.5 m/s) are observed according to [53]. A similar
trend is presented again in [51] where the monthly distribution of wind speeds at 10 m
is between 4 m/s-6 m/s during the summer months but increases to 6 m/s-8 m/s in the
winter. The reason for this is believed to be the storm activity in Europe which peaks in the
winter and decreases in the summer. Similar seasonal trends are found from [54] which
compares a lot of different data sources such as reanalysis, masts and models. They un-
derline a significant decrease of the wind speed also at 100 m during the summer months
in the North Sea, especially in July (mean value around 9 m/s), and increase in the winter
months, especially in January (mean value around 12 m/s). The results from the thesis
agree with the findings from these studies, as the seasonal analysis of the SAR-derived
wind speed in chapter 5 shows a negative deviation from the mean wind by 1 m/s and 1.9
m/s in the summer, and positive deviation between 0.9 m/s and 1.7 m/s during the winter.
Figure 7.3: Maps showing the mean wind speed and wind directions in the North Sea per
season for the period 1999 to 2009 [53].
The SAR-derived wind speeds at the seven buoy locations are compared to data from
the Global Wind Atlas (GWA) [55] that provides high resolution wind speed data derived
with numerical weather prediction modeling for the period 2008-2017 [56]. GWA gives
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
47
==PAGE:56==
results at different levels (10 m , 50 m, 100 m, 150 m and 250 m); in order to compare
with the SAR-derived wind speeds of this thesis (at 10 m), only the GWA 10 m values
are considered. Continuing with [55], for location 6200144 GWA presents a mean wind
speed 7.8 m/s with predominant direction from SW, in accordance with that observed
in chapter 6 table 6.1, but 0.4 m/s higher in velocity than SAR. Location 6200146 shows
GWA mean wind speed equal to 8 m/s, with only 0.1 m/s difference from SAR table 6.1 and
predominant location from SW as there is a lot of wind observed from S, W and NW as well,
which is similar to the result on the wind rose fig. 6.6. Location 6200165 shows significantly
higher wind speed in GWA, by 7.8 m/s, than the one observed in SAR table 6.1 (5.8 m/s).
The wind rose also shows some disagreement as GWA shows predominant location at
SW-W while in fig. 6.6 the most observed direction is S-SW. Location 6300110 shows
0.4 m/s difference: GWA gives means speed of 8.1 while table 6.1 observes 8.5 m/s,
and the direction shown in GWA is S-SE, while the predominant direction in fig. 6.6 is S.
Location 6200086 has higher wind speed observed of 8 m/s from GWA, while in table 6.1
is 7.0 m/s. Predominant wind direction in both studies is SW-W. Location 6200087 shows
discrepancy between GWA and this analysis, as the mean wind speed is 7.9 m/s while in
table 6.1 is 5.8 m/s; the wind direction is however in agreed to be SW-W. Location 6202114
shows GWA wind speed of 7.8 m/s, which is 1.4 m/s higher than the one observed in
table 6.1, and predominant direction of SW-W in agreement with fig. 6.6. In general [55]
agrees well with the results of this work, with exception of those locations in the SW of
the North Sea where the values shows by GWA are generally higher than those found in
SAR table 6.1. A possible reason is that GWA uses 9 years of data (between 2008 and
2017), while this study refer to 5 years (2019-2023).
7.2
Assessment of the research objectives
This section presents a resume of the research objectives, the answers proposed in this
thesis and comparisons with similar works in the literature.
7.2.1
Validation of SAR-derived wind speed using buoy data
SAR-derived wind speeds show better alignment with buoy measurements in dry condi-
tions, with standard deviation of 2.35 m/s, MAE of 1.78 m/s and RMSE of 2.51. However,
under rainy conditions the uncertainty grows: heavy rainfall raises the standard deviation
to 4.92 m/s, MAE to 3.67 m/s and RMSE to 4.81 m/s. When SAR wind speed is compared
to the buoy wind speed at each of the locations, the former shows lower mean values of
approximately 1 m/s. Overall, the correlation between the two datasets is 0.81, showing
good agreement between them. When considering only dry conditions, the correlation is
expected to be higher, as expected.
A study [15] compares SAR wind speeds derived with CMOD5.n against buoy collected
data; while the study’s main objective of using Convolutional Neural Networks to reduce
the rain-induced error on radar is not relevant for this thesis, it does confirm the impact of
rainfall on the quality of data from SAR. The RMSE is calculated for three rain intensities:
under 1 mm/h, with RMSE 1.48 m/s, between 1 and 3 mm/h, with RMSE 2.18 m/s and over
3 mm/h, with RMSE 2.93 m/s. The errors are lower than the ones found in the thesis, but
in that study no case for exclusively dry conditions is considered. However the decrease
of the accuracy of the wind speed with higher rain intensity is present.
Most of the existing studies do not look at the impact of rain when comparing buoy mea-
surements and SAR-derived wind speed. For example, [57] compares Sentinel-1 SAR-
derived wind speed values using CMOD5.n to buoy observations near the coast of Fujian,
China for 7 months: the results show 71 collocated points which give RMSE of 2.5 m/s,
equal to the RMSE obtained during no rainfall on table 6.7; the correlation between the
48
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:57==
two datasets in the study is 0.77, 0.03 lower than the correlation obtained in this thesis in
chapter 6.
The same [57] presents another case of comparing buoys and Sentinel-1 SAR-derived
wind speed values with CMOD5.n, with 1069 collocated points, near the Gulf of Mexico
for five years data. These results show higher accuracy with RMSE of 1.5 m/s, lower
than the one presented on table 6.7. However, the correlation of the data is 0.84, which
is only 0.03 higher than the correlation found in this thesis. A possible explanation of the
difference between the study near the Gulf of Mexico and the North Sea, could be the fact
that there is collocation of 1 km around the buoys, while in the thesis the collocation of
SAR is done within 2.5 km around the buoy. Another possible explanation is the different
location of the studies, which implies different weather and climate conditions .
Another study using Sentinel-1 SAR-derived wind speed against buoy observations is
made by [58]. They have used the CMOD7 function, which is the successor of CMOD5.n.
The study is made in the Gulf of Maine, North America and takes six years of data. It
considers 346 collocated points between SAR and buoy wind speed and the resulted
RMSE is 1.45 m/s, with correlation of 0.93. These results are significantly better than the
one received in the thesis. Explanation for that could be the use of an updated ”CMOD”
function and the fact that in that study the wind speeds are filtered to keep data over 4
m/s as they noticed higher error and low correlation in the wind speeds under that value.
Another reason could be again the fact that they use higher spatial resolution, of 1 km,
around the buoy locations.
Another study [59] investigates SAR-derived wind speeds against buoy data in the United
States’ east coast. The investigation is made using CMOD5.n where are presented dif-
ferent collocated points of buoys with Sentinel 1-A and Sentinel 1-B, to compare the wind
speeds derived from the two satellites. The collocation is made with 3 km spatial resolu-
tion. The results of Sentinel-1B against buoys show lower RMSE of 1.39 m/s than RMSE
of Sentinel-1A against buoys, which is 1.54 m/s. Both of these values are significantly
lower than the RMSE results in the thesis. A reason for that could be the fact that in the
study buoy data are filtered to cover full years as seasonal sampling biases may occur.
As there are gaps in the buoy data used in this thesis, that could be a possible reason for
the higher error.
In study [60] SAR-derived wind speeds with CMOD-IFR2 from Envisat ASAR have been
used and compared with buoy data on the offshore site Horns Rev in the North Sea. It
used 91 collocated points at 30 m and 100 m resolution. The standard deviation between
SAR and buoy at 30 m resolution is 1.00 m/s and increases to 1.15 m/s at 100 m. Both
of these std values are lower than those observed in table 6.7 (2.35 m/s for no rain up to
4.92 m/s for heavy rain), which as the study suggests could be due to the resolution of
the data. The correlation for 30 m is 0.90 and for 100 m is 0.85. This results are similar
to fig. 6.18, where the correlation observed between buoy and SAR wind speeds is 0.81.
The reason for the difference between the results could be the different resolution used
in the thesis (5 km by 5 km) or the different GMF, CMOD5.n.
More studies have been made with the objective of validating SAR data for wind detection,
however they do not employ buoys as validating source. [61] employs LiDAR sensors for
wind detection from the coast; this data is then used to validate Sentinel-1 SAR data
derived with CMOD5.N. The study obtains a RMSE of 1.31 m/s and 1.42 m/s depending
on the LiDAR configuration. However the length of this study is only of 3 months due
to the nature of the equipment used. Other works use mast based meteorological data
to validate SAR measurements. [62] and [63] validate Envisat ASAR data against mast
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
49
==PAGE:58==
measurements in the Baltic and East China Sea; both studies use CMOD5.N and reach
respectively an RMSE of 1.17 m/s and 2.23 m/s and standard deviations of 1.88 m/s and
1.99 m/s. Both studies gather around 3 years of data. Lastly, [64] investigates 10 years
(2002-2012) of Envisat ASAR data derived with CMOD5.N and CMOD-IFR2. Data is
validated against meteorological masts in the North Sea at two locations: Egmond aan
Zee and Horns Rev offshore wind farms; RMSE values obtained are respectively of 1.65
m/s and 1.47 m/s for Egmond aan Zee and 1.34 m/s and 1.28 m/s for Horns Rev.
Results-wise, these four studies show better RMSE by around 1.0 m/s and std by around
0.30 m/s than the results presented on table 6.7. Among the reasons, besides those
already mentioned, could figure the use of different validation methods and the quality of
the in situ data.
In summary, SAR and buoy wind speeds have good correlation, particularly in drier condi-
tions. The results from different studies ([57], [58], [59], [60]) have shown similar of better
results. That could be due to different spatial collocation, different geophysical function for
wind deriving, the different time periods analyzed and the quality of buoy data. In addition,
buoy data tends to be less reliable than LiDAR and mast data due to less maintenance,
worse sensors and buoy being more subjected to wave-induced movement [65]. Future
work could include improving filtering for poor quality data.
7.2.2
Assessment of rainfall frequency and intensity in the North Sea
IMERG data effectively captures rainfall distribution, distinguishing high-rainfall regions
from low-rainfall regions.
The overall average annual rainfall in the whole region is 1851 mm; on ’dry’ locations
the mean annual rainfall is around 1547 mm, contrasting the mean annual rainfall on the
’wet’ locations which is 2083 mm. Season-wise, autumn is the rainiest for the majority of
locations, and the season with the least rainfall is the spring. Knowing the variability of
the precipitation is beneficial for offshore wind planning, as it helps identify areas where
rain is less likely to accelerate leading-edge erosion on turbine blades.
Other sources [53] present the mean annual precipitation across the North Sea fig. 7.4:
it shows lower precipitation (400 mm-600 mm) in the SW and the central areas of the
North Sea and higher precipitation in the NW, near the Norwegian coast (over 1200 mm).
This is also aligned with the results from the thesis presented in fig. 3.1 and fig. 6.7 .
However, the thesis finds another area with higher precipitation than the average for the
period 2019-2023 in the SE near the coast of Germany and the Netherlands, which is not
well established in the results from the book. The reason could be due to a different time
and space of analysis: the book looks at 30 years of data with spatial resolution of 50 km,
while this work is limited to 0.5 °(around 50 km), and IMERGs resolution is 0.1 °(around
10 km). Climate change could also be a factor in this difference as the study used data
from around 20 years ago.
In addition, based on a report from Copernicus [66], 2023 was a year of high precipitation
anomaly in Europe, and especially in the North Sea. The map on fig. 7.5 shows the
anomaly distribution around Europe with the high anomaly of 50 % more precipitation
than the average between 1991-2020 in the North Sea is observed in the coast near
Germany and the Netherlands, shown as ’wet’ in this thesis.
Another study carried out for data between 2011 and 2023 in the North Sea is [67]. It uses
IMERG data and compares it to atmospheric reanalysis data from ECMWF, ERA5. It had
observed wet regions in the North and NE and in the SE part near the coast of Germany
and the Netherlands. The study does not look specifically on rain, but on all precipitation.
50
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:59==
Figure 7.4: Annual precipitation in mm across the North Sea for the period 1988-2008
[53].
The observed wet parts have mean precipitation over 1300 mm/year, which is lower than
the observed in the thesis, where the wet locations have received over 1900 mm/year only
rainfall. The dry locations are observed to have also lower precipitation than the rainfall in
the thesis - between 1000 mm/year and 1100 mm/year in [67] and between 1498 mm/year
and 1540 mm/year rainfall as observed in chapter 6. A reason for that could be that in
this thesis are used only 5 years, in which one of them (2023) had high anomaly in the
North Sea [66].
The IMERG rainfall data is used for investigating wind speed variance under different
rainfall conditions. SAR-derived wind speeds increase consistently with rainfall intensity
in the North Sea. In ’light rain’ conditions SAR-derived wind speeds rise by approximately
2.61 m/s compared to ’dry’ conditions, while in ’moderate to heavy’ rain, the average
increase is 3.63 m/s compared to ’dry’ conditions and 1.02 m/s compared to ’light rain’
conditions. This result is backed up also by the correlation heatmap, where a positive
correlation is shown between the precipitation feature and wind speed features. That
means that with a higher precipitation value, there is a higher chance for high wind speed.
As there is no specific study on rain intensities compared to the wind offshore in the North
Sea, there is assessment of rain and wind climate on two coastal locations which are
placed in West Denmark - Hvide Sande and Thyborøn [68]. It states that the coastal
climate is expected to represent the offshore climate The analysis is made using weather
stations from the Danish Meteorological Institute. It is found that on those stations there
is a connection between heavy rain and high wind speeds: the occurrence of heavy rain,
over 10 mm/h occur during wind speeds over 13 m/s. As there have been no enough data
in this project to compare heavy rain over 10 mm/h, and it had to combine moderate and
heavy rains together, similar patterns are observed. The mean wind speed for moderate
and heavy rain (over 0.5 mm) is found to exceed 10 m/s for three out of the seven locations.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 7.5: Precipitation anomalies for 2023 in % over Europe. The reference period is
1991–2020 [66].
As it might not be specifically for offshore North Sea, the study [68] suggests the same
relation between wind speeds and rain intensity as this thesis - high wind speeds occur
at high rainfall intensity events.
7.3
Hypothesis validation
The thesis confirms the hypothesis that SAR-derived wind speeds experience lower ac-
curacy under rainy conditions. That is shown by the RMSE increase with 2.30 m/s under
conditions with heavy rain compared to no rain, when calculated for SAR against buoy
wind speed. Based on that and the other statistics presented on table 6.7 is suggested
that SAR data correlate better under dry conditions. The same conclusion is made also
from the scatter plots on fig. 6.17. The study [15] confirms the hypothesis by showing
RMSE for SAR-derived wind speeds compared to buoys measurements and confirming
higher values for higher rain intensity. The same study also compares SAR-derived wind
speeds with ECMWF model data in different raining conditions. The results are similar:
RMSE increases with rain intensity. For the sake of comparison between SAR and model
data, rain intensity is separated on four categories: 0 to 1 mm/h (RMSE 2.41), 1 to 3 mm/h
(RMSE 3.16), 3 to 10 mm/h (RMSE 3.42) and over 10 mm/h (RMSE 3.70) [15]. These val-
ues are higher than the results observed in this thesis for SAR-derived wind speeds and
GFS model (table 6.7). This could be due to the different model inputs used in the study
(ECMWF instead of GFS), as usually models find it hard to estimate the wind speeds in
rain conditions [69]. The difference between the two models is in their spatial resolution
52
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:61==
(ECMWF 16 km [70], GFS 28 km [71]), as well as in different parametrization [72], [70].
Despite these limitations, the data reveals (fig. 6.15) a positive relationship between SAR-
derived wind speed and the NRCS values, suggesting that SAR radar backscatter accu-
rately reflects wind speed trends across different raining conditions, and does not affect
the resulting wind speed values.
The results affirm the reliability of SAR sources for wind speed estimations, though ad-
justments may be needed in regions with frequently heavy rainfall. For example a devel-
opment of a deep learning model like the one presented in [15] could be a good way to
reduce the error of the SAR-derived wind speeds.
In conclusion, the integration of SAR and IMERG datasets offers valuable insights for
optimizing offshore wind farm placement and maintenance strategies in the North Sea.
However, additional attention is needed in areas that experience moderate and heavy
rainfall events.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
53
==PAGE:62==
8
Conclusion
This thesis analyzed Sentinel-1 SAR wind data and GPM IMERG precipitation data to as-
sess wind and rainfall patterns in the North Sea, focusing on their implications for offshore
wind energy. By collocating SAR wind speeds with buoy measurements and comparing
IMERG precipitation patterns, several key insights were achieved:
• SAR-wind speed values show a consistent increase in wind speed with the rainfall
intensity. Analysis of seven locations around the North Sea shows a noticeable
increase in wind speed during rainy events and consistently lower wind speeds in
no-rain conditions.
• SAR-wind speed values have a maximum during the winter and a minimum during
the summer.
• IMERG data effectively captures spatial and seasonal variations across the North
Sea, showing more intense rainfall near the Norwegian coast and the German-Dutch
coasts, while central and SW areas exhibit lower precipitation levels. IMERG data
aligns well with known precipitation patterns [53]. The season with the highest rain-
fall is autumn, and the season with the lowest rainfall is spring.
• SAR data shows good agreement with the in-situ measurements from buoys un-
der dry conditions, with deviations becoming more pronounced as rainfall intensity
increases. Despite this, SAR-derived wind speed data proved helpful in depicting
general wind patterns in the North Sea.
• Investigation of SAR wind data on the seven locations in the North Sea suggests
that the northern locations are better for wind energy purposes due to higher wind
speeds. However, going northern, the precipitation increases, which can negatively
affect wind turbines. The optimal location from the seven examined is the location
of buoy ID 6200146, which is in the NW area of the North Sea. It is the optimal site
for possible offshore wind farm with high wind speed and dry conditions.
In conclusion, this study demonstrates that integrating SAR-derived wind speed data with
rainfall data derived from IMERG provides a valuable approach to characterizing wind and
rain patterns in the North Sea. By examining the relationship between wind speed and
rainfall intensity, this work confirms that SAR-derived winds maintain reliability under dry
conditions, but encounter reduced accuracy as rain intensity increases. These findings
confirm SAR data as a valid tool for offshore wind assessment.
54
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
About Wind. Accessed: 2024-10-04. URL: https://windeurope.org/about-wind/.
[2]
Offshore renewable energy. Accessed: 2024-10-04. URL: https://energy.ec.europa.
eu/topics/renewable-energy/offshore-renewable-energy_en.
[3]
Piotr Bojek. Wind. Accessed: 2024-10-04. URL: https://www.iea.org/energy-system/
renewables/wind.
[4]
K. Freeman et al. “Our Energy, Our Future: How Offshore Wind Will Help Europe
Go Carbon-Neutral”. In: (2019). URL: https://windeurope.org/intelligence-platform/
product/our-energy-our-future/#overview.
[5]
Orbis Energy Centre. 4C Offshore. Accessed: 2024-10-30. URL: https : / / map .
4coffshore.com/offshorewind/.
[6]
Robbie Herring et al. “The increasing importance of leading edge erosion and a
review of existing protection solutions”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Re-
views 115 (2019), p. 109382. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j . rser . 2019 . 109382. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1364032119305908.
[7]
The Copernicus Sentinel-1 mission. https://www.esa.int/Applications/Observing_
the_Earth/Copernicus/Sentinel-1. Accessed: 2024-06-07.
[8]
The Global Precipitation Measurement Mission (GPM). https : / / gpm . nasa . gov /
missions/GPM. Accessed: 2024-10-31.
[9]
Anis Elyouncha et al. “Joint retrieval of ocean surface wind and current vectors
from satellite SAR data using a Bayesian inversion method”. In: Remote Sensing
of Environment 260 (2021), p. 112455. ISSN: 0034-4257. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rse.2021.112455. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0034425721001735.
[10]
Knut-Frode Dagestad et al. “Wind retrieval from synthetic aperture radar - An overview”.
In: Proceedings of SEASAR 2012 (Jan. 2013).
[11]
T. Ahsbahs et al. “US East Coast synthetic aperture radar wind atlas for offshore
wind energy”. In: Wind Energy Science 5.3 (2020), pp. 1191–1210. DOI: 10.5194/
wes-5-1191-2020. URL: https://wes.copernicus.org/articles/5/1191/2020/.
[12]
Edvinas Stonevicius, Giedrius Uselis, and Dalia Grendaite. “Ice Detection with Sentinel-
1 SAR Backscatter Threshold in Long Sections of Temperate Climate Rivers”. In:
Remote Sensing 14.7 (2022). ISSN: 2072-4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs14071627. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/14/7/1627.
[13]
Biao Zhang and Werner Alpers. “The Effect of Rain on Radar Backscattering from
the Ocean”. In: May 2018. ISBN: 9781351235822. DOI: 10.1201/9781351235822-20.
[14]
Sentinel-1: S1 Mission. https://sentiwiki.copernicus.eu/web/s1-mission. Accessed:
2024-06-07.
[15]
Aurélien Colin et al. “Reduction of Rain-Induced Errors for Wind Speed Estimation
on SAR Observations Using Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 16 (2023),
pp. 8586–8594. DOI: 10.1109/JSTARS.2023.3291236.
[16]
Biao Zhang and Werner Alpers. “The Effect of Rain on Radar Backscattering from
the Ocean”. In: May 2018. ISBN: 9781351235822. DOI: 10.1201/9781351235822-20.
[17]
Xun Wang et al. “Radar Signal Behavior in Maritime Environments: Falling Rain Ef-
fects”. In: Electronics 13.1 (2024). ISSN: 2079-9292. DOI: 10.3390/electronics13010058.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/13/1/58.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
55
==PAGE:64==
[18]
Jake Badger et al. The Global Wind Atlas: An EUDP Project Carried Out by DTU
Wind Energy. English. 2015.
[19]
Francisco J. Tapiador et al. “Is Precipitation a Good Metric for Model Performance?”
In: Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 100.2 (2019), pp. 223 –233.
DOI: 10.1175/BAMS-D-17-0218.1. URL: https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/
bams/100/2/bams-d-17-0218.1.xml.
[20]
DTU et al. Global Wind Atlas. Accessed: 2024-09-03. URL: https://science.globalwindatlas.
info/#/map.
[21]
Copernicus. Copernicus Marine Service, In Situ Thematic Assembly Center. https:
//marineinsitu.eu/dashboard/. Accessed: 2024-09-03.
[22]
Africa Flores et al. The SAR Handbook: Comprehensive Methodologies for Forest
Monitoring and Biomass Estimation. Apr. 2019. DOI: 10.25966/nr2c-s697.
[23]
S1 Mission. Accessed: 2024-09-29.
[24]
Mission Ends for Copernicus Sentinel-1B Satellite. Accessed: 2024-09-29.
[25]
Sentinel-1 Data Products. Accessed: 2024-09-29.
[26]
S1 Products - SAR Products Overview. Accessed: 2024-09-29.
[27]
S1 Products Overview. Accessed: 2024-10-26. URL: https://sentiwiki.copernicus.
eu/web/s1-products#S1Products-Level-0ProductsFormattingS1-Products-Level-0-
Products-Formatting.
[28]
EODATA collections: CREODIAS Platform, Sentinel-1. Accessed: 2024-10-26. URL:
https://creodias.eu/eodata/sentinel-1/.
[29]
Abdalmenem Owda. “Enhancing SAR Data Analyses for Offshore Wind Energy
and Coastal Applications”. Department of Wind and Energy Systems. PhD thesis.
Roskilde, Denmark: Technical University of Denmark, 2024.
[30]
ESA Charter Mapper - Sentinel 1. Accessed: 2024-10-26. URL: https : / / docs .
disasterscharter.org/missions/sar/sentinel-1/.
[31]
Hans Hersbach. CMOD5.N: A C-Band Geophysical Model Function for Equivalent
Neutral Wind. English. 2008. DOI: 10.21957/mzcfm6jfl. URL: https://www.ecmwf.
int/node/9873.
[32]
George J. Huffman et al. Integrated Multi-satellite Retrievals for GPM (IMERG)
Technical Documentation. Tech. rep. 1. Also available at: Science Systems and Ap-
plications, Inc.; George Mason University; University of Maryland Baltimore County;
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; KBR, Inc. Greenbelt, MD: Earth Sciences Di-
vision, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 2023.
[33]
The GPM Constellation. Accessed: 2024-10-26.
[34]
Yaji Wang et al. “Comparison of GPM IMERG Version 06 Final Run Products and
Its Latest Version 07 Precipitation Products across Scales: Similarities, Differences
and Improvements”. In: Remote Sensing 15.23 (2023). ISSN: 2072-4292. DOI: 10.
3390/rs15235622. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/15/23/5622.
[35]
G.J. Huffman et al. GPM IMERG Final Precipitation L3 Half Hourly 0.1 degree x
0.1 degree V07, Greenbelt, MD, Goddard Earth Sciences Data and Information
Services Center. Accessed: 2024-08-25. URL: https://gpm.nasa.gov/data/imerg.
[36]
Poseidon System. Fixed Mooring Buoys. Accessed: 2024-10-26. URL: https : / /
poseidon.hcmr.gr/components/observing-components/buoys.
[37]
Ramasamy Venkatesan et al. “Best Practices for the Ocean Moored Observatories”.
In: Frontiers in Marine Science 5 (Dec. 2018). DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2018.00469.
[38]
A. Saulter. Quality Information Document for the CMEMS North West European
Shelf Wave Hindcast. Technical Report CMEMS-NWS-QUID-004-015. Copernicus
Marine Environment Monitoring Service, 2021. URL: https : / / catalogue . marine .
copernicus.eu/documents/QUID/CMEMS-NWS-QUID-004-015.pdf.
56
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:65==
[39]
M. Badger et al. “Lifetime Prediction of Turbine Blades Using Global Precipitation
Products from Satellites”. In: Wind Energy Science 7.6 (2022), pp. 2497–2512. DOI:
10.5194/wes-7-2497-2022. URL: https://wes.copernicus.org/articles/7/2497/2022/.
[40]
Mekalathur B Hemanth Kumar et al. “Wind Energy Potential Assessment by Weibull
Parameter Estimation Using Multiverse Optimization Method: A Case Study of Tiru-
mala Region in India”. In: Energies 12.11 (2019). ISSN: 1996-1073. DOI: 10.3390/
en12112158. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/12/11/2158.
[41]
Z. R. Shu and Mike Jesson. “Estimation of Weibull parameters for wind energy
analysis across the UK”. In: Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy 13.2
(Mar. 2021), p. 023303. ISSN: 1941-7012. DOI: 10.1063/5.0038001. eprint: https:
//pubs.aip.org/aip/jrse/article-pdf/doi/10.1063/5.0038001/15705415/023303\_1\
_online.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0038001.
[42]
The Swiss Wind Power Data Website. Power Calculator. URL: {https://wind-data.
ch/tools/powercalc.php?lng=en},note={Accessed:2024-11-07}.
[43]
Paola Crippa et al. “A Temporal Model for Vertical Extrapolation of Wind Speed
and Wind Energy Assessment”. In: Applied Energy 301 (2021), p. 117378. ISSN:
0306-2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.117378. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261921007819.
[44]
National Institude of Medicine. Standard Deviation definition. Accessed: 2024-11-
03. URL: https://www.nlm.nih.gov/oet/ed/stats/02-900.html.
[45]
C. Willmott and K Matsuura. “Advantages of the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) over
the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) in Assessing Average Model Performance”.
In: Climate Research 30 (Dec. 2005), p. 79. DOI: 10.3354/cr030079.
[46]
Deepak Kumar Sharma et al. “3 - Deep learning applications for disease diagnosis”.
In: Deep Learning for Medical Applications with Unique Data. Ed. by Deepak Gupta
et al. Academic Press, 2022, pp. 31–51. ISBN: 978-0-12-824145-5. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-824145-5.00005-8. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780128241455000058.
[47]
Alaa Tharwat. “Principal component analysis - a tutorial”. In: International Journal of
Applied Pattern Recognition 3 (Jan. 2016), p. 197. DOI: 10.1504/IJAPR.2016.079733.
[48]
T. Herlau, M. N. Schmidt, and M. Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learning and Data
Mining. English. 2022.
[49]
“Analysis of Wind Energy Conversion System Using Weibull Distribution”. In: Pro-
cedia Engineering 90 (2014). 10th International Conference on Mechanical Engi-
neering, ICME 2013, pp. 725–732. ISSN: 1877-7058. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.proeng.2014.11.803. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1877705814029257.
[50]
Vestas. V136-4.2 MW. Accessed: 2024-11-07. URL: {https://www.vestas.com/en/
energy-solutions/onshore-wind-turbines/4-mw-platform/V136-4-2-MW}.
[51]
K. Sušelj, A. Sood, and D. Heinemann. North Sea near-surface wind climate and
its relation to the large-scale circulation patterns. Springer, 2009.
[52]
C. B. Hasager et al. “Europe’s offshore winds assessed with synthetic aperture
radar, ASCAT and WRF”. In: Wind Energy Science 5.1 (2020), pp. 375–390. DOI:
10.5194/wes-5-375-2020. URL: https://wes.copernicus.org/articles/5/375/2020/.
[53]
Markus Quante and Franciscus Colijn, eds. North Sea Region Climate Change
Assessment. Regional Climate Studies. Springer Cham, 2016. ISBN: 978-3-319-
39743-6. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-39745-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-39745-0.
[54]
A. N. Hahmann, O. García-Santiago, and A. Peña. “Current and future wind en-
ergy resources in the North Sea according to CMIP6”. In: Wind Energy Science
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
57
==PAGE:66==
7.6 (2022), pp. 2373–2391. DOI: 10.5194/wes- 7- 2373- 2022. URL: https://wes.
copernicus.org/articles/7/2373/2022/.
[55]
Global Wind Atlas. Accessed: 2024-09-03. URL: https://science.globalwindatlas.
info/#/map.
[56]
Neil N. Davis et al. “The Global Wind Atlas: A High-Resolution Dataset of Climatolo-
gies and Associated Web-Based Application”. In: Bulletin of the American Meteo-
rological Society 104.8 (2023), E1507 –E1525. DOI: 10.1175/BAMS-D-21-0075.1.
URL: https : / / journals . ametsoc . org / view / journals / bams / 104 / 8 / BAMS - D - 21 -
0075.1.xml.
[57]
Peng Yu et al. “A Neural Network Method for Retrieving Sea Surface Wind Speed
for C-Band SAR”. In: Remote Sensing 14.9 (2022). ISSN: 2072-4292. DOI: 10.3390/
rs14092269. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/14/9/2269.
[58]
Jingbei Sun et al. “Joint Inversion of Sea Surface Wind and Current Velocity Based
on Sentinel-1 Synthetic Aperture Radar Observations”. In: Journal of Marine Sci-
ence and Engineering 12.3 (2024). ISSN: 2077-1312. DOI: 10.3390/jmse12030450.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2077-1312/12/3/450.
[59]
Tobias Ahsbahs et al. “US East Coast synthetic aperture radar wind atlas for off-
shore wind energy”. In: Wind Energy Science 5 (Sept. 2020), pp. 1191–1210. DOI:
10.5194/wes-5-1191-2020.
[60]
Merete Bruun Christiansen et al. “Wind resource assessment from C-band SAR”.
In: Remote Sensing of Environment 105.1 (2006), pp. 68–81. ISSN: 0034-4257.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2006.06.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0034425706002239.
[61]
Tobias Ahsbahs et al. “Validation of Sentinel-1A SAR Coastal Wind Speeds Against
Scanning LiDAR”. In: Remote Sensing 9.6 (2017). ISSN: 2072-4292. DOI: 10.3390/
rs9060552. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/9/6/552.
[62]
Charlotte B. Hasager et al. “SAR-Based Wind Resource Statistics in the Baltic Sea”.
In: Remote Sensing 3.1 (2011), pp. 117–144. ISSN: 2072-4292. DOI: 10 . 3390 /
rs3010117. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/3/1/117.
[63]
Rui Chang et al. “Applicability of Synthetic Aperture Radar Wind Retrievals on Off-
shore Wind Resources Assessment in Hangzhou Bay, China”. In: Energies 7.5
(2014), pp. 3339–3354. ISSN: 1996-1073. DOI: 10.3390/en7053339. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/7/5/3339.
[64]
Charlotte B. Hasager et al. “Offshore wind climatology based on synergetic use of
Envisat ASAR, ASCAT and QuikSCAT”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 156
(2015), pp. 247–263. ISSN: 0034-4257. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2014.09.
030. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0034425714003848.
[65]
C. O. Collins and R. E. Jensen. “Tilt Error in NDBC Ocean Wave Height Records”.
In: Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology 39.7 (2022), pp. 915 –928. DOI:
10.1175/JTECH-D-21-0079.1. URL: https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/atot/
39/7/JTECH-D-21-0079.1.xml.
[66]
Copernicus. Europe in 2023: Precipitation. Accessed: 2024-11-08. URL: {https://
climate.copernicus.eu/esotc/2023/precipitation}.
[67]
Tsvetelina Ivanova et al. “Investigating North Sea Precipitation Variability: Impli-
cations for Offshore Wind Energy Siting and Condition Assessments”. In: 2767.6
(2024), p. 062009. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2767/6/062009. URL: https://dx.doi.
org/10.1088/1742-6596/2767/6/062009.
[68]
C. Hasager et al. “Assessment of the rain and wind climate with focus on wind
turbine blade leading edge erosion rate and expected lifetime in Danish Seas”. In:
Renewable Energy 149 (2020), pp. 91–102. ISSN: 0960-1481. DOI: https://doi.
58
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:67==
org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.12.043. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0960148119319159.
[69]
Yunxiao Chen et al. “Multivariable space-time correction for wind speed in numerical
weather prediction (NWP) based on ConvLSTM and the prediction of probability
interval”. In: Earth Science Informatics 16 (July 2023), pp. 1–22. DOI: 10.1007/
s12145-023-01036-1.
[70]
Nick P. Bassill. “Accuracy of early GFS and ECMWF Sandy (2012) track fore-
casts: Evidence for a dependence on cumulus parameterization”. In: Geophysical
Research Letters 41.9 (2014), pp. 3274–3281. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 /
2014GL059839. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
2014GL059839. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
2014GL059839.
[71]
Global Forecast System (GFS). Accessed: 2024-11-14. URL: https://www.ncei.
noaa.gov/products/weather-climate-models/global-forecast#:~:text=GFS%20is%
20a%20global%20model,one%20week%20and%20two%20weeks..
[72]
Patrick Mathiesen and Jan Kleissl. “Evaluation of numerical weather prediction for
intra-day solar forecasting in the continental United States”. In: Solar Energy 85.5
(2011), pp. 967–977. ISSN: 0038-092X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2011.
02.013. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038092X11000570.
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
==PAGE:69==
Analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR offshore winds and GPM IMERG precipitation data for wind energy in
the North Sea
61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU Risø Campus, Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://wind.dtu.dk/
