==PAGE:1==
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the
collection
of
eDNA
using
an
autonomous
ecogenomic sensor
Manuel Arcieri
Master’s thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous
ecogenomic sensor
Master’s thesis
December, 2024
Author:
Manuel Arcieri
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
DTU Aqua, Technical University of Denmark
Published by:
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Health Technology, Ørst­
eds Plads, Building 345C, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was prepared over six months in collaboration with the National Institute of
Aquatic Resources, at the Technical University of Denmark, in partial fulfilment of the
MSc Eng. in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of statistics and fish ecology.
ii
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Marine biodiversity is undergoing rapid changes due to global warming and human activi­
ties, which are leading to unprecedented extinction rates among fish. Despite the serious­
ness of these changes, there is limited research documenting them, making it challenging
to assess marine ecosystems accurately. The impact of human activities on marine life is
extensive and has significant consequences. Global factors, such as rising temperatures
and increased ocean acidity, worsen the situation.
Monitoring marine ecosystems is often costly and labour­intensive, and it typically focuses
more on larger species. Traditional methods, such as trawling and video capture, can be
invasive or require skilled personnel. Therefore, there is a crucial need for non­destructive
and efficient biomonitoring techniques to support effective conservation efforts.
To address some of these challenges, the National Institute of Aquatic Resources devel­
oped a second­generation Environmental Sample Processor. This portable DNA labora­
tory can be deployed at sea to automatically collect and analyse marine environmental
DNA samples. By combining these two techniques, researchers can assess local biodi­
versity in a cost­effective and non­invasive way. The instrument operates without human
intervention, allowing for the investigation of variations over entire weeks or months. DTU
Aqua conducted three campaigns to test this machine in Lysekil, Horsens Fjord, and North
Sea.
Valuable data was collected on the presence and composition of bony fishes, and it was
also possible to detect traces of elusive marine mammals like the Harbour porpoise. The
horizontal, vertical, and temporal components of sampling significantly impact the out­
comes of experiments. Additionally, sea currents were found to be an important factor
influencing eDNA concentration. However, it was not possible to detect traces of Elas­
mobranchs during any of the expeditions, which hints at the potential drawbacks of this
technology.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
iii
==PAGE:6==
Production
Manuel Arcieri, MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, DTU Health Tech
Author
Magnus Wulff Jacobsen, Senior Researcher, DTU Aqua
Supervisor
Einar Eg Nielsen, Professor, DTU Aqua
Co­supervisor
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank Magnus for all the help and support he has offered
me over the past half of the year. He introduced me to a truly fascinating subject: finding
traces of dozens of living organisms in just a few litres of seawater, much like a magician
pulling a rabbit out of a hat.
I also want to express my gratitude to all the wonderful people from DTU Aqua I met in
Silkeborg: Jakob, Danny, Sara, Einar, and the rest of the crew!
May this be the first step toward a bright and peaceful future.
This work was funded by the Aage V. Jensens Foundation and TotalEnergies. We thank
Martin Riis at the North Sea Oceanarium for access to the aquarium. We also thank
DTU Aqua’s technicians Mikkel Skafte, Jes Dolby, Britta Sønderskov Pedersen, Dorte
Meldrup, and Maj­Brit Jacobsen for their valuable help during the startup and deployment
phase, as well as for laboratory assistance. We further thank Andreas Sundelöf (Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences) and Matthieu Povis­delefosse (former TotalEnergies)
for logistical assistance during the Lysekil and North Sea deployments, and Kim Rørbæk
(DHI) for help with moorings and deployments. Other thanks go to Morten Tange Olsen for
providing DNA samples for marine mammals for positive controls, Steen Knudsen (NIVA
Denmark) and Peter Rask (KU) for permission to use qPCR assays before publication,
and the Danish Defence Centre for Operational Oceanography (FCOO) for ocean data
for the Horsens Fjord deployment. We thank all potential co­authors not acknowledged
above. Those include Brian K. Hansen (DTU Aqua), Dorte Bekkevold (DTU Aqua), Sara
Maggini (DTU Aqua), Lars O. Mortensen (DHI), Anne Lise Middelboe (DHI), Katrina Povis­
delefosse (TotalEnergies), and Thomas Merci (TotalEnergies). Finally, a great thank you
goes to the whole ESP team from Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI).
Without your help, support, and guidance, this research would not have been possible.
iv
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Environmental DNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Metabarcoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Environmental Sample Processor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research questions for this project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Deployment campaigns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Materials and methods
9
2.1
Sampling regimes and manual samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
DNA extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Analysis and archival samples: Quantitative PCR (qPCR) . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
qPCR: statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Analysis and archival samples: Metabarcoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Metabarcoding: statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Results
13
3.1
qPCR data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Metabarcoding data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Discussion
27
4.1
Comparing different primers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Horizontal and vertical diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.3
Temporal changes in eDNA observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.4
Impact of environmental factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.5
Advantages and pitfalls of environmental DNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Bibliography
33
A Appendix I – Rarefaction data
39
B Appendix II – Clustering of spatial data
41
C Appendix III – Selected species for the analysis
42
D Appendix IV – Assay table
49
E
Appendix V – ESP samples table
50
F
Appendix VI – Correlation between species­specific DNA concentration and
total DNA mass
52
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Marine biodiversity is undergoing significant changes due to various factors, including
global warming and human activities [1]. These transformations are affecting the overall
composition and abundance of species within marine ecosystems. Continuous moni­
toring and documentation of these shifts in biodiversity are essential for addressing the
challenges and evaluating the effectiveness of initiatives aimed at preserving or restoring
marine environments.
Current extinction rates for marine species are higher than they have ever been [2], and
yet most of these changes are still undocumented due to limited research attention com­
pared to terrestrial species and technical difficulties to assess the condition of marine
ecosystems, especially in oceans.
The intensification of human activities is one of the factors driving this decline in biodi­
versity. As an example, less than 1% of the entire Mediterranean Sea is estimated to
be unaffected by human impact, and over 20% of its surface is highly impacted by these
changes [3]. Global effects include the rise of temperature and acidity.
Monitoring offshore marine ecosystems is challenging. The cost efficiency and labour
efforts play a key role in implementing biomonitoring methods [4]. Ideally, they should
provide a comprehensive assessment of local biodiversity in a non­destructive, minimally
invasive manner. Traditional techniques may involve diver­operated video, bottom trawl­
ing, fishing, acoustic methods, or baited remote underwater video capture [5, 6, 7]. These
methods are expensive, labour­intensive, and may detect a limited number of species
compared to the whole ecosystem, with a bias for larger and more common animals.
Experienced personnel are also needed to visually identify species.
1.1
Environmental DNA
Sampling and analysis of environmental DNA (eDNA) is a novel and increasingly popular
monitoring technique to assess the biodiversity of an ecosystem [8]. Here, eDNA is de­
fined as the collection of genetic material that is shed into the environment by animals and
plants. It can be extracted from faeces, urine, mucous, skin cells, hair, sperm, eggs, and
degraded organisms, providing insights into the composition of local communities. Com­
mon sources of eDNA are soil, cave sediments, permafrost, and sea, river, or lake water.
Aquatic eDNA samples are normally collected by passing water through a micro­pore filter
that captures cells, particles with bound DNA, and free DNA. The filter is then brought into
a laboratory where the captured DNA is extracted and examined using different methods
that allow species designation based on DNA­based analysis.
One such method is quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR): it generates billions of
copies of DNA segments that are targeted and amplified as needed using a pair of primers,
a probe, a DNA polymerase enzyme, and nucleotides [9]. Heat cycles are repeated un­
til the product reaches a predetermined DNA concentration. The choice of primers will
determine which genetic regions are amplified. Species­specific primers target a single
species, while universal primers amplify regions belonging to a broader taxonomic group
[8]. Primers are picked based on the scope of the study. Compared to the traditional
method, quantitative PCR can also estimate the precise number of DNA copies in real­
time. This is accomplished thanks to the binding of fluorescent molecules (probes) to
the amplified DNA segments. A standard curve is also required to calibrate the analysis,
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
1
==PAGE:10==
enabling the estimation of DNA copies and allowing the calculation of the eDNA concen­
tration in the original water samples.
When using universal primers, qPCR can be paired with so­called metabarcoding. This
technique uses taxon­specific PCR targeting DNA from broader taxonomic groups (e.g.,
bony fishes, elasmobranchs, marine mammals) to concentrate DNA from those species.
After PCR, the amplicons (sequences) are sequenced using next­generation sequencing
(NGS) platforms to generate thousands or even millions of reads per samples. Sequence
targets can be compared to a reference database, enabling the taxonomic identification
of species, genera, or families. The species abundance can be used to derive statistics
on the biodiversity of an ecosystem.
eDNA is a powerful tool for the monitoring and surveillance of oceans, lakes, and other
environments. It is often more efficient than alternative methods, less error­prone, non­
invasive, non­destructive, and easier to standardise [10]. Thanks to the constantly reduc­
ing cost of DNA sequencing, it is also becoming cheaper and more accessible [4].
Metabarcoding of eDNA samples offers a higher­resolution snapshot of the biodiversity of
an ecosystem, including smaller or more elusive species that are hard to observe using
traditional visual methods. However, eDNA assays may sometimes be challenging to
design due to the need to find a good compromise between the sequence length and its
number of polymorphic sites [11]. The targeting of short primers (< 200 nucleotides) may
be insufficient to distinguish between the DNA sequences of two closely related species,
resulting in ambiguous taxonomic assignments [12]. Building a good reference dataset
for taxonomic assignment may also be challenging. Using longer amplicons may increase
the overall accuracy. In the best­case scenario, whole genome sequencing data could be
used to identify species with a negligible error rate. However, environmental data usually
contains such a small amount of biological content that it would be close to impossible to
reassemble the genome of an individual, as bacterial and algae DNA would dominate the
results.
Additionally, degradation imposes hard limits on the lifespan of free DNA particles. The
spatial and vertical dimensions of sample extraction also play a key role in interpreting
eDNA results. Environmental factors like sea currents, salinity, and temperature may in­
fluence data interpretation. For example, it has been shown that stratification can prevent
the mixing of the water column and lead to differences in eDNA signals between surface
and bottom water in lakes and marine waters [13, 14]. In general, marine eDNA particles
are expected to degrade within days, allowing eDNA transport across seascapes. How­
ever, eDNA is diluted from its source, which likely explains why several recent marine
eDNA studies have detected biodiversity differences even at small geographical scales.
Environmental DNA also has several other challenges, and some are particularly rele­
vant for offshore marine biodiversity monitoring. Here, one of the main challenges of
using eDNA for offshore marine monitoring is the use of dedicated vessel time, which
increases operational costs and reduces the number of samples which can be collected
and analysed. However, this problem may be solved using autonomous eDNA samplers
that can be deployed at sea and collect tens or even hundreds of samples over several
weeks or months [15]. Still, few studies have investigated the general potential for using
such devices to collect and analyse complex marine biodiversity data.
1.2
Metabarcoding
Species­specific primers may not be available for all taxa, or their specificity might be
insufficient to distinguish closely related species. Moreover, it requires a priori knowl­
2
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:11==
edge of our target group, but sometimes we lack this information or prefer not to set strict
taxonomic bounds for the analysis.
The metabarcoding of environmental DNA is a novel technique that allows us to perform
taxonomic inference of arbitrary genetic samples. Less specific primers are used to am­
plify DNA regions common to all organisms belonging to a certain class, order, or phylum.
Short strings of nucleotides, called barcodes, are added at both strands of the amplified
DNA segments to uniquely tag them and identify their collection area and other informa­
tion during downstream analysis. The samples are then sequenced and can be studied
with generic or task­specific bioinformatic tools for genomic data.
This pipeline has the advantage of being able to identify hundreds or even thousands of
different species all from the same data [8]. DNA sequencing and analysis are progres­
sively cheaper to perform and more standardised, reducing the cost and effort to assess
the biodiversity of an ecosystem.
For eDNA analysis, we are looking for short genomic regions that maximise the chances
of being assigned to the right species. 2nd generation shotgun sequencing machines may
also impose hard limits on the length of these regions: most of them can read strands up
to 300 nucleotide­long, but the quality may degrade starting from around 150­200 base
pairs.
Among the most common targeted loci, we can find the 12S, 16S, and 18S ribosomal DNA
regions, and the Cytochrome b and c mitochondrial genes (especially COX1). These
regions are highly conserved within species yet show high variation between species,
making them a great choice for metabarcoding.
1.3
Environmental Sample Processor
To tackle some of the issues linked with eDNA collection, the National Institute of Aquatic
Resources designed and implemented a second­generation Environmental Sample Pro­
cessor (2­G ESP) [15]. It is an unmanned electromechanical fluidic system acting as a
mobile DNA laboratory.
The ESP is powered by batteries and can operate independently for up to two months, au­
tomatically collecting environmental samples. The most prominent feature is its ability to
collect and store eDNA samples (or analyse previous samples in real­time) using species­
specific quantitative PCR (qPCR) [15]. In total, the ESP can extract and hold up to 132
filters (archived samples) or collect and analyse up to 66 filters (in­situ samples). Mixing
these two types of filter processing is also possible. After deployment, the sampled DNA
material can be retrieved and analysed using qPCR or metabarcoding methods. During
deployment, the ESP can be connected to a tele­buoy using either the GSM or satellite
network, allowing scientists to control and operate the instrument from land, as well as
to download and analyse qPCR results in real time. The instrument can be deployed in
several ways: i) at the docking site using an external pump; ii) directly at the seabed us­
ing a bottom lander module; or iii) pelagically using a buoyant foam module surrounding
the instrument. Standard moorings allow for deployment at a depth of 10­20 metres un­
derwater. However, deep­water deployments can also be conducted using specialized
deep­sea moorings [16]. In addition to eDNA sampling, the ESP can also be equipped
with advanced sensors and analytical tools. As such, the ESP can measure parameters
such as temperature, salinity, pH, chlorophyll concentration, and nutrient levels [16].
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: A collection of pictures of the ESP taken during separate campaigns, both in
the lab and at sea.
1.4
Research questions for this project
This study aimed to investigate the potential for using the Environmental Sample Proces­
sor (ESP) to collect offshore eDNA data for biodiversity monitoring. The project focused
on data collected from three sampling campaigns conducted in 2018, 2019, and 2020
in Skagerrak, the North Sea and Kattegat. The collected eDNA samples were analysed
using both qPCR and metabarcoding methods, which allowed testing different questions
about future deployment strategies. In this regard, qPCR targeted a few species of high
relevance for the individual deployments, while metabarcoding enabled analyses for fish,
but also rarer species of elasmobranchs and marine mammals.
4
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:13==
Overall, this study aimed at: i) investigating the general use of the ESP to monitor biodi­
versity, focused on fish, as well as rare species like elasmobranchs and marine mammals.
Specifically, this was done through both qPCR and metabarcoding approaches; ii) explore
the importance of sampling depth for eDNA observations in Danish waters by comparing
observations from different deployments and manual samples collected at the surface vs.
few meters over the seabed; iii) test the importance of temporal samples to cover full bio­
diversity at a fixed location. This was done by testing eDNA observations through time to
understand day­to­day variation; iv) investigating the importance of external factors like
current velocity and water salinity on eDNA observations.
1.5
Deployment campaigns
The ESP was deployed between 2018 and 2020 at three separate locations to collect
eDNA data on the local biodiversity. Filters (25 mm, 0.22 µm) were collected at a regular
rate during a period ranging from 4 to 21 days.
Location
Period
# of days
Species
# of samples
Lysekil
October 2018
21
Atlantic mackerel,
At­
lantic tuna, Garfish
16
North Sea
September 2019
4
Atlantic mackerel, Har­
bour porpoise, Whiting
4
Horsens Fjord
May 2020
15
Comb
jellies,
Pacific
oyster, Rainbow trout
21 + 6 (manual)
Table 1.1: Summary of the three expeditions covered by this project.
Figure 1.2: Overview of the location of the three campaigns.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
5
==PAGE:14==
The first ESP deployment originally focused on tracking migratory and prey species in
East Skagerrak, 15 km west of the town of Lysekil. The deployment focused on important
migratory species with special focus on the Atlantic bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus), and
prey species of Atlantic mackerel (Scomber scombrus) and garfish (Belone belone). The
deployment was conducted between the 1st and 21st of October 2018 using a bottom
lander deployed at a depth of around 13 metres on an underwater plateau surrounded by
40­50 metres­deep water.
The second expedition focused on the monitoring of rare marine species in the North Sea.
The device was deployed 200 meters from TotalEnergies’s Dan F oil platform, around
200 km west of Esbjerg, as Harbour porpoises gather around this area in summer and
autumn. In addition to Harbour porpoise, the deployment focused on its potential prey
species of Atlantic mackerel (Scomber scombrus) and Whiting (Merlangius merlangus).
As the depth at the site was too deep for seabed deployment (43 meters), the ESP was
deployed pelagically at approximately 15 metres of water. Due to technical problems, the
ESP stopped working after four days.
The last deployment took place south of Horsens Fjord, Kattegat, in the As Vig bay, and
it targeted invasive species. There were several Rainbow trout farms in the area. The
deployment was carried out between the 5th and 28th of May. The ESP was deployed di­
rectly on the seabed at a depth of 13 metres. The site was chosen based on the presence
of several Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) fish farms in the area, as well as possi­
ble presence of Pacific oyster (Magallana gigas) and the Warty Comb jelly (Mnemiopsis
leidyi), which are also considered invasive species in Denmark. The deployment site was
located roughly 700 meters south of a rainbow trout fish farm (Hundshage, see Figure
1.3).
Figure 1.3: Geographical distribution of the Rainbow trout farms in Horsens Fjord. The
deployment site is marked, too.
6
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:15==
Additional manual samples were collected from two deployment sites at Dan F and Hors­
ens Fjord. Water was collected using a weighted 4L Nisking water sampler. It was poured
into a sterile 10L bucket and filtered on­site using Sterivex 0.22 µm filters (SVGPL10RC,
Sigma­Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), a sterile 60 mL disposable syringe (Becton, Dickin­
son and Company, Franklin lakes, NJ, USA), and wearing disposable nitrile gloves. After
sampling, filters were stored in a freezer (­20°C) until extraction. For Horsens Fjord, trip­
licate 1L samples were collected from the surface (2 m below the surface) and bottom
water (2 m above the seabed). Given the greater depth at the ESP deployment site (Dan
F platform) in the North Sea, triplicate 3L water samples were collected from both surface
water (2 m below the surface), mid­water (at the same depth as the ESP), and bottom
water (2 m above the seabed). Sampling and filtering procedures were the same as for
Horsens Fjord.
In addition to the samples collected at the ESP deployment site, seven other locations
were sampled on the same day. The sites were chosen based on earlier acoustic studies
[7] on the presence of Harbour porpoises in the North Sea, showing higher abundances of
harbour porpoises around Dan F and the oil well (Regnar) compared to the other stations.
In total, samples were collected in transects away from the Dan F oil and gas platform to
Esbjerg harbour. Overall, the manual samples were used to investigate the possibility of
vertical eDNA variation.
Site
Date
Depth
# of samples
Dan F
18 May 2019
Surface, middle, bottom
3 per depth
1600 m East
24 May 2019
Surface
3
6400 m East
24 May 2019
Surface
3
Regnar
15/18 May 2019
Surface, bottom
3 per depth
Ref South
15/18 May 2019
Surface, bottom
3 per depth
Ref East
15 May 2019
Surface, bottom
3 per depth
Norvana shipwreck
24 May 2019
Surface
3
Esbjerg harbour
15 May 2019
Surface
3
Table 1.2: Collection sites for the manual samples from the North Sea.
Figure 1.4: Geographical distribution of the collection sites from the North Sea.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:17==
2
Materials and methods
2.1
Sampling regimes and manual samples
All deployments originally included a mixture of in situ and archival sampling. An overview
of all samples can be found in Appendix V. Quantitative PCR assays of specific target
species were performed in real­time directly on the ESP. Archival samples were also anal­
ysed by the ESP after deployment targeting the same species. Overall, the in­situ analysis
did not perform well, with only two positive detections from all three test cases (one for the
Rainbow trout and another for the Warty comb jelly). Hence, this study focuses only on
the subsequent qPCR and metabarcoding analyses performed on the archival samples.
For all sampling events, the instrument followed a cleaning protocol that involved using
bleach, followed by rinsing with nuclease­free water to clean all tubes inside the instru­
ment. Additionally, each ESP expedition included samplings of sterile water, referred to
as ESP­negatives, both before and after deployment. This was done to analyse for po­
tential DNA contamination, which could arise from DNA residues left over from previous
sampling events.
2.2
DNA extraction
All filters were collected after retrieving the instrument. The samples from Sweden were
extracted using a protocol exactly mimicking the ESP extraction protocol (Hansen et al.
2020), while samples from the two Danish deployments were extracted using the protocol
by Spens et al. [17] using the Qiagen blood and tissue kit. All extractions were per­
formed in a clean room. Procedures included wiping all surfaces with 5% bleach before
and after use, UV­light exposure after use, and wearing sterile full­body suits. All extrac­
tions included the collection of blanks to control potentially exogenous DNA contamination
originating from the laboratory or sample cross­contamination. DNA concentration was
measured for all samples using a Qubit fluorometer and the Qubit dsDNA High­sensitivity
kit.
2.3
Analysis and archival samples: Quantitative PCR (qPCR)
Samples were analysed for eDNA from pre­defined target species using qPCR. Specifi­
cally, we looked for Atlantic bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus), Atlantic mackerel (Scomber
scombrus), and Garfish (Belone belone) during the Swedish deployment. For the North
Sea, we analysed Harbor porpoise (Phocoena phocoena), Atlantic mackerel (Scomber
scombrus), and Whiting (Merlangius merlangus). Finally, for the deployment close to
Horsens Fjord, we targeted Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), Pacific oyster (Maga­
llana gigas), and the Warty comb jelly (Mnemiopsis leidyi).
All used qPCR assays consisted of already developed and published species­specific
assays (Appendix IV). Reactions were run on a StepOnePlus Real­time PCR instrument
(Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA), using 10 min initial denaturation at 95°C, followed
by 50 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 30 s. Tests for potential PCR inhibitors were
conducted by running a positive control (IPC, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA)
on all extracts using the same volume as in the species tests. All samples and extraction
blanks were run in triplicates and three negative controls were run per 96­plate. Estimation
of number of copies per reaction was performed using a dilution series of 1­105 copies
of synthetic amplicons (gBlocks). The average copy number estimates across triplicates
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
9
==PAGE:18==
were used to calculate the average eDNA copy number per litre (copies/L) of water in the
samples, which was used for downstream analyses. This data is the basis for the qPCR
analyses in the report.
2.4
qPCR: statistical analysis
The data from the qPCR was calculated in eDNA concentrations in the original samples
(copies/L) and studied using the R programming language. The DNA concentration of
the selected species was associated with the time of collection and sample volume. The
Pearson correlation coefficient was used to calculate the correlation matrix between the
following variables: target DNA concentration, meridional and zonal velocity of the sea
currents, water salinity, and temperature. The same method was used to estimate the
p­value for the variables showing the highest correlation values (i.e., meridional velocity
and salinity).
Information about the temperature, salinity, and velocity of sea currents was made avail­
able by the Danish Defence Center for Operational Oceanography (FCOO). These vari­
ables were tested and recorded every hour for the whole duration of the expedition. This
dataset was joined with the sample table by extracting the weather records with the small­
est delay compared to the extraction day and time.
2.5
Analysis and archival samples: Metabarcoding
To investigate the broader biodiversity, all eDNA samples were further analysed using
metabarcoding. Depending on the collection area, we targeted up to three taxonomic
groups: bony fishes (MiFish­U), elasmobranchs (Elas02), and marine mammals (Mamm02).
Analyses of marine mammals were performed for eDNA samples collected from the North
Sea region. We amplified the 12S rRNA region of the mitochondrial DNA for the first two
groups and the 16S rRNA subunit for the latter. The final PCR reactions were performed
in 20 µL reaction volumes containing 10 µL of Amplitaq Gold Master Mix (Applied Biosys­
tems, Foster City, CA, USA), 0.16 µL BSA (20 μg/ µL), 10 μM of each primer, and 2 µL
of DNA. Reactions were run on a standard PCR machine, using 10 minutes at 95°C, fol­
lowed by 40 cycles including a 1 min DNA denaturation step at 94°C, a 1 min annealing
step at 45°C, and a 1 min extension step at 72°C for 1 min. A final 5 min extension step
at 72°C was performed after all 40 cycles.
A total of three 20 µL reactions were run per sample. Negative controls (NTCs) were
included to test for DNA contamination during PCR setup. Since all NTCs contained no
measurable DNA, we used 12 µL of these samples to ensure maximal representation
of any amplified DNA. To discriminate between samples, PCR reactions were performed
using different combinations of uniquely barcoded primers. Each barcode was 7 bp long
and had a minimum of 3 mismatches to other barcodes. Barcodes were applied on both
forward and reverse primers to ensure a low risk of misidentification. Following PCR,
positive amplification of target DNA was confirmed by gel electrophoresis. We pooled the
triplicate PCR reactions and measured DNA concentrations on a Qubit fluorometer. The
measured concentrations were used as a reference for the subsequent pooling of all the
samples in equimolar concentrations.
After pooling the samples, DNA libraries were prepared following the KAPA PCR­free
library kit using dual­indexed barcodes. Sequencing was conducted using either High­
output or Mid­output flow cells (150 PE) and run on a MiniSeq sequencing instrument
(Illumina, San Diego, California, United States). To simplify DNA sequencing, all the sam­
ples were split into three libraries, summarised in the table below.
10
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:19==
Library
Campaigns
Target
Taxa
# of samples
Lib01
North Sea (2019),
Horsens Fjord (2020)
12S,
16S
Bony fish,
Elasmobranch,
Mammals
87
Lib02
Lysekil (2018),
North Sea (2019)
12S
Bony fish,
Elasmobranch
71
Lib04
North Sea (2019)
12S
Bony fish,
Elasmobranch,
Mammals
44
Table 2.1: Number of samples and targeted taxonomic groups for each deployment.
2.6
Metabarcoding: statistical analysis
Given the short length of our targeted primers and the high similarity with closely related
taxonomic groups, we decided to restrict the OTU labelling to a subset of species living
in the North Sea. First, we downloaded a taxa list of Danish sea animals from the SeaL­
ifeBase database [18]. We also added the species used as positive controls (i.e., Sand
tiger shark, Roach), the 25 most frequent marine mammals found in the North Sea, and
common sources of natural contamination (i.e., Human, Chicken, Horse, Pig, Domestic
cattle, and Sheep). We ended up with a total of 294 species: 234 fishes, 25 marine mam­
mals, 25 birds, 6 contaminants, and 4 positive controls. The list can be found in Appendix
III.
Reference DNA sequences for the 12S and 16S ribosomal RNA were obtained from the
MIDORI2 database [19] (GenBank 261), filtering out taxa not belonging to our list of pre­
defined species.
The paired­end (PE) DNA sequencing data extracted from the samples was merged and
trimmed using PEAR [20] with its default parameters. Unassembled and low­quality reads
(p­value > 0.01) were discarded. FastQC [21] was used to qualitatively assess the original
and trimmed FASTQ files.
Next, Cutadapt [22] was utilised to remove the sequencing primers from the reads and
to demultiplex them depending on their barcode sequences. We set a maximum allowed
error rate of 10%, a minimum overlap of 7 nucleotides, and a minimum and maximum
read lengths according to the targeted sequences. After this, we obtained an annotated
FASTQ file for each library. All reads are associated with a specific sample ID to trace
them back to the original collection site and target group.
Operational Taxonomic Units (OTU) were assembled following the OBITools pipeline [23]
for metabarcoding:
1. obiuniq: clustering of identical reads;
2. obigrep: removal of sequence records with a single occurrence in the whole library;
3. obiclean: removal of reads that may have been caused by PCR or sequencing
errors (using a threshold ratio between rare/abundant counts of 0.5);
4. obiannotate: trimming of unused metadata from sequence record;
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
11
==PAGE:20==
5. obitab: metadata extraction and conversion to a tabular file.
Negative controls were checked, confirming the absence of unwanted contaminations.
OTUs with less than 2 reads were removed.
The taxonomic assignment of OTUs was based on the algorithm created by Joseph Se­
vigny [24]. Briefly, a consensus assignment is used to classify OTUs by comparing the
top 5 hits from a BLASTN query. We set a minimum identity of 97%, minimum coverage
of 97%, and a maximum E­value of 10−3.
Finally, the metadata tables exported with obitab and the results from BLAST were merged
and plotted using the R programming language. Rarefaction analysis was performed us­
ing the vegan [25] package, while the phyloseq [26] package was used for dissimilarity
analysis and ordination. Dendrogram clustering analysis was performed by building a
sample­taxon matrix and estimating the similarity between samples using the Jaccard
index. The resulting Newick tree was then plotted using TreeViewer [27].
12
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:21==
3
Results
3.1
qPCR data
Quantitative PCR detected the presence of eDNA from mackerel and garfish at Lysekil
and mackerel and whiting at the Dan F platform in the North Sea. Atlantic bluefin tuna
and Harbour porpoise were not detected and left out of subsequent analyses. Analysis of
samples from Horsens Fjord showed the presence of the Warty comb jelly and rainbow
trout, but not pacific oyster. All NTCs, extraction blanks, and ESP­negatives were nega­
tive, excluding the risk of DNA contamination affecting the results. IPCs showed no sign
of sample inhibition.
3.1.1
Daily variations in observed eDNA concentrations
Figure 3.1: Daily eDNA concentrations for the targeted species from Lysekil.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: Daily eDNA concentrations for the targeted species from the North Sea.
The eDNA concentrations of target species measured by qPCR varied considerably from
day to day at all deployment sites. In Lysekil and the North Sea regions, we detected the
highest concentrations of Atlantic mackerel while DNA concentrations from garfish and
whiting were much lower. At Lysekil, eDNA concentrations from mackerel varied from 0
to around 200 copies/L, while mackerel DNA concentrations at the Dan F platform in the
North Sea varied from approximately 200 to 1,500 copies/L. Whiting eDNA concentration
varied from 0 to about 300 copies/L, and garfish showed very low concentrations. In
Lysekil, mackerel was detected in 47% (10/21) of the collected samples and garfish in
19% of the samples. In the North Sea samples, mackerel was detected in all four collected
samples, while whiting was detected in 50% (2/4) of them.
14
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:23==
The campaign at Horsens Fjord provided more data and higher eDNA concentrations,
allowing us to perform a more exhaustive analysis. Overall, the ESP collected a total of
21 samples over 15 days, while another 6 were collected through manual sampling.
Figure 3.3: Daily eDNA concentrations for the targeted species from Horsens Fjord.
Here the qPCR focussed on the Rainbow trout and Comb jelly, two species considered
invasive in Denmark. As for the samples collected at the other sites, we saw a high
variation in eDNA concentration between consecutive days. DNA concentrations for the
Rainbow trout varied from 0 to around 6,000 copies/L, while DNA concentrations from
the Warty comb jelly varied from 0 to approximately 1,800 copies/L. Days with observed
high concentrations from one species did not correspond with similar high concentrations
for the other. This fact supports that the observed differences were not due to technical
artefacts, like sample extraction efficiencies, as such bias should lead to similar trends
for both species. Further, while DNA concentrations and sampling volume showed a
significant correlation, the same was not observed between the overall DNA concentration
and species­specific estimates, ensuring the absence of a potential sampling bias.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
15
==PAGE:24==
3.1.2
Correlation with abiotic conditions
We observed sudden spikes in DNA concentration for the Rainbow trout. Given the pres­
ence of several farms in the area, it is plausible to think that the two elements are related.
Hence, we calculated a correlation matrix per species using the Pearson correlation coef­
ficient to highlight possible relationships between variables. We included the ocean data
collected by FCOO’s buoy. Sea currents were split into their zonal (east to west) and
meridional (south to north) components.
Figure 3.4: The Pearson correlation matrix was used to find statistically valid associations
between DNA concentration and abiotic factors.
The analysis showed two particularly strong factors influencing DNA concentration: the
meridional velocity of the water currents, for the Rainbow trout, and the salinity, for the
Comb jelly. We can plot the relative variation of these factors against the DNA concen­
tration to better visualise their relations.
16
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:25==
Rainbow trout and sea currents
Figure 3.5: Direct comparison between the daily eDNA concentration for the Rainbow
trout (blue columns) and the scaled meridional speed of the sea currents (red line). Higher
values of the line indicate stronger currents from north to south.
For the Rainbow trout, there is a negative correlation between the meridional velocity
and the DNA concentration. This means we register stronger biological signals when the
currents flow from north to south. To more easily visualise this relationship, the red line
on the plot represents the inverse of the velocity. The observations match with a primary
eDNA source from the nearest farm in the area, the Hundshage fish farm, situated around
700 metres north of the ESP deployment site. Thus, we can hypothesise that the spikes
in DNA concentration are due to the material carried southwards from the fish farm by the
sea currents.
Concentration and meridional velocity are correlated by a p­value = 0.02. We can reject
the null hypothesis and confirm that this correlation is statistically sound.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
17
==PAGE:26==
Comb jelly and water salinity
The story changes when we look at the data for the Comb jelly and the water salinity.
Figure 3.6: Direct comparison between the daily eDNA concentration for the Warty comb
jelly (red columns) and the scaled salinity of seawater (blue line). Higher values of the
line indicate higher concentrations of salt in the water.
At first glance, we might say that the concentration of Comb jelly goes down when the
salinity increases. This is also supported by a small p­value = 0.01.
18
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:27==
3.1.3
Sampling variation
The unique sampling design at Horsens Fjord allowed us to explore the sampling variation
through analysis of the relative deviation from the average concentration per sample.
We divided the data into three categories: i) temporal samples containing all the ESP
observations for the whole period; ii) daily samples, a special cycle of the ESP collecting
multiple samples within a 24­hour window; iii) six samples that were manually extracted
without the use of the ESP, all on the same day. Half were collected from surface water,
while the other half were collected 2 metres above the seabed.
Overall, there was a clear difference between the data for the Comb jelly and the Rainbow
trout. Jellies were harder to detect, and we have seen that their concentration decreases
over time. This is reflected in the deviation from the mean, with values that fluctuate a lot
between sampling, even when they are collected a few hours apart.
The Rainbow trout was easier to detect and yielded much higher DNA concentrations.
This helped us to get more reproducible results, with a deviation from the mean that re­
sembles what we would expect. The values obtained from the same­day data collection
stick close together and experience minor variations compared to the total temporal data.
A remarkable distinction can be seen with the manual extraction, where surface and bot­
tom samples clearly follow different trends. Bottom samples show the highest eDNA con­
centration (1,340 copies/L), while values from the surface have around one­third of the
concentration (390 copies/L).
Figure 3.7: Box plot showing the deviation from the mean (Y = 0) of individual samples,
categorised by species and collection strategy. Samples (points) above the mean (red
line) have higher DNA concentrations than the average for that category. The opposite is
valid for the samples below the mean.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
19
==PAGE:28==
3.2
Metabarcoding data
Primer selection is the factor that mostly influenced the performance of our libraries.
MiFish­U produced the best results, capturing DNA sequences from a large variety of
bony fish. Among the 50 most common taxa across all libraries, five of them could only
be labelled at a family level (Clupeidae, Pleuronectidae, Gobiidae, Triglidae, Gadidae) and
one at the genus level (Pomatoschistus). Two possible causes for this are the absence
of the correct species from our reference database or excessive similarities between ge­
nomic regions.
Mamm02 captured some faint traces of marine mammals, while Elas02 failed to detect the
presence of any member of the Elasmobranch subclass except for the positive controls.
The following table summarises the average and maximum depths of the OTUs found for
each primer. The data before filtering contains all reads obtained from DNA sequencing,
including non­targeted species and positive controls. Negative controls were manually
assessed for potential contamination, detecting only non­marine species (almost entirely
humans and pigs). Since this category of organisms was already excluded, we did not
have to perform other forms of calibrations.
Library
Target
Primer
Avg. depth ­
Before filtering
Max. depth ­
Before filtering
Avg. depth ­
After filtering
Max. depth ­
After filtering
Lib01
Bony fish
MiFish­U
337
1,403,466
12,075
298,341
Elasmobranch
Elas02
337
1,403,466
0
0
Mammals
Mamm02
1,952
1,284,167
3
6
Lib02
Bony fish
MiFish­U
397
624,243
7,329
56,165
Elasmobranch
Elas02
397
624,243
0
0
Lib04
Bony fish
MiFish­U
52
490,412
1,017
22,583
Elasmobranch
Elas02
74
1,185,623
0
0
Mammals
Mamm02
578
5,495,450
40
302
Table 3.1: List of primers used for each targeted taxonomic unit along with the average
and maximum depths before and after filtering.
The following analyses focus on the bony fish data, as it is the only class that produces
larger biodiversity data.
3.2.1
Elasmobranchs, marine mammals, and natural contaminants
During the analysis, virtually all OTUs were assigned to Bony fish. Nonetheless, we man­
aged to detect some faint traces of marine mammals, mostly Harbor porpoises (Phocoena
phocoena), concentrated in the North Sea (1,025 copies at Dan F, 334 in Regnar, 78 at
the Norvana shipwreck, 32 in 6400 m East), and Harbor seals (Phoca vitulina; 218 copies
at Esbjerg harbour, 123 at 6400 m East). No elasmobranchs were found in our data.
Positive controls gave a strong signal, including DNA extracted from Sand tiger shark,
used as positive control, but also water collected from the Nordsøen Oceanarium, which
contains several species of sharks and rays.
Finally, it is worth to spend a few words on contaminants. When collecting environmental
samples like seawater, we should always expect to encounter some OTUs belonging to
non­marine species. Human DNA had the highest abundance in all libraries, probably due
to all the manual labour required to deploy and retrieve the ESP. Pig, chicken, domestic
cattle, and sheep DNA was also present in various amounts. They may stem from sewage
wastewater and human activities close to the collection areas, like offshore oil platforms
20
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:29==
or coastal towns. We also included 25 marine birds in our taxonomic database, but we
did not find any trace of them.
3.2.2
Rarefaction
To get a better understanding of whether the libraries were sequenced deep enough,
we conducted a rarefaction analysis. In short, it can be used to visualise the species
distribution over a random subset of observations. Despite large variations in sequencing
depth, all rarefaction curves for fish biodiversity (MiFish) reached a plateau for the number
of species, showing that the sequencing depth was sufficient to find all the species in the
samples. All rarefaction plots can be found in Appendix I.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
21
==PAGE:30==
3.2.3
Biodiversity clustering between ESP deployment sites
Dendrogram clustering analysis by species compositions (Jaccard beta­diversity index)
showed a clear separation of samples by deployment site. Overall, we see that there is
a strong relationship between samples and locations. There are a few spurious elements
in the tree (e.g., ESP 11, ESP 13, ESP 14) caused by atypical concentrations of one or
more rarer species compared to the other samples collected from the same area.
Figure 3.8: Dendrogram built on top of the Jaccard dissimilarity matrix showing clustering
between samples collected from the same deployment sites.
A dendrogram specific to the spatial data can be found in Appendix II.
22
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:31==
3.2.4
Overall biodiversity
Figure 3.9: On the left: distribution of read counts from all samples, coloured by species
and split by collection site. On the right: percentage of samples where we detected at
least one copy for each species, split by collection site.
The taxonomic composition of the fishes found in Horsens Fjord showed generally similar
results in terms of the relative species proportions of ray­finned fishes among most sam­
ples. Overall, there was a strong presence of European sprat, Goldsinny wrasse, and
Sand goby, which were found in all samples. The results from Lysekil and the Dan F oil
platform in the North Sea also showed distinct patterns. In Lysekil, results indicated a high
presence of benthic fishes like wrasses (Labridae family), gobies (Gobiidae family), and
European flounders. In the North Sea, we mostly detected pelagic fishes like the Atlantic
mackerel and European sprat, but also fish like Atlantic cod, and other species belong­
ing to the Triglidae and Gadidae families. Interestingly, the patterns matched well with
the sampling depth. As such, we observed a higher presence of benthic fish at Lysekil
and Horsens Fjord, where the ESP was deployed directly on the seabed, while we found
that the most abundant species at Dan F belonged to pelagic species. Just like for the
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
23
==PAGE:32==
qPCR data, the Rainbow trout dominates the results from the metabarcoding analysis.
The results from qPCR and metabarcoding analysis matched. As an example, samples
WCR_2003 (May 22nd) and WCR_1005 (May 19th) had, respectively, a high and low
concentration of Rainbow trout in the qPCR data. The same trend can be observed for
the other samples.
3.2.5
Biodiversity: spatial data
The spatial data gathered samples extracted from multiple locations along the route from
the Dan F oil platform to Esbjerg harbour. For many of those sites, samples were collected
from both the bottom and surface of the water, providing us with a vertical component to
analyse.
Figure 3.10: On the left: distribution of read counts from all samples, coloured by species
and split by collection site. On the right: percentage of samples where we detected at
least one copy for each species, split by collection site.
24
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:33==
We can observe different patterns for each location. Species­wise, the locations can be
split into two categories: oceanic and coastal sites. The former is composed of all sites
close to Dan F, showing similar trends for the North Sea as we saw for Lib02. The latter
includes Norvana shipwreck and Esbjerg harbour, with a higher concentration of coastal
and pelagic fish, like Gobies and Shorthorn sculpins.
3.2.6
Species clustering
Non­metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) was used to visualise the difference be­
tween surface and bottom samples. It showed a clear difference between beta­diversity
and sampling depth, especially for the ESP site and Regnar samples.
Figure 3.11: Non­metric multidimensional scaling plot for the North Sea’s collection sites
where we extracted both surface and bottom samples.
3.2.7
Temporal dimension
We performed an analysis to estimate the minimum number of days one should sample
at each location to cover the whole detected local biodiversity. It represents a best­case
scenario where daily samples were ordered by abundance and kept being extracted until
we found at least one copy for all species.
Overall, the ESP performed differently at each location, probably reflecting sample volume
and species diversity. In Horsens Fjord, it could identify 65% of all species in two days,
but it required 13 more days to cover the whole spectrum. In Lysekil, 60% of all species
were detected in four days, requiring 9 more days of sampling for full coverage. The ESP
data from the North Sea is too limited for a good comparison.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
25
==PAGE:34==
For the spatial data, multiple samples were collected on the same day for most locations,
so we cannot talk in terms of days, but extractions needed to cover the whole detected
biodiversity.
Figure 3.12: The histograms show how many days (on the left) or sampling activities (on
the right) we need to cover the whole detected biodiversity. Individual plots are split by
collection site.
26
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:35==
4
Discussion
Throughout this study, we investigated the use of a novel method for marine biodiversity
assessment involving the use of an Environmental Sample Processor to collect eDNA
samples, which were subsequently analysed using both quantitative PCR and metabar­
coding methods.
This combination of technologies enables users to monitor aquatic
species in a non­invasive and low­effort manner. Automatic samplers like the ESP can
be deployed offshore to autonomously collect and analyse samples at regular intervals.
Filters can be retrieved weeks or even months later for DNA sequencing and data pro­
cessing. This facilitates time series studies, which might better capture biodiversity than
traditional “snapshots” collected using manual sampling.
However, like traditional eDNA methods, the use of automatic samplers also has pitfalls
that may affect the quality of results. Technical problems, such as component malfunc­
tions, and external factors, like deployment depth and environmental conditions, should
be carefully considered before and after an expedition. Below we discuss the results
of extensive analyses conducted in this report and discuss key considerations for future
deployment strategies in Danish waters.
4.1
Comparing different primers
Due to the limited DNA concentration in seawater, adequate PCR primers should be se­
lected to target relevant taxonomic groups. In our study, we tested the use of MiFish­U,
Mamm02, and Elas02 primers to analyse eDNA from bony fish, marine mammals, and
elasmobranchs. We also performed species­specific quantitative PCR targeting Atlantic
bluefin tuna, Harbour porpoise, Atlantic mackerel, Garfish, Whiting, Rainbow trout, and
the Warty comb jelly.
As expected, the MiFish­U primer proved to be a good choice for detection and taxo­
nomic assignment, identifying more than 50 species of bony fish, distributed among all
deployment sites.
The remaining two metabarcoding primers performed worse and mostly captured eDNA
from non­target species, like fish, and terrestrial contamination from pigs, cattle, and hu­
mans. Elas02 did not detect any elasmobranch from the ESP expeditions. Nevertheless,
we successfully verified its capacity to capture elasmobranch eDNA from positive con­
trols collected from Nordsøen Oceanarium in Hirtshals, supporting that the used primers
worked as intended.
We barely detected any trace of marine mammals from our samples. One exception was
the Harbor porpoise, with just a few hundred copies from the North Sea (around 0.1% of
the total). However, Harbor porpoises are known to shed little eDNA [28]. Combined with
a relative low abundance of individuals in nature, eDNA observations are expected to be
difficult. Hence, identifying even tiny portions of their DNA is already a remarkable ac­
complishment. Interestingly, the Regnar and Dan F sites showed the highest number of
positive replicates with respectively 100% (3/3 replicates) and 55% (5/9) of the samples
positive for Harbor porpoise eDNA. This result matches well with knowledge of acous­
tic studies on Harbor porpoise abundance in the North Sea, showing higher specimen
abundance around these two sites [29].
Interestingly, Harbour porpoise concentration from the North Sea’s ESP samples collected
at Dan F was much lower (13 copies over four samples). This finding is not surprising
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
27
==PAGE:36==
given the limited number of samples from this deployment and the likely low concentra­
tion of eDNA from Harbour porpoises. Analysing additional ESP data would be beneficial
to determine whether the long storage of filters in the ESP may have contributed to DNA
degradation, potentially increasing the risk of false negatives. However, Harbour por­
poises were also detected in eDNA samples collected from Lysekil (1,013 copies) and
Horsens Fjord (36 copies) using MiFish primers, which are expected to be less effective
for amplifying this species. This finding tentatively suggests that longer storage times of
samples do not negatively affect the detection of rare species in eDNA analysis.
4.2
Horizontal and vertical diversity
In this study, we observed distinct patterns from different deployment sites and noted a
strong clustering between these locations when comparing the observed beta diversity.
This finding was expected due to the significant separation of the sites both spatially and
temporally. Additionally, the results from the spatial samples collected in the North Sea
indicated consistent changes in biodiversity as we moved farther away from the coast.
The deployment depth and closeness to the seabed is another important factor to ac­
count for. Samples collected by the ESP represent snapshots of the local biodiversity.
The concentration of eDNA from different species might, however, not uniformly spread
throughout the seawater. For example, water stratification is known to lead to differences
in eDNA signals between surface and bottom water in freshwater lakes [13, 14]. How­
ever, published marine eDNA studies show opposite results on the vertical stratification of
eDNA concentration, suggesting that this segregation may be more accentuated in certain
regions than others. Dukan et al. [30] showed that eDNA samples collected at different
depths do not exhibit distinct vertical concentration patterns, comparing their finding with
more traditional trawl catch data. In contrast, Jeunen et al. [31] collected eDNA samples
at three depths next to a rock wall, finding distinct concentration patterns along the water
column, and hinting at the presence of vertically localised communities.
Our study further supports the concept that different biodiversity is observed at various
depths. In Lysekil and Horsens Fjord, the ESP was placed close to the sea bottom, either
on an underwater plateau or directly on the seabed. Here, we detected more benthic fish
and bottom feeders like gobies, wrasses, flounders, and plaice compared to the deploy­
ment in the North Sea.
In the North Sea, the ESP was deployed mid­water at around 15 metres from the sur­
face and identified mostly pelagic species like mackerels, sprats, herrings, and sardines.
The observed differences between deployment sites suggest that water depth influences
eDNA results. This is further supported by our analyses of surface and bottom samples
from the other stations in the North Sea. In this case, sample clustering using the Jaccard
index and non­metric multidimensional scaling revealed clear dissimilarities between col­
lection sites and deployment depths. Rainbow trout eDNA samples collected as part of
the Horsens Fjord deployment also showed clear differences, with a much higher con­
centration in bottom samples compared to the surface. This finding further reinforces the
general impact of sampling depth across various sites. Other studies [32, 31] also found
that bottom samples, including sediment samples, tend to have higher concentrations of
species, with different patterns detected at separate depths. Thus, factors like deploy­
ment depth might influence biodiversity observations using automated samplers like the
ESP, heavily influencing downstream data interpretation.
28
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:37==
4.3
Temporal changes in eDNA observations
Seasonal changes and shifts in biodiversity are known to be reflected in eDNA obser­
vations [33, 34]. However, so far little is known about the potential effects of short­term
variations. Jensen et al. [35] suggest considering marine communities as dynamic enti­
ties, with a strong correlation to the sampling time, especially for daylight vs. dark hours.
Daily patterns can provide insights into the behaviour of certain species. This informa­
tion can be used to refine future experiments by collecting samples at different hours of
the day and night. Our study offered a unique opportunity to investigate the importance
of short­term temporal sampling and how it can be used to better cover an area’s real
biodiversity.
Overall, we saw large fluctuations in DNA concentration throughout the 15 days of sam­
pling in Horsens Fjord. This is especially true for the Rainbow trout, which went from
near­zero values to over 6,000 copies/L in just 24 hours, highlighting the importance of
distributing sampling activities over time. The concentration of Warty comb jelly DNA also
showed significant daily variations, going from 0 to 1,600 copies/L, with an average of 380
copies/L.
The deviation from the mean of the observed eDNA concentrations in the samples gives
us some further insights into its variability. The DNA concentration in samples collected
within a 24­hour window showed little deviation from the average the Rainbow trout. The
same did not apply to the Comb jelly, presenting much higher fluctuations, possibly due
to the smaller amount of captured eDNA or because of the outliers from larger cell ag­
gregates in the water. Variation in eDNA concentration is larger over time, supporting the
need for a higher temporal resolution during sample collection.
The major distinction, however, involves the extraction depth. Surface samples revealed
a much lower eDNA concentration for Rainbow trout compared to bottom samples. This
further suggests that the vertical component of eDNA analyses can influence findings and
downstream results. This clustering was not detected for the Comb jelly.
We conducted a time analysis to investigate the minimum days required to cover the full
detected biodiversity. This is a best­case estimate that does not take into account the
collection order of individual samples.
Multiple days of data extraction are required to capture the largest possible amount of
species. Spending more time sampling from the same location leads to increasingly ac­
curate information about the local biodiversity.
While this finding is not surprising, it is challenging to determine the exact number of days
needed to obtain a comprehensive snapshot of the current situation. In Horsens Fjord,
the ESP identified 65% of all species in two days, but it required 13 more days to cover the
whole spectrum. In Lysekil, 60% of all species were detected within four days, requiring
9 more days of sampling for full coverage.
It is important to remember that these estimates are based on a best­case scenario. Real
collection campaigns may require more days of sampling to achieve the same results.
As a general guideline, we should aim for at least 10 samples per location during future
deployments, preferably collected on different days.
Another limitation is that we currently do not know if the rarer species that were observed
inhabit the area close to the deployment site, or if some genetic material has been trans­
ported there by sea currents or as part of the excretions of predators. More data is needed
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
29
==PAGE:38==
to refine this metric, but there are limits to what can be inferred from the environment using
eDNA methods alone.
Similarly, even though we can detect a very strong signal for Rainbow trout in Horsens
Fjord, we may not be able to capture it from other nearby locations if the ESP is deployed
upstream.
Using automatic sampling stations can be significantly cheaper compared to other meth­
ods when assessing data over extended periods. This approach eliminates the need for
deploying vessels or having stationary personnel supervising the device, as all the work
is done autonomously. The device can be retrieved weeks after deployment, which will
save costs and at the same time enable the collection of extensive time series data.
4.4
Impact of environmental factors
After being deployed, the ESP remains stationary until its retrieval. Therefore, variations
in observed eDNA concentrations are mostly dictated by changes in water flow, dilution,
and animal activities in the surrounding area.
We found an especially strong correlation with sea currents in Horsens Fjord. The Hund­
shage Rainbow trout farm was located around 700 metres north of the deployment site.
The eDNA concentration for this species is in an inverse relationship with the meridional
component of the water currents, recording much higher values when they flow from north
to south (p­value = 0.02).
This observation has several important implications for this study, but also in a more gen­
eral eDNA context. DNA transportation is believed to be a key factor in understanding
eDNA results [36]. Here, the focus has been on the potential risk of eDNA being trans­
ported over vast areas, hence leading to potential false positives [8, 36]. However, trans­
port might also impact observed eDNA concentrations on a local scale, impacting the
interpretations of species abundance and biodiversity.
Although many research groups have studied the relationship between biomass or abun­
dance and eDNA, a clear connection has yet to be established (Hansen et al. 2018).
So far, controlled experimental studies from aquaria or ponds have reported significant
associations between biomass and eDNA concentration, with other abiotic factors like
temperature, fish diet, population size, and DNA extraction methods also being important
[37, 38]. However, studies in natural habitats are much less consistent and often report
weak or no relationship between eDNA and biomass or species abundance [39, 40, 41,
42].
The results from this study, which demonstrates a clear impact of current velocity on eDNA
concentration despite a large stationary biomass, highlight the importance of incorporat­
ing current data into marine eDNA monitoring when investigating biomass­eDNA relation­
ships. In our case, the results emphasize the same need for information on currents when
interpreting results from stationary sampling. While this might lead to increased complex­
ity when analysing eDNA data, it may also improve deployment planning and facilitate
the capture of target­specific eDNA when current patterns are known. In such scenar­
ios, eDNA samplers, like the ESP, can be deployed down­current to better capture eDNA
from specific areas. Potential areas of interest include oil and gas platforms, wind parks,
and aquaculture sites, as all may benefit from monitoring biodiversity [43] in the case of
aquaculture, pathogens [44].
Finally, we also detected a negative correlation (p­value = 0.01) between the concentra­
tion of Comb jelly and water salinity, but we could not establish if it is a spurious relation­
30
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:39==
ship, a confounder effect linked to seasonality, or a proper association between these two
variables.
4.5
Advantages and pitfalls of environmental DNA
eDNA and metabarcoding proved to be a powerful tool for biodiversity assessment, but
it has also some potential issues compared with other monitoring methods like underwa­
ter video capture, netting, or acoustic analyses. The advantages include the possibility
of capturing a broader taxonomic spectrum, including rarer and more elusive species.
Autonomous sampling devices are non­invasive and potentially cheaper than alternative
methods, especially for longer offshore monitoring campaigns, and do not require taxo­
nomic expertise to interpret the data. The temporal dimension of the analysis lets us trace
the variation in eDNA biodiversity observations over days or weeks, and this data can be
further enhanced with sea current information.
However, eDNA detection may not directly translate into demographic information, es­
pecially if we want to determine the size of local fish communities. False negatives are
also a problem for species shedding little eDNA. Negative eDNA results do not exclude
the presence of a species since it may have not been active at the time of sequencing,
or it might shed such a small amount of genetic material that cannot be detected [45].
Reference databases used for taxonomic assignment may incorrectly label species with
genetically close relatives, but this effect can be attenuated by compiling a list of accept­
able taxa based on the specific location [46, 12]. Lastly, abiotic factors may also influence
eDNA concentration in ways that are only partially understood, with fluctuations from day
to day [35].
4.6
Conclusion
Research worldwide has seen a recent surge in studies on eDNA and metabarcoding,
highlighting the power of this technique and the many uses and benefits that may derive
from it. Quantitative PCR and metabarcoding can be powerful tools for marine biodiversity
assessment from environmental DNA in the hands of ecologists and other researchers.
However, eDNA also has several fundamental challenges, of which some are particularly
relevant for offshore marine biodiversity monitoring.
One of the main challenges of using eDNA for offshore marine monitoring is the use
of dedicated vessel time, which increases operational costs and reduces the number of
samples which can be collected and analysed. In the study, we investigated the use
of an autonomous eDNA sampler, the ESP, to collect offshore eDNA data. By deploying
such samplers and subsequently analysing eDNA data, we can cut down operating costs,
streamlining the process of marine fauna surveillance and assessment.
To get the best results possible, current data should be matched to the collection areas so
that the ESP can be deployed in pivotal locations. By placing it downstream, we can use
the water currents to our advantage, letting them carry genetic material from surrounding
areas directly to our sampler.
The deployment depth is another discriminant when it comes to biodiversity assessment,
and we observed different biological signals depending on whether the ESP was placed
closer to the seabed or mid­water. This matched with vertically collected manual samples,
showing distinct differences in biodiversity between surface and bottom water.
Significant variations in eDNA concentrations can also be recorded from day to day, or
even from daytime to nighttime. Longer sampling periods should be preferred to get a
better overview of the local biodiversity.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
[1]
Angel Borja. “Grand challenges in marine ecosystems ecology”. In: Frontiers in Ma­
rine Science 1 (2014). ISSN: 2296­7745. DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2014.00001. URL:
https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/marine-science/articles/10.3389/fmars.2014.
00001.
[2]
Trevor M. Bak et al. “A global ecological signal of extinction risk in marine ray­finned
fishes (class Actinopterygii)”. In: Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 1 (2023), e25. DOI:
10.1017/ext.2023.23.
[3]
Fiorenza Micheli et al. “Cumulative Human Impacts on Mediterranean and Black
Sea Marine Ecosystems: Assessing Current Pressures and Opportunities”. In: PLOS
ONE 8.12 (Dec. 2013), pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079889. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0079889.
[4]
Alice J. Clark et al. “Cost­effort analysis of Baited Remote Underwater Video (BRUV)
and environmental DNA (eDNA) in monitoring marine ecological communities”. In:
PeerJ 12 (Apr. 2024), e17091. ISSN: 2167­8359. DOI: 10.7717/peerj.17091. URL:
https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.17091.
[5]
Malcolm R. Clark et al. “Science Priorities for Seamounts: Research Links to Con­
servation and Management”. In: PLOS ONE 7.1 (Jan. 2012), pp. 1–12. DOI: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0029232. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0029232.
[6]
Brooks EJ et al. “Validating the use of baited remote underwater video surveys for
assessing the diversity, distribution and abundance of sharks in the Bahamas”. In:
Endangered Species Research 13 (2011), pp. 231–243. DOI: 10.3354/esr00331.
URL: https://www.int-res.com/abstracts/esr/v13/n3/p231-243/.
[7]
Mooney T. Aran et al. “Listening forward: approaching marine biodiversity assess­
ments using acoustic methods”. In: Royal Society Open Science (2020). DOI: 10.
1098/rsos.201287. URL: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.201287.
[8]
Philip Francis Thomsen and Eske Willerslev. “Environmental DNA – An emerging
tool in conservation for monitoring past and present biodiversity”. In: Biological Con­
servation 183 (2015). Special Issue: Environmental DNA: A powerful new tool for
biological conservation, pp. 4–18. ISSN: 0006­3207. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biocon.2014.11.019. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0006320714004443.
[9]
Magnus Wulff Jacobsen, Brian Klitgaard Hansen, and Einar Eg Nielsen. “Possible
Uses of Genetic Methods in Fisheries Under the EU Landing Obligation”. In: The
European Landing Obligation: Reducing Discards in Complex, Multi­Species and
Multi­Jurisdictional Fisheries. Ed. by Sven Sebastian Uhlmann, Clara Ulrich, and
Steven J. Kennelly. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 407–427.
ISBN: 978­3­030­03308­8. DOI: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 03308 - 8 _ 20. URL: https :
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-03308-8_20.
[10]
Julija Fediajevaite et al. “Meta­analysis shows that environmental DNA outperforms
traditional surveys, but warrants better reporting standards”. In: Ecology and Evo­
lution 11.9 (2021), pp. 4803–4815. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ece3 . 7382.
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/ece3.7382. URL: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ece3.7382.
[11]
Paula Suarez­Bregua et al. “Environmental DNA (eDNA) for monitoring marine
mammals: Challenges and opportunities”. In: Frontiers in Marine Science 9 (2022).
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
33
==PAGE:42==
ISSN: 2296­7745. DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2022.987774. URL: https://www.frontiersin.
org/journals/marine-science/articles/10.3389/fmars.2022.987774.
[12]
Laurence Dugal et al. “Coral monitoring in northwest Australia with environmental
DNA metabarcoding using a curated reference database for optimized detection”.
In: Environmental DNA 4.1 (2022), pp. 63–76. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 /
edn3.199. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/edn3.199. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/edn3.199.
[13]
Bernd Hänfling et al. “Environmental DNA metabarcoding of lake fish communities
reflects long­term data from established survey methods”. In: Molecular Ecology
25.13 (2016), pp. 3101–3119. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.13660. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/mec.13660. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/mec.13660.
[14]
Lori Lawson Handley et al. “Temporal and spatial variation in distribution of fish
environmental DNA in England’s largest lake”. In: Environmental DNA 1.1 (2019),
pp. 26–39. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/edn3.5. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/edn3.5. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
edn3.5.
[15]
Brian K. Hansen et al. “Remote, autonomous real­time monitoring of environmental
DNA from commercial fish”. In: Scientific Reports 10.1 (2020). ISSN: 2045­2322.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-70206-8. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-
70206-8.
[16]
Christopher A. Scholin et al. “The Quest to Develop Ecogenomic Sensors: A 25­
Year History of the Environmental Sample Processor (ESP) as a Case Study”. In:
Oceanography (Dec. 2017). URL: https://doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2017.427.
[17]
Johan Spens et al. “Comparison of capture and storage methods for aqueous mac­
robial eDNA using an optimized extraction protocol: advantage of enclosed filter”.
In: Methods in Ecology and Evolution 8.5 (2017), pp. 635–645. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1111/2041-210X.12683. eprint: https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1111/2041-210X.12683. URL: https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1111/2041-210X.12683.
[18]
URL: https://www.sealifebase.se/Home/index.php.
[19]
Matthieu Leray, Nancy Knowlton, and Ryuji J. Machida. “MIDORI2: A collection
of quality controlled, preformatted, and regularly updated reference databases for
taxonomic assignment of eukaryotic mitochondrial sequences”. In: Environmental
DNA 4.4 (2022), pp. 894–907. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/edn3.303. eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/edn3.303. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/edn3.303.
[20]
Jiajie Zhang et al. “PEAR: a fast and accurate Illumina Paired­End reAd mergeR”.
In: Bioinformatics 30.5 (Oct. 2013), pp. 614–620. ISSN: 1367­4803. DOI: 10.1093/
bioinformatics / btt593. eprint: https : / / academic . oup . com / bioinformatics / article -
pdf/30/5/614/48919224/bioinformatics\_30\_5\_614.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btt593.
[21]
URL: https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/.
[22]
Marcel Martin. “Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high­throughput se­
quencing reads”. In: EMBnet.journal 17.1 (2011), pp. 10–12. ISSN: 2226­6089. DOI:
10.14806/ej.17.1.200. URL: https://journal.embnet.org/index.php/embnetjournal/
article/view/200.
[23]
Frédéric Boyer et al. “obitools: a unix­inspired software package for DNA metabar­
coding”. In: Molecular Ecology Resources 16.1 (2016), pp. 176–182. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1111/1755-0998.12428. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
34
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:43==
1111/1755-0998.12428. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1755-
0998.12428.
[24]
Joseph Sevigny. URL: https://github.com/Joseph7e/Assign-Taxonomy-with-BLAST.
[25]
Jari Oksanen, Gavin L. Simpson, and F. Guillaume Blanchet et al. vegan: Commu­
nity Ecology Package. R package version 2.7­0, https://github.com/vegandevs/vegan.
2024. URL: https://vegandevs.github.io/vegan/.
[26]
Paul J. McMurdie and Susan Holmes. “phyloseq: An R Package for Reproducible
Interactive Analysis and Graphics of Microbiome Census Data”. In: PLOS ONE 8.4
(Apr. 2013), pp. 1–11. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061217. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0061217.
[27]
Giorgio Bianchini and Patricia Sánchez­Baracaldo. “TreeViewer: Flexible, modular
software to visualise and manipulate phylogenetic trees”. In: Ecology and Evolution
14.2 (2024). e10873 ECE­2023­11­01976, e10873. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
ece3.10873. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/ece3.10873. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ece3.10873.
[28]
Andrew D. Foote et al. “Investigating the Potential Use of Environmental DNA (eDNA)
for Genetic Monitoring of Marine Mammals”. In: PLOS ONE 7.8 (Aug. 2012), pp. 1–
6. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041781. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0041781.
[29]
Karin Tubbert Clausen et al. “Echolocation activity of harbour porpoises, Phocoena
phocoena, shows seasonal artificial reef attraction despite elevated noise levels
close to oil and gas platforms”. In: Ecological Solutions and Evidence 2.1 (2021),
e12055. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/2688-8319.12055. eprint: https://besjournals.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/2688-8319.12055. URL: https://besjournals.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/2688-8319.12055.
[30]
Nergiz Dukan et al. “Vertical and horizontal environmental DNA (eDNA) patterns of
fish in a shallow and well­mixed North Sea area”. In: Scientific Reports 14.1 (July
2024). ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-66912-2. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-024-66912-2.
[31]
Gert­Jan Jeunen et al. “Water stratification in the marine biome restricts vertical
environmental DNA (eDNA) signal dispersal”. In: Environmental DNA 2.1 (2020),
pp. 99–111. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/edn3.49. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/edn3.49. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/edn3.49.
[32]
Masaaki Sato et al. “Quantitative assessment of multiple fish species around arti­
ficial reefs combining environmental DNA metabarcoding and acoustic survey”. In:
Scientific Reports 11.1 (Sept. 2021). ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-
98926-5. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-98926-5.
[33]
Anni Djurhuus et al. “Environmental DNA reveals seasonal shifts and potential in­
teractions in a marine community”. In: Nature Communications 11.1 (Jan. 2020).
ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-14105-1. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1038/s41467-019-14105-1.
[34]
Ida Hedal. “Evaluating the use of eDNA to monitor offshore biodiversity shifts in
relation to the establishment of artificial reefs”. MA thesis. Technical University of
Denmark, 2023.
[35]
Mads Reinholdt Jensen et al. “Short­term temporal variation of coastal marine eDNA”.
In: Environmental DNA 4.4 (2022), pp. 747–762. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
edn3.285. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/edn3.285. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/edn3.285.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
35
==PAGE:44==
[36]
Brian Klitgaard Hansen et al. “The sceptical optimist: challenges and perspectives
for the application of environmental DNA in marine fisheries”. In: Fish and Fisheries
19.5 (2018), pp. 751–768. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12286. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/faf.12286. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/faf.12286.
[37]
Katy E. Klymus et al. “Quantification of eDNA shedding rates from invasive bighead
carp Hypophthalmichthys nobilis and silver carp Hypophthalmichthys molitrix”. In:
Biological Conservation 183 (Mar. 2015), pp. 77–84. ISSN: 0006­3207. DOI: 10.
1016/j.biocon.2014.11.020. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2014.11.020.
[38]
Hideyuki Doi et al. “Use of Droplet Digital PCR for Estimation of Fish Abundance
and Biomass in Environmental DNA Surveys”. In: PLOS ONE 10.3 (Mar. 2015),
pp. 1–11. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122763. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0122763.
[39]
Steen Wilhelm Knudsen et al. “Species­specific detection and quantification of en­
vironmental DNA from marine fishes in the Baltic Sea”. In: Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 510 (2019), pp. 31–45. ISSN: 0022­0981. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jembe.2018.09.004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0022098118302168.
[40]
Stephen F. Spear et al. “Using environmental DNA methods to improve detectability
in a hellbender (Cryptobranchus alleganiensis) monitoring program”. In: Biological
Conservation 183 (2015). Special Issue: Environmental DNA: A powerful new tool
for biological conservation, pp. 38–45. ISSN: 0006­3207. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.biocon.2014.11.016. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0006320714004418.
[41]
Philip Francis Thomsen et al. “Environmental DNA from Seawater Samples Cor­
relate with Trawl Catches of Subarctic, Deepwater Fishes”. In: PLOS ONE 11.11
(Nov. 2016), pp. 1–22. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165252. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0165252.
[42]
Satoshi Yamamoto et al. “Environmental DNA as a ‘Snapshot’ of Fish Distribution:
A Case Study of Japanese Jack Mackerel in Maizuru Bay, Sea of Japan”. In: PLOS
ONE 11.3 (Mar. 2016), pp. 1–18. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149786. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0149786.
[43]
Matthieu Delefosse et al. “Marine Mammal Biodiversity Around Oil and Gas Plat­
forms ­ Challenges and Successes of Long­Term Monitoring”. In: SPE International
Conference and Exhibition on Health, Safety, Environment, and Sustainability SPE
International Conference and Exhibition on Health, Safety, Environment, and Sus­
tainability (July 2020), D011S002R001. DOI: 10.2118/199479- MS. eprint: https:
//onepetro.org/SPEHSE/proceedings-pdf/20HSE/20HSE/D011S002R001/3814580/
spe-199479-ms.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.2118/199479-MS.
[44]
Adriana Krolicka et al. “Sea lice (Lepeophtherius salmonis) detection and quantifi­
cation around aquaculture installations using environmental DNA”. In: PLOS ONE
17.9 (Sept. 2022), pp. 1–18. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0274736. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0274736.
[45]
Kay Weltz et al. “Application of environmental DNA to detect an endangered marine
skate species in the wild”. In: PLOS ONE 12.6 (June 2017), pp. 1–16. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0178124. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0178124.
[46]
José Luis Mena et al. “Environmental DNA metabarcoding as a useful tool for eval­
uating terrestrial mammal diversity in tropical forests”. In: Ecological Applications
31.5 (2021), e02335. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / eap . 2335. eprint: https :
36
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:45==
/ / esajournals . onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / eap . 2335. URL: https :
//esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/eap.2335.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:47==
A
Appendix I – Rarefaction data
Rarefaction curves are a way to represent the species distributions of samples in a prob­
abilistic manner. By choosing X observations from a randomised dataset, we will likely
find Y unique species among them.
Figure A.1: Rarefaction curve for Lib01.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure A.2: Rarefaction curve for Lib02.
Figure A.3: Rarefaction curve for Lib04.
40
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:49==
B
Appendix II – Clustering of spatial data
This is an overview of the spatial data collected in Lib04. Here, it is tougher to define clear
clusters. Many deployment sites in the North Sea were close to each other, showing little
variation.
Three sub­clusters are well­defined: Esbjerg harbour, Norvana shipwreck, and the bot­
tom samples from Dan F. These areas are distant from one another and have unique
environmental compositions.
All the other samples represent similar ecosystems, making it challenging to separate
them using the Jaccard index. In addition, surface and bottom samples are known to
have different species concentrations.
Figure B.1: Dendrogram based on the Jaccard dissimilarities for the spatial data from the
North Sea (Lib04).
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
41
==PAGE:50==
C
Appendix III – Selected species for the
analysis
Table C.1: List of acceptable taxa that were included as part of the reference database
for the metabarcoding analysis.
TaxId
Scientific name
Common name
Category
7748
Lampetra fluviatilis
European river lamprey
Fishes
7757
Petromyzon marinus
Sea lamprey
Fishes
7769
Myxine glutinosa
Atlantic hagfish
Fishes
7781
Raja clavata
Thornback ray
Fishes
7788
Torpedo marmorata
Marbled electric ray
Fishes
7797
Squalus acanthias
Spiny dogfish
Fishes
7815
Prionace glauca
Blue shark
Fishes
7830
Scyliorhinus canicula
Smaller spotted catshark
Fishes
7849
Lamna nasus
NA
Fishes
7852
Alopias vulpinus
Thresher shark
Fishes
7871
Chimaera monstrosa
Rabbit fish
Fishes
7902
Acipenser gueldenstaedtii
Russian sturgeon
Fishes
7903
Acipenser stellatus
Stellate sturgeon
Fishes
7936
Anguilla anguilla
European eel
Fishes
7950
Clupea harengus
Atlantic herring
Fishes
8017
Oncorhynchus gorbuscha
Pink salmon
Fishes
8019
Oncorhynchus kisutch
Coho salmon
Fishes
8022
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Rainbow trout
Fishes
8030
Salmo salar
Atlantic salmon
Fishes
8032
Salmo trutta
River trout
Fishes
8036
Salvelinus alpinus
Arctic char
Fishes
8049
Gadus morhua
Atlantic cod
Fishes
8056
Melanogrammus aeglefinus
Haddock
Fishes
8058
Merlangius merlangus
Whiting
Fishes
8060
Pollachius virens
Saithe
Fishes
8063
Merluccius merluccius
European hake
Fishes
8074
Lophius piscatorius
Angler
Fishes
8097
Myoxocephalus scorpius
Shorthorn sculpin
Fishes
8103
Cyclopterus lumpus
Lumpfish
Fishes
8175
Sparus aurata
Gilthead seabream
Fishes
8204
Anarhichas lupus
Atlantic wolffish
Fishes
8226
Katsuwonus pelamis
Skipjack tuna
Fishes
8228
Euthynnus alletteratus
Little tunny
Fishes
8232
Sarda sarda
Atlantic bonito
Fishes
8237
Thunnus thynnus
Atlantic bluefin tuna
Fishes
8245
Xiphias gladius
Swordfish
Fishes
8260
Platichthys flesus
European flounder
Fishes
8262
Pleuronectes platessa
European plaice
Fishes
8267
Hippoglossus hippoglossus
Atlantic halibut
Fishes
Continued on next page
42
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:51==
Table C.1 – Continued from previous page
TaxId
Scientific name
Common name
Category
13225
Pomatoschistus minutus
Sand goby
Fishes
13489
Dicentrarchus labrax
European seabass
Fishes
13677
Scomber scombrus
Atlantic mackerel
Fishes
27588
Raja montagui
Spotted ray
Fishes
27590
Tetronarce nobiliana
Atlantic torpedo
Fishes
27689
Acipenser baerii
Siberian sturgeon
Fishes
27697
Sardina pilchardus
Sardine
Fishes
27722
Trisopterus luscus
NA
Fishes
27771
Limanda limanda
Common dab
Fishes
29151
Osmerus eperlanus
European smelt
Fishes
29154
Micropogonias undulatus
Atlantic croaker
Fishes
30804
Chelon ramada
Thin­lipped mullet
Fishes
34785
Callionymus lyra
Dragonet
Fishes
34817
Hippoglossoides platessoides
American plaice
Fishes
34819
Glyptocephalus cynoglossus
Witch
Fishes
36177
Acipenser oxyrinchus
Atlantic sturgeon
Fishes
36212
Trachurus trachurus
Atlantic horse mackerel
Fishes
36219
Boops boops
NA
Fishes
37007
Mullus barbatus
Red mullet
Fishes
38941
Diplodus sargus
White seabream
Fishes
47308
Neogobius melanostomus
Round goby
Fishes
48171
Chelon labrosus
Thicklip grey mullet
Fishes
48191
Chelon auratus
Golden grey mullet
Fishes
48416
Zoarces viviparus
Viviparous blenny
Fishes
50593
Pagellus erythrinus
Common pandora
Fishes
50595
Spondyliosoma cantharus
Black seabream
Fishes
52904
Scophthalmus maximus
Turbot
Fishes
56720
Lipophrys pholis
Shanny
Fishes
56723
Labrus bergylta
Ballan wrasse
Fishes
56726
Pholis gunnellus
Rock gunnel
Fishes
56737
Trachinus draco
Greater weever
Fishes
57982
Cetorhinus maximus
NA
Fishes
61643
Taurulus bubalis
NA
Fishes
61674
Acipenser sturio
Sturgeon
Fishes
61971
Huso huso
Beluga
Fishes
64108
Zeus faber
John dory
Fishes
65125
Scophthalmus rhombus
Brill
Fishes
68454
Scyliorhinus stellaris
Nursehound
Fishes
68502
Maurolicus muelleri
Pearlsides
Fishes
69293
Gasterosteus aculeatus
Three­spined stickleback
Fishes
77914
Galeus melastomus
Blackmouth catshark
Fishes
80722
Trisopterus minutus
Poor cod
Fishes
80723
Trisopterus esmarkii
Norway pout
Fishes
81370
Lampris guttatus
North Atlantic opah
Fishes
81389
Regalecus glesne
King of herrings
Fishes
81636
Micromesistius poutassou
Blue whiting
Fishes
81638
Brosme brosme
NA
Fishes
Continued on next page
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
43
==PAGE:52==
Table C.1 – Continued from previous page
TaxId
Scientific name
Common name
Category
81640
Enchelyopus cimbrius
Fourbeard rockling
Fishes
82655
Conger conger
European conger
Fishes
84621
Ammodytes tobianus
Small sandeel
Fishes
85417
Gobius niger
Black goby
Fishes
86063
Galeorhinus galeus
Tope shark
Fishes
87757
Mullus surmuletus
Striped red mullet
Fishes
87759
Sarpa salpa
NA
Fishes
90068
Pegusa lascaris
Sand sole
Fishes
90069
Solea solea
Common sole
Fishes
90071
Buglossidium luteum
Solenette
Fishes
90074
Microchirus variegatus
Thickback sole
Fishes
94237
Mola mola
Ocean sunfish
Fishes
94984
Echiichthys vipera
Lesser weever
Fishes
94987
Hexanchus griseus
NA
Fishes
98815
Dentex maroccanus
Morocco dentex
Fishes
98817
Pagellus acarne
Axillary seabream
Fishes
98819
Pagellus bogaraveo
Blackspot seabream
Fishes
98928
Leuciscus aspius
NA
Fishes
106175
Microstomus kitt
Lemon sole
Fishes
107241
Beryx decadactylus
Alfonsino
Fishes
109282
Hippocampus guttulatus
Long­snouted seahorse
Fishes
109283
Hippocampus hippocampus
Short­snouted seahorse
Fishes
112230
Mustelus mustelus
Smooth­hound
Fishes
112232
Mustelus asterias
Starry smooth­hound
Fishes
112728
Polyprion americanus
Wreckfish
Fishes
114866
Myctophum punctatum
Spotted lanternfish
Fishes
118170
Nemichthys scolopaceus
Slender snipe eel
Fishes
125806
Notoscopelus elongatus kroyeri
NA
Fishes
126330
Coris julis
Mediterranean rainbow wrasse
Fishes
129037
Belone belone
NA
Fishes
129061
Scomberesox saurus
NA
Fishes
134920
Pungitius pungitius
Ninespine stickleback
Fishes
146480
Ammodytes marinus
Lesser sand­eel
Fishes
154550
Lepidorhombus whiffiagonis
Megrim
Fishes
159077
Nerophis ophidion
Straightnose pipefish
Fishes
159850
Pomatoschistus lozanoi
Lozano’s goby
Fishes
161455
Entelurus aequoreus
Snake pipefish
Fishes
161584
Syngnathus acus
Greater pipefish
Fishes
161589
Syngnathus rostellatus
Nilsson’s pipefish
Fishes
161592
Syngnathus typhle
Broad­nosed pipefish
Fishes
163112
Molva molva
Ling
Fishes
163115
Phycis blennoides
NA
Fishes
163117
Raniceps raninus
Tadpole fish
Fishes
163118
Coryphaenoides rupestris
Roundnose grenadier
Fishes
170817
Dalatias licha
Kitefin shark
Fishes
171732
Centrolabrus exoletus
Rock cook
Fishes
171735
Ctenolabrus rupestris
Goldsinny wrasse
Fishes
Continued on next page
44
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:53==
Table C.1 – Continued from previous page
TaxId
Scientific name
Common name
Category
171736
Symphodus melops
Corkwing wrasse
Fishes
172269
Argyrosomus regius
Meagre
Fishes
173339
Trachinotus ovatus
Derbio
Fishes
182854
Dipturus oxyrinchus
Longnosed skate
Fishes
184585
Engraulis encrasicolus
European anchovy
Fishes
185738
Molva dypterygia
Blue ling
Fishes
185739
Pollachius pollachius
Pollack
Fishes
191678
Lophius budegassa
Black­bellied angler
Fishes
191813
Somniosus microcephalus
Greenland sleeper shark
Fishes
196075
Sprattus sprattus
European sprat
Fishes
202727
Helicolenus dactylopterus
NA
Fishes
206100
Capros aper
Boarfish
Fishes
206124
Macroramphosus scolopax
Longspine snipefish
Fishes
206126
Spinachia spinachia
Sea stickleback
Fishes
208529
Arnoglossus laterna
Scaldfish
Fishes
213384
Leucoraja circularis
Sandy ray
Fishes
215414
Lycenchelys sarsii
Sar’s wolf eel
Fishes
215424
Lycodes vahlii
Vahl’s eelpout
Fishes
217026
Auxis rochei
NA
Fishes
223862
Raja brachyura
Blonde ray
Fishes
223888
Leucoraja naevus
Cuckoo ray
Fishes
223889
Leucoraja fullonica
Shagreen ray
Fishes
225753
Pomatoschistus microps
Common goby
Fishes
257537
Pomatoschistus pictus
Painted goby
Fishes
257538
Pomatoschistus norvegicus
Norway goby
Fishes
257540
Gobiusculus flavescens
NA
Fishes
263718
Squatina squatina
Angelshark
Fishes
268865
Aphanopus carbo
Black scabbardfish
Fishes
278164
Alosa alosa
Allis shad
Fishes
278165
Alosa fallax
Twaite shad
Fishes
303685
Balistes capriscus
Grey triggerfish
Fishes
303921
Atherina presbyter
Sand smelt
Fishes
305631
Remora remora
Common remora
Fishes
316130
Centrolophus niger
Blackfish
Fishes
319769
Magnisudis atlantica
Duckbill barracudina
Fishes
335025
Deania calcea
Birdbeak dogfish
Fishes
335027
Centrophorus squamosus
Leafscale gulper shark
Fishes
335028
Centroscymnus crepidater
Longnose velvet dogfish
Fishes
348057
Gaidropsarus vulgaris
Three­bearded rockling
Fishes
348443
Ciliata mustela
Fivebeard rockling
Fishes
349651
Brama brama
Atlantic pomfret
Fishes
372798
Nesiarchus nasutus
Black gemfish
Fishes
386614
Amblyraja radiata
Thorny skate
Fishes
394699
Sebastes norvegicus
Golden redfish
Fishes
394708
Sebastes viviparus
Norway redfish
Fishes
414887
Trachipterus arcticus
Dealfish
Fishes
417956
Rajella fyllae
Round ray
Fishes
Continued on next page
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
45
==PAGE:54==
Table C.1 – Continued from previous page
TaxId
Scientific name
Common name
Category
420460
Dipturus batis
Blue skate
Fishes
425520
Anarhichas denticulatus
Northern wolffish
Fishes
426094
Chelidonichthys cuculus
Red gurnard
Fishes
426098
Eutrigla gurnardus
Grey gurnard
Fishes
426100
Gaidropsarus mediterraneus
Shore rockling
Fishes
430084
Trigla lyra
NA
Fishes
441899
Aphia minuta
Transparent goby
Fishes
441903
Crystallogobius linearis
Crystal goby
Fishes
441905
Lesueurigobius friesii
Fries’s goby
Fishes
442169
Argentina sphyraena
European argentine
Fishes
446415
Argentina silus
Greater argentine
Fishes
446792
Liparis liparis
Striped seasnail
Fishes
446793
Liparis montagui
Montagu’s sea snail
Fishes
455296
Centroscymnus coelolepis
Portuguese dogfish
Fishes
473298
Argyropelecus olfersii
NA
Fishes
473364
Etmopterus princeps
Great lanternshark
Fishes
508551
Callionymus maculatus
Spotted dragonet
Fishes
508552
Callionymus reticulatus
Reticulated dragonet
Fishes
508553
Ciliata septentrionalis
Northern rockling
Fishes
508554
Labrus mixtus
Cuckoo wrasse
Fishes
508607
Agonus cataphractus
Hooknose
Fishes
508657
Hyperoplus lanceolatus
Great sand­eel
Fishes
508659
Zeugopterus norvegicus
Norwegian topknot
Fishes
509777
Paralepis coregonoides
Sharpchin barracudina
Fishes
526623
Zeugopterus punctatus
Topknot
Fishes
546515
Cheilopogon heterurus
Mediterranean flyingfish
Fishes
546530
Nerophis lumbriciformis
Worm pipefish
Fishes
546535
Schedophilus medusophagus
Cornish blackfish
Fishes
557337
Bathyraja spinicauda
Spinetail ray
Fishes
630738
Malacocephalus laevis
Softhead grenadier
Fishes
648166
Etmopterus spinax
Velvet belly lantern shark
Fishes
651723
Pteroplatytrygon violacea
Pelagic stingray
Fishes
673854
Dasyatis pastinaca
Common stingray
Fishes
674131
Coregonus maraena
Maraena whitefish
Fishes
862826
Echinorhinus brucus
Bramble shark
Fishes
980323
Artediellus atlanticus
Atlantic hookear sculpin
Fishes
980417
Leptoclinus maculatus
NA
Fishes
990611
Myliobatis aquila
Common eagle ray
Fishes
1016941
Oxynotus centrina
Angular roughshark
Fishes
1266874
Lumpenus lampretaeformis
Snakeblenny
Fishes
1266884
Triglops murrayi
Moustache sculpin
Fishes
1306753
Gymnammodytes semisquamatus
Smooth sandeel
Fishes
1365585
Thorogobius ephippiatus
Leopard­spotted goby
Fishes
1365694
Lebetus guilleti
Guillet’s goby
Fishes
1482869
Gadiculus argenteus thori
Silvery pout
Fishes
1484357
Hyperoplus immaculatus
Greater sand­eel
Fishes
1552233
Buenia jeffreysii
Jeffrey’s goby
Fishes
Continued on next page
46
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:55==
Table C.1 – Continued from previous page
TaxId
Scientific name
Common name
Category
1819258
Echiodon drummondii
NA
Fishes
2014788
Lebetus scorpioides
NA
Fishes
2576622
Chelidonichthys lucerna
Tub gurnard
Fishes
2719052
Chirolophis ascanii
NA
Fishes
2719090
Rajella lintea
Sailray
Fishes
2814718
Dipturus intermedius
NA
Fishes
2821466
Micrenophrys lilljeborgii
NA
Fishes
8879
Mergus serrator
NA
Birds
13746
Uria aalge
Common murre
Birds
28689
Alca torda
Razorbill
Birds
28691
Alle alle
NA
Birds
28701
Fratercula arctica
Atlantic puffin
Birds
30455
Fulmarus glacialis
Northern fulmar
Birds
37050
Podiceps auritus
NA
Birds
37051
Puffinus gravis
Great shearwater
Birds
37052
Puffinus griseus
Sooty shearwater
Birds
48670
Puffinus assimilis
NA
Birds
48681
Puffinus mauretanicus
NA
Birds
48688
Puffinus puffinus
NA
Birds
52122
Calonectris diomedea
Scopoli’s shearwater
Birds
52124
Oceanodroma leucorhoa
Leach’s storm­petrel
Birds
57069
Gavia arctica
NA
Birds
76058
Somateria mollissima
Common eider
Birds
79651
Hydrobates pelagicus
European storm­petrel
Birds
79653
Oceanites oceanicus
Wilson’s storm­petrel
Birds
126723
Sterna sandvicensis
Sandwich tern
Birds
126865
Gelochelidon nilotica
NA
Birds
197941
Clangula hyemalis
Long­tailed duck
Birds
198027
Melanitta nigra
European common scoter
Birds
345573
Podiceps cristatus
Great crested grebe
Birds
371864
Melanitta fusca
Velvet scoter
Birds
1323832
Calonectris borealis
Cory’s shearwater
Birds
9707
Odobenus rosmarus
Walrus
Marine mammals
9711
Halichoerus grypus
Gray seal
Marine mammals
9718
Pusa hispida
Ringed seal
Marine mammals
9720
Phoca vitulina
Harbor seal
Marine mammals
9728
Delphinus delphis
Saddleback dolphin
Marine mammals
9731
Globicephala melas
Long­finned pilot whale
Marine mammals
9733
Orcinus orca
Killer whale
Marine mammals
9737
Stenella coeruleoalba
Striped dolphin
Marine mammals
9739
Tursiops truncatus
Common bottlenose dolphin
Marine mammals
9742
Phocoena phocoena
Harbor porpoise
Marine mammals
9749
Delphinapterus leucas
Beluga whale
Marine mammals
9755
Physeter macrocephalus
Sperm whale
Marine mammals
9760
Ziphius cavirostris
Cuvier’s beaked whale
Marine mammals
9767
Balaenoptera acutorostrata
Minke whale
Marine mammals
9768
Balaenoptera borealis
Sei whale
Marine mammals
Continued on next page
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
47
==PAGE:56==
Table C.1 – Continued from previous page
TaxId
Scientific name
Common name
Category
9770
Balaenoptera physalus
Fin whale
Marine mammals
9771
Balaenoptera musculus
Blue whale
Marine mammals
9773
Megaptera novaeangliae
Humpback whale
Marine mammals
27606
Eubalaena glacialis
North Atlantic right whale
Marine mammals
27610
Lagenorhynchus albirostris
White­beaked dolphin
Marine mammals
27615
Kogia breviceps
Pygmy sperm whale
Marine mammals
39293
Cystophora cristata
Hooded seal
Marine mammals
48744
Hyperoodon ampullatus
Northern bottlenose whale
Marine mammals
48745
Mesoplodon bidens
Sowerby’s beaked whale
Marine mammals
90246
Lagenorhynchus acutus
Atlantic white­sided dolphin
Marine mammals
9031
Gallus gallus
Chicken
Contamination
9606
Homo sapiens
Human
Contamination
9796
Equus caballus
Horse
Contamination
9823
Sus scrofa
Pig
Contamination
9913
Bos taurus
Domestic cattle
Contamination
9940
Ovis aries
Sheep
Contamination
30501
Carcharias taurus
Sand tiger shark
Positive control
54563
Rutilus frisii
Common roach
Positive control
563643
Rutilus pigus
Danube roach
Positive control
48668
Rutilus rutilus
Roach minnow
Positive control
48
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:57==
D
Appendix IV – Assay table
Figure D.1: Information on all qPCR assays used for eDNA analysis. Concentrations of
primers and probes can be found in the relevant papers or obtained by requesting them
from the supervisors.
Hansen, B. K., Farrant, G. K., Ogden, R., Humble, E., Ólafsdóttir, G., Bekkevold, D.,
Knudsen, S. W., Møller, P. R., Nielsen, E. E., From DNA to biomass: opportunities and
challenges in species quantification of bulk fisheries products. 2020. ICES Journal of
Marine Science, 77, 2557–2566. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsaa115
Knudsen, S.W., Hesselsøe, M., Thaulow, J., Agersnap, S., Hansen, B.K., Jacobsen,
M.W., Bekkevold, D., Jensen, S.K.S., Møller, P.R., Andersen, J.H. 2022. Monitoring of
environmental DNA from nonindigenous species of algae, dinoflagellates and animals in
the North East Atlantic. Science of the Total Environment, 821, https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.SCITOTENV.2022.153093
Knudsen, S. W., Ebert, R. B., Hesselsøe, M., Kuntke, F., Hassingboe, J., Mortensen, P.
B., Thomsen, P. F., Sigsgaard, E. E., Hansen, B. K., Nielsen, E. E. & Peter Rask Møller.
2019. Species­specific detection and quantification of environmental DNA from marine
fishes in the Baltic Sea. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 510, 31­45.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jembe.2018.09.004
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:59==
E
Appendix V – ESP samples table
Figure E.1: List of all ESP samples collected from the various deployment sites.
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
51
==PAGE:60==
F
Appendix VI – Correlation between
species-specific DNA concentration and
total DNA mass
Figure F.1: Correlation between the total DNA concentration per sample (X) and the copy
number for each species (Y ). No direct link between the two variables was detected.
52
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
==PAGE:61==
Monitoring offshore biodiversity through the collection of eDNA using an autonomous ecogenomic sensor
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 101
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
