==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A Visual Studio Code Extension for Editing Swarm
Protocols
Caroline Bjørch Fallesen (s194570)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
at the Technical University of Denmark over a period of 5 months, from August 1st to January 1st.
The thesis was conducted in fulfilment of the requirements for a Master of Science degree in Computer
Science engineering. The work done throughout this thesis period corresponds to 30 ECTS points.
The work done in this thesis has been supervised by Associate Professor Alceste Scalas from DTU
and co-supervised by co-founder of Actyx, Roland Kuhn.
Kongens Lyngby, January 1, 2025
Caroline Bjørch Fallesen (s194570)
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Alceste Scalas and Roland Kuhn, for their help, guidance, and
project insight during our weekly meetings.
I would also like to express my deepest appreciation to everyone who took the time to test the extension
developed, both for the User Acceptance Testing and for the UX validation.
To my friends and family I would like to say thank you for the endless support, care, and patience that
you provided throughout the entire process of working on this thesis. Thank you for keeping me on track.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project describes the development of an extension to visualise swarm protocols. The goal of the
project has been to simplify the process of viewing and editing swarm protocols. By making the protocol
visual, it should be easier for the user to see the effect of the changes they make to the swarm protocol.
A swarm is a distributed system of machines communicating through events. Each machine can
execute commands, which will notify other machines by propagating events to all other machines in
the system. The overall communication between machines in the swarm can be described by a swarm
protocol. This protocol describes which commands will cause the swarm to change to which state and
which role is responsible for this command. The swarm protocol can then be described as a finite-state
machine, easily visualised as a graph.
A Visual Studio Code extension was designed and implemented during the project to visualise these
swarm protocols as a visual state machine. This extension was implemented as a webview using the
React framework and contains both a visual protocol and features allowing users to manipulate this
protocol. Users can add, move, or delete elements such as states and transitions. It is also possible
to rename states, commands, roles, or log types of transitions. It is also possible to save the changes
made, both directly in the protocol file or as an image downloaded to the user’s computer. Before the
new protocol is saved in the file, a well-formedness check is performed, to ensure that the new protocol
satisfies the behaviour of a swarm protocol.
During the development of the extension, different methods of testing and validation were used.
Manual testing was used to test the implemented functionalities and to test the robustness of the
program.
UX validation ensured that each program iteration also improved the users’ experience.
Lastly, User Acceptance Testing was used to determine if the program had the desired effect on a
potential user. A few weeks of testing showed that the program did indeed ease the process of editing
protocols, saving up to 2 hours per protocol.
The extension discussed in this thesis was developed purely for the sake of this project. The program
has, however, been released to the Visual Studio Code marketplace, for testing purposes. This extension
contains the newest version, and can be found under the name ”Visual Swarm Protocol Editing”. The
release of the extension was done after consulting with project supervisors to allow an Actyx client to
use the program. After the end of the thesis period, the extension developed will be released as an
open-source program. This will allow interested parties, such as the TaRDIS project, to maintain the
extension.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Finite-State Machines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Swarms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
The Actyx Toolkit for Swarm Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Program Overview
9
3.1
Current Work Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
A Visual Studio Code Extension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Design
16
4.1
Project Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Program Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Implementation
28
5.1
Project Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Program Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Evaluation
46
6.1
UX Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
User Acceptance Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Manual Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.4
Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.5
Working Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.6
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
52
A ChatGPT Usage
55
A.1 Extension template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2 Data passing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.3 Posting messages from webview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
B Used licenses
64
C UX validation
65
C.1 Round 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
C.2 Round 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This thesis will describe the design and implementation of a Visual Studio Code extension developed to
facilitate the design of swarm protocols, which define the communication between machines in a swarm.
Before this project, the possibility of creating and editing these protocols was strictly in a textual format.
To make this process easier, the intention of this project has been to create a visual editor of swarm
protocols. This editor should allow users to have a visual representation of the designed protocol and
make changes within this representation.
Below is the project description, defined before the beginning of the thesis period.
A swarm protocol[1][2] specifies how a collection of roles interact in a distributed heterogeneous
system and work towards completing a task without central coordination. The Germany-based company
Actyx has developed an open-source library and toolset [3] to describe a swarm protocol and program its
roles. The toolset can model and conformance-check the implementations of one or more state machines
implementing the roles involved in a swarm protocol. This project will design and develop an extension
for the Visual Studio Code IDE that can visualise the shape of a swarm protocol (as a sort of ”global
state machine” depicting the interactions between roles), and allow the user to make changes to the
swarm within the visualisation. This extension will interface with the Actyx toolset to ensure that a
swarm protocol is well-formed and to perform conformance checks whenever changes are made.
The goals set in this description have been met by developing an extension compatible with VS
Code and the Actyx toolkit. This extension allows a user to open a protocol designed using the Actyx
toolkit in a visual representation. It is then possible to move, add, or delete already existing elements.
The visual diagram can then be saved as an image, and changes made can also be saved in the original
file.
Chapter 2 describes the theory necessary to understand the basis of the project, along with related
works. A short overview of the current possibilities when building swarm protocols and the added
possibilities when using the extension is presented in Chapter 3. The basic design of the extension and
the planned programming design can be found in Chapter 4. The extension implementation is described
in Chapter 5, and the extension and work process has been described in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Background
In this chapter, the necessary background for the project is described. The purpose of this project is to
visualise a swarm protocol in the shape of a finite-state machine. The protocols will come from swarms
and will be designed using the Actyx libraries. Apart from visualising protocols, it is also necessary to
check the well-formedness of these. To ensure proper knowledge of these topics, they are discussed in
this chapter. Apart from this, some research has been done on similar or related projects, and these
will also be presented here.
2.1
Finite-State Machines
As previously mentioned, the representation and visualisation of swarm protocols can be seen as that of
finite-state machines. A finite-state machine (FSM) is a model that describes the overall behaviour
of a system as a set of states and transitions. A state is used to describe the system’s status, and each
state is part of the system’s lifecycle. States are deterministic, meaning that the system can only be in
one state at a time.[4] Transitions are the move from one state to another. Transitions will be triggered
by some event or input, and then move the system from the current state to the state matching this
specific transition. Transitions are also deterministic, meaning that a combination of a state and input
will always give the same resulting state.[5]
Formally, an FSM can be defined as a tuple that looks as follows:
Q : A finite set of states
Σ : A finite alphabet of inputs
q0 ∈Q : An initial state found in the set of states
A ⊆Q : A set of accepting/final states within Q
δ : The transition function(Q × Σ →Q)
Q describes the set of all possible states within the system. One of these states will be the initial
state, the state that the system starts in, which is q0. Some of the states may be accepting or final,
meaning that it is not possible to move to other states, because there are no outgoing transitions. These
are denoted by A, which is a subset of Q. Swarms and swarm protocols do not use accepting states,
meaning that this element will be disregarded throughout this report. Σ is a list of all possible inputs
or events that can happen in the system. Lastly, δ is the transition function. This function uses the
current state along with an input to compute the next state to move to.[6]
This formal definition of FSM can be used to visualise the behaviour of a system.
Finite-state
machines are typically visualised using a box for states and arrows for transitions. A label can be added
to the arrow, to show the event that causes the transition. This visualisation method will give a result
similar to a graph or a flow chart.
2.2
Swarms
The basis of this project is swarms and swarm protocols.
A swarm is a type of distributed
system. Distributed systems are collections of programs that use the same resources but have separate
==PAGE:10==
2.2 Swarms
3
computations, to achieve some common goal. These types of systems communicate and synchronise
over a network, as the participants in the system will typically process the function at the same time.
The participants in a distributed system can be hardware or software processes.[7]
Swarms are useful to represent communication between several machines, for instance in factories,
where production might involve multiple machines handling the same product at the same production
step. This requires the machines to work together and coordinate their behaviour.[1]
To accurately explain a swarm, a few important definitions are required.
• A machine is a participant in the distributed system. Machines interact and communicate by
passing around events.
• Events are created in response to the execution of a command. These events are generated locally
and added to the local log.
• A command is executed and can trigger events that will cause the state to change.
• Logs are sequences of events. They can be merged with other logs, and the logs are not synchro-
nised between machines.
Now that these four terms have been expressed, a swarm can be defined as a set of machines that
communicate only through events propagating the system. Table 2.1 contains nomenclature relating to
swarms. The concept of an event type is added. Because of this, a statement is also introduced, saying
that an event is of a type l. The table also shows the symbols for machines, commands and logs. Each
machine has a role R. Roles are important because, within a swarm, a role will subscribe to all events
of certain types. Roles and subscriptions are introduced, so machines only handle relevant events. S is
a list of pairs, each pair consisting of a machine and its local log. Swarms are denoted by another pair,
which is the list of pairs described earlier, along with a global log. A swarm is said to be coherent
when each local log in the swarm has all events in the same order as they appear in the global log. The
global log is a theoretical concept, introduced to describe the total order of events. In reality, the total
order of events must be achieved in each machine’s local log, without coordination between machines.
Each machine in a swarm is in a certain state that can be computed from the events in the local log.
Using events to determine the state of a machine also makes it possible to define the swarm as a finite-
state machine. In a swarm, states are computed using a transition function, just as with finite-state
machines, and this function has been defined from that of FSM. The transition function of a machine
is denoted by δ(M, l), meaning that the state is computed from a machine and its log. The following
formula can be used to compute the state of a machine:
δ(M, ϵ) = q0
(2.1)
δ(M, e · l) =
{
δ(M[q], l),
if ⊢e : t, q0
t?
−→q in M
δ(M, l),
otherwise
(2.2)
M
Machine
R
Role
l
Event log type
⊢e : l
Event e is of type l
c / l
A command c that emits a log of type l
l
Event log
S
A list of pairs of machines and local logs (Mi, li)
(S, l)
A swarm with a global log.
Table 2.1: A list of formal definitions for swarms and elements.
==PAGE:11==
2.2 Swarms
4
Equation 2.1 describes the initial state of a machine, where the log is empty. Equation 2.2 describes
the choice between transitioning to a new state, or staying in the current state. The transition to a
new state only happens if the event has a type t that the machine subscribes to and if the current state
(in this case, the initial state) can consume this event type and move to another state, meaning that a
transition with the label t exists. There are no other conditions to satisfy for a transition to happen.
Swarms use the principle of eventual consensus, meaning that all machines across the swarm will
eventually end up agreeing on the order of events, given that they have consumed the same events.
This means that each local log must have the same total order of events, to satisfy the state transition
function. There may be temporary inconsistencies where a machine makes a choice that is not in line
with the overall choices of the swarm because there are unknown events that have not yet propagated
to this machine.
The concept of the global log is used here, to describe the total order of events.
Each machine’s local log will eventually adhere to the total ordering of events, given that all events
have propagated to each machine. When events are propagated, it is done without coordination and
without any information regarding other events since these might not have been received by all machines.
Eventual consensus means that eventually, all machines will reach this total order.[2]
2.2.1
Swarm Protocols
A protocol is the general structure of event logs for a swarm of machines, and protocols are meant
to show the overall communication between machines. Protocols show the intended communication
between machines in an idealised environment where communication is instant and without error. Below
is the formal syntax of a swarm protocol. An example of a swarm protocol can be seen in figure 2.1.
This example shows the communication of a swarm consisting of three different roles. These roles are
a passenger, a taxi and an oﬀice.
There may be multiple machines taking on the same role.
The
communication of the roles is shown in the figure. A passenger may request a taxi, and the taxis have
the opportunity to make offers. The passenger can then select a taxi, and when the taxi arrives, the
trip will start and finish. Alternatively, the passenger can choose to cancel the trip, but only before the
taxi arrives. Lastly, the oﬀice can create a receipt. The example used has been taken directly from [2].
State computation in protocols generates and consumes logs instead of events. The state can be
computed by a partial transition function δ.
This partial function only works, when a log can be
generated according to a protocol. It is not the same as for machines, where events are discarded if not
recognised. This partial function is described as:
δ(G, l) =







G,
if l = ϵ
δ(G′, l′′),
if G c/l
→G′ and ⊢l′ : l and l = l′ · l′′
⊥,
otherwise
(2.3)
Here, the following definition applies for case 2 in equation 2.3.
Gcj/lj
→Gj ⇔G =
∑
i∈I
ci@Ri. Gi and j ∈I
(2.4)
This means that when a command is invoked, the log is consumed and the state will change based
on the events in the log. If the log is empty, there are no changes, and if the log fits a state, it will
change to that state.[2] The formal syntax is not explicitly used within the scope of this project, but it
does give an important basic knowledge of swarm protocols.
Throughout this project swarm protocols will be seen as finite-state machines. Most of the mecha-
nisms are the same, meaning that it will make sense to view swarm protocols as state machines. A swarm
protocol is a set of transitions, but also a set of states embedded in the transitions. The commands in
a protocol can be seen as the inputs, that will move the machine to the next state. Within these state
==PAGE:12==
2.2 Swarms
5
Figure 2.1: Example of a protocol between taxis, a passenger and an oﬀice.
machines, each role can be played by any positive number of machines. Since swarm protocols do not
explicitly use accepting states, as mentioned in Section 2.1, these are not part of the state machines
used. Another important difference is that swarm protocols will disregard unknown or incorrect inputs.
The advantage of comparing these two data types is that state machines are easily visualised. The idea
is to visualise a protocol in the same way as a state machine in this project. Finite-state machines are
often depicted as graphs with nodes and directed edges.
2.2.2
Well-formedness
The extension built in this project allows the user to check if a swarm protocol is well-formed. A well-
formed protocol ensures that eventual consensus is reached. This is because conditions are made, that
will rule out issues that may be caused by the temporary inconsistencies from choices made by certain
machines. Two points are defined and must be satisfied, for a protocol to be well-formed.
1. The protocol must be causal-consistent, determinate and confusion-free.
2. All continuations of the protocol are well-formed with respect to subscriptions.
The first point has three different conditions that must all be satisfied, to call the protocol well-formed.
The first definition is causal consistency. This condition is meant to solve two different issues, the first
being the way commands are disabled after they have been invoked. In some cases, commands are
never disabled, because the executing role is not aware of resulting events. In others, another command
must be executed before being able to invoke the next. The second issue is the fact that events are
spread throughout machines asynchronously, which can cause the machines to receive some events in
a different order. Because of this, it is important that multiple events cannot be emitted at the same
time, since that could risk the total order. Causal consistency is meant to solve these issues, and to
ensure that the behaviour of the system is correct.
==PAGE:13==
2.3 The Actyx Toolkit for Swarm Development
6
Active roles are used to define causal consistency. These are roles that are able to choose a branch
in the protocol; simply put, they are the roles that can start an action by triggering commands. The
total set of roles also includes roles that are subscribed to events, apart from the active roles. After
this, a protocol is causal consistent if two points are satisfied.
1. A role must observe at least one event emitted by the command that was invoked.
2. The triggering transition must occur before the event, and events from the command must be
generated after all events of the previous command.
The first point is meant to ensure that commands can not be repeated unless they are meant to. The
second is to secure the order of the emitted events.
In the model, it is possible for multiple roles to be active at the same time, without coordination,
which can cause machines to make local decisions that are inconsistent with the rest of the swarm.
Instead of preventing these, they are allowed and will be mended, once the events have propagated
the entire swarm. Determinacy is meant to fix these inconsistencies. A determinant protocol is causal-
consistent. Apart from this, the first event type of a branch in a protocol continuation must be included
in the subscriptions of the roles involved. This is to prevent the role is unaware of the starting point of
a branch it is engaged in to avoid invalid decisions.
The last part of well-formedness is for the protocol to be confusion-free. Confusion may arise if
a branch-choosing event is emitted in the wrong context. For instance, if a sibling branch is being
processed at the same time. This confusion is avoided by requiring that branch-choosing events are a
unique type that can not be emitted by other commands. A confusion-free protocol is invariant for all
types of branch-choosing events. This means that the event type does not appear in any other branches
of the protocol. This rule ensures that the losing branches in conflicts can be ignored. A branch wins if
it is eventually agreed upon throughout the protocol, and in that case, all other branches lose and are
consequentially ignored.
All of these definitions and conditions make up the definition of well-formedness.
First, causal
consistency requires machines to observe events in the correct order. Determinacy then uses the first
event of each event as an identifier that can be used to determine which branch is taken. Lastly, branch-
choosing events are ensured to be unique, to avoid any confusion about winning and losing branches.
All losing branches can then be ignored. If all of these demands are satisfied, for all subscriptions of all
protocol continuations, the protocol is well-formed.
2.3
The Actyx Toolkit for Swarm Development
The company Actyx has developed a toolset that helps describe processes where multiple computers
and programs must work together. To achieve this, they use local twins, which stems from the local-first
approach.[3] Local-first cooperation uses local communication between devices, such as wifi, Bluetooth
or other close connections. Instead of using cloud services, the system data is stored on each device,
but they can still exchange data between each other.[8]
In a system consisting of multiple machines, data would typically be exchanged between two different
programs using a database. In the Actyx toolset, pieces of code are created to describe part of a process.
These are called local twins.[9]
The Actyx system consists of both a CLI and a node manager. These can be used to manually
publish and query events.[10][11] Since this project is based solely on given swarm protocols, these
functionalities will not be used. Instead, the focus of this project will be on the machines that can be
written in TypeScript code using the Actyx SDK and the machine-runner library from Actyx, which
will be discussed further in the Section 2.3.1.
==PAGE:14==
2.4 Related Work
7
2.3.1
Useful Packages
The GitHub repository @actyx/machine is a collection of three libraries that allows a user to run
machines in a swarm protocol, as intended by Actyx.[12] Out of these three libraries, only two are
relevant for this project: @actyx/machine-runner, and @actyx/machine-check.
The machine-runner library is used to instantiate, run and evaluate finite-state machines. Apart
from this, it is also possible to interact with such machines within this library.
The library machine-check is used to verify that the implemented machine follows the expected
behaviour within the swarm protocol. It can be used to check the well-formedness of the swarm protocol.
This library also brings a new type SwarmProtocolType, which is a critical element for this project.[1]
The swarm protocol type consists of an initial state and a list of transitions. This new type is what will
be visualised in this project. The library machine-check also has other functionalities. Since these are
irrelevant to this project, they will not be described further.
2.3.2
Use of the Actyx Toolkit
In the Actyx SDK, the notation of swarms described in Section 2.2 is used. Here, participants are
machines that can react to and put out events. These events are added to the local log after a command
has been executed, and the local log can then be propagated to other machines in the system. This
entire process is the communication between machines, which happens asynchronously and has no
coordination method. Within the swarm, each machine plays a role, meaning that only some events
may be relevant for each role. Because of this, subscriptions are introduced. Subscriptions are lists of
event types that are relevant for each role.
In Actyx, all states are represented in their class, using the machine-runner library. When running
a program on a machine, the initial state of the machine is generated, and can then be changed using
the event log. The subscriptions of the machine’s role are also noted in the program, ensuring that only
relevant events are delivered to the machine. The events are then used as parameters in event handlers,
designed to change the state of the machine based on the event.[2]
For this project, the communication between machines, events and states will not be used. Instead,
the focus will be on the SwarmProtocolType, as the visualisation of these protocols is the main goal.
A basic understanding of the Actyx SDK and libraries is, however, useful for the overall picture of the
project. The process of communication can be treated as a finite state machine, which is highly relevant
to this project since swarm protocols are represented as finite state machines visually.
2.4
Related Work
The related work of this project is limited. Swarms and swarm protocols are relatively new topics,
with little documentation, to the best of the author’s knowledge. Actyx is also a unique program that
especially utilises these swarms and protocols. There are, however, some VS Code extensions that can
be seen as related works, as their primary functionality is visualising and editing state machines.
2.4.1
VS Code Extensions
One example of such an extension is XState. When researching the possibility of visualising finite-state
machines, this library shows up. XState is available as both a library to integrate in code, or as a VS
Code extension and has many of the same features that have been implemented in this project. The VS
Code extension allows for visual editing of state machines, meaning it can visualise the state machine
from a file, and then apply any changes.[13] This is generally the same idea as for this project, however,
the notation of XState machines is very different from that of swarm protocols. Because of this, XState
would not support swarm protocols directly. Instead, this project will be about building a program
around the SwarmProtocolType allowing the extension to be used directly in existing code with no
changes.
==PAGE:15==
2.4 Related Work
8
Mermaidjs is a library that allows the user to create diagrams of different types. Mermaid allows for
several types of diagrams, in this project the most important is flowcharts. These show a set of nodes
and where they transition to. This is a similar type of diagram as used in this project. It is, however,
not useful since it is used in a language similar to markdown.[14] This means that if this were used
to represent swarm protocols, it would not be able to extract data directly from the TypeScript files
written by the user. It would also require the user to learn a new syntax, to translate to the Mermaid
syntax.
Graphviz is a software developed to show information as diagrams in the shape of graphs and
networks. This software has the desired functionality for showing state machines and also exists as
a library. An issue here is that the languages supported by Graphviz to describe state machines are
not comparable to the TypeScript object of a SwarmProtocolType. Instead, using this library would
also require rewriting the protocol to another language.
Graphviz also has the ability to save the
graphs generated as files and images, which is very convenient. It is, however, not practical to make
changes directly in the graphical representation, and the Graphviz documentation recommends editing
the text files instead.[15] This takes away a large part of the desired functionality, making it necessary
to implement this feature in an extension, to accomplish the goals of this project.
These libraries all have some similar functionality as is necessary for this project, but none of them
will satisfy the exact needs of an Actyx user.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3
Program Overview
To better understand the usage of this project, this chapter will describe the workflow of a user working
with swarm protocols.
This includes the usage of the current possibilities with the Actyx libraries
and the features added by the extension created throughout the project. A running example, seen in
listing 3.1, will be used throughout this project. This example comes from the readme file of the Actyx
machine-check library.
1
import { Door, Control, HangarBay } from './example-proto.js'
2
import { SwarmProtocolType , checkProjection , checkSwarmProtocol } from '@actyx/machine-check'
3
4
const swarmProtocol: SwarmProtocolType = {
5
initial: 'Closed',
6
transitions: [
7
{
8
source: 'Closed',
9
target: 'Opening',
10
label: { cmd: 'open', role: 'Control', logType: ['opening'] },
11
},
12
{
13
source: 'Opening',
14
target: 'Opening',
15
label: { cmd: 'update', role: 'Door', logType: ['opening'] },
16
},
17
{
18
source: 'Opening',
19
target: 'Open',
20
label: { cmd: 'open', role: 'Door', logType: ['opened'] },
21
},
22
{
23
source: 'Open',
24
target: 'Closing',
25
label: { cmd: 'close', role: 'Control', logType: ['closing'] },
26
},
27
{
28
source: 'Closing',
29
target: 'Closing',
30
label: { cmd: 'update', role: 'Door', logType: ['closing'] },
31
},
32
{
33
source: 'Closing',
34
target: 'Closed',
35
label: { cmd: 'close', role: 'Door', logType: ['closed'] },
36
},
37
],
38
}
39
40
const subscriptions = {
41
Control: ['closing', 'closed', 'opening', 'opened'],
42
Door: ['closing', 'closed', 'opening', 'opened'],
43
}
Listing 3.1: Example of a swarm protocol written in the Actyx syntax.
==PAGE:17==
3.1 Current Work Process
10
This example describes the process of opening and closing a door. There are two roles in this system,
the ”Control” and the ”Door”. The control sends the command to either close or open the door, while
the door can open, close, and update the state of the door. As can be seen, the subscriptions of the
two roles are included, but as a separate variable containing both subscriptions.[16]
3.1
Current Work Process
The Actyx libraries allow users to design, program, and verify swarm protocols. The programmer will
create the necessary machines as separate classes, containing the possible states of each machine, along
with event handlers that are used to move machines to the next state after events are called. Currently,
a user would not be able to visualise the protocol in listing 3.1. Instead, it can only be seen as in
the running example, and the user must draw the protocol by hand if necessary. The Actyx libraries
allow users to design, program, and verify swarm protocols. The programmer will create the essential
machines as separate classes. These will contain the possible states of each machine, along with event
handlers that are used to move machines to the next state after events are called. In the example
above, the two machine types will be ”Control” and ”Door”. The protocol will then show the overall
communication between machines, as described in Section 2.2.1.
The protocol is defined using SwarmProtocolType and gives a textual depiction of the communica-
tion, described as an initial state and a set of transitions. Any changes made to the protocol must be
done in the textual representation too. Any changes to the protocol are made by changing the transi-
tions since they essentially make up the protocol. If a user wishes to add new states, it must be done by
adding transitions that include these new states. Changing the transitions between states is also done
by adding new transitions or changing existing ones. If the user wishes to rename labels of the states or
transitions, it is again done by changing the existing transitions. Since the changes are made exclusively
to transitions, the process can be prone to errors. There is no visual confirmation that the changes have
the desired effect. For larger protocols, changing the content can become a time-consuming task, as it
is important that the changes made in the text also reflect the desired changes to the protocol.
Currently, it is possible to check the protocol for well-formedness.
This can be done using the
command checkSwarmProtocol from the machine-check library. The command checks if the protocol
satisfies all of the conditions described in Section 2.2.2. It then returns either ”OK” or a description of
an error, describing the problem.
3.2
A Visual Studio Code Extension
The extension created in this project has been developed to make the process of working with swarm
protocols easier. It has updated the work process by introducing new visual features.
A user can now, just as before, start with a protocol of the type SwarmProtocolType. This protocol
can either contain an initial node and a list of transitions, or it can be empty. As long as a variable
of the type SwarmProtocolType has been introduced, it is possible to run the extension. This can be
done by using the key binding (ctrl+shift+e or cmd+shift+e), or by finding the command ”Visualise
protocol” in the command palette. Opening the protocol described in the running example of listing
3.1 will look as in figure 3.1.
Apart from providing a visual representation of the protocol, it is also possible for the user to make
changes to this representation. The idea behind this is, that the user should be able to visualise the
consequences of the changes as well as the protocol. This will make it easier to spot any mistakes made
in these changes. It is possible to add new states by clicking the button ”Add new state”, and then
new transitions can be dragged to and from this state. This also means that when adding new states,
these are not immediately connected to the protocol; this must be done manually. As mentioned, new
transitions are added by dragging from the blue handle of one state to the red handle of another. Newly
added transitions have no labels, and states have a generic name by number. Because of this, it must be
possible to change the labels as well. This can be done by double-clicking on the element to be renamed.
==PAGE:18==
3.2 A Visual Studio Code Extension
11
Figure 3.1: A visualisation of the protocol given in the running example.
This will result in a popup that prompts the user for the necessary information to rename the element.
The popups will look different depending on the type of the element to be renamed. Examples of both
can be seen in figure 3.2 and figure 3.3
When changing the label of a transition, the command and the role must be filled out. It is also
possible to fill out the log type, but it is not required. This is used when checking the well-formedness
and not directly in the label. An error will appear if a label of a state is not filled out or if the transition
does not have a role and command. This error informs the user of the mistake so that it can be fixed
directly.
It is possible to change the subscriptions from the visual editor as well. This can be done by clicking
Figure 3.2: Renaming a state.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 A Visual Studio Code Extension
12
Figure 3.3: Renaming a transition label.
the ”Subscriptions” button, which will cause another popup to appear. In this popup, all roles will be
listed, along with their subscriptions. The user can then edit the subscriptions of each role, and save
the changes made. The popup for subscriptions can be seen in figure 3.4.
Apart from making structural changes to the protocol, it is also possible to change the layout of a
protocol. States and transitions can be moved around to make the diagram easier to read. States are
moved by dragging the state directly, while transitions must be right-clicked to create handles that can
be dragged. The first handle created is the label, which can then be dragged. Right-clicking on the
transition again will create more handles, which can then be used to position segments of the transition.
These handles can also be removed by right-clicking the handle.
Figure 3.4: Popup used to make changes to the subscriptions of a protocol.
==PAGE:20==
3.2 A Visual Studio Code Extension
13
Once all necessary changes have been made, they can be saved in the textual representation. This
means that the next time the protocol is opened in the extension, it will reflect the changes as well.
When the user saves, either by clicking ”Save changes” or using the keybinding (ctrl+s or cmd+s), the
program will automatically run a well-formedness check. This is done by using the same command as
previously mentioned, checkSwarmProtocol. The program will issue a warning for the user, describing
in detail the error found and highlighting any affected transitions. Apart from a well-formedness check,
a few other checks are also done. This includes duplicated labels for transitions and states that are not
connected to anything. If there are any errors here, the affected elements will also be highlighted. Once
an error has been fixed, the user must save it again so a new check can be executed. The new protocol
is not saved until it is free of errors. An example of a well-formedness error can be seen in figure 3.5.
Some errors are not critical errors and will instead serve as warnings to the user. When trying to
save protocols with unconnected states or duplicated transition labels, the user will be warned by a
popup. In this case, it will be possible to cancel the save, and the affected elements will be highlighted,
as shown in figure 3.6. If the user chooses to save anyway, the diagram will be saved as it was presented,
with unconnected states or duplicated labels.
Once errors have been eliminated and the protocol is saved, the structure of the textual protocol is
changed. Two new categories are added, one for the diagram layout, and one for subscriptions. These
new categories are added outside of the transitions, so the communication is not affected. This will
result in a protocol of the format seen in listing 3.2.
Lastly, it is also possible for the user to export the protocol to a .png file. This will download the
diagram as an image while allowing the user to choose a location and file name.
Figure 3.5: Error message.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 A Visual Studio Code Extension
14
1
import { Door, Control, HangarBay } from "./example-proto.js";
2
import {
3
SwarmProtocolType ,
4
checkProjection ,
5
checkSwarmProtocol ,
6
} from "@actyx/machine-check";
7
8
const swarmProtocol: SwarmProtocolType = {
9
initial: { name: "Closed" },
10
layout: {
11
nodes: [
12
{ name: "Closed", x: 128.75, y: 22.5 },
13
{ name: "Opening", x: 52.5, y: 147.5 },
14
{ name: "Open", x: 52.5, y: 272.5 },
15
{ name: "Closing", x: 128.75, y: 397.5 },
16
],
17
edges: [],
18
},
19
subscriptions: {
20
Control: ["closing", "closed", "opening", "opened", "opening2", "closing2"],
21
Door: ["closing", "closed", "opening", "opened", "opening2", "closing2"],
22
},
23
transitions: [
24
{
25
source: "Closed",
26
target: "Opening",
27
label: { cmd: "open", role: "Control", logType: ["opening"] },
28
},
29
{
30
source: "Opening",
31
target: "Opening",
32
label: { cmd: "update", role: "Door", logType: ["opening2"] },
33
},
34
{
35
source: "Opening",
36
target: "Open",
37
label: { cmd: "open", role: "Door", logType: ["opened"] },
38
},
39
{
40
source: "Open",
41
target: "Closing",
42
label: { cmd: "close", role: "Control", logType: ["closing"] },
43
},
44
{
45
source: "Closing",
46
target: "Closing",
47
label: { cmd: "update2", role: "Door", logType: ["closing2"] },
48
},
49
{
50
source: "Closing",
51
target: "Closed",
52
label: { cmd: "close", role: "Door", logType: ["closed"] },
53
},
54
],
55
};
56
57
const subscriptions = {
58
Control: ["closing", "closed", "opening", "opened"],
59
Door: ["closing", "closed", "opening", "opened"],
60
};
Listing 3.2: Well-formed and updated version of the running example.
==PAGE:22==
3.2 A Visual Studio Code Extension
15
Figure 3.6: Highlighted transitions for the error.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Design
This chapter documents the thoughts behind the decisions made to develop the Visual Studio Code
extension and the design of the features in the extension.
4.1
Project Basics
The following sections describe the process of designing and planning a simple extension, which will be
the base of the extension developed throughout this project. This includes decisions made regarding
language, setup and more.
4.1.1
Language
The programming language of the project was the first thing to be decided. JavaScript would have
been the obvious choice since the standard language for Visual Studio Code extensions is JavaScript.
Another possibility was to use TypeScript, which is JavaScript extended with type-safe object-oriented
language, which is an advantage in this project. Since the data is given as a JSON structure, it would
be advantageous to put this structure into an object of a certain type.[17]
Both languages work with extensions and different frameworks, so for that purpose either will work.
However, Actyx has previously used TypeScript for their projects. Apart from this, previous personal
experience with the language was also an advantage of this language. For these reasons, it was decided
to use TypeScript throughout this project.
4.1.2
Visual Studio Code Extensions
After spending some time researching the capabilities of VS Code extensions, it became clear that
visualisation and diagrams were not part of the basic extension, as these primarily show messages, data
storage, etc.[18] To visualise the extension, there seem to be two options. Either using a web extension
or using a webview. Web extensions use a browser to display the extension. They also have some
limitations set up by the browser, e.g. not having access to the node.js API.[19]
Webviews have their own API and are contained within VS Code. They are also able to render
HTML, which is crucial for this type of extension as a visualisation tool. When using webviews, the
browser limitations can be avoided.[20] For these reasons, webviews are decided as the way to go with
this extension. Since webviews are part of the common capabilities of VS Code extensions, plenty of
documentation exists, making it a good choice.
4.1.3
Front-end Frameworks
After deciding to use a webview to build the extension, another decision became relevant. It is fully
possible to create a webview without using a framework, but also possible to use a framework. This led
to some research about when using a framework is a good idea.
The main reason for using a framework would be getting a template, with boilerplate code already
created. VS Code extensions are written as a TypeScript file and an HTML file, working together. Once
==PAGE:24==
4.2 Program Design
17
the extension grows bigger, and the code may become more complicated, using a framework could help
avoid creating messy spaghetti code. Especially since the project is front-end based, it is important to
keep the code tidy. Frameworks also allow for components, which can help structure the code. It can
also structure the directory, as frameworks typically have some rules for structure.[21] According to one
source, using a framework is almost always a good idea, since it ensures that not everything has to be
written from scratch, and it offers flexibility and a larger community for help.[22]
These sources are of course opinion based, but their reasoning leads to a decision to use a framework
when creating this VSCode extension.
More specifically, the framework React was chosen. The main reason is that Actyx has used it
for their existing projects. When the implementation of the project was started, it was unknown how
much the extension would interact with the Actyx toolkit, so the same framework was chosen to ensure
that this would not cause problems. Another reason for the choice of React is the fact that it is the
framework with the most examples working with extensions. Although few examples exist, there are
still more for React than for other frameworks like Angular, to the author’s knowledge. Apart from
this, in comparisons between React and Angular[23], it is recommended to use React for simple and
interactive web applications. The product of this thesis is exactly that: a simple application with some
interaction. React is also useful for applications with frequent UI updates, which will be useful for
editing diagrams. React is also view-oriented and has faster updating times.[24] Once again, when
editing diagrams, it will be necessary to make quick updates so the user can track their changes.
4.1.4
State Machine Library
A few options were found when looking for a library to represent a state machine. Examples of these were
XState[13], ReactFlow[25], dagre-d3[26], and Graphviz[15]. From quick research, all of these seemed
possible to use. However, ReactFlow seemed more appealing based on its connection to React. Since
the project is largely based on React, finding a library that works well within the framework would be
preferable.
ReactFlow also has the interactive functionality necessary for this project, including the ability to
move, create and delete nodes and edges in the state machine. The library can also represent looping
machines, which is not necessarily the case for the others.
Lastly, it is highly customisable, which
may be an advantage for some necessary elements. Because of the functionality and possibilities of
ReactFlow, this library was chosen to represent the visual state machine in the project.
4.2
Program Design
The program design can be split into six parts, all listed below.
• Creating a visual protocol
• Making changes to the visual protocol
• Saving any changes made
• Styling
• State management
• Error handling
Below is the description of the design of each part, as well as the design of features. These sections will
follow the process of creating a diagram from a protocol, making changes to the protocol and saving
the changes made, which was described in Section 3.2.
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Program Design
18
4.2.1
Creating a Flow from File
Users who have an open file should be able to run the extension directly, either through the command
palette or a key binding.
The program then reads the content of the file, locates all instances of
the SwarmProtocolType, and passes them to the visual view. From here, a flow is created using the
information from the protocol and shown to the user. The design of this process is described in detail
below.
Swarm Protocols in file
It is necessary to read data from a file to create the flow.
There are several approaches to this,
the two approaches considered in this project have been accessing the compiler of the TypeScript
to get the Abstract Syntax Tree (AST), and using regular expressions to find all occurrences of the
SwarmProtocolType.
Accessing the AST from the compiler would allow access to the type and its children directly. This
would create a robust solution, as inconsistencies in the dictionary format would be accepted, as long
as there are no syntax errors. This would also allow for direct parsing to the necessary data types for
the flow. Implementing this method would be more time-consuming and complicated than reading the
text directly.
The alternative solution is to take the protocol directly from the text in the active editor, which is
the approach chosen for this project. This method will essentially give the same results, as the entire
protocol can be read simultaneously. It does, however, slightly inconvinience the user, as it only uses
strings in the definition of a protocol. Because this method requires parsing from a string to a JSON
object, the value must be in string format, as it would otherwise fail during serialisation.
Though
this approach limits the user, it is simpler and does not require access to the TypeScript API. Since
the primary focus in this project is the visualisation of a protocol, and the advantage of the compiler
approach is small, the extra workload of the AST approach is not worth it for this project.
Instead, the approach will be to locate all objects of the type SwarmProtocolType and find the
entire object. This can be done by counting the number of opening and closing curly brackets. Once
the numbers match up, it is safe to assume that the object has been found completely, and this new
string can then be parsed to a JSON object.
To parse the protocol from a string to a JSON object, the format of the string has to strictly follow
the rules of JSON. This means that there is no room for trailing commas and other minor inconsistencies.
To be robust, an alternative solution was researched. Here, the library JSON5 was found, claiming to be
JSON for humans, meaning that it can handle trailing commas and can also handle different quotation
methods.[27] This library will be used to parse data in the implementation.
Certain scenarios should show the user an error. For instance, if the protocol does not follow the
syntax of a JSON object, if the number of opening and closing curly brackets do not add up, or if
the file has no SwarmProtocolType. The handling of these errors is further described in the section
Section 4.2.6.
Once all protocols in the active file have been found, and parsed to objects, they should be passed
to the webview of the program. This means creating a webview and passing this data to the webview
through messages.
Creating webview
As discussed in Section 4.1.2 the approach chosen for visualisation is to use a webview. When opening
this webview, all information from the file must be transferred to this new view.
The webview should be created using the framework React, as mentioned in Section 4.1.3. This
will create the extension that reads the data written in TypeScript, and a webview written in React
and TypeScript. Communication between the extension and the webview is through message passing,
as documented by the VS Code webview API.[20] The message passed in this case should contain the
protocol object found by the extension. There might be multiple protocols in a file, all of which should
==PAGE:26==
4.2 Program Design
19
be passed to the webview, so the user can choose which protocol to see. The process of creating a
webview using a framework is not well documented, but possible. The idea is to create a React project,
separated from the extension, that can then communicate with the extension. This will be described
further in Chapter 5.
Creating nodes and edges
When a webview is up and running, the data of the protocols should be processed. The data comes from
the extension in a JSON object that needs to be transformed to access the values. Within the extension,
there are no requirements for the minimum content of the object. There are some requirements as
to what keys may be in the protocol, as the type accepts an initial state, transitions, layout, and
subscriptions. The initial state and transitions come from the SwarmProtocolType, while the layout
has been added specifically for the purpose of saving data from the extension. The subscriptions are
added to allow the program to perform well-formedness checks on protocols.
Since the data type of a protocol differs from the necessary types in ReactFlow, some changes to the
data are necessary. The library ReactFlow has its own types, defined to create graphs, called Node and
Edge. Here, a Node will correspond to a state, while an Edge will correspond to a transition. Throughout
this report, nodes and edges are used to describe the ReactFlow elements, while states and transitions
are used to describe the protocol elements. There are different properties to set when defining objects
of these new types, and most of this data can either be hard-coded or found in the transitions from the
protocol. There are, however, some properties, like the position of a node or the position of handles for
edges, that cannot be found here. This is why the layout property has been created to preserve this
information.
There is a single special case when creating these new edges. This is the case of states that can
transition back to the same state. ReactFlow does not directly support this behaviour, meaning that
it will be necessary to implement a custom edge type, for these self-connecting edges. This means
that any transitions where the source and target are the same should have this new custom type when
transformed to edges. An example of this is given by the ReactFlow documentation.[28]
All of the information in layout and transitions is transformed into nodes and edges, which can then
be used to build a flow.
Building flow
As discussed in Section 4.1.4 the library ReactFlow has been chosen to visualise the protocol. The
protocol will be described using a flow consisting of the previously mentioned nodes and edges. When
building a flow, having a predetermined layout of positions should be possible, but it should also be
possible for the program to decide the layout if nothing else is specified.
For the program to be able to position the nodes and edges in a manner so nodes do not overlap, the
simplest solution is to use a library. The ReactFlow documentation mentions some recommendations
for libraries of this type. Originally the library d3-force seemed most useful, as other libraries seemed
to work best for tree structures.
This library instead forces the nodes away from each other, but
not necessarily in a tree structure. However, after spending some time working with the library, the
workload was too overwhelming for the scope of an Minimum Viable Product, which is the minimum
functionality expected from the program. Because of this, the library Dagre instead became the chosen
solution. D3-force would be more complicated and time-consuming to implement without adding any
extra functionality since the user will manipulate the diagram in most cases. ReactFlow has an example
of using the Dagre library to give new positions to nodes so they are separated completely.[29] This
example was used as the base, however some changes were made. For instance, the example allowed the
user to choose between a vertical and horizontal representation, and this feature was removed. Instead,
only vertical positioning is allowed, giving the nicest results. Examples can be seen in figures 4.1 and
4.2.
As mentioned, this feature of positioning nodes is only used when there are no predetermined node
positions, otherwise, the positions from the layout are used when defining the nodes.
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Program Design
20
Figure 4.1: Horizontal version of the protocol.
Figure 4.2: Vertical version of the protocol. This version is used in the extension.
==PAGE:28==
4.2 Program Design
21
ReactFlow allows a simple set of controls to be added to a flow. This feature is used in the extension,
allowing users to perform simple actions on the diagram without much extra work to implement. These
actions include zooming in or out, fitting the screen to the diagram, and toggling interactivity. The
latter action allows users to ensure that states cannot be moved, which is especially helpful when moving
around to different parts of a diagram.[30]
Switching between diagrams
When there are multiple protocols within a file, it should be possible for the user to switch between
these. When the extension passes data to the webview, it passes all occurrences of protocols in the file.
When building a flow, the first occurrence is shown. It should be possible for the user to choose one of
the other occurrences, and then the flow should rerender to reflect the new protocol instead.
4.2.2
Changes to Diagram
It is now possible to create and show a protocol; it should also be possible for a user to make changes
to the protocol while being in the visual state. There are several features necessary for this, such as
being able to move, rename, or delete elements, as well as the possibility to add new elements.
Adding elements
When using the program, it is important that new states and transitions can be added to the protocol.
The possibility of adding new edges to a flow already exists within the functionality of the ReactFlow
library; there are, however, some limitations. When creating default nodes used within this program,
they have two different handles. One is an input, while the other is an output. It is not possible to
drag new edges from input handles, and it is not possible to connect output handles to other output
handles. The transitions of a protocol are directed, meaning they are represented by directed edges, and
therefore connecting an input handle to an output handle will create an edge in the opposite direction.
During the evaluation, it became apparent that it was necessary to make a visual distinction between
the two and provide an explanation of the mechanics. This is described further in Chapter 6.
Adding new nodes in a flow is not a built-in feature of ReactFlow, so this must be implemented
manually. Through evaluation and discussion with test subjects, the solution of adding a button for
new nodes was selected. Pressing this button should add a new node to the graph. For this solution,
the new node should be easy for the user to find, which is ensured by adding this node close to the
middle node of the diagram. This way it is created near the other nodes.
Renaming elements
The methods for renaming states and transition labels are very similar. The user must double-click the
element to be renamed. This will open a popup where the new name can be written. The user then
has the option to either save or cancel the renaming. This format was decided upon after UX testing,
where the feedback from test subjects was clear that users immediately tried to double-click when asked
to rename. Testing also showed that the cancel button should be the less accessible option, so the user
is urged to save the changes.
There is a slight difference between the two dialogues created for the popups. This is because a
state has a name given in the transitions. A transition label does not have a given name, instead it
has a command and a role. In a swarm protocol, these are denoted using the format ’command@role’,
both are available as information in the transitions. When changing the transition label, the user will
change the command and the role separately, and the extension will then put them together in a label
following the format from swarm protocols. When the role is updated, it should be checked if the new
role exists within the subscriptions, this new role should be added to the subscriptions, with an empty
list. It is also possible to set the log type of the transition when renaming the label. A separate input
field is added for this, which can be translated to the list format that log types are saved as. When
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Program Design
22
renaming states, it is also possible to set the selected node as the initial node. Checking this box will
ensure that this is the only initial state in the protocol.
To ensure that states and transitions have all the necessary information, saving empty labels is not
possible. This means that if the user tries to save an empty state label, or an empty role or command,
an error message will be displayed, and the dialogue will stay open. It is possible, however, to save an
empty log type because in some cases, without subscriptions, the well-formedness is not checked. In
cases where the log type is necessary, but not filled out, this error will be caught by the well-formedness
check. This is discussed further in Section 4.2.6.
Moving elements
If a user is unhappy with the layout of a diagram, it is possible for them to move states and transitions
around. Moving states is a built-in feature that updates the state’s position. Moving transitions is
more complicated. Since the default Edge types are by definition immovable, creating another custom
edge type is necessary. An example exists, where clicking a transition will create a draggable handle.
Multiple handles can then be created, and removed as needed. Handles are removed by right-clicking
the handle. For this project, it is necessary to have both actions be on right-click, since the click and
double-click actions are already reserved for selection and renaming. The two right-click actions are
distinct, since right-clicking an edge creates a handle, and right-clicking the handle removes it. The
first handle created is the transition label; this is meant to make the design more simple by not adding
too many extra elements. While this method using custom edges does not provide full movability of
transitions, it allows more flexibility and ensures that the user can position transitions as wanted.[31][32]
These options are not available for self-connecting edges. Here it is not possible to move the edge.
This is due to time limitations of the project. Since the path of a self-connecting edge is calculated
by the program, and not the ReactFlow API, moving these edges would be more complex. No simple
algorithm was found by the author, and this feature was as such not prioritised.
Selecting elements
It is possible to select both states and transitions in the diagram, by clicking the element to be selected.
This is useful when moving or deleting elements. During the first round of UX evaluation, multiple test
subjects requested a clear way to tell which element was selected. Because of this, selected elements
are now highlighted. Transitions are marked by a darker grey colour, while states are highlighted by a
light grey border. This is meant to clearly show the user which elements are selected. It is possible to
select multiple elements at a time. This is done by holding down ctrl/cmd while using the mouse to
select elements. This will result in multiple highlighted elements, which can then be moved or deleted
simultaneously.
Deleting elements
The method for deleting elements is to select one or more elements, and then press the backspace button
on the keyboard. This will prompt a dialogue to open, asking the user to confirm that the elements
should be deleted. The message within the dialogue also clearly states that the action cannot be undone.
The confirm button is red, to indicate the seriousness of the action, while the cancel button is in muted
colours here, just as when renaming elements. Confirming the deletion will remove all selected states
and transitions from the diagram. Any in- and outgoing transitions from a deleted state will also be
removed. This is to ensure that there are no transitions that are not connected to anything.
Auto layout
As mentioned in Section 4.2.1, states in a diagram will be positioned using the Dagre library, unless
another layout has been specified. The user can then move around states and transitions, which can
create complex designs. To make the process of designing easier, a button has been added that allows
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Program Design
23
the user to use the Dagre library to reposition the states and transitions. This ensures that no states
overlap, and should give the user a simpler positioning.
4.2.3
Saving Changes in File
After making changes to a diagram, it is important that this data can be saved, so the changes are
preserved. This happens by transforming the data back to a SwarmProtocolType and replacing the
text in the text editor. This will ensure that the next time the extension is used to open the same
protocol, the changes are still reflected.
Passing data to parent component
The user can save either by using a keybinding (ctrl/cmd + s) or clicking the ”Save changes” button.
Doing this will cause the flow to pass data back to the parent, where the data can be processed in the
necessary ways. The reasoning for this communication is to keep the logic separate, as is the standard
with React.
Communication between components is important, as it simplifies the code structure. The preferred
method in this project is to only have the logic of the functionality necessary to a component within its
class, any other logic is moved out of the component. This is why the flow is its own component, that
exists as a child component to the rest of the webview. When passing data back to the webview, the
method used is to create a callback function from the parent component, which is then passed to the
child component. When saving, the callback function can then be called.[33] This will pass the newly
changed data back to the webview, in the shape of Nodes and Edges, where they can be processed.
Parsing elements to protocol
When the data reaches the webview again, the process will be the opposite of when the flow was
created. First, the data is parsed back to a SwarmProtocolType using the Nodes and Edges from the
flow. This includes an initial node, setting the layout to match the positioning of all elements and a list
of transitions. The layout key in the SwarmProtocolType has been added specifically for this project.
It is used to save information such as the position of nodes, as well as the position of handles that are
created to move edges. These positions are saved for all elements; this way, the user will open a flow that
is in the exact same position as they left it. The subscriptions key has also been added for the purpose
of well-formedness checks in this extension. The design of subscriptions will be discussed along with the
well-formedness check, but the data from the subscription list is also added to the SwarmProtocolType
so that this information can also be saved.
Passing protocol out of webview
Just as when passing the data to the webview, the webview will pass data back to the extension using
message passing. The webview will construct a message containing the name of the protocol to be
updated and the protocol as a string. This can then be processed by the extension.
Checking well-formedness
When a user tries to save a diagram it should be checked if it is well-formed.
This check should
investigate whether the protocol designed using the extension satisfies all of the conditions described in
Section 2.2.2. If that is the case, the process of saving can continue.
To check the well-formedness of a protocol, it is necessary to know the subscriptions of each role.
Since these are not included in a typical SwarmProtocolType, but typically found in separate files, a new
key must be added to the protocol containing all subscriptions. For the convenience of the user, it must
be possible to edit these subscriptions within the extension. It is necessary for the protocol to contain
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Program Design
24
the subscription key and that it be filled out; otherwise, it is seen as a choice to avoid a well-formedness
check. The user will be informed about this if they save changes without adding subscriptions.
Since this feature was implemented towards the end of the project, this feature works with five error
types. The errors found are listed below.
• Guard events that are not unique.
• Active roles that do not subscribe to their own emitted events.
• Other involved roles that do not subscribe to guard events.
• Other involved roles that subscribe to more events than active roles
• Transitions with empty log types
The first point of this list goes against the condition of keeping a protocol confusion-free. The next
two points go against the condition of determinacy. The last point also goes against the confusion-free
condition since the branch-choosing event will have no type, meaning that it is not unique.
Finding a complete list of possible errors in the checkSwarmProtocol function has not been possible,
so the four errors were found by trial. If any more exist, these are not currently explicitly checked in this
extension, but they could be added in any future work to the extension. Instead, these errors are handled
by showing the message given by the Actyx check. The handling of errors from the well-formedness
check is described further in the Section 4.2.6.
Replacing protocol in editor
Once the well-formedness check of the protocol has been performed, the protocol must be replaced in
the original text file. This is to ensure that data is changed and can be opened again. The data received
from the webview comes with the name of the protocol to be replaced, meaning that the protocol can
be found in the text using the same technique as when creating the webview. Using RegEx to find the
protocol and then counting the curly brackets to find the full object will give the protocol’s start and
end index.
After the protocol is found, the indexes can be used to find the exact substring in the file to be
replaced. This will replace everything from the first opening bracket to the last closing bracket with
the object from the webview.
When replacing the protocol, it is necessary to go to the file editor, to make it the active editor.
After replacing the text, the program will go directly back to showing the extension, but it means that
there is a brief moment that looks like a glitch where the file editor will be shown. The extension window
must not be opened until after the text has been replaced since the protocol will otherwise continue
looking at the old object. Instead, the extension should reload, using the replaced text, to ensure that
all indexes will match up the next time the user saves.
Exporting protcols
As will be discussed in Section 6.2, a client of Actyx has performed User Acceptance Testing on the
extension. The client that performed the UAT expressed a desire to download the diagram as an image.
This is a possibility that has been described in the ReactFlow documentation, making it a simple feature
to implement. Exporting a protocol should save the diagram as an image of the type .png on the user’s
computer.
4.2.4
Styling
After performing UX validation on the project’s first iteration, some things were pointed out in the
styling of the project that needed to be addressed. The styling of the extension serves the purpose of
making it look nice, but it is also necessary to emphasise certain features using styling.
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Program Design
25
For instance, a repeated point during feedback sessions has been that states and transition labels
had a similar design. Because of this, the nodes have been designed in a rounded design, to ensure that
a visible difference between the two elements has been established.
Figure 4.3: Design of states and transition labels.
Figure 4.3 shows the difference between a state and a transition label. States are rounded and have
handles, while transition labels are square and have no handles.
The handles on states are another example of styling based on feedback.
To create distinction
between state input and output, colour has been added to the handles. A red colour for input handles
and a blue colour for output handles. In the description of the extension, it is described that blue
handles connect to red handles, giving the program the desired functionality. After reevaluating this,
the results were better.
There are two different types of popups used for this extension. One is used when deleting elements;
an example of this is shown in figure 4.4, and the other is used when renaming elements, which can
be seen in figure 3.2. They have the same general structure; the main difference is the buttons at the
bottom of the dialogue.
The design of the buttons here is based on feedback from UX validation. After the second iteration,
users suggested that it should be easier to differentiate between the action and cancel buttons. Because
of this, the cancel button is designed to be less attention-drawing than the action button. Since there
Figure 4.4: Popup for deleting elements.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Program Design
26
Figure 4.5: Popup for renaming states.
are no built-in popups in VS Code extensions, these dialogues are designed through styling. They are
created using different elements, such as a transparent overlay and a white box with content.
Some styling is also added to the handles that are used to position edges. These handles should be
easily recognisable and stand out from the edge, making it easy for the user to locate. The handles
should also be easy to grab, meaning that they cannot be too small. Figure 4.6 shows the yellow handles.
These are found in the example that was followed to add this feature.[32]
Lastly, buttons, dropdowns and input fields are also styled. This is not for functionality but purely
an aesthetic choice.
Figure 4.6: Yellow handles that are used to position edges.
==PAGE:34==
4.2 Program Design
27
4.2.5
State management
After working with ReactFlow, it became apparent that the ReactFlow context can only be accessed
within one component; anything else will lead to errors.[34] Because of this, it was deemed necessary to
create a local storage that will manage the state of the flow. This local storage can be accessed from
all components without causing errors.
The most important job of the storage is to manage the state of the flow by keeping track of nodes
and edges. Any changes to nodes and edges will go through the store, for instance, when adding or
deleting elements or when updating positions or labels. This also means that the logic of ReactFlow is
moved out of the flow component, so only the custom logic is within the component.[35]
4.2.6
Error handling
Throughout the program, certain actions should cause errors or warnings for the user. There is a list
of critical errors that should not allow the user to save changes and a list of warnings where the user
should have their attention drawn to the issue, and if they continue to save, it will be saved.
The critical errors include states or transitions with empty labels. If a transition is missing either
a role or a command this should not be saved, as it would not match the criteria of a protocol. The
same thing goes for states missing their names. Apart from this, any duplicated labels should also
display an error. Here, the affected transitions are highlighted. It is not possible to duplicate nodes
since ReactFlow will see them as identical objects and keep only the unique objects.
The critical errors above show up during the editing of protocol visualisations. Some errors may
prevent the protocol from being visualised. This could be due to the syntax of the SwarmProtocolType.
As previously mentioned, the entire object must be written using strings, otherwise the program will
fail. This is a critical error that the user is informed about, but the extension will never open. The
same thing goes for objects whose number of opening and closing brackets do not match up. Lastly,
the user will also be informed, if the file has no object of the type SwarmProtocol. This error will also
mean that the extension is not opened.
As previously mentioned, the program will also check the well-formedness of the protocol. These
are critical errors as well, but will typically be longer messages. Because of this, these errors are shown
in a different format, where the message can easily get across, without the user being forced to expand
the error to read it all. This will be done using a warning dialogue built into VS Code. Since the errors
given by the machine-check library are not necessarily easily readable, the error is translated to a more
specific text, highlighting the affected elements. If the well-formedness check returns an error that has
not been translated, it will still be shown to the user, but only as a short message containing the exact
error. This is due to time limitations in the project.
Along with well-formedness, the program also checks for other error types, when the program is
saved. If any states are not connected to anything, this error will be reported to the user. This will also
be reported if a protocol has any transitions with duplicated labels. The format of these errors is the
same as the format of well-formedness errors. The user will get an error message in a popup, and the
states or transitions affected are highlighted in the visualisation. For these warnings, the popup allows
the user to save anyway, and the data will be saved. Otherwise, it is possible to cancel, and the errors
will be highlighted.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
The design of all features was described in the previous chapter, and this chapter will describe the
implementation of the program. The program can be split into the extension and the webview. The
extension is a file called extension.ts, along with some other files used as utilities, while the webview
is the entire webview constructed with React. This basic structure was created using chatGPT[36], and
the entire conversation can be found in appendix A.1.
5.1
Project Structure
The structure of the program is split into the extension and webview as discussed. The extension can
be found in a single file called extension.ts. A file called types.ts is also defined in the extension
since this contains all types used both in the extension and the webview. The extension also has a
utility file called error-utils.ts, which contains the error handling of the program. The webview
is found in a folder called webview, which contains all files included in the webview. The main file
is the App.tsx, where the webview is constructed using the data from the extension. The App com-
ponent is set as the main component in the index.tsx file. App uses the Flow component to show a
protocol. This component is found in the Flow.tsx file. The store.ts file is used for state manage-
ment. The webview also has a style sheet called style.css. A nested folder contains all custom ele-
ments used in the diagrams. Three different edges, ClickableBaseEdge.tsx, PositionableEdge.tsx,
and SelfConnectingEdge.tsx are contained in this folder, along with another style sheet called
PositionableEdge.css. In this folder is also a custom button component. In another nested folder,
all of the popups used in the program are contained as separate components. Listing 5.1 shows the
overall project structure used.
5.2
Program Implementation
As Section 4.2 mentions, the extension can be split into six parts. The implementation of each part has
been described below.
5.2.1
Creating a Flow from File
When a user opens a file, the extension should run when the command ”Visualise protocol” is called
from the command palette, or when the keybinding (ctrl/cmd + e) is used.
This will construct a
webview containing a diagram within a ReactFlow component.
Swarm protocols in file
Firstly, the program will find all occurrences of swarm protocols within the file.
This is done, as
mentioned in Section 4.2.1, by locating all occurrences of the SwarmProtocolType. A RegEx string is
built, and then the occurrences matching the regular expression are found. The RegEx will look as
follows:
/\S*:\s*SwarmProtocolType\s*=\s*/gm
==PAGE:36==
5.2 Program Implementation
29
1
visual-swarm-protocol-editing/￿￿￿￿
2
3
...￿￿￿￿
4
5
src/
// Source files for both the extension and the webview￿￿￿￿
6
extension.ts
// The main extension file￿￿￿￿
7
error-utils.ts
// Utility functions for error handling￿￿￿￿
8
types.ts
// All custom types used in the program￿￿￿￿
9
webview/
// All files relevant to the webview￿￿￿￿
10
App.tsx
// Main component￿￿￿￿
11
index.tsx
// React entry point￿￿￿￿
12
Flow.tsx
// Diagram component￿￿￿￿
13
store.ts
// State management file￿￿￿￿
14
style.css
// Overall style sheet￿￿￿￿
15
webpack.config.js
// Webpack config to bundle React app￿￿￿￿
16
custom-elements/
// All custom edges￿￿￿￿
17
ClickableBaseEdge.tsx
// Custom edge component￿￿￿￿
18
DownloadButton.tsx
// Custom button component￿￿￿￿
19
PositionableEdge.tsx
// Custom edge component￿￿￿￿
20
SelfConnectingEdge.tsx
// Custom edge component￿￿￿￿
21
PositionableEdge.css
// Custom edge style sheet￿￿￿￿
22
modals/
// All dialogue components￿￿￿￿
23
ChangeEdgeLabelDialog.tsx
// Custom popup￿￿￿￿
24
ChangeNodeLabelDialog.tsx
// Custom popup￿￿￿￿
25
DeleteDialog.tsx
// Custom popup￿￿￿￿
26
SubscriptionsDialog.tsx
// Custom popup￿￿￿￿
27
28
...
Listing 5.1: Structure of the project.
The regular expression looks for any number of characters, followed by a ”:”, zero or more whites-
pace, then the SwarmProtocolType, zero or more whitespaces, an ”=” and lastly any number of
whitespaces again. Essentially, this expression includes any initialisation of a variable with the type
SwarmProtocolType. The text and the expression are then both passed to a function that searches for
these occurrences and puts them in a list.
The method created to find all occurrences first checks if the text includes any instance of the
SwarmProtocolType. Otherwise, it will report an error. When the file contains at least one protocol,
each occurrence is found by locating all initialisations matching the regular expression and then split
into a name and an object. Listing 5.2 shows the while-loop used to search for the regular expression,
as well as the method used to specifically locate the name of the occurrence.[37] The objects are found
1
while ((helperArray = typeRegex.exec(text)) !== null) {
2
// Find the name of the protocol
3
const occurrenceName = helperArray[0].substring(
4
0,
5
helperArray[0].indexOf(":")
6
);
7
8
...
9
}
Listing 5.2: Function to find all occurrences of swarm protocols.
using another function, designed to find the first and last index of the object. To get the entire object,
the first opening curly bracket and the last closing bracket, after the object initialisation, are found.
The opening bracket is easily found, as it will be the first character found after the regular expression.
The last bracket requires a bit more work, which has been split into a separate function. This function,
as can be seen in listing 5.3, finds the next opening and closing curly bracket and determines which of
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Program Implementation
30
the two appear first. A counter is then increased if the opening bracket is first and decreased if the
closing bracket appears first. Once the counter reaches zero, the index of the closing bracket is returned
with one added, to ensure that the bracket is included. This essentially matches all opening brackets
to closing brackets, until the entire object is found. These brackets found will be the first and last
1
function getLastIndex(text: string, index: number): number {
2
// Get the index of the opening curly brace
3
let closingCurlyBraceIndex;
4
5
let counter = 0;
6
7
do {
8
const openIndex = text.indexOf("{", index);
9
const closingIndex = text.indexOf("}", index);
10
11
// Ensure that last curly brace can be found
12
if (closingIndex === -1) {
13
vscode.window.showErrorMessage(
14
"Cannot find the last closing curly brace"
15
);
16
return -1;
17
}
18
19
// Check if the opening curly brace is before the closing curly brace
20
if (openIndex < closingIndex && openIndex !== -1) {
21
index = openIndex + 1;
22
counter++;
23
} else {
24
index = closingIndex + 1;
25
closingCurlyBraceIndex = closingIndex;
26
counter--;
27
}
28
} while (counter !== 0);
29
30
return closingCurlyBraceIndex + 1;
31
}
Listing 5.3: Finding the last closing curly bracket of an object.
index of the object in the string format of the text. These indexes are used to create a substring of the
document text, which can then be parsed to a JSON object, using the library JSON5. This process is
then repeated for each occurrence of the SwarmProtocolType.
Creating a webview
After finding all occurrences, a webview must be created, to process and show the data found. Since
the webview is built with React, the webview must allow the use of scripts. This is handled using the
enableScripts setting in the panel creation and giving it the value true. Apart from the usage of
scripts, local resources must also be defined. The local resource is the bundle file, that is created by
React. This must be included since the permissions will otherwise prevent the use of this file.[20]
After the panel has been created, the React app is added to the webview. This is done by using a
function creating the HTML of the app using the script from the bundle file. Then, a message is passed
asking to build a protocol, containing all of the occurrences found earlier. The message is passed to the
webview, where the App component is listening. This will be elaborated during the creation of nodes
and edges.
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Program Implementation
31
Creating nodes and edges
In the App component there are five different state variables, defined with the React useState hook.
These variables are nodes, edges, occurrences, a protocol, and a value keeping track of the subscriptions
popup. They all come with a function to update the variable and re-render. When setting the variables,
they will be changed in the next rendering, not the current.[38] Apart from the useState hooks, two
other variables are defined using the useRef hook. This hook is used specifically for variables that
are not needed for re-rendering and can be updated immediately.[39] These two references are for the
currently selected protocol, which must be updated immediately, and the subscriptions.
Since the
subscriptions have no influence on the flow, they are handled exclusively in the App component and do
not require re-rendering immediately.
An event listener receives the message from the extension and uses the message data to set the
occurrences. Since the occurrences are not updated until the next rendering, the message data is also
used to set the protocol as the first occurrence. The same protocol is used to set the nodes and edges
for the flow as well. When setting the nodes and edges of the flow, two functions are declared. The
function to create edges uses the transitions declared in the protocol, to create new objects of the type
Edge from ReactFlow.
A ReactFlow Edge can have multiple properties, in this project, the properties used are id, source,
target, label, data, type, markerEnd, and style. These are all used to determine the path, direction
and look of the arrows that make up edges. The id, source, and target are made up of the source and
target of the transition. The label is made up of the command and role of the transition label. Data
contains the positions of any handles belonging to the edge. These are found using the layout key in
the protocol object. The type refers to which of the custom edge types should be used. The marker
end is defined as a closed arrow, this is to make sure that it is easily visible. The colour of the arrow
is also defined. Lastly, the style contains the width of the arrow, as well as the colour. Listing 5.4
1
...
2
3
const edgeLayout = protocol.layout?.edges?.find(
4
(edge) => edge.id === `${transition.source}-${transition.target}`
5
);
6
return {
7
id: `${transition.source}-${transition.target}`,
8
source: transition.source,
9
target: transition.target,
10
label: transition.label.cmd + "@" + transition.label.role,
11
data: {
12
positionHandlers: edgeLayout?.positionHandlers ?? [],
13
logType: transition.label.logType,
14
},
15
type: "positionable",
16
markerEnd: {
17
type: MarkerType.ArrowClosed ,
18
color: highlight === undefined ? "#b1b1b6" : "red",
19
},
20
style: {
21
strokeWidth: 1.7,
22
stroke: highlight === undefined ? "#b1b1b6" : "red",
23
},
24
};
25
26
...
27
}
Listing 5.4: Setting values of default edges.
shows the use of a highlight value, which is used to determine the colour of the edge. This will be
addressed further when addressing error handling. The same listing also shows how a default transition
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Program Implementation
32
is transformed into an edge. It shows how the layout is searched to find the layout of a single edge,
which can be added to the position handlers. It also shows how all other edge values are set. The type
of the edge is determined by the source and target since they may either connect to the same node or a
different node. If the transition connects to the same state, the type of the edge should be the custom
type ”self-connecting”; otherwise, it should be the type ”positionable”. These two types are defined
using the components SelfConnectingEdge and PositionableEdge.
A self-connecting edge connects a node to itself. As previously mentioned, this is not a built-in
feature of ReactFlow, so it is designed as a custom edge. This custom edge is implemented following
an example from the ReactFlow documentation.[28] Here the properties from the definition of the edge
are split into necessary values, such as the position of the source and target. The path of the edge and
the radius are then calculated from the source and target. The radius in the X direction is calculated
from an approximation of the label length. This length is approximated by multiplying the length of
the string by 2.25. The radius is then set to be the greater value of 100, and the label width multiplied
by two. This is to ensure, that the label text will not be overlapped by the node. The path is in the
form of a regular SVG path. Custom HTML is then created to show both an edge and the label of the
edge. The edge is created using the BaseEdge component from ReactFlow. Here the calculated path is
passed, along with the properties of the edge definition. The label is created, only if one exists, using
the built-in EdgeLabelRenderer component. Here, the label is styled, to match the layout of standard
labels. This is also where the label is placed on the edge, which is why a translation of coordinates
is used to place the label in the middle of the edge. The custom edge type for positionable edges is
defined in Section 5.2.2, for moving elements.
When creating nodes, another function is defined. Again, the protocol is used to gather the necessary
information. The name of each state is found in the transitions, using both source and target and added
to a list of names for the nodes to be created. Each name is only added once. Then, the function will
search through the layout key, which may contain a list of nodes, to check if any other nodes should
be added. Once all states have been found, nodes are created from this list. This is done by creating
an id and a label from the name of the state. Then the layout, if it exists for the node, is used to set
the position. Otherwise, the position is set to (0,0), and the layout function of the flow will fix this
later. If the initial node matches the newly created node, this is noted in the data of the node. Lastly,
the node type is set to default. Listing 5.5 shows the setup of new nodes created. Here the layout is
1
...
2
3
const nodes = Array.from(nodeNames).map((nodeName) => {
4
let nodeLayout = protocol.layout?.nodes?.find(
5
(node) => node.name === nodeName
6
);
7
return {
8
id: nodeName,
9
data: { label: nodeName, initial: nodeName === protocol.initial },
10
position: {
11
x: nodeLayout?.x ?? 0,
12
y: nodeLayout?.y ?? 0,
13
},
14
style: {
15
border: highlighted.includes(nodeName) ? "2px solid red" : null,
16
},
17
type: "default",
18
};
19
});
20
21
...
Listing 5.5: Setting all values of newly created nodes.
also used to find a single node, which gives the position information to the new nodes. With these two
==PAGE:40==
5.2 Program Implementation
33
functionalities, all nodes and edges necessary in the flow have been created. Again, a value is used to
highlight nodes involved in errors, which will be discussed in the error handling in Section 5.2.6.
Building flow
When building the flow, another component is introduced. This is the Flow component, which consists
of two different functions. The Flow component is called from the App component, from where important
properties are passed as well. These properties include newly created nodes and edges that are passed
along with a function that determines whether or not a layout of the flow already exists. Apart from
this, the different types of edges are also passed, and three callback functions for saving, error handling,
and for when a new role has been added. These functions will be described further in Section 5.2.3,
Section 5.2.6, and Section 5.2.2.
The flow component is a simple component, only used to create a ReactFlowProvider component,
containing another custom component called LayoutFlow. This structure is necessary to work with
ReactFlow. This is because creating the functionality of the LayoutFlow component directly in the
Flow component would give a context error. Instead, it must be wrapped in a ReactFlowProvider, to
prevent this error.[34] From experiences through the project, it must be wrapped within the same file,
so it is not enough to put the provider in the App component, where the flow is called. This has been
the only working solution for the error.
The LayoutFlow component consists mostly of functionality necessary for making changes to the
diagram, this will be described further in Section 5.2.2.
At the top level of the component, a few
variables are defined, using the store class. This will be described further in Section 5.2.5. For now, it
is important to know, that two arrays are defined, called nodes and edges. These are variables for the
component, while the nodes and edges passed from the Flow component are called initialNodes and
initialEdges. The initial nodes and edges are only used to build the flow, while nodes and edges are
used for state management of the flow.
The component also has a function used to set the layout of the nodes and edges. As previously
mentioned, the program should automatically apply a position to nodes, so they are distributed and
not overlapping. This should only happen, if there are no layout specifications already given in the
protocol. A hook is used to determine whether the layout of the diagram should come from the nodes
and edges defined, or if it should be calculated using a function. The function may be used multiple
times, so it determines whether to use the initial nodes and edges or the nodes and edges from the
state management. A function will be called to determine the layout of the nodes, but the parameters
vary, depending on the state of the nodes and edges.
The function called is used to redefine the nodes, to change their position. The Dagre library is
used, as previously discussed. A Dagre graph is created in the vertical direction, to which the nodes
and edges from the protocol are added. The layout function is then called on the Dagre graph. Lastly,
a new set of nodes and edges are returned. There are no changes to the edges, but the position of
the nodes is set using the Dagre graph. As can be seen in listing 5.6, the height and width of nodes
are manually defined. This is because there are no guarantees that nodes have measured dimensions.
Without dimensions, the Dagre collision detection will not function properly, and the nodes will overlap.
An example of this can be seen, where figure 5.1 shows the graph with no measurements, and figure 5.2
shows the graph with measurements.
The measurements are found through trial and error. This layout method is heavily inspired by an
example given in the ReactFlow documentation.[26]
After the layout has been set, the protocol is built using the ReactFlow component. Here, some
styling is added to ensure that the component’s height is large enough for it to be visible. A list of
properties is also passed to the component. This includes the arrays of nodes and edges, the different
types of edges, and a list of event functions. These will be discussed in the following sections, but they
include the onNodesChange, onEdgesChange, onConnect, onNodeDoubleClick, onEdgesDoubleClick
and onBeforeDelete events.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Program Implementation
34
1
const nodeWidth = 175;
2
const nodeHeight = 75;
3
4
// Create nodes and edges from the protocol data
5
const getLayoutedElements = (nodes, edges) => {
6
const g = new Dagre.graphlib.Graph().setDefaultEdgeLabel(() => ({}));
7
g.setGraph({ rankdir: "TB" });
8
9
edges.forEach((edge) => g.setEdge(edge.source, edge.target));
10
nodes.forEach((node) =>
11
g.setNode(node.id, {
12
...node,
13
// Change to standard values other than 0, if no measurements are found
14
// Helps collision detection from dagre
15
width: node.measured?.width ?? nodeWidth,
16
height: node.measured?.height ?? nodeHeight ,
17
nodesep: 20,
18
ranksep: 100,
19
})
20
);
21
22
Dagre.layout(g);
23
24
return {
25
nodes: nodes.map((node) => {
26
const position = g.node(node.id);
27
const x = position.x;
28
const y = position.y;
29
30
return { ...node, position: { x, y } };
31
}),
32
edges,
33
};
34
};
Listing 5.6: Function to set the layout of elements in the graph.
Figure 5.1: Before adding measurements to the nodes. Nodes are positioned, overlapping each other.
==PAGE:42==
5.2 Program Implementation
35
Figure 5.2: After adding measurements to the nodes. Nodes are positioned with suﬀicient spacing.
The nodes and edges lists are added, so the flow is updated with the newest elements. The edge
types are also added, so the component has the necessary information to build the edges as they are
designed.
To implement the simple controls mentioned in the design of this process, a ReactFlow component
Controls is used. This component allows four simple actions and is automatically placed in the bottom
left corner of the ReactFlow panel. Since all of the actions are built-in, it has not been necessary to
add extra functionality or properties.[30]
Switching between diagrams
It should be possible for the user to change the displayed protocol if there are multiple protocols within
the file. This is done, by adding a dropdown above the Flow component, which is done in the App
component. The dropdown will contain all the names of the protocol occurrences.
A function is defined to handle any time the selected choice in the dropdown changes. The function
updates the state variables using the same method as the initial creation of a flow. The selected protocol
is updated, and new nodes and edges are created to update these. A re-rendering is triggered by the
onChange property, which also updates the nodes and edges. This will cause the flow to be redesigned,
to match the new protocol.
5.2.2
Changes to Diagram
Once the protocol has been visualised, the user can make changes to the protocol in the visual editor.
Below is a description of the features associated with changing protocols.
Adding elements
As mentioned in Section 4.2.2 the possibility of adding edges is a built-in feature of ReactFlow. It
is immediately possible to drag a handle on a node, to create a new edge. However, some additions
must be made, for the changes to be persistent. For this, an onConnect event handler is added to the
ReactFlow component. First, this function checks if an edge already exists between the same states. It
is not possible to have duplicated edges in ReactFlow, so the solution has been to inform the user of
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Program Implementation
36
this and ignore the request to make duplicated edges. If an edge does not already exist, the function
updates the newly created edge with the necessary information, that is not automatically added by the
program. Once the new connection has been updated, the edge is added to the existing array of edges
using a function called addEdge. This means that it will persist in future renderings.
To add a new state to the protocol, the user must add a new node to the diagram. For this, a
button is added. The method in the button’s onClick event is similar to adding a new edge. A new
node is created and updated with the relevant information. The position is calculated from the node
in the middle of the nodes array, with an offset added. This is to ensure that the new node shows up
close to the existing nodes. The calculation of this position can be seen in listing 5.7.
1
...
2
position: {
3
x: nodes[Math.floor((nodes.length - 1) / 2)]?.position.x + 20,
4
y: nodes[Math.floor((nodes.length - 1) / 2)]?.position.y + 20,
5
},
6
...
Listing 5.7: Position calculation for a new node.
The new node is then added to the array, by the addNode function. Both addNode and addEdge are
functions defined in the store class and will be described further in Section 5.2.5.
Renaming elements
As previously mentioned, the user can rename an element by double-clicking on it. This will open a
popup, where the necessary information can be filled out and saved by clicking the save button. The
double-click feature is implemented using the properties onNodeDoubleClick and onEdgeDoubleClick.
It is not possible to double-click without it also being registered as a single click, meaning that double-
clicking an edge will also select the edge.
For renaming an edge five references are created using the useRef hook. These can be updated
without rendering, as opposed to state variables. The references are for the selected edge, the command,
the role, the log type, and the label of the selected edge. When double-clicking, all five of these will be
updated to match the edge clicked. Next, a toggling function will be triggered, to set a state variable to
true. These state variables are used to open and close the popup window. Once the variable has been
set to true, the dialogue will be shown. The dialogue is built as a separate component and contains
three different input fields. When changed, they will update the command, role, and log type references
respectively.
The user can then either discard the changes by clicking outside of the popup or by
clicking cancel. If the user clicks save, the function updateEdgeLabel is called. The function comes
from the store file and updates the label of the selected edge. When the new label is saved, the program
checks if the role in the label already exists. If it does not, a function has been passed as a parameter,
communicating with the App component. [33] This function is used to update the subscription Record
with a key for the new role. This key will have an empty list of subscriptions. This ensures that as
soon as a new role is added, it is possible to update the subscriptions of that role.
When renaming a node, two references are used. This is the selected node and the label of the
selected node.
The concept is the same as when renaming edges.
The user will double-click, and
the selected node and label references will be updated. After that, the popup, created in a separate
component, is called. The popup has an input field, where any changes will update the label reference.
Apart from this, it also contains a checkbox that allows the user to choose the selected node as the
initial state. The initial state is found using the initial property from the node reference. This variable
only exists within the popup since the value of the initial node is updated directly and does not affect
the flow. Clicking outside of the dialogue or clicking cancel will trigger the toggling function, and close
the popup without saving. Clicking the save button will also close the dialogue, but first, it will call a
function from the store to update all nodes. Only the selected node will be set as the initial, all others
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Program Implementation
37
will be set as not initial. If the checkbox is not checked, the selected node will be set as not initial.
Another function from the store file will also be called to update the node label. All updating functions
for labels will be presented in Section 5.2.5.
Moving elements
Moving nodes is a built-in feature of ReactFlow.
When the user drags a node around, it triggers
the onNodesChange function, which comes from the store. This function is discussed further in the
Section 5.2.5.
Since edges are generally immovable, a custom edge type is created to be able to create handles.
There are two types created, one will be a new type of clickable base edge, and the other will be a
positionable edge. Since base edges are not clickable by default in ReactFlow, the first step is to create
a custom component for clickable edges.
This new base edge works as a regular edge, taking style parameters, a path, and an id as properties.
It also has an event function for when the mouse is right-clicked. This can be passed when using the
component.
Once the clickable edge has been created, it can be used to develop the positionable edge. The idea
is to right-click on the edge to create a handle that can then be moved. It will then drag along the edge.
First, the edge is split into segments, divided by the handles defined in the position handlers. This
process can be seen in listing 5.8. The edge is split into segments by first computing how many segments
are needed to create the given number of handles. Then an array is initialised for the segments. The
first segment will have the source node as its source, any other segment will have a handle as a source
node. The last segment will have the target node as its target, any other segment will have a handle as
its target. This also means that if there are no handles, the only segment will be a regular edge. From
the new source and target coordinates, a path and label position are found for each segment from a
built-in ReactFlow function called getSmoothStepPath. The path and label position are added to the
array of segments. Once the path of each segment has been found, these can be used to build the edge.
Each segment is created using the new clickable base edge.
The function passed in the mouse event is used to translate the position of the mouse on the screen,
where a new handle should be placed, to coordinates within the flow. This translation is done using
a built-in function from the ReactFlow API. After the position is found, the position handler array
of the edge is updated to contain the new handle.
The new handle is added with the calculated
positions and set as a label if it is the first handle. Listing 5.9 shows the position calculation done
in the onMouseDown event. Lastly, a label must be added, this is done using the EdgeLabelRenderer
component from ReactFlow. If there are no handles, the label is created in the same way as in the
self-connecting edge type. Handles are also created using the EdgeLabelRenderer component, however,
the method is different if the handle is a label or a regular handle. The difference is in the styling of the
handle since all of the functionality is the same. They have different style classes, these are discussed
in Section 5.2.4. The label also has some label text, while handles do not.
The handle is created as a button, which is the styled element, and when the button is clicked, it will
make the handle active. When the button is right-clicked, which triggers an onContextMenu event, the
handle is removed from the edge’s handles, effectively deleting the handle. The button is wrapped in
a component which contains all of the functionality for moving the handle. When the mouse is moved,
the active edge is found, and the position of the mouse is translated to a position within the flow. The
position of the handle is then updated to match the new mouse position. When the mouse is no longer
down, the edges are all set to not be active. Putting all of this together means that the mouse is clicked,
and an edge is selected. The active edge’s handle positions are updated to match the position of the
mouse, and when the user stops dragging the edge, it is deselected.
A discussion from StackOverflow has heavily inspired the entire process of creating movable edges
with handles.[31][32] A few minor changes have been made, to better accommodate the needs of this
extension, such as the first handle being the label of the edge, instead of a regular handle, and the event
being a right-click, instead of a regular click.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Program Implementation
38
1
const positionHandlers = (data?.positionHandlers ?? []) as PositionHandler[];
2
const edgeSegmentsCount = positionHandlers.length + 1;
3
4
let edgeSegments = [];
5
for (let i = 0; i < edgeSegmentsCount; i++) {
6
let segmentSourceX , segmentSourceY , segmentTargetX , segmentTargetY;
7
8
if (i === 0) {
9
segmentSourceX = sourceX;
10
segmentSourceY = sourceY;
11
} else {
12
const handler = positionHandlers[i - 1];
13
segmentSourceX = handler.x;
14
segmentSourceY = handler.y;
15
}
16
17
if (i === edgeSegmentsCount - 1) {
18
segmentTargetX = targetX;
19
segmentTargetY = targetY;
20
} else {
21
const handler = positionHandlers[i];
22
segmentTargetX = handler.x;
23
segmentTargetY = handler.y;
24
}
25
26
// Create a standard path for the edge
27
const [edgePath, labelX, labelY] = getSmoothStepPath({
28
sourceX: segmentSourceX ,
29
sourceY: segmentSourceY ,
30
sourcePosition ,
31
targetX: segmentTargetX ,
32
targetY: segmentTargetY ,
33
targetPosition ,
34
});
35
36
edgeSegments.push({ edgePath, labelX, labelY });
37
}
Listing 5.8: Process of splitting the edge into segments.
1
...
2
3
const position = reactFlowInstance.screenToFlowPosition({
4
x: event.clientX,
5
y: event.clientY,
6
});
7
8
...
Listing 5.9: Translating the position of the mouse to flow coordinates.
==PAGE:46==
5.2 Program Implementation
39
Selecting elements
This is a built-in feature from ReactFlow, meaning that no extra implementation has been necessary.
Some styling has been added to both edges and nodes that are selected to make the selected elements
more prominent. This has been done by adding information to the already existing style elements in
the CSS.
Deleting elements
When deleting elements, ReactFlow has a built-in event type called onBeforeDelete. This is used to
create a warning for the user, since there are no possibilities in the extension to undo deletion. The
event updates the delete reference to match all selected elements to be deleted, and then calls a toggling
function for the delete state variable. The concept of this popup is very similar to that of renaming
elements. This popup is also created a separate component, where the necessary functions are passed
as properties. This will open a popup, where the user must confirm deletion. The popup is closed by
clicking ”Cancel”, or clicking outside of the popup. When the ”Delete” button is clicked, two different
delete functions from the store are called. These are discussed further in Section 5.2.5. The dialogue is
then closed after all selected elements have been deleted.
Auto layout
When the user wants the layout of the graph to be automated, they can press the button labelled
”Auto layout”. This will call the onLayout function, with the false parameter. This will ensure that
new positions for each existing node are calculated and updated. When the layout function is called,
the references for nodes and edges are used, to ensure that the newest values can be used, without
re-rendering. The nodes and edges arrays cannot be used, because they will contain the last value,
instead of the newest, so the auto layout would return to the last saved protocol, if these were used.
5.2.3
Saving Changes in File
After making changes to the flow, these changes must be saved. This is done by communicating across
the parent and child component of the webview, and through messages to the extension. The data of
the initial protocol must be replaced by a new protocol including all of the changes.
Passing data to parent component
The user can choose to save changes to the protocol, by pressing the button labelled ”Save changes”.
This button will call a function to save changes, as can be seen in listing 5.10. First, the function checks
for any edges without labels, as this is not allowed. If there are none, the nodes are updated, so that the
id matches the name of the node. Then, the data is passed back to the parent component. This is done
by using the callback function that was passed as a property to the flow. The necessary parameters are
given to the function, and it is called. This will call the function from the App component.[33]
Parsing elements to protocol
The callback function described in the previous section is used to get the data from the child component
to the parent component, but also to parse the ReactFlow elements to a SwarmProtocolType that can
be saved.
Firstly, the list of edges from the flow is translated back to a list of transitions. This is done by
setting the source and target of the transition, as well as adding commands and roles found by splitting
the edges’ labels. The log type of the edge is also added to the transition label. Then, the layout key is
created. This is done by first creating a list of edge handles, and then adding it to the layout along with
the list of nodes and their coordinates. The initial state of the protocol is set by finding the node that
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Program Implementation
40
1
function saveChanges() {
2
// Check that all nodes have a label
3
if (edgesRef.current.some((edge) => !edge.label)) {
4
// Check that all edges have a label
5
sendErrorToParent("noEdgeLabel");
6
return;
7
} else {
8
const fixNodeNames = nodesRef.current.map((node) => {
9
return {
10
...node,
11
id: node.data.label,
12
};
13
});
14
sendDataToParent(fixNodeNames , edgesRef.current);
15
}
16
}
Listing 5.10: Function to save changes in flow component.
is set to be the initial node, if that does not exist, it is set to unknown. The subscriptions list already
exists in the App component, meaning that the reference for this list can be used directly. Lastly, the
protocol is built from the initial node, the layout, the subscriptions, and the list of transitions.
Passing protocol out of webview
To pass the newly created protocol back to the extension, a message is posted. It contains the command,
and then the name of the selected protocol along with the protocol itself. The protocol is stringified,
so the data is given to the extension in the right format. When passing data back to the extension,
it became apparent that to post messages the VS Code API was necessary. To access this outside of
the extension, a global function is necessary. This function is defined as in listing 5.11. This function
1
declare function acquireVsCodeApi(): {
2
postMessage: (message: any) => void;
3
setState: (state: any) => void;
4
getState: () => any;
5
};
Listing 5.11: Global function allowing webview to post messages.
ensures that the ability to post messages can be seen in the webview as well. This solution was found
using ChatGPT[36], and the full conversation can be seen in appendix A.3.
Checking well-formedness
The well-formedness check that was discussed as part of Section 4.2.3 has been implemented as a
condition that must be satisfied, before the protocol changes can be saved. As was also mentioned,
the well-formedness check uses the subscriptions of each role, which means that subscriptions must be
available.
Subscriptions are implemented as a new key in the protocol. This new key is built as a Record<string,
string[]> which means that it looks like a list of keys and values. The keys are the roles, while the
values are all log types that the roles subscribe to. Since the subscriptions are an optional field, it is
possible to add these from the extension. A button is added called ”Subscriptions”, and clicking it
opens a dialogue in the same style as the ones previously described. A difference here is that the status
of the dialogue cannot be saved in the ReactFlow state, meaning that the setting functions cannot be
defined there. Instead, they must be passed to the popup, which makes it necessary to create a new
==PAGE:48==
5.2 Program Implementation
41
type called SubscriptionsDialogProps, which allows the state of the dialogue to be set outside of the
dialogue.[40] This one contains an input field for each role, where the subscriptions of the corresponding
role can be changed. Since the subscriptions are in a list form, this list is joined to a string, separated
by a comma and a whitespace. When changes are made to this string, they are saved by splitting the
string by comma and whitespace. This will put the subscriptions back into an array, which can be
put into the protocol. This entire process happens in the App component since subscriptions have no
relevance to the flow.
To ensure that subscriptions can be edited, even if they are not present at the initialisation of the
protocol, a function is added to create subscriptions. When the subscriptions reference is set, it will be
set as the Record listed in the key; if one exists, and if any role exists outside of those already listed in
the subscriptions, these will be added. The function traverses through all transitions to find roles not
already included in the subscriptions, and sets each role as a new key in the Record, with the value set
as an empty list. This creates a new subscription list for each role in the protocol, which the user can
then fill out.
The well-formedness check is performed after the changed protocol has been passed to the extension.
The check is done using the function checkSwarmProtocol, which takes a SwarmProtocolType and a list
of subscriptions as parameters. This means that the custom SwarmProtocol type must be transformed
back to this simpler type. It is done by using only the initial state and the list of transitions. When
the function is used, it will either return ”OK” or ”ERROR”. If ”OK” is returned, the protocol can
be replaced in the editor. Otherwise, some error handling is necessary. The error type will contain a
description of the error. The handling of the errors is described in Section 5.2.6.
Replacing protocol in editor
Once the data has been passed to the extension and been through the well-formedness check and other
error checks, it should replace the original protocol. As described in Section 4.2.3 the file editor must
be active, to replace text. The first step is therefore to find the editor, and make it active. After finding
the active editor, all occurrences of swarm protocols are found. This is done using the same method as
in Section 5.2.1, where a regular expression is used.[37] Here, the name of the protocol to be replaced is
used to compare to the name of each occurrence. Once the right occurrence is found, a built-in method
from the VS Code API is used to replace the text within the beginning and end index of the protocol.
Since this is a promise function, it is asynchronous. To ensure that the program does not continue until
the text has been replaced, a then is used. When the text has been replaced, all occurrences are found
again, this is to ensure that when the extension continues, it is working with updated data. Then the
protocol is built and visualised again, and lastly, the panel is revealed so the user can see the extension
again. The replacement process can be seen from listing 5.12. This is the last step in the process of
visualising, changing, and saving a swarm protocol. Because the extension is opened again, the user can
restart the process, but they will notice a short switch between the extension, the file and then back to
the extension.
Exporting protocols
As previously mentioned, a feature was implemented allowing the user to export the diagram to a
.png file. This feature was implemented by adding a button to the extension called ”Export to PNG”,
which will start the export process when clicked.
This button was added as a custom component
called DownloadButton. This custom component is heavily inspired by an example from the ReactFlow
documentation.[41] Some changes have been made to the example implementation, to incorporate the
local storage used in this extension.
The component is implemented using a simple button, where the onClick event has a function
defined to download images. The area to download is determined using the boundaries of the nodes,
this is to ensure that the entire diagram is downloaded. The boundaries are found using a ReactFlow
function called getNodesBounds, and then these bounds are used as the parameter in another function
called getViewportForBounds. This function captures the area within the bounds as a viewport, which
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Program Implementation
42
1
...
2
// Find the correct occurrence based on the data from the child component
3
if (occurrenceName === message.data.name) {
4
// Replace text in the active editor with the new data
5
editor
6
.edit((editBuilder) => {
7
editBuilder.replace(
8
new vscode.Range(
9
activeEditor.document.positionAt(typeRegex.lastIndex),
10
activeEditor.document.positionAt(
11
getLastIndex(
12
editor.document.getText(),
13
typeRegex.lastIndex
14
)
15
)
16
),
17
`${message.data.protocol}`
18
);
19
})
20
// Wait until the editor has been updated
21
.then(() => {
22
// Get the updated occurrences
23
occurrences = getAllProtocolOccurrences(
24
editor.document.getText(),
25
typeRegex
26
);
27
28
// Open the webview again with the new data
29
panel.webview.postMessage({
30
command: "buildProtocol",
31
data: occurrences ,
32
});
33
34
// Make sure the panel is visible again
35
panel.reveal();
36
});
37
}
38
39
...
Listing 5.12: Replacing a protocol in active file.
uses coordinates from the flow. Once the viewport has been found, the diagram is exported to .png using
a library called ”html-to-image”. This library has been described in the ReactFlow documentation.[42]
The function toPng uses the given measurements to create the image, and only when this process is
finished, the image is downloaded. The image is downloaded by creating an HTML element. VS Code
then allows the user to make changes to the name and location of the file, before downloading.
5.2.4
Styling
All of the styling is implemented by two different style sheets. One sheet contains all of the styling
classes relevant to the custom positionable edge. It has the style classes of the handles. For the handle
itself, the colour is set to yellow, and the height and width of the handle are set as well. This style
sheet comes directly from the StackOverflow example used to add handles.[32]
The other style sheet is general and is used in multiple components. In this sheet, the general layout
of buttons, dropdowns and input fields are set. There are also three extra button classes. One class
is for the save button in popups, this is styled by setting the colour to green, and ensuring rounded
corners. The button for the delete dialog is similar in style, but is instead a red colour. The last button
type is the cancel button, also used in popups, where the style is transparent, and the text colour is set
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Program Implementation
43
to grey. The text is underlined, so it is still readable.
Some changes are also made to ReactFlow classes. These are used by the flow automatically, so
changes made will affect the look of the flow. An example of this is change made to nodes, using the
react-flow__node class. Listing 5.13 shows the styling of nodes, where the colour of the node is set
1
.react-flow__node {
2
background -color: #ffffff;
3
border-color: #000;
4
color: #000;
5
border-radius: 80px;
6
}
Listing 5.13: Changes to the built-in ReactFlow nodes.
to white, the label text and outline is set to black, and the corners are rounded. The same technique
is used to style the input and output handles connecting nodes through transitions. Here, one handle
is set to be a red colour, and the other is set to be a blue colour. When a node is selected it can be
highlighted, this is done by editing the selected class of nodes. Here the colour of the outline is set to
grey, and the width of the outline is increased, so it is highlighted differently than the rest of the nodes.
The react-flow__custom-edge class is also modified, since custom edges are used in the program.
Apart from this a few classes are also added, to create the effect of a popup. An overlay class is
used to darken the background, so the popup appears to open on top of the extension. It is a black
background that is transparent. The dialog class is a white box, where the dimensions are made to fit
the content of the dialogue.
In all cases where styling is used, it is done by adding the style as the value of the property className
to the component to be styled. Since the ReactFlow component uses the class names, no changes are
made here.
5.2.5
State Management
As mentioned in Section 4.2.5 the management of the ReactFlow state is done manually in a separate
file. This is the store, where any functionality of the flow regarding nodes and edges can be found.
This file contains a new type definition for a ReactFlow state, where all of the functions are defined,
and the nodes and edges as well. A useStore value is then defined using the createWithEquality
function from the zustand library. This newly created store contains the initial nodes and edges. In
this case they are set to be empty arrays, and the values can be added later. Apart from nodes and
edges, the store also contains three variables used to open and close popups. The store also contains 15
functions, used to update the nodes, edges and popups.
One function sets the initial values of the nodes and edges. This is used once, to ensure that the two
arrays are not empty when the protocol is loaded and visualised. There are also two other functions,
setNodes and setEdges, to set the value of one of the arrays without changing the other.
These
functions are used throughout the program, whenever the nodes or edges should be updated.
When nodes or edges change, for instance when the positioning is updated, the onNodesChange and
onEdgesChange functions are called. These use built-in ReactFlow functions to apply changes to the
affected nodes or edges. These functions are called applyNodeChanges and applyEdgeChanges.
Two functions are used to add new nodes or edges. The process of adding elements has already been
described in Section 5.2.2, but actually adding the new elements to the existing elements happens in
the store. The process is simple, the existing array is updated to also contain the new element. The two
functions are very similar, the only difference is whether it is the nodes or edges array that is updated.
The process of updating labels has also been described already. Again, the actual change happens
in the state management. When an edge label is updated the affected edge is found, and the label is
set to match the new text. When a log type is added to the label, it is added to any other label data
in the edge. Updating a node label is more complicated. Here, the affected node is also found, and the
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Program Implementation
44
label is replaced. Apart from this, all edges connected to this node must also have their source and/or
target updated. This process can be seen in listing 5.14. When a node is set as the initial node, all
1
updateNodeLabel: (nodeId: string, label: string) => {
2
set({
3
nodes: get().nodes.map((node) => {
4
if (node.id === nodeId) {
5
return {
6
...node,
7
data: { ...node.data, label },
8
id: label,
9
};
10
}
11
return node;
12
}),
13
edges: get().edges.map((edge) => {
14
if (edge.source === nodeId && edge.target === nodeId) {
15
return { ...edge, source: label, target: label };
16
} else if (edge.source === nodeId) {
17
return { ...edge, source: label };
18
} else if (edge.target === nodeId) {
19
return { ...edge, target: label };
20
}
21
return edge;
22
}),
23
});
24
},
Listing 5.14: Updating the label of a node.
other nodes must also be set not to be initial nodes. This is to ensure that only one initial node exists.
Updating initial nodes is also done in the store, in the function updateInitialNode. Here, the custom
parameter in the node data is updated. In the initial node it is set to true, while all other nodes will
be set to false.
Three different functions exist for opening and closing popups. For each dialogue type, node label,
edge label, and deletion, a boolean variable keeps track of whether the popups are opened or closed. A
function is created for each, to set the value of the variable.
The last functionality in the store is to delete elements. This is done by filtering the list of nodes or
edges, so it no longer includes the elements that were deleted.
All of these functions in the store can be called from all over the program, which is what makes it
the desirable solution to use a store.
5.2.6
Error Handling
Error handling is done throughout the program. Some errors are found within the flow, such as missing
labels or transition labels that are in the wrong format. These errors are caught when saving in the
dialogue, but they are handled by passing an error message from the Flow component to the App
component through the same method as described in Section 5.2.3 to pass data back to the parent
component.[33] The callback function is designed to directly post a message for the extension containing
the error type. All of the errors are then shown to the user with a message describing the issue.
Some errors are also caught during the process of building the protocol. This has been previously
mentioned. If the program cannot find a protocol or find the last closing curly bracket when searching
through each occurrence, an error will be shown to the user. Again, the error will show a description
of the issue, so the user can make changes that will fix the error. The same thing is the case for syntax
in the protocol that is not written as strings.
For all other errors, a utility file has been created. In this file, the well-formedness of a protocol
is checked in a function. If there are no subscriptions, this will return a status OK, since it is seen as
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Program Implementation
45
a choice not to check well-formedness. Because of this, the user is informed that the well-formedness
has not been checked in a warning message. If subscriptions are included in the protocol, the well-
formedness check is done and saved in a message. The message is then used to determine if any errors
were found.
As previously mentioned there are four different error types explicitly handled by the
program. These errors are handled by type, and this type is found by the message returned from the
machine-check function checkSwarmProtocol. These messages contain an error description and, in
most cases, an affected transition. To isolate this transition, the message is replaced with an empty
string, leaving only the transition. From this it is possible to find the source and target, as well as the
label. This makes it possible to find the edge in the diagram matching the described transition. When
an error is found, an object is created with a message for the program, details for the user and the
affected elements.
The first function for affected transitions is used to find transitions with the same log type. This
function simply filters all transitions with the log type included in the error, and returns it to the message.
The second function finds the transition matching the transition described in the error message from
the checkSwarmProtocol function. This is also returned to pass in the message.
The message, details and affected transitions can then be used to show the user an error and to
post a new message to the App component. This new message tells the program to highlight edges, and
which transitions should be highlighted. As was mentioned in Section 5.2.1 the edges are created taking
the highlighting into account. Essentially the protocol is rebuilt, creating red edges for the transitions
that are affected by the well-formedness check.
Apart from the well-formedness check two other errors are also handled. These are, however, only
handled as warnings, where the user has the possibility of saving despite the errors found. This is for any
unconnected states and for transitions with duplicated labels. Two functions exist to catch these errors.
To find unconnected states, the function traverses through all nodes in the layout and searches for a
transition, including the state. All unconnected nodes found are returned. For duplicated transition
labels, the list of transitions is traversed. One list is used to keep track of unique labels, while another is
used to keep track of duplicated labels. For each transition, the label is compared to the unique labels,
and if it is not already in the list, it is added. If it is already in the list, all transitions with this label are
added to the list of duplicated labels. This list is returned, as the list of transitions to be highlighted.
Using the same concept as for the well-formedness checks, the error is shown to the user. The user
then has the choice to cancel, so the protocol is not saved. This will result in the list of highlighted
elements being sent to the App component, where the protocol will be built, highlighting the affected
elements in red. If the user chooses to save anyway, the protocol is saved as is.[43]
Only one error can be shown at a time. This was due to time limitations, not allowing for enough
time to find a suitable solution for finding multiple errors at once.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
Several different methods were used to evaluate this project. Some were used as a method of evaluation
and testing during the process of implementing the extension, while others were used to evaluate the
overall outcome of the project. The different approaches to assessment are described in this chapter,
along with their results.
6.1
UX Validation
During the project, the user experience of the extension has been evaluated. To do this, a UX validation
was planned and executed twice. The purpose of the UX validation is both testing and evaluation. The
first execution was done after the first iteration of the MVP was finished. After getting results from the
first validation, updates were added to the extension to accommodate the feedback and comments from
the first round of testing. Then, a second round of validation was executed, and some of the feedback
from this was also fixed.
The validation process was planned before it was executed to ensure that the necessary information
could be extracted. The testing was planned by first setting a list of goals.[44] The goals are defined in
the following list:
• Easy to use
• Intuitive
• Accuracy i.e. diagram looks as expected
• Quality of user experience
To test for these goals specifically, a list of measurements is also defined. These measurements are
chosen to reflect the satisfaction of the goals.[45]
• Time on task
• Error rate
• User opinion
The time will be used to extract information about how easy the program is to use. The error rate
will be used to test how intuitive the extension is since many errors would indicate that the program is
not as intuitive as it needs to be. The user opinion is used to describe the quality of the user experience.
The accuracy is tested by asking the users to validate the diagram in each task.
The testing will consist of a thinking-aloud test. Here, the idea is to find a group of representative
users and have them perform some tasks. The users performed three different simple tasks:
Task 1:
1. Open the file “protocol.ts”
2. Use the extension (can be done using the Command Palette, then the command “Visualise proto-
col”, or the key binding cmd+shift+e)
==PAGE:54==
6.1 UX Validation
47
3. Validate that the diagram matches the state machine described in the file
Task 2:
1. Create a new file
2. Make a simple state machine as a SwarmProtocolType; it must match the notation as seen in
“protocol.ts”
3. Use the extension with the new file
4. Validate that the diagram looks as expected
Task 3:
1. Make changes to your new diagram, specifically:
a) Create a new edge
b) Create a new node
c) Change the name of a node
d) Change the name of an edge
e) Delete a node
f) Delete an edge
2. Save the changes
3. Verify that opening the extension again will show your new state machine
The idea of the tests was to slowly familiarise the users with the program while also testing how
intuitive it is. Apart from this, it would also show if the program works as expected outside of the
manual tests. During the tasks, the user was asked to talk out loud about their thoughts, and their
thoughts were written down. The reasoning for choosing this method was primarily to experience the
test subjects’ first impressions of the program.
The method of thinking-aloud testing has a list of
advantages, which has also affected the decision to use this method. It is a robust way to perform
validation since the users are talking and will give their opinions. It is, as such, not as easy for the
facilitator of the test to influence the subjects. It is also a good method to use for agile development
since it is possible to do these tests iteratively.
The process was timed on each of the tasks, and any errors were noted. This was to tell how well the
program did in the defined measurements. Since the users were talking during the tasks, that should be
taken into account when looking at the time to complete the tasks. The users were also asked to validate
that the diagram matched the textual representation. This should also be considered when looking at
the times. The thoughts of the users helped make anything that might need changing clear.[46]
Apart from a thinking-aloud test, the users were also presented with a few different design options
that could help tell if the current design of the program was usable and intuitive. These design options
were drawn as sketches and shown to the user. The users expressed their thoughts on each design and,
in the end, picked their favourite. The user was presented with three different design options, which
helped determine the placement of buttons and inputs.
The above is the description of the first round of validation. The second round of validation reused
some of the same concepts. It also consisted of a thinking-aloud test, where Task 1 and Task 3 were
reused. Task 1 was to ensure that the user remembered the basics of the program, while task 3 was to
test the functionality of the program. Again, another test was conducted, showing two different design
options for the users to choose between. The two presented design options were black handles and
coloured handles, and the users were asked to choose their favourite option.
After the first round, from the feedback from the users, it was evident that some features did not
give the desired results, and this had to be addressed. This has been described throughout the report.
==PAGE:55==
6.2 User Acceptance Testing
48
In the second round, the users were happy about the changes made, and the overall consensus was that
the extension was easy to use and intuitive. There were some new comments that was repeated among
users, unfortunately these could not be improved due to time limits.
The full responses to the two rounds of UX validation can be seen in appendix C.
6.2
User Acceptance Testing
Another method of evaluation that has been used throughout this project is User Acceptance Testing,
which means that a real-world user has tested the program.[47] Here, the real-world user is an Actyx
customer who works with swarm protocols daily.
In order for the user to be able to test the program, the extension had to be published.
This
also means that a published version of the project exists on the VS Code marketplace. However, the
extension was developed solely for this project.
This was done after a discussion with the project
supervisors.
After the real-world user received download information about the extension and a small note that
only strings are allowed in the protocol description, they were told to use the extension freely. After
a couple of weeks of using the program, a meeting was held to discuss the user’s experiences. Overall,
the user was happy with the extension but had some suggestions for improving it. One of these was
the possibility to save the visual protocol as a .png file. Because the protocols were often used as part
of discussions, it would be easier to have a file saved. Apart from this, the user also mentioned the
possibility of simulating a run through the protocol. Specifically useful for debugging a process, this
feature should allow the user to click through a protocol to further elaborate the communication. The
last wish of the user was to save the layout data in another file, so there would not be merge conflicts
for the protocol file specifically. Instead, they would appear in a separate file. The real-world user also
had some of the same comments as found in the UX validation. Especially the overlapping transition
labels were mentioned, and the fact that the self-connecting transitions were immovable.
When asked if the extension provided help or was useful in their use cases, the user expressed
that this was the case. Communication with their clients became easier after visualising the protocols
discussed at their meetings. Specifically, the user mentioned that they could save up to 30 minutes per
iteration of each protocol. In total, this would mean two hours saved per protocol process and release.
This means that the extension throughout this project can add value to customers using the Actyx
toolset.
6.3
Manual Testing
Manual testing has been done throughout the entire process of developing this extension. Some testing
was directed at specific features that had been implemented, while some were to test the overall func-
tionality of the program. Since the program is mostly visual, manual testing has been decided to be
the best method to test.
After each iteration was finished, all of the features were tested specifically in tests designed to test
the limits of the implementation. Basic features were also tested, such as adding new elements, moving
and saving. Since using the program has been the preferred method to test, the goal of each test was
to find bugs. This would mean that the bugs could be fixed.
Apart from this method of manually searching for bugs and checking that each feature works as
intended, another method was used to test how robust the program is. Some files were created using
a tool that Lucas Clorius developed as part of his thesis project.[48] These different files contained a
number of roles and commands, varying from five to 20. These files were used to test whether the
extension could handle large protocols and still work in a reasonable amount of time. The protocols
tested caused no problems. Apart from this, test files were created for this project, and some files came
from readme files from Actyx projects, as well as a presentation from the TaRDIS project.[49][16][50]
All files used in manual testing can be found as part of the project deliverable, in the folder ”test-files”.
==PAGE:56==
6.4 Project Goals
49
6.4
Project Goals
To evaluate the result of the project, it is also important to look at the project goals. Below is the
project description, describing the background and overall goals of the project.
A swarm protocol[1][2] specifies how a collection of roles interact in a distributed heterogeneous
system and work towards completing a task without central coordination. The Germany-based company
Actyx has developed an open-source library and toolset[3] to describe a swarm protocol and program its
roles. The toolset can model and conformance-check the implementations of one or more state machines
implementing the roles involved in a swarm protocol. This project will design and develop an extension
for the Visual Studio Code IDE that can visualise the shape of a swarm protocol (as a sort of ”global
state machine” depicting the interactions between roles), and allow the user to make changes to the
swarm within the visualisation. This extension will interface with the Actyx toolset to ensure that a
swarm protocol is well-formed and to perform conformance checks whenever changes are made.
The overall goal of creating a VS Code extension has been fulfilled. The extension developed allows
the user to visualise a protocol that has been written in the right form, as defined by Actyx, to see
the communication between roles. Apart from this, it is also possible for the user to make changes to
this protocol. Existing states and transitions can be moved around or deleted, or new elements can be
added to better describe the desired interactions. All of these changes can be saved to still exist the
next time the extension is opened.
The project description also mentions that any changes made will be checked using the Actyx toolset
to see if the protocol is still well-formed. This goal has also been implemented. Apart from just notifying
the user of an error, the error is described in detail, and all elements affected by the well-formedness error
are highlighted. This is done to attract the user’s attention to the problem areas. The well-formedness
is checked using the function checkSwarmProtocol from the Actyx toolkit.
As can be seen from all of this, the goals set before starting the project have been met and have also
been tested to ensure that the extension will add value for users and that the implementation makes
sense for the users.
6.5
Working Process
The work on this project has been agile development. This means that development was split into
multiple iterations, where new features were added to each. Each iteration was also thoroughly tested
before further development. The process has also worked with the concept of an MVP. A Minimum
Viable Product was planned before the project started, setting the first goal. Each iteration before this
MVP was working towards accomplishing these goals. After the MVP was created, iterations were used
to implement single features.
Some approaches to the design and implementation of this extension have been revised during the
process of developing this extension. Some things have been changed due to requests from test subjects,
while other changes have been necessary to correctly implement the desired features. A few examples
of these revisions are listed below.
A simple change has been the shape of the transitions. This was changed because many of the test
subjects found it hard to tell the edges apart, as the soft edges previously used tended to overlap in
confusing spots. Due to this, the transition shape was changed to steps.
Originally, the method for renaming labels was very different. If a transition or state were selected,
an input field would appear at the top of the screen. The selected label would be shown within this
field, and it was possible to make changes. Saving the new label was done by pressing enter on the
keyboard. This approach was disliked by users and would also cause errors since it was not possible
to de-select edges. Since many test subjects expressed the desire to double-click elements to rename,
this feature was implemented along with the popups previously described. The implementation of the
popups has also been revised.
==PAGE:57==
6.6 Future Work
50
Previously, state management was not done in a local manner as described here. Instead, the built-
in state management of ReactFlow was used. This was changed because the introduction of movable
edges required the ReactFlow API to be used in two different contexts, which is not allowed. After some
research, the solution of introducing a local state management seemed like the most robust solution.
A linter was used to ensure that the implemented code did not contain any programmatic mistakes.
This gave some warnings, that then resulted in the possibility to change these.
6.6
Future Work
After discussing the extension with validation subjects and actual users, some things have been men-
tioned multiple times that could be interesting to work with. Due to the time limits of this project, it
has not been possible to implement these features before the project deadline. Below is a list of wishes
that have been mentioned throughout testing.
• Ensure that transition labels do not overlap with each other or with states.
• Being able to move self-connecting edges.
• Accepting the action in a popup by pressing enter.
• Making it impossible to drag new edges from input handles.
During the user acceptance testing, another feature was also suggested. The user expressed a desire to
simulate the communication of the protocol to allow for some type of debugging process.
These points are a generalisation of the feedback given during testing. The obvious choice would
be to fix these issues before moving on to other features. Apart from this list, another idea could be to
improve usability by making it easier to open the extension. VS Code has the option to create a tree
view in the file structure. It would be nice to list all occurrences of protocols in this tree view and make
it possible for the user to open the extension directly from here. Again, because of the limited time in
this project, it has not been possible to implement these ideas, but it would be the logical next step.
During the development of this extension, a meeting was held with some of the parties involved in the
EU-funded project TaRDIS. The goal of this project is to make the process of developing heterogenous
swarms easier. These swarms developed using the TaRDIS toolset must also be correct.[51] The TaRDIS
project expressed some interest in using the extension developed throughout this project as part of their
toolset. This would also mean that the group from the TaRDIS project would continue the work on the
extension developed in this thesis project. To this end, the extension will be released as an open-source
project after the end of the thesis period.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
Throughout this project, a Visual Studio Code extension has been developed. The goal of this extension
has been to ease the process of making and editing swarm protocols. This has been accomplished by
adding the possibility of opening the visualisation of a protocol in a file in a visual editor. It is possible
to open all textual representations of protocols within a file, but only one can be visualised at a time.
Changes can be made in the protocol by dragging around states and transitions to change the layout,
adding new states and transitions, and renaming or deleting elements. These changes can be saved to
the original file or exported as an image containing the visual representation.
This thesis contains a detailed description of the theory on which the extension is based and the use
of the extension. It also contains both the thoughts behind the design of the developed extension and
details describing the implementation of this program. Apart from this, the extension developed has
been evaluated using different methods, such as User Acceptance Testing and thinking-aloud validation.
When comparing the accomplishments of this thesis to the goals defined at the beginning of the
project, all of the goals have been satisfied. The project description defined for this project has also been
satisfied, and more features have been added. The idea of the extension was to make the creation and
editing of swarm protocols easier, and after allowing a potential user to test the extension for a couple
of weeks, the overall feedback was positive. Here, the Actyx client that used the program specified
that the process of creating new protocols had become significantly easier after seeing the protocol as a
diagram was possible. The user also specified that using the extension saved approximately 30 minutes
for each iteration of protocol implementations.
Apart from the user acceptance testing done with a possible user, UX validation has also been
executed. The idea behind this was to understand the users’ thoughts while using the extension and
to research how intuitive the program is. This was done iteratively, so the extension that has been
developed is specifically designed to match the needs of users. Again, the overall feedback received in
the last tested iteration was overall positive.
While the project’s overall goals have been accomplished, some feedback from users still calls for
work on the project. Due to the time limitations of this thesis, it has not been possible to fulfil these
wishes. This leaves some work to be done, mostly to improve the program’s user experience. The
EU-funded project TaRDIS has shown interest in the extension and may continue working on and
developing the extension created in this thesis.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Roland Kuhn and Alan Darmasaputra. “Behaviorally Typed State Machines in TypeScript for
Heterogeneous Swarms.” In: ISSTA 2023 - Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. Association for Computing Machinery, Inc, July
2023, pages 1475–1478. isbn: 9798400702211. doi: 10.1145/3597926.3604917.
[2]
Roland Kuhn, Hernán Melgratti, and Emilio Tuosto. “Behavioural Types for Local-First Soft-
ware.” In: Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, LIPIcs. Volume 263. Schloss Dagstuhl-
Leibniz-Zentrum fur Informatik GmbH, Dagstuhl Publishing, July 2023. isbn: 9783959772815.
doi: 10.4230/LIPIcs.ECOOP.2023.15.
[3]
Actyx Developer Documentation | Actyx Developer. url: https : / / developer . actyx . com/
(visited on 8 August 2024).
[4]
David Khourshid. What is a state machine? | Stately. October 2023. url: https://stately.ai/
blog/2023-10-05-what-is-a-state-machine (visited on 21 November 2024).
[5]
What are state machines and statecharts? | Stately. url: https://stately.ai/docs/state-
machines-and-statecharts#states (visited on 21 November 2024).
[6]
Old Dominion College. Finite State Automata. 2024. url: https://www.cs.odu.edu/~zeil/
cs390/latest/Public/fsa/index.html (visited on 19 November 2024).
[7]
Kev Zettler. What is a distributed system? | Atlassian. url: https://www.atlassian.com/
microservices/microservices-architecture/distributed-architecture (visited on 21 Novem-
ber 2024).
[8]
Introduction | Local-First Cooperation. url: https://www.local-first-cooperation.org/
docs/about/introduction/ (visited on 24 September 2024).
[9]
Alan Darmasaputra. How Actyx works | Actyx Developer. September 2023. url: https : / /
developer.actyx.com/docs/conceptual/how-actyx-works (visited on 3 August 2024).
[10]
José Duarte. Publishing your first event | Actyx Developer. October 2023. url: https://developer.
actyx.com/docs/tutorials/getting-started/first-event (visited on 3 August 2024).
[11]
José Duarte. Running your first query | Actyx Developer. October 2023. url: https://developer.
actyx.com/docs/tutorials/getting-started/first-query (visited on 3 August 2024).
[12]
Roland Kuhn, Alan Darmasaputra, and José Duarte. Actyx/machines. May 2024. url: https:
//github.com/Actyx/machines.
[13]
XState | Stately. url: https://stately.ai/docs/xstate (visited on 18 September 2024).
[14]
About Mermaid | Mermaid. url: https://mermaid.js.org/intro/ (visited on 11 November
2024).
[15]
Graphviz. url: https://graphviz.org/ (visited on 18 September 2024).
[16]
Roland Kuhn. machines/machine-check/README.md at master · Actyx/machines. April 2023.
url: https://github.com/Actyx/machines/blob/master/machine-check/README.md.
[17]
Milit Panchasara. TypeScript vs JavaScript: Which One Is Better to Choose? August 2024. url:
https://radixweb.com/blog/typescript-vs-javascript.
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
53
[18]
Microsoft. Common capabilities. November 2021. url: https://code.visualstudio.com/api/
extension-capabilities/common-capabilities (visited on 10 September 2024).
[19]
Microsoft. Web extensions. November 2021. url: https : / / code . visualstudio . com / api /
extension-guides/web-extensions (visited on 10 September 2024).
[20]
Microsoft. Webview API. November 2021. url: https : / / code . visualstudio . com / api /
extension-guides/webview (visited on 21 August 2024).
[21]
Max Pekarsky. Does your web app need a front-end framework? February 2020. url: https:
//stackoverflow.blog/2020/02/03/is-it-time-for-a-front-end-framework/ (visited on
4 September 2024).
[22]
Ritika. What is a framework and why use frameworks in software development? - invedus. Septem-
ber 2023. url: https://invedus.com/blog/what-is-a-framework-and-why-use-frameworks-
in-software-development/ (visited on 10 September 2024).
[23]
GeeksforGeeks. Angular vs reactjs: Which one to choose as frontend development framework in
2024. July 2024. url: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/angular-vs-reactjs/ (visited on
10 September 2024).
[24]
Vishal-Siddhpara. React vs angular: Which one is best for your next front-end project? September
2024. url: https://radixweb.com/blog/react-vs-angular (visited on 4 September 2024).
[25]
Introduction – React Flow. url: https://reactflow.dev/learn/concepts/introduction
(visited on 18 September 2024).
[26]
dagrejs/dagre-d3: A D3-based renderer for Dagre. url: https://github.com/dagrejs/dagre-
d3?tab=readme-ov-file (visited on 18 September 2024).
[27]
Aseem Kishore. JSON5 – JSON for Humans | JSON5. 2022. url: https://json5.org/ (visited
on 22 September 2024).
[28]
Custom Edges – React Flow. September 12. url: https://reactflow.dev/examples/edges/
custom-edges (visited on 1 October 2024).
[29]
Layouting – React Flow. September 2024. url: https://reactflow.dev/learn/layouting/
layouting (visited on 1 October 2024).
[30]
The Controls component - React Flow. November 2024. url: https://reactflow.dev/api-
reference/components/controls (visited on 23 December 2024).
[31]
javascript - Is it possible to shape reactflow edges by dragging them? - Stack Overflow. url:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/77831116/is-it-possible-to-shape-reactflow-
edges-by-dragging-them (visited on 26 November 2024).
[32]
danicruz0415. Preview — nodebox — CodeSandbox. url: https://codesandbox.io/p/sandbox/
goofy-wave-hp25zj (visited on 26 November 2024).
[33]
Passing Data from Child to Parent Components in React | by ozhanli | Medium. url: https:
//medium.com/@ozhanli/passing-data-from-child-to-parent-components-in-react-
e347ea60b1bb (visited on 26 October 2024).
[34]
Troubleshooting - React Flow. url: https://reactflow.dev/learn/troubleshooting (visited
on 18 October 2024).
[35]
Moritz Klack. Build a Mind Map App with React Flow - React Flow. January 2023. url: https://
reactflow.dev/learn/tutorials/mind-map-app-with-react-flow (visited on 23 November
2024).
[36]
OpenAI. ChatGPT: GPT-4. https://chat.openai.com/. Large language model. 2023. (Visited
on 3 September 2024).
[37]
RegExp.prototype.exec() - JavaScript | MDN. July 2024. url: https://developer.mozilla.
org/en- US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/RegExp/exec (visited on
22 October 2024).
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
54
[38]
useState – React. url: https://react.dev/reference/react/useState (visited on 1 October
2024).
[39]
useRef – React. url: https://react.dev/reference/react/useRef (visited on 15 November
2024).
[40]
reactjs - Typescript useState: SetState in Child with argument - Stack Overflow. url: https:
//stackoverflow.com/questions/64729482/typescript-usestate-setstate-in-child-
with-argument (visited on 22 December 2024).
[41]
Download Image - React Flow. November 2024. url: https://reactflow.dev/examples/misc/
download-image (visited on 18 December 2024).
[42]
html-to-image. url: https://github.com/bubkoo/html-to-image (visited on 18 December
2024).
[43]
VS Code API | Visual Studio Code Extension API. url: https://code.visualstudio.com/
api/references/vscode-api (visited on 10 September 2024).
[44]
How to set and measure UX goals. December 2023. url: https://www.usertesting.com/blog/
measure-UX-goals (visited on 2 October 2024).
[45]
7 UX metrics to measure the User Experience | by UXness | UXness | Medium. May 2023.
url: https://medium.com/uxness/7- ux- metrics- to- measure- the- user- experience-
2782409d7a41 (visited on 2 October 2024).
[46]
Jakob Nielsen. Thinking Aloud: The #1 Usability Tool. January 2012. url: https://www.nngroup.
com/articles/thinking-aloud-the-1-usability-tool/ (visited on 2 October 2024).
[47]
Matthew Setter. What Is User Acceptance Testing (UAT): Meaning, Definition. url: https:
//usersnap.com/blog/user-acceptance-testing-right/ (visited on 14 December 2024).
[48]
Lucas Clorius. “Swarm protocol test.” Used with the permission of Lucas.
[49]
Roland Kuhn. 05.TaRDIS M18 review - Use Case ACT - Google Slides. September 2024. url:
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/19QxLcPS-zKCULilVfLVd_0-MVTDhixxUxXJfkcl1cME/
edit#slide=id.g2f070d7ab69_0_25.
[50]
workshop-plant-watering-robot/src/protocol.ts at master · Actyx/workshop-plant-watering-robot.
url: https://github.com/Actyx/workshop- plant- watering- robot/blob/master/src/
protocol.ts (visited on 21 October 2024).
[51]
TaRDIS project. url: https://project-tardis.eu/ (visited on 20 December 2024).
==PAGE:62==
APPENDIX A
ChatGPT Usage
All examples of chatGPT usage
A.1
Extension template
To create a basic extension template able to pass data, ChatGPT4 was used. Below is the chat, including
the given prompts, and the answers used in the project.
The first prompt was: ”How can I pass data from a file, to the context of a VS Code extension that
is created using react and typescript”
ChatGPT returned four code snippets.
1
import * as vscode from 'vscode';
2
import * as fs from 'fs';
3
4
export function activate(context: vscode.ExtensionContext) {
5
context.subscriptions.push(
6
vscode.commands.registerCommand('extension.openWebview', () => {
7
const panel = vscode.window.createWebviewPanel(
8
'myWebview', // Identifies the type of the webview
9
'React App', // Title of the panel
10
vscode.ViewColumn.One, // Editor column to show the new webview panel in
11
{
12
enableScripts: true, // Enable JavaScript in the webview
13
}
14
);
15
16
// Load your React app into the webview
17
const reactAppHtml = getReactAppHtml(); // Implement this function to return the
HTML content
18
panel.webview.html = reactAppHtml;
19
20
// Read the file and send the data to the React app
21
const filePath = vscode.Uri.file('/path/to/your/file.txt');
22
fs.readFile(filePath.fsPath, 'utf8', (err, data) => {
23
if (err) {
24
vscode.window.showErrorMessage('Error reading file');
25
} else {
26
// Send the file data to the webview (React app)
27
panel.webview.postMessage({ command: 'fileData', data });
28
}
29
});
30
31
// Handle messages from the webview (React side)
32
panel.webview.onDidReceiveMessage((message) => {
33
if (message.command === 'log') {
34
console.log(message.data);
35
}
36
});
37
})
38
);
39
}
==PAGE:63==
A.1 Extension template
56
Listing A.1: extension.ts
1
import React, { useEffect, useState } from 'react';
2
3
const App: React.FC = () => {
4
const [fileContent , setFileContent] = useState<string >('');
5
6
useEffect(() => {
7
// Listen for messages from the VS Code extension
8
window.addEventListener('message', (event) => {
9
const message = event.data;
10
11
if (message.command === 'fileData') {
12
// Update the React state with the file content
13
setFileContent(message.data);
14
}
15
});
16
17
// Clean up the event listener on unmount
18
return () => {
19
window.removeEventListener('message', () => {});
20
};
21
}, []);
22
23
return (
24
<div>
25
<h1>File Content:</h1>
26
<pre>{fileContent}</pre>
27
</div>
28
);
29
};
30
31
export default App;
Listing A.2: App.tsx
1
function getReactAppHtml() {
2
const scriptUri = vscode.Uri.file('/path/to/your/react/bundle.js')
3
.with({ scheme: 'vscode-resource' });
4
5
return `
6
<!DOCTYPE html>
7
<html lang="en">
8
<head>
9
<meta charset="UTF-8">
10
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
11
<title>React App</title>
12
</head>
13
<body>
14
<div id="root"></div>
15
<script src="${scriptUri}"></script>
16
</body>
17
</html>
18
`;
19
}
Listing A.3: extension.ts (continued)
1
const path = require('path');
2
3
module.exports = {
4
entry: './src/index.tsx',
==PAGE:64==
A.1 Extension template
57
5
output: {
6
path: path.resolve(__dirname, 'out'),
7
filename: 'bundle.js'
8
},
9
resolve: {
10
extensions: ['.ts', '.tsx', '.js']
11
},
12
module: {
13
rules: [
14
{
15
test: /\.tsx?$/,
16
use: 'ts-loader',
17
exclude: /node_modules/
18
}
19
]
20
}
21
};
Listing A.4: webpack.config.js
These four code snippets are given from chatGPT, along with an explanation. A clarifying question
was asked, to ensure correct structure of the code from the begginning.
”can you show me the exact file layout for this project?”
This gave the following answer:
1
my-vscode-extension/￿￿￿￿
2
3
.vscode/
// VS Code-specific files￿￿￿￿
4
launch.json
// (Optional) Debugging configuration￿￿￿￿
5
6
dist/
// Webpack build output (can be called 'out' or 'dist')￿￿￿￿
7
bundle.js
// The bundled React app JavaScript (created by Webpack)￿￿￿￿
8
9
media/
// Static assets (optional)￿￿￿￿
10
styles.css
// (Optional) Styles for the React app￿￿￿￿
11
12
node_modules/
// Node.js dependencies￿￿￿￿
13
14
src/
// Source files for both the extension and React app￿￿￿￿
15
extension.ts
// The main extension file (VS Code API backend logic)￿￿￿￿
16
reactApp/
// React app files￿￿￿￿
17
App.tsx
// React component￿￿￿￿
18
index.tsx
// React entry point￿￿￿￿
19
webpack.config.js // Webpack config to bundle React app￿￿￿￿
20
21
.gitignore
// Ignoring unnecessary files from Git￿￿￿
22
package.json
// Project metadata and dependencies￿￿￿
23
tsconfig.json
// TypeScript configuration￿￿￿
24
webpack.config.js
// Webpack config for bundling the React app (alternative location)￿￿￿
25
README.md
// Project documentation
Listing A.5: Project structure.
Apart from the file structure, extra code snippets were also given.
1
import React from 'react';
2
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
3
import App from './App';
4
5
ReactDOM.render(<App />, document.getElementById('root'));
Listing A.6: index.tsx
1
{
2
"compilerOptions": {
==PAGE:65==
A.2 Data passing
58
3
"target": "ES2020",
4
"module": "commonjs",
5
"lib": ["ES2020", "DOM"],
6
"outDir": "dist",
7
"rootDir": "src",
8
"strict": true,
9
"esModuleInterop": true,
10
"skipLibCheck": true
11
},
12
"include": ["src/**/*.ts", "src/**/*.tsx"],
13
"exclude": ["node_modules"]
14
}
Listing A.7: tsconfig.json
1
{
2
"name": "my-vscode-extension",
3
"version": "1.0.0",
4
"engines": {
5
"vscode": "^1.60.0"
6
},
7
"main": "./dist/extension.js",
8
"scripts": {
9
"build": "webpack --config ./src/reactApp/webpack.config.js",
10
"watch": "webpack --watch --config ./src/reactApp/webpack.config.js"
11
},
12
"devDependencies": {
13
"ts-loader": "^9.0.0",
14
"typescript": "^4.4.3",
15
"webpack": "^5.0.0",
16
"webpack-cli": "^4.0.0",
17
"react": "^17.0.2",
18
"react-dom": "^17.0.2"
19
}
20
}
Listing A.8: package.json
All of these code snippets were used in the project, however they were modified.
A.2
Data passing
After struggling with passing data back to my extension, I had the following exchange:
I have a vscode extension, and want to pass a message from my webview to my extension.ts file.
Through the vscode api documentation I have found that I can do it by using the method ”acquireVs-
CodeApi”, but when I implement it as suggested in the documentation I get an error ”cannot find name
’acquireVsCodeApi’”. How can I fix this?
The error ”cannot find name ’acquireVsCodeApi’” typically occurs when TypeScript can’t recognize
the acquireVsCodeApi function within the context of your webview code. This function is provided
by VS Code’s environment only when running within a webview, so TypeScript doesn’t natively know
about it during development. Here’s how you can resolve this error.
Solution 1: Define acquireVsCodeApi Manually in TypeScript
You can declare acquireVsCodeApi manually in your webview TypeScript file to let the TypeScript
compiler know about its existence. Here’s how:
Add a declaration for acquireVsCodeApi at the top of your webview’s TypeScript file:
1
declare function acquireVsCodeApi(): {
2
postMessage: (message: any) => void;
3
setState: (state: any) => void;
4
getState: () => any;
==PAGE:66==
A.3 Posting messages from webview
59
5
};
Listing A.9: Declaration within file.
Now you can use acquireVsCodeApi() as shown in the documentation without TypeScript throwing an
error. For example:
1
const vscode = acquireVsCodeApi();
2
3
// Example of sending a message from the webview to the extension
4
vscode.postMessage({ command: 'someCommand', text: 'Hello from the webview!' });
Listing A.10: Using declaration.
Solution 2: Use a TypeScript Declaration File (optional)
If you want this declaration to be available across multiple files, you can create a separate TypeScript
declaration file:
Create a file, say vscode-webview.d.ts, in your project.
Add the following code to it:
1
declare function acquireVsCodeApi(): {
2
postMessage: (message: any) => void;
3
setState: (state: any) => void;
4
getState: () => any;
5
};
Listing A.11: Global declaration.
TypeScript will then recognize acquireVsCodeApi() across your webview scripts.
Additional Steps: Handling Messages in extension.ts
In your extension.ts file, make sure you’re listening for messages from the webview:
1
// Inside your `extension.ts` file
2
panel.webview.onDidReceiveMessage(
3
message => {
4
switch (message.command) {
5
case 'someCommand':
6
console.log('Message received:', message.text);
7
break;
8
// Handle other commands here
9
}
10
},
11
undefined,
12
context.subscriptions
13
);
Listing A.12: extension.ts
With this setup, acquireVsCodeApi will be properly recognized in your webview code, allowing you to
pass messages to extension.ts as needed.
A.3
Posting messages from webview
The following prompts were used to find a method to pass data from the webview to the extension.
The first question was: How can I pass data from my react webview to my extension.ts file within a
vscode extension?
ChatGPT said:
Passing data between your React WebView and your extension.ts file in a VS Code extension
involves establishing a communication channel using VS Code’s Webview API. Here’s a step-by-step
guide:
1. Set Up the WebView Panel
In your extension.ts file, create a WebView panel and inject your React application into it:
==PAGE:67==
A.3 Posting messages from webview
60
1
// extension.ts
2
import * as vscode from 'vscode';
3
import * as path from 'path';
4
5
export function activate(context: vscode.ExtensionContext) {
6
context.subscriptions.push(
7
vscode.commands.registerCommand('extension.openWebView', () => {
8
const panel = vscode.window.createWebviewPanel(
9
'myWebView',
10
'My WebView',
11
vscode.ViewColumn.One, {
12
enableScripts: true, // Important for enabling communication with the
WebView
13
} );
14
15
panel.webview.html = getWebviewContent(panel.webview, context.extensionUri);
16
17
// Listen for messages from the WebView
18
panel.webview.onDidReceiveMessage(
19
(message) => {
20
switch (message.command) {
21
case 'alert': vscode.window.showInformationMessage(message.text);
22
break;
23
}
24
},
25
undefined,
26
context.subscriptions
27
);
28
})
29
);
30
}
31
32
function getWebviewContent(webview: vscode.Webview, extensionUri: vscode.Uri): string {
33
const scriptUri = webview.asWebviewUri(
34
vscode.Uri.joinPath(extensionUri , 'out', 'webview.js')
35
);
36
37
return `<!DOCTYPE HTML>
38
<html lang="en">
39
<head>
40
<meta charset="UTF-8">
41
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
42
<title>React App</title>
43
</head>
44
<body>
45
<div id="root"></div>
46
<script src="${scriptUri}"></script>
47
</body>
48
</html>`;
49
}
Here’s what’s happening:
• We create a WebView panel and set it to allow JavaScript.
• We load a webview.js file, which is your bundled React application.
• We set up a listener on the panel.webview.onDidReceiveMessage event, which will handle mes-
sages sent from the WebView.
2. Set Up Communication from React (WebView) to extension.ts
==PAGE:68==
A.3 Posting messages from webview
61
In your React application (specifically in the entry JavaScript/TypeScript file for your WebView
app), you need to send messages back to the extension. You can access vscode globally within the
WebView.
For example, in App.tsx:
1
// src/App.tsx
2
import React from 'react';
3
4
function App() {
5
const sendMessageToExtension = () => {
6
// Send a message from WebView to extension.ts
7
vscode.postMessage({
8
command: 'alert',
9
text: 'Hello from the WebView!',
10
});
11
};
12
13
return (
14
<div>
15
<h1>React WebView </h1>
16
<button onClick={sendMessageToExtension}>
17
Send Message to Extension
18
</button>
19
</div>
20
);
21
}
22
23
export default App;
To enable this, declare the vscode API globally. Add this to the top of your file if using TypeScript:
declare const vscode: any;
3. Process Messages in extension.ts
Now that the WebView can send messages to the extension, handle them in the onDidReceiveMessage
callback as defined in extension.ts. Here, message.command determines the action, and message.text
contains any data sent.
In the example provided:
• When the button is clicked, it sends a message with { command: 'alert', text: 'Hello from
the WebView!' }.
• The extension receives this message, checks if the command is alert, and then displays an infor-
mation message in VS Code.
4. Building and Packaging Your React App for VS Code
Ensure your React app is bundled, typically with Webpack or Vite. The output should be placed
in the out folder (or wherever you set in extension.ts), so the WebView can load it. Make sure your
VS Code package.json has the extension.openWebView command registered:
"contributes": { "commands": [ { "command": "extension.openWebView", "title": "Open
WebView" } ] }
With this setup:
• Your React WebView can send messages to the extension.ts.
• extension.ts can respond based on the data received, enabling a powerful way to interact be-
tween the WebView and the extension logic.
The next prompt was:
Using this definition of vscode I get this error Uncaught ReferenceError: vscode is not defined
==PAGE:69==
A.3 Posting messages from webview
62
To this, ChatGPT said:
The vscode object is indeed available globally inside the WebView, but it’s only injected by VS
Code once the WebView is set up and running. If you’re seeing Uncaught ReferenceError: vscode
is not defined, it could mean that:
1. The WebView hasn’t injected the vscode API yet (e.g., you may be running code before
the WebView is fully loaded).
2. The vscode object is being accessed outside the WebView’s HTML file (like during the
initial React build process in a non-VS Code environment).
Here’s a step-by-step solution to ensure vscode is accessible in your React code:
1. Check for vscode in the Global Scope
To avoid accessing vscode before it’s available, we can conditionally check for its existence before
using it. You can modify the code as follows:
1
// App.tsx
2
import React from 'react';
3
4
// Use typeof to avoid any errors during runtime if vscode is not defined const vscode =
typeof acquireVsCodeApi !== 'undefined' ? acquireVsCodeApi() : null;
5
6
const App: React.FC = () => {
7
const sendMessageToExtension = () => {
8
if (vscode) {
9
vscode.postMessage({
10
command: 'myCommand',
11
text: 'Hello from WebView!',
12
});
13
} else {
14
console.warn("vscode API not available.");
15
}
16
};
17
18
return (
19
<div>
20
<h1>React in WebView </h1>
21
<button onClick={sendMessageToExtension}>
22
Send Message to Extension
23
</button>
24
</div>
25
);
26
};
27
28
export default App;
2. Declare acquireVsCodeApi Globally in TypeScript
In a TypeScript environment, declare acquireVsCodeApi globally to avoid TypeScript errors:
1
// src/global.d.ts
2
declare function acquireVsCodeApi(): {
3
postMessage: (message: any) => void;
4
};
3. Ensure vscode API is Used Inside the WebView Context Only
Make sure that:
• You’re building your React app correctly, so the bundle (e.g., webview.js) is accessible to the
WebView.
==PAGE:70==
A.3 Posting messages from webview
63
• The WebView is configured to load this script in the getWebviewContent function:
1
function getWebviewContent(webview: vscode.Webview, extensionUri: vscode.Uri): string {
2
const scriptUri = webview.asWebviewUri(
3
vscode.Uri.joinPath(extensionUri , 'out', 'webview.js')
4
);
5
6
return `<!DOCTYPE HTML>
7
<html lang="en">
8
<head>
9
<meta charset="UTF-8">
10
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
11
<title>React App</title>
12
</head>
13
<body>
14
<div id="root"></div>
15
<script src="${scriptUri}"></script>
16
</body>
17
</html>`;
18
}
Why This Works
By checking typeof acquireVsCodeApi !== 'undefined', we’re ensuring vscode is only defined
once the WebView has actually injected it. The acquireVsCodeApi() function is the standard way to
retrieve the vscode object in a VS Code WebView. This approach avoids trying to access vscode when
it’s not available, preventing the ReferenceError.
This setup should allow you to use vscode.postMessage in your React WebView without runtime
errors.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
Used licenses
This table shows all packages used in the extension and their license. This table has been generated
using the npm package license-report.
name
license
period
material /
not material
license type
link
remote
version
installed
version
defined
version
author
@actyx/
machine-check
perpetual
material
Apache-2.0
https://github.com/Actyx/machines.git
0.3.1
0.3.1
^0.3.1
Actyx AG
@dagrejs/
dagre
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/dagrejs/dagre.git
1.1.4
1.1.4
^1.1.4
Chris Pettitt
<cpettitt@gmail.com>
@types/
vscode
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped.git
1.96.0
1.93.0
^1.93.0
n/a
@xyflow/
react
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/xyflow/xyflow.git
12.3.6
12.3.0
^12.3.0
n/a
html-to-image
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/bubkoo/html-to-image.git
1.11.11
1.11.11
^1.11.11
bubkooo
bubkoo.wy@gmail.com
json5
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/json5/json5.git
2.2.3
2.2.3
^2.2.3
Aseem Kishore
<aseem.kishore@gmail.com>
tapable
perpetual
material
MIT
git+ssh://git@github.com/webpack/tapable.git
2.2.1
2.2.1
^2.2.1
Tobias Koppers
@sokra
vscode-test
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/Microsoft/vscode-test.git
1.6.1
1.6.1
^1.6.1
Visual Studio Code Team
zustand
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/pmndrs/zustand.git
4.5.5
4.5.5
^4.4.0
Paul Henschel
@babel/
core
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/babel/babel.git
7.26.0
7.25.2
^7.25.2
The Babel Team
(https://babel.dev/team)
@babel/
preset-react
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/babel/babel.git
7.26.3
7.24.7
^7.24.7
The Babel Team
(https://babel.dev/team)
@babel/
preset-typescript
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/babel/babel.git
7.26.0
7.24.7
^7.24.7
The Babel Team
(https://babel.dev/team)
@eslint-react/
eslint-plugin
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/Rel1cx/eslint-react.git
1.22.1
1.22.0
^1.22.0
Eva1ent
<rel1cx@proton.me>
@types/
mocha
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped.git
10.0.8
10.0.8
10.0.8
n/a
@types/
node
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped.git
22.10.2
22.5.5
^22.5.5
n/a
@types/
react
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped.git
18.3.18
18.3.6
^18.3.6
n/a
@types/
react-dom
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped.git
18.3.5
18.3.0
^18.3.0
n/a
@types/
vscode
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped.git
1.93.0
1.93.0
1.93.0
n/a
babel-loader
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/babel/babel-loader.git
9.2.1
9.2.1
^9.2.1
Luis Couto
<hello@luiscouto.pt>
css-loader
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/webpack-contrib/css-loader.git
7.1.2
7.1.2
^7.1.2
Tobias Koppers
@sokra
react
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/facebook/react.git
17.0.2
17.0.2
^17.0.2
n/a
react-dom
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/facebook/react.git
17.0.2
17.0.2
^17.0.2
n/a
style-loader
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/webpack-contrib/style-loader.git
4.0.0
4.0.0
^4.0.0
Tobias Koppers
@sokra
ts-loader
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-loader.git
9.5.1
9.5.1
^9.5.1
John Reilly
<johnny_reilly@hotmail.com>
(https://johnnyreilly.com)
typescript
perpetual
material
Apache-2.0
https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript.git
5.7.2
5.6.2
^5.6.2
Microsoft Corp.
typescript-eslint
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint.git
8.18.2
8.18.1
^8.18.1
n/a
webpack
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/webpack/webpack.git
5.97.1
5.94.0
^5.0.0
Tobias Koppers
@sokra
webpack-cli
perpetual
material
MIT
https://github.com/webpack/webpack-cli.git
4.10.0
4.10.0
^4.0.0
n/a
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX C
UX validation
The purpose of this UX validation is to test the design and content of the VS Code extension created.
This document describes the validation done on the overall MVP of the project. The purpose of the
validation is both testing and evaluation of the current outcome of the work done. Especially evaluation
of the design choices made, and the usability of the tool.
Goals:
What are the UX goals for my extension? [44]
• Easy to use
• Intuitive
• Accuracy (diagram looks as expected)
• Quality of user experience
Measures:
The following UX measures can be used to measure the satisfaction of the goals. [45]
• Time on task
• Error rate
• User opinion
UX test:
The testing will consist of a thinking-aloud test. Here, the idea is to find a group of representative
users and have them perform some tasks. I will have the user perform three different simple tasks:
Task 1:
• Open the file “protocol.ts”
• Use the extension (can be done using the Command Palette, then the command “Visualise proto-
col”, or the key binding cmd+shift+e)
• Validate that the diagram matches the state machine described in the file.
Task 2:
• Create a new file
• Make a simple state machine as a SwarmProtocolType; it must match the notation as seen in
“protocol.ts”
• Use the extension with the new file
• Validate that the diagram looks as expected
Task 3:
==PAGE:73==
C.1 Round 1
66
• Make changes to your new diagram, specifically:
– Create a new edge
– Create a new node
– Change the name of a node
– Change the name of an edge
– Delete a node
– Delete an edge
• Save the changes
• Verify that opening the extension again will show your new state machine
The idea of the tests is to slowly familiarise the user with the program while also testing how intuitive
it is. Apart from this, it will also show me if the program works as expected outside of the tests I have
done myself.
During the tasks, I will ask the user to talk out loud about their thoughts, and I will write them
down. I will also time the user on each of the tasks and note if they make any errors. Since the users will
be talking during the tasks, that should be taken into account when looking at the time to successfully
complete the tasks. The thoughts of the users will help me realise anything that might need changing.
[46]
Apart from a thinking-aloud test, I will also present my users with a few different design options
that can help me tell if the current design of the program is usable and intuitive. These design options
will be drawn as sketches and shown to the user. I will have the user tell me their thoughts on each
design and, in the end, pick their favourite.
I will present the user with three different design options, which will help me determine the placement
of buttons and inputs.
Users:
The test users should be representative of the users who will use the extension once it is finished.
That means that I will look for users that:
• Have some experience with programming
• Have used VS Code before
• Know what a state machine is
C.1
Round 1
==PAGE:74==
‭User 1‬
‭Male, 26‬
‭Student Computer Science engineering‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭1 min 26 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Not obvious how to start the extension.‬
‭Would like to be able to press a button to‬
‭start it.‬
‭“Does the @ make sense if you know the‬
‭terminology of swarms?”‬
‭Did very thorough validation, so it took‬
‭some time.‬
‭The node names are hard to read.‬
‭The look of labels of edges could differ‬
‭more from nodes, they look too similar.‬
‭Test 2‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭1 min 50 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Reused the code from protocol.ts in the‬
‭new file.‬
‭Regenerated the flow just to see what the‬
‭end result could look like again.‬
‭Created initial nodes and transitions from‬
‭the same in protocol.ts. Deleted the old and‬
‭created new (see newProtocol).‬
‭Looked if an end node was necessary.‬
‭Created a flow where a node looped back‬
‭to the initial node. This result looked weird,‬
‭because edge placement is not optimised in‬
‭the MVP. Did not think to move nodes to‬
‭see if the edge was correct. Would expect‬
‭same behaviour as self-connecting nodes.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭4 minutes‬
‭Error rate‬
‭2‬
==PAGE:75==
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Noticed that the newly created edges does‬
‭not have a direction. Only after save‬
‭changes.‬
‭Noticed that selected node does not update‬
‭properly. Will show old node label in input,‬
‭but another node is selected.‬
‭Tried to save a label that had the wrong‬
‭format, saw the error message and‬
‭immediately understood that format should‬
‭be “command@role”.‬
‭Expected to be able to edit labels directly‬
‭by double clicking.‬
‭Annoying that the extension closes‬
‭completely after save.‬
‭Noticed that autolayout will go back to the‬
‭last saved changes for nodes and edges.‬
‭Will not represent changes.‬
‭Not able to create a self-connecting edge‬
‭when editing visually.‬
‭It is not possible to deselect nodes and‬
‭edges by clicking away from them.‬
‭Hard to tell the difference between input‬
‭and output of nodes, so drag and drop is‬
‭not intuitive enough.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭A few features that could be nice to have:‬
‭-‬
‭Being able to move edges and labels‬
‭-‬
‭Undo button‬
‭-‬
‭Drag edge to nowhere to create a node‬
‭-‬
‭Possibility to reconnect edges.‬
‭Intuitive program, but minor adjustments could make it better.‬
‭Design 1‬
‭Icons on buttons?‬
‭Placement makes sense‬
‭Inline with dropdown, or move them‬
‭downwards instead.‬
‭Design 2‬
‭Likes it less than design 1.‬
‭Likes that the button is named save instead‬
‭of save changes.‬
‭Confusing with the selected nodes and‬
==PAGE:76==
‭edges. Not sure what selected edge and‬
‭node meant. Confusing, what edges/nodes‬
‭can be chosen at the same time. Would‬
‭prefer to only be able to select a node or an‬
‭edge at a time. Would also prefer to not‬
‭have the text that says if it is node or edge.‬
‭Doesn’t like that it is down in the corner.‬
‭Design 1 is more clean.‬
‭Design 3‬
‭More clean than design 2. Prefers that add‬
‭node is below the selected information.‬
‭Actions grouped away from descriptions‬
‭makes sense. Still only prefers to see one‬
‭selected item.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Only dropdown if there are more choices. If there is only 1 flow, show the name?‬
‭Would like to see what was selected, and then the program will show if it is an edge or a‬
‭node, without writing it as a label for the input.‬
‭How are you supposed to create a new protocol within the program?‬
‭New protocols:‬
‭Plus or new that allows user to create/add a new protocol.‬
‭Permanent dropdown, where bottom option is to add a new protocol.‬
‭User 2‬
‭Male, 25‬
‭Student, MMC‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭1 minute 19 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Immediately tried to press run instead of‬
‭using the keybinding as described.‬
‭Does not have a lot of experience with state‬
‭machines, and none with swarms and‬
‭protocols, so is a little confused.‬
‭The flow makes sense.‬
‭Test 2‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭2 minutes 8 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Struggled using mac, took extra time.‬
==PAGE:77==
‭Copy paste of protocol.ts, deleted most‬
‭transitions and created some new from the‬
‭template.‬
‭Also created a self-connecting edge.‬
‭Easy and intuitive as long as you know the‬
‭notation.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭2 minutes 54 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭2‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Tried to double click to edit the node label,‬
‭did not see the input for a while.‬
‭Tried to save label text by pressing save‬
‭changes. Ended up closing the extension‬
‭so he had to start over.‬
‭Intuitive to create new edge.‬
‭Selected label is not updated.‬
‭Nice that the edge was removed along with‬
‭the node.‬
‭Node was not deleted the first time. Unclear‬
‭if it was program error or human error.‬
‭Design 1‬
‭Intuitive placement. Not intuitive where to‬
‭change name of labels and nodes. Would‬
‭prefer to change directly. More information‬
‭showed up in a different place than where‬
‭you pressed.‬
‭Design 2‬
‭Likes this better, because selected node‬
‭and edge is always there. Likes this design,‬
‭it makes sense. Maybe move add node‬
‭back to actions, but not important. Doesn’t‬
‭work for wide flows.‬
‭Design 3‬
‭Liked design 2 better. Liked that add node‬
‭is over selected, here it seems that you‬
‭must select before you add node.‬
‭Additional nodes:‬
‭Would prefer consistent layout of dropdown.‬
==PAGE:78==
‭Another possibility to move selected edge/node to the left, so that flow is separate from‬
‭information.‬
‭User 3‬
‭Male, 26‬
‭Automation engineer‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭2 minutes 47 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Had trouble understanding the Actyx label‬
‭style.‬
‭Intuitive use of program.‬
‭Thought it was a simple state machine.‬
‭Works with swarms on a daily basis.‬
‭Test 2‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭3 minutes 33 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Mostly struggled because he is not used to‬
‭mac.‬
‭Nothing new to add.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭4 minutes 2 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Edges did not behave as expected. Took‬
‭another path than expected. Tried to drag‬
‭input and connect to an output. The top and‬
‭bottom (input/output) is not intuitive.‬
‭Did not intuitively press enter after changing‬
‭node/edge labels.‬
‭Could not write label.‬
‭Annoying that you have to rewrite the name‬
‭of a label when making changes.‬
‭Used both ui button and backspace to‬
‭delete.‬
==PAGE:79==
‭Incorrect positions after save!‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Design 1‬
‭Simple design‬
‭Not anything not used‬
‭Can press things to change them‬
‭One time to write, one time to save.‬
‭Nice that everything is collected in the‬
‭corner.‬
‭Would be nice to be able to change labels‬
‭directly instead of a separate field.‬
‭Design 2‬
‭Liked design 1 better, because it had one‬
‭place where all the buttons were, so you‬
‭don’t have to look for things.‬
‭Design 3‬
‭Same problem as number 2, but prefers‬
‭that everything is at the top.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Would like that everything was in one side, because in his experience, diagrams can grow‬
‭quite large, so it would be nice to have a big area to see and edit it.‬
‭User 4‬
‭Male, 25‬
‭Student, electrical engineering‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭1 minute 59 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Opened as a side by side view of the‬
‭protocol and the visualisation.‬
‭Not very familiar with TypeScript or mac.‬
‭Wanted the initial node to be more obvious‬
‭than the others.‬
‭Test 2‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭7 minutes 50 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
==PAGE:80==
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Spent over a minute trying to create a file.‬
‭Took over 5 minutes making the protocol in‬
‭TypeScript.‬
‭Forgot to create  a target in one of the‬
‭transitions, which crashed the program.‬
‭Finally created a protocol that works.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭4 minutes 8 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Dragged the top of the nodes to create‬
‭edges.‬
‭Automatically used backspace to delete.‬
‭Did not add edge labels.‬
‭Tried to drag edges to change their‬
‭positioning.‬
‭Would prefer to double click nodes to‬
‭change labels.‬
‭Highlight the selected node?‬
‭Missing undo button.‬
‭When deleting an edge with no label, it‬
‭deleted all edges without labels.‬
‭Read and understood the error message‬
‭about label format.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Design 1‬
‭It was fine. Delete button was good,‬
‭especially fine because there are not many‬
‭buttons. Not necessary, but it is fine. More‬
‭contained.‬
‭Design 2‬
‭Depends on the flow designed. Might take‬
‭up too much space, so there won’t be‬
‭enough room for the flow. Takes up space‬
‭in both width and height. Maybe move‬
‭everything to the side? Seems to have‬
‭vertical approach, so it might be good to‬
==PAGE:81==
‭have more vertical space.‬
‭Design 3‬
‭Better to either have everything at the top‬
‭or everything at the side, so there is more‬
‭room for the graph.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Would prefer to always have the dropdown. Might provoke error thoughts, when trying the‬
‭software for the first time. New updated software, thoughts like that might occur if the dd is‬
‭suddenly there or suddenly gone.‬
‭Also prefers that selected edge and node is shown all the time, but could maybe fade away‬
‭a little when nothing is selected. Would be nice to show selected edge or node in the graph‬
‭as well.‬
‭User 5‬
‭Male, 26‬
‭Student, computer science engineering‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭1 minute 16 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Easy to open.‬
‭Tried to validating a tool, no such tool‬
‭exists.‬
‭Test 2‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭2 minutes 33 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Created separate initial node, that did not‬
‭show up.‬
‭Connected end node to first node, hard to‬
‭tell it connected because of edge‬
‭positioning.‬
‭“Intuitive once you know the syntax”‬
‭Would like larger arrows.‬
‭Easy to understand the flow.‬
‭Test 3‬
==PAGE:82==
‭Time to succeed‬
‭3 minutes 31 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Used enter to save node name, but a‬
‭button would be more intuitive.‬
‭Dragged the edge to input, because it is not‬
‭clear that there is a difference between‬
‭input and output.‬
‭Got the label format error and understood it.‬
‭Tried to drag edge to change position,‬
‭would like that feature.‬
‭Input/output should be defined by the‬
‭arrows of the edges, instead of top and‬
‭bottom of node.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Very intuitive program.‬
‭Could it be possible to add a button or something that allows the user to open the extension,‬
‭so they don’t have to use command palette or keybinding?‬
‭Would like better error handling. Tell user where errors occur, so debugging is easier.‬
‭Primarily for the Actyx syntax.‬
‭Design 1‬
‭Simple layout, easy to use. Should show‬
‭delete button when something is selected.‬
‭Should not always be available.‬
‭Save/confirm button for labels, so editing‬
‭ends after.‬
‭Design 2‬
‭Prefers that selection is not always‬
‭available.‬
‭Design 3‬
‭Selected should not be there at all. Too‬
‭much information.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Would be nice to see multiple flows side by side, perhaps for debugging services.‬
‭Would prefer drop down to be shown all the time, but with only one entry if there are no‬
‭others.‬
‭User 6‬
‭Male, 27‬
‭PhD student, Mathematical modelling‬
==PAGE:83==
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭41 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Spent some time finding the nodes. Moved‬
‭very close to the screen, perhaps unclear?‬
‭Did not see it was directed at first. Needs‬
‭larger arrows.‬
‭Colours are very faded.‬
‭Test 2‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭2 minutes 1 second‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Copied protocol.ts‬
‭Not used to mac.‬
‭Edge label has disappeared behind a node.‬
‭Would like better edge design, so nodes‬
‭and edges/edge labels don’t collide with‬
‭each other.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭2 minutes 56 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Did not try to pull to create an edge.‬
‭Confused about how to do it. Only found‬
‭the feature, when adding a new node.‬
‭Pressed enter to finish renaming.‬
‭Pressed autolayout, reverted to last saved‬
‭nodes and edges. Fixed positioning.‬
‭Tried to use cmd+s to save changes.‬
‭Tried to save an edge label called @@‬
‭which worked. It shouldn’t.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Perhaps rename command in the command label. “Open Webview” isn’t saying much.‬
‭Maybe add a command to create a template for a swarm protocol.‬
==PAGE:84==
‭Design 1‬
‭Seems a lot like the one he tried. Quite‬
‭intuitive, quick to figure out what things do.‬
‭Only thing was, it took a second to figure‬
‭out how to create edge. Prefers to keep the‬
‭delete button.‬
‭Design 2‬
‭Also a nice design. More fields, more‬
‭precise information, but also more‬
‭elements. Prefers that everything is‬
‭collected in one corner, instead of spread‬
‭out.‬
‭Design 3‬
‭Prefers that it is up, but the thoughts are the‬
‭same as in design 2.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭If there are more protocols, he would like a button that allows user to create more protocols.‬
‭Would then make more sense to keep the dropdown at all times. A list with one element‬
‭indicates that it is possible to add more protocols.‬
‭User 7‬
‭Male, 27‬
‭Student, Computer Science engineering‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭1 minute 54 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Could not find his way between the file and‬
‭the extension.‬
‭Not familiar with mac.‬
‭Node labels are not clear.‬
‭Test 2‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭3 minutes 8 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Very unfamiliar with mac.‬
‭Spent 1 minute trying to copy content of‬
‭protocol.ts.‬
‭Tried to see updates in file directly in‬
‭extension, without restarting. Did not work.‬
‭Test 3‬
==PAGE:85==
‭Time to succeed‬
‭2 minutes 21 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭2‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Not sure how to create an edge. Found it.‬
‭Tried to double click node to change label.‬
‭Missed the label format error message.‬
‭Tried to drag edge to change positioning.‬
‭Used cmd+s to save.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Design 1‬
‭Likes the design. Would maybe prefer‬
‭cascading down, instead of sideways.‬
‭Design 2‬
‭Prefers that it is dynamic (show selected‬
‭only when they are useful)‬
‭Design 3‬
‭Prefers it to the top instead of bottom,‬
‭because it takes up less space.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Likes that the dropdown is only there when there are multiple swarm protocols in a file.‬
‭Prefers save instead of save changes.‬
‭User 8‬
‭Male, 25‬
‭Research assistant, energy forecasting‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭1 minute 2 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Found key binding.‬
‭Opened in side-by-side view.‬
‭Test 2‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭30 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
==PAGE:86==
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Copied protocol and changed a single‬
‭node.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭1 minute 52 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Pressed enter when done renaming‬
‭edge/node.‬
‭Saw the label format error and understood.‬
‭Pressed cmd+s to save.‬
‭Accidentally pressed add node twice, so an‬
‭extra node was added, only visible after‬
‭save.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Program works fine, and it is intuitive.‬
‭Good error message, also liked zoom. Liked the self-connecting nodes.‬
‭Would like to be able to double-click nodes to change their label.‬
‭Doesn’t like the overlapping edges.‬
‭Design 1‬
‭Simple design. Easy to understand. Sketch‬
‭has more room than current design, likes‬
‭that better. Clean.‬
‭Design 2‬
‭Doesn’t like constant show of selected.‬
‭Design 3‬
‭Prefers this placement. Still a problem to‬
‭always show selected. Not useful if nothing‬
‭is selected.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Would prefer to see it all the time. You are not bombarded with information, so it is fine to‬
‭show it, so you can always tell if there are multiple flows.‬
==PAGE:87==
C.2 Round 2
80
C.2
Round 2
==PAGE:88==
‭User 1‬
‭Male, 26‬
‭Student Computer Science engineering‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭1 min 41 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Tried to drag edges to better see label that‬
‭was covered.‬
‭When edges are too small it is confusing to‬
‭look at.‬
‭Problematic that edges and nodes overlap.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭2 minutes 2 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Not clear how to create a new edge?‬
‭New nodes appear outside of screen focus.‬
‭Tried to right click to delete a node instead‬
‭of backspace.‬
‭Missing an undo button.‬
‭Likes that the new edges are steps instead‬
‭of curves.‬
‭No error message for missing label?‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Would be nice if it was possible to select multiple elements.‬
‭Selected nodes should be highlighted.‬
‭Not clear what is input and output of node (tested using black handles).‬
‭Cancel button should not be highlighted, should be like a muted button.‬
‭Save button should be green.‬
‭Input fields should be automatically focused when editing labels.‬
‭Press enter to save/delete in dialogs.‬
‭If input is dragged to output, the arrow gets the wrong direction.‬
‭Should be more flexible when creating new edges.‬
‭Are new edges meant to have no label?‬
‭What happens when an edge is dragged to nothing?‬
‭Edge with no label should be deleted immediately, without asking.‬
==PAGE:89==
‭Black handles‬
‭Black handles are creating confusion. Not‬
‭sure what is input and output, and edges‬
‭are created in the wrong direction, or not at‬
‭all.‬
‭Coloured handles‬
‭Not sure if colours are etter. A little better.‬
‭Makes sense with an explanation. Would be‬
‭more intuitive to only have output handles,‬
‭and then drag into node instead.‬
‭User 2‬
‭Male, 25‬
‭Student, MMC‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭1 minute 32 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Noticed new colours.‬
‭Prettier than last time.‬
‭Likes the step edges and that they are‬
‭different from self-connecting.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭1 minutes 31 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Pressed enter to save label.‬
‭Still used input handle to create an edge.‬
‭Super intuitive.‬
‭Double-click is nice, but had to find the‬
‭feature first.‬
‭Black handles‬
‭Would be more intuitive to use triangles‬
‭going in and out of the node.‬
‭Coloured handles‬
‭Likes the red and blue better. Assumed that‬
‭the program would figure out the direction.‬
==PAGE:90==
‭User 3‬
‭Not available for second round of testing.‬
‭User 4‬
‭Male, 25‬
‭Student, electrical engineering‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭2 minute 2 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Would like for visualisation to open‬
‭side-by-side with protocol.‬
‭Paths could be better. Labels can be‬
‭misleading because they look like they‬
‭belong to other edges.‬
‭Scrolling down can be confusing, because‬
‭buttons disappear.‬
‭Arrows are not the same side.‬
‭Autolayout does not spread nodes far‬
‭enough.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭4 minutes 25 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Autolayout turned out nice.‬
‭Liked the dialogue when deleting nodes.‬
‭Pressed enter to confirm dialogue, nothing‬
‭happened.‬
‭Black handles‬
‭No notes‬
‭Coloured handles‬
‭Liked this one better.‬
‭User 5‬
‭Male, 26‬
==PAGE:91==
‭Student, computer science engineering‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭56 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Some edges are wider than others.‬
‭Noticed other colours for input/output‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭4 minutes 11 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭2‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Couldn’t figure out how to delete. Tried‬
‭double-clicking to find options.‬
‭Pressed enter to confirm.‬
‭Not impressed by edge placement. They‬
‭are placed on top of each other.‬
‭Warned when saving without label.‬
‭Works when multiple are selected.‬
‭Change the highlight colour? Or change‬
‭border pattern?‬
‭Design 1‬
‭Design 2‬
‭Colours are more intuitive. Doesn’t like red‬
‭and blue, but they are still better than black.‬
‭Additional notes:‬
‭Autolayout also zooms in and out?‬
‭When using cmd+s protocol can be saved without labels.‬
‭User 6‬
‭Not available for second round of testing.‬
‭User 7‬
‭Male, 27‬
‭Student, Computer Science engineering‬
==PAGE:92==
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭45 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Noticed new colours immediately.‬
‭Edges are not the same size, but easier to‬
‭see than last time.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭1 minute 56 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭1‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Has inconsistent naming of node/state.‬
‭Works better/more fancy with double-click‬
‭feature.‬
‭Pressed enter to confirm delete, did‬
‭nothing.‬
‭Better that input fields were moved to‬
‭popup.‬
‭Would like enter functionality.‬
‭Black handles‬
‭Coloured handles‬
‭Likes colouring better than only black. More‬
‭intuitive than last time.‬
‭User 8‬
‭Male, 25‬
‭Research assistant, energy forecasting‬
‭Test 1‬
‭Time to succeed (including validation)‬
‭24 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Saw that colours were input/output.‬
‭Green for input, red for output?‬
==PAGE:93==
‭Edges are not nice. Self-connecting edges‬
‭should fully connect.‬
‭Test 3‬
‭Time to succeed‬
‭1 minute 44 seconds‬
‭Error rate‬
‭0‬
‭Thinking aloud notes‬
‭Option to always accept delete?‬
‭Something happened with new node, it‬
‭appeared twice.‬
‭Likes double-click functionality.‬
‭Black handles‬
‭Coloured handles‬
‭Liked coloured handles better.‬
