==PAGE:1==
Meta-Learning Methods for Traffic
Flow Estimation in Diverse Urban
Contexts
Master Thesis
Amalie Roark, s184227
December 23, 2024
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Meta-Learning Methods for Traffic Flow Estimation in
Diverse Urban Contexts
Master Thesis
30 ECTS
Date: August 3, 2023
Author: Amalie Roark
Supervised by: Guido Cantelmo and Francisco Camara Pereira
Department of Management
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Traffic congestion in urban areas presents significant challenges for
mobility, public health, and the environment. Addressing these is-
sues requires accurate models of macroscopic traffic patterns, such
as the macroscopic fundamental diagram (MFD), which relates
flow and occupancy in an urban network. However, obtaining re-
liable MFD estimates often necessitates extensive loop detector
(LD) data, which is not always available. This thesis explores how
machine learning, specifically meta-learning, can alleviate the data
scarcity challenge by leveraging data from multiple cities to facili-
tate rapid adaptation to new urban environments with limited LD
data.
The study develops two primary models: a parametric bi-parabolic
model and a non-parametric multi-task physics-informed neural
network (MTPINN). Both models are evaluated on their ability
to estimate critical MFD parameters, such as critical occupancy
and maximum flow. Additionally, a model-agnostic meta-learning
(MAML) framework is implemented to address biased MFDs re-
sulting from insufficient LD coverage. Results show that meta-
learning enables successful generalization across diverse urban set-
tings, improving performance on cities with limited data compared
to models trained solely on local data. These findings demonstrate
the potential of meta-learning as a tool for addressing data scarcity
and improving macroscopic traffic flow modeling across diverse ur-
ban environments.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Used Abbreviations
CD:
floating car data
DL
deep learning
FCD:
floating car data
FD:
fundamental diagram
GNN:
graph neural network
GP
Gaussian process
LD:
loop detector
LDD:
loop detector data
MAML:
Model Agnostic Meta-Learning
MFD:
Multi-task learning
MSE:
mean square error
MTL:
Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram
MTPINN:
Multi-Task Physics-Informed Neural Network
M-L:
meta-learning
NN:
neural network
RRSE:
root relative squared error
TL:
transfer learning
PINN:
physics-informed neural network
v
==PAGE:8==
Preface
This report has been written by Amalie Roark.
Guido Cantelmo and Francisco Camara Pereira have supervised
the project.
Acknowledgments
A huge thanks is owed to my supervisors, Guido and Francisco.
Thank you for all your time, your support, and all the insights
you have provided. I have learned a lot from our discussions.
I would also like to thank my boyfriend, my family, and my friends
for all of their support and understanding.
vi
==PAGE:9==
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Abstract
iii
Used Abbreviations
v
Preface
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Utilizing the Power of Machine Learning . .
1
1.1.2
Finding Data for the Study . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aims and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Traffic Flow Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Fundamental Diagram (FD) . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram (MFD)
7
2.2
Machine Learning Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Multi-task learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Physics-Informed NNs and Machine Learning 10
2.2.4
Transfer Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.5
Meta-learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Estimating the MFD . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Recent Approaches and Advances
. . . . .
14
2.3.3
Applications od the MFD . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Data
18
3.1
UTD19
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Data Pre-processing and Cleaning
. . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Data cleaning steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.2
Description of Dataset and Relevant Variables 20
3.3
MFD Plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.1
The shape of the MFD . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.2
Coloring observations by the time of day . .
25
3.3.3
The influence of averaging by road class . .
25
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
4
Methodology
27
4.1
Parametric Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
Polynomial Regression . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Bi-parabolic Hybrid Model
. . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Non-parametric Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Multi-task Physics-Informed NN . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Meta-learning model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
37
5.1
Experiments and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1
Polynomial Regression . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.2
Bi-parabolic Hybrid Model
. . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.3
Multi-Task Physics Informed NN . . . . . .
40
5.1.4
Meta-learning Model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Model comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Discussion
53
6.1
Shape of the MFD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1.1
Modelling the Congested Regime . . . . . .
53
6.2
Model calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
Reliability & Robustness of Models . . . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Generalization between cities . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.5
The Problem of Normalized Statistics
. . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusions and Future Work
58
7.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2
Suggestions for Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.2.1
Straightforward extensions
. . . . . . . . .
60
7.2.2
Future Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
References
61
A Data Exploration - Additional Plots
66
B The Bi-parabolic Hybrid Model - Additional Plots 72
C Original project description and objectives
79
D Revised Project Plan
81
ix
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter provides context for the relevance of this study and
introduces the overall aims and objectives. The last section con-
tains an overview of the report.
1.1
Context and Motivation
The macroscopic traffic patterns of cities are of great importance
when it comes to policymaking and planning urban development.
Major cities are plagued by various degrees of congestion, which
has many negative impacts on people, the city, society, and the en-
vironment. Vehicle emission is a top contributor to air pollution
in many cities, and several studies, including [1], have addressed
the impact of traffic congestion on air pollution and the adverse
effects on public health. It has also been shown that congestion
reduces mobility [2], which affects the workforce of a city and, by
extension, the people and the economy of the city.
The reactions to increasing vehicles vary by city, country, region,
and economy.
Many countries in Europe, including Barcelona,
have seen movements arise with the purpose of ”reclaiming the
city streets from cars” [3]. To support and plan such strategies,
policymakers, and decision-makers need accurate models to an-
alyze the current situation and evaluate the effects of different
proposed scenarios.
The macroscopic fundamental diagram (MFD) provides an over-
all metric for the macroscopic traffic patterns of an entire urban
network. It is typically estimated from loop detector (LD) data,
but getting an accurate measure requires many LDs distributed
evenly across the city, which can be expensive.
1.1.1
Utilizing the Power of Machine Learning
During the last decade, the potential of harvesting and using big
data in every imaginable area has been unlocked owing to the
advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning and the
continuous improvement of the speed of GPUs [4].
This rapid
evolution has been termed the The Deep Learning Revolution.
While these vast deep learning models trained on massive amounts
of data have enabled us to solve problems that previously appeared
out of reach, there exist types of issues to which these techniques
1
==PAGE:14==
1.1.
Context and Motivation
are not applicable. For one thing, plenty of problems do not have
huge data sets readily available. An example is training large lan-
guage models, e.g., for translation purposes. For more minor lan-
guages, the amount of accessible texts may be limited, severely re-
stricting the model’s ability to learn this language. Creating suit-
able and sufficient datasets for a DL model can be an extensive and
expensive undertaking. Another thing is that building and main-
taining such large models requires a lot of resources, which can be
problematic for several reasons. Again, it is expensive, but there
is also an ethical aspect as these processes have considerable car-
bon footprints [5]. Meta-learning is a subfield of machine learning
that addresses some of these shortcomings. Meta-learning centers
on the concept of learning to learn, or as Donald B. Maudsley [6]
formulated it: ”the process by which learners become aware of and
increasingly in control of habits of perception, inquiry, learning,
and growth that they have internalized.” The general idea behind
meta-learning is that if there is only a small amount of data avail-
able for a new problem we wish to solve, we could use data from
previously seen similar problems and try to learn how to learn this
kind of problem very efficiently. In meta-learning, the problems
are called tasks. So more formally, the purpose is to learn across a
set of tasks and extract meta-knowledge that allows the model to
generalize and learn individual tasks more quickly and efficiently.
This is a key idea for the direction of this study: applying meta-
learning to leverage MFD data available for multiple cities to try
to learn general representations and facilitate rapid adaptation to
the local pattern of a new city. Ideally, this will be used to mitigate
the biased MFDs resulting from insufficient loop detector coverage
of the city and allow accurate estimations of central characteristics
of the macroscopic traffic patterns.
1.1.2
Finding Data for the Study
One of the very first and most essential tasks in this project was to
find an appropriate dataset to work with, as this would influence
the research questions I could explore and the methods used. In
the beginning, I was looking for cities where it would be possible to
obtain both floating car data (FCD) and loop detector (LD) data,
such as flow data, as this would allow me to study the relationship
between network flows and speed as had been done in [7] that
was the inspiration for the topic of my thesis. Another objective
was to study the possibilities of using transfer learning (TL) or
meta-learning (M-L) to leverage data from one city to improve
the predictions/estimations for another city.
To achieve this, I
would need data from several cities to be available in a similar
format. This was difficult to obtain because several FCD datasets
were not freely available, and finding FCD and LD data for the
same cities was not immediately possible. For these reasons, it
was decided to change the objective to focus instead on predicting
the MFD for cities based on LD data and investigating how TL
2
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1.
Introduction
or M-L could be used in predicting the MFD of cities with limited
LD data available. The freely available UTD19 dataset [8] was a
very good fit for these questions.
1.2
Aims and Objectives
The overarching goal of this project is to investigate how machine
learning methods can be used to alleviate the issue of data scarcity
when modeling traffic flow and density and estimating the MFD
of cities through the utilization of data across cities.
This project’s original aims and objectives were inspired by the
work of Vishal et al. [7]. They found that transfer learning could
improve performance when a model was pre-trained in one city
with ample data available and then transferred to another city
with limited data available, compared to a model trained only on
limited data. However, the data necessary to extend this study
was not readily available, as described in section 1.1.2. Further-
more, the initial survey of related works and theory highlighted
the possibilities afforded by using meta-learning.
The decision
was made to use meta-learning instead of transfer learning, and
the aims and objectives were updated accordingly. The following
summarizes the overall points of interest:
1. Constructing models to accurately predict key quantities of
the MFD of a city
2. Investigating the requirements for successful generalization
between cities, i.e., can the same methodology be useful
across diverse urban environments?
3. Investigate and apply machine learning methods to address
the common issue of data scarcity due to limited LD data
4. What are the impacts of the resulting models? Are they,
e.g., reliable enough to support policy making?
These points served as a guideline for this project and were not
necessarily sought to be answered in full.
The original project description, including the originally formu-
lated research questions, is included in appendix C; the objectives
above have been updated to account for the change in focus ex-
plained above. The project plan submitted after the first month
is attached to the end of the report and shown in figure D.1 (as
per DTU’s requirements), and an evaluation of the project plan
and the course of the project is provided in appendix D.
1.3
Thesis Outline
The following outlines the structure of this thesis by summarizing
the content of each chapter:
3
==PAGE:16==
1.3.
Thesis Outline
Chapter 2 summarizes the relevant traffic flow theory and
machine learning methods central to the developed models.
Chapter 3 introduces the dataset and describes how it has
been pre-processed. The MFD plots are created and studied.
Chapter
4
describes
the
methodology
of
each
of
the
im-
plemented models. It consists of two parts: one describing the
parametric models and one describing the non-parametric models.
Chapter 5 provides descriptions of the experiments carried
out with each model and presents the results.
The models
are compared regarding their predictive performance and how
accurately they estimate the critical occupancy and maximum
flow.
Chapter 6 discusses the shape of the MFD, modeling choice,
robustness, and reliability of the models, and the criteria for
generalization between cities.
Chapter 7 summarizes the project findings and contains the
overall conclusions, in addition to suggestions for directions for
future work.
4
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter consists of three sections: the first covers basic traffic
flow theory necessary for the model design. The second describes
the machine learning methods that will be used as the basis for
the model development. The third section includes an overview of
works relevant to this study.
2.1
Traffic Flow Theory
This section build on the descriptions provided by [9] and [10].
Traffic flow theory provides the framework for analyzing and un-
derstanding how vehicles move within a road network. Central
for this is the relationships between the variables flow, density,
and speed that collectively form the basis for describing traffic
dynamics:
• flow, q: is the rate at which vehicles pass a point, typically
measured in vehicles per hour.
• density, k: refers to the number of vehicles occupying a unit
length of road - typically measured in vehicles per kilometer.
• speed, v: is the average velocity of vehicles in a given road
segment, typically measured in kilometers per hour.
These variables are connected through what is often termed the
(macroscopic) fundamental relationship, i.e. by Knoop in [9]:
q = k · v
(2.1)
The equation shows that flow is the product of density and speed,
meaning that a change of either density and speed while the other
remains constant will result in a directly proportional change of
the flow, which is very intuitive. It implies that changes in traffic
conditions directly affect how (efficiently) vehicles move through
a network.
Flow is measured using detectors such as inductive loops, cameras,
or radar placed at fixed locations along a roadway, which count
the number of vehicles passing a select point during a given time
interval. Speed can be obtained from individual vehicle measure-
ments or aggregated averages. For individual vehicles, the speed
5
==PAGE:18==
2.1.
Traffic Flow Theory
1
While the flow-density relationship
is central, two additional diagrams of-
ten complement the FD, namely the
speed-density diagram and the speed-
flow diagram.
The first, speed (v)
as a function of density (k), shows
speed decreasing non-linearly as den-
sity increases, and the second, speed
(v) as a function of flow (q), indicating
that speed decreases as flow approaches
maximum capacity.
Figure 2.1: FD diagrams relating the
variables speed, density, and flow. The
figure is from [9].
can be directly measured using radar, or it can be provided from
the GPS in a car. The latter is termed floating car data (FCD).
Density is estimated using spatial data from either video or radar
systems that provide the positions of vehicles on a given stretch of
road. Another approach is to estimate it indirectly by combining
speed and flow data and using the fundamental relationship for
the average speed: k =
q
vavg .
Another essential variable in urban traffic management is occu-
pancy, o, referring to the proportion of time a road segment is oc-
cupied by vehicles. This is measured using loop detectors (LDs).
Although occupancy and density are derived differently they are
in some ways closely related, and occupancy can be a useful proxy.
Unlike density, occupancy does not require knowledge of the phys-
ical positions or spacing of vehicles along a roadway which in prac-
tice means it is more readily measured in urban traffic systems.
The relationship between occupancy and density can be described
by:
k =
o
Lv + Ld
(2.2)
Here Lv is the average vehicle length and Ld is the detector length,
i.e.
the length of the road being monitored.
This shows that
density increases with occupancy but also that it depends on how
much road space each vehicle occupies.
2.1.1
Fundamental Diagram (FD)
The fundamental diagram provides a graphical representation of
the relationship between flow, density, and speed, and illustrates
the fundamental dynamics of traffic under different conditions.
The most common form of the FD is a flow-density diagram, where
flow (q) is plotted as a function of density (k)1. Different examples
of FD-shapes are observed on p. 25 of [9]. This relationship be-
tween flow and density can generally be divided into two distinct
regimes:
• Free-flow regime: At low densities, vehicles can travel at
high speeds, and flow increases linearly with density.
• Congested regime: Beyond a certain critical density (kc),
the flow reaches a maximum value (qmax), after which further
increases in density result in reduced speeds and declining
flow.
The transition between these regimes is characterized by the
critical density (kc), where the road operates at its maximum
capacity.
The corresponding flow value is termed the capacity
flow or maximum flow (qmax). These concepts are indicated on
figure 2.1.
6
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2.
Background
Figure 2.2:
The diagram shows a
common
theoretical
shape
for
the
MFD. Other variations include non-
symmetric congested and uncongested
regimes and trapez-like shapes with a
flat area at the top.
The urban net-
work is said to be saturated at the crit-
ical density, kc, which corresponds to
the maximum flow, qc.
2.1.2
Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram (MFD)
The Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram (MFD) extends the prin-
ciples of the Fundamental Diagram (FD) to an entire network,
describing the relationship between the aggregated flow (Q) and
density (K) across a city or urban area. This concept was first
introduced to capture the collective traffic dynamics at a macro-
scopic scale by Geroliminis et al. [11], and has since become a
powerful tool for analyzing and managing urban traffic networks.
Unlike the FD, which applies to individual road segments, the
MFD aggregates traffic data from multiple roads in a network. It
provides a network-wide representation of traffic dynamics, plot-
ting the total flow (Q) as a function of the average density (K)
for the network. Similar to the FD, the MFD is characterized by:
• Free-flow regime: At low average densities, vehicles expe-
rience minimal interactions, and network-wide flow increases
approximately linearly with density.
• Critical density (Kc) and maximum flow (Qmax): At
a specific critical density, the network reaches its maximum
capacity.
• Congested regime:
Beyond Kc, the flow decreases as
increasing density causes widespread congestion, reducing
travel speeds across the network.
This is illustrated in figure 2.2 which shows a graphical represen-
tation of a commonly used shape for the MFD.
The key variables used in the MFD are typically obtained by
aggregating data from all road segments in the network.
The
network-wide flow, Q, is the average flow across all (monitored)
road segments in the network, (normally/typically) weighted by
the length Li of each segment:
Q =
P
i qi · Li
P
i Li
(2.3)
The network-wide density, K, is the weighted average density
across all road segments:
K =
P
i ki · Li
P
i Li
(2.4)
While density is commonly used in the formulation of the MFD,
occupancy provides a closely related measure and is often more
directly observed in traffic data. Occupancy represents the pro-
portion of time a detector observes a vehicle on the road and is
influenced by vehicle length and speed. In practice, density and
occupancy are strongly correlated, with occupancy serving as a
practical surrogate for density in many empirical analyses, includ-
ing the present study.
7
==PAGE:20==
2.2.
Machine Learning Methods
2 An example of this behavior can be
seen in the dataset used for this study
for Los Angeles. The averaged flow and
occupancy measurements in the MFD
plots shown in figure 3.6 contain several
hysteresis loops for this city.
Figure 2.3: The figure shows a basic
structure for a NN. It has an input layer
receiving two inputs, two hidden layers,
h1 and h2, and an output layer produc-
ing a single output.
Shape and Characteristics of the MFD
The literature does not agree on one shape for the MFD or an
exact model relating it to e.g. urban network characteristics, and
this is an active field of research (this will be expanded on in in sec-
tion 2.3). However, the MFD captures the overall performance of a
traffic network, and some properties can be observed from the gen-
eral shape. In terms of spatial variability, the shape of the MFD
depends on the uniformity of traffic conditions across the network.
A well-distributed flow-density pattern yields a clearer and more
predictable MFD, while highly variable conditions can distort its
shape[12]. Another unique property that can be observed from the
MFD is hysteresis loops. During periods of congestion, the MFD
may show a hysteresis loop, where the flow-density relationship
differs between the onset and dissipation of congestion2[13].
In figure 2.2 a generic theoretical shape for the MFD is shown,
and the boundary between the uncongested and congested regime
is typically taken to be the point of critical density, kc, correspond-
ing to the maximum flow, qc, i.e. the point where the network is
completely saturated. In general, the congested branch is hardly
observed; at best the beginning of it is observed.
2.2
Machine Learning Methods
2.2.1
Neural Networks
Neural networks (NNs) are a class of machine learning models in-
spired by the structure and functioning of the human brain, as the
name suggests. They are particularly effective at modeling non-
linear relationships and have been widely used in many different
areas of research due to their ability to learn complex patterns
from data. At a high level, an NN consists of interconnected lay-
ers of neurons (nodes), where each connection is associated with a
weight, and learning involves optimizing these weights to minimize
prediction errors, as described in chapter 5 in [14]. The following
constitute the key components of a NN:
• Input Layer: Accepts features, such as occupancy or flow,
that describe the data. Each feature corresponds to a neuron
in this layer.
• Hidden Layers: Intermediate layers that apply transfor-
mations to the input using activation functions, enabling
the model to capture non-linear relationships. Common ac-
tivation functions include ReLU and sigmoid.
• Output Layer: Produces the final predictions. In traffic
flow modeling, this could be a single value (e.g., predicted
flow) or multiple outputs (e.g., predicted flow and critical
density)
8
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2.
Background
Figure 2.4: The figure shows a basic
structure for a multi-task model. The
shared layers learn a common repre-
sentation of the input data, X, which
is then fed into the separate output
branches.
These consist of separate,
task-specific layers which are trained to
predict different variables.
An example of a very simple NN is shown in figure 2.3.
Before training a NN, the weights are initialized. There are
different approaches for this and it is common to use a (partly)
random initialization. The actual training involves four different
steps. The first is forward propagation, where input data passes
through the network to produce predictions. Second, a loss func-
tion such as MSE or RMSE is used to quantify the error between
the predictions and the true values. The third step is backprop-
agation, and this is where the gradients of the loss with respect
to the weights are calculated using the chain rule. In the fourth
step the weights of the network are updated using an optimization
algorithm to minimize the loss, with Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SDG) and Adam [15] being common choices for the optimizer.
Then the algorithm jumps back to step one, and the iterative
process continues until the model converges or some predefined
stopping criterion is reached.
When training and evaluating a NN, it is common to split the data
into either two or three parts: one for training, possibly one for
validation, and one for testing, as described in [16].
2.2.2
Multi-task learning
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a machine learning paradigm where
multiple related tasks are learned simultaneously within a shared
framework. By leveraging shared representations, MTL can ex-
ploit commonalities between tasks to improve learning efficiency
and generalization. This approach is particularly useful in scenar-
ios where tasks are interrelated or when datasets are limited [17].
The structure of an MTL model typically consists of a shared base
and task-specific output branches, as shown in the example on fig-
ure 2.4.
The shared base includes common layers that learn a
unified representation of the input data, capturing features rele-
vant across all tasks. Each task-specific output branch comprises
separate layers tailored to predict a specific target variable, such as
flow, critical density, or maximum flow in traffic modeling. This
modular design enables the model to balance shared knowledge
with task-specific specialization.
MTL offers several advantages, including improved efficiency by
allowing multiple tasks to be addressed simultaneously, reducing
the need for separate models. Furthermore, by sharing informa-
tion between tasks, MTL encourages generalization and reduces
the risk of overfitting to a single task. However, challenges arise in
balancing the importance of different tasks. For example, weight-
ing the loss terms for each task appropriately is critical to ensure
that all tasks are learned effectively without disproportionately
favoring one over another.
9
==PAGE:22==
2.2.
Machine Learning Methods
2.2.3
Physics-Informed NNs and Machine Learning
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) are an emerging class
of machine learning models that integrate physical laws into their
structure or training process. By embedding domain knowledge,
PINNs ensure that model predictions align with known physical
principles, such as conservation laws or traffic dynamics, leading
to improved interpretability [18].
There are several ways to incorporate physics into a model as de-
scribed in [19]. One common approach is using physics-informed
loss functions, which penalize deviations from established physical
relationships, such as the equations governing the Fundamental
Diagram (FD) or the Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram (MFD).
Another strategy involves embedding constraints directly into the
model structure, such as enforcing specific shapes (e.g., parabolic
curves) to adhere to physical laws. Hybrid models, which combine
data-driven neural network predictions with outputs from physics-
based simulations, offer another avenue for physics-informed learn-
ing.
In the context of traffic flow modeling, PINNs could prove partic-
ularly advantageous. They enhance interpretability by ensuring
that predictions reflect established traffic dynamics and reduce
data requirements by leveraging physical insights, which might be
leveraged to mitigate the often missing observations of the con-
gested regime in MFDs.
However, developing effective PINNs
involves challenges such as balancing data-driven learning with
physics constraints and selecting an appropriate physics-informed
loss formulation. These considerations are crucial to ensure that
the model performs well on real-world data while adhering to the-
oretical principles.
2.2.4
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning is a machine learning approach that focuses on
adapting a model trained on one task or dataset to perform effec-
tively on a related task or dataset. This technique is particularly
valuable when data for the target task is limited, as it enables the
reuse of knowledge learned from a larger or related dataset.
In practice, transfer learning is typically applied in two stages,
as described in [20]. In the pretraining phase, a model is trained
on a large dataset (often called the source domain), where the
model learns general features in the early layers of the network,
i.e. layers close to the input. These features often represent uni-
versal patterns, such as basic shapes or dynamics, that are useful
across many tasks. The later layers (i.e. closer to the output),
typically learn task-specific representations, such as city-specific
traffic flow patterns.
In the fine-tuning phase, the pre-trained
model is adapted to a target task. This is done bye ”freezing” the
early layers, meaning that their weights are not updated during
the fine-tuning. This reduces the number of trainable parameters,
10
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2.
Background
which helps to avoid overfitting in cases of small datasets. The
weights of the later layers are then trained on the target dataset;
or possibly these layers are replaced entirely by ones better suited
for the target task.
For traffic modeling, transfer learning offers significant advantages,
and it can be used to improve performance on smaller datasets by
leveraging shared traffic dynamics across cities (as seen in [7]). Ad-
ditionally, it allows models to capture general traffic patterns while
adapting to unique local features. However, transfer learning also
comes with challenges, particularly the risk of negative transfer,
where adapting the pre-trained model to the target task degrades
its performance.
Careful selection of pre-training datasets and
fine-tuning techniques is crucial to mitigate this risk.
2.2.5
Meta-learning
Meta-learning, often referred to as ”learning to learn,” is a ma-
chine learning paradigm aimed at training models that can gen-
eralize across multiple tasks or datasets.
Rather than focusing
solely on performing well on a single task, meta-learning seeks to
develop models that can quickly adapt to new tasks with minimal
retraining [21]. This is particularly valuable in scenarios where
task-specific data is limited or where rapid adaptation is critical.
Meta-learning typically involves to nested optimization loops:
• Inner loop: In the inner loop, a model is trained on a
specific task or dataset. This involves task-specific updates
to the model’s parameters to optimize performance for that
task.
• Outer loop: In the outer loop, the meta-learning algorithm
adjusts the model’s initial parameters or learning strategy
based on feedback from multiple tasks. The goal is to iden-
tify a set of parameters that enables the model to perform
well across a variety of tasks with minimal fine-tuning.
Figure 2.5 illustrates the operations of the meta-learning frame-
work and a detailed description is provided in the caption.
The challenges and limitations of meta-learning include com-
putational complexity, as the dual-loop training process can be
computationally intensive and may require significant resources
for optimization across tasks. It can also be difficult to balance
the model’s ability to generalize well across tasks with maintaining
high performance on individual tasks. This requires careful tuning
of the meta-learning framework.
Model Agnostic Meta-Learning(MAML)
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) is a versatile framework
for meta-learning designed to train models that can quickly adapt
to new tasks with minimal data. It was introduced by Chelsea
11
==PAGE:24==
2.2.
Machine Learning Methods
Figure 2.5: This figure illustrates the fundamental design of Meta-Learning models. A model is created and its parameters
are initialized. These are then cloned for the inner loop of the meta-training, where the model is trained on a training
task with N samples, including k (sub)tasks consisting of h samples each (so k · h = N). This is also known as k-way,
h-shot training tasks. After training the model on the support set in N steps of the inner loop and updating the cloned
model parameters accordingly, the model is tested on a query set containing M observations from the k (sub)tasks
included in the support set. The loss is stored, and the whole process is repeated - i.e. the original model parameters are
cloned, and the inner loop trains the model on a new training task. This is known as an episode of meta-training, and p
episodes constitute an epoch of meta-training. At the end of each epoch, the stored losses from each episode constitute
the meta-loss and are used to calculate the meta-gradients and optimize the meta-parameters of the model. This is then
back-propagated through the model, and the model with updated parameters is used in the next epoch.
12
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2.
Background
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the gradient
updates that characterizes MAML.
Finn and Stanford colleagues [22] and is inspired by transfer learn-
ing and fine-tuning which [21] describes. Unlike traditional ma-
chine learning, where a model learns a single task, MAML focuses
on optimizing for adaptability, making it particularly useful for do-
mains with limited labeled data or where tasks vary significantly.
The key idea of MAML is to learn a set of model parameters (θ)
that serve as a good initialization for fine-tuning on new tasks.
During training, MAML operates in two main loops:
• Inner Loop: For each task, the model’s parameters are up-
dated using a small number of gradient steps on task-specific
data. These updates generate task-specific parameters (θ′
t).
• Outer Loop: The meta-objective is computed by evaluat-
ing the task-specific parameters (θ′
t) on a separate validation
set for each task. Gradients of the meta-objective are used
to update the shared initialization parameters (θ).
Mathematically, [22] derives the following expression for the meta-
learning update:
θ ←θ −α∇θ
X
t
Lt(fθ′
t)
(2.5)
MAML is model-agnostic, meaning it can be applied to any dif-
ferentiable model, such as neural networks.
2.3
Related works
This section will introduce relevant literature, covering estimation
of the MFD, recent approaches and advances, and finally listing
applications of the MFD.
2.3.1
Estimating the MFD
The MFD is a very active area of research within traffic flow the-
ory. The existence of an urban-scale macroscopic relation between
network flow and density was brought forward by Daganzo in [23],
and the characteristic shape of the well-defined MFD was first
observed by Daganzo and Geroliminis for the central part the
Japanese city of Yokohama in 2008 [11]. Since then, several dif-
ferent theoretical forms have been proposed, but consensus has
not been reached on the exact shape or model for the MFD. In
2020, Amb¨uhl et al.
[24] proposed a functional form for MFD
approximation based on physically meaningful parameters and in-
corporating both traffic observations and network properties.
There have been many studies of very different methodologies has
been undertaken to estimate the empirical MFD under various
conditions, and in 2014 Leclerq et al.
[25] carried out a cross-
comparison of proposed estimation methods using a synthetic
dataset. Since then many new estimation methods have been pro-
posed, with a larger part of them using various machine learning
13
==PAGE:26==
2.3.
Related works
techniques. A brief overview will be given in the next section.
A common problem for the prediction and modeling of macro-
scopic traffic flow is insufficient data. Models using loop detec-
tor (LD) data often make assumptions about the distributions of
the detectors throughout the city; but often the detectors are not
evenly distributed and not numerous enough to cover the city well.
Traffic signals have a significant influence on the dynamics of an
urban network which is not captured by LD’s. It has been shown
by Courbon and Leclercq [26] that these factors can introduce
significant bias to the MFD.
2.3.2
Recent Approaches and Advances
This section will provide an overview of recent studies and ad-
vances made in the topic of estimating the MFD, focusing pri-
marily on the last five years. The intention is to cover a broad
variety of methods and approaches, especially methods similar to
those considered for this study to address the issue of data scarcity
and cross-city learning. The table 2.1 provides an overview of the
studies considered. This overview is not exhaustive; many other
studies exist; but together they provide insights into current prac-
tices relevant to this study.
Laval et al. [27] propose using stochastic approximation meth-
ods to estimate the MFD, aiming to handle the variability and
uncertainty in traffic data.
This approach offers a robust way
to estimate the MFD, especially when dealing with incomplete or
noisy data, though it may require careful calibration and data pre-
processing.
In the study by Yao et al.
[28], a meta-learning approach for
spatio-temporal prediction in traffic networks is introduced with a
focus on learning from data across multiple cities. They propose
using a spatial-temporal network and meta-learning techniques to
enhance the model’s ability to generalize across different urban
environments, offering improvements in forecasting traffic condi-
tions in new cities with minimal retraining.
In the paper by Yuan et al.
[29], a physics-regularized Gaus-
sian process (GP) model for macroscopic traffic flow modeling is
proposed. This approach integrates traffic flow physics into the
GP framework to improve prediction accuracy, and they find that
the regularization helps the model generalize better across differ-
ent traffic scenarios. Another example of physics-informed ML is
found in the paper by Shi et al.[30], where they present a physics-
informed deep learning approach for estimating traffic states and
the MFD. Here the accuracy of both state estimation and MFD
prediction is improved by incorporating traffic flow physics into
the NN model.
In their study, Aghamohammadi et al. [31] extend the Stochastic
Method of Cuts (SMoC) to approximate the MFD of urban net-
works, and employ Maximum Likelihood approach for parameter
estimation. Their method offers a statistically robust framework
14
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2.
Background
for estimating MFD parameters, however, the approach may re-
quire extensive data and computational resources, which could
limit its applicability in data-scarce scenarios.
Sun et al. [32] and Liu et al. [33] both focus on few-shot traffic
prediction using meta-learning techniques. Sun et al. introduce
STDA-Meta, a framework that leverages meta-learning to improve
traffic prediction accuracy in data-scarce scenarios, while Liu et
al. propose a traffic pattern bank to enhance forecasting across
multiple cities with minimal data, demonstrating a cross-city ap-
plication of few-shot learning for traffic forecasting.
Han et al. [34] and Tygesen et al. [35] focus on advancing the
understanding and prediction of transportation systems through
innovative modeling techniques.
Han et al.
derive a MFD in-
tegrating volume-delay relationships, validate it empirically, and
identify an invariance property of the MFD across different con-
ditions. Tygesen et al. propose a graph neural network (GNN)
framework with neural relational inference for transport predic-
tion, emphasizing interpretability in graph-based traffic models.
While neither are closely related to the modeling approach in this
study, they represent two other areas of modeling approaches that
help complete this brief overview.
Finally, in a study published last month, Li et al.
intro-
duce a physics-guided multi-source transfer learning approach for
network-scale traffic flow prediction.
Their method integrates
physical traffic flow principles with data-driven models to enhance
prediction accuracy across diverse urban networks. This approach
effectively addresses challenges in data scarcity and variability be-
tween different traffic environments, and demonstrates improved
performance in real-world scenarios.
2.3.3
Applications od the MFD
The MFD has many applications in transportation research and
e.g. in simulations used to support policy making. It has been
applied extensively to address various operational and planning
challenges. Below, several of these applications will be presented
to highlight the relevance of MFD estimation.
The most widely used application or extensions of the MFD
is perhaps in perimeter control.
Geroliminis et al.
[37] intro-
duced a model predictive control (MPC) framework for optimiz-
ing traffic flow between two interconnected urban regions charac-
terized by MFDs. By dynamically regulating perimeter inflows,
their approach balances traffic densities within regions, prevent-
ing gridlock and maximizing overall network throughput. Building
on the idea of managing network-wide traffic dynamics, Hamed-
moghadam et al.
[38] developed a percolation-based dynamic
perimeter control strategy to mitigate congestion propagation.
Their method utilizes MFDs to identify critical thresholds and
prioritize flow adjustments, effectively preventing the collapse of
mobility in congested networks.
Expanding on these concepts,
15
==PAGE:28==
2.3.
Related works
Topic
Type of data
Study
Application
Method
Insufficient data
Real-world
Simulation
LDD
FCD
Geroliminis et al. (2008) [11]
MFD estimation
Analytical methods
x
x
x
Laval et al. (2015) [27]
MFD estimation
Stochastic approximation
x
x
x
x
Yao et al. (2019) [28]
Traffic estimation,
stabilize transfer of learning
Spatio-temporal
network, meta-learning
x
x
x
Yuan (2021) [28]
Macroscopic traffic
flow modeling
Stochastic physics-regularized
Gaussian process
(x)
x
x
Aghamohammadi et al. (2022) [31]
MFD parameter estimation
Maximum likelihood approach
x
Shi et al. (2022) [30]
Traffic state and
FD estimation
Physics-informed
deep learning
x
x
x
Liu et al. (2023) [33]
Cross-city few-shot
traffic forecasting
Meta-learning
(Reptile)
x
x
x
x
Sun et al. (2023) [32]
Spatio-temporal
traffic prediction
Few-shot meta-learning
(MAML)
x
x
x
Tygesen (2023) [35]
Transport prediction through
neural relational inference
Graph neural
networks
x
x
x
Han et al. (2024) [34]
MFD model for license plate
cameras and road congestion
indices
Analytical methods
(x)
x
Li et al. (2024) [36]
Encoding traffic flow patterns
to improve MFD estimation
Physics-guided
transfer learning
x
x
x
Table 2.1: The table gives an overview of related works with similar applications to that of this study through the use of a variety of methods.
16
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2.
Background
Tsitsokas et al.
[39] proposed a two-layer adaptive signal con-
trol framework that integrates max-pressure control with perime-
ter control for large-scale, dynamically congested networks. By
employing MFDs at both the network and perimeter levels, their
framework improve system performance even under fluctuating de-
mand patterns.
Another area of application is parking pricing, and an example of
this is provided in the paper by Zheng et al. [40] who propose
a framework that integrates traffic flow and parking availability
with dynamic pricing strategies to manage demand.
Yildirimoglu et al.
[41] use MFDs to develop a route guid-
ance framework for large-scale urban networks.
They analyze
the aggregated traffic dynamics described by MFDs, and pro-
pose equilibrium-based routing strategies that aim to distribute
demand across the network more efficiently, to enhance the overall
performance and reduce travel times. In addition to these appli-
cations, the MFD has also been used in congestion pricing, bus
dispatching, dynamic traffic assignment, and many other areas.
17
==PAGE:30==
1
The description provided of the
dataset in [8] mentions that the data
for 40 cities is available, but that is not
the case in the dataset to which I was
granted access. Comparing my dataset
with earlier written articles using the
UTD19 access such as [31] shows that
the data for Tokyo must have been
removed from the publically available
version of the dataset.
The authors
have made no comments regarding this
removal.
2 I will discuss the implications of this
for the MFD plots in 6.1.
Figure 3.1: The figure shows the de-
tector locations mapped out on the
road network of four different cities:
Darmstadt, London, Santander, and
Toronto.
Note that the scale ratio
between the maps is not the same,
e.g. London and Santander are much
larger cities than Darmstadt and San-
tander. Regardless of scale, the maps
show how differently the detectors are
placed in the cities and howmany de-
tectors varys greatly.
The plots have
been created with the Python pack-
age OSMnx [42] that enables down-
loading and visualization of street net-
works and other geospatial features
from OpenStreetMap.
Chapter 3
Data
In this chapter, the UTD19 dataset will be introduced, including
how the data was obtained and what cities it contains observations
for. The steps taken to preprocess the data are described, and
summaries of relevant variables are provided to give an overview
of how they vary between cities. The average occupancy and flow
values are calculated, and the MFDs are shown and studied for all
the cities included in the study.
3.1
UTD19
UTD19 is a dataset containing traffic data from 391 cities around
the world collected by a group of researchers at the Institute for
Transport Planning and Systems in Zurich [8]. More specifically, it
contains LD measurements, including occupancy, flow, and speed.
It also contains information on the loop detectors, including lo-
cation, length of the monitored lane, number of lanes monitored,
type of road they monitor, and speed limit. The dataset consists
of three CSV files: the first contains information about each de-
tector and its location, the second contains information about the
specific links the detectors monitor, and the third includes the traf-
fic measurements. Figure 3.1 shows where the loop detectors are
placed in the road networks of four different cities - Darmstadt,
London, Santander, and Toronto - and clearly shows that their
distribution does not follow a similar pattern. The data has been
obtained from existing LDs in cities across different nations and
geographic regions. Given this, it is likely that they were placed
to monitor different aspects of the local traffic. From the figure,
it could appear that the detectors in London have been placed to
monitor a very clearly defined, central part of the city, while at
Santander, they might be placed to monitor major access roads,
and so on. 2
3.2
Data Pre-processing and Cleaning
As mentioned in section 3.1, the UTD19 consists of threeCSV-
filess containing information on the detectors’ locations, the
links
they
monitor,
and
the
traffic
measurements
theyob-
taind.Toinvestigateg the MFD for different citie,s the most crucial
18
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3.
Data
3 More than 60% of the observations
do not contain any information on this
as can be seen on figure 3.4, and the
unlabeled observations are presumed to
be accurate.
variables are considered to be:the day, time, and interval of the
observations and the occupancy, flow, and speed measurements
themselves. There are no missing values for the day, time, and
interval variables.
A closer examination of the UTD19 data reveals that few cities
in the dataset have speed data availabl,e and only three cities
have both occupancy, flow, and speed data available.
Further
examination finds that the following cities have no or limited
occupancy measurements:
Bolton,
Birmingham,
Gr¨oningen,
Innsbruck,
Machester,
Melbourne,
Rotterdam,
Torino,
and
Utrecht have no or partial occupancy measurements available.
Therefore, these cities were excluded from this study. Considering
the interval length of the observations, most cities have intervals
of 3 or 5 minutes, a few have intervals of 10 to 15 minutes, and
Bordeaux and Paris stand out by having, respectively, 25 minutes
long and one-hour-long intervals. Paris is excluded for being too
aggregated, and Bordeaux is kept in the study as the length of
the intervals is not that much longer than other included interval
lengths.
3.2.1
Data cleaning steps
The authors Aghamohammadi and Laval of the paper Parameter
Estimation of the macroscopic fundamental diagram: A maximum
likelihood approach [31] reach the same conclusion on which cities
to keep, and in the article, they outline a series of steps they have
taken to prepare the data. These steps have been replicated in
this project, as they address critical concerns and ensure better
comparability with their work.
The steps are listed below and
closely follow the description in [31].
• Erroneous observations are deleted.3
• Negative and nonnumerical values are deleted.
• Occupancy measurements larger than 1 are deleted.
• Flow measurements larger than 2500 veh/h/ln are deleted.
• Flow measurements less than 10 veh/h/ln for occupancy val-
ues between 0.2 and 0.75 are deleted.
• Flow measurements higher than 100 veh/hr/ln for occu-
pancy values larger than 0.95 are deleted.
• Keep only loop detectors with valid data for more than 80%
of the intervals.
• Keep only intervals with valid data for more than 80% of the
loop detectors.
19
==PAGE:32==
3.2.
Data Pre-processing and Cleaning
Figure 3.2:
The figure shows scatter
plots of occupancy measurements ver-
sus flow measurements in the cleaned
data.
To contextualize the above criteria (as they are not detailed
in [31]), the first steps delete the obvious faulty observations -
those marked as errors or containing impossible observations such
as occupancy values greater than 1.
The next steps establish
some guidelines for reasonable observations,
i.e.,
criteria to
rule out potential outliers that can likely be ascribed to faulty
measurements. This includes unrealistically high flow values, as
flows above 2500 veh/h/ln are rarely observed in practice due to
physical limitations of roadway capacity, such as vehicle headways
and speeds.
Similarly, occupancy values between 0.2 and 0.75
correspond to moderate to high levels of road utilization, and
extremely low flow values would be inconsistent with expected
traffic behavior.
Occupancy values higher than 0.95 indicate
network-wide congestion corresponding to almost or complete
saturation, where vehicles would barely move or at a complete
standstill. High flow measurements would be unrealistic in this
situation and likely to be errors.
The final two steps in cleaning the data are important for
ensuring the robustness and reliability of the dataset.
Keeping
only the detectors with valid observations for more than 80%
of the intervals helps ensure consistency as the remaining data
represent the true traffic conditions over time, and accuracy as
unreliable detectors and many missing intervals might increase
the noise in the data.
Lastly, keeping only the intervals with
valid data for more than 80% of the loop detectors helps ensure
the completeness and fairness of the dataset, as the remaining
data will better represent network-wide behavior and avoid the
risk of a few detectors dominating the observed patterns for some
intervals.
The observations of occupancy and flow in the fully cleaned
data for all 29 selected cities are shown in the appendix in
figure A.1, and the plots for four selected cities are shown
in figure 3.2.
From these plots, it can be observed that for
some of the larger cities such as London, Los Angeles, Madrid,
and also Taipeh, although this city are comparatively smaller,
the distribution of data points appears to be ’cut off’ at 2500
veh/h/ln indicating that this may not be an appropriate higher
bound for the flows of some typically larger cities. However, for
most cities, the majority of observations fall (well) below this limit.
3.2.2
Description of Dataset and Relevant Variables
This section presents an overview and summary statistics of
the preprocessed data.
As described in section 3.2, the initial
examination of the dataset found 29 cities with the relevant
observations available. The distribution of cities among different
countries is visualized in figure 3.3.
Of the 29 cities, 26 are
European of which almost half are German, with the rest being
Swiss, French, Spanish, Italian, Austrian, English, and Lithuanian
20
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3.
Data
Figure 3.3:
The pie chart shows the
distribution of cities among different
countries.
German cities make up a
little more than 40%, Switzerland and
France both make up almost 14% of the
cities. Only 3 out of the 29 cities are
located outside of Europe: one in the
USA, one in Canada, and one in Tai-
wan.
Figure 3.4:
The stacked bar chart
shows the proportion of missing infor-
mation for some of the central vari-
ables in the dataset. More than 60%
of the values do not have an error la-
bel (as mentioned in 3.2.1), and more
than 20% of the observations are miss-
ing information on the speed limit of
the road.
Still, most of the essential
variables such as the road class do not
have any missing values.
cities. Only three cities are located outside of Europe: one in the
US, one in Canada, and one in Taiwan.
Apart from the variables crucial in determining the MFDs for the
cities, the UTD19 contains other variables that could be relevant
in predicting and investigating the shapes of the MFD. This
includes variables containing the link length, the road class (or
category), the speed limit of the observed link, and the number of
lanes monitored by a detector. Unfortunately, more than 20% of
the observations have missing values for the variable containing
the speed limit for the link in question. However, the link length
and road class variables have no missing values, and the variable
containing the number of lanes monitored has less than 0.01%
missing variables.
Each loop detector has a unique ID (within a given city, as
some IDs are repeated across cities). The number of loop detec-
tors varies between cities. This is illustrated in the top bar plot
in figure 3.5 where it is observed that the number of detectors
ranges from 36 in Essen to 2620 in London. The majority of cities
have approximately 100 to 350 detectors. However, the absolute
spread is huge, and it is natural to look for trends that reflect
these differences in the MFD curves, which will be done in the
following section 3.3. The second bar plot in figure 3.5 shows each
city’s total number of observations, i.e., traffic measurements. The
smallest number of observations is for Frankfurt at 287, and the
largest is for Luzern at 173,139 observations.
In the third and
fourth plots, the total number of days that the traffic measure-
ments span and the interval lengths of the observations are shown
for each city. The number of days of traffic measurements varies
between 1 for Frankfurt, Munich, and Vilnius and 361 for Luzern.
In addition to the cities with only one day of observations, there
are only 4 and 6 days of observations for Kassel and Los Ange-
les, respectively, meaning that we have data for less than a full
week for five cities. As traffic patterns typically vary significantly
during the week, it raises the concern that it will not be possible
to observe these trends in full from the available data. 13 cities
contain traffic measurements for 7 to 14 days. The remaining 11
cities contain data for more than 14 days. Having only a few days
of observations for many of the cities can be a cause of concern
for the accuracy of the traffic patterns observed, as short periods
of observations are more prone to be heavily biased by the effect
of, e.g., a public holiday.
The fourth lot shows that the intervals between the traffic mea-
surements are 3 or 5 minutes long for most cities, with the ex-
ceptions of Bordeaux with 25-minute intervals, Graz and Toronto
with 15-minute intervals, and Munich with 10-minute intervals.
21
==PAGE:34==
3.2.
Data Pre-processing and Cleaning
Augsburg
Basel
Bern
Bordeaux
Bremen
Cagliari
Constance
Darmstadt
Essen
Frankfurt
Graz
Hamburg
Kassel
London
Losangeles
Luzern
Madrid
Marseille
Munich
Santander
Speyer
Strasbourg
Stuttgart
Taipeh
Toronto
Toulouse
Vilnius
Wolfsburg
Zurich
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of Loop Detectors
106
50
294
254 352
96
77 127
36 73
187 273 367
2620
353
131
766
150
352
178
107141
149 252
113
296
147
64
1019
Number of Unique Loop Detectors for Each City
Augsburg
Basel
Bern
Bordeaux
Bremen
Cagliari
Constance
Darmstadt
Essen
Frankfurt
Graz
Hamburg
Kassel
London
Losangeles
Luzern
Madrid
Marseille
Munich
Santander
Speyer
Strasbourg
Stuttgart
Taipeh
Toronto
Toulouse
Vilnius
Wolfsburg
Zurich
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Total Observations
4605
2015
1739
1689
5760
24000
2016
16947
8076
287 2515
50119
975
5979
2050
173139
3352
14396
231 2156
6611 9349
1970
6514
5751
2511
352
6720
3354
Total Number of Observations for Each City
Augsburg
Basel
Bern
Bordeaux
Bremen
Cagliari
Constance
Darmstadt
Essen
Frankfurt
Graz
Hamburg
Kassel
London
Losangeles
Luzern
Madrid
Marseille
Munich
Santander
Speyer
Strasbourg
Stuttgart
Taipeh
Toronto
Toulouse
Vilnius
Wolfsburg
Zurich
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Number of Days
16
7
7
7
12
50
7
36 35
1
10
105
4
21
6
361
19
30
1
11 14
25
8
14
60
7
1
14
7
Number of Days of Data for Each City
Augsburg
Basel
Bern
Bordeaux
Bremen
Cagliari
Constance
Darmstadt
Essen
Frankfurt
Graz
Hamburg
Kassel
London
Losangeles
Luzern
Madrid
Marseille
Munich
Santander
Speyer
Strasbourg
Stuttgart
Taipeh
Toronto
Toulouse
Vilnius
Wolfsburg
Zurich
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
Interval Length (minutes)
5
5
5
25
3
3
5
3
5
5
15
3
5
5
3
3
5
3
10
5
3
3
5
3
15
3
3
3
3
Interval Length in Minutes for Each City
Figure 3.5: The figure gives an overview of the number of loop detectors, the total number of observations, the number
of days the observations extend over, and the length of the observation interval for each city.
22
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3.
Data
Figure 3.7: The figure shows the ob-
servation density of the average oc-
cupancy versus flow for four selected
cities. Shared for all of them - and the
29 cities in general - is a very high den-
sity of observations in the lower left cor-
ner where both flow and occupancy are
low.
The spread of observations and
density along the curves vary between
cities.
Still, it is also common to see
a high density of observations towards
the top of the curve, as is very visible
for London here, which indicates some
degree of congestion on a network-wide
level. An overview of all 29 cities can
be found in the appendix figure A.3.
3.3
MFD Plots
There are two common approaches to obtain the MFDs; one is
to use the average flow versus average occupancy, and the other
is to use the weighted averages of the flow and occupancy. The
weighted averages are obtained by weighting the occupancy and
flow measurements by the link length that the loop detector in
question monitors. As mentioned above in the description of the
dataset and variables 3.2.2, the link length is available for almost
all variables, and therefore both approaches are possible. I decided
to use averages rather than weighted averages, as this reduces the
number of calculations needed to create each MFD plot, which will
significantly impact the speed of the models that are developed
later.
The MFD plots are shown for all 29 cities in figure 3.6.
For comparison, I have included the weighted MFD plots in the
appendix figure A.2, and when looking at the two versions of the
MFD plots, they appear to be very similar in shape and spread of
the curve for each city. This indicates that both approaches are
suitable for determining the shape of the MFD for a city.
3.3.1
The shape of the MFD
By examining the plots in figure 3.6, it is immediately apparent
that they share a characteristic shape where the flow increases al-
most linearly at first (corresponding to free-flow conditions) before
- in many cases - the growth slows down as it nears the maximum
flow values. In some cities, such as Luzern and Toronto, the max
average flow values are observed for various average occupancy val-
ues, resulting in a stretched-out top of the MFD curve. In other
cities, such as Constance and Darmstadt, a different pattern oc-
curs as the upper third of the flow values have a higher spread in
occupancy values, resulting in a stem-with-a-bulb shape. Typical
for all cities is that while many of these different shapes indicate a
degree of congestion in the network, we do not observe the entire
congested branch that we expect from the theoretical shape of the
MFD (see section 3.3.1).
Interestingly, the five cities that have the most spread out MFD
curves - Cagliari, Darmstadt, Hamburg, Luzern, and Marseille -
coincide with having the largest amount of observations according
to the bar plot in 3.5.
Density plots were created to better understand the distribution
of observations within the shape of the MFD. Figure 3.7 contains
density plots for four cities, and the complete overview of the plots
for all 29 cities is included in appendix figure A.3. Overall, we can
observe that there is generally a very high density of observations
in the lower left corner, where both flow and occupancy are low.
The variation in density along the curves is a bit different between
cities. Still, it is common to see a high density of observations to-
wards the top of the curve, which is especially visible for London
in the margin figure.
23
==PAGE:36==
3.3.
MFD Plots
Figure 3.6: The plots show the average occupancy versus average flow for 29 cities based on data from UTD19[8]
.
24
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3.
Data
Figure 3.8: The figure shows the MFD
plots of average occupancy versus flow
for four cities, where the observations
have been colored according to the
time of day.
The following intervals
were used: night: 00.00-04.59, morn-
ing: 05.00-08.59, midday: 09.00-12.59,
early afternoon: 13.00-15.59, late after-
noon: 16.00-18.59, and evening: 19.00-
23.59. Some clustering of observations
is visible from this grouping, indicating
that the traffic pattern of a city varies
throughout the day. An overview of all
29 cities can be found in the appendix
figure A.4.
3.3.2
Coloring observations by the time of day
Coloring MFD observations by time-of-day intervals can be a quick
way to check if the MFDs reveal patterns in traffic dynamics tied to
daily routines, which is to be expected. In the morning and (late)
afternoon peaks, we might expect to observe higher flows near
the critical occupancy, reflecting commuting traffic with increased
congestion. Midday traffic could show moderate flow values spread
across lower densities as non-commuting trips dominate. Evening
intervals might resemble afternoon patterns but with potentially
slower flow recovery due to lingering congestion. Nighttime traffic,
by contrast, is likely to concentrate in the free-flow region, with
low occupancy and high-speed traffic.
To investigate this, I defined six intervals as follows:
night:
00.00-04.59, morning: 05.00-08.59, midday: 09.00-12.59, early af-
ternoon: 13.00-15.59, late afternoon: 16.00-18.59, and evening:
19.00-23.59. A color was assigned to each interval, and the re-
sulting plots for all cities can be found in the appendix figure A.4
while the plots of four selected cities can be found in figure 3.8
for easy viewing. From these, it is evident that some clustering
of observations according to the time of day does occur, although
the expected patterns described above do not stand out clearly.
However, it can be observed that some parts of the MFD curve
are dominated by observations from a certain part of the day, i.e.,
the highest flow values in the city of Darmstadt appear, for the
majority, to belong to the ’early afternoon’ interval. Curiously,
patterns do not immediately appear across different cities, but as
they belong to different countries, they also represent, e.g., differ-
ent cultures of work hours and dinner times. Tuning the intervals
would possibly make some patterns more distinguishable.
3.3.3
The influence of averaging by road class
Since the type of road is available in the dataset, we have the
opportunity to look into how this variable influences the MFD.
Therefore, new MFD plots were created by averaging the flow and
occupancy measurements by interval and road class. The resulting
MFD plots for all 29 cities can be found in the appendix figure A.5,
and four of these are also shown here in figure 3.9. The detector
dataset includes 14 categories, and 12 categories were included
in the plots.
Eleven of those directly correspond to the labels
included in the dataset: primary, secondary, tertiary, residential,
primary link, secondary link, trunk, trunk link, motorway link,
motorway, service, and the three additional road classes present
in the detector dataset - e.g., living street - have been grouped into
the category ’other’ for the plots for the sake of simplicity. For
most cities, this results in MFD curves for each road class that are
often well-defined and separate, which is especially evident in the
plots for Darmstadt and Santander. London is one of the cities
where these branches are the least present or visible, although
25
==PAGE:38==
3.3.
MFD Plots
Figure 3.9: The figure contains MFD
plots for four cities created by averag-
ing the observed occupancy and flow
for each road class, respectively. The
detector dataset includes 14 different
categories, eleven of which were kept,
while the remaining three were grouped
for simplicity.
For most cities, this
results in MFD curves for each road
class that are often well-defined and
separate, which is especially evident in
the plots for Darmstadt and Santander.
London is one of the cities where these
branches are the least present or vis-
ible, although there is a lot of over-
lap between the branches for a lot of
cities. An overview of all 29 cities can
be found in the appendix figure A.5.
there is a lot of overlap between the branches for a lot of cities.
Min-max normalization
After calculating the averages, the data is normalized through
min-max scaling.
This transforms the data to the range [0, 1]
by rescaling the features based on their minimum and maximum
values. This is done by city - and for the specific averages resulting
from a subset of detectors, if relevant - and helps ensure that
all features contribute equally to the learning process.
This is
especially relevant for meta-learning as it standardizes the feature
range across tasks. The min-max scaling is given by:
x′ =
x −min(x)
max(x) −min(x)
(3.1)
26
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Methodology
This chapter contains a description of the four models developed;
the first two are parametric, and the last two are non-parametric.
The first model is a simple polynomial regression investigating
the relationship between the averaged flow and occupancy values.
The second model provides a bi-parabolic fit to the MFD and de-
termines the city’s maximum flow and critical occupancy.
The
non-parametric multi-task physics-informed NN model also pre-
dicts these values, but the predicted flow is not forced to follow a
pre-determined parametric shape. Instead, the shape of the pre-
dicted MFD is guided by a physics-informed loss function. The
fourth model is a meta-learning model implementing MAML to
create a model that can learn to generalize across cities. After
being trained, it can adapt rapidly to a new city based on few and
biased observations.
4.1
Parametric Models
4.1.1
Polynomial Regression
Polynomial regression was employed to establish a baseline for
modeling the relationship between average flow and average occu-
pancy in macroscopic fundamental diagrams (MFDs) across cities.
Polynomial regression extends linear regression by introducing
higher-order terms of the independent variable x, allowing for the
modeling of non-linear relationships. Specifically, for a polynomial
of degree d, the model is expressed as:
y = β0 + β1x + β2x2 + ... + βdxd + ϵ,
(4.1)
where β0, β1, ..., βd are the coefficients and ϵ is the error term.
In this study, the scikit-learn library in Python was used to imple-
ment polynomial regression [43]. The input feature x, occupancy,
was transformed into a matrix of polynomial features using the
PolynomialFeatures class, which generates all powers of x up to
the specified degree. The transformed features were then passed
to a LinearRegression model, which solved for the coefficients β
using least-squares optimization.
The performance of each polynomial fit was evaluated using the
27
==PAGE:40==
4.1.
Parametric Models
Figure 4.1: The figure shows how the
parameters for the models relate to the
MFD plot and the parabolic shapes.
Figure 4.2: The figure shows a diagram
of a parabola and how the vertex form
of its equation is defined.
mean squared error (MSE), defined as:
MSE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2,
(4.2)
where yi are the observed values, ˆyi are the predicted values, and
N is the number of observations. By systematically increasing the
degree from 1 to 8, the model identified the polynomial degree
that minimized the MSE, intending to balance model complexity
and fit quality.
This method was applied to data, with scatter plots of flow versus
occupancy overlaid with polynomial fits for degrees 1 through 8.
The coefficients and MSE of the best-performing model for each
subgroup were recorded. This systematic approach ensures that
the baseline model adapts to the observed data structure, provid-
ing a foundation for comparing the more sophisticated modeling
techniques introduced next.
4.1.2
Bi-parabolic Hybrid Model
The Bi-parabolic hybrid model is designed to use functions cor-
responding to a shape founded in theory while also allowing a
physical interpretation of its parameters. The model encodes this
relationship as two piecewise parabolic functions that meet at a
shared vertex, representing the critical occupancy at which traffic
flow reaches its maximum.
It is a fully parametric model that
is implemented using PyTorch. The Bi-parabolic model does not
include traditional neural network layers - which is usually what
PyTorch is used to implement - but instead optimizes learnable
parameters directly via gradient-based methods, utilizing the spe-
cialized components of PyTorch to combine physical intuition with
data-driven learning efficiently.
Model Description
As mentioned, using two parabolas, the bi-parabolic model pre-
dicts traffic flow f(x) as a function of x. The first parabola de-
scribes the uncongested regime, i.e., the first part of the MFD,
where the flow increases with occupancy. It is required to pass
through the origin, (0, 0), and then ends at the vertex (xcd, fvertex).
The parabola is defined as:
f1(x) = −a1(x −xcd)2 + fvertex, x ≤xcd
(4.3)
Here a1 = fvertex
x2
cd
ensures that the parabola passes through the
origin.
The second parabola describes the congested regime and
extends from the vertex shared with the first parabola to a second
intersection with the x-axis. Its shape is defined by:
f2(x) = −a2(x −xcd)2 + fvertex, x ≥xcd
(4.4)
28
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4.
Methodology
1 A lot of experiments were run for
many different configurations, and an
upward-facing fit was never observed
for the first parabola.
2 By allowing the model a degree of
freedom in choosing yvertex to opti-
mize the quality of the fits and not
forcing the parabolic functions through
(xcd, fmax), they will provide a better
description of the data including the
spread of the observations.
where a2 > 0 controls the curvature.
Both parabolas have
downward-facing openings, and the first parabola is always able
to learn this shape from the data1. Still, for the second parabola,
it is difficult for the model to arrive at this conclusion without
additional guidance, as very little of the congested branch is ob-
served. Therefore, the negativity of a2 is enforced through a logit
transformation, ensuring that the parabola opens downward.
The other parameters used to define the shape of two parabolas are
learned based on selected loss functions and penalties, as detailed
in the following section.
Loss Functions
The model is trained using a composite loss function, which can
be summarized by:
Ltotal = β(L1 + L2) + αLλ
(4.5)
In this expression, L1 and L2 are the MSE losses for the two
regimes given the two fits described in equations 4.3 and 4.4. The
general definition for MSE is given in equation 4.2. As mentioned,
the model learns the optimal parameters used in the two parabolic
fits while training given the loss functions. The intersection be-
tween the two fits is their common vertex, and the appropriate lo-
cation for this is determined as a compromise between the quality
of the fits, i.e., their contribution to the total loss, and a penalty
that encourages the location to be consistent with theory. The
penalty is designed to encourage the model to determine the point
of critical occupancy to correspond to one of the max flow values
observed for the city. This is implemented by letting the penalty
term scale with the number of observations of flow values greater
than the flow value of the current chosen max flow, (xcd, fmax).
As the plot contains some scattering, it is desirable to allow some
flexibility by not forcing it to select the max flow value but simply
a value near the max flow. The weight assigned to the qualities of
the fit versus the regularization through the penalty terms can be
balanced by tuning the hyperparameters α and β.
The location of the common vertex for the parabolic fits is defined
to be the critical occupancy xcd, and a value fvertex that provides
a good fit2.
Loss Weighting
The data distribution between the two parts of the fit is very
uneven, as the uncongested branch is fully observed. In contrast,
only a tiny portion of the congested branch is observed, often
corresponding to 5-10 % of the total observations. To handle the
imbalanced data and ensure that the model prioritizes the quality
of both fits, two options for weighting the MSE losses, L1 and L2,
were implemented:
29
==PAGE:42==
4.2.
Non-parametric Models
• Inverse Frequency Weighting: Assign weights inversely pro-
portional to the sample of each regime.
• Focal Loss Weighting: Amplify the impact of samples that
are hard to fit using a focal factor:
Focal Weight =

1 −
|y −f(x)|
max(|y −f(x)|)

· γ
(4.6)
here γ controls the strength of the weighting, and f(x) =
f1(x) for x < xcd and f(x) = f2(x) for x ≥xcd.
Gradient Updates
The model parameters, including xcd, fmax, fvertex, and a2 are op-
timized via gradient descent. In particular, the critical occupancy
xcd is represented as a weighted softmax of the occupancy values:
xcd =
N
X
i=1
wi · xi
width, wi =
exp(li)
PN
j=1 exp(lj)
(4.7)
Where li are learnable logits. The gradients of the loss concerning
xcd are computed through the chain rule, and for this, PyTorch’s
automatic differentiation is leveraged, providing a good example
of the advantages of using the framework to implement this model.
4.2
Non-parametric Models
4.2.1
Multi-task Physics-Informed NN
The Multi-Task Physics-Informed Neural Network (MTPINN for
short) model aims to characterize the MFD of the traffic flow by
estimating three key parameters: the critical occupancy, the maxi-
mum flow, and the flow-occupancy relationship. Unlike traditional
approaches that require prior knowledge or manual tuning of these
values, the proposed model simultaneously learns these parame-
ters and the flow dynamics directly from data using supervised
learning and physics-informed loss components.
Model Architecture
The Multi-Task PINN model is a neural network with three dis-
tinct output branches for predicting flow, critical occupancy, and
maximum flow and two learnable parameters for refining the pre-
dictions. The network consists of:
1. Feature extraction layers: a series of fully connected lay-
ers with ReLU activations and dropout for regularization.
These layers map input occupancy values to a latent feature
representation and are shared between the prediction tasks.
2. Output branches:
as mentioned, there are three output
branches that each learn a separate task:
30
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4.
Methodology
• Flow predictor - predicts the flow values for given oc-
cupancy inputs.
• Critical occupancy predictor - predicts the critical oc-
cupancy value, normalized to the range [0.05, 0.95] to
avoid extreme values and ensure stability
• Maximum flow predictor - Predicts the maximum flow
value, normalized to [0, 1] (like the normalized target
values).
3. Learnable parameters: Two learnable parameters are defined
to help inform the loss. One is the offset, and the other is the
occupancy scaler. Their purpose and use will be explained
in detail in the following section.
The architecture is implemented in PyTorch [44], a widely used
deep learning framework for Python, using its built-in support to,
e.g., add dropout as regularization and to ensure efficient training.
Regularization and loss function design
As mentioned, the feature extraction layers and the output
branches of the network contain dropout, the strength (proba-
bility) of which can be adjusted at run-time as a hyperparameter
of the model.
Apart from the option of regularizing the model through dropout,
the model is primarily regularized through loss functions. Two
loss functions have been defined to guide the model’s learning and
encourage it to learn representations that are in accordance with
the theory on flow theory. The first computes the supervised loss,
i.e., the MSE between the predicted flow, ˆf and the true flow
values, f, for N observations:
LMSE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(fi −ˆfi)2
(4.8)
The second loss function computes the physics-informed loss, de-
signed to encourage the predictions to follow a bi-parabolic shape
around the critical occupancy, similar to how the flow is modeled
in 4.1.2. The physics loss is comprised of the following terms:
LPhysics = w1 · L1 + w2 · L2 + λoffset + λscale + λmax
(4.9)
That is, to loss terms L1 and L2, weighted by model hyperparam-
eters w1 and w2 controlling their relative strength/impact on the
regularisation term, and three penalty terms.
Because the model is designed to predict some of the key values
for the MFD, namely the maximum flow, the critical occupancy,
and predicting flow given occupancy, the physics loss is designed
to regulate how these parameters are learned and which values
they can take or are likely to take. The two parabolas intended
to guide the model predictions are designed to share a vertex at
31
==PAGE:44==
4.2.
Non-parametric Models
3 The vertex form of parabolas is illus-
trated in figure 4.2 for reference.
the occupancy value corresponding to the critical occupancy value,
which the model also determines. The first parabola describes the
observations from origo to the critical occupancy, xcd. It is defined
as follows3:
f1(x) = a1 + (x −xcd)2 + (fmax −foffset)
(4.10)
where the value a1 given by:
a1 = −(fmax −foffset)
x2
cd
(4.11)
The second parabola describes the observations to the right of the
critical occupancy and is defined as:
f2(x) = a2 + (x −xcd)2 + (fmax −foffset)
(4.12)
where the value a2 given by:
a2 = −
(fmax −foffset)
((xscaler −1) · xcd)2
(4.13)
The denominators in the expressions for a1 and a2 control the
width of the parabolas, i.e., the horizontal distance between ei-
ther intersection with the x-axis and the vertex point.
For a1,
the desired distance is xcd, whereas for the second parabola, it
is expected to be different, and xscaler lets it be defined as some
multiplex of the xcd distance. This will be used to regulate the
desired shape of the parabolas, which is described below as the
scaler penalty.
The loss terms L1 and L2 are calculated as the MSE errors for
the two parabolic fits for the data points falling respectively to
the left and the right of the occupancy value xcd. The shape of
the parabolas is controlled by the predictions made by the model
for the dataset, i.e., the shape parameter a1 is calculated based
on the height of the parabolas’ vertices. This is determined by
fmax −foffset, where foffset is a learned parameter that allows
the model to fit the parabolas through a value smaller than the
max flow, as the best value for the fit will typically go through the
mean of the spread of the flow data at xcd and not the peak value.
The penalty terms are included to encourage certain properties of
the model’s predictions:
• Critical occupancy penalty: Encourages the location of the
model-determined critical occupancy to align with the plot
region containing the max flow observation(s).
• Scaler penalty: Encourages the width of the second parabola
to be between 1 to 4 times that of the first parabola by
penalizing widths smaller or larger than this.
• Max flow penalty:
Penalizes flow values larger than the
model-determined max flow, fmax.
32
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4.
Methodology
The total loss is the combination of ordinary MSE loss and the
specified physics loss:
LTotal = LMSE + αLPhysics,
(4.14)
Here, α is a hyperparameter of the model controlling the relative
strength of the two loss functions.
4.2.2
Meta-learning model
This study employs a meta-learning approach to improve traf-
fic flow prediction models by leveraging the Multi-Task Physics-
Informed Neural Network (MTPINN) architecture described ear-
lier.
The meta-learning framework is based on Model-Agnostic
Meta-Learning (MAML) and adapts the MTPINN model to city-
specific traffic data. The primary objective is to enable the model
to generalize effectively across cities while maintaining the capac-
ity for rapid adaptation to new city-specific traffic patterns.
The learn2learn software library [45], which builds on top of Py-
Torch, provides support for meta-learning in Python and is used
to implement the model.
Dataset Construction
Traffic data is organized into city-wise groups, with separate
training (support set) and validation (query set) datasets for each
city. For meta-learning, tasks are defined at the city level, where
each task corresponds to predicting flow based on occupancy
data for a specific city.
The support set is used for inner-loop
adaptation, while the query set evaluates the performance of the
adapted version of the model resulting from the inner loop.
A class has been implemented to handle task sampling to
ensure the modularity of the code. The support and query sets
are sampled randomly from the respective city’s training and
validation data for each task. A consistent random seed ensures
reproducibility.
The data used for validation is the flow and occupancy averages
created from a given city’s full dataset.
For training, the data
consists of averages calculated from a subset of randomly selected
detectors for each city for the entire observation period available
for a given city. The support sets corresponding to the averages
calculated from n randomly picked detectors are pre-computed,
as computing them during the model’s training proved inefficient.
The chosen number of detectors for sampling is n = 75, 50, 25,
and 10.
For each city, this number of detectors is randomly
sampled 30 times, resulting in four datasets - one for each of the
numbers of sampled detectors - of 30 biased averages for each
city.
To ensure that the constructed biased MFD datasets are
significantly different from the full MFD datasets, only cities with
more than 100 detectors are used. Furthermore, only cities with
more than one day observations are included, leaving 21 cities
33
==PAGE:46==
4.2.
Non-parametric Models
that can be used for meta-learning.
Meta-training Procedure
The structure of the meta-training is built around two optimiza-
tion objectives. The objective of the inner loop is to minimize the
task-specific loss Ltask by adapting the model parameters θ for a
given task Ti:
θ′
i = θ −α∇θLtask(Dsupport
i
; θ)
(4.15)
where θ are the shared meta-parameters that are cloned for each
new task, θ′
i are the task-adapted parameters for Ti, α is the inner
loop learning rate, and Di is the support set for Ti, the sampled
task i.
The meta-objective is to minimize the expected loss over the query
sets of all tasks after performing the inner-loop adaptation:
min
θ
ETi∼p(T )[Ltask(Dquery
i
; θ′
i)]
(4.16)
where Dquery
i
is the query set for Ti, θ′
i is computed from the inner
loop, and p(T ) is the distribution over tasks.
By differentiating through the inner-loop updates, the meta-
gradient is computed to optimize θ using the outer-loop learning
rate β:
θ ←θ −β∇θ
X
i
Ltassk(Dquery
i
; θ′
i)
(4.17)
The algorithm 1 describes the steps in the model’s training
procedure in pseudo-code and is closely inspired by the algorithm
MAML for Few-Shot Supervised Learning described in [22].
Customizations to the MAML Algorithm
This implementation of MAML differs from the original formula-
tion by Finn et al. in several key ways, specifically adapting the
framework for domain-specific traffic modeling tasks. Rather than
sampling tasks independently and identically from a distribution,
tasks are constructed from structured traffic datasets, divided into
support and query sets with sequential adaptation. This means
that for each task Ti in a batch of tasks, K·N observations are sam-
pled, as described in the algorithm 1. This addresses the type of
data scarcity typically faced when working with LD data: not few
observations (i.e., limited period of observations) but somewhat
biased observations due to few or unevenly distributed detectors.
Therefore, the training loop has been adapted to facilitate the
model’s adaptation to support sets of biased MFD observations in
the inner loop. It is evaluated on its ability to make predictions
for the MFD based on the entire set of detectors contained in the
query sets for the meta-update.
34
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4.
Methodology
Algorithm 1 Adapted MAML for Few-Shot Supervised Learning
Require: p(T ): distribution over tasks
Require: α, β: step size hyperparameters (learning rates)
randomly initialize θ
while not done do
Sample batch of tasks {Ti} ∼p(T )
for all Ti do
Sample K · N obs. Dsupport
i
= {x(j), y(j)}K
j=1 from Ti
Sample M obs. Dquery
i
= {x(j), y(j)}M
j=1 from Ti
Initialize task-specific parameters θ′
i ←θ
for N inner loop steps do
Compute task-specific loss:
1.5emLtask(Dsupport
i
; θ′
i)
Update task-specific parameters:
1.5emθ′
i ←θ′
i −α∇θ′
iLtask(Dsupport
i
; θ′
i)
end for
Compute query loss: Ltask(Dquery
i
; θ′
i)
end for
Accumulate meta-gradient: ∇θ
P
i Ltask(Dquery
i
; θ′
i)
Update meta-parameters: θ ←θ−β∇θ
P
i Ltask(Dquery
i
; θ′
i)
end while
return θ
Meta-testing Procedure
Every time a dataset is constructed, three random cities out of
the 21 available are randomly selected for testing and separated
from the training data (support set) so that the data used for
testing is unseen for the model.
After the model has been
trained, it is tested on these three cities, and the statistics, such
as MSE, RRSE, and the correlation coefficient, as well as the
learned/predicted parameters, are stored for later evaluation.
The meta-testing procedure mimics the inner loop in that the
trained MAML model takes the same number of n gradient steps
as the number of inner steps and uses the same number, K,
observations from the support test set for each of these in the
inner loop. The learning rate for the inner loop is used, and as
such, the model follows the same procedure as in the training
phase when learning to adapt to a new task, i.e., sampled data
set for a city before making predictions for the query set.
When the model has adapted to the test dataset through the n
gradient steps, predictions are made for the entire query set for
the city in question.
For comparison, the MTPINN model is trained on the same small
dataset the meta-model has available for adapting to the new,
unseen task, i.e., the n · K observations from the support test set.
After training on this data, the model similarly makes predictions
for the query set, and the same statistics are computed and stored
for later comparison.
35
==PAGE:48==
4.2.
Non-parametric Models
As mentioned, different metrics are used to compare and eval-
uate the performance of the models. The MSE, described in equa-
tion 4.2, between the predicted flow values and the corresponding
actual observed values, is calculated as an overall indication of the
model’s prediction error. It penalizes larger errors more heavily
due to squaring. The root relative squared error (RRSE) is also
calculated to evaluate the model’s performance, i.e., the predic-
tions ˆy, relative to a baseline that predicts the mean of the actual
values, ¯y. It normalizes the error, which makes interpretation very
straightforward. It is given by the following expression:
RRSE =
sPn
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
Pn
i=1(yi −¯yi)2
(4.18)
The correlation coefficient, usually denoted r, is also calculated
to measure the strength and direction or the linear relationship
between the true and predicted values. It is calculated by:
r =
Pn
i=1(yi −¯yi)(ˆyi −¯ˆyi)
pPn
i=1(yi −¯yi)2
qPn
i=1(ˆyi −¯ˆyi)2
(4.19)
36
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Results
This first section of this chapter provides detailed descriptions of
how experiments were carried out to calibrate the models and
presents the results obtained by each model. The second section
compares the models’ predictive performance and how accurately
they estimate the critical occupancy and maximum flow.
5.1
Experiments and Results
5.1.1
Polynomial Regression
For the very simple case of polynomial regression, the only choices
made for the experiment design was that the number of degrees
fitted to each city’s dataset would range from 1 to 8. The result-
ing polynomial fits were plotted atop the normalized observations
for the city, and the title includes the degree for the best-fitting
polynomial and the corresponding MSE error. These MSE errors
are stored for later comparison with other models.
Figure 5.1 includes two examples of the polynomial regression for
London and Stuttgart. It is clear that polynomials of all degrees
(except degree 1, the straight line) can fit the first part of the data
well, i.e., the uncongested regime. However, for the second part
of the data, where the curve flattens out and begins to decrease
again in the congested regime, many of the polynomials reflect
the theoretically expected behavior very poorly. For example, in
the plot for London, the polynomial fits of degrees 4, 5, and 6 all
increase in the region past the observed data, and the polynomials
of degrees 7 and 8 have a small bump where it increases before
decreasing again. The second-degree polynomial provides the fit
that best complies with the theoretically expected behavior. The
polynomial of degree 8 provides the best fit to all 29 cities, which
is not surprising considering that the highest degree provides the
largest flexibility to fit the data.
5.1.2
Bi-parabolic Hybrid Model
The purpose of the experiments for the bi-parabolic hybrid model
is to get the best possible fit to the full dataset. In other words,
using all detectors available for each city, the goal is to have
the model determine the parabolic functions that best describe
37
==PAGE:50==
5.1.
Experiments and Results
(a) The plots show polynomials of degree 1 to 8 for London.
(b) The plots show polynomials of degree 1 to 8 for London.
Figure 5.1: The figure shows two examples of how the polynomials of degrees 1 to 8 fit the normalized MFD observations
for the cities. For both London and Stuttgart, the polynomials of degrees 2 to 8 all explain the first part of the data
well, but towards the end of the MFD curves, the polynomials of degrees higher than 2 exhibit curious predictions that
do not align well with the theoretical shapes for the congested MFD branch.
the shape of the MFD and determine the critical occupancy and
maximum flow in accordance with theoretical descriptions.
As described in section 4.1.2, the model is updated through
gradient updates based on a composite loss function, where two
hyperparameters, α and β, respectively, control the weight of the
regularization term versus the weight of the MSE loss for the
parabolic fits. The regularization term encourages the location of
the critical occupancy and maximum flow to align with theoretical
expectations as described in section 2. An experiment is carried
out to determine the optimal parameter values, where the model
is applied to all cities with different combinations of α and β. All
combinations of [0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0] for the two parameters are
executed, and the learning rate is also varied between 0.001 and
0.01.
The optimal combination is α = 1.0, β = 0.1, and a learning rate
of 0.01.
The optimal learning rate is determined by studying
the trace plots for the training loss, and the optimal values for
α and β are determined by a visual inspection of the resulting
plots; how well the parabolas describe the MFD curves if the
location of the maximum flow is suitably closely aligned with the
actual maximum flow values, and if the location of the critical
occupancy aligns well with the limit between the uncongested and
uncongested regime as based on visual inspection. An example
of the resulting plots for four cities is shown in figure 5.2, and
appendix B includes the plots for all cities to allow the reader
to confirm that the model does provide appropriate predictions
for all cities The MSE from the bi-parabolic fit is stored for later
comparison with other models.
The trace plots of the training loss in figure 5.2 show that
the total loss decreases rapidly at first but eventually evens out,
indicating that the model improves and eventually converges. Ex-
38
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5.
Results
Figure 5.2: The figure shows the results of the bi-parabolic hybrid model for four different cities - Strasbourg, Stuttgart,
Taipeh, and Toronto - with differently shaped MFD diagrams and varying amounts of available observations. The model
determines the point of critical occupancy and maximum flow, and the two parabolas meet at a shared vertex determined
by the corresponding occupancy value, while the flow value for the vertex is determined by the best fit of the parabolas.
The shaded area shows the 95% prediction interval. The plots to the right show the training loss as a function of epochs,
i.e., the number of gradient updates for the parametric model.
39
==PAGE:52==
5.1.
Experiments and Results
1 The reader might note that two con-
stants were used to balance the loss
terms for the bi-parabolic model. How-
ever, the same effect can be achieved
by a single constant, which reduces the
number of hyper-parameters, thereby
the training time.
amining the plots showing the bi-parabolic fits to the four cities -
Strasbourg, Stuttgart, Taipeh, and Toronto - the model appears
to adapt and describe all cities well. Considering that these four
cities represent some of the typical characteristics for the MFD
plots described in section 3.3.1 such as increased scattering as-
sociated with a large amount of observations (Toronto) and the
stem-with-a-bulb shape (Stuttgart) where the MFD curve is nar-
row for the lower occupancy values but broadens at the top. The
ability to fit different types of MFD diagrams equally well indicates
that the model is well-calibrated and robust across the datasets.
As mentioned, the model independently determines the point of
critical occupancy and maximum flow, and the two parabolas meet
at a shared vertex defined by the corresponding occupancy value,
while the flow value for the vertex is determined by the best fit
of the parabolas. In the four plots, the critical occupancy and
maximum flow appear to have been appropriately located by the
model. As the ”true” values are unknown, a visual inspection con-
firming compliance with the theory is the best possible validation.
The observations mainly lie within the shaded area, indicating the
95% prediction interval.
5.1.3
Multi-Task Physics Informed NN
The multi-task physics informed NN is a non-parametric model
with three separate output branches that predict the average flow,
the critical occupancy, and the maximum flow as described in de-
tail in section 4.2.1. Like the bi-parabolic model, it has a com-
posite loss function, which consists of the MSE loss calculated for
the model’s prediction plus a physics-informed loss term. They
are balanced by a constant, α, scaling the loss term.1 In addition
to this, there are several other hyper-parameters, including the
learning rate, the batch size (the number of observations the mod-
els see in each training epoch), and the dropout rate in the model’s
shared input layers. Using a holdout-based approach, the model
is trained on normalized occupancy and flow data. The dataset is
divided into training, validation, and test subsets to ensure robust
evaluation.
To determine the combination of parameters that result in the
optimal fit, an experiment is carried out where one parameter is
varied at a time to give an intuition on the influence of each param-
eter on the fit. Based on this, a subset of the values are selected for
each parameter, and they are then all tested out in combinations
in nested for-loops. The plots showing the resulting fits and the
training and validation loss are studied to determine which of the
combinations appear most promising. Then new combinations are
selected for more experiments to try to further improve the quality
of the fits. This is repeated until the parameters are balanced as
well as possible, and tuning the hyperparameters yields no clear
improvements in the trained models.
40
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5.
Results
Parameter
Values tested
α
0.5, 1.0, 2.0
Learning rate
0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001
Batch size
32, 64, 128
Dropout
0.0, 0.05, 0.1
Table 5.1: Parameter values for the experiments with the multi-
task physics-informed NN model; the ones selected are indicated
in bold.
2 The model is already strongly regu-
lated through the composite loss func-
tions, so it is perhaps not surprising
that the regulation provided by the
dropout is not beneficial in this case.
It can be useful when working with less
than the complete set of observations,
as will be shown in the comparison for
the meta-trained model
The model is trained for the parameter values given in table
5.1, and for each city the goal is for the model to adapt well to all
cities and make adequate predictions without tuning the parame-
ters to each specific city. This means that 34 = 81 combinations
are tested for 29 cities, i.e., 2349 models are trained. It is immedi-
ately apparent from the resulting predictions that adding dropout
to the model results in worse predictions; it consequently underes-
timates the flow.2 However, finding the optimal combination of the
other hyperparameters’ values is more challenging, as their con-
tributions to the final predictions are harder to distinguish and
interpret.
Careful consideration of the training and validation
loss, combined with how the predictions for critical occupancy
and maximum flow compare to the ”true” values determined by
the bi-parabolic model and the overall fit of the flow predictions,
are carried out. The conclusion is that a zero dropout, a learning
rate of 0.001, a batch size of 32, and an alpha of 1.0 provide the
best fit across all cities.
Figure 5.3 shows the predictions from
the model trained on four different cities. The green lines show
the models’ prediction of the average flow, and the two dashed red
lines indicate the model’s prediction of the critical occupancy and
maximum flow for the cities. These elements correspond to the
model’s three output branches. The plots also show the parabolas
used as a basis for calculating the physics-informed loss for the
model, intending to encourage the model to favor this parabola
shape. The blue line corresponds to the parabola informing the
first part of the MFD prediction curve, and the orange shows the
parabola that informs the second part after the point of critical
occupancy. The details of the loss calculations are described in sec-
tion 4.2.1. In all four cities (and in general for the other cities), the
green line of the model flow prediction has a shape similar to the
blue parabola but diverges a bit to provide a closer fit to the pat-
tern of the distribution of observations for the city. This changes
roughly at the point of the critical occupancy, where the orange
parabola provides the MSE loss term for the physics-informed loss
function. One of the penalties also included in this loss function
(see section 4.2.1 for details) has the purpose of regulating the
respective widths of the parabolas’ curves and encourages the sec-
ond orange parabola to be between 1 and 4 times the width of the
first blue parabola. T”For the cities of Stuttgart and Strasbourg
41
==PAGE:54==
5.1.
Experiments and Results
Figure 5.3: ...
42
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5.
Results
3 An offset of 0.0 means that the bi-
parabolic fits used to inform the physics
loss term will pass through the ver-
tex specified by the critical occupancy
and the maximum flow value, as op-
posed to being ’offset’ to a lower flow
value. Initializing the occupancy scaler
to 3.0 corresponds to assuming that the
width of the second parabola i the loss
term being twice as wide as the first
parabola, which is not uncommon.
the width of the parabolas comply with this principle, but for San-
tander and Speyer this condition is far from satisfied as the second
orange parabola is much more narrow. Notably, the observations
for Strasbourg and Stuttgart clearly include part of the congested
regime for the cities, while for Speyer, it is not entirely clear from
the shape of the observed MFD that the last part actually belongs
to the congested branch. For Santander, a visual inspection of the
plot (and the bi-parabolic model) would lower the point of criti-
cal occupancy, e.g., at occupancy 0.85 rather than at occupancy
0.95 as estimated by the multi-task physics-informed model. But
while the beginning of the congested regime is observed for San-
tander, it does not include the expected decreasing flow, which the
observations for Strasbourg and Stuttgart capture part of. This
extends to the other cities; when the observations include part of
the characteristic behavior for the congested branch, the physics-
informed loss term successfully helps guide the model to predict
a downward trend, but when none or very little of the congested
branch is observed the model puts very little importance to this
compared to the overall trend of increasing flow.
5.1.4
Meta-learning Model
The purpose of the previous models has been to estimate the best
possible fit and characteristics describing the MFD observed from
the complete dataset for each city. The meta-model is intended
to address the issue of data scarcity discussed in the introduction
1 and in the section on related works 2.3. Typical problems when
working with LD data are insufficient numbers of detectors and
that are unevenly spaced in the urban road network. Therefore,
datasets have been created to simulate the scenarios of having only
75, 50, 25, and 10 detectors available in each city, resulting in bi-
ased MFDs. The construction of the datasets is detailed in section
4.2.2, and the adaptations made to the MAML few-shot learning
algorithm to accommodate this type of data scarcity is described
in section 4.2.2.
The MTPINN model is chosen to be the ’learner’ model used in
the meta-learning algorithm, meaning that the goal will be to find
the optimal initialization of the parameters and weights for this
model through the MAML algorithm described in 1.
The first
steps include defining the learning rates for the inner and outer
loops and initializing the model parameters. The MTPINN model
has two learnable parameters, the offset o and the occupancy scaler
s, that relate to the penalty terms in the physics-informed loss.
They are initialized to 0.0 and 3.0, respectively3. The weights of
the shared input layers and those of the separate output branches
are implicitly initialized by PyTorch’s default settings.
In addition to the learning rates, several other hyperparameters
can be adjusted for the model to facilitate meta-learning. This
includes the number of inner loop steps per task, N, the num-
ber of meta-iterations, the number of tasks sampled per meta-
43
==PAGE:56==
5.1.
Experiments and Results
Parameter
Values tested
α, inner learning rate
0.01, 0.02, 0.05
β, outer learning rate
0.001, 0.005, 0.01
N, inner loop steps
5
Number of meta iterations
150, 300
Tasks per meta-iteration
1, 3, 5
K, support obs. per inner step
50, 150
M, support obs. for meta-test
250, 750
Dropout rate in meta-training
0.0, 0.1
Dropout rate in meta-testing
0.0, 0.1
Table 5.2: Parameter values for the experiments with the meta-
model, the ones selected are indicated in bold.
iteration, the number of support observations, K, used for each
inner loop step, the number of support observations, M, used for
meta-testing, and the dropout rates used in the meta-training and
the meta-testing phases. The different values tested for each pa-
rameter have been limited to those shown in table 5.2 with the
chosen optimal values indicated in bold.
Testing all combinations of these values would mean testing
and comparing 648 combinations, which is a huge undertaking.
For this reason, experiments with combinations of the parame-
ters have been made in different ways. The model was initialized
with a combination of these values, and they have been adjusted
one by one to find the apparent best fit for each parameter be-
fore moving on to the next. All parameters have been visited at
least twice to allow adjusting the first selected value according to
the changes made in the other parameter values. The suitability
of each parameter was evaluated by studying the inner and outer
loop loss and the predictions made when meta-testing the model.
While this way of finding and tuning the model parameters is not
exhaustive, manually updating the parameters provides intuition
for the model’s behavior, arguably making it likely that the opti-
mal combination of values was found. The model parameters were
tuned using the dataset containing the biased MFD datasets from
75 randomly chosen detectors and then applied to the datasets
created from 50, 25, and 10 randomly chosen detectors for com-
parison.
As described in section 4.2.2, 30 datasets were constructed from
this number of cities, and sampling a task for the support set in
the training corresponds to sampling a K·N observations from one
of these datasets. To better account for variability in the datasets
within and between cities, the model is trained 50 times on dif-
ferently initialized task sets on each of the datasets created from
the 75, 50, 25, and 10 randomly chosen detectors. An example
of the development of the loss during the 150 meta-iterations of
meta-training is shown in figure 5.4 for two models trained on a
44
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5.
Results
task set from the 75 and 10 detector datasets.
(a) Training losses from meta-experiment with datasets based on
75 detectors.
(b) Training losses from meta-experiment with datasets based
on 10 detectors.
Figure 5.4: The left plot shows the training losses for the inner and outer loop during meta-training of the model
using datasets consisting of averages based on observations from 75 randomly selected detectors in a city. The training
loss corresponds to one experiment, which consists of training the model for 150 meta-iterations, i.e., on 150 randomly
sampled tasks (city datasets). For each meta-iteration, the model parameters are cloned and updated in 5 gradient steps
in the inner loop, allowing the model to optimize its parameters for the current task. This is seen in the upper plot in
the oscillations, where a new spike occurs each time the model is introduced to a new task. The meta-parameters, i.e.,
the model parameters cloned in the inner loop, are updated every 3 meta-iterations based on the meta-losses calculated
and stored in each meta-iteration after adapting to a specific task. Similarly, the right figure shows the training losses for
the inner and outer loop during meta-training of the model using datasets consisting of averages based on observations
from 10 randomly selected detectors in a city
In each task set, three out of 21 cities are selected for meta-
testing, meaning that the meta-model is trained on the 18 other
cities and then tested using the support and query sets for the
three held-out cities. For comparison, an MTPINN model is also
trained from scratch on the M observations used by the meta-
model during the test phase to adapt to a new task, i.e., city.
They both make predictions that are evaluated on the query sets,
the predicted maximum flow and critical occupancy are stored for
later comparison, and the calculated performance statistics for the
flow predictions are also stored. The parameters of the MTPINN
have been updated from the ones used in the experiments on the
full dataset to achieve the best performance on this dataset. It is
trained on batches of size 10 for 100 epochs, and a dropout rate
of 0.1 has been found to improve performance.
Figures illustrating the performance and predictions of the trained
meta-model on test sets have been included alongside the MT-
PINN performance for the same test tasks.
Figure 5.5 shows
the performance of two of the three test cities, Strasbourg and
Stuttgart, for one of the models trained on the datasets con-
structed from 75 detectors. The black dots are the observations
from the full dataset using all available detectors, and the yel-
low dots show the M sampled observations from the biased MFD
dataset that the model has used to adapt to the previously unseen
45
==PAGE:58==
5.2.
Model comparison
task before making predictions, i.e., the green line shown on the
plots. The predictions fairly accurately capture the shape of the
MFD, but not the expected downward trend towards the end of
the MFD curve. The title contains the MSE error for the predic-
tions evaluated on the full dataset. The dashed red lines indicate
the estimated maximum flow and critical occupancy for the cities,
and it is noteworthy that, as seen in this figure, the maximum flow
is generally a bit underestimated, while the critical occupancy is
estimated at a significantly higher value than the ’true’ value esti-
mated by the bi-parabolic model. The plots on the right show the
model loss as it adapts to the new city by mimicking the inner loop
and taking N = 5 gradient steps using the M observations. These
examples are representative of the general decrease development
observed across the trained models, with a rapid decreasing loss in
the first few steps, and then a beginning stabilization. Figure 5.6
shows the performance of the MTPINN model on the same obser-
vations. While the loss curve has clearly stabilized, the model does
not achieve a prediction for the flow or the values of the critical
occupancy or the maximum flow.
The figures 5.7 and 5.8 similarly show examples of the performance
of the meta-model trained on the datasets from 10 randomly sam-
pled detectors and the comparative performance of the MTPINN
model trained on the sampled observations for the test task sup-
port set. On these plots, it is seen that the biased MFDs (yellow)
created from only 10 detectors compared to the full set of detec-
tors (black) has a quite different shape, i.e. shows a much larger
degree of scattering.
It is evident from these examples that pre-training the model on
tasks from different cities allows the model to generalize and make
better predictions when tested on a new city using only a limited
amount of observations from the biased MFD for the new city, as
compared to a model that has only seen the biased observations
from the city in question. This is also seen for the models trained
on the datasets calculated from 50 and 25 randomly selected de-
tectors.
5.2
Model comparison
The models were created with somewhat different purposes and
priorities. Still, as the bi-parabolic model, the MTPINN model,
and the meta-model predict the same things, their performances
can be compared in some ways.
The meta-learning model attempts to address the problem of in-
sufficient or biased LD data by learning to generalize across cities.
It was tested on datasets containing MFD data of various de-
grees of bias, namely based on observations of either 75, 50, 25,
or 10 randomly sampled detectors. For comparison, all the cities
in question contain observations from more than 100 detectors in
their complete datasets. As described in the previous section, 50
46
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5.
Results
Figure 5.5: Meta-test sample of a meta-model trained on 75 detector datasets.
Figure 5.6: MTPINN comparison of the same sample from a 75 detector datasets
47
==PAGE:60==
5.2.
Model comparison
Figure 5.7: Meta-test sample of a meta-model trained on 10 detector datasets.
Figure 5.8: MTPINN comparison of the same sample from a 10 detector datasets.
48
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5.
Results
4 I was made aware of the fact that
I had forgotten to de-normalize the
predictions by my supervisors shortly
before the deadline, and fixing this
would necessitate running all the mod-
els again.
Unfortunately, I did not
have time to do that before the dead-
line, but I will include the properly de-
normalized metrics and predictions in
my presentation.
models were run on differently initialized task sets for each num-
ber of sampled detectors, and the resulting performance metrics
are shown in the boxplots in figure 5.9. Unfortunately, the predic-
tions were not de-normalized before the metrics were calculated.
The implications of this will be discussed in the section 6.5, and
at present, the results will be discussed as-is in this section4.
For the MSE, the meta-model trained on 75 detector datasets has
the lowest median and the narrowest distribution, indicating that
it performs the best and is consistent in predictions. The meta-
models trained on the 50, 25, and 10 detectors dataset have very
similar means and distributions. Still, the mean and variability
increase slightly as the MFDs become more biased, and the out-
liers become more spread out.
This indicates that the model’s
predictive performance decreases slowly the more biased the data
it was trained on. The median of the MSE error for the MTPINN
comparison model is significantly higher than that of all the meta-
models. The variance is much larger, indicating a poorer and less
consistent performance.
Interestingly, the performance of the meta-models and the MT-
PINN models are very similar when measured with the RRSE for
a given dataset. The mean is almost identical for the two models
on the 75 and 50 detector datasets, although the variance is larger
for the 50 detector dataset. Overall, an increasing variance is ob-
served, indicating a less consistent performance in the more biased
dataset. Still, there is no clear trend in the median before the 10
detector dataset, where both models had poorer performance.
The mean of the correlation coefficients is 0.98 or higher for both
models for the 75, 50, and 25 detector datasets, and the variance
in performance is more significant for the MTPINN comparison
model, indicating a somewhat inferior performance.
Figure 5.9: Performance metrics for the meta-model trained and tested on different types of datasets and the MTPINN
comparison model. (75) indicates the model was trained on MFD observations based on 75 randomly sampled detectors.
Figure 5.10 shows the MSE for the bi-parabolic model and
the MTPINN model trained on the full datasets.
The MSE
for the meta-model and the MTPINN comparison model have
been included as a reference for scale. From this, it is clear that
49
==PAGE:62==
5.2.
Model comparison
Figure 5.10: The boxplots show the distributions of the MSE cal-
culated for the bi-parabolic model and the MTPINN model trained
on the full datasets. The MSE for the meta-model and the MT-
PINN comparison model have been included as a reference for
scale.
5 In the table, the critical occupancy is
labeled as CD (critical density).
6 For the meta-model, some models
were excluded due to the criteria estab-
lished for creating the biased datasets.
See section 4.2.2 for details.
the median performance of the MTPINN model trained on the
full data shows the best performance overall, as it also has the
smallest spread in distribution and outliers. The meta-model and
the bi-parabolic have almost the same median, with the spread of
the meta-model being slightly more narrow. This indicates that
the meta-model has much potential for accurately predicting the
true MFD from biased estimates.
The table 5.3 includes average flow and occupancy values from
the full (normalized) datasets for each city, and the predicted max-
imum flow and critical occupancy values5 for each of these mod-
els6. The bi-parabolic model was created to determine the best
possible fit of a parametric model, i.e., a pre-defined shape to the
MFD for each city. It was also intended to determine the loca-
tion of the maximum flow and critical occupancy by the observed
shape of the MFD and the theoretical shape of the MFD, where
both can be considered measures of the border between the uncon-
gested and congested regimes. It can be seen from this diagram
that neither of these coincides, respectively, with the average val-
ues of flow or occupancy. The estimated maximum flow values
are surprisingly consistent across the cities, ranging from 0.603 to
0.685. The estimated critical occupancies vary a lot more, ranging
from 0.393 to 0.703.
The MTPINN model trained on the full data generally provides
higher estimates of the critical occupancy.
The maximum flow
50
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5.
Results
estimates mostly fall in the same range as those estimated by the
bi-parabolic model, and no clear trend appears as to whether the
MTPINN over- or underestimates these values.
The average estimates of the maximum flow and critical occu-
pancy for each city by the meta-models trained on the 75 detector
datasets range from 0.620 to 0.655. This corresponds to the model
typically overestimating the critical occupancy compared to the bi-
parabolic model and shows a slight tendency to underestimate the
maximum flow value. Similar trends can be observed for the meta-
model trained on the 10 detector datasets, although its estimates
are generally lower than those of the 75 meta-models.
51
==PAGE:64==
5.2.
Model comparison
City
Average
Occupancy
Average
Flow
BiParabolic
- CD
BiParabolic
- Max Flow
MTPINN
- CD
MTPINN
- Max Flow
MAML Test
(75) - CD
MAML Test
(75) - Max Flow
MAML Test
(10) - CD
MAML Test
(10) - Max Flow
Augsburg
0.311
0.453
0.533
0.670
0.616
0.676
0.648
0.626
0.593
0.630
Basel
0.280
0.455
0.497
0.673
0.538
0.656
-
-
-
-
Bern
0.385
0.456
0.640
0.677
0.660
0.683
0.652
0.620
0.648
0.645
Bordeaux
0.339
0.552
0.610
0.683
0.560
0.679
0.648
0.635
0.611
0.626
Bremen
0.392
0.475
0.638
0.668
0.660
0.686
0.643
0.633
0.566
0.617
Cagliari
0.293
0.399
0.384
0.638
0.547
0.585
-
-
-
-
Constance
0.375
0.448
0.603
0.675
0.660
0.678
-
-
-
-
Darmstadt
0.349
0.479
0.503
0.667
0.614
0.661
0.632
0.634
0.640
0.635
Essen
0.268
0.393
0.300
0.603
0.586
0.596
-
-
-
-
Frankfurt
0.418
0.564
0.626
0.684
0.658
0.679
-
-
-
-
Graz
0.427
0.596
0.619
0.675
0.640
0.676
0.647
0.628
0.636
0.610
Hamburg
0.349
0.513
0.487
0.669
0.578
0.656
0.652
0.629
0.617
0.619
Kassel
0.510
0.608
0.596
0.675
0.660
0.667
0.650
0.633
0.628
0.620
London
0.491
0.655
0.592
0.680
0.623
0.676
0.651
0.636
0.633
0.617
Losangeles
0.443
0.691
0.634
0.683
0.551
0.671
0.647
0.638
0.638
0.629
Luzern
0.225
0.497
0.401
0.662
0.400
0.642
-
-
-
-
Madrid
0.483
0.703
0.573
0.683
0.596
0.679
0.655
0.634
0.654
0.631
Marseille
0.289
0.543
0.485
0.675
0.478
0.667
0.638
0.643
0.593
0.640
Munich
0.467
0.660
0.440
0.677
0.515
0.636
-
-
-
-
Santander
0.396
0.486
0.549
0.668
0.660
0.663
0.648
0.635
0.642
0.630
Speyer
0.337
0.452
0.642
0.676
0.660
0.683
0.627
0.635
0.626
0.628
Strasbourg
0.193
0.479
0.393
0.680
0.394
0.673
0.644
0.624
0.583
0.626
Stuttgart
0.331
0.623
0.384
0.680
0.436
0.663
0.646
0.638
0.626
0.626
Taipeh
0.374
0.545
0.553
0.679
0.654
0.687
0.651
0.635
0.606
0.620
Toronto
0.285
0.517
0.338
0.670
0.428
0.638
0.649
0.626
0.635
0.631
Toulouse
0.376
0.642
0.526
0.685
0.519
0.684
0.651
0.627
0.617
0.616
Vilnius
0.397
0.647
0.485
0.681
0.501
0.670
-
-
-
-
Wolfsburg
0.267
0.397
0.600
0.677
0.622
0.686
-
-
-
-
Zurich
0.338
0.527
0.545
0.678
0.589
0.676
0.646
0.633
0.634
0.628
Table 5.3: Predicted critical density (occupancy) and maximum flow by the different models. The average value of the
averaged occupancy and flow values are included for the full dataset.
52
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
Shape of the MFD
While exploring the UTD19 dataset, several interesting character-
istics of the MFDs were observed, including the shape, a time-
dependent aspect, and the presence of often well-defined MFDs
for the separate road types in the dataset. On the overall shape of
the MFD, it was observed that the total amount of observations
for a city appeared to relate to the amount of scatter or spread of
the MFD. It was also noted that the shapes of the CD from the
cities with the most LDs did not differ notably. As biased datasets
were constructed for the meta-models, it could be observed that
selecting different subsets of the detectors for a given city gave rise
to various shapes for the MFD, and it would appear that the fewer
LDs were used, the more diffuse or spread out the MFD shape be-
came. This fits well with the observations made by a study on the
effect of using a reduced number of LDs on the shape of the MFD
[12].
6.1.1
Modelling the Congested Regime
The exploration aimed to identify aspects that a model could use
to learn to predict the MFD for all the cities accurately. As men-
tioned previously, only the very early stages of congestion are ob-
served in the UTD19 data. In some cities, this is increased by a
gradual flattening of the curve toward the maximum flow values;
for others, it appears as an increased scattering of the curve near
the top; for some cities like Luzern and Toulouse, the beginning of
a downward trend for the congested regime can be observed. How-
ever, for other cities like Bern, it is hard to argue that congestion
is observed at all in the MFD. Therefore, much attention was paid
to the overall shared characteristics as a basis for the models, such
as the steeply increasing flow observed for the free-flow regime in
all the MFDs. As parabolas could describe this part of the MFD
very well, a natural choice was to try to model the entire MFD
using parabolas. To provide a degree of freedom for the shape,
the fit comprised two parabolas connected at the vertex to ensure
a smooth transition.
The bi-parabolic model provided suitable fits to the cities, and the
estimated locations of the critical occupancy seemed to coincide
53
==PAGE:66==
6.2.
Model calibration
with the theory’s expectations. But evaluating the quality of the
fit for the second parabola describing the congested regime is very
difficult, as so little of it is observed.
The MTPINN model is built on the same idea, but instead of en-
forcing the expected shape for the unobserved part of the MFD, it
simply encourages it. It was clear from the resulting fits that this
encouragement only succeeded for the cities where a (relatively)
larger part of the MFD was observed.
There have been many approaches to modeling and simulating the
congested branch in literature. In the paper [27], Laval et al. pro-
posed a probabilistic approach to modeling the congested branch
of the MFD by representing urban networks as probabilistically
homogeneous corridors. Their method uses stochastic approxima-
tions based on intersection traffic interruptions (cuts) to analyt-
ically estimate the MFD, assuming symmetry between free-flow
and congested states.
While this approach is powerful for un-
derstanding localized traffic dynamics and specific corridor-level
MFDs, it is less applicable for modeling the entire urban network’s
MFD, as it does not account for the network-wide heterogene-
ity and variation observed in UTD19 data.
Nonetheless, using
stochastic approximations and probabilistic symmetry could in-
spire future work in refining the modeling of the congested branch
in networks with limited observed congestion.
6.2
Model calibration
There is a large difference between the parametric and non-
parametric models when calibrating them to obtain the best pos-
sible fit for the MFDs. For the bi-parabolic model, the calibration
process was fairly straightforward, as the effects of adjusting the
hyper-parameters on the predefined shape of the model fit were
intuitive. This made finding the hyperparameters for an optimal
fit for all cities easier.
Calibrating the MTPINN model was more challenging as it had
both more hyperparameters and, as a non-parametric model, no
predefined shape for the predicted fit. This made it more difficult
to get an intuition for the impact of each of the hyperparameters
on the predictions. Comparing the 81 predictions on the quality
of the fits and estimation of the maximum flow and critical occu-
pancy made it clear that finding a combination that fits all the
cities accurately and equally well might not be possible. The cho-
sen combination of parameters provides a good prediction of the
flow across all the cities, but the accuracy of the predicted maxi-
mum flow and critical occupancy is inconsistent. This may relate
to how much of the congested branch of the MFD is observed for
a given city, as this seems to significantly impact the overall trend
of the fit for the higher occupancy values. This suggests that the
model could achieve better performance if calibrated to the indi-
vidual cities or possibly if calibrated to fit a group of cities with
54
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6.
Discussion
specific MFD characteristics.
As the number of hyperparameters increased for the meta-model,
the difficulty of calibration also increased, which is a known chal-
lenge for MAML [21].
Because MAML is model-agnostic, it
could have been used with the bi-parabolic model instead of the
MTPINN. This would significantly reduce the number of hyper-
parameters for the meta-model. Still, the parametric form of the
bi-parabolic model also severely restricts the model’s flexibility,
which was considered adversarial to the problem of fitting biased
MFDs.
6.3
Reliability & Robustness of Models
The reliability and robustness of the implemented models are key
to understanding their performance across diverse cities. Both at-
tributes reflect the models’ consistency in predictions and their
stability under varying conditions, assessed through metrics such
as MSE, RRSE, and correlation coefficients.
The bi-parabolic model exhibited high reliability due to its struc-
tured, parametric design. Its calibration process was intuitive, al-
lowing hyperparameters to be adjusted systematically to fit most
cities with minimal variance in performance.
In contrast, the MTPINN model offered the flexibility to adapt to
diverse city-specific MFD patterns. As a non-parametric model,
it allowed more nuanced fits but was less reliable overall. Its lack
of a predefined structure made hyperparameter tuning more com-
plex, and the resulting fits displayed higher variability. Grouped
or city-specific calibration could mitigate some of these issues, im-
proving reliability and robustness.
The meta-model, leveraging MAML, added further complexity
with its extensive hyperparameter space. While it was broadly
applicable across cities and various degrees of bias in the datasets,
this model demonstrated greater sensitivity to initialization and
calibration choices.
Surprisingly, the performance distributions
based on 50 trained models tested on three different unseen cities
each showed a median MSE value comparable to that of the bi-
parabolic model and with slightly less variability. This was sum-
marized in figure 5.10. However, the meta-model predictions for
the maximum flow and critical occupancy values were very in-
consistent with the values estimated by the bi-parabolic model.
Further studies are needed to investigate the consistency of pre-
dictions for a given city for the model trained on different datasets,
as it is unclear how robust the model predictions are.
6.4
Generalization between cities
One of the requirements for generalization between tasks in meta-
learning is that the tasks are sampled from the same distribution.
This is also mentioned in the first line of the MAML algorithm 1.
55
==PAGE:68==
6.5.
The Problem of Normalized Statistics
In real-life applications of meta-learning, the true distribution of a
group of tasks is difficult to define and estimate. In this case, it is
assumed that the observations of occupancy and flow for the cities
share some characteristics, i.e., belong to some common overarch-
ing distribution. From a very high-level perspective, the cities in
the UTD19 dataset have similar characteristics, e.g., intersections,
traffic lights, buses, etc. Upon a closer examination of the cities,
many differences also become apparent, including green-red light
ratios, the existence of bus lanes, the size of the city, the types
of roads, and many more. Considering the overview of the MFD
shapes for the 29 cities used in this study in figure 3.6, it seems
clear that there is an overall characteristic shape and many similar-
ities between the cities. It is also apparent that the MFDs for some
cities are more alike than others. From the parameters estimated
by the bi-parabolic model, it could be seen that the maximum
flow estimated across the cities was very similar when normalized.
At the same time, this was not the case for the estimated criti-
cal occupancies. All these examples show that many arguments
can be made for the notion of shared characteristics between the
cities, supporting the requirement of a common distribution for the
MFDs. However, as many dissimilarities have also been pointed
out, some of these may be significant enough that the argument
could be made for creating sub-groups of distributions. This would
not necessarily make the overarching distribution less valid, but
better generalization might be achieved within sub-groups if the
discriminative characteristics are correctly identified.
The results obtained from training the meta-model on the simu-
lated biased datasets clearly show that the model can generalize
across the city and use this to adapt quickly to an unseen city.
6.5
The Problem of Normalized Statistics
When comparing performance across datasets from different cities,
normalizing predictions and observations before calculating met-
rics such as MSE, RRSE, and correlation coefficients introduces
benefits and challenges. Normalization ensures that metrics are
scale-independent, enabling fair comparisons despite absolute flow
and occupancy value variations between cities. However, this ap-
proach is not without limitations.
One key concern is the loss of interpretability. Normalized values
obscure the original scale of the data, making it difficult to evalu-
ate the practical significance of errors. For example, a normalized
MSE may appear small but represent significant absolute devia-
tions in cities with high flow or occupancy ranges.
Another limitation is the potential distortion of relationships be-
tween variables. Normalization can introduce artifacts, particu-
larly when distributions differ significantly between cities. This
may lead to biased model performance evaluations as metrics be-
come sensitive to the chosen normalization method.
56
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 6.
Discussion
Additionally, normalization may hide regional or structural dif-
ferences in the data.
Cities with unique MFD characteristics
might be unfairly penalized or favored, as normalization forces
all datasets into a comparable range, potentially underrepresent-
ing outliers or distinctive patterns.
A combination of normalized and unnormalized metrics should
be considered to address these issues. While normalized metrics
facilitate cross-dataset comparisons, unnormalized values provide
essential context for interpreting results and understanding city-
specific performance. Incorporating both approaches offers a more
nuanced evaluation of model reliability and robustness across di-
verse datasets.
57
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 7
Conclusions and Future Work
This chapter contains the conclusions of the project and sugges-
tions for future work.
7.1
Conclusions
Concerning the aims of this study stated in section 1.2 and re-
peated below, the following can be concluded:
1. Constructing models to accurately predict key quantities of
the MFD of a city
Chapter 4 described the design of a bi-parabolic model that
accurately fits parabolas to both the congested and uncon-
gested regimes observed in the MFDs of the UTD19 cities. It
proved able to predict the critical occupancy and maximum
flow values that were consistent with the theoretical values,
as determined by visual inspection of the MFDs. These val-
ues were used to compare the performance of other models.
A non-parametric form’s second model, the multi-task
physics-informed neural network (MTPINN), was also pro-
posed and tested. This provided a more flexible fit guided by
a physics-informed loss function inspired by the bi-parabolic
model. It performed well in predicting the curve of the MFD.
However, it showed behavior inconsistent with the theory for
cities with very limited observations of the congested regime.
It predicted increasing rather than decreasing flow as shown
in chapter 5. Compared to the bi-parabolic model, it consis-
tently overestimated the critical occupancies, while the esti-
mated maximum flow values were mainly within the range
of those predicted by the bi-parabolic model.
2. Investigating the requirements for successful generalization
between cities, i.e., can the same methodology be applicable
across diverse urban environments?
As discussed in chapter 6, a requirement for successful meta-
learning is that the tasks the model is generalizing between
must belong to a pool of tasks sharing the same overarching
distribution of tasks. Arguments supported this claim based
on shared high-level characteristics, including the overall
shape of the MFDs described in chapter 3 and similarities
58
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 7.
Conclusions and Future Work
in the normalized maximum flow values shown in chapter 5.
The results of the meta-model trained on several different
cities clearly showed that it is possible to generalize across
the cities, even in diverse urban environments with varia-
tions including MFD shape, population size, continent, and
more.
3. Investigate and apply machine learning methods to address
data scarcity due to limited LD data.
A model-agnostic meta-model (MAML) was implemented to
address the issue of insufficient data arising from limited
loop detectors. It has been applied to datasets constructed
to simulate increasingly biased MFDs for the city created by
sampling subsets of detectors. The results of the meta-model
trained on biased datasets for multiple cities showed much
superior performance when adapting to a new city with lim-
ited data compared to an MTPINN model trained only on
the limited data for that city. They were both tested on their
ability to predict the true shape of the MFD for the new city,
i.e., the MFD obtained from the complete set of LDs. Eval-
uating their predictions by the MSE, the meta-model out-
performed the comparison MTPINN model. Neither model
accurately predicted the values of maximum flow and crit-
ical occupancy for the city. However, this showed that the
meta-model can successfully be applied to mitigate the issue
of insufficient LD data.
4. What are the impacts of the resulting models? Are they, e.g.,
reliable enough to support policy making?
The bi-parabolic model demonstrated high reliability due to
its structured and parametric nature, allowing systematic
calibration and consistent performance across cities.
The
MTPINN model provided greater flexibility to fit diverse
city-specific MFDs. However, it exhibited less reliability due
to its non-parametric structure, resulting in higher variabil-
ity and sensitivity to hyperparameter tuning. Grouped or
city-specific calibration could address these challenges. The
meta-model, using MAML, showed promise in addressing
data scarcity issues and generalizing across cities with vary-
ing characteristics. While its predictions for the overall MFD
curve were robust, its estimates of maximum flow and criti-
cal occupancy lacked consistency compared to theoretical or
bi-parabolic model values.
In conclusion, only the bi-parabolic model demonstrated ro-
bust and reliable performance across the cities, providing
predictions consistent with the theory. While the MTPINN
model and the meta-model show promise, further develop-
ment is necessary to ensure and evaluate their robustness
under varying conditions.
59
==PAGE:72==
7.2.
Suggestions for Future Work
7.2
Suggestions for Future Work
7.2.1
Straightforward extensions
Following the discussion and conclusions, several straightforward
extensions can be undertaken to improve the models and broaden
this study:
1. The performance of the MTPINN model could likely be im-
proved by calibrating it to individual cities or identifying
clusters of cities with similar MFD shapes and calibrating
the model to these groups.
2. Integrate the meta-model with the bi-parabolic model to
evaluate whether the parametric model definition is too re-
strictive for generalization across biased datasets or whether
its reduced number of parameters facilitates model calibra-
tion and improves stability.
3. Further examine the robustness and reliability of the MT-
PINN and meta-model by analyzing the consistency of their
predictions across diverse datasets.
7.2.2
Future Research
Some of the most relevant avenues for future research are listed
below:
1. Building on the positive results from using meta-learning to
address insufficient low-density (LD) data, further develop-
ment of a more advanced learner model is worth pursuing.
For instance, the functional form of the MFD proposed by
[24] could serve as a foundation for this.
2. The exploration of MFDs revealed distinct and often well-
defined diagrams corresponding to different road types
within a city. Investigating the relationship between these
individual diagrams and the aggregate MFD of a city could
provide valuable insights.
60
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Peng Wang et al. “Aggravated air pollution and health bur-
den due to traffic congestion in urban China”. In: Atmo-
spheric Chemistry and Physics 23.5 (Mar. 2023). [Online;
accessed 2024-12-23], pp. 2983–2996.
[2]
John C Falcocchio and Herbert S Levinson. “The impact of
traffic congestion on mobility”. In: Road Traffic Congestion:
A Concise Guide. [Online; accessed 2024-12-23]. Springer,
Mar. 2015.
[3]
Stephen Burgen. “Barcelona launches 10-year plan to re-
claim city streets from cars”. In: The Guardian (Nov. 2020).
[Online; accessed 2024-12-23].
[4]
Exponential
growth
of
computation
in
the
training
of
notable
AI
systems.
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/exponential-growth-
of-computation-in-the-training-of-notable-ai-systems.
[Online; accessed 2024-12-23]. Dec. 2024.
[5]
Melissa Heikkil¨a. “AI’s carbon footprint is bigger than you
think”. In: MIT Technology Review (Dec. 2023). [Online;
accessed 2024-12-23].
[6]
Donald B. Maudsley. A Theory of Meta-Learning and Prin-
ciples of Facilitation: An Organismic Perspective. English.
Edition in English. University of Toronto, 1979.
[7]
Vishal Mahajan et al. “Predicting network flows from speeds
using open data and transfer learning”. In: IET Intelligent
Transport Systems (2022).
[8]
Allister Loder et al. “UTD19: Urban traffic data from 40
cities”. In: (2020).
[9]
Victor L. Knoop and Serge Hoogendorrn. Transport Flow
Theory: an Introduction with Exercises. TU Delft Open,
2018. isbn: 978-94-6366-378-6.
[10]
Bert Van Wee et al. The Transport System and Transport
Policy. Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 2023. isbn: 978-1-
80220-677-7.
[11]
Nikolas Geroliminis and Carlos F. Daganzo. “Existence of
urban-scale macroscopic fundamental diagrams: Some ex-
perimental findings”. In: Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological (2008).
61
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[12]
Christine Marie Buisson and Cyril Ladier. “Exploring the
Impact of Homogeneity of Traffic Measurements on the Ex-
istence of Macroscopic Fundamental Diagrams”. In: Trans-
portation Research Record Journal of the Transportation Re-
search Board (2009).
[13]
Amr M. Wahaballa, Seham Hemdan, and Fumitaka Ku-
rauchi. “Relationship between macroscopic fundamental di-
agram hysteresis and network-wide traffic conditions”. In:
Transportation Research Procedia 34 (2018), pp. 235–242.
[14]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and. Springer,
2006. isbn: 978-0387-31073-2.
[15]
Diederik P Kingma. “Adam: A method for stochastic opti-
mization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[16]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. “Intro-
duction to Machine Learning and Data Mining”. In: Tech-
nical University of Denmark, 2021. Chap. Overfitting and
cross-validation.
[17]
CS 330: Deep Multi-Task and Meta Learning. 2023. https:
/ / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = Gj5SEpFIv8I & list =
PLoROMvodv4rNjRoawgt72BBNwL2V7doGI&index=5 (visited
on 11/15/2024).
[18]
George Em Karniadakis et al. “Physics-Informed Machine
Learning”. In: Nature Reviews Physics (2021).
[19]
Ulisses Braga-Neto. “Fundamentals of Pattern Recognition
and Machine Learning”. In: Springer International Publish-
ing, 2024. Chap. Physics-Informed Machine Learning.
[20]
Riyanshi Gupta1, Kartik Krishna Bhardwaj1, and Deepak
Kumar Sharma. “Machine-Learning and Big Data: Con-
cepts, Algorithms, Tools and Application”. In: ed. by Uma
N. Dulhare, Khaleel Ahmad, and Khairol Amali Bin Ahmad.
Scrivener Publishing LLC, 2020. Chap. 13 Transfer Learn-
ing.
[21]
Lan Zou. Meta-Learning. Theory, Algorithms and Appli-
cations. Academic Press, Elsevier, 2023. isbn: 978-0-323-
89931-4.
[22]
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. “Model-
Agnostic Meta-Learning for Fast Adaptation of Deep Net-
works”. In: (2017). arXiv: 1703 . 03400 [cs.LG]. https :
//arxiv.org/abs/1703.03400.
[23]
Carlos F. Daganzo. “Urban gridlock: Macroscopic model-
ing and mitigation approaches”. In: Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological 41.1 (Jan. 2007). [Online; accessed
2024-12-21], pp. 49–62.
62
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[24]
Lukas Amb¨uhl et al. “A functional form with a physical
meaning for the macroscopic fundamental diagram”. In:
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 137 (July
2020). [Online; accessed 2024-12-21], pp. 119–132.
[25]
Ludovic Leclercq, Nicolas Chiabaut, and B´eatrice Trinquier.
“Macroscopic Fundamental Diagrams: A cross-comparison
of estimation methods”. In: Transportation Research Part
B: Methodological 62 (Apr. 2014). [Online; accessed 2024-
12-21], pp. 1–12.
[26]
Thomas Courbon and Ludovic Leclercq. “Cross-comparison
of macroscopic fundamental diagram estimation methods”.
In: Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011). [On-
line; accessed 2024-12-21], pp. 417–426.
[27]
Jorge A. Laval and Felipe Castrill´on. “Stochastic approxi-
mations for the macroscopic fundamental diagram of urban
networks”. In: Transportation Research Procedia 7 (2015).
[Online; accessed 2024-12-21], pp. 615–630.
[28]
Huaxiu Yao et al. “Learning from multiple cities: A meta-
learning approach for spatial-temporal prediction”. In: The
World Wide Web Conference. [Online; accessed 2024-12-21].
ACM. New York, NY, USA, May 2019.
[29]
Yun Yuan et al. “Macroscopic traffic flow modeling with
physics regularized Gaussian process: A new insight into
machine learning applications in transportation”. In: Trans-
portation Research Part B: Methodological 146 (Apr. 2021).
[Online; accessed 2024-12-21], pp. 88–110.
[30]
Rongye Shi et al. “A physics-informed deep learning
paradigm for traffic state and fundamental diagram esti-
mation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems 23.8 (Aug. 2022). [Online; accessed 2024-12-
21], pp. 11688–11698.
[31]
Rafegh Aghamohammadi and Jorge A. Laval. “Parame-
ter Estimation of the macroscopic fundamental diagram: A
maximum likelihood approach.” In: Transportation Research
Part C (2022).
[32]
Maoxiang Sun et al. “STDA-Meta: A meta-learning frame-
work for few-shot traffic prediction”. In: 2023 IEEE 29th
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Sys-
tems (ICPADS). [Online; accessed 2024-12-21]. IEEE. Dec.
2023, pp. 534–541.
[33]
Zhanyu Liu, Guanjie Zheng, and Yanwei Yu. “Cross-city
few-shot traffic forecasting via traffic pattern bank”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on In-
formation and Knowledge Management. [Online; accessed
2024-12-21]. ACM. New York, NY, USA, Oct. 2023.
63
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[34]
Ke Han et al. “Macroscopic fundamental diagram with
volume–delay relationship: Model derivation, empirical val-
idation and invariance property”. In: Transportation Re-
search Part C: Emerging Technologies 166 (Sept. 2024). [On-
line; accessed 2024-12-21], p. 104739.
[35]
Mathias Niemann Tygesen, Francisco Camara Pereira, and
Filipe Rodrigues. “Unboxing the graph: Towards inter-
pretable graph neural networks for transport prediction
through neural relational inference”. In: Transportation Re-
search Part C: Emerging Technologies 146 (Jan. 2023). [On-
line; accessed 2024-12-21], p. 103946.
[36]
Junyi Li et al. “Physics-Guided multi-source transfer learn-
ing for network-scale traffic flow prediction”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 25.11
(Nov. 2024). [Online; accessed 2024-12-21], pp. 17533–17546.
[37]
Nikolas Geroliminis, Jack Haddad, and Mohsen Ramezani.
“Optimal perimeter control for two urban regions with
macroscopic fundamental diagrams: A model predictive ap-
proach”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems 14.1 (Mar. 2013). [Online; accessed 2024-12-
21], pp. 348–359.
[38]
Homayoun Hamedmoghadam et al. “Percolation-based dy-
namic perimeter control for mitigating congestion propaga-
tion in urban road networks”. In: Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies 145 (Dec. 2022). [Online; ac-
cessed 2024-12-21], p. 103922.
[39]
Dimitrios Tsitsokas, Anastasios Kouvelas, and Nikolas
Geroliminis. “Two-layer adaptive signal control framework
for large-scale dynamically-congested networks: Combining
efficient Max Pressure with Perimeter Control”. In: Trans-
portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 152 (July
2023). [Online; accessed 2024-12-21], p. 104128.
[40]
Nan Zheng and Nikolas Geroliminis. “Modeling and opti-
mization of multimodal urban networks with limited park-
ing and dynamic pricing”. In: Transportation Research Part
B: Methodological 83 (Jan. 2016). [Online; accessed 2024-12-
21], pp. 36–58.
[41]
Mehmet Yildirimoglu, Mohsen Ramezani, and Nikolas
Geroliminis. “Equilibrium analysis and route guidance in
large-scale networks with MFD dynamics”. In: Transporta-
tion Research Procedia 9 (2015), pp. 185–204.
[42]
Geoff Boeing. “Modeling and Analyzing Urban Networks
and Amenities with OSMnx”. In: Working Paper (2024).
https : / / geoffboeing . com / publications / osmnx -
paper/.
64
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[43]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in
Python”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 12
(2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[44]
Adam Paszke et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-
Performance Deep Learning Library. 2019. arXiv: 1912 .
01703 [cs.LG]. https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01703.
[45]
Sebastien M.R. Arnold et al. learn2learn. Sept. 2019. https:
//github.com/learnables/learn2learn.
65
==PAGE:78==
Appendix A
Data Exploration - Additional Plots
In this appendix, additional plots are included to complement the
reading of chapter 3. This includes figure A.2 where plots of the
raw, cleaned data for the 29 selected cities is shown. The orig-
inal data was obtained from [8], and the data cleaning followed
the steps described in 3.2.1. In figure A.2, plots of the weighted
averages for all 29 cities are included for comparison with the
unweighted averages used throughout this project. As previously
mentioned, both are commonly used when working with the MFD.
As can be seen the overall shapes of the MFD curve does not
change between the weighted and unweighted averages.
On figure A.3 the observation density plots for the average oc-
cupancy versus flow for all 29 cities can be seen.
Below that,
figure A.4 contains plots for all cities where the average occu-
pancy and flow have been colored by the time of the day of the
observation in question. The following intervals were used: night:
00.00-04.59, morning: 05.00-08.59, midday: 09.00-12.59, early af-
ternoon: 13.00-15.59, late afternoon: 16.00-18.59, and evening:
19.00-23.59.
Figure A.5 contains the average occupancy and flow by road cat-
egory. 12 categories were included, and 11 of those directly corre-
spond to the labels included in the dataset: primary, secondary,
tertiary, residential, primary link, secondary link, trunk, trunk
link, motorway link, motorway, service, and the three additional
road classes present in the detector dataset - e.g. living street -
have been grouped into the category ’other’ for the plots for the
sake of simplicity.
66
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A. Data Exploration - Additional Plots
Figure A.1: This figure contains plots showing the cleaned (following the steps outlined in 3.2.1) raw occupancy and flow
data for the 29 selected cities. The data is obtained from [8].
67
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.2: The plots show the weighted average occupancy versus flow for the 29 cities based on data from UTD19[8]
.
68
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A. Data Exploration - Additional Plots
Figure A.3: The plots show the distribution and density of observations of the average occupancy versus flow for the 29
cities based on data from UTD19[8]
.
69
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.4: The plots show how the average occupancy versus flow observations for the 29 cities based on data from
UTD19[8] are distributed throughout the day
.
70
==PAGE:83==
Appendix A. Data Exploration - Additional Plots
Figure A.5: The plots show the average occupancy versus flow calculated 12 different road categories for the 29 cities
based on data from UTD19[8]
.
71
==PAGE:84==
Appendix B
The Bi-parabolic Hybrid Model - Ad-
ditional Plots
The Bi-Parabolic model is intended to provide the best possible
parabolic fits to the data as well as predict the maximum flow and
the critical density (occupancy) that best align with the theoretical
shape of the MFD. Because they will be used as comparison for
other models, plots showing the result for all cities will be included
here. The intention is to allow the reader to confirm that the model
does indeed provide appropriate predictions for all cities.
72
==PAGE:85==
Appendix B. The Bi-parabolic Hybrid Model - Additional Plots
Figure B.1: This figure contains plots showing the results of applying the bi-parabolic hybrid model to cities.
73
==PAGE:86==
Figure B.2: This figure contains plots showing the results of applying the bi-parabolic hybrid model to cities.
74
==PAGE:87==
Appendix B. The Bi-parabolic Hybrid Model - Additional Plots
Figure B.3: This figure contains plots showing the results of applying the bi-parabolic hybrid model to cities.
75
==PAGE:88==
Figure B.4: This figure contains plots showing the results of applying the bi-parabolic hybrid model to cities.
76
==PAGE:89==
Appendix B. The Bi-parabolic Hybrid Model - Additional Plots
Figure B.5: This figure contains plots showing the results of applying the bi-parabolic hybrid model to cities.
77
==PAGE:90==
Figure B.6: This figure contains plots showing the results of applying the bi-parabolic hybrid model to cities.
78
==PAGE:91==
Appendix C
Original project description and ob-
jectives
The following is the original project description and objectives
submitted with the project registration.
Accurate traffic forecasts are essential for effective planning
and policy making in transport and urban development. Tradi-
tional methods rely on traffic flow (volume) data collected by
stationary sensors like loop detectors, limiting their application
due to cost and coverage constraints.
With the rise of readily
available speed and location data, there is potential to develop
new models that leverage this data to improve traffic forecasting
accuracy.
Recent studies, such as those by Mahajan et al., have demon-
strated an indirect approach to estimating traffic flow by utilizing
transfer learning. By relating traffic speed and flow through the
fundamental traffic diagram, they used machine learning models
pre-trained on data from one city and calibrated them using
data from another.
This method shows promise in overcoming
the scarcity of flow data by generalizing across different urban
contexts.
This project aims to extend and evaluate the transfer learning
methods for traffic flow estimation developed by Mahajan et al.
Specifically, I will investigate the applicability of these methods
to cities in diverse contexts, such as comparatively smaller Danish
cities (e.g., Aarhus) or North American cities with very different
urban structures.
The goal is to determine the requirements for successful gener-
alization and calibration of traffic models across varied urban
environments.
I will also investigate various possibilities to
improve upon the methods used by Mahajan et.al. e.g. by using
machine learning techniques such as clustering.
This will be guided by the findings of an initial literature
review, which will help shed light on the current practices in
similar applications of transfer learning. Finally, I will evaluate
the societal implications of implementing these traffic models,
particularly their reliability for supporting policy decisions and
urban planning. This evaluation will consider potential benefits
and challenges in real-world applications.
79
==PAGE:92==
Research questions:
• What does it take to be able to generalize between cities,
i.e.can this methodology be applied in a different context?
Can it be applied to a Northern American city, or a compar-
atively much smaller Danish city such as Aarhus?
• Can we improve upon the method presented in Mahajan
et.al. by using various techniques such as clustering?
• What are the (societal) impacts of the resulting models? Are
they reliable enough to support policy making?
80
==PAGE:93==
Appendix D
Revised Project Plan
The revised project plan is included below in figure D.1. Changes
to the original project plan are indicated by red text color; it shows
that the project period was extended by two weeks to allow me to
attend two re-exams. I also followed one 5-ECTS course alongside
the master thesis.
I tried to mark what I was working on each week on the plan
to track my progress, and as can be seen from the plan, figure,
my progress only follows the plan for roughly the first two weeks.
I mentioned in the introduction, that the original focus for the
project was on the application of transfer learning, and therefore
I had mostly focused on this. However, around this time I made a
decision - after discussion with my supervisors - to switch the focus
to meta-learning. This meant that instead of starting to write up
a literature review, I continued reading up on related works for
meta-learning. In general, it shifted a lot of the aspects of the
plan, and probably resulted in quite a bit more work than if I had
chosen to stick to transfer learning. Even so, I am happy with
the decision, as it gave me the chance to learn a machine learning
framework that was entirely new to me.
81
==PAGE:94==
Figure D.1: The figure shows the revised project plan.
82
==PAGE:95==
