==PAGE:1==
Optimization of baggage handling in Copen-
hagen Airport
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Optimization of baggage handling in
Copenhagen Airport
Supervisor: David Pisinger
Laura Jensen
s194367
Sigrid Elisabeth Ravn
s194355
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
December 31, 2024
==PAGE:3==
Optimization of baggage handling in Copenhagen Airport
Copyright: Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic
citation, including author attribution, report title, etc. Copyright ©2024 by Laura Jensen & Sigrid Elisabeth
Ravn.
Cover photo: Vibeke Hempler, 2012
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej Bygning 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis have been prepared over five months at Department of Technology, Management and
Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, in Business Analytics.
The project spanned from August 1st, 2024 to January 1st, 2025, and was supervised by DTU
Professor David Pisinger. The thesis is credited with 60 ECTS in total, 30 each. Both group
members have contributed equally to the project.
It is assumed that the reader has knowledge in the areas of operations research and mathematical
modeling.
Laura Jensen - s194367
Sigrid Elisabeth Ravn- s194355
Signature
Signature
Date
Date
December 31, 2024
Page ii of 92
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
At Copenhagen Airport, the baggage system often operates at maximum capacity during peak
periods. Due to the location, physical expansion of the airport is not feasible, therefore requiring
optimization of the baggage system to handle flight operations eﬀiciently. This thesis investigates
the chute allocation problem, focusing on daily flight assignments to chutes. A Guided Local
Search (GLS) framework was developed, utilizing a Fast Local Search (FLS) to generate feasible
flight allocation schedules. The flights are placed such that overlap between flights on chutes is
allowed, but the objective is to minimize the total overlap during the day. A simulation of the
system was developed to identify the bottlenecks in the allocation and find an Early Baggage
Storage (EBS) assignment strategy that minimizes the number of lost bags. The two models
were coupled to iteratively refine the chute allocation, reducing the number of lost bags in the
simulation.
Different strategies were developed to couple the two models.
The GLS model
produced favorable results with a minimal overlap using data provided by Copenhagen Airport.
The results demonstrated successful coupling of the two models, reducing lost bags compared
to the initial allocation.
December 31, 2024
Page iii of 92
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgment
First and foremost, we would like to express our gratitude to our supervisor, David Pisinger.
We truly appreciate all the guidance and support he has offered throughout our thesis journey.
His genuine interest in our project made an enormous difference, and his insightful suggestions
and expert advice have been incredibly helpful. He has consistently made himself available to
answer our questions and offer solutions whenever we faced challenges. Our meetings with him
were always rewarding, leading to useful discussions that helped our understanding and inspired
new approaches. We are truly grateful for his dedication and the time he has invested in helping
us refine and strengthen our work.
We would also like to extend our appreciation to Copenhagen Airport, especially Malene Høgsvig
og Franciska Jenrich who introduced us to the processes in the airport. Thank you for taking
the time to answer all our airport-specific questions and provide us with relevant data.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge our families and friends for the encouragement and emo-
tional support. They have kept our spirits and motivation high during this process and we are
deeply grateful for their patience and understanding along the way.
December 31, 2024
Page iv of 92
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
BPP
Bin Packing Problem
2DBPP
Two-dimensional bin packing problem
3DBPP
Three-dimensional bin packing problem
EBS
Early Baggage Storage
FLS
Fast Local Search
GLS
Guided Local Search
LS
Local Search
December 31, 2024
Page v of 92
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The chute allocation problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Summary of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature review
6
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Applications of optimization in airport baggage handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Studies on bin packing optimization methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Theory
11
3.1
The two-dimensional bin packing problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Local Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Guided Local Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Analysis
15
4.1
Chute allocation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Data and airport specifications
25
5.1
Baggage and flight information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Airport specifications: Chute assignment to ground handlers . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Experiments: Chute allocation
31
6.1
Construction heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Results of the Guided Local Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3
Evaluation of the chute allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Experiments: Simulation
41
7.1
Untractable bags in the simulation experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Sorter and EBS capacities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3
Parameters in the experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.4
Experimental evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.5
Conclusion on simulation experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8
Coupling between chute allocation and EBS simulation
52
8.1
Generated data with increased number of departing flights . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.2
Soft coupling strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.3
Evaluation of the soft coupling strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9
Conclusion
59
10 Appendix
61
December 31, 2024
Page vi of 92
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and background
In 2017, 3.5% of the gross domestic product (GDP) worldwide was constituted by air traﬀic.
According to the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), the demand for air transport
will increase by an average of 4.3% per year over the next 20 years [11]. Therefore, airports
can expect increasing pressure on their operations. This tendency will, among others, increase
the number of checked bags that the airport will need to handle, thus put more pressure on the
baggage handling systems.
Chutes play an essential role in the baggage handling process, directing bags from the baggage
belt system to large containers. To avoid manual mistakes, chutes are assigned to only one flight
at a time. This ensures that the containers used to collect all the bags from a chute belong to
the same flight. They can then be gathered and transported to the assigned flight. Therefore,
the allocation of chutes is a crucial part of ensuring flights leave on time with the correct luggage
on board.
This thesis will optimize the allocation of chutes to flights using real data from Copenhagen
Airport (CPH Airport). Due to the airport’s location, CPH Airport is limited in the possibility
of expanding. Therefore, we aim to optimize the utilization of chutes so that the airport can
handle more flights with the existing number of chutes. Furthermore, we will gain insight into the
issues arising in the baggage handling factory by simulating the system with the resulting chute
allocation. The thesis will be limited to the process from when baggage enters the airport’s
baggage factory until it arrives at an assigned chute.
In the simulation, the utilization of
resources will be monitored to identify potential bottlenecks and analyze the performance of the
baggage handling process.
1.1.1
Baggage flow in the baggage factory
To provide context for the problem, we first describe the baggage flow within the baggage factory
and introduce the reader to the terminology used throughout the report. A flowchart of the
journey a single bag makes throughout the baggage factory is presented in Figure 1.1.
When a bag enters the baggage factory, the bag tag is scanned to retrieve the flight information,
and the baggage handling process begins. The bag is induced into an injection queue, which
feeds a conveyor belt system equipped with sorter plates, referred to as the sorter. The sorter
will distribute the baggage around the baggage factory and is connected to chutes and line-based
Early Baggage Storage (EBS) belts. In the baggage factory, each flight is assigned a number
of chutes, which collect all the bags for that flight. A chute can only serve one flight at a time
during its designated period. The baggage is distributed on the sorter to the assigned chutes,
where the bags will be placed into containers or smaller wagons and transported to the flight
shortly before departure by ground handlers.
Once the bag is fed from the injection queue to the sorter, the bag will be directed to one of
three destinations, depending on the status of the assigned chute:
1. If the assigned chute is open: the sorter transports the baggage to the chute and ”tilt” it
in. Ground handlers then pack the baggage into containers or wagons.
2. If the assigned chute is closed: (due to either a short time frame before departure or
because the flight has already left) the sorter transports the baggage to an overflow chute.
The individual pieces of baggage in the overflow chute will be handled manually by a
ground handler, who will ensure it reaches the right flight in time, if possible.
December 31, 2024
Page 1 of 92
==PAGE:10==
1.1. Motivation and background
3. If the chute is not yet open: the baggage will be transported to EBS. The EBS allows
passenger bags to be checked in hours before departure. The belts vary in length and can
hold a different number of bags, depending on the size of the individual bags. A bag is
assigned a particular EBS belt according to its departure time.
Figure 1.1: Flowchart of the baggage handling process within the baggage factory, illustrating
the flow of a single bag, and how it is distributed to chutes, EBS belts, or overflow chutes
depending on the chute status.
1.1.2
Simulation of the baggage factory
The simulation of the baggage handling system will be based on the flow presented in Figure 1.1.
The airport recommends checking in at least 2-3 hours before departure, depending on the flight’s
destination [4], and transfer baggage may enter the system even earlier. This results in some
bags needing to be stored in the EBS for different time frames until their chutes open. The
EBS consists of multiple line-based belts. The entire belt must be emptied onto the sorter to
December 31, 2024
Page 2 of 92
==PAGE:11==
1.2. The chute allocation problem description
retrieve a bag, and it is not possible only to collect a single bag. Therefore, the EBS belts are
emptied at a scheduled time, and the assignment strategy of a bag to a specific EBS belt will
affect the system’s flow. Poor assignment to EBS belts, for instance, continuous reassignment
of bags from an emptied EBS belt that still has a closed chute, is not optimal usage of the
infrastructure. An anticipated bottleneck in the system is the limited capacity of EBS belts,
particularly during peak departure times. Various scheduling strategies will be presented and
evaluated in this thesis.
1.1.3
The chute allocation problem
When the baggage arrives in the assigned chutes, it is packed into containers and wagons and
then transported to the flights by ground handling companies. Each ground handling company
services different airlines and is assigned a specific area within the baggage factory with desig-
nated chutes. In CPH Airport, the number and location of the specific chutes are distributed
every quarter. The assignment of chutes to various ground handling companies is based on
the types of flights they manage. The airport categorizes each flight into a particular flight
group, which determines the number of chutes they would assign to the specific flight of that
size and destination. One parameter they base the classification on is the size of the flight. The
airport has special chutes designed for large planes, as these require specific lifting equipment.
Therefore, the ground handling companies that handle large flights need access to these specific
chutes. To better utilize the resources in the baggage factory, CPH Airport has introduced
a number of chutes as flex chutes. These can be used by any handler. Once the airport has
assigned all the chutes to the ground handling companies, it is up to these companies to decide
how many chutes they will allocate to each flight. Some airlines have negotiated agreements
with the ground handling companies for additional chutes. This makes it possible to pre-pack
the flights; one chute can be designated only for baggage going to the flight’s destination city,
while others can be allocated to transfer baggage.
Currently, the ground handling companies manually allocate chutes for specific days. We aim to
optimize the allocation of chutes to flights so that the airport and ground handling companies
can manage more flights with the existing infrastructure.
A detailed description of the chute allocation problem will be provided in the next section.
1.2
The chute allocation problem description
We want to explain the chute allocation problem further. It can be seen as a variation of the
two-dimensional bin packing problem (2DBPP). The chute allocation problem addresses the
challenge of assigning flights to chutes under specific constraints. In the problem we have a
set of flights F = {1, ..., f} and a set of chutes C = {1, ..., c}. The flights can be viewed as
rectangular boxes. Every flight i ∈F has a width wi, representing the number of consecutive
chutes required, and a height hi, representing the duration in minutes that the flight occupies
the assigned chutes. The baggage factory can be viewed as a single bin that needs to fit all the
flights. A feasible packing of the flights into the bin is a packing where no flights overlap and
all flights are placed.
In the chute allocation problem, a ground handling company is responsible for an entire airline
and is given a set of chutes in the baggage factory. Furthermore, only particular chutes can
accommodate large flights. Therefore, chutes can only be assigned to flights handled by the
same handler as the chutes. We define the set Pi as the set of all feasible chutes to which flight
i can be assigned. The goal is to find a feasible packing of all the flights with a given height
and width into the baggage factory without overlap between flights. Each flight has a scheduled
departure time and must be open for a specific time period. Therefore, hi for each flight i is
fixed, and it is only possible to move the flight in the chute dimension. We define the set O to
contain all the flights (i, j) that can overlap both in the time and chute dimension. Thus, the
December 31, 2024
Page 3 of 92
==PAGE:12==
1.2. The chute allocation problem description
set contains two flights i, j if they overlap in the sets of feasible chutes: Pi and Pj and if they
also overlap in time.
To formulate the chute allocation problem, we use the bin packing problem formulation proposed
by Pisinger and Sigurd in [21], which is inspired by Onodera et al. in [18] and Chen et al. in [5].
In the formulation, we introduce the decision variable xi ∈Pi ∀i ∈F, representing the label of
the first chute to which flight i is assigned. An illustration of the chute allocation problem as a
2DBPP with only a single bin can be found in Figure 1.2. Here, the height H of the bin is the
time of a whole day, and the width W of the bin is the total number of chutes available. The
bin is divided into different areas by vertical lines, as the airport has ground handlers handling
specific chutes. The flights i, j ∈F are illustrated as rectangles with the width wi and the
height hi for flight i and width wj and height hj for flight j. The variable xi corresponds to the
lower-left corner of the rectangular box in the schedule.
Figure 1.2: Illustration of the chute allocation problem as a 2DBPP with only a single bin
with height H, representing the time in a day, and width W, representing the total number
of available chutes. The bin is divided into different areas by vertical lines, as the airport has
ground handlers handling specific chutes. The flights i, j ∈F are illustrated as rectangles, where
the width wj represents the number of required chutes for flight j, and the height hj indicates
the duration of flight j on its assigned chutes.
We also define a binary decision variable lij ∈{0, 1}, where lij = 1 if flight i is located to the left
of flight j. In other words, lij = 1 when the first chute used by flight i (xi) and number of chutes
required (wi) are positioned to the left of the first chute used by flight j (xj). Mathematically,
this can be formulated as:
lij = 1 ⇒xi + wi ≤xj
In Figure 1.2, lij = 1 as flight i is to the left of flight j. To ensure no two rectangles (i.e., flights)
December 31, 2024
Page 4 of 92
==PAGE:13==
1.3. Summary of the problem
overlap in the solution, the following constraint is added to the model:
lij + lji ≥1 ∀(i, j) ∈O
This constraint ensures that for two flights (flight i and flight j) in the set O at least one of the
variables lij or lji needs to be 1, ensuring no overlap exists between the two flights. This applies
to all the set of flights in the set O.
The objective is to find a feasible packing of the flights in the baggage factory constrained by
the feasible positions of the flights.
1.3
Summary of the problem
The challenge of optimizing the baggage handling system arises from daily operations at CPH
Airport, where the system reaches close to maximum capacity during peak hours in high seasons.
The primary objective is to optimize the allocation of chutes, which will then be simulated to
evaluate the baggage handling process and identify potential bottlenecks. Finally, we aim to
couple the simulation results, utilizing the best assignment strategy and the optimized chute
allocation, such that we iteratively adjust the chute allocation to enhance the overall baggage
handling process.
December 31, 2024
Page 5 of 92
==PAGE:14==
2
Literature review
2.1
Introduction
This chapter reviews relevant literature within optimization of airport processes focusing on
baggage handling in section 2.2 and the main models for solving optimization problems related
to the bin packing problem in section 2.3.
Numerous research studies exist on both inbound and outbound flights. Since the thesis con-
centrates on chute allocation and EBS simulation, research regarding outbound flights will be
the priority. A previous chute allocation optimization research for CPH Airport will be intro-
duced in subsection 2.2.2. Because the chute allocation problem is a scheduling problem that
can be formulated as a variation of the two-dimensional bin packing problem as described in
section 1.2, the section 2.3 introduces the main models for solving optimization problems related
to the bin packing problem. Studies using optimization methods on the bin packing problem
are highlighted, followed by an elaboration of different applied metaheuristics.
The chapter will end with a brief conclusion, summarizing the main findings from the literature
review in section 2.4.
2.2
Applications of optimization in airport baggage
handling
The chute allocation problem is part of the broader challenge of allocating limited airport re-
sources to multiple prescheduled activities. Each activity has specific timing and resource re-
quirements, often overlapping and leading to competition for shared resources. Allocating lim-
ited airport resources has treated various problem formulations for both inbound and outbound
flights.
2.2.1
Inbound flights
The assignment of baggage belts to inbound flights in an airport’s baggage reclaim area is studied
By Pisinger and Scatamacchia in [20]. The article proposes a solution focusing on preventing
baggage delivery before passenger arrival to avoid congestion. It proposes an Integer Linear
Programming (ILP) model that penalizes delays exceeding a preferred start time for baggage
delivery. Given the problem’s dynamic and NP-hard nature, the authors use a rolling horizon
approach with 2-hour segments and introduce a Branch-and-Price algorithm, reformulating the
ILP and using column generation to solve the LP relaxation.
They further apply dynamic
programming to solve the pricing problem more eﬀiciently. Their study finds that their proposed
method performs better than commercial ILP solvers, resulting in better solutions within limited
computational times.
Hence, they find their method suitable for medium and large airport
operations.
2.2.2
Outbound flights
The assignment of bags from all arriving aircraft to an infeed area from which they are brought
to their corresponding outbound flights by a conveyor belt system is optimized in [3] by Barth
et al. The choice of the infeed area needs to be decided before the aircraft’s arrival - but due to
a high level of uncertainty (regarding the actual landing time of the plane), the decision cannot
be fixed before the final arrival of the plane. The whole setup can change within minutes.
They present a baseline model as a static mixed integer programming model, which relies on
a time horizon. It seeks to optimize multiple criteria simultaneously, all to contribute to mini-
mizing the number of missed bags. These include minimizing transportation times, time spent
December 31, 2024
Page 6 of 92
==PAGE:15==
2.2. Applications of optimization in airport baggage handling
on conveyor belts, queuing baggage, etc. Hence, the model contains a weight for each crite-
rion, which is summed and minimized. However, due to uncertainty related to the air crafts’
actual arrival times, they present a stochastic model, which models a finite set of scenarios.
However, although this model, in theory, should lead to a better representation of the system,
it leads to very long solution times. Finally, they present a semi-stochastic model based on the
two previously deduced models, utilizing their strengths. Hence, the short-term decisions are
stochastic, while the long-term decisions are deterministic. The three models are tested on data
from Frankfurt Airport, and the semi-stochastic model especially shows promising results.
Scheduling the outbound luggage to handling facilities at airports in terms of assigning flights
to a handling facility along with assigning the best start time for the handling of each flight is
optimized in [2] By Barth and Pisinger. Their optimization is based on a greedy randomized
adaptive search procedure (GRASP). In each iteration, the flights are assigned in a random-
ized greedy way to handling facilities, and then this solution is optimized with a local search.
Their study further included a decomposition approach splitting the problem into subprob-
lems, modeling them as mixed integer programming problems. They tested the two strategies
based on data from Frankfurt Airport and concluded that they had different strengths and that
both approaches could help improve the process. Where GRASP was much faster in producing
good results, the decomposition produced overall better results. Finally, they commented that
GRASP is better suited for cases with only one or two criteria in the objective.
Chute allocation and early baggage storage in airports
The chute allocation problem has been explored in previous studies.
One of the first using
a greedy strategy is Abdelghany and Narasimhan in [1]. Their objective was to optimize the
utilization of available chutes by minimizing the number of chutes simultaneously open for
operation. They viewed the problem as an Activity Selection Problem (ASP) and developed a
solution algorithm based on a greedy selection strategy. Their solution algorithm was tested to
assign the daily flights of a major US carrier to available chutes in O’Hare airport. Here, they
had to assign 355 daily flights to 78 chutes.
The chute allocation problem of CPH Airport is optimized in [19] by Pisinger and Rude. Here,
they allocate the chutes based on a Guided Local Search algorithm. They used Big Data Anal-
ysis to predict the number of required chutes for each flight, based on regression methods to
cluster different types of flights. Their study further showed that shared areas were introduced
to optimize the utilization of the facilities, as the ground handlers had complementary demands.
The handlers supporting charter flights needed the shared chutes on the weekend, while han-
dlers with business flights had a high demand on working days. Stimulating shared chutes led
to a better distribution of the load. The chute allocation scheduling algorithm provided a fea-
sible schedule of flights, which the handlers could adjust to accommodate their specific needs
without exceeding the allocated resources. Agreements between specific flight carriers and their
handlers could cause an adjustment. The sorting strategy previously used in the airport was
a conventional method, with a relatively long and fixed duration from when the chute opened
until it closed.
The study’s resulting chute allocation utilized the compressed build sorting
method, which balanced the length of chute opening times against EBS loads. The reduced
chute opening times enhanced the utilization of the BHS infrastructure.
Interaction between the chute allocation and early baggage handling
The study [19] is not the only study advocating for the interaction between the chutes and EBS
to enhance operations in the baggage handling facilities. According to Gracia in [12], there is
often a close correlation between the demand for the Early Baggage Storage (EBS) system and
the demand for the chutes. The study recommends coordinating the opening times assigned
to each chute with the EBS belts’ allocation strategies. Ensuring the two systems corporate
makes it possible to share the burden during peak demand periods.
When the EBS is not
operating at full capacity, the chute opening times can be reduced, utilizing the EBS as a buffer.
This strategy enhances the eﬀiciency of the chutes, as fewer may be needed. On the contrary,
December 31, 2024
Page 7 of 92
==PAGE:16==
2.3. Studies on bin packing optimization methods
during times of high demand for the EBS, extending the opening times of the chutes can help
redistribute more baggage, thereby relieving the load on the EBS system.
2.3
Studies on bin packing optimization methods
After reviewing the literature regarding optimization of airport processes we dive into studies
solving bin packing problems and explore the different models for solving these problems.
Different variants of packing problems can be found in the literature. Dowsland and Dowsland
in [7] review work that has been done on different packing problems such as one-, two- and
three-dimensional bin packing problems, pallet loading problems, and more. This review also
concludes that practical solution methods tend to be heuristic and that interest lies within using
intelligent heuristic methods such as simulated annealing and tabu search. In [15] by Lodi et al.,
different variants of the bin packing problem are divided into four cases based on the rotation
and cutting: 2BP|O|G, 2BP|R|G, 2BP|O|F and 2BP|R|F, which differentiate the 2DBPP into
whether the items are oriented or rotation is allowed and whether cutting is free or the solution
should satisfy guillotine cutting.
Some of the known algorithms from the literature for solving the bin packing problem are greedy
algorithms. The survey in [16] by Lodi et al. reviews exact algorithms and heuristic approaches
for solving the 2DBPP. The algorithms can be divided into two types: one-phase algorithms
and two-phase algorithms. In both cases, the items are sorted after increasing height. The
algorithms often used in the literature for bin packing problems are the Finite Next-Fit (FNF),
Finite First-Fit (FFF), and Finite Best-Strip (FBS). The survey in [16] showed that smaller
instances could be solved to optimality, while the larger instances could only be handled by
approximation algorithms.
2.3.1
Metaheuristics applied on bin packing problems
Different studies have been conducted in the literature on methods to solve bin packing problems
with different metaheuristics. In the paper [6] by Dowsland, experiments have been conducted
by applying a simulated annealing approach to packing problems. In the paper, two problems
were addressed: the problem of packing identical rectangles into a larger rectangle and packing
non-identical pieces. The study experimented with some of the decisions regarding simulated
annealing that would make it useful for packing problems. These experiments regarded the
objective function, the cooling schedule, the probability function, the neighborhood, and more.
For the first experiment with packing identical pieces, the annealing process was successful when
a few pieces had to be fitted, but less successful when the number was larger. In general, the
study found that simulated annealing was not the best heuristic for packing problems, and
during the experiments, it was suggested that tabu search would provide a better alternative.
Using tabu search for solving the bin packing problem is addressed in [14] by Lodi et al. and in
[15]. The study in [14] focuses on the oriented two-dimensional bin packing problem and uses a
tabu search approach for solving the problem. The results from this study satisfy the constraint
regarding guillotine cuts. The study in [15] addresses different variants of the 2DBPP, such as
oriented and rotated items and guillotine and free cutting, and introduces different algorithms
for solving the other problem variants, which later are used within a tabu search.
In [14], an initial solution is created using a heuristic, which provides a good starting point
for the tabu search, and the tabu search is initialized with the solution. In this study, two
neighborhoods are explored in the search. The neighborhoods are searched through moves that
alter the solution. If the move results in one of the two options, it is immediately performed:
a move that decreases the number of bins in the current solution and a move where an item
j is removed from the weakest bin without increasing the number of bins. The weakest bin is
the bin that is easiest to empty. For each iteration of the search, they consider an item packed
December 31, 2024
Page 8 of 92
==PAGE:17==
2.4. Conclusion
in the weakest bin and seek to pack this in another bin by first exploring the moves in the
first neighborhood, attempting to pack the item directly into another bin. When no moves
are possible, they explore the moves in the second neighborhood. The second neighborhood is
searched by combining the items from two bins with the item from the weakest bin and using
the FBS (finite best strip) algorithm to place the items into the bins again, where the best move
is accepted. The tabu lists keep track of the moves between the bins. In the first neighborhood,
an item is added to the tabu list if it is moved from the weakest bin to another bin. In the
second neighborhood, the best move is performed and stored in the second tabu list.
In [15], the search also focuses on emptying the weakest bin. The neighborhood is searched
through moves that change the solution by packing a subset of items S, which contains an item
from the weakest bin and the items from k other bins. Then, one of the algorithms is used to
pack the items in S depending on the specific problem variant. The parameter k is increased and
decreased during the search. If a move is immediately performed, the parameter k is decreased
by one unit. A move is immediately performed in two situations: the number of bins is decreased
by the move, or an item is removed from the weakest bin by packing the set of items in k bins.
If the move is not directly performed, a penalty is associated with the move. If the move is
tabu or the number of bins increases by two extra bins, the penalty is infinity. The move with
the lowest penalty is chosen when the neighborhood has been searched. If the lowest penalty is
infinity, the parameter k is increased by 1 to change the neighborhood. There is a tabu list and
tabu tenure for each value of k.
Both studies use a heuristic within the tabu search. The study in [14] showed good behavior
of the tabu search implemented. And showed lower results than the algorithms using only FFF
and FBS. Also, in the study [15], the results showed that tabu search was effective regardless
of the inner algorithm used in the search. In this study the algorithm used in the search varied
with the problem variant.
Using a metaheuristic for solving the bin packing problem is also explored by Faroe et al. in
[9]. This study focuses on packing three-dimensional boxes into a minimum number of three-
dimensional bins, which is referred to as the three-dimensional bin packing problem (3DBPP).
The study’s objective is to pack the boxes into a minimum number of bins so that the original
orientation is respected.
Faroe et al.
present in [9] a new local search heuristic based on
the Guided Local Search (GLS) method for solving the 3DBPP. The optimization process is
initialized by creating a solution with a greedy construction heuristic. For each iteration, the
upper bound is tightened by removing one bin from the solution and using GLS to construct a
feasible packing of the boxes into the given number of bins. The constraint regarding no overlap
of boxes in the same bin is relaxed. The problem solved by the GLS heuristic is to construct
a feasible packing into a fixed number of bins. In [9], the objective function of the GLS is the
sum of the volume of the overlap between two boxes in the solution. The cost of an overlap
between two boxes is calculated by factoring in the volume of the boxes that overlap, such that
an overlap between large boxes is worse. To speed up the process of GLS, a Fast Local Search
was utilized. The study finds that the method on average was 6,8% from the lower bound, which
is a smaller gap than results found in [17] by Martello et al. In [9], the method is also applied
on 2DBPP, where they achieved a relative deviation of 4.4% from the lower bound. For all the
tested instances, the GLS algorithm found an equally good or better solution than the tabu
search results in [15]. The study also showed that GLS can be applied to bin packing problems
with success and that local search can be applied directly on the packing problems instead of
using a construction algorithm within the search.
2.4
Conclusion
The GLS method introduced by Faroe et al. in [9] showed that GLS can be applied to bin
packing problems successfully and that local search can be applied directly to the packing
December 31, 2024
Page 9 of 92
==PAGE:18==
2.4. Conclusion
problems instead of using a construction algorithm within the search. They found better gaps
than the exact method in [17] for three-dimensional bin packing problems, and the algorithm
further found a better solution than the tabu search results in [15] for some of the instances.
Research in [19] optimized the chute allocation in CPH Airport using Guided Local Search
while balancing the opening times of chutes against the EBS loads. [12] advocated for the close
correlation between the demand for the EBS and chute opening times.
The research above lays the foundation for the inspiration for investigating the coupling between
the chute allocation performed using GLS and EBS simulation, allowing the results of the EBS
simulation to guide the GLS to achieve a schedule with better flow in the actual infrastructure
of CPH Airport.
December 31, 2024
Page 10 of 92
==PAGE:19==
3
Theory
This chapter will introduce the theory used in our solution of the chute allocation. Initially, we
will cover the theory behind the two-dimensional bin packing problem in section 3.1 because the
problem of scheduling flights to chutes can be seen as a variation of it. Here, we will cover the
theory of the problem definition and closely related variations. Then, we will cover the main
theory regarding local search in section 3.2 since Guided Local Search uses it as its basis. From
here, we will move on to an elaborative description of the theory regarding GLS in section 3.3
and how FLS can be incorporated in the GLS procedure to speed up the process.
3.1
The two-dimensional bin packing problem
The two-dimensional bin packing problem (2DBPP) is a classic optimization problem that in-
volves packing a set of items into a number of bins, aiming to minimize the number of required
bins. The problem often arises in practical tasks like container loading or ship cargo arrange-
ment. However, the bin packing problem can also be used more abstractly to model scheduling
problems, resource allocation, and other related challenges [9]. Many different variants of the
problem exist, but in general, additional requirements are orientation and guillotine cuts. The
requirement about orientation is that the items can have a fixed orientation or be rotated when
placed within a bin. The requirement about guillotine cuts is that the items are placed such
that they can be obtained by cutting the bin with edge to edge cuts that are parallel to the
edges of the bin, i.e. no diagonal cuts [15]
In the 2DBPP we are given a set J of n items where J = {1, ..., n}. Each item i has a height hi
and a width wi. Each bin has the width W and the height H, which are the two dimensions that
must not be exceeded. The objective is to arrange the items within a minimum number of bins
while ensuring that no items overlap and that each item is contained within a bin’s dimensions.
3.1.1
Common heuristic approaches
Because the problem is NP-hard, it is diﬀicult to find optimal solutions, especially for large
instances. As a result, heuristics has been employed to find feasible solutions in a short amount
of time. As described in section 2.3, common construction heuristics such as first-fit, best-fit,
and next-fit methods have often been used in the literature to create a fast solution. In [16],
they go through some greedy construction heuristics often used to find an upper bound on the
2DBPP. These construction heuristics use a level approach, where the first item is placed at
the bottom left of the bin, and if the next item cannot fit, a new level is initialized at the
height of the tallest item on the level. The items are ordered after decreasing height. The three
construction algorithms previously mentioned work in the following manner:
• In the next-fit algorithm, each item is packed into the current level s if it fits, otherwise,
a new level is initialized, where the item is then placed.
• In the first-fit algorithm, each item is packed into the first level, where it fits. A new level
is initialized if it does not fit into any of the current levels.
• In the best-fit algorithm, the item is packed into the level where the unused space is
minimized. A new level is created if it cannot fit into any of the levels.
Different two-phase algorithms have been proposed for packing the strips into bins, using the
above strip packing in the first phase and then solving the one-dimensional bin packing problem
in the second phase. Finite first-fit (FFF) and finite next-fit (FNF) are one-phase algorithms
that directly pack the items into bins.
December 31, 2024
Page 11 of 92
==PAGE:20==
3.2. Local Search
3.1.2
Difference between 2DBPP and the chute allocation problem
The bin packing problem has multiple variations that are closely related.
Despite allowing
rotation or restricting the solution to contain guillotine cuts, examples of variations of the bin
packing problem are the one and three-dimensional bin packing problem, knapsack problem, the
cutting stock problem, container loading problem, and more [8]. The chute allocation problem
can also be seen as a variation of the 2DBPP. In the chute allocation problem, the flights
represent items to be packed within a bin. Only one bin is available in the chute allocation
problem, and a feasible packing is to place the items within the bin without overlap. Each flight
can be considered as a rectangle with two dimensions: time and chutes. The time duration from
the earliest opening time to the latest opening time of the chutes and the number of required
chutes constitute the rectangle. The height hj for flight j is the time duration for which a flight
needs the assigned chutes, and the width wj is the number of chutes flight j requires. The
height H of the bin is the time of a whole day, and the width W of the bin is the total number
of chutes available. An illustration of the bin with two flights was presented in Figure 1.2 in
section 1.2. The bin is divided into different areas by vertical lines, as the airport has ground
handlers handling specific chutes. The areas constrain the assignment of flights to chutes since
the flights can only be placed within a specific area in the bin. Further, a flight must be assigned
to consecutive chutes, meaning the chutes are adjacent, as the item cannot be separated. In
contrast to the 2DBPP, the items can only be moved in one dimension, as each flight has a
scheduled departure time, which cannot be changed, thus the flight can only be moved in the
chute dimension within the specific area in the bin. In conclusion, the difference between the
2DBPP and the chute allocation problem is the number of available bins to place all the items
within and the restriction on the placement of the items within the bin. In the 2DBPP, we seek
to minimize the number of bins, and in the chute allocation problem, we seek to place all the
items within the specific areas in one bin.
3.2
Local Search
Local search is an iterative process that aims to improve a solution by incrementally changing
it. The process continues until no further improvements can be achieved, at which point a local
optimum is reached. This iterative process is referred to as hill climbing. Local search serves as
the basis for many metaheuristic algorithms.
The local search starts with an initial solution. A construction heuristic typically generates
the initial solution. A change in the solution is made by exploring the neighborhood, N, of
the current solution. For a given solution s, N(s) consists of all possible solutions that can
be reached from s by making a move. A move is an operation that transforms one solution to
another [22].
Let f(s) denote the cost of the current solution s. In a minimization problem, the local search
explores the neighborhood for a solution s∗where f(s∗) < f(s). If such a solution s∗is found,
the local search process is iterated by searching the neighborhood for s∗as the new solution.
The process continues until it finds no further improvement, indicating that a local optimum
has been reached [10].
When implementing the local search framework, one can search the entire neighborhood for
a solution that yields the greatest improvement, updating the current solution with this best
improvement in the next iteration. Alternatively, one can adopt the first improvement approach,
where the search stops once the first solution that improves the current one is found.
3.3
Guided Local Search
Guided Local Search (GLS) is a metaheuristic developed by Voudouris and Tsang [22]. It was
used for solving partial constraint satisfaction problems in [24]. GLS is based on local search.
December 31, 2024
Page 12 of 92
==PAGE:21==
3.3. Guided Local Search
While local search can find good solutions, it is known to get trapped in local optima. To help
local search escape a local optimum, the GLS procedure incorporates features, attributes that
characterize the solution. Defining these features is problem dependent, and they are used to
augment the objective function with penalties for certain features. As a result, the local search
will be guided by this augmented objective function.
The GLS procedure begins by defining a set of features suitable to the problem. A cost, ci,
is associated to each feature i ∈{1, ..., M}. For a solution s an indicator function is used to
indicate whether feature i is present in the solution:
Ii(s) =
{1,
solution s has feature i
0,
otherwise
(3.1)
To help the local search escape a local optimum, the local search will be performed on an
augmented objective function where penalties of present features are included. Features present
in the solution will contribute to the objective function, and features with high cost will affect
the objective function the most. The objective function of a solution s is given as f(s) where
the augmented objective function can be calculated by:
h(s) = f(s) + λ ·
M
∑
i=1
pi · Ii(s)
(3.2)
Here M is the number of features, and λ is the regularization parameter. pi counts how many
times a feature i has been penalized and is initialized to 0 in the procedure. When the local search
reaches a local optimum, the penalties for selected features will be increased by increasing pi by
one. The regularization parameter λ balances the penalties and the original objective function
in the augmented objective function. The value of λ is set experimentally.
When penalizing a feature, the cost of that feature, along with the current penalization of the
feature, is considered. We can define the utility of penalizing a feature i in the current solution
s as:
utili(s) = Ii(s) ·
ci
1 + pi
(3.3)
Including pi in the utility calculation ensures that not just the features with high cost are pe-
nalized. For features that have already been penalized many times, the utilization of penalizing
that feature again will decrease [23].
The GLS procedure involves utilizing an initial solution of the problem constructed using a
heuristic. The first time a local search is applied, it will be on the original objective function
without any penalization, as no features have been penalized yet. The local search then finds a
local optimum for the given problem. After the first call to LS, the features with the maximum
utilization will be penalized. In the next call to GLS, the local search is applied to the augmented
objective function to escape the local optimum. Each time the local search finds a local optimum,
the features and penalizations are updated.
3.3.1
The regularization parameter λ
The regularization parameter λ value is problem-dependent and must be experimentally deter-
mined. It is the only parameter in GLS that is instance-dependent. λ controls the influence of
the penalty on the augmented objective value, affecting how strongly the search is guided away
from heavily penalized features.
For small values of λ, the search is allowed to explore the local solution space more thoroughly,
which can intensify the search and lead to a local minimum. However, if λ is too small, the
December 31, 2024
Page 13 of 92
==PAGE:22==
3.4. Conclusion
search may get stuck in a local minimum. In contrast, large λ values amplify the effect of the
penalties, ensuring that the search in the solution space is diversified to explore new areas,
making it more likely to escape local minima, as reusing features that have been penalized is
discouraged.
Dynamic λ
In [23], it is described that a dynamic λ can lead to good results. In this approach, λ is defined
as the ratio between the objective value in a local minimum and the number of features present
at that minimum, controlled by a scaling factor α:
λ = α ·
f(local minimum)
no. of features present in the local minimum
(3.4)
Here, f is the objective value in the local minimum. The dynamic λ is recalculated after each
call to local search, beginning with the first local minimum. Please note that λ is set before
the penalties are applied to the features for the first time and that α must be determined
experimentally.
3.3.2
Fast Local Search
For problems with large neighborhoods, the local search procedure can take considerable time
to converge to a local optimum. One way to speed up this process is by using Fast Local Search
(FLS), as proposed by Voudouris and Tsang in [22].
In FLS, the neighborhood is divided into sub-neighborhoods, which can be either active or
inactive. Initially, all sub-neighborhoods are activated. During each iteration, only the active
sub-neighborhoods are explored. A sub-neighborhood is deactivated if no improving moves can
be found within it. In contrast, if a move within a sub-neighborhood improves the objective
function, the move is performed. Sub-neighborhoods affected by the performed move may be
reactivated if these have already been inactivated. The principle of FLS is to search the neighbors
likely to improve the solution and ignore the neighbors unlikely to improve the solution [23].
Unlike traditional local search, where the search restarts after every improving move, FLS
performs multiple changes to the solution without restarting until all sub-neighborhoods are
inactive, meaning no further improvements can be made. A metaheuristic is employed to help
the search escape the local optimum, similar to how conventional local search operates.
3.4
Conclusion
The 2DBPP is known to be NP-hard, and the same applies to the chute allocation problem.
The chute allocation problem is more constrained than the 2DBPP; therefore, we will allow
overlap between flights when placing them within the bin. We will utilize a GLS framework to
find a packing solution that minimizes this overlap. As the problem scales, meaning there are
many flights to schedule, the neighborhood for potential solutions also increases significantly. To
address this challenge, we use a FLS to speed up the process. This approach has demonstrated
effective results when applied within a GLS framework.
December 31, 2024
Page 14 of 92
==PAGE:23==
4
Analysis
This chapter will provide a detailed description of the application of GLS to the chute allocation
problem.
We will initially present the assumptions regarding the chute allocation problem.
Then, as GLS utilizes a construction heuristic to build its initial solution, we will present the
construction of various construction heuristics utilizing three distinct sorting methods and four
chute selection methods in subsection 4.1.1. From here, we will introduce the reader to how
GLS is applied to the chute allocation problem in subsection 4.1.2, including the utilization of
FLS on our problem.
We will then describe the implementation of the simulation of the baggage factory in section 4.2.
Here, we explain the assumptions used to construct the simulation and present different EBS
assignment strategies. Finally, key performance indicators will be presented as these will be
closely monitored throughout the simulation and used to evaluate the strategies in the experi-
ments later presented in chapter 7.
4.1
Chute allocation
For clarity, several assumptions regarding chute allocation have been made before constructing
a schedule using greedy construction heuristics. These are described below:
• A selection of the chutes are Flex chutes. These can be used by any ground handling
company and are reassigned between handlers as needed throughout the day.
• When assigning flights to chutes, the layout of the chutes influences the selection of avail-
able chutes for a given flight. Some flights require multiple chutes, as described in sec-
tion 1.2, with each flight j having an associated width wj. The assigned chutes must be
adjacent in the airport layout. Chutes separated by a corridor cannot handle the same
flight. A single corridor is assumed to divide the upper and lower parts of the baggage
factory.
• Chutes located around a corner are considered adjacent.
• Chutes separated by overflow chutes or by chutes not currently used by the airport are
not labeled as adjacent.
• The chutes assigned to a specific flight will close 20 minutes before the flight’s departure.
This buffer time ensures robustness in the solution such that the ground handlers have
time to transport and load the bags onto the flights before departure.
4.1.1
Construction heuristics
Several construction heuristics have been developed to address the chute allocation problem
eﬀiciently. Greedy heuristics are used to quickly schedule flights. The construction heuristic
inserts each flight into the schedule at a feasible position, aiming to minimize the overlap at
each step of the algorithm. Once a flight is placed in the schedule, the algorithm does not
revisit the flight or alter its position in the schedule. Consequently, it is possible to insert two
overlapping flights if no other options are available.
Each heuristic sorts flights based on a chosen method and selects the best chutes for each
flight. A best-fit strategy ensures that the chutes with the least overlap are chosen. In total, 12
construction heuristics are presented, utilizing three sorting methods and four chute selection
methods. The heuristic processes each flight in the sorted order, identifies feasible chutes, and
assigns the flight to the chute set with the minimum overlap. If multiple options yield the same
minimum overlap, the chute selection method determines the assignment.
December 31, 2024
Page 15 of 92
==PAGE:24==
4.1. Chute allocation
Sorting methods
The greedy heuristic considers the flights in a sorted order. The presented sorting methods
considers features such as the flight’s departure time whether the flight is large and, therefore,
require multiple assigned chutes. The flights are sorted in the following manner for the three
sorting methods:
1. The flights are sorted based on the required number of chutes in descending order. Within
each group, the flights are then sorted after departure time in ascending order.
2. The flights are sorted according to departure time in ascending order.
3. The flights are divided into interval groups based on the flight’s departure time. Each
group is a 2-hour interval, and the flights are sorted ascending after departure time in the
interval groups. Within each interval group, the flights are sorted based on the required
number of chutes in descending order.
Chute selection methods
The greedy heuristic assigns the given flight to the set of feasible chutes, which generates the
least overlap with other flights. In case multiple sets of chutes result in the same minimum
overlap, the four chute selection methods assigns the flight in the following manner:
1. The flight is assigned to the first set of chutes.
2. The flight is assigned to the last set of chutes.
3. The flight is assigned to the set of chutes used the least at the given step in the algorithm.
4. The flight is assigned randomly.
4.1.2
Guided Local Search
GLS is utilized to escape a local minimum by learning from previously encountered solutions.
This is achieved by introducing and building up penalties of features during the GLS procedure.
Each time local search reaches a local minimum, GLS modify the objective function to an
augmented objective function to escape the local minimum.
When applying GLS to the chute allocation problem, we define a feature as an overlap between
flight i and flight j in the solution. Whether the solution exhibits the feature can be described
by the following indicator function:
Iij(s) =
{1,
if i, j overlap in s
0,
otherwise
The objective function is modified by increasing the penalty of one or more features present in
that solution. Meaning that the two flights with the penalized overlap will be more expensive to
include in new solutions. This guide the heuristic away from heavily penalized features, allowing
the search to focus on less-explored areas of the solution space [23].
Each feature will be assigned a cost. In the chute allocation problem, the cost will be defined
as the overlap between the two flights. The overlap is defined as the time two flights are using
the same chute multiplied by the number of chutes the two flights are intersecting at:
cij =
{overlapij(s),
if overlapij(s) > 0
0,
otherwise
After reaching a local minimum with local search, the utilization of each feature is calculated
using the indicator function, the cost of the feature (cij), and its penalty (pij),
utilij(s) = Iij(s) ·
cij
1 + pij
(4.1)
December 31, 2024
Page 16 of 92
==PAGE:25==
4.1. Chute allocation
Initially, the penalty, pij for each feature is set to 0. If a feature has not yet been penalized,
the utilization of flight i and flight j in the solution equals the feature’s cost, thus, the amount
of time the two flights overlap. After reaching a local minimum with local search, the feature
exhibiting the maximum utility will be penalized, and the penalty will be incremented by 1.
Number of penalized features
In the experiment section of this thesis (subsection 6.2.2), we will investigate how the number
of penalized features in each iteration influences the performance of the meta heuristic. The
number of penalized features will be denoted µ. In case the number of features in the solution
is less than µ, we penalize the actual number of features present in the solution. An example
could be that µ = 4, and the solution only contains two overlaps, then only the two features will
be penalized. Therefore, in cases where the number of penalized features needs to be adjusted
during the search, µ can be interpreted as a maximum number of penalizations.
GLS Pseudocode
The pseudocode of the GLS framework is provided in Algorithm 1. The heuristic takes the
following inputs: the data d, the regularization parameter λ, the number of features to penalize
µ, and the indicator function I. The indicator function will always indicate whether a feature is
present or not, however, the problem specific definition of a feature is needed to check whether
such feature is present in the solution. Therefore, when the indicator function is used in GLS,
it checks whether an overlap exists between two flights. The values of λ and µ best suiting the
chute allocation problem will be determined experimentally in subsection 6.2.2.
Initially, a construction heuristic generates an initial solution, s, for the problem in the function
greedyHeuristic, whose only input is the data d of the problem. Then, GLS runs until a certain
termination criteria is met. The penalties p are initialized as an empty array, and there are no
present features in the first iteration. Thus, the augmented objective function h returned by
the augmentedObjective function will be the same as the objective of the construction heuristic.
Because the neighborhood is very large, we utilize FLS, which has shown promising results
when used within a GLS framework [17]. All flights are initially active. FLS is then used in
the function FastLocalSearch as an improvement method, operating on the augmented objective
function rather than the original one, returning a solution s where all flights are inactivated.
Further explanation of the implementation of FLS is provided in the next section along with a
pseudocode in Algorithm 2. After each iteration of FLS, the penalties, p, are updated based
on the utilizations in the solution (defined by Equation 4.1). Therefore, the updatePenalties
function takes the indicator function as input, which identifies all overlaps in the solution along
with the number of features to penalize. Then, all flights in the solution are activated, indicated
by the activate function. We check whether the solution s contains a smaller overlap than the
best obtained solution sbest in each iteration. If so, sbest is overwritten by s. This procedure is
repeated until the termination criterion is reached. The termination criteria is when a solution
with an objective of 0 is found, i.e., a solution where no flights overlap or the time limit is
reached. When the termination criteria is met, the best obtained solution across all iterations,
sbest, is returned.
December 31, 2024
Page 17 of 92
==PAGE:26==
4.1. Chute allocation
Algorithm 1 Guided Local Search
1: Input: d, λ, µ, I
2: Output: sbest
3: s ←GreedyHeuristic(d)
4: sbest ←s
5: p ←∅
6: while not Termination Criteria do
7:
h ←augmentedObjective(s, λ, p, I)
8:
s ←FastLocalSearch(s, h)
9:
p ←updatePenalties(s, p, I, µ)
10:
s ←activate(s)
11:
if Cost(s) < Cost(sbest) then
12:
sbest ←s
13:
end if
14: end while
Fast Local Search
FLS is given a solution along with an augmented objective function as input. FLS considers each
flight as a sub-neighborhood. Initially, all sub-neighborhoods are active. FLS is implemented
using the first improvement strategy regarding each flight. Therefore, for each flight all the
feasible chutes are evaluated, and the flight is moved if a move will provide a better objective
than the current solution. However, the move of each flight is made using the best improvement
strategy. Meaning, that all feasible chutes for the fight is evaluated, and the move of the flight
to another set of chutes, which results in the greatest improvement, is chosen.
The pseudocode for the FLS framework is shown in Algorithm 2. FLS takes a solution s, and
the augmented objective function h as input. In the first call to FLS in the GLS framework, the
input solution will be constructed by the greedy construction heuristic, while the input solution
in the following iterations will be those previously improved by FLS.
In FLS, all sub-neighborhoods are initially activated. For each flight, FLS explores if it will
reduce the augmented objective value by moving the flight to another feasible set of chutes while
considering the features and imposed penalties. If there is no improvement in the placement
of the flight, the sub-neighborhood is inactivated. If it is possible to move the flight and get a
better solution, the move is performed. If the moved flight creates a new overlap with another
flight, the affected flight will be activated, if it was currently inactivated. Activating the flight
ensures FLS revisits the sub-neighborhood again. FLS continues to improve the solution until
all sub-neighborhood are inactivated, which is the termination criteria.
December 31, 2024
Page 18 of 92
==PAGE:27==
4.1. Chute allocation
Algorithm 2 Fast Local Search
1: Input: s, h
2: Output: s
3: while not Termination Criteria do
4:
for i do
▷all active flights
5:
smove ←moveOneFlight(i, s, h)
6:
if Cost(smove) < Cost(s) then
7:
s ←smove
8:
s ←activateAffectedFlights(s)
▷activate the flights affected by the move
9:
else
10:
Inactivate i
▷If moving the flight cannot improve the objective value
11:
end if
12:
end for
13: end while
Implementation of dynamic λ in GLS
A dynamic λ is implemented as proposed by Voudouris and Tsang using Equation 3.4, where
λ is dependent on the objective value in the local minimum, the number of features present in
the solution at the local minimum, and a constant α, which must be determined experimentally.
The first update of the dynamic lambda is after the first call to FLS before the penalties are
applied to the features.
A pseudocode for GLS with a dynamic lambda is presented below in Algorithm 3, it is based
on Algorithm 1, additions and changes are indicated by blue text. Please note, that the scaling
parameter α is given as input instead of λ. Instead λ is initialized as 0, but will not be used in the
initial iteration, as there are no features nor penalties given. Therefore, the augmented objective
function is equal to the objective function. It is simply initialized in the pseudocode. After each
call to FLS the number of present features in the solution f ∗, i.e. the number of overlaps between
flights, is found using the indicator function I on the solution s by the countFeatures function
indicated with blue. Then, λ is updated using the updateLambda function which takes α, the
solution from FLS and f ∗as inputs. The new λ will be used in the following iteration to calculate
the augmented objective value. After λ has been found, the features with maximum utilization
are found and penalized in updatePenalties, in the same manner as the static implementation of
GLS. The sub-neighborhoods are reactivated, and sbest is updated, if the found solution contains
less overlap than the current best solution.
December 31, 2024
Page 19 of 92
==PAGE:28==
4.2. Simulation
Algorithm 3 Guided Local Search using a dynamic λ
1: Input: d, α, µ, I
2: s ←GreedyHeuristic(d)
3: sbest ←s
4: p ←∅
5: λ ←0
6: while not Termination Criteria do
7:
h ←augmentedObjective(s, λ, p, I)
8:
s ←FastLocalSearch(s, h)
9:
f ∗←countFeatures(s, I)
10:
λ ←updateLambda(α, s, f ∗)
11:
p ←updatePenalties(s, p, I, µ)
12:
s ←activate(s)
13:
if Cost(s) < Cost(sbest) then
14:
sbest ←s
15:
end if
16: end while
4.2
Simulation
The simulation of the baggage factory and the chute allocation are connected, as the simulation
is used to model and evaluate the chute allocation within the baggage handling system. The
following section will explain the simulation in the baggage factory, including the assumptions
made to implement the simulation and a description of how the simulation is developed. Then
the EBS assignment strategies will be developed and we will introduce the chosen parameters.
The section will conclude with a description of the key performance indicators that we have set
up to evaluate the overall performance of the assignment strategies.
4.2.1
Chute allocation data for simulation
The chute allocation schedule may contain overlaps, resulting in two flights being assigned the
same chute at the same time. A chute is not allowed to handle multiple flights at once, as this
may lead to manual errors and missed bags. Therefore, the overlaps in the chute allocation for
the different instances are removed by adjusting the opening times of the chutes. The opening
time of a chute for the later flight will be delayed to ensure that a chute for a specific flight
opens when the same chute for a previous flight has closed. If a flight requires multiple chutes,
we assume that all of these chutes will open and close simultaneously. Therefore, if the opening
time for one chute needs adjustment, the opening times of any additional chutes for the same
flight will be adjusted accordingly. When adjusting the chute allocation schedule, flights can be
placed back to back. Meaning, that the second the chute closes for one flight, it immediately
opens for the next.
4.2.2
Developing the Simulation Model
The simulation models the process from when the baggage enters the baggage factory until it
reaches the correct chute. The system has a single entity: the bags, which are induced into the
system at specific timestamps. We have multiple resources in the system, including a sorter
with fixed capacity and a number of EBS belts of varying lengths.
Before explaining how the simulation is developed we present the different assumptions made
and the specifications of the system in order to implement the simulation model.
• The baggage factory has one sorter.
• The sorter has a fixed capacity and each slot on the sorter can hold one piece of baggage.
December 31, 2024
Page 20 of 92
==PAGE:29==
4.2. Simulation
• The sorter move at a constant speed and it takes a fixed amount of time to complete an
entire circuit.
• There is a fixed number of EBS belts with varying capacities.
Each belt has a fixed
capacity in the model.
• The sorter is connected to all the EBS belts, but at different chutes. This means, that a
piece of baggage needs to be at the right chute to be directed to a specific EBS belt.
• Once a piece of baggage is placed on an EBS belt, the entire belt must be emptied to
return the baggage to the sorter. It is not possible to remove a single piece of baggage
from the middle of the belt and place it on the sorter.
• If the EBS belts are full, the bags are allowed to circulate the sorter and will attempt to
be reassigned to EBS at the reassignment chute locations.
• Two queues are considered in the system: a queue from when the bag is induced into the
system before it has been given a spot on the sorter, and a queue from the EBS belts back
to the sorter.
Operations during each time step
The bags enters the baggage factory at the specific timestamps.
Each piece of baggage is
associated to a flight with an assigned chute, which has specific opening and closing times. The
simulation runs for 24 hours (one full day), where the time is incremented with the time it takes
for the sorter to move one slot. Thus, with each iteration in the simulation, the sorter advances
by one slot, and the time increases by the amount of time it takes for the sorter to move a single
slot.
At each time step, the simulation follows a series of actions that are executed in the following
order
1. Bag Induction
• If new bags are induced into the system between the last and current time step, these
are all placed in the sorter queue.
2. Sorter Operations
• If there are bags in the sorter queue, check if there is an available slot at the beginning
of the sorter, which is the connection point between the sorter queue and sorter. If
so, move the bag from the queue onto the sorter.
• For each bag on the sorter: check if the location is at the assigned chute. If so, tilt
the bag into the chute, freeing up the slot on the sorter. The assigned chute could
be:
– A regular chute.
– An overflow chute (if the assigned chute is closed and the plane has departed or
is close to).
– A connecting EBS chute: the sorter has specific chutes that lead to the EBS
belts.
• Check if there is a bag on the sorter at one of the reassignment chute locations. If
there is, check whether the bag needs reassignment to EBS.
3. EBS Management
• Check if any of the EBS belts should be emptied according to the emptying strategy.
If so, empty the EBS into a queue.
December 31, 2024
Page 21 of 92
==PAGE:30==
4.2. Simulation
• Check if the connection point where a bag moves from the EBS belt to the sorter is
empty. If so, remove the bag from the queue and add it to the sorter at that slot.
4. Sorter Movement
• At the end of each time step, advance all plates on the sorter by one slot.
4.2.3
Parameters in the EBS assignment strategy
In the simulation, 14 belts are available for early baggage storage. They are emptied according
to a specific unloading strategy. If the bag is checked in before the associated chutes open, it
is assigned an EBS belt. The best belt for the bag is the belt with unloading time a certain
amount of time before the chute opens and at least one hour before the chute closes. If such
a belt exists, the bag will be assigned to this belt. It is possible to have multiple best belts
for a given bag; in these cases, we place the bag on the first with the capacity available. Some
belts are uncategorized belts, designated for miscellaneous bags that do not fit into any other
belts. This situation arises when bags are checked in very early and do not meet the unloading
time requirements of the other belts or if all the other belts are full. As a result, these bags are
assigned to an uncategorized belt. Because the uncategorized belt contains bags with a wide
range of departure times, it is emptied a certain amount of time before the chute closes for the
bag with the earliest departure time on that belt. Some bags may still require EBS when the
uncategorized belt is emptied. These bags are then assigned to a new EBS belt and circulate
the sorter until they reach the chute connecting to the assigned EBS belt. If the EBS belts are
full, the bag can circulate the sorter at maximum circulation time. If the best belts for the given
bag are full, we use our overflow strategy to choose another belt for that bag. The overflow
strategy is handling bags that are supposed to be stored at a specific belt, but that belt is at full
capacity. The different overflow strategies, unloading intervals, number of uncategorized belts,
and maximum circulation time chosen for the experiments are described further in the following
sections.
Maximum circulation time
The maximum circulation time affects the system when bags enter the sorter. If a bag arrives
before its designated chute is open, it is allowed to circulate on the sorter for a duration corre-
sponding to the maximum circulation time if the chute opens within this time frame. If no space
is available on the assigned EBS belt, the bag is allowed to circulate the sorter for the maximum
circulation time and attempt to get reassigned to another EBS belt. The bag will attempt to
be reassigned to a new EBS belt at the reassignment chute locations. If the bag exceeds the
maximum circulation time, it will be directed to an overflow chute and handled manually.
EBS unloading intervals
We conduct experiments with different EBS unloading intervals. The unloading interval is the
interval between the unloading of each EBS belt, not including the uncategorized belts. An
unloading interval of 30 minutes means that if EBS belt 1 is set to be emptied at 8:00, then
EBS belt 2 is set to be emptied at 8:30.
Number of uncategorized belts
The uncategorized belts are primarily used for bags that enter the system a long time before
departure of the associated flight and for bags that cannot fit into the other belts.
Overflow strategy
The overflow strategy manages bags that cannot fit into the best belt for that bag. In all cases,
we will choose the best belt for the given bag. If we cannot find a best belt, it indicates that
the bag has been inducted into the system early, and it will be assigned to an uncategorized
belt. When assigning a bag to an uncategorized belt, we choose the belt with the unloading
time closest to the optimal unloading time, which is not at full capacity. If the bag should be
assigned a belt with an earlier unloading time, the unloading time of the uncategorized belt
is then adjusted to accommodate the bag. If the best belts for the bag exist but are at full
capacity, we use one of our implemented overflow strategies instead.
December 31, 2024
Page 22 of 92
==PAGE:31==
4.2. Simulation
• Overflow strategy 1: When the bag cannot go on the best belt, we assign it to an
uncategorized belt. If none of the uncategorized belts have capacity left, the bag circulates
the sorter until it can be assigned an EBS belt, the chute opens or the maximum allowed
circulation time has been reached.
• Overflow strategy 2: The time interval for finding the best belts has been changed in
this strategy. Instead of finding belts that are emptied at least an hour before the chutes
close and the maximum circulation time before the chutes open, the new interval is now
30 minutes before the chutes open and at least 30 minutes before the chutes close. If these
belts are full, the bag is assigned to an uncategorized belt.
• Overflow strategy 3: If there is no remaining capacity on the best belts for the given
bag, all belts (excluding the uncategorized belts) with an unloading time earlier than that
of the best belt are sorted by the closest unloading time to the best one. The bag is then
assigned to the first of the sorted belts, that can fit the bag. If none of these belts have
capacity, the bag is assigned to an uncategorized belt.
• Overflow strategy 4: If there is no remaining capacity on the best belts for the given
bag, all other belts (excluding uncategorized belts) are sorted by their unloading times,
selecting the one closest to the ideal unloading time for the bag. The ideal unloading time
is defined as one hour before the chutes close. The bag is then assigned to the first belt
with capacity. If the selected belt has an unloading time later than the ideal time for the
bag, the unloading time is adjusted. If none of the belts have available capacity, the bag
will be assigned to an uncategorized belt.
• Overflow strategy 5: We identify all belts with available capacity (excluding uncatego-
rized belts) and randomly select one from this group. If the selected belt has an unloading
time later than the ideal time for the bag, we adjust the unloading time accordingly. If
no belts have capacity available, we assign the bag to an uncategorized belt.
Suppose all belts in the EBS are at full capacity.
In that case, the bag will circulate the
sorter until it can be stored on an EBS belt, the associated chute has opened, or the maximum
circulation time has been reached.
4.2.4
Succes criteria / key performance indicators
To monitor and evaluate the system, we have set up different indicators.
Resource utilization is closely monitored throughout the simulation to evaluate the effectiveness
of the EBS strategy. The first resource we monitor is the utilization of the EBS belts. Ideally, the
belts should operate at full capacity, as this reflects optimal use of storage resources. However,
issues arise when the belts are unable to manage the assigned number of bags. The second
resource we monitor is the sorter’s utilization. This provides insights into which periods the
system is under most stress and how emptying the EBS belts impacts the system. Additionally,
we track the system queues, particularly those formed when an EBS belt is emptied to assess its
impact on the system. We also track the queue formed when accessing the sorter to determine
if there are specific timestamps when the number of bags induced into the system stresses the
system.
Table 4.1: Utilizations and queues tracked to monitor the system
Utilizations
Queue
Utilization of the sorter
Utilization of EBS belts
Queue to the sorter
Queue between EBS and sorter
We have set up a set of key performance indicators (KPI) to evaluate how well the system
December 31, 2024
Page 23 of 92
==PAGE:32==
4.2. Simulation
handles the EBS strategy and the chute allocation. These can be found in Table 4.2.
The goal is to minimize the number of bags that miss their flights. A missed bag is a bag with
less than 10 minutes to departure because the flight is ready for takeoff and all doors have been
closed. We also aim to reduce the number of bags that arrive in the overflow chute, which ground
handlers must manually transport to the respective flights. A bag is defined as an overflow bag if
the assigned chute is closed, and there is between 10 and 20 minutes until departure. The third
KPI is overflow bags because the bag has been circulating the sorter for a maximum circulation
time. The final KPI is the frequency with which the EBS belts are emptied. The aim is to
minimize the number of times the belts are emptied, as this puts stress on the system while
ensuring that bags can be stored on them.
Table 4.2: Key performance indicators for the simulation
Key performance indicators
Number of missed bags
Number of overflow bags
Number of overflow bags due to reaching maximum circulation time
Number of EBS unloadings
December 31, 2024
Page 24 of 92
==PAGE:33==
5
Data and airport specifications
This section will introduce the data provided by Copenhagen Airport (CPH Aiport) along with
a description of the layout of their baggage factory. CPH Airport has two baggage factories,
and this thesis only considers the largest one, Baggage Factory 3, BF3, which handles 85% of
the bags [13]. BF3 will simply be referred to as the baggage factory in the following.
Initially we will present the data, which contains baggage information from three separate days
during the summer of 2024. It contains records of all checked bags for these dates, including the
assigned flight, corresponding departure time, and timestamps indicating when each bag entered
the baggage factory. Each flight is categorized by size, which determines the number of required
chutes and how long the chute must open before departure. Additionally, each flight is managed
by a specific ground handler, as prearranged agreements exist between airlines and handling
companies. The section will conclude with a description of layout of the baggage factory and
how the chutes was assigned to ground handlers in the period the data was gathered.
5.1
Baggage and flight information
The baggage data contains records from three specific days during the summer of 2024: June
13th, June 24th, and July 8th. For each checked bag, the dataset includes a record of:
• The flight name to which the bag is assigned.
• The departure time of the flight.
• The induction time, which is the time the baggage is scanned upon entering the sorting
system in BF3.
• The ground handling company managing the flight.
• The flight group indicating the size of the flight. The group determines the number of
required chutes and how early the chute must open before departure:
– Flight group B: small flight, requires 1 chute, must open 2 hours before departure.
– Flight group C and D: regular flight, requires 2 chutes, must open 2 hours before
departure.
– Flight group E: large flight, requires 4 chutes, must open 3 hours before departure.
Flight group E is considered a large flight and can only use specific chutes, which contain special
lifting equipment. In CPH airport, a large flight can only use one of the following chute numbers:
23 −33, 103 −115, and 121 −151.
The data set is anonymized.
As a result, the four ground handling companies are named
”Handler1”, ”Handler2”, ”Handler3,” and ”Handler4” rather than the actual ground handling
company names. Additionally, flights are labeled ”Flight” followed by a random number, e.g.
”Flight01” or ”Flight298”. Please note that the induction time will only be used in the simulation
part of the project.
5.1.1
Cleaning of data
As we are dealing with real data, we cleaned the data before using it. To clean the data, we
have done the following for each of the three instances:
1. We have removed records where the departure time does not match the instance name,
keeping only the bag records for June 13th, June 24th, and July 8th, respectively.
December 31, 2024
Page 25 of 92
==PAGE:34==
5.1. Baggage and flight information
2. We have removed the records where the bag is induced into the system another day than
the departure of its assigned flight.
First, we removed a total number of 666 records from the data, where the departure date differed
from the instance date. The specific number of removed records for each instance can be found
in Table 5.1. Afterward, we removed an additional 60 records in total where the bag was induced
into the system on another date than the departure date.
Table 5.1: Table summarizing the initial number of records, the number of removed records due
to a different departure date, the number of removed records due to a different injection date
and the final number of records in each instance
Instance
Date
Initial
records
Different
dep. date
Different
inject date
Final
records
Day1
June 13th
18248
86
15
18147
Day2
June 24th
23722
164
12
23546
Day3
July 8th
30235
416
33
29786
5.1.2
Characteristics of the Instances
The three provided instances have distinct characteristics, allowing us to more effectively address
the problem’s diversity.
The instances will be referred to as Day1, Day2 and Day3 in the
remainder of this thesis. The three dates represent a Thursday and two Mondays. The days
vary in the number of flights, the number of bags handled, and the proportion of large planes. As
large planes need more chutes than small planes, more stress is applied to the system when the
number of large planes increases. The characteristics of each instance, can be seen in Table 5.2.
The number of bags on the least busy day, Day1, is only 61% of the number of bags on the
busiest day, Day3.
Table 5.2: Characteristics of each instance provided by CPH Airport.
Instance
Date
Day of the
week
Number
of bags
Number
of flights
% Large planes
% Small planes
Day1
June 13th
Thursday
18147
310
5, 5%
0, 0%
Day2
June 24th
Monday
23546
316
6, 3%
0, 3%
Day3
July 8th
Monday
29786
306
7, 2%
0, 0%
Departure times
The departure times for the flights on the three days all experience peak hours. The number
of departures per 15 minutes is plotted in Figure 5.1. Therefore, the records at 00:30 show the
number of departures from 00:15 to 00:30. There are only a couple of departures during the night
around 1:30. The morning traﬀic begins at 5:30, peaking around 7:30. Another peak occurs
at 9:15, followed by the largest peak during the day around lunchtime, at 12:15. Throughout
the afternoon, the activity level is continuously high, without clear peaks, until the peak in the
evening at 22:30.
December 31, 2024
Page 26 of 92
==PAGE:35==
5.1. Baggage and flight information
Figure 5.1: Number of departures every 15 minutes for each of the three days.
Induction times
For the simulation part of the project, the induction time of baggage for each instance will
be used. The number of bags induced every 15 minutes is visualized in Figure 5.2. The data
reveals that morning traﬀic gradually begins between 3:00 and 6:30, with two significant peaks
during the day. The first peak occurs between 6:30 and 8:00 and the second between 10:30 and
12:00. During these times, up to 900 bags are induced into the system every 15 minutes. The
morning peak aligns with the 8:00 departure peak, suggesting that passengers starts checking in
approximately 1.5 hours before their flights. Similarly, the mid-morning induction peak around
11:00 coincides with the subsequent departure peak.
Figure 5.2: Number of bags induced every 15 minutes for each of the three datasets from CPH
Airport.
December 31, 2024
Page 27 of 92
==PAGE:36==
5.2. Airport specifications: Chute assignment to ground handlers
While the plot of the departure times shows that the departures are relatively evenly distributed
throughout the day, the induction records shows a higher concentration of activity before noon.
After the midday peak, the number of bags entering the system gradually declines as the day
progresses.
The following plot in Figure 5.3 shows the minutes until departure depending on the induction
time to illustrate how long, before departure, the bags enter the baggage factory. The quantiles
for the instance have been included as horizontal lines, where Q1 = 82.9, Q2 = 110.9, and
Q3 = 178.0.
The plot has been shown for Day2.
However, the plot and quantiles for the
two remaining instances are very similar and can be found in the appendix in Figure 10.1 and
Figure 10.2.
Figure 5.3: The scatter plot shows how long prior to departure the bags are induced into the
baggage factory. The plot is shown for Day2, where Q1 = 82.9, Q2 = 110.9, and Q3 = 178.0.
From Figure 5.3, it is clear that 50% of the bags enter the baggage factory less than 110 minutes
before departure.
Their chutes will be open for these bags, and they will not take up any
space on the EBS. Bags that enter the system more than 120 minutes before departure must
be assigned an EBS unless assigned to a large flight. In that case, the chute will open 180
minutes before departure. However, only between 5.5% and 7.2% of flights during the day are
large flights. Consequently, most chutes will open 120 minutes before departure. Therefore, the
figure indicates that many bags must be stored at the EBS. Furthermore, we want to highlight
a significant spike at 7:00, indicating that many bags are introduced at this time, with some
entering the system as early as 800 minutes before their scheduled departure.
5.2
Airport specifications: Chute assignment to ground
handlers
We will now present the actual layout of the baggage factory to familiarize the reader with the
connection between the sorter, chutes, and EBS belts in Figure 5.4. The airport has two sorters:
sorter 1, shown in red on the image, and sorter 2, shown in green. Each sorter is connected
December 31, 2024
Page 28 of 92
==PAGE:37==
5.2. Airport specifications: Chute assignment to ground handlers
to all the chutes, shown as black circles. Each sorter is only connected to specific EBS belts,
shown in blue, and can only receive and deliver bags to these. It takes each sorter 4.5 minutes
to complete an entire circuit. Sorter 1 has 389 sorter plates, while sorter 2 has 367 plates. Each
sorter plate can carry a single piece of luggage.
Figure 5.4: Layout of the baggage factory in CPH Airport. The chutes are shown as black
circles, the sorter belt is red, and the EBS belts are blue. The image has been provided by CPH
Airport.
The baggage factory contains a total of 134 chutes connected to the sorter. Each chute has a
number in the range 1-151. Currently, six chutes (1, 2, 3, 4, 28, and 103) are not in use, and
four additional chutes (5, 37, 66, and 78) function as overflow chutes. Overflow chutes are used
when a bag arrives at the baggage factory after the assigned chute has closed. Bags directed
to an overflow chute require manual handling by the ground handlers. As a result, the chutes
cannot be used in the allocation. This leaves 124 chutes available for allocation to flights.
CPH Airport has an agreement with the ground handling companies, where specific chutes are
pre-assigned to each company quarterly. An additional subset of the chutes is designated as
Flex chutes, which any handler can use. The airport provides the chute assignment for the four
ground handlers during the summer of 2024, corresponding to the data instances. Table 5.3
provides an overview of the number of chutes assigned to each handler, as well as the number
of flights each handler is responsible for across the three instances.
Table 5.3: The number of chutes in each handler area and the number of flights handled by each
ground handling company the three days.
Handler1
Handler2
Handler3
Handler4
Chutes
66
14
20
11
Flights Day1
187
28
47
48
Flights Day2
185
31
60
61
Flights Day3
167
28
55
56
A visual representation of the assigned chutes can be found in Figure 5.5. Here colors have been
applied on the layout of the baggage factory. The six chutes not currently in use have been
removed for clarity, while the four overflow chutes are left unmarked. The blue arrows indicate
that two chutes are considered adjacent.
December 31, 2024
Page 29 of 92
==PAGE:38==
5.2. Airport specifications: Chute assignment to ground handlers
Figure 5.5: The chute assignment to the four handlers and flex during the three instances in the
summer of 2024 in CPH Airport. Each handler’s area is marked with a specific color.
When a flight requires more than one chute, the assigned chutes must be adjacent and belong
to the flight’s assigned handler. Two chutes can be utilized if one is a flex chute and the other
belongs to the assigned handler. Since a flight cannot be assigned an overflow chute, the overflow
chutes break two otherwise adjacent chutes in a handler area.
The baggage enters the baggage facility from the upper left corner. The sorter moves clockwise,
and the chutes in the upper section of Figure 5.5 are all connected, as are the chutes in the
bottom part of the layout. This means that a flight can be assigned the two chutes at each end,
which are considered adjacent, as indicated by the blue arrows. However, as indicated in the
figure with the blue arrow in the top left, two overflow chutes are connected. Since these can
never be assigned, the adjacent chutes, the first chute from the left in the red area for Handler4
and the first chute in the green area for Handler3, can only be used in conjunction with the
chute they have on their opposite side. The same can be said in the upper right corner for
Handler1, where the overflow chute 37 is located between two chutes for Handler1, resulting in
these two chutes only having a single neighboring chute they can be allocated with.
5.2.1
Indices of the chutes for the chute selection methods
In the chute selection methods of the construction heuristic, the chutes are considered according
to their indices. The chutes are considered such that the first index corresponds to the chute
in the upper left corner of Handler4. The next chute is to the right of the first chute. Once
the top row is complete, the following chute is located around the corner. After that, the whole
bottom row of the top section is considered. Then, we move on to the bottom section of the
chutes, starting with the bottom row and moving to the right. At the end of that row, the
chutes connect back to the top row.
December 31, 2024
Page 30 of 92
==PAGE:39==
6
Experiments: Chute allocation
In this chapter, we present the results of the 12 construction heuristics based on data from
CPH Airport.
The construction heuristic resulting in the best average solution across the
three instances will be used in implementing GLS. We then evaluate GLS through a series of
experiments.
Initially, a basic version of GLS is implemented with a static λ parameter. The parameter is
tuned, and we also investigate whether increasing the number of penalized features after each
iteration of FLS will improve the solution.
The second experiment examines the impact of
dynamically adjusting λ during the search. In this approach, λ is updated after each call to
FLS, aiming to determine whether this dynamic adjustment leads to better objective values. The
chapter concludes with an evaluation and comparison of the results from these experiments. We
want to identify the most effective implementation of GLS to achieve the lowest objective values.
Ideally, the best-found implementation can serve as a reference for similar chute allocation
problems as the one described in this thesis.
All the results presented in this chapter were obtained using HPC computers, specifically Huawei
XH620 V3 with an Intel Xeon Processor 2650v4. We used Julia version 1.10.2 for our compu-
tations. To ensure reproducibility, we set the random seed to 1234, as chute selection method 4
involves a random choice.
6.1
Construction heuristic
We tested 12 unique greedy heuristics, each combining one of three sorting methods with one of
four chute selection methods described in subsection 4.1.1. Using flight data from three instances
provided by CPH Airport, each heuristic generated an initial solution.
The objective value, representing the total overlap in the initial solution, is presented for each
heuristic as an average across the three instances in Table 6.1. The solutions for each instance
can be found in the appendix subsection 10.0.1. The average overlap is calculated to determine
the construction heuristic likely to yield the best overall results.
Conditional formatting is
applied to the table, with low objective values highlighted in green and high values in red.
Table 6.1: Average objectives across on the three CPH Airport instances for each construction
heuristic. Conditional formatting is applied with low values in green and high values in red.
Chute Selection 1
Chute Selection 2
Chute Selection 3
Chute Selection 4
Sort 1
923.33
961.67
1061.67
1241.67
Sort 2
1818.33
3346.67
2040.00
3273.33
Sort 3
726.67
1213.33
738.33
1181.67
Table 6.1 shows the average overlap of the 12 different greedy heuristics across the three dates.
From the table, we observe that sorting methods 1 and 3 consistently produce significantly
lower objectives than sorting method 2. Sorting method 2 only sorts by the earliest departure
time, whereas sorting methods 1 and 3 both consider larger planes. Hence, the results suggest
that flights requiring most chutes should be prioritized in the planning process. Furthermore,
when using sorting method 1, which initially sorts flights by their required number of chutes
in descending order, and by earliest departure time within each group, we find that the first
three chute selection methods yield better results than chute selection method 4. When using
sorting method 3, which arranges flights by departure time in ascending order, and then orders
December 31, 2024
Page 31 of 92
==PAGE:40==
6.2. Results of the Guided Local Search
flights by chute requirements within each 2 hour interval, chute selection methods 1 and 3 are
preferable and yield the best results.
We also observe that chute selection method 4 results in higher objective values than the other
three methods, indicating that random chute selection is not the most effective. Chute selections
1 and 2 use the layout of the chutes to assign the flights to those with the minimum overlap;
method 1 assigns to the first available index and method 2 to the last. Chute selection 3, in
contrast, distributes flights across the baggage facility by assigning the flights to the least-used
chutes.
The best overall result is achieved by combining chute selection method 1 with sorting method
3, yielding an average overlap of 726.67. This suggests that sorting flights initially by departure
time and then, within 2-hour intervals, by chute requirements, combined with a chute selection
that fills up the chutes that have been used the least, is best.
The best greedy construction heuristic, which use sorting method 3 and chute selection 1, will
serve as the initial solution for further analysis.
6.2
Results of the Guided Local Search
In this section, we describe our testing of the GLS implementation and present the results
obtained. Two distinct experiments are conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of GLS in solving
the chute allocation problem. The first experiment focuses on the influence of the parameter λ,
performing parameter tuning to determine the optimal λ value for this problem. This tuning
also examines whether increasing the number of penalized features after each iteration of the
FLS can improve the solution quality. The second experiment introduces a dynamic adjustment
of λ based on the objective value of the most recently discovered solution and the number of
present features in this solution.
A time limit of 60 minutes was applied to all GLS experiments. Preliminary testing indicated
that a 60-minute limit led to better results compared to shorter limits. In some cases, the best
objective value was reached within the first 15 minutes, while for other λ values, the search
utilized the entire hour to improve the solution further. The parameter λ will be explained in
the following section.
Below, we provide two examples for different λ values for the instance of Day3, illustrating how
the best objective value can be found both early and later in the search, see Figure 6.1 and
6.2. From the airport’s perspective, they want a heuristic that can produce a good solution.
Therefore, an hour is acceptable since the chute allocation process can be run every night.
Figure 6.1: Preliminary experiment illustrating how the best objective value is found early in
the search.
December 31, 2024
Page 32 of 92
==PAGE:41==
6.2. Results of the Guided Local Search
Figure 6.2: Preliminary experiment illustrating how the best objective value is found later in
the search.
In the plot shown in Figure 6.1, the best objective value is achieved just before 500 iterations.
Differently, in Figure 6.2, we see that the best objective value is found just before 2000 iterations.
Based on this, allowing GLS to run for one hour provides time to explore different areas of the
solution space, while relatively quickly providing the airport with a solution.
6.2.1
The regularization parameter λ
To illustrate the influence of λ in the augmented objective function, the overlap term f(x) is
plotted along with the penalty term for two different values of λ in Figure 6.3 and 6.4. The
overlap term is plotted as the blue line while the penalty term is plotted as the orange line. λ
has been chosen as a percentage of the max box size, defined as the maximum time a chute can
be open for a flight, multiplied by the maximum number of chutes a flight can require. Using
the data from CPH Airport, the max box size = 640.
The first plot, Figure 6.3 is an example where the λ value has been chosen very small (λ = 1%).
The graph contains plateaus for the overlap term indicating that the search gets stuck in a
local minimum. During these plateaus, the penalty term increases rapidly, indicating that the
same features are used in the solution, and for each iteration, are being more penalized. A clear
example is from 690 to 700 iterations, where the penalty term spikes as the overlap term is at a
plateau. The penalized feature is eventually removed from the solution at the 700th iteration,
leading to an instant drop in the penalty term. Because the feature is no longer present in the
solution, we see a shift in the overlap term indicating a new solution is found, and a new area
of the solution space can now be examined.
December 31, 2024
Page 33 of 92
==PAGE:42==
6.2. Results of the Guided Local Search
Figure 6.3: Influence of a small λ = 1% of the max box size on the penalty term and overlap
term during the search of GLS, using data from Day3.
The second plot, Figure 6.4, illustrates a large value of λ = 20%. In contrast, we see that it
is now the penalty term that forms plateaus and not the overlap term. This suggests that the
search is diversifying into the solution space, avoiding using the features that are penalized.
We can also see a larger variation in both the penalty term and overlap term. The increased
variation in the overlap term indicates that new areas are explored much more in the search.
However, the increased variation in the penalty term and quick growth implies that the local
minimum cannot be thoroughly investigated.
Figure 6.4: Influence of a large λ = 20% of the max box size on the penalty term and overlap
term during the search of GLS, using data from Day3.
December 31, 2024
Page 34 of 92
==PAGE:43==
6.2. Results of the Guided Local Search
6.2.2
Parameter tuning of λ and number of penalized features
The parameter tuning of λ will include tuning the number of features penalized after each
iteration of FLS, denoted µ.
By adjusting µ we try to determine how penalizing multiple
features impacts the balance between intensifying and diversifying in the solution search, and
especially in relation to λ, which scales the influence of the penalties.
Initial tuning
The parameter tuning is performed on the three instances with λ varying from 1% to 20%
of the maximal box size, and µ varying from 1 to 4. The average objective values across the
three instances are summarized in Table 6.2. Detailed results for each instance can be found in
Table 10.2 in the appendix subsection 10.0.2.
Table 6.2: Results of the initial parameter tuning of λ and the number of penalized features µ
for GLS, the average of the three instances with a time limit of 60 minutes is presented.
µ \λ
1%
5%
10%
15%
20%
1
346.67
273.33
266.67
298.33
271.67
2
311.67
261.67
246.67
276.67
283.33
3
331.67
275.00
258.33
293.33
283.33
4
353.33
300.00
306.67
291.67
268.33
From Table 6.2 it is clear that λ = 1% produces much worse results compared to the remaining
values, indicating that this parameter is too small. The best outcomes are achieved when µ = 2
and λ = 10%, with an average objective value of 246.67. Similar, using µ = 3 with λ = 10%
and using µ = 2 with λ = 5% showed good results.
When averaging the results across instances, Day2 has the largest influence due to its higher
values (an average value of 453.0), followed by Day3 (376.1) and Day1 (37.3).
Erasing the
influence of each day by normalizing the results using min-max scaling before taking the average
does not change the outcome of the initial parameter tuning. The normalized results can be
found in Table 10.3 in the appendix subsection 10.0.2. It is worth noting that the Day1 instance
has fewer bags and a smaller percentage of large planes, potentially classifying it as an ”easier”
scenario compared to the other instances.
However, our heuristic is intended to be robust
and capable of generating effective chute allocation schedules across all types of operational
scenarios. Consequently, we have chosen to present the non-normalized results in the tables and
in the following results.
Extended tuning
Based on the initial findings, we narrowed the focus to λ values ranging from 5% to 12%. The
average results across the three instances are presented in Table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Results of the extended parameter tuning of λ and the number of penalized features
µ for GLS, the average of the three instances with a time limit of 60 minutes is presented.
µ \λ
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
11%
12%
1
273.33
266.67
308.33
303.33
283.33
266.67
298.33
280.00
2
261.67
276.67
243.33
266.67
265.00
246.67
236.67
276.67
3
275.00
301.67
288.33
275.00
286.67
258.33
255.00
286.67
4
300.00
265.00
303.33
290.00
283.33
306.67
290.00
343.33
The extension of the parameter tuning, summarized in Table 6.3, highlight three optimal pa-
rameter combinations: µ = 2 paired with λ = 7%, 10%, or 11%. The best combination, λ = 11%
and µ = 2, achieves an average objective value of 236.67.
December 31, 2024
Page 35 of 92
==PAGE:44==
6.2. Results of the Guided Local Search
A plot showing how the search progresses in the solution space, along with how the penalty term
influences the objective for this best combination of parameters is shown for Day2 in Figure 6.5
below, where the optimal objective value is plotted as a red point. The corresponding plots for
the other two instances can be found in the appendix (Figure 10.3 and Figure 10.4).
Figure 6.5: Progression of the GLS algorithm with λ = 11% of the max box size and the
number of penalized features µ = 2 for Day2. The plot shows the objective value as a function
of iterations. The blue graph represents the overlap term, while the orange graph represents the
penalty term. The best objective value is found to be 335.
We see that the best objective is found after approximately 30% of the iterations are run. It
can further be observed that after approximately half the iterations, the penalty term increases
rapidly and continuously without finding a better objective value.
Since the optimal value of λ is problem dependent and might work well for some instances but
perform poorly for others, we would now like to explore if we can encounter a better solution if
λ is adjusted dynamically during the search.
6.2.3
Dynamic λ value
Until now, we have used a static λ in our implementation of GLS. However, a static λ value
may either penalize features too much or too little throughout the search, making it diﬀicult
to balance the influence of penalties across different phases of the search. Hence, dynamically
adjusting λ based on the current position in the solution space could improve the heuristic.
To find the optimal value for α, we conducted parameter tuning, varying α from 0.1 to 0.9 to
identify which value yields the best performance for our problem. We decided to penalize 2
features after each call to FLS, as this showed effectiveness in the previous section. The average
objectives for the three instances can be found below in Table 6.4.
December 31, 2024
Page 36 of 92
==PAGE:45==
6.2. Results of the Guided Local Search
Table 6.4: Results of the parameter tuning of α for the GLS method using dynamic λ. The
parameter µ is set to 2 and the average of the three instances with a time limit of 60 minutes is
presented.
α
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Average obj.
315.00
318.33
280.00
306.67
306.67
320.00
238.33
336.67
303.33
The results from the parameter tuning indicate that the best average objective values were
achieved with α = 0.7, which yielded an average objective value of 238.33. In comparison, the
best average objective value obtained with a static λ was 236.67. To see if better results could
be achieved near 0.7, we examined the average objectives for α = 0.65 and α = 0.75, but they
returned an average of 283.33 and 285.0, respectively.
To further investigate potential improvements with a dynamic λ, we analyzed the results when
µ = 1, applying the same values of α varying from 0.1 to 0.9 as for µ = 2. The results are
included in the appendix Table 10.7 as they showed that using µ = 1 is not better than µ = 2.
The best average objective value using µ = 1 was 305.00 for α = 0.8. Unfortunately, the results
cannot be used to show that the dynamic λ configurations can outperform the static approach.
Nevertheless, to illustrate the search progression and the dynamic updates of λ, a plot for Day2
using the best dynamic parameter (α = 0.7) is provided in Figure 6.6. Similar plots for the
remaining instances can be found in the appendix Figure 10.5 and Figure 10.6.
Figure 6.6: GLS results using a dynamic λ value, where α = 0.7. The instance is Day2 and a
time limit of 60 min have been used.
From Figure 6.6, we see that the penalty terms increase rapidly and steadily during the first
December 31, 2024
Page 37 of 92
==PAGE:46==
6.3. Evaluation of the chute allocation
300 iterations while the overlap terms decrease slowly and steadily. After this initial phase, we
observe a substantial drop in the penalty terms; some features have become excessively penalized
and are no longer included in the solution. This leads to the exploration of a new area within
the solution space. As a result, we observe a considerable spike in the overlap term, causing λ
to increase drastically from around 20 to 50. Following this, the penalties start to build up from
iteration 300 to 625, while the overlap term gradually decreases, as does λ. Overall, we can
observe that λ takes values between 14.6 and 74.6 throughout the iterations. In comparison, the
best static λ = 11% of max box size corresponds to λ = 70.4. Additionally, we observe that λ is
high when the overlap term is high, as λ is defined as a function of the objective value divided
by the number of features present in the solution multiplied by α. The best objective value is
obtained in iteration 940; the following iteration is where the smallest value of λ is recorded.
6.3
Evaluation of the chute allocation
Our analysis of a dynamic λ approach revealed that, while it introduced flexibility in adjusting
penalties throughout the search process, it did not yield better solutions compared to using a
static λ. Thus, for the chute allocation problem, a static λ remains the most effective choice.
The best parameter combination was identified as λ = 11% of the maximum box size, and
the number of penalized features was µ = 2.
The visual solution for Day2 is presented in
Figure 6.7. The objective value in this allocation is 335 minutes, equivalent to 5 hours and 35
minutes. Visualizations for Day1 and Day3 are provided in the appendix (see Figure 10.7 and
Figure 10.8).
December 31, 2024
Page 38 of 92
==PAGE:47==
6.3. Evaluation of the chute allocation
Figure 6.7: Visual representation of the best chute allocation for Day2 with λ = 11%, µ = 2,
resulting in a total overlap of 335 minutes. Each flight is represented as a rectangular boxes.
The number of boxes per flight is determined by the required number of chutes for the flight.
The schedule is consistently busy from 6:00 to 21:00 with several back-to-back flights, increasing
December 31, 2024
Page 39 of 92
==PAGE:48==
6.3. Evaluation of the chute allocation
the intensity of the schedule.
Regarding each handler, we can make the following observations from the figure:
• Handler 1 (Yellow): Manages the highest number of chutes and flights. The most con-
siderable overlap occurs from 11:30 to 11:50, where flights 02 and 420 overlap on three
chutes.
• Handler 2 (Green): Handler 2 has no overlaps in its schedule, maintaining eﬀicient al-
location throughout the day. Despite this, Handler 2 could accommodate more flights
if assigned, as its flights are concentrated in specific periods, leaving significant idle time
available. For example, some large-plane chutes (149, 150, and 151) are unused after 15:30,
and some regular chutes (70–75) are sparsely assigned, handling only 1 to 3 flights per
day.
• Handler 3 (Purple): Handler 3 has only a 15-minute overlap between flights 327 and 381,
on a single chute from 10:50 to 11:30.
• Handler 4 (Red): Handler 4 has a tightly packed schedule. Two sets of flights overlap,
creating four overlaps with durations of 5 minutes and 15 minutes, respectively.
• Flex Chutes (Orange): The flex chutes are heavily utilized. A notable 45-minute overlap
occurs on flex chute 144 at 11:15-12:30, indicating high demand for shared resources during
this period.
Overall, the total overlap is limited, and the GLS effectively produces good chute allocations.
The biggest constraint is the preallocation of chutes to the different handlers, which restricts
the available chute options for each flight. Despite this, we see some empty slots in the schedule
where flights could be accommodated, suggesting that GLS effectively creates a schedule for the
chute allocation problem.
December 31, 2024
Page 40 of 92
==PAGE:49==
7
Experiments: Simulation
In the simulation, we have multiple parameters affecting the effectiveness of the system, these
will be explored in this section and evaluated based on the utilization and the key performance
indicators described in subsection 4.2.4. These parameters include
• EBS emptying interval: how often the EBS belts should be emptied.
• Overflow strategy: how we choose an EBS belt for a bag if the best belts are full.
• Number of uncategorized belts: these belts will be used for the bags that arrive very early
and therefore do not fit into any other belts.
• Maximum circulation time: how long we allow the bag to circulate the sorter in case the
chute opens soon or if there is no space at the assigned EBS.
Experiments with these parameters will be carried out in the following sections.
7.1
Untractable bags in the simulation experiments
The data used in these experiments are organized so that some records are pre-categorized
as missed or overflow bags before entering the simulation. This results in two types of bags:
untractable missed bags and untractable overflow bags. The definition of untractable bags is
based on our definition of missed and overflow bags from subsection 4.2.4.
An untractable
missed bag refers to a bag that enters the baggage factory less than 10 minutes before departure.
Meanwhile, an untractable overflow bag enters the baggage factory between 10 and 20 minutes
before departure. In this case, the assigned chute will already be closed, and the bag will need
manual handling. These bags are not classified as missed or overflow bags due to delays in
queues or on an EBS belt, therefore, they do not provide insights into our current strategy.
To accurately evaluate our simulation parameters, these prelabeled records allow us to disregard
such bags when comparing different strategies.
Table 7.1: Untractable missed and overflow bags in overflow chutes for each of the instances
Instance
No. missed bags
No. bags in overflow
Day1
121
112
Day2
433
131
Day3
456
124
As shown in Table 7.1, many bags are labeled as missed bags before entering the simulation due
to their departure and induction times in the dataset.
7.2
Sorter and EBS capacities
In the layout of CPH Airport in Figure 5.4, we observe that both a green and a red sorter are
present in the baggage factory. However, to simplify the simulation of the baggage facility, we
omit the use of the green sorter and assume that the red sorter is connected to all EBS belts. To
maintain a similar capacity for the sorting belt, the red sorter has been extended to include 778
sorter plates, with each plate capable of holding one piece of luggage. It takes approximately
4.5 minutes for a sorter plate to pass all the chutes once.
December 31, 2024
Page 41 of 92
==PAGE:50==
7.3. Parameters in the experiments
The baggage factory includes 14 EBS belts. Each belt’s capacity is dynamic and varies depending
on the size of the bags placed on it. An overview of the observed capacities for these belts can
be found in Table 7.2. The capacities listed in the table reflect actual observations in operation,
and for our purposes, we will treat them as fixed values. From our observations, EBS3 has
the largest capacity, accommodating up to 150 pieces of luggage, while EBS9 has the smallest
capacity, holding only 96 pieces.
Table 7.2: Number of bags each of the 14 EBS belts can hold in the baggage factory.
EBS Belt
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Capacity
102
125
150
141
120
115
126
130
96
116
144
138
124
109
7.3
Parameters in the experiments
The five overflow strategies and parameters outlined in subsection 4.2.3 will be utilized in the
upcoming section, where specific experiment values will be provided. In the experiments con-
cerning the EBS strategy, the the maximum time a bag is allowed to circulate on the sorter is
set to:
Maximum circulation time = [10 min, 20 min, 30 min]
After conducting preliminary experiments, we observed that very few bags enter the system
at night, and none are scheduled for flights that depart during that time.
Additionally, by
examining Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.1 in chapter 5, we noted that bags begin to enter the system
at 3:00, with the first flight departing at 5:30. Based on these observations, we decided to start
the unloading interval for the EBS at 4:00 to avoid unloading an empty EBS belt. If a bag is
induced into the system and the associated flight departs before 5:30, that bag will be assigned
to an uncategorized belt. The decision to set the first unloading time at 4:00 was made because
we want to ensure that a bag is assigned to a belt that is emptied at least one hour prior to the
chute closing, which occurs 20 minutes before departure.
For our experiments, we have established the following EBS unloading intervals and number of
uncategorized belts:
EBS unloading interval = [15 min, 30 min, 60 min]
Number of uncategorized belts = [1 belt, 2 belts, 3 belts]
7.4
Experimental evaluation
The chute allocation for the three instances will be used in the experiments, and the results of the
baggage handling system simulation will be analyzed. Any overlaps in the chute allocation are
removed before the simulation is conducted, as described in subsection 4.2.1. To investigate the
EBS assignment strategies, a simulation will be run for each instance, examining all combinations
of the EBS unloading interval, different overflow strategies, the number of uncategorized EBS
belts, and the maximum circulation times. This will result in running the simulation a total of
135 times for each data instance.
The results presented in Table 7.3 represent an average across three instances shown for a
maximum circulation time of 10 minutes, as this setting produced the best outcomes. We have
allowed the more challenging instances to have a higher weight in the average calculation, so we
have not normalized the data. This approach was also discussed in the parameter tuning section
of the chute allocation chapter subsection 6.2.2. Tables with results for maximum circulation
times of 20 minutes and 30 minutes along with the results of each instance can be found in the
appendix (subsection 10.0.5).
December 31, 2024
Page 42 of 92
==PAGE:51==
7.4. Experimental evaluation
Table 7.3: Simulation results averaged over three instances with a maximum circulation time of
10 minutes. For each combination of the parameters, the table reports the average number of:
missed bags, overflow bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
1
2,7
30,7
1051,7
2
2,7
30,7
576,7
1
3
2,7
30,7
171,0
1
2,7
30,7
969,0
2
2,7
30,7
486,3
2
3
2,7
30,7
126,7
1
2,7
30,7
1061,7
2
2,7
30,7
574,7
3
3
2,7
30,7
153,7
1
2,7
30,7
0,0
2
2,7
30,7
0,0
4
3
2,7
30,7
0,0
1
2,7
30,7
0,0
2
2,7
30,7
0,0
30 min
5
3
2,7
30,7
0,0
1
3,0
29,0
1652,0
2
2,7
29,3
897,0
1
3
2,7
29,3
354,3
1
2,7
29,3
1564,3
2
2,7
29,3
794,3
2
3
2,7
29,3
336,0
1
3,0
29,0
1658,7
2
2,7
29,3
896,7
3
3
2,7
29,3
394,3
1
2,7
29,3
0,0
2
2,7
29,3
0,0
4
3
2,7
29,3
0,0
1
2,7
29,3
0,0
2
2,7
29,3
0,0
45 min
5
3
2,7
29,3
0,0
1
3,0
29,0
2164,0
2
2,7
29,3
1277,3
1
3
2,7
29,3
612,0
1
3,0
29,0
2059,7
2
2,7
29,3
1210,3
2
3
2,7
29,3
564,0
1
3,0
29,0
2175,0
2
2,7
29,3
1276,3
3
3
2,7
29,3
608,7
1
2,7
29,3
0,0
2
2,7
29,3
0,0
4
3
2,7
29,3
0,0
1
2,7
29,3
0,0
2
2,7
29,3
0,0
60 min
5
3
2,7
29,3
0,0
In Table 7.3, we observe that the average number of missed bags is either 2.7 or 3.0. For most of
the strategies, we miss 2.7 bags on average, while five strategies lead to an average of 3.0 missed
December 31, 2024
Page 43 of 92
==PAGE:52==
7.4. Experimental evaluation
bags. On Day1 and Day3, the number of missed bags remains constant across all strategies.
However, on Day2, it varies between 5 and 6 bags. The five strategies that result in 6 missed
bags contribute to the overall average of 3.0 bags in the table.
We do not see significant differences regarding the number of overflow bags.
However, all
experiments using a 30-minute unloading interval resulted in the highest average number of
these bags.
There is no clear favorite for the two remaining unloading intervals.
The real
difference in the strategies can be seen in the number of bags in the overflow chutes as a result
of maximum circulation time being reached. Overflow strategies 4 and 5 consistently lead to zero
bags in this category, regardless of the unloading interval or the number of uncategorized belts.
In contrast, overflow strategies 1, 2, and 3 result in a higher number of such bags, especially
during the last interval (60 minutes). This increase is primarily due to the large unloading
interval and the inability of these strategies to adjust unloading times dynamically.
We observe the same patterns in the experiments with a maximum circulation time of 20 and 30
minutes. When the maximum circulation time is increased to 20 and 30 minutes, we allow the
bags to circulate the sorter for a longer period of time, resulting in fewer bags in the overflow
chute caused by reaching the maximum circulation time. For each 10 minutes extra we allow the
bags to circulate the number of bags in the overflow chute decreases by half or more. However,
we have chosen to present the results with a maximum circulation time of 10 minutes because
the most crucial observation is the number of missed bags. The parameter combinations using
a maximum circulation time of 10 minutes showed the fewest missed bags.
To determine the best parameter combination, we calculate a weighted average for the different
strategies by averaging missed bags, overflow bags, and overflow bags max circulation time.
The weights are calculated by estimating the price of a bag missing the flight and the price
of a ground handler manually handling a bag. A bag missing the flight is estimated to cost
the airport 1000 DKK. The bags that the ground handler has to handle manually will cost the
hourly wage of a ground handler, estimated to 200 DKK, divided by the number of bags it is
assumed a handler can attend in one hour
Weight for missed bags = 1000
Weight for overflow bags = 200
60
(7.1)
The calculated score for each parameter combination from Table 7.3 is presented in the following
Table 7.4.
December 31, 2024
Page 44 of 92
==PAGE:53==
7.4. Experimental evaluation
Table 7.4: The calculated score for each parameter combination using a maximum circulation
time of 10 minutes. The calculated score is based on the number of missed bags, overflow bags,
and overflow bags max circulation time where the weights in Equation 7.1 have been applied.
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncat.
belts
Score
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncat.
belts
Score
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncat.
belts
Score
1
6,233
1
8,546
1
10,242
2
4,660
2
5,716
2
6,976
1
3
3,317
1
3
3,919
1
3
4,773
1
5,959
1
7,926
1
9,896
2
4,361
2
5,376
2
6,754
2
3
3,170
2
3
3,859
2
3
4,614
1
6,266
1
8,568
1
10,278
2
4,653
2
5,715
2
6,972
3
3
3,259
3
3
4,052
3
3
4,762
1
2,751
1
2,746
1
2,746
2
2,751
2
2,746
2
2,746
4
3
2,751
4
3
2,746
4
3
2,746
1
2,751
1
2,746
1
2,746
2
2,751
2
2,746
2
2,746
30 min
5
3
2,751
45 min
5
3
2,746
60 min
5
3
2,746
From the calculated score in Table 7.4, we see that overflow strategies 4 and 5 result in the
lowest scores regardless of the unloading interval because neither had any overflow bags due
to maximum circulation time. However, the lowest score of 2.746 is obtained for the 45 and
60-minute intervals for strategy 4 and 5, regardless of the number of uncategorized belts. This
results in 12 parameter combinations, all achieving the same score.
The KPI, number of belt unloadings, is not included in the calculated score but is a parameter
used to evaluate the strategies. It indicates how stressed the system is when compared to the
sorter utilization and queue to the sorter. The sorter is allowed to be fully utilized as long as the
system can still handle the bags entering the sorter both from the initial queue and the queue
from unloading an EBS belt. The 12 strategies all have the same maximum circulation time but
two different unloading intervals. They will, therefore, be distinguished in the following text
based on the unloading interval, overflow strategy, and number of uncategorized belts.
Table 7.5: The number of belt unloadings for each of the best EBS assignment strategies.
Interval
Overflow strategy
Uncat. belts
Belt unloadings
45
4
1
78
2
75
3
81
5
1
77
2
74
3
75
60
4
1
79
2
79
3
80
5
1
75
2
77
3
77
From Table 7.5, we see that the belts are unloaded between 74 and 81 times.
There is no
significant difference in the results, and generally, all strategies in the simulation have proven to
perform well. We want to point out that strategy 5 selects a random belt in case the best belt
December 31, 2024
Page 45 of 92
==PAGE:54==
7.4. Experimental evaluation
is unavailable. Strategy 4 is more well-considered, and because all the results are so similar, we
chose to move on with this strategy.
During the simulation, we monitor the utilization of both the sorter and the EBS belts along
with the queue from the EBS to the sorter.
Our monitoring shows that the system is not
stressed, but it experiences pressure around 12:00 due to the many induced bags at this time
and many departures shortly after. We want to determine if the interval should be 45 or 60
minutes and how many uncategorized belts are needed. Generally, strategy 4 utilized the EBS
belts dynamically. When the best belt is full, this strategy sorts the remaining belts according
to the absolute time difference between their unloading time and the best unloading time for the
bag, with the exception of the uncategorized belts. Therefore, in this strategy, the uncategorized
belts might become more or less redundant.
We have generated utilization plots of the EBS, which show that two and three uncategorized
belts for both 45 and 60 minute intervals are not fully utilized. The plots for the 45-minute and
60-minute intervals are quite similar. An example of the simulation using three uncategorized
belts and a 45 minute interval is shown in Figure 7.1. This simulation is shown for Day3, but
the results for Day2 are very similar. Both instances are more interesting than Day1, as they
handle significantly more bags. Additional plots for the 45-minute and 60-minute intervals can
be found in the appendix, subsection 10.0.6, for Day 2, as well as the 60-minute interval plots
for Day 3.
December 31, 2024
Page 46 of 92
==PAGE:55==
7.4. Experimental evaluation
Figure 7.1: Utilization of the 14 EBS belts for Day3 when using overflow strategy 4 with 3
uncategorized belts (12, 13 and 14), a max circulation time of 10 minutes, and an interval of 45
minutes.
December 31, 2024
Page 47 of 92
==PAGE:56==
7.4. Experimental evaluation
From Figure 7.1, we can observe how bags are placed onto an EBS belt by examining the
increasing peaks in the graphs. The plateaus indicate that the belt’s utilization is constant for
a period indicated on the x-axis. The quick rises and falls suggest that the EBS is quickly filled
and emptied. The peaks with a less steep slope indicate that the bags have been filling up over
time. This was the original intention for the uncategorized belts (12, 13, and 14 in the figure),
which were designed to be utilized by bags entering the system long before their departure.
However, the less steep peaks are observed not only for the uncategorized belts but also on EBS
belts 9, 5, 4, and 3. The uncategorized belts are only emptied 2, 3, and 4 times for belts 14, 13
and 12, respectively. Belt 13 is never fully filled, reaching only slightly above 80% of its capacity.
We further observe that some belts, specifically belts 1, 2, 8, and 10, are highly used. Here, the
peaks are closely spaced, indicating that they start filling up almost immediately after emptying
the belt.
To show that increasing the number of uncategorized belts for this strategy is not an improve-
ment, we will present the EBS utilizations when only using one uncategorized belt in Figure 7.2.
December 31, 2024
Page 48 of 92
==PAGE:57==
7.4. Experimental evaluation
Figure 7.2: Utilization of the 14 EBS belts for Day3 when using overflow strategy 4 with
1 uncategorized belt (Belt 14), a max circulation time of 10 minutes, and an interval of 45
minutes.
December 31, 2024
Page 49 of 92
==PAGE:58==
7.4. Experimental evaluation
From Figure 7.2, we observe how the uncategorized belt is utilized more throughout the day
and that the strategy dynamically assigns the remaining belts, for instance, belt 12 serves as an
uncategorized belt after 12:00, where we see that the slope has a gradual incline.
Based on the presented results of the EBS utilizations, we would like to argue that EBS strategy
4 with only one uncategorized belt is preferred.
Examining the sorter utilization, and queue from the EBS onto the sorter does not show a
particular difference for the 45-minute and 60-minute intervals. Two figures are included below
to illustrate the sorter utilization, Figure 7.3 for both intervals, where the utilization is shown
in the y-axis. Figure 7.4 shows the queue from the EBS belt onto the sorter.
Figure 7.3: Sorter utilization for Day3 with strategy 4 using 1 uncategorized belt and a max
circulation time of 10 minutes
December 31, 2024
Page 50 of 92
==PAGE:59==
7.5. Conclusion on simulation experiments
From Figure 7.3, we see that the average utilization of the sorter is below 25% at all times,
regardless of the interval. The maximum utilization is approximately 55% for the 45-minute
interval and slightly higher for the 60-minute interval, yet still below 60%. To identify potential
bottlenecks we evaluate the EBS to sorter queues in the following Figure 7.4.
Figure 7.4: Queue from ESB to sorter for Day3 with strategy 4 using 1 uncategorized belt and
a max circulation time of 10 minutes for 45-minute and 60-minute intervals, respectively.
From the two plots of the queue from the EBS to the sorter in Figure 7.4, we see that the
maximum queue for both time intervals is around 700 bags, indicating that approximately five
belts have been emptied around the same time, as each belt can contain up to 150 bags. However,
the figures for sorter utilization indicated that the system is under stress and can handle the
induced bags effectively. Overall, the two interval strategies do not significantly differ in the
generated queues. Therefore, moving forward, we choose the 45-minute interval.
7.5
Conclusion on simulation experiments
The system is never under more pressure than it can handle, which results in all the proposed
strategies yielding positive outcomes. In the next chapter, we will increase the stress on the
system by generating data with a higher number of flights and bags. A detailed description of
this generated data will be provided.
To provide a conclusion on the simulation strategies and select a strategy to use in the interaction
section, we will use overflow strategy 4 using 1 uncategorized belt with a 45-minute unloading
interval and a maximum circulation time of 10 minutes.
This strategy performed the best,
based on an evaluation of the costs associated with lost bags and the manual handling of bags.
On average, this strategy results in the loss of 2.7 bags across three instances, with 29.3 bags
requiring manual handling.
December 31, 2024
Page 51 of 92
==PAGE:60==
8
Coupling between chute allocation
and EBS simulation
In this chapter, we will investigate the coupling between the chute allocation and the simulation
of the system using such allocation. The simulation results will be used to adjust the chute
allocation to minimize the number of missed bags. The chute allocation provides a schedule for
assigning chutes to flights, and by incorporating insights from the simulation, we aim to further
reduce the number of missed bags.
In the two previous chapters, we tuned the parameters for the chute allocation to identify
the parameter combination that achieved the best average results across the three dates. We
determined the optimal EBS strategy in the simulation chapter, which resulted in the fewest
bags missing their flights and the fewest bags requiring manual handling by ground handlers.
When applying the current chute allocation in the simulation with the best EBS strategy, an
average of 2.7 bags missed their flights, and 29.3 bags required manual handling. Therefore, we
now generate new data with more flights to pressure the system to explore whether the chute
allocation can be optimized further by taking the insights from the simulation into account and
reducing the number of missed bags in the simulation. The different performed experiments and
new data will be elaborated in the following sections.
8.1
Generated data with increased number of departing
flights
New datasets have been generated based on the Day3 dataset. This dataset was chosen because it
contained the largest number of bags and the highest percentage of large flights. A percentage of
randomly selected flights from the Day1 dataset was added to the Day3 data. The new datasets
include 10%, 20%, and 30% of randomly selected flights added to the original dataset. Because
the process of randomly selecting flights can result in very different results depending on the
chosen flights and their departure times, we have generated two datasets for each percentage,
resulting in six new datasets. A specific and unique seed was used for each dataset to ensure
reproducibility and that the newly generated data sets are not simply extensions of the other.
We would like to ensure that the data set for each of the percentages contains different flights
with different flight times.
The characteristics of each dataset can be found in Table 8.1. These include the percentage of
added flights, the unique seed used to generate the data, the number of bags, the number of
flights, and the percentage of large flights.
Table 8.1: Characteristics of the new data reporting the percentage of added flights from Day1,
the seed set when the data was generated, the number of bags, the number of flights, and the
percentage of large flights.
Instance
Added
flights
Seed
Number
of bags
Number
of flights
% Large
flights
Dataset1
10%
1234
31305
337
7.1%
Dataset2
10%
123
31552
337
6.8%
Dataset3
20%
2345
33777
368
7.1%
Dataset4
20%
234
32842
368
6.3%
Dataset5
30%
3456
35182
399
7.3%
Dataset6
30%
345
34675
399
6.3%
December 31, 2024
Page 52 of 92
==PAGE:61==
8.2. Soft coupling strategies
If the added flights in the generated datasets have departure times in a peak hour, the system
will be under more pressure regardless of the dataset’s characteristics. Therefore, the generated
datasets are used in the simulation to observe the initial number of missed bags. The initial
simulation results can be found in Table 8.2.
For each of the generated datasets, we have
reported the percentage of added fights from Day1, the number of missed bags, the number of
overflow bags, the number of overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time, the
number of EBS unloadings, and the number of different flights with missed bags in Table 8.2.
The number of flights with missed bags is reported to help identify whether the missed bags
belong to the same few flights or from many different flights.
Table 8.2: Simulation results when using the generated datasets. The table reports the number
of missed bags, the number of overflow bags, the number of overflow bags due the reaching
maximum circulation time, the number of EBS unloadings, and the number of flights the missed
bags belonged to.
Instance
Added
flights
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. time
EBS
unloadings
Different flights
w. missed bags
Dataset1
10%
59
241
0
107
3
Dataset2
10%
114
37
0
112
8
Dataset3
20%
145
99
0
163
8
Dataset4
20%
140
50
0
136
6
Dataset5
30%
11
111
65
278
9
Dataset6
30%
102
279
0
242
9
All the generated datasets will be used in the new section to experimentally determine the best
strategy for soft coupling the models to reduce the number of missed bags effectively.
The
selected strategy did not result in overflow bags due to the maximum circulation time for the
original instances. However, we see that the simulation for Dataset4 results in 65 overflow bags
due to maximum circulation time.
We further see that the current number of missed bags
for each generated dataset varies a lot, and Dataset3 with 20% added flights currently has a
higher number of missed bags than e.g. Dataset5 with 30% added flights. This shows that the
departure time of the added flights has a big impact on the simulation results. If the random
flights have departure time in peak hours, the system is under more stress than if the random
flights have departure time early in the morning or at night. Finally, we find that the ceiled
average across the instances results in 96 missed bags and 137 overflow bags.
8.2
Soft coupling strategies
The simulation demonstrates how the allocation of chutes affects baggage flow within the bag-
gage factory and identifies the flights associated with missed bags. Therefore, we aim to use the
simulation results to adjust the chute allocation in an iterative process to prioritize the flights
linked to these missing bags. In this phase, we utilize all the generated datasets to develop a
strategy that, on average, minimizes the number of missed bags. The generated datasets differ
in the number of additional flights and missed bags.
In the initial iteration, we use the chute allocation generated by running GLS for an hour. To
increase the number of iterations in the coupling of the models, GLS will be allowed to run for
only 20 minutes during the remaining iterations. The coupling between the chute allocation and
simulation will be performed in each experiment for 30 iterations, resulting in a total running
time of 10 hours and 10 minutes. In the remaining iterations, GLS uses the chute allocation
from the previous iteration as a starting point, and we prioritize a percentage of the flights from
which we miss the most bags in the simulation with the previous chute allocation schedule.
We propose two strategies to prioritize the flights associated with the missed bags: first, by
December 31, 2024
Page 53 of 92
==PAGE:62==
8.3. Evaluation of the soft coupling strategies
increasing the cost of overlapping with these flights, and second, by extending the opening
duration of the chutes for the affected flights in the next allocation. GLS will then search for
a better solution. The simulation will be executed in each iteration to report the number of
missed bags for the current chute allocation. This iterative approach aims to refine the chute
allocation and reduce the number of missed bags by making small adjustments.
The strategies implemented to prioritize flights with missed bags are as follows:
• Increasing cost of overlap: This strategy increases the cost of overlapping flights in
GLS. In the strategy, we select the top 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of flights with the most
missed bags. In each iteration, the cost of overlapping with these flights is increased in
GLS if the flight is still present within the chosen percentage. The cost is increased by
0.5, 1.0, or 1.5 in each iteration if the flight still has missed bags. This strategy results in
multiple experiments by combining the selected percentages and various cost increments.
• Extending chute opening times: This strategy increases the opening times of the
chutes associated with several flights that have missed bags. We select the top 25%, 50%,
75%, and 100% of flights with missed bags as in the first strategy, and the opening times
of the associated chutes are increased. For each iteration where a flight is selected (i.e., it
still has missed bags within the chosen percentage), the opening times of the associated
chutes are increased by 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 minutes. This also results in multiple experiments
due to a combination of the percentages and the different time increments.
When the cost of a flight increases, an overlap with one of these flights in GLS becomes more
expensive than an overlap with a flight not included in the list. The goal is to minimize or
avoid overlap with the flights that currently have missed bags in the simulation. By extending
the chute opening duration, a potential current overlap will increase, and it might be possible
to find a new set of chutes for this flight with a smaller overlap, also aiming at minimizing the
overlap with flights that have missed bags in the simulation.
8.3
Evaluation of the soft coupling strategies
The combination of parameters in the two strategies leads to 12 experiments where the cost of
overlap with certain flights is increased and 20 experiments where the chute opening times are
extended in the following GLS. The coupling returns the best observed chute allocation in each
experiment with the minimum number of missed bags.
8.3.1
Increasing cost of overlap
In these experiments, for each iteration, we select the top 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% flights with
missed bags and increase the cost of the resulting flights with 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 in the following
GLS. We conduct the 12 experiments for each of the generated datasets. To identify the best
parameter combination, we take the minimum number of missed bags across the 30 iterations for
each dataset and experiment. The best combination is then the one with the minimum average
over the generated datasets. The ceiled average table is reported in Table 8.3.
Table 8.3: Ceiled average over the minimum number of missed bags for each dataset for each
parameter combination for the experiment where the cost is increased for the percentage of the
flights responsible for the missed bags.
Percentage/ Cost
0.5
1
1.5
25%
42
52
39
50%
45
36
24
75%
20
38
24
100%
30
39
39
December 31, 2024
Page 54 of 92
==PAGE:63==
8.3. Evaluation of the soft coupling strategies
From Table 8.3, we see that, on average, the best strategy is using the top 75% of the flights with
missed bags in each iteration and increasing the cost by 0.5 for each of these selected flights.
On average, this combination resulted in 20 missed bags. We miss the fewest bags in Dataset1
where we miss 4 bags, and we miss the most in Dataset3 where we miss 37 bags. We refer to
the appendix (subsection 10.0.7) to see the missed bags’ distribution on the different datasets.
Increasing the cost by 1.5 and choosing the top 50% and 75% of the flights with missed bags
also showed good results, with an average of 24 missed bags in both cases. To investigate how
the best parameter combination behaves, we have plotted the number of missed bags in each
iteration for the six datasets for the parameter combination of an increased cost of 0.5 and the
top 75% of flights with missed bags. The plot is presented in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: Plot of the number of missed bags for each dataset in each iteration. The results
are presented for the strategy with an increased cost of 0.5 for the top 75% flights with missed
bags in the previous iteration.
We observe that the number of missed bags stabilizes for multiple datasets, where the number
neither decreases nor increases. This is observed in most experiments involving increased cost.
We consistently find that the missed bags are from the same flight, thus increasing the cost of
the same flights repeatedly, but without finding a better chute allocation. For instance, Dataset5
stabilizes at a worse solution than the initial one. Similarly, Dataset3 and Dataset4 stabilize at
a worse solution than one found in a previous iteration. Dataset2 stabilizes from iteration 18 to
27 but eventually finds a better solution in the final iterations. The observed stabilization for
the different datasets could indicate that no overlaps exist in the solution for the selected flights,
so increasing the cost will not affect the best chute allocation. It could also suggest that the
coupling between models may require more iterations for the increased cost to have an effect.
Even though we aim to gradually reduce the number of missed bags, we also value jumps
in the solution space that indicate exploration of different areas.
Since we select the best
solution among all chute allocations across 30 iterations, we accept such jumps if they result
in fewer missed bags. Exploring the solution space often leads to spikes in the plots of missed
bags, reflecting shifts to different solution areas and new bottlenecks in the system. Given the
stabilization observed in the experiments with increased costs, we conduct experiments with
extended chute opening duration for the selected flights. Suppose the flight does not overlap
with another flight in the current solution. In that case, the increased cost will not affect the
December 31, 2024
Page 55 of 92
==PAGE:64==
8.3. Evaluation of the soft coupling strategies
chute allocation, and we will end up with the same allocation being returned across successive
iterations. By instead extending the chute opening times, GLS is more likely forced to make a
change in the allocation, caused by an increasing overlap. The aim is to find improved allocations
by encouraging the exploration of new areas in the solution space. This is because increasing
the time enough will often result in an eventual overlap, and after extending the opening time
enough, the GLS will make a new chute allocation.
8.3.2
Extending chute opening times
In this experiment we select the top 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of flights with missed bags and
extend the opening time of the resulting flights with T = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 minutes in the following
GLS.
A regular flight must open 120 minutes before departure and a large flight must open 180
minutes before departure. This strategy aims to extend the opening times for specific flights
that contribute to missed bags in the simulation, to improve the chute allocation by taking these
flights into account. The selected time increments, T, have been carefully chosen to ensure that
the total opening time will not be extended by more than 150 minutes throughout 30 iterations.
This assumes that the same flight causes missed bags in all iterations, resulting in an extension
of 5 minutes per iteration.
When extending the chute opening time it might take several iterations for a small extension
to make a difference in the chute allocation if there is no current overlap on the flight. If two
flights overlap, the overlap will be removed in the simulation so that a chute is only assigned to
a single flight simultaneously in the schedule. Therefore, we might get the same chute allocation
for several iterations, resulting in the same number of bags being missed in the simulation for
the small extensions. Despite this, we slowly extend the opening time in each iteration, which
will cause overlaps for some flights or increase already existing overlaps. Consequently, GLS will
move the flight once an overlap becomes too large.
We conduct the 20 experiments for each of the generated datasets. To identify the best parameter
combination, we take the minimum number of missed bags for each dataset and experiment.
The best combination is the one with the minimum average over the generated datasets. The
ceiled average of the minimum number of missed bags for the six datasets is reported for each
parameter combination in Table 8.4.
Table 8.4: Ceiled average over the minimum number of missed bags for each dataset for each
parameter combination for the extended chute opening time strategy.
Percentage / Time increase
1
2
3
4
5
25%
31
17
40
33
32
50%
34
16
35
22
18
75%
46
41
32
26
21
100%
32
34
15
29
22
From Table 8.4, we see that we get a lower average number of missed bags for multiple of the
parameter combinations compared to the average number of missed bags in the increased cost
experiments in Table 8.3. The lowest average number of missed bags is observed for selecting
the top 100% of the flights with missed bags and extending the opening time with 3 minutes. In
general, four parameter combinations are better than the best combination in the experiments
with increased cost, where the lowest average number of missed bags was 20.
Also, in these experiments, the number of missed bags is distributed between the different
datasets. For the best combination using 100% selected flights and a time extension of 3 minutes,
December 31, 2024
Page 56 of 92
==PAGE:65==
8.3. Evaluation of the soft coupling strategies
we missed the fewest number of bags for Dataset3, resulting in 2 missed bags, and the highest
number of missed bags for Dataset4, resulting in 58 missed bags. For the next best combination
using 50% selected flights and a time extension of 2 minutes, the number of missed bags ranged
from 2 to 34. How the lost bags in the average calculation are distributed among the six datasets
can be seen in the appendix (subsection 10.0.8). We plot the two best parameter combinations
to observe how these behave during the 30 iterations in Figure 8.2 and Figure 8.3.
Figure 8.2: Plot of the number of missed bags in each iteration for the six datasets for the
best parameter combination where 100% of the flights with missed bags are selected and a time
extension of 3 minutes is used.
Figure 8.3: Plot of the number of missed bags in each iteration for the six datasets for the next
best parameter combination where the top 50% of the flights with missed bags are selected and
a time extension of 2 minutes is used.
When examining the plots in Figure 8.2 and Figure 8.3, we observe more spikes compared to the
December 31, 2024
Page 57 of 92
==PAGE:66==
8.3. Evaluation of the soft coupling strategies
increased cost experiment in Figure 8.1, which aligns with our expectations. In the extended
chute opening time experiments, we do not see the same stabilization as in the increased cost
experiment. Only for Dataset3 in Figure 8.2 we see, that the coupling of models neither increases
nor decreases the number of missed bags after the first six iterations. From that iteration onward,
the number of missed bags remains at 2 for the rest of the iterations.
8.3.3
Conclusion on the soft coupling strategies
Overall, the extended chute opening time experiments lead to considerably more spikes in the
number of missed bags, indicating the exploration of different areas in the solution space. The
average number of missed bags, as shown in Table 8.3 and Table 8.4, suggests that exploring a
broader solution space finds better results. In contrast, the increased cost experiments tend to
stabilize and limit the discovery of other solutions.
In conclusion, all parameter combinations in both strategies lead to a better average number
of missed bags than before we iteratively tried to reduce the number of missed bags. Initially,
the simulation of the chute allocation for the new datasets showed we lost 96 bags on average.
Furthermore, we found four parameters in the extended chute opening time experiments that
were better than the best in the increased cost experiments. The two parameter combinations
that resulted in the lowest average number of missed bags of 15 and 16, respectively, were:
• Selecting all the flights with missed bags (100% of the flights) and extending the chute
opening time with 3 minutes for each iteration where the flight still has missed bags in
the simulation.
• Selecting the top 50% of the flights with missed bags and extending the chute opening
time with 2 minutes for each iteration the flight is still selected in the 50%.
December 31, 2024
Page 58 of 92
==PAGE:67==
9
Conclusion
In this chapter, we will summarize the findings throughout the thesis. We will review the chute
allocation and simulation results and then finally comment on the results from the coupling of
the two models. In general, we achieve good results from all our models, but we will comment
on them in detail in the following.
In the GLS model’s parameter tuning experiments, we found that using a dynamic λ parameter
did not improve the solutions compared to using a static value for λ. We achieved the best
results with a static lambda set to 11 % of the maximum box size.
In the resulting chute
allocations for the three instances, we recorded the total overlap of all flights as: 30 minutes
for Day1, 5 hours and 35 minutes for Day2, and 5 hours and 45 minutes for Day3, distributed
across different flights throughout the day. The dataset Day1 represents the instance with the
fewest bags and the smallest proportion of large flights among the three instances. The overlaps
in this solution were minimal, occurring between a set of flights on two chutes of 15 minutes
each. For the chute allocation on Day2, there were five large overlaps ranging from 30 to 45
minutes, with the remaining overlaps being 20 minutes or less. On Day3, the chute allocation
included six significant overlaps of 30 to 45 minutes, while the rest were 10 minutes or less.
These three instances are challenging due to their diverse parameters, including numerous flights
and bags. Additionally, one instance has a considerable proportion of large planes, which require
double the number of chutes compared to regular planes. Despite these challenges, the results
obtained from the GLS model are satisfactory. The total overlap was relatively small, especially
given that the instances are among the most challenging instances observed by CPH Aiport,
placing a substantial strain on the airport’s infrastructure.
In the simulation of the system, the overlaps between flights in the chute allocation are initially
removed. They are removed so that the start time of the latest flight is pushed to the end time
of the first flight. Despite a handful of overlaps of 30 minutes or more in the chute allocations of
two instances, our simulation indicates that the baggage handling facility can meet the demand
effectively. The simulation reveals that, on average, 2.7 bags will miss their flight, and the airport
will need to handle an additional 29.3 bags manually, as these are directed to an overflow chute.
All the tested strategies produced good results. However, the most effective strategy was found
to be overflow strategy 4 with 1 uncategorized belt, an unloading interval of 45 minutes, and
a maximum circulation time of 10 minutes. In this strategy, the bags are assigned to the belt,
where the absolute difference in unloading time is the smallest, in case the best belt is not
available.
If the assigned belt has a later unloading time than the bag would require, this
strategy allows the unloading time to be dynamically adjusted. Furthermore, if none of the
belts have available capacity, the bag will be assigned to an uncategorized belt.
We did not observe a significant difference in the number of missed bags and bags in overflow
across the presented strategies. The first three overflow strategies 1, 2, and 3, are similar. Here,
it is not possible to dynamically adjust the emptying time of a belt in case the best belt is not
available, as it is in strategies 4 and 5. Since strategies 4 and 5 can dynamically update the EBS
unloading time, these strategies avoid additional time on the sorter, resulting in zero overflow
bags due to maximum circulation time. This parameter, however, is very different for the first
three strategies. Overall, our simulation strategies all showed good performance for the given
datasets.
Because our chute allocation and simulation produced good results for the current data, we
generated synthetic data to simulate even more challenging scenarios for the airport. This was
done to investigate whether we could reduce the number of missed bags by adjusting the chute
December 31, 2024
Page 59 of 92
==PAGE:68==
allocation using the results of the simulation, by coupling the two models. The new data was
created by extending the Day3 instance with a percentage of randomly selected flights from
Day1.
In the newly generated instances, the number of missed bags increased significantly,
ranging from 11 to 145, with a ceiled average of 96. The two models were coupled such that
flights associated with missed bags in the simulation would be prioritized according to a specific
strategy in the following chute allocation.
By coupling our two models, we discovered that
both proposed strategies, across all parameter combinations, effectively reduced the number of
missed bags. The first strategy involved increasing the cost for a percentage of the flights linked
to the missed bags. The second strategy extended the chute opening time for a percentage of
the flights. The strategy, where we increased the cost, had a tendency to stabilize, as the cost in
some iterations was increased for flights not overlapping with other flights, leading to repeated
chute allocations. The second strategy did not encounter this obstacle and yielded the best
results. The best parameter combination was found to be extending the opening time of 100%
of the flights responsible for the missed bags by 3 minutes over 30 iterations.
Our findings indicate that the chute allocation can be enhanced by incorporating simulation
results into the allocation process. Specifically, extending chute opening times for flights as-
sociated with the majority of missing bags has the potential to reduce errors and significantly
improve overall performance.
December 31, 2024
Page 60 of 92
==PAGE:69==
10
Appendix
Data
Figure 10.1: The scatter plot shows how long prior to departure the bags are induced into the
baggage factory. The plot is shown for day1, where Q1 = 83.6, Q2 = 110.8, Q3 = 143.6
December 31, 2024
Page 61 of 92
==PAGE:70==
Figure 10.2: The scatter plot shows how long prior to departure the bags are induced into the
baggage factory. The plot is shown for day3, where Q1 = 84.6, Q2 = 109.1, Q3 = 140.2
December 31, 2024
Page 62 of 92
==PAGE:71==
Experiments: Chute allocation
10.0.1
Greedy construction heuristic
Table 10.1: Results of the construction heuristics using a particular sorting and chute selection
method
Chute Selection 1
Chute Selection 2
Chute Selection 3
Chute Selection 4
day1
Sort 1
545
510
635
920
Sort 2
1255
2705
1610
2495
Sort 3
275
1110
165
770
day2
Sort 1
1250
1130
1505
1310
Sort 2
1920
3920
2350
3850
Sort 3
1170
1305
1165
1410
day3
Sort 1
975
1245
1045
1495
Sort 2
2280
3415
2160
3475
Sort 3
735
1225
885
1365
Average
Sort 1
923.33
961.67
1061.67
1241.67
Sort 2
1818.33
3346.67
2040.00
3273.33
Sort 3
726.67
1213.33
738.33
1181.67
10.0.2
Parameter tuning of λ and µ
Table 10.2: Parameter tuning of λ and µ for GLS using a time limit of 3600 sec.
Instance
µ \λ
1%
5%
10%
15%
20%
day1
1
50
55
60
45
35
2
45
30
30
30
30
3
55
55
30
30
30
4
30
30
30
30
30
day2
1
590
395
415
515
440
2
485
435
370
435
445
3
515
400
410
445
400
4
580
475
440
455
425
day3
1
400
370
325
335
340
2
405
320
340
365
375
3
425
370
335
405
420
4
450
395
450
390
350
Average
1
346.67
273.33
266.67
298.33
271.67
2
311.67
261.67
246.67
276.67
283.33
3
331.67
275.00
258.33
293.33
283.33
4
353.33
300.00
306.67
291.67
268.33
Normalized Results
December 31, 2024
Page 63 of 92
==PAGE:72==
Table 10.3: Parameter tuning λ and µ for GLS, using a time limit of 3600 sec. The results for
each instance has been normalized using max-min scaling.
Instance
µ \λ
1%
5%
10%
15%
20%
day1
1
0.67
0.83
1.00
0.50
0.17
2
0.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3
0.83
0.83
0.00
0.00
0.00
4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
day2
1
1.00
0.11
0.20
0.66
0.32
2
0.52
0.30
0.00
0.30
0.34
3
0.66
0.14
0.18
0.34
0.14
4
0.95
0.48
0.32
0.39
0.25
day3
1
0.62
0.38
0.04
0.12
0.15
2
0.65
0.00
0.15
0.35
0.42
3
0.81
0.38
0.12
0.65
0.77
4
1.00
0.58
1.00
0.54
0.23
Average
1
0.76
0.44
0.41
0.42
0.21
2
0.56
0.10
0.05
0.21
0.25
3
0.77
0.45
0.10
0.33
0.30
4
0.65
0.35
0.44
0.31
0.16
Table 10.4: Parameter tuning λ and µ for GLS, using a time limit of 3600 sec. The results for
each instance has been normalized using max-min scaling.
Instance
µ \λ
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
11%
12%
day1
1
55
30
35
30
35
60
30
35
2
30
55
45
30
30
30
30
50
3
55
60
30
30
30
30
30
30
4
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
95
day2
1
395
430
470
545
450
415
525
460
2
435
400
375
405
380
370
335
425
3
400
470
440
395
460
410
335
460
4
475
385
480
465
450
440
395
505
day3
1
370
340
420
335
365
325
340
345
2
320
375
310
365
385
340
345
355
3
370
375
395
400
370
335
400
370
4
395
380
400
375
370
450
445
430
Average
1
273.33
266.67
308.33
303.33
283.33
266.67
298.33
280.00
2
261.67
276.67
243.33
266.67
265.00
246.67
236.67
276.67
3
275.00
301.67
288.33
275.00
286.67
258.33
255.00
286.67
4
300.00
265.00
303.33
290.00
283.33
306.67
290.00
343.33
December 31, 2024
Page 64 of 92
==PAGE:73==
Table 10.5: Parameter tuning λ and µ for GLS, using a time limit of 3600 sec. The results for
each instance has been normalized using max-min scaling.
Instance
µ \λ
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
11%
12%
day1
1
0.38
0.00
0.08
0.00
0.08
0.46
0.00
0.08
2
0.00
0.38
0.23
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.31
3
0.38
0.46
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
day2
1
0.29
0.45
0.64
1.00
0.55
0.38
0.90
0.60
2
0.48
0.31
0.19
0.33
0.21
0.17
0.00
0.43
3
0.31
0.64
0.50
0.29
0.60
0.36
0.00
0.60
4
0.67
0.24
0.69
0.62
0.55
0.50
0.29
0.81
day3
1
0.43
0.21
0.79
0.18
0.39
0.11
0.21
0.25
2
0.07
0.46
0.00
0.39
0.54
0.21
0.25
0.32
3
0.43
0.46
0.61
0.64
0.43
0.18
0.64
0.43
4
0.61
0.50
0.64
0.46
0.43
1.00
0.96
0.86
Average
1
0.37
0.22
0.50
0.39
0.34
0.32
0.37
0.31
2
0.18
0.39
0.14
0.24
0.25
0.13
0.08
0.35
3
0.37
0.52
0.37
0.31
0.34
0.18
0.21
0.34
4
0.42
0.25
0.44
0.36
0.33
0.50
0.42
0.89
Figure 10.3: Best parameter combination of GLS for day1
December 31, 2024
Page 65 of 92
==PAGE:74==
Figure 10.4: Best parameter combination of GLS for day3
10.0.3
Dynamic λ value
Table 10.6: Results of the parameter tuning of α for the GLS method using dynamic λ. The
parameter µ = 2, GLS time limit is 60 minutes.
instance \α
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.9
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.9
Day1
50
30
45
30
55
55
25
30
55
55
30
Day2
500
550
450
490
460
530
475
335
435
550
515
Day3
395
375
345
400
405
375
350
350
365
405
365
Average
315.00
318.33
280.00
306.67
306.67
320.00
283.33
238.33
285.00
336.67
303.33
Table 10.7: Results of the parameter tuning of α for the GLS method using dynamic λ. The
parameter µ = 1, GLS time limit is 60 minutes.
instance \α
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Day1
50
40
45
55
50
50
45
35
35
Day2
515
540
540
500
575
570
470
525
515
Day3
455
380
430
465
405
380
425
355
410
Average obj.
340.00
320.00
338.33
340.00
343.33
333.33
313.33
305.00
320.00
December 31, 2024
Page 66 of 92
==PAGE:75==
Figure 10.5: day1, α = 0.7
December 31, 2024
Page 67 of 92
==PAGE:76==
Figure 10.6: day3, α = 0.7
December 31, 2024
Page 68 of 92
==PAGE:77==
10.0.4
Evaluation of the chute allocation
Figure 10.7: Chute allocation assignment day1 where λ = 11%, µ = 2, time limit = 3600, obj
= 30.0
December 31, 2024
Page 69 of 92
==PAGE:78==
Figure 10.8: Chute allocation assignment day3 where λ = 11%, µ = 2, time limit = 3600, obj
= 345.0
December 31, 2024
Page 70 of 92
==PAGE:79==
Simulation results
10.0.5
Simulation parameter tuning results
Average results with maximum circulation time: 20 min
Table 10.8: Simulation results averaged over three instances with a maximum circulation time
of 20 minutes. For each combination of the parameters, the table reports the average number
of: missed bags, bags in the overflow chute, and bags in the overflow chute due to reaching the
maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
1
2,7
31,3
286,7
2
2,7
31,3
105,7
1
3
2,7
31,3
4,0
1
2,7
31,3
248,7
2
2,7
31,3
65,7
2
3
2,7
31,3
0,0
1
2,7
31,3
295,3
2
2,7
31,3
113,7
3
3
2,7
31,3
4,0
1
2,7
31,3
0,0
2
2,7
31,3
0,0
4
3
2,7
31,3
0,0
1
2,7
31,3
0,0
2
2,7
31,3
0,0
30 min
5
3
2,7
31,3
0,0
1
3,0
29,3
645,0
2
3,0
29,0
260,7
1
3
3,0
29,0
33,7
1
3,0
29,0
566,3
2
3,0
29,0
233,7
2
3
3,0
29,0
11,0
1
3,0
29,3
645,0
2
3,0
29,3
268,7
3
3
3,0
29,0
34,7
1
3,0
29,0
0,0
2
3,0
29,0
0,0
4
3
3,0
29,0
0,0
1
3,0
29,0
0,0
2
3,0
29,0
0,0
45 min
5
3
3,0
29,0
0,0
1
3,0
29,0
945,7
2
3,0
29,0
466,3
1
3
3,0
29,0
162,7
1
3,0
29,0
852,7
2
3,0
29,0
434,0
2
3
3,0
29,0
138,7
1
3,0
29,0
947,3
2
3,0
29,0
466,3
3
3
3,0
29,0
162,7
1
3,0
29,0
0,0
2
3,0
29,0
0,0
4
3
3,0
29,0
0,0
1
3,0
29,0
0,0
2
3,0
29,0
0,0
60 min
5
3
3,0
29,0
0,0
December 31, 2024
Page 71 of 92
==PAGE:80==
Results with maximum circulation time: 30 min
Table 10.9: Simulation results averaged over three instances with a maximum circulation time
of 30 minutes. For each combination of the parameters, the table reports the average number
of: missed bags, bags in the overflow chute, and bags in the overflow chute due to reaching the
maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
1
3,0
31,0
33,7
2
3,0
30,7
8,0
1
3
3,0
30,7
0,0
1
3,0
30,7
33,0
2
3,0
30,7
0,0
2
3
3,0
30,7
0,0
1
3,0
31,0
30,0
2
3,0
30,7
5,7
3
3
3,0
30,7
0,0
1
3,0
30,7
0,0
2
3,0
30,7
0,0
4
3
3,0
30,7
0,0
1
3,0
30,7
0,0
2
3,0
30,7
0,0
30 min
5
3
3,0
30,7
0,0
1
3,0
30,0
171,3
2
3,0
30,0
29,7
1
3
3,0
30,0
0,0
1
3,0
30,3
164,0
2
3,0
30,0
16,0
2
3
3,0
30,0
0,0
1
3,0
30,0
172,0
2
3,0
30,0
30,0
3
3
3,0
30,0
0,0
1
3,0
30,0
0,0
2
3,0
30,0
0,0
4
3
3,0
30,0
0,0
1
3,0
30,0
0,0
2
3,0
30,0
0,0
45 min
5
3
3,0
30,0
0,0
1
3,0
30,3
365,0
2
3,0
30,0
123,7
1
3
3,0
30,0
2,0
1
3,0
30,3
319,0
2
3,0
30,0
115,7
2
3
3,0
30,0
1,3
1
3,0
30,3
364,7
2
3,0
30,0
123,7
3
3
3,0
30,0
2,0
1
3,0
30,0
0,0
2
3,0
30,0
0,0
4
3
3,0
30,0
0,0
1
3,0
30,0
0,0
2
3,0
30,0
0,0
60 min
5
3
3,0
30,3
0,0
December 31, 2024
Page 72 of 92
==PAGE:81==
Simulation results of Day1 with 10 minutes max circ time
Table 10.10: Simulation results for Day1 with a maximum circulation time of 10 minutes. For
each combination of the parameters, the table reports the number of: missed bags, overflow
bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
30 min
1
1
1
25
355
2
1
25
58
3
1
25
0
2
1
1
25
256
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
3
1
1
25
357
2
1
25
58
3
1
25
0
4
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
5
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
45 min
1
1
1
25
733
2
1
25
137
3
1
25
0
2
1
1
25
628
2
1
25
113
3
1
25
0
3
1
1
25
733
2
1
25
139
3
1
25
0
4
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
5
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
60 min
1
1
1
25
1178
2
1
25
435
3
1
25
0
2
1
1
25
1111
2
1
25
393
3
1
25
28
3
1
1
25
1178
2
1
25
431
3
1
25
0
4
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
5
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
December 31, 2024
Page 73 of 92
==PAGE:82==
Simulation results of Day2 with 10 minutes max circ time
Table 10.11: Simulation results for Day2 with a maximum circulation time of 10 minutes. For
each combination of the parameters, the table reports the number of: missed bags, overflow
bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
30 min
1
1
5
26
1334
2
5
26
739
3
5
26
205
2
1
5
26
1294
2
5
26
684
3
5
26
187
3
1
5
26
1345
2
5
26
743
3
5
26
183
4
1
5
26
0
2
5
26
0
3
5
26
0
5
1
5
26
0
2
5
26
0
3
5
26
0
45 min
1
1
6
25
1991
2
5
26
1217
3
5
26
492
2
1
5
26
1937
2
5
26
1107
3
5
26
462
3
1
6
25
2000
2
5
26
1216
3
5
26
534
4
1
5
26
0
2
5
26
0
3
5
26
0
5
1
5
26
0
2
5
26
0
3
5
26
0
60 min
1
1
6
25
2482
2
5
26
1627
3
5
26
910
2
1
6
25
2477
2
5
26
1554
3
5
26
861
3
1
6
25
2492
2
5
26
1639
3
5
26
911
4
1
5
26
0
2
5
26
0
3
5
26
0
5
1
5
26
0
2
5
26
0
3
1
5
26
0
December 31, 2024
Page 74 of 92
==PAGE:83==
Simulation results of Day3 with 10 minutes max circ time
Table 10.12: Simulation results for Day3 with a maximum circulation time of 10 minutes. For
each combination of the parameters, the table reports the number of: missed bags, overflow
bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
30 min
1
1
2
41
1466
2
2
41
933
3
2
41
308
2
1
2
41
1357
2
2
41
775
3
2
41
193
3
1
2
41
1483
2
2
41
923
3
2
41
278
4
1
2
41
0
2
2
41
0
3
2
41
0
5
1
2
41
0
2
2
41
0
3
2
41
0
45 min
1
1
2
37
2232
2
2
37
1337
3
2
37
571
2
1
2
37
2128
2
2
37
1163
3
2
37
546
3
1
2
37
2243
2
2
37
1335
3
2
37
649
4
1
2
37
0
2
2
37
0
3
2
37
0
5
1
2
37
0
2
2
37
0
3
2
37
0
60 min
1
1
2
37
2832
2
2
37
1770
3
2
37
926
2
1
2
37
2591
2
2
37
1684
3
2
37
803
3
1
2
37
2855
2
2
37
1759
3
2
37
915
4
1
2
37
0
2
2
37
0
3
2
37
0
5
1
2
37
0
2
2
37
0
3
2
37
0
December 31, 2024
Page 75 of 92
==PAGE:84==
Simulation results of Day1 with 20 minutes max circ time
Table 10.13: Simulation results for Day1 with a maximum circulation time of 20 minutes. For
each combination of the parameters, the table reports the number of: missed bags, overflow
bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
30 min
1
1
1
25
49
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
2
1
1
25
9
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
3
1
1
25
52
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
4
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
5
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
45 min
1
1
1
25
260
2
1
25
1
3
1
25
0
2
1
1
25
132
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
3
1
1
25
234
2
1
25
1
3
1
25
0
4
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
5
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
60 min
1
1
1
25
431
2
1
25
39
3
1
25
0
2
1
1
25
330
2
1
25
22
3
1
25
0
3
1
1
25
431
2
1
25
39
3
1
25
0
4
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
5
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
December 31, 2024
Page 76 of 92
==PAGE:85==
Simulation results of Day2 with 20 minutes max circ time
Table 10.14: Simulation results for Day2 with a maximum circulation time of 20 minutes. For
each combination of the parameters, the table reports the number of: missed bags, overflow
bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
30 min
1
1
5
26
442
2
5
26
158
3
5
26
0
2
1
5
26
412
2
5
26
86
3
5
26
0
3
1
5
26
469
2
5
26
176
3
5
26
0
4
1
5
26
0
2
5
26
0
3
5
26
0
5
1
5
26
0
2
5
26
0
3
5
26
0
45 min
1
1
6
26
865
2
6
25
432
3
6
25
40
2
1
6
25
841
2
6
25
374
3
6
25
33
3
1
6
26
853
2
6
26
429
3
6
25
38
4
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
5
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
60 min
1
1
6
25
1205
2
6
25
726
3
6
25
232
2
1
6
25
1185
2
6
25
686
3
6
25
199
3
1
6
25
1205
2
6
25
726
3
6
25
232
4
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
5
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
December 31, 2024
Page 77 of 92
==PAGE:86==
Simulation results of Day3 with 20 minutes max circ time
Table 10.15: Simulation results for Day3 with a maximum circulation time of 20 minutes. For
each combination of the parameters, the table reports the number of: missed bags, overflow
bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
30 min
1
1
2
43
369
2
2
43
159
3
2
43
12
2
1
2
43
325
2
2
43
111
3
2
43
0
3
1
2
43
365
2
2
43
165
3
2
43
12
4
1
2
43
0
2
2
43
0
3
2
43
0
5
1
2
43
0
2
2
43
0
3
2
43
0
45 min
1
1
2
37
810
2
2
37
349
3
2
37
61
2
1
2
37
726
2
2
37
327
3
2
37
0
3
1
2
37
848
2
2
37
376
3
2
37
66
4
1
2
37
0
2
2
37
0
3
2
37
0
5
1
2
37
0
2
2
37
0
3
2
37
0
60 min
1
1
2
37
1201
2
2
37
634
3
2
37
256
2
1
2
37
1043
2
2
37
594
3
2
37
217
3
1
2
37
1206
2
2
37
634
3
2
37
256
4
1
2
37
0
2
2
37
0
3
2
37
0
5
1
2
37
0
2
2
37
0
3
2
37
0
December 31, 2024
Page 78 of 92
==PAGE:87==
Simulation results of Day1 with 30 minutes max circ time
Table 10.16: Simulation results for Day1 with a maximum circulation time of 30 minutes. For
each combination of the parameters, the table reports the number of: missed bags, overflow
bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
30 min
1
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
2
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
3
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
4
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
5
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
45 min
1
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
2
1
1
25
2
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
3
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
4
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
5
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
60 min
1
1
1
25
98
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
2
1
1
25
69
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
3
1
1
25
98
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
4
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
5
1
1
25
0
2
1
25
0
3
1
25
0
December 31, 2024
Page 79 of 92
==PAGE:88==
Simulation results of Day2 with 30 minutes max circ time
Table 10.17: Simulation results for Day2 with a maximum circulation time of 30 minutes. For
each combination of the parameters, the table reports the number of: missed bags, overflow
bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
30 min
1
1
6
25
74
2
6
25
15
3
6
25
0
2
1
6
25
69
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
3
1
6
25
69
2
6
25
15
3
6
25
0
4
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
5
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
45 min
1
1
6
25
303
2
6
25
41
3
6
25
0
2
1
6
26
305
2
6
25
29
3
6
25
0
3
1
6
25
304
2
6
25
41
3
6
25
0
4
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
5
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
60 min
1
1
6
25
546
2
6
25
237
3
6
25
6
2
1
6
25
497
2
6
25
210
3
6
25
0
3
1
6
25
545
2
6
25
237
3
6
25
6
4
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
25
0
5
1
6
25
0
2
6
25
0
3
6
26
0
December 31, 2024
Page 80 of 92
==PAGE:89==
Simulation results of Day3 with 30 minutes max circ time
Table 10.18: Simulation results for Day3 with a maximum circulation time of 30 minutes. For
each combination of the parameters, the table reports the number of: missed bags, overflow
bags, and overflow bags due to reaching the maximum circulation time
Interval
Overflow
strategy
Uncategorized
belts
Missed
bags
Overflow
bags
Overflow bags
max circ. Time
30 min
1
1
2
43
27
2
2
42
9
3
2
42
0
2
1
2
42
30
2
2
42
0
3
2
42
0
3
1
2
43
21
2
2
42
2
3
2
42
0
4
1
2
42
0
2
2
42
0
3
2
42
0
5
1
2
42
0
2
2
42
0
3
2
42
0
45 min
1
1
2
40
211
2
2
40
48
3
2
40
0
2
1
2
40
185
2
2
40
19
3
2
40
0
3
1
2
40
212
2
2
40
49
3
2
40
0
4
1
2
40
0
2
2
40
0
3
2
40
0
5
1
2
40
0
2
2
40
0
3
2
40
0
60 min
1
1
2
41
451
2
2
40
134
3
2
40
0
2
1
2
41
391
2
2
40
137
3
2
40
4
3
1
2
41
451
2
2
40
134
3
2
40
0
4
1
2
40
0
2
2
40
0
3
2
40
0
5
1
2
40
0
2
2
40
0
3
2
40
0
December 31, 2024
Page 81 of 92
==PAGE:90==
10.0.6
EBS utilization plots with max circulation time of 10 minutes
Day3 with 60 minutes intervals and 2 uncategorized belts
Figure 10.9: Utilization of the 14 EBS belts when using overflow strategy 4 with 2 uncategorized
belts (13 and 14), a max circulation time of 10 minutes, and an interval of 60 minutes for Day3.
December 31, 2024
Page 82 of 92
==PAGE:91==
Day3 with 60 minutes intervals and 3 uncategorized belts
Figure 10.10: Utilization of the 14 EBS belts when using overflow strategy 4 with 3 uncategorized
belts (12, 13 and 14), a max circulation time of 10 minutes, and an interval of 60 minutes for
Day3.
December 31, 2024
Page 83 of 92
==PAGE:92==
Day2 with 45 minutes intervals and 2 uncategorized belts
Figure 10.11: Utilization of the 14 EBS belts when using overflow strategy 4 with 2 uncategorized
belts (13 and 14), a max circulation time of 10 minutes, and an interval of 45 minutes for Day2.
December 31, 2024
Page 84 of 92
==PAGE:93==
Day2 with 60 minutes intervals and 2 uncategorized belts
Figure 10.12: Utilization of the 14 EBS belts when using overflow strategy 4 with 2 uncategorized
belts (13 and 14), a max circulation time of 10 minutes, and an interval of 60 minutes for Day2.
December 31, 2024
Page 85 of 92
==PAGE:94==
Day2 with 45 minutes intervals and 3 uncategorized belts
Figure 10.13: Utilization of the 14 EBS belts when using overflow strategy 4 with 3 uncategorized
belts (12, 13 and 14), a max circulation time of 10 minutes, and an interval of 45 minutes for
Day2.
December 31, 2024
Page 86 of 92
==PAGE:95==
Day2 with 60 minutes intervals and 3 uncategorized belts
Figure 10.14: Utilization of the 14 EBS belts when using overflow strategy 4 with 3 uncategorized
belts (12, 13 and 14), a max circulation time of 10 minutes, and an interval of 60 minutes for
Day2.
December 31, 2024
Page 87 of 92
==PAGE:96==
Coupling experiments
Results for each dataset for the two coupling strategies can be found in the extra appendix
handed-in alongside the thesis.
10.0.7
Increasing cost of overlap - Minimum result over the 6
datasets
Table 10.19: Minimum number of missed bags over 30 iterations for each dataset for each
parameter combination for the increasing cost of overlap strategy
Cost
0.5
1
1.5
P
Instance
Missed bags
Missed bags
Missed bags
Dataset1
4
4
4
Dataset2
34
34
77
Dataset3
42
68
5
Dataset4
59
88
88
Dataset5
11
11
11
25%
Dataset6
102
102
46
Dataset1
4
4
4
Dataset2
64
34
3
Dataset3
42
46
9
Dataset4
88
15
68
Dataset5
11
11
11
50%
Dataset6
57
102
49
Dataset1
4
4
4
Dataset2
16
73
11
Dataset3
37
50
7
Dataset4
34
34
88
Dataset5
11
11
11
75%
Dataset6
13
54
18
Dataset1
4
4
4
Dataset2
40
77
11
Dataset3
43
2
51
Dataset4
34
34
88
Dataset5
11
11
11
100%
Dataset6
45
102
68
December 31, 2024
Page 88 of 92
==PAGE:97==
10.0.8
Extending chute opening times - Minimum result over the 6
datasets
Table 10.20: Minimum number of missed bags over 30 iterations for each dataset for each
parameter combination for the extended chute opening time strategy
P
25%
50%
75%
100%
T
Instance
Missed bags
Missed bags
Missed bags
Missed bags
Dataset1
4
4
4
4
Dataset2
32
21
65
38
Dataset3
3
21
63
22
Dataset4
72
88
92
53
Dataset5
11
11
11
11
1
Dataset6
59
59
40
59
Dataset1
2
2
4
4
Dataset2
5
34
71
37
Dataset3
13
6
22
4
Dataset4
3
23
34
85
Dataset5
11
11
11
11
2
Dataset6
65
16
102
59
Dataset1
3
2
4
4
Dataset2
98
27
3
5
Dataset3
5
2
44
2
Dataset4
37
65
81
58
Dataset5
11
11
11
11
3
Dataset6
85
102
45
7
Dataset1
2
2
4
4
Dataset2
50
37
64
5
Dataset3
39
8
2
21
Dataset4
73
21
21
48
Dataset5
11
11
11
11
4
Dataset6
19
51
53
82
Dataset1
4
2
2
4
Dataset2
49
2
2
3
Dataset3
3
3
36
2
Dataset4
81
35
32
5
Dataset5
11
11
11
11
5
Dataset6
40
50
41
102
December 31, 2024
Page 89 of 92
==PAGE:98==
Bibliography
[1]
Khaled Abdelghany and Ram Narasimhan. “Scheduling baggage-handling facilities in con-
gested airports”. In: Journal of Air Transport Management - J AIR TRANSP MANAG
12 (Mar. 2006), pp. 76–81.
[2]
Torben C. Barth and David Pisinger. “Scheduling of outbound luggage handling at air-
ports”. In: International Conference on Operations Research (2012), pp. 251–256. issn:
07215924.
[3]
Torben C. Barth et al. “Optimization of Transfer Baggage Handling in a Major Transit
Airport”. In: SN Operations Research Forum 2 (2021). issn: 2662-2556.
[4]
Check-in. url: https://www.cph.dk/praktisk/check-in.
[5]
C.S. Chen, S.M. Lee, and Q.S. Shen. “An analytical model for the container loading
problem”. In: European J. Oper. Res. 80 (1995), pp. 68–76.
[6]
Kathryn A. Dowsland. “Some experiments with simulated annealing techniques for packing
problems”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 68 (1993) 389-399 (1992).
[7]
Kathryn A. Dowsland and William B. Dowsland. “Packing Problems”. In: European Jour-
nal of Operational Research 56 (1992) 2-14 (1991).
[8]
Harald Dyckhoff. “A typology of cutting and packing problems”. In: European Journal of
Operational Research 44 145-159 (1990).
[9]
Oluf Faroe, David Pisinger, and Martin Zachariasen. “Guided local search for the three-
dimensional bin packing problem”. In: INFORMS Journal on Computing 15 (3) (1999).
[10]
Filippo Focacci, François Laburthe, and Andrea Lodi. “Local search and constraint pro-
gramming”. In: Handbook of metaheuristics. Ed. by Fred Glover and Gary A. Kochen-
berger. KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS, 2003.
[11]
Future of Aviation. url: https://www.icao.int/Meetings/FutureOfAviation/Pages/
default.aspx.
[12]
Beatriz Nebot Gracia. “Analysis and improvement of baggage handling in CPH airport us-
ing simulation tools”. In: MSc thesis, DTU Management, Technical University of Denmark
(2018).
[13]
Malene Høgsvig. E-mail correspondence with Sigrid and Laura. Sept. 2024.
[14]
Andrea Lodi, Silvano Martello, and Daniele Vigo. “Approximation algorithms for the ori-
ented two-dimensional bin packing problem”. In: European Journal of Operational Research
112 (1) (1997).
[15]
Andrea Lodi, Silvano Martello, and Daniele Vigo. “Heuristic and Metaheuristic Approaches
for a Class of Two-Dimensional Bin Packing Problems”. In: INFORMS Journal on Com-
puting 11 (4) (1999).
[16]
Andrea Lodi, Silvano Martello, and Daniele Vigo. “Recent advances on two-dimensional
bin packing problems”. In: Discrete Applied Mathematics 123 (1–3) (2002).
[17]
Silvano Martello, David Pisinger, and Daniele Vigo. “The Three-Dimensional Bin Packing
Problem”. In: Operations Research 48(2):256-267 (2000).
[18]
Hidetoschi Onodera, Yo Taniguchi, and Keikichi Tamaru. “Branch-and-Bound Placement
for Building Block Layout”. In: 28th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (1991),
pp. 433–439.
[19]
David Pisinger and Samuel í Hjøllum Rude. “Advanced algorithms for improved baggage
handling”. In: Journal of Airport Management 14.3 (2020), pp. 280–290.
[20]
David Pisinger and Rosario Scatamacchia. “The Baggage Belt Assignment Problem”. In:
EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics 10 (2021), p. 100041. issn: 2192-4376.
December 31, 2024
Page 90 of 92
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[21]
David Pisinger and Mikkel Sigurd. “Using Decomposition Techniques and Constraint Pro-
gramming for Solving the Two-Dimensional Bin-Packing Problem”. In: INFORMS Journal
on Computing (2007), 19(1):36–51.
[22]
Christos Voudouris and Edward P.K. Tsang. Guided Local Search. Technical Report CSM-
247. Department of Computer Science,University of Essex, UK, 1995.
[23]
Christos Voudouris and Edward P.K. Tsang. “Guided Local Search”. In: Handbook of
metaheuristics. Ed. by Fred Glover and Gary A. Kochenberger. KLUWER ACADEMIC
PUBLISHERS, 2003.
[24]
Christos Voudouris and Edward P.K. Tsang. “Partial Constraint Satisfaction Problems
and Guided Local Search”. In: Proceedings of PACT’96 (1996), pp. 337–356.
December 31, 2024
Page 91 of 92
==PAGE:100==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej Bygning 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
