==PAGE:1==
Natural Capital Accounting for Prototyping
microfabrication
Master Thesis Project
AMAIA ORTIZ DE ZARATE OSA - S223456
Supervisors:
Kristian Speranza Mølhave
Stig Irving Olssen
January 1, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Contents
1
Literature Review and Introduction
1
1.1
Brief introduction to cleanrooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
DTU’s case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Regulatory framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Why the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methods
6
2.1
NCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Goal and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
LCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
LCIA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Monetization methods
12
3.1
EPS2020
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
ReCiPe2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
EF3.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Tax for carbon emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Comparison between the different monetization methods . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
NCA calculator - how to use
18
5
Results and sicussion
19
5.1
EPS2020
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
ReCiPe2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Comparison between different monetization methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
ALCA vs CLCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Conclusions
26
6.1
Recommendations for DTU’s cleanroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Future changes/recommendations
27
A Anex: NCA inventory
32
1
==PAGE:3==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
1
Literature Review and Introduction
The semiconductor industry, specifically the microchip industry, is a hot topic nowadays. Over the last
five decades, the semiconductor industry has been through a steady increase in revenue and market size,
reaching 611.24 billion US dollars in 2024 [1]. The growth in market size comes by a greater demand,
mainly for memory chips, AI chips, smartphones.
This demand led to larger production, demanding higher energy and chemical consumption, resulting in
greater environmental impact and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions [2]. Computational technology, for
instance, is predicted to contribute up to 23% of the globally released greenhouse gas emissions in 2030
[3].
One of the tools that could help in the analisis and comparison of emissions is the Natural Capital Ac-
counting. This tool enable the comparison of different emission and Life Cycles. The NCA is a step
further to the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). Day today, all the performed LCAs in the cleanrooms or
semiconductor fabrications are focused especially on the energy used. Other sources such as [4] [5] [6]
expressed the problematic of other emissions related to the Perfluorinated chemicals used in several steps
of the production, but did not show the quantification of emissions that are related to them.
From an industrial point of view, big semiconductor manufacturer, i.e. Intel, TMSC and IMEC, have
seen that they need to focus on the sustainability of their product and processes. These manufacturers
although, are just focusing on the reduction of energy or electricity in their fabrication and replacing by
green energy [7][8][9][10]The usage of renewable energy is not enough to get a net zero process, as these
energy sources also have emissions in their production [11] [12][13].
To have a bit of perspective, a semiconductor unit consumed 9.57 L/cm2 of water, 1.16 kWh/cm2 of
energy and has a GHG emissions of 1 kgCO2eq./cm2 on average in 2021 [2]. Taking an average size of
a chip being 17.7 mm2, the consumption is 1.69 L/chip and 0.205 kWh/chip for water and energy re-
spectively, and 0.177 kgCO2eq./chip for GHG emissions. In 2022, 1.15 trillion of units where produced
[14], what is 235,75 GWh of energy. The consumed energy is approximately as 0.0013% of globally
consumed energy yearly [15].
The 27 biggest semiconductor manufacturing corporations had an average water and energy consump-
tion of 1.61 · 103 m3 and 2.74 · 109 kWh, respectively in 2021 [2]. The biggest consumers were found to
be Samsung, SK Hynix, TSMS, Intel and Micron [2]. Most of this consumption has its source in Scope
1, more specifically in the perfluorinated compounds and direct energy consumption [5][2]. The biggest
manufacturers’ strategies can be seen in the next table, from their ESG reports.
Page 1 of 27
==PAGE:4==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Figure 1: The main focus of the ESG reports of the semiconductor corporations in 2022, 2023 or 2024.
Source: [7][8][9][10]
As shown in Table 1, most of the semiconductor manufacturing companies are focusing on the replace-
ment of the energy source by green energy. However, more than the replacement with renewable energy
is requared to tackle the increase in the demand for energy in the microchip production [11], as the usage
of renewable energy is not enough to get a net zero process, as these energy sources also have emissions
in their production [11][12] [13]. Another point to consider is that not all the emissions come from en-
ergy or electricity usage, several chemicals also as mentioned before, such as, perfluorinated compounds,
have a big GHG capacity in low amounts if emitted directly to the atmosphere.
On the other hand, green energy is not 100% free of emissions when the whole life cycle is consid-
ered [13]. All renewable energies have emissions, mainly in the production of the technology, which
are sometimes not considered when talking about net-zero emissions. These emissions can be seen in
Table 1, where a big difference between conventional and renewable sources can be visualized, however
there are still emissions, and considering the high energy demand, this number can be significant.
Page 2 of 27
==PAGE:5==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Conventional systems
Renewable Systems
System
gCO2/kWh
System
gCO2/kWh
Coal-fired
975,3
Hydro
3,7-237
Oil fired
742,1
Wind
9,7-123,7
Gas fired
607,6
Biomass
35-178
Nuclear
24,2
Solar PV
53,4-250
Solar thermal
13,6-202
Table 1: Comparative between the emissions in the life cycle of conventional and renewable systems.
Source: [13]
Some organizations have already started looking into building an emission calculator to see the most
pollutant steps and reduce or modify them. One of the organizations is the International Sematech Man-
ufacturing Initiative (ISMI). This organization created a calculator in 2010 called SEMI s23-0708. The
calculator is built only measures the Total Equivalent Energy Calculator (TEE CalcII) [16], but does not
consider the emissions related to the used chemicals and their emissions.
For a better overview and to make this process economically viable and sustainable, a natural capital ac-
counting (NCA) is potentially better than LCA. This method enables in the quantification of a monetary
value for the emissions, allowing a comparison between different processes [17]. This can be performed
using different monetization methods, such as Rethinking Environmental Choices using Indicators at
Midpoint and Endpoint levels (ReCiPe) or Environmental Priority Strategies (EPS), and each method
contains different disadvantages and advantages. Unfortunately, there are no studies around NCA in mi-
crofabrication or cleanrooms. This project aims to fill the gap and give a better understanding of how to
make cleanrooms and microfabrication more sustainable with the most impactful steps.
NCA has already being used by Puma in 2010 and Novo Nordisk in 2013. Both of them called the
result report as Environmental Profit & Loss (EP&L) [18]. In the case of Puma, in their last study they
realised that more than half of the environmental costs are coming from the material and raw-material
productios [19]. Consequently, they started to use more sustainable materials such as cotton, polyester
and cardboard.
As a future direction, introducing ultra-pure chemicals in the calculations is highly recommended, as the
current numbers are for bulk chemicals, and requiring the requested purity for microfabrication needs
several hundred MJ/kg [20]. As an example, the distillation processes usually used for purification are
currently about 7% of energy consumption for all the US chemical production [20].
Page 3 of 27
==PAGE:6==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
1.1
Brief introduction to cleanrooms
For the semiconductor and microfabrication industry, cleanrooms are an essential part. These buildings
are constructed to always maintain a very low concentration of particles to obtain the highest purities
[21]. Cleanrooms are extensively used in different industries, such as pharmaceutical, food and aero
space. The necessity for ultrapure fabrication was rushed during WWII by the US Navy’s North Island
Naval Air Station [21]. Once they saw that the contamination could be controlled, it was rapidly extended
for different applications.
For their utilization, cleanrooms require high energy and chemicals. Briefly, for the creation of one piece
of semiconductor, several steps are carried out, and each step is precisely supervised as a minimum dis-
ruption can destroy the product. Even the smallest disturbances in temperature or humidity inside the
installations, can destroy the output. That is where the difficulties in the sustainability of these buildings
resides in the short space to modify in the production steps, as very few to none changes can be executed.
1.2
DTU’s case
In the specific case of DTU, the university counts with a cleanroom building in its installation. This
cleanroom is not industrial scale, but currently, there is a plan to increase the capacity of the cleanroom
facilities. The results of this project are not able to be implemented in industrial side facilities completely,
due to its size.
The expansion plan aims to meet the increasing demand for microchips both for companies and re-
searchers. This project will cost DKK 345 million [22], with the increase of microchip production in
Denmark as the principal goal. The actual DTU cleanroom uses an average of 0.328 GWh per month,
which is the energy that 123 Danish citizens consume per month.
1.3
Regulatory framework
The European Union has attempted to implement a strategy and the Microchip Act in September of 2023.
In this document, a declaration of intent is shown to make the production of semiconductors inside the
union and in a sustainable way [23]. The sustainability part, however, comes from using renewable en-
ergy sources and introducing the circular economy in the different parts and materials of the microchips.
No emission is mentioned, or how to tackle that problem.
Afterwards, in July of 2024, the Ecodesing for Sustainable Regulation (ESPR) was entered into force
[24]. This regulation applies to all the products made in the EU with the exception of food and medicines.
The ESPR is part of a bigger measures package to achieve a circular economy, and improve energy per-
formance, recyclability and durability [24]. One of the new additions to this regulation is that it increases
the scope to get the overall reduction of the environmental and climate footprint, which goes through
making products more energy and resource-efficient.
Page 4 of 27
==PAGE:7==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
This last regulation is not yet implemented, but it is forecasted to be adopted in the first half of 2025 [24].
1.4
Why the study
The semiconductor industry had a notable increase in market size and inversion, which created more
production-related emissions. Unfortunately, the source of these emissions is not being considered by
the biggest manufacturers and governmental bodies, such as the European Union. The main focus has
been the usage of green energy and reuse of materials creating a circular economy.
This project aims to create a calculator where the economic value of each emission can be quantified for
a comparison between different chemicals and consumptions. When given a standardised economical
value the most impactful chemicals or processes can be modified having the biggest positive value in the
totality of the manufacturing.
The calculator is designed to measure the monetary benefits and costs of the chemicals and resources
used in a cleanroom. This calculator is linked to the EcoIvent dataset so that the data is always the
latest and the results are always based on the most recent data. Through these calculations, the most
economically sound decisions can be proposed for DTU’s cleanroom. If the tool is found to be valuable
and useful, a start-up path will be analysed.
Page 5 of 27
==PAGE:8==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
2
Methods
The methodology used is NCA. But to get there, a number of steps need to be taken. First of all, a
problem has to be identified. Once identified, data needs to be collected and a scope chosen. The
different approaches can be seen in Figure 4. The assessment method is then chosen. It is important to be
clear about the objective of the study, as the different evaluation methods have different output indicators
and units. In this case, as we need a consistent method to easily compare very different processes and
products, an endpoint method is chosen. Monetisation methods are used to achieve this. Using these
methods, a result is obtained that can be interpreted by a wide range of people because the result units
are easy to understand.
Figure 2: Followed steps in the study
A calculator has been created to obtain the results. This calculator is linked to the Allocation and Con-
sequential datasets in EcoInvent v.3.11. This tool makes it easy to calculate the products, emissions and
required systems in a single unit.
2.1
NCA
Natural Capital Accounting is a method to compare different emissions by assigning a monetary value to
them [17]. It is a comprehensive way of showing the impacts on the environment, allowing an easy com-
parison within different stages. The advantage of this method relies upon the easy comparison between
different parts of the manufacture and points in the most significant step to have the biggest final impact
in the totality of the process. This allows industry owners to identify the best route to reach sustainable
production from an environmental perspective. It could give an aswered if an inversion will get a highest
environmental impact, such as, is it useful to invest 1000 USD for a change that could only save 1 USD
to the environment?.
Some studies however and the ISO 14001 and 14004, have raised that the usage of a single indicator can
introduce a high degree of uncertainty [25]. However, is the easiest method for decision-making in the
Page 6 of 27
==PAGE:9==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
industry and policies.
Unfortunately, the ISO standards contain a big amount of uncertainties that makes it difficult to follow in
several cases. Some authors, have already expressed the neccesity of a different framework, and no ISO
standards in LCA mehtods [26].
2.2
LCA
The Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a methodology that seeks to identify the different environmental
impacts for both a product and a process at every stage of its life cycle [27]. The methodology can be
complex for the end user due to the big databases and different methods. In Figure 3 a simple represen-
tation of a process in LCA is visualised.
Figure 3: Example of all the processes considered in LCA with the inputs and outputs of each step.
Throughout all the years that LCA has been used, there was a problem with the divergence in methods.
Different methods have different system boundaries and allocation methods which result in a completely
different output assessment. To prevent this differentiation, several ISO standards were created ISO
14040-14044.
Even though the standards were created, this method continued to have its challenges due to the potential
to shift burdens to different products or processes. Two models were created to prevent the shifting from
happening: Attributional LCA (ALCA) and Consequential LCA (CLCA). These concepts are not men-
tioned in the ISO standards, so their interpretation is based on past articles and studies [28] [29] [30].
The ALCA is the approach that informs what portion of global burdens can be associated with a product
or process. The CLCA on the other hand, tries to inform about the environmental burdens that happen,
both directly or indirectly, as a consequence of a decision [29].
In a few words, ALCA partitions the flow between the different products, and CLCA addresses multi-
functionality, opening the boundaries to the subproducts created in the processes [30]. The main differ-
ences can be seen in Table 4.
Page 7 of 27
==PAGE:10==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Figure 4: The differences between the two LCA models. Source: [30]
The decision on which approach is a design decision based on the interests and goals of the study.
LCA is mainly composed of four indispensable stages [27][28][31]:
1. Goal and Scope definition
2. Life cycle inventory (LCI)
3. Life cycle impact assessment (LCIA)
4. Interpretation of the results
Page 8 of 27
==PAGE:11==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
2.2.1
Goal and Scope
The Goal and Scope depend on the model being used. As can be seen in the table 4, each model uses a
different Goal and Scope. In the built calculator, both models are taken into account for easier adaptation
to the needs of the end user.
The goal is to see which step is the most cost effective to change in DTU’s cleanroom, and for this the
chemicals, energy and systems used are analysed, as well as direct emissions and life cycles.
2.2.2
LCI
The LCI is a crucial part of LCAs that controls the quantification and accumulation of the inputs and
outputs of a system [31]. This is probably one of the most complicated, time consuming and costly
steps of an LCA. For this reason, different strategies have been developed: process-based LCI models,
input-out (IO) models and hybrid models. The main difference between the models is their focus. The
process-based ones focus on the physical processes and the IO on the economic sectors. The hybrid ap-
proaches are the ones that give the greatest accuracy [31] as it is a mixture between the process-based and
the IO. There is a problem in choosing the right method, as the collection of huge extensive data is time
intensive, but ignoring some data from upstream and downstream processes can create some escalating
errors that can have a big impact on the further decision making process. In this study an IO method is
used, but a hybrid approach could be used if all processes are detailed and all chemicals are listed in the
future.
For EcoInvent, the LCI database supports three system models: Allocation cut-off by classification, Al-
location at the Point of Substitution, and Consequential [32]. In the case of this project, the data is from
DTU’s cleanroom and the inventory for the related exchanges of those processes comes from EcoInvent
version 3.11. The energy conversion, on the other hand, is taken from the Danish Energy Agency [33].
This is done as the analysed cleanroom is in Denmark, for a global overview, this source needs to be
changed.
The inventory has been divided into different Scopes: Scope 1, Scope 2 and Scope 3. Inside Scope 1 all
the direct emissions are considered [34]. In the case of the studied cleanroom, the only direct emission
is SF6. On the Scope 2, the purchased electricity is considered, in addition to the systems that needs for
a functional cleanroom. This consist of systems: heating systems, air compression and cooling systems.
The heating system is considered to be done by floor heating using district heating system. Finally, on
Scope 3, the potential impact of the purchased materials are considered. In the case of this study, all the
purchased chemicals and materials are considered.
All used inventory data is not long-term (LT). This is due to the uncertainties and variations that can
be introduced as different types of leaks can occur in the landfill. These leaks can push the problem
completely to the end of life.
Page 9 of 27
==PAGE:12==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
The geography chosen is RoW (Rest of the World) to prevent any possible shifting of the burden between
the different countries or regions.
The conversion factor for the used electricity has diverse sources for Kongens Lyngby. The source can
be from the Danish national energy agency, the country average or the city average.
Figure 5: Energy conversion factor from kWh to kgCO2eq. from different sources for Lyngby
There are big differences depending on which source is used. All values represent the same, but it has
up to 94.56% of variation. The chosen one was the Adjusted value from the Danish Energy Agency in
2023, as it is a verified value published by the Danish government and it was found to be the most reliable.
Here is the link to the calculator: https://dtudk-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/r/personal/s223456˙dtu˙dk/Documents/Calculator%
In the Anex the inventory used for the NCA calculator can be seen.
2.2.3
LCIA
The LCIA quantifies the impact by classifying and characterising the inventory data of an impact. When
assessing different impacts, several studies have identified the midpoint as the most accurate [35][36].
The lowest uncertainties were found for midpoint is the Global Warming Potential (GWP) impact [35].
Some variations in the values can be found depending on the GWP values, because not every Life Cy-
cle Inventory (LCI) dataset contains all relevant information on the CO2 equivalent flows, for various
reasons such as; outdated data, different approaches or different system boundaries. These uncertainties
may be increased when using the endpoint indicators, as some missing paths may appear.
There are different approaches for LCIA’s: endpoint and midpoint. There is a general belief that the end-
point models are more relevant, but with higher uncertainties. The midpoint models, on the other hand,
have more certainty but are generally less relevant [37] for decision making. Some relevant information
for further analysis can be left out in the case of the endpoint.
Page 10 of 27
==PAGE:13==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Figure 6: A simple representation of the difference between endpoint and midpoint approaches for
ReCiPe2016 method. Source: [38]
Midpoint indicators usually provide a broader perspective as they apply to a wider range of effects at the
endpoint level. On the other hand, endpoint models tend to focus on a limited number of pathways due
to the need for quantitative and clearer modelling [37].
Although certain knowledge gaps are recognised, experts in the relevant fields are not confident in mak-
ing assessments further the well-defined midpoints to endpoint effects [37]. Pathways with significant
knowledge gaps can still be incorporated into endpoint modelling by making assumptions in the cause-
effect chain, excluding certain pathways from consideration, or using parallel indices [25].
The LCIA methods analized in this report and its classification and characterization models are shown
below on Figure 7.
Page 11 of 27
==PAGE:14==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Figure 7: Different LCIA methods and the available versions.Source of some: [35]
The monetization method is an endpoint method. This available enpoint methods in EcoInvent dataset
are EPS2020 and ReCiPe2016. Due to an study [25], however, the EF method can also be used for
monetization through conversion factors.
The monetization methods are inside the ISO14008:2019 standard. This document specifies the method-
ological framework around the monetary valuation of environmental impacts and the related environmen-
tal aspects. These impacts account for human health, the natural environment, and the natural resources.
The standard understands environment as everything that surrounds the organization where operates,
such as air, water, land, natural resources, flora, fauna, humans and their interrelationships [39].
The objective of this method is to help in internal organizational decision-making when different risks
and opportunities in the operational decisions [39].
3
Monetization methods
Monetization methods are end-point models, giving a simple understanding of the impact, but introduc-
ing an extra uncertainty. Some monetization methods, such as EPS2020, give a monetary value directly.
ReCiPe2016, on the other hand, has different values for each area of protection (AoP) (Human health,
environmental protection and ecosystem protection). The EF monetization is done differently, however,
follows a similar pathway to ReCiPe, but it focuses in giving an economic value to each midpoint indi-
Page 12 of 27
==PAGE:15==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
cator.
3.1
EPS2020
This monetization method follows the ISO 14040-14043 standards and explains in more detail the
database [40]. This method measures the cost of decreasing the quality of the environmental goods
[41]. The main vision of this system was pushed by the designers at Volvo, who said that they had to
make a thousand decisions every year, and that a thousand people were involved in them. In order to
take the best option, they argue that a common language was needed so everyone could understand and
participate in the decision-making [40].
Figure 8: Graphical representation of the EPS2020 steps to get the monetary value of impacts on envi-
ronmental goods. Source:[41]
To understand how the method is weighted, here is an example. ”Suppose a bucket would be manu-
factured from polypropylene (PP) using an injection moulding process. We would need 2.7 kg of PP.
For the PP there is an environmental impact value of say 1.2 ELU/kg representing the overall impact
value for the manufacturing of PP. (A cradle to gate process). ELU stands for Environmental Load Units.
For the blow moulding process there is an index of say 0.2 ELU/kg. The total environmental impact
value for the manufacturing of the bucket would thus be 2.7 kg*1.2ELU/kg + 2.7 kg*0.2 ELU/kg = 3.78
ELU.Suppose then that the bucket when it is weird out is deposited in a landfill and an additional impact
on the environment occurs. An index of say 0.1 ELU/kg would the give an additional impact of 0.27
ELU. Other indices could be developed for processes related to PP, like material recycling,energy recov-
ery, incineration etc” [40].
There are different goals of this method; one is to be operative in a product development phase and be
able to assess different concepts and see which has the least environmental impact. Other is to assess the
added value from the different impact and communicate in an understanding magnitude.
The main difference with other LCA methods is that it uses indices to describe the environmental impacts
of different activities. It relies on standardisation to move from inventory results, then characterisation
factor, weighting factor and finally the index number. This can be seen in Figure 8. It takes a more holis-
Page 13 of 27
==PAGE:16==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
tic approach, considering as a ”whole” the environmental impact load of the product life cycle, focusing
mainly on economic evaluation and prioritisation [41].
The monetization valuations is similar to the willignes to pay (WTP), and has no discounting for future
effects, as it follows the Rio convention where it was stated that the future generations have the same
right to a good environment [40][42].
3.2
ReCiPe2016
This method has being categorized as the most scientifically “robust” method by several authors [43].
One of the reasons to be taken as a robust method is its criteria selection for the model. The data for
the GHG emissions are taken from the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report [44]. The
IPCC was created by the United Nations, and its database is developed and updated yearly by volunteer
scientists from all over the world, and the data comes from the different studies of that year.
The criteria says that the models should consider a global scale, use the latest scientific values, the mod-
els need to maintain consistency between different impact categories, and in the case of different suitable
models, the once-form ReCiPe consortium should be used.
This method enables the calculation for both, midpoint and endpoint characterization methods. The
endpoint characterization is divided into three areas of protection (AoP) as the ISO14008 states; human
health (DALYs (disability-adjusted life years)), ecosystem quality (species.year) and resource scarcity
(USD).
Figure 9: The relation between the different pathways from midpoint to endpoint. The dotted lines mean
that there is no constant from the mid-to-end-point factor. Source: [45]
Page 14 of 27
==PAGE:17==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
The different relations and paths from mid-point to end-point characterization factors are shown in Fig-
ure 9. The conversion from midpoint to endpoint, however, is done from different perspectives; Individu-
alist (I), Hierarchist (H) and Egalitarian (E). Some examples of the differences between the perspectives
can be seen in Table 2.
Individualist
Hierarchist
Egalitarian
Climate change
Time horizon
20 years
100 years
1000 years
Climate-carbon feedbacks non-CO2
No
Yes
No
Future socio-economic developments
Optimistic
Baseline
Pessimistic
Adaptation potential
Adaptive
Controlling
Comprehensive
Table 2: Examples of the differences between the ReCiPe2016 approaches. Source: [44]
The main difference on the approaches can be summarized by looking into the future socio-economic
developments. The individualist is an optimistic approach, hierarchist is the baseline as everything con-
tinues as planned, and the egalitarian is the pessimistic point of view. All the following data for this
method is going to be taken from the Hierarchist approach, as it is the most similar one to the actual
tendencies. All these different approaches are available in EcoInvent for both the ALCA and CLCA
aproaches and consequently on the calculator.
3.3
EF3.0
The Environmental Footprint is a method developed by the European Commission. The data for the
different conversion factors (CF) comes from different data and LCIA methods, such as IPCC2020 for
climate change (GWP100) [46]. This scheme only recommends methods at midpoint models [47], but
can get to an endpoint with the conversion factors shown in Table 4. Inside the midpoint categories,
this is divided into 16 impacts, such as climate change (kgCO2), ozone depletion (kg CFC-11eq.) and
resource use (MH) [46]. The data of the CFs takes into account the limitations of the method and the
methodological advice on how to use the different conversions [47].
Page 15 of 27
==PAGE:18==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Figure 10: Monetization values for the different indicators of the mid-point indicators in EF. Source:
[25]
Following the conversion factors, a better and unified indicator can be obtained, so it is easier to com-
pare the different indicators and methods. The downfall, as explained before, is the introduction of less
accurate results.
3.4
Tax for carbon emissions
Denmark had the thirteenth-highest carbon tax rate globally this April 28.2 USD tCO2eq. [48]. This tax
is a policy instrument to reduce carbon emissions. This environmental tax has been found effective by
some scholars and it is applied in more than thirty countries [49]. The carbon tax was first time studied
in 1980, showing strong reasons for its application: environmental quality and a more efficient economy.
The difficulty of the policy resides in the monetary value assignment for the emission, low taxes have no
effect on the economy and a too high tax can impact the economy significantly.
Page 16 of 27
==PAGE:19==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
3.5
Comparison between the different monetization methods
Figure 11: The main differences between the EPS2020 and ReCiPe2016 methods
The EF methods is not in the comparison, as it is a midpoint method, that can be converted into end-
point using some conversion factors for the different indicators as explained in the chapter before. Big
differences can be seen in Figure 11, from the purpose to the time horizon. Consequently, the result ob-
tained from the methods are expected to vary substantially. The decision on which method to use closely
Page 17 of 27
==PAGE:20==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
depends on the purpose and time horizon the study is mean to be.
4
NCA calculator - how to use
The built in NCA calculator is based on an IO inventory where the amount of different chemicals and
materials used must be manually entered into the input sheet.
The calculator is made in Excel, where different sheets are created: Imput, Results and the Allocation
and Consequential datasets. The cleanroom data must be entered manually according to the units speci-
fied in the table. If a new chemical or process, such as an air compressor, is to be added, the process must
first be looked up in the dataset sheet and the name copied exactly. If the name is not exactly the same,
a text ”no value found” will appear in the column where it says ”LCIA Allocation per unit” or ”LCIA
Consequential per unit”. Note that not all chemical compounds are available. If this is the case, a value
of 5 kgCO2eq. will be assigned if it is an organic compound. This is due to a study showing that most
organic compounds are found around this value [50].
Once the name has been added correctly, a geography must be selected. Clicking on the geography cell
will bring up a list of options. At the top of the input sheet there is a legend that explains what each
geography means.
The next step is to find the methodology to measure the flow between all the LCA processes. As for the
geographies, there is a legend at the top of the sheet to see what the different numbers of the methods
mean for allocation and consequence. Note that not all compounds and geographies are available for all
methods.
In the next sheet there is a ’Results’ sheet. This file is linked to the values on the ”Input” sheet, so
whenever the values are changed, be aware that the results will also be changed. If the results are to be
discussed further, remember to save the graph before changing the values on the input sheet.
The calculator is divided into different scopes. Scope 1 considers direct emissions. In this case the only
direct emission is SF6. In this case, a midpoint indicator is needed and then a conversion factor (CF) is
multiplied to get the cost. This CF depends on the monetisation method. The different CFs are listed at
the top of the page. For Scope 2, the energy purchased and the systems used are considered. In the case
of purchased energy, the same CF factor is needed to go from GWP100 to EUR or USD. In the case of
the system, the different methods have taken into account the energy and resources required. Finally, in
Scope 3, the chemicals and materials used are considered. The whole LC of them is considered, not just
their end use.
Page 18 of 27
==PAGE:21==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
5
Results and sicussion
The results for the calculated cleanroom are obtained using the EPS2020 method and the ReCiPe2016
method. Both methods are applied to the same cleanroom, using the same input and inventory, but due
to the differences seen in Figure 11, the results are expected to vary.
5.1
EPS2020
The first step is to divide the total impact into Scope 1, 2 and 3 to see which needs the most attention.
In the case of DTU’s cleanroom, Scope 1 is related to direct emissions, Scope 2 consists of purchased
electricity and the system used for the correct performance of the facility, and finally Scope 3 is the life
cycle of used chemicals and materials.
Figure 12: Distribution of the Scope cost (left) and from Scope 2 in EUR2018 and inside the system
distribution the different systems in EUR2018
In EPS2020, Scope 2 has the largest impact. Scope 1 and 3 have a contribution of 20% and 15% re-
spectively. As mentioned above, within Scope 2, the electricity purchased from the Danish market and
the systems needed for the correct operation of the cleanroom are taken into account. Within Scope
2, 90% comes from the required system and 10% from the purchased electricity. This may mean that
replacing the electricity mix with green sources may not solve the problem. In order to analyse the distri-
bution between the systems in more detail, this subgroup within Scope 2 is further subdivided into three
subgroups, as shown in the figure below.
Figure 13: Systems distribution inside Scope 2, using the EPS2020 method
The main impact in the systems comes from the market for underfloor heating using air-to-water heat
Page 19 of 27
==PAGE:22==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
pumps. The heat comes from district heating in the case of Denmark, but this is not the case globally.
As we are using the RoW geography, the global average is considered and it might not fit the case
for Denmark where district heating is a widely used system. Another thing to consider is the climate in
Denmark, where the average temperature is around 9ºC, so the energy required for heating is considerable
[51]. In the following Figure 14, the Scopes distribution is considered without the market for floor
heating.
Figure 14: Distribution of Socpe 1, 2 and 3 without considering floor heating as this impact does not
refelct the reality for Denmark
Once the underfloor heating is removed, the largest impacts is related to Scope 1. Scope 1 is the emission
of SF6. It is interesting to note that reducing or eliminating this emission can have a greater impact than
all of Scope 3, which considers the production and transport of the chemicals and materials used. An
abatement system can be implemented to control the direct emissions of sulphur hexafluoride. This sys-
tem is already in use in MIT’s clean room. According to the results of the EPS2020 method and ALCA,
this is the right choice as it has the largest environmental loss and the highest WTP.
In case of Scope 3 ,on the other hand, the chemicals and materials life cycle is considered. The produc-
tion and usage of these product contributes up to 33% of the global impact. The impact of this Scope
will be analyzed in more detail in the following Figures.
Inside the EPS, the emissions can be categorized by different aspects, air, energy resources, soil, land
use, water and material resources.
Page 20 of 27
==PAGE:23==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Figure 15: The EPS2020 method impact distribution for the DTU’s cleanroom. All the monetary emis-
sion impacts (left), those impacts without the nitrogen (right)
Most of the impact of the EPS2020 method comes from nitrogen emissions to air. Nitrogen is the most
abundant gas in the atmosphere and is fairly stable. However, this chemical can react with oxygen at
high temperatures, for example during the combustion reaction. The NOx contributes to the trophosferic
formation of ozone. Trophosferic ozone is very harmful to human health, especially for respiratory and
cardiovascular diseases, and increases the monetary cost of EPS2020.
Another impact related to the nitrogen to air the GH effect of the NO2. Nitrous oxide is formed during
the agriculture and industrial processes, such as, fertilizers. This molecule, has the same GHG impact as
300 carbon dioxide molecules.
Regarding the other areas considered in this method, a big part of the impact is on the material resources
and more specifically on the metals. The EPS2020 method takes as no-renewable all the used compo-
nents, such as in the case of sulfuric acid. This is due to the usage of the sulfuric acid in the upstream
metal production.
5.2
ReCiPe2016
The same for the ReCiPe method is done, by comparing the distribution of the cost impact between
Scope 1, 2 and 3.
Page 21 of 27
==PAGE:24==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Figure 16: The distribution between the impact of Scope 1 2 and 3(Left), and the distribution inside
Scope 2 (Right) using the ReCiPe2016 impact assessment method.
In this case, using the ReCiPe methodology, the majority of the impact comes from Scope 1. The impact
of SF6 emissions increases from 20% in EPS2020 to 68% in ReCiPe2018. Purchased energy from the
Danish mix has a smaller contribution compared to EPS2020 (15% to 23%). The system distribution
within Scope 2 has decreased from 90% in EPS to 20% in ReCiPe. Scope 3 impacts have also decreased
from 20% in EPS to 3% in ReCiPe. According to this method, the decision to phase out SF6 emissions
is stronger.
Figure 17: Impact distribution of the subgroup of Scope 2. The green color is the impact for floor heating,
blue color is the impact related to the air compression
In this case, most of the contribution for the systems is coming from the market for floor heating. The
distribution for the systems is exactly the same for both analyzed methods. However, are not quite simi-
lar, but this will be analized in the following chapter.
When using this method compared to EPS2020, the remaining chemicals lost weight compared to the
emission related to sulphur hexafluoride. This is due to the weighting of this method. The ReCiPe
method takes into account the long-term impact of the products and the SF6 has a lifetime of more than
1000 years.
To see the weight of the other used chemicals, another graph without the SF6 emission is shown in
Figure 18.
Page 22 of 27
==PAGE:25==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Figure 18: Distribution of the used chemicals and their direct emissions using ReCiPe2016 method
Once the direct emission of sulfuric hexafluoride to the atmosphere is removed (Scope 1), the biggest
impact is related to the life cycle of the production of nitrogen. The total weight of the nitrogen is much
smaller using the ReCiPe method, as it goes from 38% in EPS2020 to 4%. This is due to considering the
average for the damage potential, as the most of nitrogen impacts (entrophitatizain and acidification), are
often regionally significant instead of globally. Another reason is the lifetime perspective, as nitrogen is
often diminished compared to other global impacts such as, CO2 emissions and biodiversity loss.
As this methods follows the ISO14008, the same subcategorized are found. In the following graph, the
three subgroups and their impacts are shown.
Figure 19: The three subgroups of ReCiPe endpoint indicators; Environmental impact (USD2018)(blue),
ecosystem quality (USD2018)(orange) and humans toxicity (USD2018)(green)
The majority of the costs are related to environmental impacts. In particular, the nitrogen life cycle and
sulphur hexafluoride emissions. The reason is the same as for the EPS2020, nitrogen is the most abun-
dant gas in the atmosphere, but when going through different chemical reactions, such as, combustion,
termical nitrogen oxides can be made. This compound can create trophosferic ozone, and consequently
create respiratory problems for humans. Ecosystem quality and human toxicity are not relevant to the
overall picture in this case as can be seen in Figure 19.
Page 23 of 27
==PAGE:26==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
5.3
Comparison between different monetization methods
In the following table a comparison between three methods can be seen for each of the used chemicals
and its direct emissions.
Figure 20: Values of the used chemicals and its direct emission for the different monetization methods
The EF and ReCiPe methods have very similar values, as the methods get to the endpoint in a very
similar way. This is done by an extra step, as the total of the indicators are not in monetary value. For
EPS2020 on the other hand, a direct conversion to EUR2018 is done. This is due to the monetization of
the replacement of the loss of the resource and the WTP of the population for it. Some examples of this
variations are marked in red.
The cost is based on assumptions on the lost environmental quality for the EPS2020, and based on those
assumptions, the cost is greater than the scientific method. The EF and ReCiPe follow a similar pathway,
first getting midpoint values and then using conversions to get the endpoint values. This results in a more
similar final value for these methods.
The higest cost for all three mehtods is the direct emission from SF6. An abatement system can be use
to prevent that, with a cost of
5.4
ALCA vs CLCA
Both methods, Allocation and Consequential, can be used on the calculator, as both datasets are available
and ready at the same time. However, as explain earlier these methods has its own differentes. These
differences are notable especially for nitrogen and sulfuric acid as can be seen in the Figure below.
Page 24 of 27
==PAGE:27==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Figure 21: Differences of the impact costs between ALCA and CLCA using ReCiPe2016 (H) mehtod
The variations in the nitrogen are due to the consequential method considering the liquid nitrogen as
a subproduct of the oxygen production. This means that the impact related are almost none, as all the
impacts are assigned to the oxygen. On the other hand, allocation method, considers that the goal is to
get nitrogen as a product, and all the pathways are taking into account. This is done by dividing the
impacts between the oxygen and nitrogen in this case.
A similar case also happens with the sulfuric acid, as it has a negative impact in the consequential ap-
proach. This is due that it is considered the source also steam is produced, locating all the impact to the
creation of that steam.
In the case of the NCA of a cleanroom, it is more appropriate to use an allocation method, as nitrogen is
a product with a big impact, as the results show, that cannot be taken lightly.
Page 25 of 27
==PAGE:28==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
6
Conclusions
In the NCA calculator, the biggest impact of all the methods analysed is the direct emission of SF6 into
the environment. In order to prevent this, some university cleanrooms, such as MIT, have already started
using an abatement system with very positive results. This resulted in a theoretical zero emission of SF6
into the atmosphere. The use of this system, with EPS2020, with the reduction of the emission of SF6,
can save more than 525,000 euros in environmental impact.
The second major impact following the ALCA is nitrogen. To reduce its cost, a more sustainable source
can be used, such as Linde. This company produces net-zero nitrogen using green energy. This is not
enough, as we have seen, but it is a step towards reducing the cost.
When analysing the different LCA approaches, large differences were found. These differences were
mainly related to the pathways of emissions. These pathways can be distributed over the whole life cycle
(allocation) or only in one (consequential). A clear example of this is the production of nitrogen and
sulphuric acid, which have almost no impact in CLCA and big impacts, especially nitrogen, in ALCA.
In the case of the LCIA methods, he different methods reach to big variations in the values, this is due
to the different pathways used of the methods. When going first for a midpoint indicator, as it is the case
for ReCiPe and EF, the final endpoint value are more similar. On the other hand, when giving directly a
monetization value, such as, for EPS2020 the values tend to be higher for all the analyzed chemicals.
In the case of the NCA, it is easy to see the different impacts between the used materials and processes.
This calculator enables for a better understanding and comparison of the source of the biggest monetary
impacts and a better decision making. In addition, the calculator can be used for a variety of different
industries which are chemical- and energy-intensives.
6.1
Recommendations for DTU’s cleanroom
As mentioned above, the cost is 525,000 Euros, and an abatement system can cost up to 455,230 Euros
for the current emissions of SF6 [52]. Therefore, an abatement cost would be recommended for the
DTU’s cleanroom. Another point is the additional cost of ”green” nitrogen. If a consistent approach is
followed, a higher payment for ”green” nitrogen is not recommended.
Page 26 of 27
==PAGE:29==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
7
Future changes/recommendations
As future work, the purity of the chemicals should be investigated and taken into account, as currently the
data is from bulk chemicals. It is estimated that the emissions associated with a chemical can increase by
ten each time it is purified, and in industries such as microfabrication and pharmaceuticals, all chemicals
need to have the highest degree of purity, which has a large associated impact.
Another area that needs to be focused on is the potential reuse of the ’dirty’ chemicals after use. These
materials could be used in other industries that do not require high purity chemicals, as even the slightest
impurity makes them unusable for the microfabrication industry.
The climatic geographical impact of cleanrooms should also be considered. There is already an article
explaining how cleanrooms can increase the stress on energy and water consumption in several regions
[53]. The operating parameters are related to the geographical location of the cleanrooms. In areas or
regions with higher temperature and humidity, these parameters need to be modified to adapt to the opti-
mal range for a correct functioning of the installation.
The calculator could also be used in other energy- and chemical-intensive industries, such as pharmaceu-
ticals and metallurgy. This tool could help reduce the impact of doing the most effective actions towards
a greener manufacturing.
Page 27 of 27
==PAGE:30==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
References
[1] Alsop Thomas. Semiconductor market revenue worldwide from 1987 to 2025. Statista, 2024.
[2] Qi Wang, Nan Huang, Zhuo Chen, Xiaowen Chen, Hanying Cai, and Yunpeng Wu. Environmental
data and facts in the semiconductor manufacturing industry: An unexpected high water and energy
consumption situation. Water Cycle, 4:47–54, 2023.
[3] Anders S. G. Andrae and Tomas Edler. On global electricity usage of communication technology:
Trends to 2030. Challenges, 6(1):117–157, 2015.
[4] Srinivasa Rao Vutla, Srinivasa Prakash Regalla, and Kannan Ramaswamy. Life cycle assessment of
cleanroom for micro-electro-mechanical systems fabrication with insights on sustainability. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 282:124520, 2021.
[5] Sarah Boyd, Arpad Horvath, and David Dornfeld. Life-cycle assessment of nand flash memory.
Ieee Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, 24(1):117–124, 2011.
[6] Nikhil Krishnan, Sarah Boyd, and Ajay Somani. A hybrid life cycle inventory of nano-scale semi-
conductor manufacturing. UC Berkeley: Green Manufacturing and Sustainable Manufacturing
Partnership, 2008.
[7] Micron. Sustainability report. Technical report, Micron, 2024.
[8] Samsung. Samsung electronics sustainability report. A Journey Towards a Sustainable Future,
2024.
[9] TMSC. Sustainability report. 2022.
[10] Intel. Corporate responsability report 2023-2024. RISE Strategy and Goals, 2023.
[11] Sylvia Lee Jordan Tse Hsien-Hsin S. Lee Gu-Yeon Wei David Brooks Carole-Jea Wu Udit Gupta,
Young Geun Kim. Chasing carbon: The elusive environmental footprint of computing. 2020.
[12] Luke Gibson, Elspeth N. Wilman, and William F. Laurance. How green is ‘green’ energy? Trends
in Ecology Evolution, 32(12):922–935, 2017.
[13] Varun, I.K. Bhat, and Ravi Prakash. Lca of renewable energy for electricity generation systems—a
review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 13(5):1067–1073, 2009.
[14] Joshi Ketaki and Jambhale Rohan. Microchip statistics by production, market trends and revenue.
Technical report, Electron IQ, 2024.
[15] Hannah Ritchie, Pablo Rosado, and Max Roser. Energy production and consumption. Our World
in Data, 2020. https://ourworldindata.org/energy-production-consumption.
[16] ISMI: International Sematech Manufacturing Initiative. Semi s23 application guide and total equiv-
alent energy (tee) calcii user’s guide. International SEMATECH Manufacturing Initiative, Inc.
Advanced Materials Research Center, AMRC, InternationalSEMATECHManufacturingInitiative,
2010.
Page 28 of 27
==PAGE:31==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
[17] Mathis Wackernagel, Larry Onisto, Patricia Bello, Alejandro Callejas Linares, Ina Susana L´opez
Falf´an, Jesus M´endez Garcıa, Ana Isabel Su´arez Guerrero, and Ma Guadalupe Su´arez Guerrero.
National natural capital accounting with the ecological footprint concept. Ecological Economics,
29(3):375–390, 1999.
[18] Miljøstyrelsen. Assessment of potentials and limitations in valuation of externalities: With special
focus on environmental profit and loss. 2014.
[19] PUMA. Environmental annual report. 2020.
[20] Eric D. Williams, Robert U. Ayres, and Miriam Heller. The 1.7 kilogram microchip: Energy and
material use in the production of semiconductor devices. Environmental Science & Technology,
36(24):5504–5510, 2002. PMID: 12521182.
[21] Tim Sandle. The development of cleanrooms: an historical review. part 1: From civil war to safe
surgical practice. The Journal – Institute of Science Technology, 11 2016.
[22] Billie Nasrin. Dtu builds new cleanroom for microchip production. DTU: Technical University of
Denmark, 2023.
[23] European Commission. European chips act. Technical report, European Commission, 2023.
[24] European Commission. Ecodesign for sustainable products regulation. Making sustainable prod-
ucts the norm in the EU, 2024.
[25] Ben Moins, David Hernando, Wim Van den bergh, and Amaryllis Audenaert. Using monetization
to harmonize life-cycle assessment and life-cycle cost analysis for green public procurement of
pavement projects, pages 4092–4099. 06 2023.
[26] Thomas Schaubroeck.
Sustainability assessment of product systems in dire straits due to iso
14040–14044 standards: Five key issues and solutions.
Journal of Industrial Ecology, 26, 10
2022.
[27] Jeroen Guin´ee. Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment: What Is It and What Are Its Challenges?,
pages 45–68. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016.
[28] Thomas Schaubroeck, Simon Schaubroeck, Reinout Heijungs, Alessandra Zamagni, Miguel
Brand˜ao, and Enrico Benetto. Attributional consequential life cycle assessment: Definitions, con-
ceptual characteristics and modelling restrictions. Sustainability, 13(13), 2021.
[29] UNEP. Global guidance principles for life cycle assessment databases : a basis for greener processes
and products : ’shonan guidance principles’ / produced by the unep/setac life cycle initiative. LCA,
2011.
[30] Miguel Brand˜ao, Michael Martin, Annette Cowie, Lorie Hamelin, and Alessandra Zamagni. Con-
sequential life cycle assessment: What, how, and why? In Martin A. Abraham, editor, Encyclopedia
of Sustainable Technologies, pages 277–284. Elsevier, Oxford, 2017.
Page 29 of 27
==PAGE:32==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
[31] Samantha Islam, S.G. Ponnambalam, and Hon Loong Lam. Review on life cycle inventory: meth-
ods, examples and applications. Journal of Cleaner Production, 136:266–278, 2016. PRES’15:
Cleaner energy planning, management and technologies.
[32] EcoInvent. Ecoinvent 3.11 database. 2024.
[33] Danish Energy Agency. Total energy consumed (adjusted). 2024.
[34] Justine McClimont. What’s the difference? scope 1, 2 and 3 corporate emissions. WorkForClimate,
2021.
[35] Daniel Koch, Anton Friedl, and Bettina Mihalyi. Influence of different lcia methods on an exem-
plary scenario analysis from a process development lca case study. Environment, Development and
Sustainability, 2023.
[36] Cristiane Bueno, Michael Zwicky Hauschild, Jo˜ao Adriano Rossignolo, Aldo Roberto Ometto, and
Nat´alia Crespo Mendes. Sensitivity analysis of the use of life cycle impact assessment methods: a
case study on building materials. Journal of Cleaner Production, 112:2208–2220, 2016.
[37] Jane Bare, Patrick Hofstetter, David Pennington, and Helias Haes. Midpoints versus endpoints:
The sacrifices and benefits. Int. J. Life Cycle Ass., 5:319–326, 04 2012.
[38] Michael Z. Hauschild and Mark A. J. Huijbregts. Introducing Life Cycle Impact Assessment, pages
1–16. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2015.
[39] International Standard (ISO). Iso 14008:monetary valuation of environmental impacts and related
environmental aspects. International Standard, 2019.
[40] Bengt Steen. A systematic approach to environmental priority strategies in product development
(eps). version 2000–general system characteristics. Gothenburg Centre Environ Assess Prod Mate-
rial Syst, 01 1999.
[41] Bengt Steen and Tomas Rydberg. Eps weighting factors - version 2020d. IVL Swedish Environ-
mental Research Institute, 2020.
[42] United Nations: Climate Change. The rio conventions the interconnected challenges of climate
change, desertification and biodiversity loss. United Nations, 1992.
[43] Yan Dong, Michael Hauschild, Hjalte Sørup, R´emi Rousselet, and Peter Fantke. Evaluating the
monetary values of greenhouse gases emissions in life cycle impact assessment. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 209:538–549, 2019.
[44] M.A.J. Huijbregts et al. Recipe 2016 a harmonized life cycle impact assessment method at mid-
point and endpoint level report i: Characterization. National Institute for Public Health and the
Environment of the Netherlands, 2016.
[45] Steinmann Z.J.N. Elshout P.M.F. et al Huijbregts, M.A.J. Recipe2016: a harmonised life cycle
impact assessment method at midpoint and endpoint level. Int J Life Cycle Assess 22, 138–147,
2017.
Page 30 of 27
==PAGE:33==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
[46] European Commission. Life cycle assessment the ef methods: Comprehensive coverage of im-
pacts. Directorate-General for Environment, 2018.
[47] European Commission, Joint Research Centre, S Sala, V De Laurentiis, L Zampori, E Diaconu,
S Fazio, and F Biganzioli. Supporting information to the characterisation factors of recommended
EF Life Cycle Impact Assessment methods – Version 2, from ILCD to EF 3.0. Publications Office,
2018.
[48] Ian Tiseo. Carbon tax rates in selected jurisdictions worldwide as of april 2024. Statista, 2024.
[49] Boqiang Lin and Zhijie Jia. The energy, environmental and economic impacts of carbon tax rate
and taxation industry: A cge based study in china. Energy, 159:558–568, 2018.
[50] Dachuan Zhang, Zhanyun Wang, Christopher Oberschelp, Eric Bradford, and Stefanie Hellweg.
Enhanced deep-learning model for carbon footprints of chemicals. American Chemical Society,
2024.
[51] Climate data. Data and graphs for weather climate in copenhagen. 2024.
[52] Jos Benner, Marit van Lieshout, and Harry Croezen. Abatement cost of sf6 emissions from medium
voltage switchgear. Validation of recent studies for the European Commission, 2022.
[53] Justin Z. Lian, Flora Siebler, Bernhard R.P. Steubing, Aldo Jesorka, Valerio Barbarossa, Ranran
Wang, Karl Leo, Indraneel Sen, and Stefano Cucurachi. Quantifying the present and future envi-
ronmental sustainability of cleanrooms. Cell Reports Sustainability, 1(9):100219, 2024.
Page 31 of 27
==PAGE:34==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
A
Anex: NCA inventory
Page 32 of 27
==PAGE:35==
Natural Capital Accounting for microfabrication prototyping
Page 33 of 27
