==PAGE:1==
Multi­view segmentation and depth estima­
tion of semi­transparent objects for labora­
tory automation
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of neural networks.
Kays Abdul­Aziz ­ s215961
Signature
Date
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis explores the use of multi­view semantic segmentation and depth estimation
of semi­transparent objects for use in laboraty automation. Current sensors such as Li­
dar and RGB­D, while able to accurately determine depth, are costly in nature and not
completely accurate due to the lambertian assumption and reflective nature of transpar­
ent objects. State­of­the­art models such as MVTrans lead the way for depth estimation
through the use of RGB images and deep neural networks. There are multiple pipelines
for semantic segmentation and depth estimation such as using multiple views of objects
of interest which shows to yield accurate semantic segmentation while depth estimation
had a lack in results.
iv
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Residual Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Segmentation and shape recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Depth estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methodology
7
3.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Initial Hyperparameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Validation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Results
13
4.1
Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5
Improvements
16
5.1
Model Architecture improvements and Memory Management . . . . . . . . 16
6
Conclusion
17
Bibliography
19
A Appendix
21
A.1 Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Transparency of objects proposes an issue for perception tasks as the refractory proper­
ties of certain objects interfere with the accuracy of most Deep Learning (DL) models. For
depth estimation tasks this holds especially true for objects displaying low levels of opac­
ity, as simple algorithms struggle with discerning the difference between opaque objects
in a still image and an object of high transparency camouflaging itself within that image.
This is due to transparent objects lacking noticeable surface characteristics, making DL
models more dependent on the background of said object as the color and texture fea­
tures become less prevalent. Additionally, 3D sensors such as LiDAR[1] and RGB­D[2]
cameras follow the Lambertian assumption that states that an object’s surface brightness
is constant at every viewing angle since it is assumed to reflect light uniformly in all direc­
tions, resulting in transparent objects inhibiting common sensors from reliably collecting
depth data without unpredictable noise1, as transparent objects both reflect and refract
light. This further complicates any autonomous robotic application that includes glass win­
dows, flasks or tubes commonly seen in research labs. While object detection algorithms
can reach high accuracies for transparent objects, depth estimation remains problematic
even with state of the art sensors.
This project will develop a computer vision system customized for transparent object seg­
mentation and depth estimation in a laboratory setting. The proposed solution is to utilize
multi­view images within a DL model to analyze whether the refractory properties of cer­
tain objects are identifiable in such a way that it results in higher accuracy than displayed
by current state­of­the­art DL models while successfully displaying adequate performance
in terms of real­world applicability.
1.1
State of the Art
State of the art:
The use of multiple modalities as input for DL algorithms has been prevalent over the
last couple of decades[5] and as technological as well as social structures are constantly
expanding not only their capabilities but also their outreach, our need for increasingly
complex adaptations are warranted. In the past, unimodal DL algorithms had shown im­
pressive results and the practical applications have become widespread to the point where
the every day person has access to the powerful capabilities of such models. Unfortu­
nately, along with certain restrictions such as adequate datasets, technological availability
in the form of computational power had also been a burden. However, thanks to today’s
technological advancements, we not only have the processing power but also the dataset
generation to handle deep neural networks.
Deep Multi­view learning (DMVL) comes in many forms as modality is not restricted to
images, but also include audio, text, physiological electrical signals and 3D data points
such as those captured by LIDAR sensors, to name a few. Some modalities are used
as the main input while others function as support to allow for capturing distinct features
in relation to the main input. Some prominent multi­modal models include Contrastive
Language­Image Pre­Training (CLIP)[6], DALL­E[7] and, WaveNet[8]. Currently, the state
of the art in terms of pose and depth estimation lies with Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)
1Current technology for depth estimation sensors have become quite good[3], but the hardware is ex­
pensive and through state­of­the­art DL models the data gathering has become easier as RGB images are
good[4] enough to create accurate depth predictions.
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
1
==PAGE:8==
based methods and was first introduced in 2020 by B. Mildenhall et al.[9] and has since
gained widespread attention for their ability to reconstruct a three­dimensional represen­
tation from two­dimensional images. However, since the applicability of this model is
beyond the scope of this project inspiration will instead be drawn from MVTrans[4] which
was at the forefront of transparent object detection and pose/depth estimation through the
use of their multi­view perception architecture.
1.2
Research question
For this project, the main focus will be on utilizing multi­view images of the same setup
including positional data of the camera and the objects of interest in the frame. Further­
more, labels will be gathered for use in a semantic segmentation task rather than object
classification. While some of the prominent models aim to accomplish zero­ and one­shot
segmentation, this project will aim to create a specialized framework for laboratory use,
with goals to create proper depth estimation of transparent objects.
2
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:9==
2
Theory
In the realm of Deep Multi­View Learning (DMVL) architectures there are a lot of dif­
ferent methods for structuring a model. This chapter will cover a short introduction to
Deep Learning as well as further elaborations on the theoretical concepts of the relevant
state­of­the­art methods in use and a description of how they can be adapted to semantic
segmentation and depth estimation if they are not already being used for this.
2.1
Deep Learning
The structure of a deep neural net consist of an input layer, hidden layers and an output
layer. A neural network is typically considered deep when it has more than one hid­
den layer, often with thousands of hidden layers. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN),
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and Transformers encompass the most prominent do­
mains of deep learning[10], amongst others. RNN’s are well designed for sequential data
as they process information through multiple time steps while maintaining a hidden state
that is updated at each time step. As the this thesis aims to utilize images, RNN’s will not
be used. Vision Transformers (ViT) however are particularly proficient for segmentation
tasks where global scene understanding is important and are easily integrated with depth
information for depth estimation. Even though ViT’s generally fit the task, their training is
slower and require large datasets for effective performance.
2.2
Convolutional Neural Network
This section will explain the general concept of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
as it is a popular choice for spatial data and is well performing for image segmentation
tasks[11].
CNN’s are feed­forward networks, meaning that the information is passed through in one
direction rather than through any cycles. The loss is then optimized and the learnable
parameters of the model get updated through backpropagation. An example of a CNN
can be seen in Fig. 2.1.
The overarching architecture can be split into three layers; The input layer, hidden layers
and the output layer. The input to the network is an image in the form of a tensor with
the shape of Channels,Height,Width, where channels is here usually either 1 for gray­
scale images or 3 for RGB images. The network then learns features in the following
hidden layers through what is known as convolutions, usually followed by either layers of
either a pooling, batch normalization, dropout and an activation function, where a common
choice is Rectified Linear Unit (ReLu). An example of an output layer could be a fully
connected layer for use in a classification task. Convolutions create feature maps by
applying a kernel which acts as a filter across the image. The image input gets convolved
by the kernel by calculating the dot product at every pixel depending on the kernel size, for
example a 2x2 or 3x3 kernel. The kernel is then moved across the image as determined by
the stride. These two components determine the output resolution of the image, whereas
the channels are a directly chosen hyperparameter. The kernel weights are learnable
parameters used in the forward pass which are then updated during backpropagation.
A bias term is also learned and is associated with each of the chosen output channels
and acts as a scalar offset to the weighted sum which is computed by the convolution
for each pixel. As can be seen in Fig. 2.1, the channel dimensions increase through
convolutions and the spatial dimensions decrease until the feature map goes through
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.1: Convolutional Neural Network as seen in a VGG­16 CNN architecture[12]
the fully connected layers which reduce the channels depending on the task. Each of the
filters in the CNN learn different image features as they get processes through the network.
Initially, the network learns low level features such as edges and corners. Then smaller
shapes, which are combinations of earlier learned textures and edges, are learned in the
middle layers and finally the fully connected layers learn high level features, such as the
cat in the image, by combining shapes and help create a semantic understanding. For
pixel­wise classification, instead of using a fully connected layer, one usually upsamples
the features from the final layer back to the original resolution through deconvolutions,
which will be elaborated on further in Chapter 3.3.
2.3
Residual Neural Networks
The Residual Neural Network (ResNet) was first introduced in the 2015 paper ”Deep
Residual Learning for Image Recognition”[13] by Kaiming He et al.The idea of reaching
increased performance accuracies through the use of deep layers was well known be­
fore the release of the paper. However, as seen in the paper optimization of increasingly
deeper layers proved difficult as training and test errors increased with depth rather than
decreased. It is important to note that the increased errors were not the result of over­
fitting, as the error values of the deeper layer networks did not reach the same low error
values, but was simply higher from the start, as can be seen in Fig. 1 of the paper[13]. This
is known as the vanishing gradient problem. This problem was remediated by the use of
skip connections in their residual learning architecture. An example of a Residual building
block can be seen in Fig. 2.2 The idea is to learn the residual function F(x) = H(x) −x,
where H(x) is the underlying function performed by the sub network in any number of
hidden layers and x is the input. Through residual learning the network becomes param­
4
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: A Residual building block
eterized and the output of the sub network is represented by y = F(x, Wi) + x. The
addition of the input identity mapping to the residual function is what is considered a skip
connection and allows unobstructed flow of the gradients during backpropagation which
alleviates the vanishing gradient problem. The problem arises in deep networks as the
gradients become exceedingly small during backpropagation as they go through many
layers, which causes the weights in earlier layers to not be updated by any significant
measure which in turn leads to suboptimal learning[13]. The addition of the identity map­
ping allows the initial input x to be preserved and propagated forward which mitigates the
potential failure of the residual function to learn features. The identity mapping allows the
gradients to have a direct path during backpropagation which prevents the gradients from
vanishing. A larger example can be seen in Fig. A.13 in the appendix. The skip connec­
tions are desired since they do not increase computational complexity nor introduce more
parameters.
2.4
Segmentation and shape recognition
Although different views often represent diverse and complementary information of the
same data, directly integrating them together does not obtain consistently satisfactory
performance due to the biases between multiple views. Therefore, how to integrate multi­
ple views properly is a central problem, which is also the objective of multi­view learning.
As described by Yan et al.[14], multi­view CNN architectures are usually partitioned into
the following two types: one­view­one­net mechanisms and multi­view one­net mech­
anisms. An example of both is illustrated in Fig.2.3[14]. The first illustration shown in
Fig.2.3(a) works by inputting each view separately into the network for feature generation
to then be pooled for final feature representation, usually through additional aggregation
layers, usually fully connected layers, for use as a compact feature representation. The
second illustration shown in Fig.2.3(b) works by inputting multiple views at the same into
the network.
One possible downside to using the one­view one­net architecture is that if each network
has to be updated in relation to the specific image input, then the amount of parameters
would increase dramatically. However, one way to circumvent this is to only update the
network after pooling the output features together from each network. Whether to apply
one architecture over the other in this case is up to the designer of the network. For this
thesis, the one­view one­net architecture will not be used.
2.5
Depth estimation
Depth estimation is more complex than simply taking multiple views and passing them
through a network. As illustrated by Yi Ru Wang et al.[4], using multiple views it is often
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.3: Two multi­view fusion types of CNN’s
necessary to create a 3D matching volume to represent the scene as a 3D structure. This
volume practically contains the features from different views which are evaluated against
each other through depth candidate values for each pixel. The initial creation revolves
around warping features from every support view into the reference view by applying
transformations derived from the camera intrinsics and extrinsics.
6
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:13==
3
Methodology
This section covers the evaluation metrics used to determine the accuracy of the models,
the model architectures and a description of data gathering setups.
3.1
Data collection
Robust DL algorithms require diverse and plentiful training and evaluation data to be able
to generalize and adapt to real life applications. This project utilizes both real and synthetic
data and the following section covers the data gathering methods used and the reasoning
behind them.
3.1.1
Real Data
For the initial data gathering system, a Universal Robot 3 (UR3) was used. The robot
arm, which came mounted on a movable table, was positioned next to a table where a
vial rack, as can be seen in Fig. 3.2, was placed in such a way that a mounted camera
could take images of the vials from different angles. The camera which was used was an
Intel Realsense D435i (Fig. 3.1) which is capable of taking both RGB­D images as well as
regular RGBA images. A 3D printed camera holder was created by using Blender, which
was then mounted and used as the end effector of the UR3. Through a simple python
script the robot arm could be positioned in a pre­determined location, take an image and
then move to the next location. A total of 6 views were used for the multi­view models,
an example of which can be seen in the appendix on Fig.A.1 to A.6. The vials containing
colored water were placed in different locations in the rack for each setup and along with
natural occlusion of one vial from another, some background components such as metal
rods and general utilities would blend in with the transparent vials. The assumption was
that this natural noise could help accentuate the refractory properties of a DMVL model
as compared to a single view model.
Images were initially 1920x1080p, but were cropped to 520x1350p for labeling. Each
image was semantically segmented by hand using the online Computer Vision Labeling
Tool (CVAT). Here each vial was given a distinct class value, where the background value
would be zero. In total the dataset consisted of 486 images. As the limitations imposed
by the time constraint of labeling large datasets were too prevalent, data augmentation
was applied to the images to diversify and artificially increase the size of the dataset. For
the Single­View Model, each image in a batch would either be rotated, blurred or both.
For each batch in the Multi­View Model, the applied augmentations would be consistent
across all 6 views so as to not confuse the model since the assumption is that the spatial
references of each view should compliment the reference image.
3.1.2
Synthetic Data
Unreal Engine 5 is a 3D computer graphics game engine[15] which is not only widely used
for game design but also for cinematographic design. Through their Nanite and Lumen
features high quality photo realistic scenes can be created. To imitate the real setup, a
similarly structured dynamic scene setup is made, examples of which can be seen from
Fig. A.7 to Fig. A.12 in the appendix. A floating camera takes RGB images from 6 view­
ing angles along with segmentation masks with class labels for pixels containing objects
of interest. Likewise, depth maps are taken for the reference view only as the support
views will be used to create the 3D matching volume rather than shifting the reference
view arbitrarily. After each scene has been captured and saved a new setup is randomly
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: 3D printed camera holder with an Intel RealSense D435i camera
Figure 3.2: A vial rack holding 3 separate vial class objects
generated. Camera extrinsics are stored directly and camera intrinsics computed based
on the horizontal field of view of the digital camera. As explained in section BLAH, this not
only speeds up the data gathering process but also ensures accurate ground truth data.
3.2
Model Architecture
3.2.1
3D Matching Volume
As explained in Chapter 2.5 the 3D matching volume is computed through the use of
camera extrinsics and intrinsics. The extrinsics are derived from the camera locations in
world coordinates. The camera intrinsics are derived using the horizontal field of view
(HFOV), which is given by:
f = Image Width
2 · tan
(
FOV
2
)
. Since UE5 uses a square pixel sensor for their images, there is no need to also calculate
the vertical field of view. Hereafter the principal point can be calculated as it is simply the
coordinate at the middle of the image. The intrinsic matrix, an example of which can be
seen in Fig. 3.3, can now simply be plugged into.
The extrinsics can be found by computing the rotation matrix and plugging the translation
into the transformation matrix as can be seen in Fig. 3.4.
From here a series of projections are made to create the warped volume to be used in
the feature generation pipeline.
3.2.2
Decoder Architecture
The model architecture is based on CLIP’s deep RN50x64 ResNet used for their lan­
guage and segmentation model. By leveraging the strong backbone features of CLIP,
8
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.3: The camera intrinsics matrix
Figure 3.4: The camera extrinsics matrix which takes the form of a transformation matrix
we can modify our input image by the output given by different layers in the network for
use as skip connections in our model. The model will consist of a 3D matching volume
generator for each skip connection which will be concatenated with our output rather than
summed. While summation helps alleviate the vanishing gradient problem, a lot of the
conceptual information will be skewed in an attempt to avoid poor loss metrics. The rea­
soning behind this is that concatenation along the depth dimension retains the features of
both the residual block output and the skip connection input, which is important for depth
estimation tasks[4] since the similarity degrees found in the matching volume need to be
carefully evaluated for proper estimation.
Once the 3D matching volume skip connections are found, we utilize a simple ConvTrans­
pose3D operations along with batch normalization and ReLu activation functions. The
structure of the decoder can be seen in Fig. 3.5. The same overarching principle is ap­
plied in the segmentation decoder which can be seen in Fig. 3.6. Refer to Fig. 3.6 for a
more readable version of the depth decoder. It is important to note here that the 3D match­
ing volumes need to be upsampled along the channel dimension to fit with the residual
output of the previous block. The final layer of the segmentation converts the channel
dimension into 4 channels, 0 for background and 1,2 and 3 for class identification of the
vials. The depth layer converts the channels down to one channel which can then be
removed for proper adaptation with the depth bins for loss optimization.
3.3
Initial Hyperparameters
Hyperparameter and optimization choices
• Learning rate: Initially 1e­4. Cosine Annealing[16], Period T = 150
• Optimizer: Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam)[17]
• Inadequate lighting conditions
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.5: Residual blocks used in the decoder of the depth network
Figure 3.6: Residual blocks used in the decoder of the segmentation network
10
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.7: Dataset content
Dataset: Both dataset also contain a segmentation mask for each view, while only the
synthetic dataset contains depth masks for each view, of which only the reference view is
used.
3.4
Validation metrics
When evaluating a model it is important to have meaningful and precise metrics. For this
task, Intersection over Union (IoU), which is also called Jaccard score, and mean Average
Precision (mAP) will be used. They both highlight the model’s ability to accurately detect
objects in different ways, which will be elaborated further on in the following sections.
3.4.1
Intersection over Union
IoU (eq. 3.1 shows how much the predicted segmentation overlaps with the ground truth
for a specific class and can be considered a localised inspection of segmentation accu­
racy. For IoU, a critical distinction has to be made between how true positives (TP), false
positives (FP) and false negatives (FN) are depicted in semantic segmentation tasks com­
pared to object detection, especially since no bounding boxes were used. When the aim
is to classify each pixel, a true positive is a pixel that is estimated to be a certain class
and is in fact that class when compared to the ground truth within the mask, a false pos­
itive is an estimated guess for a specific class which is not part of the ground truth and
a false negative is an estimation that the pixel either belongs to a different class or the
background within the ground truth of that object class. Typically an IoU higher than 0.5
is used to indicate whether the model prediction is useful or not, however a more robust
metric is to use multiple threshold values [] between 0 and 1 and then averaging those
values, as it aims to avoid the uncertainty of somewhat arbitrarily picking a proper value
fitting for the use­case.
IoU =
TP
TP + FP + FN
(3.1)
3.4.2
Mean average precision
For mean average precision (mAP), we first have to define precision and recall as seen in
eq. 3.2 and eq. 3.3. Precision calculates the ratio between accurately segmented pixels
for a specific class and all estimations, which include incorrectly segmented pixels for that
same class. Recall calculates the ratio of accurately segmented pixels in comparison to
all class pixels within the ground truth of the object. The average precision for each class
is then the area under the precision­recall curve, which was found using Simpson’s rule,
and gives an indication of how well the model can correctly classify pixels for each class
across varying IoU thresholds. The mAP over all classes is then calculated by taking the
mean of the average precision.
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
11
==PAGE:18==
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.2)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.3)
12
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:19==
4
Results
4.1
Segmentation
The pipelines that were tested will be referred to as follows:
• Single: Randomly batched images from all scenes
• Multi: Batched scene setups with all 6 corresponding views
• Double: First pass through Single model then through Multi model
• Depth: Depth estimation model as described in Chapter 3.2
The three model architectures were trained using the real data set and thereafter the
synthetic dataset was validated before being used for depth estimation to avoid corrupted
data. Table 4.1 shows the semantic segmentation evaluation results. There is seemingly
little to no difference between using the Single model compared to using the Multi model.
However, it is clear that the Double model out performs the two prior model architectures
as both mAP and mean IOU increased by a few percentages. If evaluating Double with
the next best performing model for mAP we see an ≈2.6% increase from 0.921 to 0.945
and likewise looking at mean IOU we see an ≈5.7% increase from 0.832 to 0.88.
Table 4.1: Single, Multi and Double model semantic segmentation evaluation results on
real data
Real Data mAP
Real Data mIOU
Single
0.921
0.812
Multi
0.917
0.832
Double
0.945
0.88
UE5 synthetic data was validated to work using the Multi model architecture rather than
the Double model since we are ensuring that the dataset is not corrupted rather than
attempt to reach higher accuracies. The results can be seen in table 4.2
Table 4.2: Multi model semantic segmentation evaluation results on UE5 data
UE mAP
UE mIOU
0.96
0.96
It is however worth noting that the use of the synthetic data with the Multi model outper­
forms all three models using the real data set. This indicates a few possible flaws with
the real dataset gathering pipeline.
Segmentation pipeline
• Incorrectly labeled segmentation masks
• Loss of pixel information during interpolation from a larger image resolution
• Inadequate lighting conditions
As mentioned in Chapter 3.1.1, the segmentation masks were done mostly by hand and
thereafter converted to a tensor and resized. The first step in particular is a likely cause
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.1: mean Average Precision of the segmentation evaluation from the Depth model
Figure 4.2: mean Intersection over Union of the segmentation evaluation from the Depth
model
for lower accuracy scores. However, one might also consider that while UE5 is capable
of creating hyper realistic imagery, there can still be a lack of completely accurate and
realistic lighting conditions which might in turn enhance the scores. The dataset creation
was done with generally high quality settings but hardware limitations, specifically in terms
of GPU availability, could have potentially posed inadequate results.
4.2
Depth
While the 3D matching volume was created following the same ideas of MVTrans[4] and
general knowledge of transformations and projections, the depth estimation results were
lacking and possibly need a lot longer time to reach appropriate values. Recall from
Chapter 3.2 that the the loss function is applied to the sum of losses for both segmentation
and depth estimation. The segmentation metrics were saved and as can be seem from
Fig. 4.1 and Fig. 4.2 the segmentation part of the network seems to accurately detect the
objects of interest. This is likely due to the internal CLIP features used for skip connection
extraction is frozen rather than being a part of the backpropagation chain. An attempt
was made to allow gradient flow, however the increased parameter size would prove to
increase the computational resource requirement to a point where the available GPU’s
from DTU’s HPC cluster could not handle the load. There are considerations to be made
to allow for proper model training, as some of the available GPU’s should be large enough
with better memory management. Refer to Chapter 5.1 for further elaboration.
The current depth estimation evaluation results can be seen in Fig. 4.3 to Fig. 4.5
14
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.3: Root mean squared error of the evaluation loss from the Depth model
Figure 4.4: Mean squared error of the evaluation loss from the Depth model
Figure 4.5: Mean absolute error of the evaluation loss from the Depth model
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
15
==PAGE:22==
5
Improvements
This chapter will elaborate on which improvements could have been made to better an­
swer the research question which also includes possibly better and newer methodologies
in terms of model architecture.
The overarching improvements can be categorized as:
• Epipolar geometry application
• Memory Management
• State­of­the­art 3D matching volume creation
5.1
Model Architecture improvements and Memory
Management
5.1.1
Memory Management
The big bottleneck for memory was not being able to un­freeze CLIP’s pre­trained param­
eters for adaption to a depth estimation pipeline. Instead, the 3D matching volumes were
a part of the backpropagation, which could possibly be averted by simply doing decon­
volutions of the 3D matching volumes while being detached from the computation graph
rather than allowing parameter build­up. Another possible solution could have been to
apply convolutions to the residual function output to match the spatial resolution of the
matching volumes. While currently unclear if these modifications are enough to warrant
allowing gradient flow through CLIP’s model, however perhaps a lower spatial resolution
for the input images could help alleviate the memory issues.
5.1.2
Model Architecture
MVTrans applies a loss calculation at different scales during upsampling and sums them
rather than computing the loss using only the final output. While using only the loss from
the final output should be a valid approach as seen in D. Suhoi[18], utilizing the sum of
sequentially gathered losses at different scales could prove beneficial.
5.1.3
Epipolar Transformer
Epipolar geometry transformers could possibly prevents extreme values in features by
incorporating more accurate 3D scene representations.
16
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:23==
6
Conclusion
While there were some positive results in the segmentation part of the task, sadly the
depth estimation part of the model did not work out as well as intended. Further consid­
eration will be made on how to properly apply current knowledge to complete the task.
A positive note was that synthetic dataset generation seemed to improve accuracy and
definitely increased data generation and could be considered a viable choice for dataset
generation in general.
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
17
==PAGE:24==
18
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:25==
Bibliography
[1]
Kihong Park, Seungryong Kim, and Kwanghoon Sohn. “High­Precision Depth Es­
timation with the 3D LiDAR and Stereo Fusion”. In: 2018 IEEE International Con­
ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2018, pp. 2156–2163. DOI: 10.1109/
ICRA.2018.8461048.
[2]
Chaoqiang Zhao et al. “Monocular Depth Estimation Based On Deep Learning: An
Overview”. In: CoRR abs/2003.06620 (2020). arXiv: 2003.06620. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2003.06620.
[3]
Luxonis.com. Depth­accuracy of RGB­D sensors. 2024. URL: https://docs.luxonis.
com/hardware/platform/depth/depth-accuracy/.
[4]
Yi Ru Wang et al. “MVTrans: Multi­View Perception of Transparent Objects”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11683 (2023). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.11683.
[5]
Jabeen Summaira et al. “A Review on Methods and Applications in Multimodal Deep
Learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09195 (2022). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2202.
09195.
[6]
Alec Radford et al. “Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language
Supervision”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020 (2021). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2103.
00020.
[7]
Aditya Ramesh et al. “Zero­Shot Text­to­Image Generation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12092
(2021). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2102.12092.
[8]
Aaron van den Oord et al. “WaveNet: A Generative Model for Raw Audio”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1609.03499 (2016). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1609.03499.
[9]
Ben Mildenhall et al. “NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for
View Synthesis”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08934 (2020). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
2003.08934.
[10]
Tala Talaei Khoei, Hadjar Ould Slimane, and Naima Kaabouch. “Deep learning: sys­
tematic review, models, challenges, and research directions”. In: Neural Computing
and Applications 35 (2023), pp. 23103–23124. DOI: 10.1007/s00521-023-08957-4.
[11]
X. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, et al. “A review of convolutional neural networks in
computer vision”. In: Artificial Intelligence Review 57 (2024), p. 99. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10462-024-10721-6.
[12]
Bill Kromydas. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN): A Complete Guide. 2023.
URL: https://learnopencv.com/understanding-convolutional-neural-networks-cnn/.
[13]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.03385 (2015).
[14]
Xiaoqiang Yan et al. “Deep multi­view learning methods: A review”. In: Neurocom­
puting 448 (2021), pp. 106–129. ISSN: 0925­2312. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neucom.2021.03.090.
[15]
Epic Games. Unreal Engine 5 on GitHub. https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/ue-
on-github. 2024.
[16]
Runhua Jiang et al. CADE: Cosine Annealing Differential Evolution for Spiking Neu­
ral Network. 2024. arXiv: 2406.02349 [cs.NE]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.
02349.
[17]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
19
==PAGE:26==
[18]
Daniil Suhoi. Metric and Relative Monocular Depth Estimation: An Overview. Fine­
Tuning Depth Anything V2. 2024. URL: https://huggingface.co/blog/Isayoften/
monocular-depth-estimation-guide/.
20
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:27==
A
Appendix
A.1
Methodology
Figure A.1: Front View of example setup. Also called reference image in the report.
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure A.2: Bottom left angle of example setup.
Figure A.3: Top left angle of example setup.
Figure A.4: Top center angle of example setup.
Figure A.5: Top right angle of example setup.
Figure A.6: Bottom right angle of example setup.
22
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:29==
Figure A.7: Front View of example setup in Unreal Engine 5. Also called reference image
in the report.
Figure A.8: Bottom left angle of example setup in Unreal Engine 5.
Figure A.9: Top left angle of example setup in Unreal Engine 5.
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure A.10: Top center angle of example setup in Unreal Engine 5.
Figure A.11: Top right angle of example setup in Unreal Engine 5.
Figure A.12: Bottom right angle of example setup in Unreal Engine 5.
24
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
==PAGE:31==
Figure A.13: As written by Kaiming He et al. ”Example network architectures for Ima­
geNet. Left: the VGG­19 model [41] (19.6 billion FLOPs) as a reference. Middle: a plain
network with 34 parameter layers (3.6 billion FLOPs). Right: a residual network with 34
parameter layers (3.6 billion FLOPs). The dotted shortcuts increase dimensions. Table 1
shows more details and other variants.”[13]
Multi­view segmentation and depth estimation of semi­transparent objects for laboratory automation
25
