==PAGE:1==
Experimental investigation of high-pressure
methanol port fuel injection in a spark igni-
tion engine
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a
spark ignition engine
Master Thesis
January, 2025
By
Rolf Wilhelm
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Rolf Wilhelm, 2024, First prototype of the CFR engine from 1928.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Alle, Build-
ing 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This study investigates the performance characteristics of high-pressure methanol port fuel
injection (PFI) in a modified Cooperative Fuel Research (CFR) spark ignition engine. The
research focused on establishing operational boundaries, optimizing injection strategies, and
understanding mixture formation processes. Experiments were conducted at 1100 rpm with
ignition timing adjusted for 50 % heat release at 12 CAD ATDC. Results demonstrate
successful methanol PFI adaptation with knock limit occurring above compression ratio 13,
and lean burn limit extending to λ = 1.8 for optimal operation. The system achieved peak
indicated efficiency of 44 % at λ ≈1.7, with brake thermal efficiency reaching approximately
30 %. High injection pressures (60−100 bar) enabled open valve injection, with optimal end
of injection timing at −270 CAD ATDC. While NOx emissions met IMO Tier III standards
for λ > 1.7, significant challenges were encountered with wall film formation in the manifold,
leading to cycle-to-cycle variations (CoV) of 3 to 5 % IMEP under most conditions. The
study highlights methanol’s potential as an efficient alternative fuel for marine applications,
particularly when synthesized from renewable sources, though challenges with fuel transport
phenomena and mixture formation require further optimization of manifold design and intake
air temperature control.
Kurzfassung
Diese Arbeit untersucht die Anwendung von Methanol Hochdruckeinspritzung in den Ein-
lasskanal (Saugrohr) eines modifizierten Fremdzündungsmotors. Zunächst wurden Betriebs-
grenzen festgelegt, anschließend Einspritzstrategien optimiert. Die Experimente wurden bei
1100 Umdrehungen pro Minute durchgeführt, wobei der Zündzeitpunkt auf 50 % Wärme-
abgabe zwölf Grad nach Passieren des oberem Totpunkt eingestellt wurde. Die Ergebnisse
zeigen einen erfolgreichen Betrieb mit Methanol bei dem Klopfen oberhalb eines Verdich-
tungsverhältnisses von 13 auftritt, sowie möglichen Magerbetrieb bis zu λ = 1, 8 bei bei
optimaler Parameterwahl. Hohe Einspritzdrücke (60-100 bar) ermöglichten Einspritzung bei
offenem Einlassventil, wobei der optimale Einspritzzeitpunkt bei 270 Grad vor Erreichen
des oberen Totpunktes lag. Stickstoffoxidemissionen erfüllten IMO Tier III Standards ab
λ > 1, 7. Erhebliche Probleme mit der Wandfilmbildung im Krümmer führten unter den
meisten Bedingungen zu starken Zyklus-Schwankungen von 3 to 5 % IMEP.
Die Studie
unterstreicht das Potenzial von Methanol als effizienter alternativer Kraftstoff für die Schiff-
fahrt, insbesondere wenn es aus erneuerbaren Quellen synthetisiert wird. Gleichwohl bedür-
fen die Herausforderungen mit den Themenfeldern Kraftstofftransport und Gemischbildung
einer weiteren Optimierung des Krümmerdesigns und der Ansauglufttemperaturregelung.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the section for Thermal Energy, Depart-
ment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, M.Sc. Eng., in Me-
chanical Engineering. The project was conducted under the supervision of Anders Ivarsson,
Associate Professor, and Mads Carsten Jespersen, Laboratory Engineer, at the section for
Thermal Energy. This work was only possible thanks to the involvement of many people,
some of whom I would like to thank in particular.
Anders Ivarsson, Associate Professor, DTU
For supervising this thesis, sharing his deep understanding of internal combustion engines
and debating the findings in this work.
Mads Carsten Jespersen, Laboratory Engineer, DTU
For even more supervision, guiding me closely throughout this work and sharing knowledge
of preexisting experimental setup and processes in the lab.
Thomas Østerby Holst Rasmussen, Ph.D. Student, DTU
For spending whole working days accompanying me in the lab, helping with experiments.
Karl Oskar Pires Bjørgen, Postdoctoral Fellow, NTNU
For sharing details on the operation and design of the used injector.
Jan Horne Hansen and Rasmus Thomasen, Maskinarbejder and Precision Mechanic,
DTU
For helping with manufacturing of test-setup-specific parts and repairs of broken engine
controls.
Arturo Alberto García Ramírez, M.Sc. Mechanical Engineering, Ford Motor Company
For borrowing me his book.
Cosima Kaiser, Marco Miolo and Klaus Wilhelm, M.Sc. various disciplines
For proofreading this report.
Rolf Wilhelm - s222583
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
January 1st, 2025
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Decarbonisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Alternative fuels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Mixture formation for port fuel injection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Methanol as fuel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Experimental setup and methodology
9
3.1
Engine specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Engine controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Injection system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Ignition system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Manifold model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
FTIR gas analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7
Data processing and combustion analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Results and Discussion
21
4.1
Uncertainty considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Ignition timing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Operation limits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Spray targeting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Injection timing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Cycle-to-cycle variation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7
Air flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.8
Multiple (Split) injections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Conclusion
43
A Supplementary data
50
A.1 Uncertainty contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.2 Complete test matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.3 Fuel supply system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.4 Setup photographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
iv
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a spark ignition engine
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ABDC
After bottom dead center
AFR
Air-fuel ratio
AHR
Apparent heat release
ATDC
After top dead center
BBDC
Before bottom dead center
BDC
Bottom dead center
BP
Brake power
BS
Brake specific
CA10
Crank angle at 10 % heat release
CA50
Crank angle at 50 % heat release
CA90
Crank angle at 90 % heat release
CAD
Crank angle degree; computer aided design
CFR
Cooperative Fuel Research
CH2O
Formaldehyde
CH4
Methane
CHR
Cumulative heat release
CI
Compression ignition
CN
Cetane number
CO
Carbon monoxide
CO2
Carbon dioxide
CO2e
Carbon dioxide equivalent
CoV
Coefficient of variance
CR
Compression ratio
CT
Computed tomography
DMDF
Diesel methanol dual fuel
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a spark ignition engine
v
==PAGE:7==
EEOI
Energy efficiency operating indicator
EVC
Exhaust valve closing
EVO
Exhaust valve opening
GUM
Guide to the expression of uncertainty in measurement
H2
Hydrogen
HC
Hydrocarbons
HHV
Higher heating value
HRR
Heat release rate
IMEP
Indicated mean effective pressure
IMO
International maritime organization
IoA
Intensity of autoignition
IP
Indicated power
IVC
Intake valve closing
IVO
Intake valve opening
LBL
Lean burn limit
LHV
Lower heating value
LNG
Liquefied natural gas
LPG
Liquefied petroleum gas
MBT
Maximum brake torque
MON
Motor octane number
NOx
Nitrogen oxides
OVI
Open valve injection
PFI
Port fuel injection
ppm
Parts per million
RON
Research octane number
rpm
Rounds per minute
SI
Spark ignited; spark ignition
SOI
Start of injection
STP
Standard temperature and pressure (300 K, 1 atm)
UN IPCC
United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Symbols
a
Empirical constant used in Equation 4.3
b
Statistical bias; empirical constant used in Equation 4.3
c1, c2
Coefficient used in Equation 3.18
==PAGE:8==
cp
Specific heat capacity at constant pressure
∆t
Duration
η
Efficiency
f
Frequency
γ
Heat capacity ratio
λ
Air-fuel equivalence ratio
L
Latent heat; heat of vaporization
˙m
Mass flow
µ
Statistical mean
M
Molar mass
m
Mass of fuel injected per one injection
N
Number of injections; engine speed
n
Molar flow
ϕ
Saturation ratio
p
Pressure
Q
Heat
ρ
Density
R
Universal (or perfect) gas constant
σ
Standard deviation
θ
Position of crank shaft
T
Temperature
U
Expanded uncertainty
V
Volume
W
Work
Subscripts
air
Air
avg
Average
bth
Brake thermal
comp
Compression
d
Displacement
exh
Exhaust
exp
Expansion
F
Normal flame propagation
gas
Gasoline
==PAGE:9==
i
Indicated
ign
Ignition
in
Intake; manifold
inj
Injection
MeOH
Methanol (CH3OH)
mot
Motoring; no injection/combustion
set
Set value
stoich
Stoichiometric conditions
v
Vapor; vaporized; volumetric
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Decarbonisation
Decarbonisation describes the “reduction or even total removal of carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions” resulting from human activity. In the face of the currently ongoing climate crisis,
this is likely one of the most pressing matters humanity is facing today and it is not going well.
The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (UN IPCC) states, that
the average planet surface temperature has increased by 1.1°C in the fifty years from 1850
to 1900 and by the same in the decade from 2010 to 2019 [11]. The rising temperatures can
be traced back to the human release of greenhouse gases (GHG) mainly CO2 and methane
(CH4). In 2019 the equivalent greenhouse emissions from fossil fuels and industrial processes
reached a new record high with 35 Tkg of equivalent CO2 (CO2e) per year, representing a
share of 65 % of the total world’s GHG emissions [11].
Decarbonization presents the solution to the worrying growth in GHG emissions, with the
ultimate goal of eliminating all human-caused CO2 emissions, which is commonly referred
to as becoming net zero. Progress on archiving this is especially challenging in harder-to-
abate industries, that have a long asset lifespan, high energy dependency, and complexity of
electrification. Shipping is one among these harder-to-abate industries, as even the industry
is acknowledging the little progress that is made. As an example the petrol company Shell,
which is affiliated with marine transport, states in its 2023 published “All Hands on Deck
2.0” strategy an increase of 6 % in CO2 emissions from shipping between the launch of its
predecessor strategy in 2020 to the end of 2021 [61]. Other businesses report similar num-
bers.1 2 The ever increasing emissions are mainly driven by an increase in shipping volumes
(from 2018 to 2021 by 13 billion ton-miles [31]). The International Maritime Organization
(IMO) has set an ambition to reduce international shipping CO2 emissions per transport
work by at least 40 % by 2030, and 70 % by 2050, based on the values of 2008 [31].
These ambitions, opposing the observed trends, call for stronger efforts in both, research
and development of net zero technologies. Romano and Yang have analyzed the evolution
of shipping decarbonization over the last 20 years perceiving an ever increasing quantity
of relevant papers published, suggesting increased efforts in research [51]. They are also
concluding that emerging research trends will focus on sustainable, low-cost biofuel, deeper
1A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S reported +7 % in carbon intensity (EEOI) from 1st of January to 31st of
December 2022 and −4 % for the same period in 2023 with a target of −50 % by 2030 [1], [2]. EEOI expresses
CO2 emission per ship voyage which makes it not directly comparable with the total GHG emissions stated
by Shells strategy.
2MSC Mediterranean Shipping Company SA reported −2.2 % in CO2e in 2022 and −0.06 % in CO2e in
2023 with no goal stated [52].
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a spark ignition engine
1
==PAGE:11==
evaluation of carbon emission analysis at different operating conditions for emission reduction
optimization purposes and a more holistic approach to the decarbonization of transport
logistics [51].
1.2
Alternative fuels
Alternative fuels is a collective term for fuels or power sources that serve, at least partly,
as a substitute for fossil oil sources and which have the potential to contribute to the de-
carbonization of the transport sector. They include electricity, hydrogen, biofuels, natural
gas, including liquefied natural gas (LNG), and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) [22]. Fig-
ure 1.1 shows the growth of the number of ships capable of using selected alternative fuels.
Methanol, as a carbon-neutral synthetic fuel, is a major contender for becoming a standard
in the shipping industry. The main benefit of methanol as a fuel is its scalability. Its ease of
synthesis and broad range of source feedstocks make it a strong candidate for a sustainable
fuel with the potential to significantly reduce the fossil carbon footprint of transportation
[63]. However, studies which have analyzed the carbon footprints and other environmental
impacts of alternative fuels, are often difficult or impossible to compare and interpret due to
different assumptions, system boundaries, and CO2 allocation procedures [57].
Figure 1.1: Number of ships in operation capable of using selected alternative fuels, excluding
LNG carriers, as of May 2024. *Including orders booked. Adapted from [19].
1.3
Objectives
Even as the number of methanol-ready ships in the worldwide fleet are growing over recent
years research is still ongoing. Premixed methanol combustion has been investigated in the
past and yields major advantages in terms of efficiency over conventional fuels [10, 13, 62, 25,
66]. However, there are still lacks of research on the mixture formation process when high
pressure PFI system is used operating at pressures and with equipment more common for
direct injection. Therefore, the focus of this thesis is to investigate pure methanol combustion
and emission characteristics in a spark ignited (SI) Cooperative Fuel Research (CFR) engine
equipped with port fuel injection (PFI). The objectives are presented in the following:
• Establish an experimental setup able to inject liquid fuels in the manifold of a CFR
engine, setting up efficient engine control and data acquisition.
• To study published literature regarding state-of-the-art port-fuel methanol injection
systems, and their corresponding benefits and limitations.
==PAGE:12==
• Validate methanol PFI operation on a CFR engine focusing on operation boundaries,
efficiency and emission characteristics.
• Optimize the injection strategy of methanol on the CFR engine by tuning specific
parameters and assessing the improvements.
• Gain a deeper understanding of mixture formation including fuel transport phenomena
and impacts on cycle-to-cycle variation.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Mixture formation for port fuel injection
With port fuel injection, fuel is sprayed into the intake manifold. Port fuel injectors are
located close to the intake valve, which is located at the engine’s intake port or manifold.
The injection of fuel starts during the suction phase of the engine cycle extending towards
the compression phase. Mixture formation begins in the manifold where fuel is mixed with
air creating a charge which is then sucked into the cylinder [53]. It can differ largely for cold
and warm engine operation and is influenced by [49]:
• Engine temperature,
• Primary-droplet spray,
• Injection timing,
• Spray targeting, and
• Airflow.
Primary droplet spray refers to the fuel spray directly after it exits the injection valve.
Small primary droplets tend to promote fuel evaporation [49]. However, it must be taken
into account that only a very small proportion of the injected fuel evaporates in the intake
manifold when the engine is cold due to the low temperature. The majority is present as a
wall film and is carried along by the airflow during the intake phase. The actual mixture
preparation then takes place inside the cylinder. When the engine is hot, a large proportion
of the injected fuel spray as well as some of the wall film already evaporates in the manifold.
The timing of injection can be differentiated into intake-synchronous and pre-intake injec-
tion [48]. For the first one, the injection is happening simultaneously to the intake valve
opening, thus the spray is directly transported into the cylinder causing wall wetting on
the side opposite of the inlet valve. Increased wall wetting has a negative impact on some
emissions as will be discussed in subsection 2.2.2. On the other hand, the air-charge can be
increased since the liquid fuel droplets in the intake manifold have a smaller volume than
vapor. Furthermore, in-cylinder evaporation cools the charge, which is positively affecting
the engine’s knock tendency. With pre-intake injection, the fuel accumulates in the manifold
shortly before the intake valve opens giving more time for droplets to evaporate. The charge
then enters the cylinder where it is forced towards the center of the combustion chamber by
4
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a spark ignition engine
==PAGE:14==
the dominant form of rotational flow1 and the undesired wall wetting can partly be avoided.
In addition to injection timing, it is possible to influence mixture formation by spray align-
ment relative to the intake manifold and combustion chamber. When the spray is targeted
at the base of the intake port, the drawn-in spray is transported with increased intensity to-
wards the center of the combustion chamber compared to when the spray is targeted directly
at the inlet valve [48]. The in-cylinder effects are the same influenced by injection timing.
Targeting the base of the intake port results in wall wetting of the manifold which needs to
be accounted for in the event of load changes.
A strong internal cylinder flow promotes good homogenization and supports fuel mixing. If
the intake manifold pressure is significantly greater than the combustion chamber pressure
when the intake valve opens, the charge and any wall deposits of fuel in the valve gap are
sucked into the combustion chamber at greater speed. If the intake manifold pressure is
lower than the combustion chamber pressure when the intake valve opens, hot exhaust gas
from the previous combustion flows back into the intake manifold. Here, the formation of
the wall wetting and fuel droplets is favored by the backflow but the warm exhaust gas also
supports evaporation [49].
2.2
Methanol as fuel
Methanol (CH3OH, MeOH) is the alcohol with the simplest chemical structure and is used
in a wide range of industrial applications. It is among the most traded chemicals in the
world [3] and can be synthesized from carbon dioxide (CO2) and hydrogen (H2).
Using
air-extracted CO2 paired with renewable energy for the electrolysis of hydrogen makes it a
so-called electrofuel [43, 67]. Due to that, it is becoming increasingly interesting again as
fuel for internal combustion engines.
Its history as fuel dates back to the early days of the spark ignition (SI) engine. In the
1920s experiments with methanol were conducted to enhance engine efficiencies and reduce
fuel consumption over fears of the world running out of oil [7]. Methanol was then applied
as a performance enhancer in Grand Prix Cars by multiple manufacturers over the years
[38]. Most interesting from today’s perspective must be the California methanol fuel trials
in the 1980s and 1990s where a gasoline-methanol fuel blend M852 was developed and rolled
out together with vehicles running on it ranging from light-duty to buses and trucks. The
trials were initiated by air quality considerations, since methanol causes significantly lower
unburned hydrocarbons (HC) and nitrogen oxides (NOx) under certain conditions which
will be highlighted later on. From a technological standpoint, it was a complete success
even though it was ultimately closed down as officials mandated for the use of reformulated
gasoline [42]. The point to take away is, that methanol has been around as fuel for decades
even as it is receiving a lot of attention just now.
2.2.1
Physical and chemical properties
Relevant physical and chemical properties for the application of methanol as fuel are listed
in Table 2.1, alongside those for gasoline, methane (CH4), and hydrogen. Not evident from
the tabulated information is the fact of methanol being liquid at standard temperature and
pressure (STP). This is of great advantage when handling the fuel and makes it easy to
transport with minimal needs on the vehicle and fuel infrastructure.
Methanol has a low energy content compared to other fuels. This can be expressed as heating
value which states the heat released during combustion. The lower heating value (LHV) is a
1Swirl and tumble are both rotational flows and their rotation axes are parallel to the piston motion and
perpendicular to the axis of the cylinder respectively [32].
2M85 is a fuel consisting of 85% methanol and 15% gasoline.
==PAGE:15==
Table 2.1: Chemical and mixture properties for selected fuels [63]
Property
Unit
Gasoline
Methanol
Methane
Hydrogen
Chemical formula
Various
CH3OH
CH4
H2
Molecular weight
kg/kmol
107.00
32.04
16.04
2.02
Oxygen content by mass
%
0.00
49.93
0.00
0.00
Hydrogen content by mass
%
∼14
12.58
25.13
100.00
Carbon content by mass
%
∼86
37.48
74.87
0.00
Lower heating value
MJ/kg
42.90
20.09
50.00
120.00
Higher heating value
MJ/kg
48.00
22.88
55.00
142.00
Volumetric energy content
MJ/m3
31746
15871
32.50
9.60
Stoichiometric AFR
kg/kg
14.70
6.50
17.65
34.20
Stoichiometric AFR
kmol/kmol
54.49
7.22
9.81
2.39
Specific CO2 emissions
g/MJ
73.95
68.44
54.87
0.00
Specific CO2 emissions
1.00
0.93
0.74
0.00
relative to gasoline
Autoignition temperature
K
465-743
738
813
858
Adiabatic flame temperature
K
∼2275
2143
2225
2390
Research Octane Number
95
109
120
∼130
Motor Octane Number
85
92
120
N/A
Cetane number
8 −14
3
−10
N/A
Cp/Cv for a stoichiometric
N/A
1.37
1.39
1.40
mixture
measure of usable thermal energy produced by the combustion accounting for energy losses,
mainly from water vaporization, whereas the higher heating value indicates the theoretical
upper limit of available energy (HHV). Methanol’s heating value is less than half that of
gasoline, resulting in a volumetric energy content of only 50 % compared to gasoline, see
Table 2.1. In other words, a vehicle moving on methanol needs a larger fuel tank compared to
gasoline to maintain a similar operating range. Obviously, from an economic standpoint, this
is a major drawback over other fuels. It should be noted though that operational adaptions
with possible increased efficiencies can alleviate this somewhat. A more technical challenge
posed by the volumetric energy content is affecting the fuel supply system, which needs to
be designed to deliver twice the amount of fuel to the engine compared to gasoline. As this is
usually done by the use of injectors, they are required to operate with longer injection times
or higher pressures. Both will pose subsequent considerations which are the main focus of
this work.
A thermophysical property of methanol is its high heat of vaporization “latent heat”, which is
the energy absorbed by its molecules when they are undergoing transformation from a liquid
to a gaseous state, assuming a constant temperature and pressure over the transformation.
Another important property is its stoichiometric air-fuel ratio (AFR) describing the amount
of air needed over the amount of fuel to archive stoichiometric combustion, which is usually
stated as a mass balance (kg/kg), but can also be expressed as molar ratio (kmol/kmol), see
Table 2.1). Methanol having a low stoichiometric AFR means that the fraction of methanol
in a stoichiometric mixture is high. Bringing together both properties means that methanol
needs the sevenfold of energy to evaporate than gasoline, leading to large cooling and low
temperatures of the intake port when methanol is introduced there. The low temperature
of the charge resulting from methanol’s evaporation in the port then leads to lower tem-
==PAGE:16==
peratures throughout the engine cycle which is desired as they are a lowering heat loss on
the cylinder walls, benefiting efficiency as well as reducing NOx emissions. These effects
are additionally supported by the low adiabatic flame temperature3 of methanol-air com-
bustion, see Table 2.1. The danger of autoignition (engine knock) is also lowered by lower
in-cylinder temperatures. Together with its advantageous chemical autoignition resistance,
SI engines can operate with a higher compression ratio (CR), again benefiting engine effi-
ciency. Methanol-air mixtures have a higher laminar flame speed than gasoline [26]. The
faster flame propagation reduces the likelihood of end-gas autoignition, as the end-gas is con-
sumed before it can reach autoignition conditions. The ability of a fuel to withstand engine
knock is expressed as octane rating. There are two common types of octane rating widely in
use, the Research Octane Number (RON) and the Motor Octane Number (MON), differing
in the fuel preparation approach for testing. For the RON test, only the intake air is heated
and the fuel is introduced after this process, while for the MON test, the entire mixture is
heated after the fuel has been introduced. Determining reliable numbers for methanol is
difficult due to the evaporative charge cooling and the values stated in Table 2.1 should be
viewed in that regard [70]. Nevertheless, the high values show that methanol is very suitable
for SI combustion. Opposing to the octane rating, the cetane rating (CN) gives insight on a
fuel’s ability to ignite under compression. Methanol has a very low CN meaning that special
measures are needed to enable its use of methanol in compression ignition (CI) engines.
Methanol’s spray properties are comparable to gasoline since its dynamic viscosity, density,
and surface tension determining these characteristics are similar [28]. Droplet size can be
expressed by the Sauter mean diameter (SMD) which is defined as the diameter of a sphere
that has the same volume/surface area ratio as a particle of interest [55]. The droplet SMD
decreases gradually with increasing methanol temperature and injection pressure [14, 69].
The properties reviewed above demonstrate methanol’s potential to increase engine perfor-
mance and efficiency over that achievable with gasoline justifying the attention it is getting
as an internal combustion engine fuel. A more thorough review than the one presented here
is conducted by Verhelst et al. [63].
2.2.2
Emissions
Looking first at the elemental composition (Table 2.1), the hydrogen-carbon ratio of methanol
is higher than that of gasoline and equal to that of methane. When calculating CO2 emissions
on an energy-specific basis (g/kWh), methanol reports 7% lower emissions compared to
gasoline. This of course assumes a similar brake thermal efficiency (ηbth). The CO2 emissions
can be further reduced by making use of higher efficiencies for methanol.
Carbon monoxide (CO) is mainly formed by incomplete combustion and thus only occurs in
significant amounts at rich operation. Still, some change in CO emission is decided by the
compatibility between oxygen concentration and local combustion temperature [17].
The formation of NOx depends on the temperature, the oxygen content, and the residence
time of the combustion gases in the cylinder [28]. All of these factors can be influenced more
by the engine operation than by the choice of fuel itself. The previously discussed lower in-
cylinder temperatures due to evaporative cooling, adiabatic flame temperature, and the high
laminar flame speed are reducing NOx production. Thus, for the same air-fuel equivalence
ratio (λ) NOx concentration can be expected lower for methanol than gasoline. From an
equilibrium point of view the formation of NOx requires two conditions: Sufficient oxygen
present and again high enough temperatures [59]. For a low λ there is not much oxygen in
3The adiabatic flame temperature is the final temperature of the products in an adiabatic combustion
process [28]. It represents an upper bound of the temperature that can be reached in an actual process.
==PAGE:17==
the combustion products and NOx emissions are therefore low in rich mixtures. When the
equivalence ratio is increased there is more oxygen in the combustion products, resulting
in a larger NOx concentration. While for rich mixtures the combustion temperature is not
strongly dependent on λ, for leaner mixtures the excess air cools the charge resulting in a
decreasing in-cylinder temperature. The cooling becomes more dominant than the higher
oxygen at some point and NOx emissions are low again for lean mixtures.
Hydrocarbon emissions are arising to a large extent because a small portion of the fuel is not
completely combusted. This is mainly due to crevices in the combustion chamber, into which
the flame cannot propagate, or by flame quenching at the cold cylinder walls. The latter
one is, when the flame approaches a colder wall it loses energy to the wall and the flame
is extinguished or quenched [59]. Another formation mechanism is bulk quenching4, which
occurs with rapid expansion and a slow flame under marginal combustion conditions leading
to flame extinction or quenching due to rapid cooling of the cylinder gases [46]. Usually, this
effect can be found in very lean mixtures. The high heat of vaporization of methanol favors
increased wall wetting, thus HC formation.
Formaldehyde (CH2O) is classified as a human carcinogen [65]. It is an intermediate species
in the reaction path of methanol oxidation meaning that its engine-out emissions are a bal-
ance between the formation and its subsequent oxidation [54]. Consequently, formaldehyde
concentrations will peak at intermediate temperatures (≈1000K), where temperatures are
sufficient for its formation but not satisfying the required ones leading to full oxidation [60].
As with HC emissions crevices support incomplete oxidation, especially with PFI engines
where the fuel-rich charge is forced into the crevices during the compression stroke. Further-
more, formaldehyde formation is significantly dependent on the exhaust gas temperature,
again due to partial oxidation of unburned methanol in the right temperature ranges [47].
Methanol itself in the exhaust gas originates from shares of the fuel not participating in the
combustion caused by insufficient conditions in the chamber (crevices, cold walls, inhomo-
geneity of the charge). Fuel slip increases with leaner mixtures, as the combustion of the full
charge becomes incomplete. Formaldehyde and methanol suppression can be archived with
well-selected exhaust gas aftertreatment, namely appropriate catalysts.
Methanol combustion will not result in soot formation even in rich mixtures [50, 60]. This
is due to the limit imposed by the adiabatic flame temperature.
Under normal engine
operation, the temperatures for methanol to form a soot cloud will never be reached. The
levels of methane (CH4) emission from methanol combustion are low in comparison with
other fuels again because of a limit placed by the adiabatic flame temperature [60].
4Bulk gases refer to the main portion of gasses in the cylinder, which are away from the influence of
cylinder walls [59].
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3
Experimental setup and
methodology
In this study a Cooperative Fuel Research (CFR) engine manufactured by Waukesha is
modified for port fuel injection (PFI). Originating in the 1920’s these engines presented the
first standardized single-cylinder, four-stroke test engines and were used for gasoline knock-
testing [4]. The CFR engines are still used today for basic research and in newer areas such
as exhaust emissions and alternative fuel suitability. The used engine is equipped with a
dynamometer unit permitting testing of fuels at various power outputs. It has been used in
investigating different fuels in previous studies and has therefore been significantly upgraded
over time [41, 68, 21, 12].
3.1
Engine specifications
The main engine specifications are presented in Table 3.1. The current engine is set up with
a shrouded intake valve generating swirl and turbulence inside the cylinder. The original
compression ratio (CR), limited to a maximum of 10, has been raised to 15 by adding a
disk on top of the original piston. The CFR engine has a side-mounted spark plug and a
cutout has been made in the piston top to avoid any geometrical restriction for the flame
propagating from the spark into the combustion chamber.
The original intake manifold and carburetor were replaced with a custom intake manifold.
This manifold has an inner air pipe diameter of 28.5 mm and a 3/4 inch pipe fitting has
been welded to it at an angle of 30°, where the injector is installed. The fitting has been
placed as close to the intake port as feasible considering manufacturing limitations (around
20 mm from the port). The exhaust manifold was not altered for the experiments.
The engine has no valve overlap meaning the end of the exhaust process does not overlap
the start of the intake process. The lift of both valves, showing the opening times is given
in Figure 3.1.
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a spark ignition engine
9
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.1: Valve lift of the intake and exhaust valve shown for the four-stroke cycle of the
CFR engine. Also shown is the timeframe of open valve injection (OVI) during the intake
stroke. Adapted from [37].
Table 3.1: Engine specifications [41, 4]
Items
Unit
Specification
Type
Single cylinder Waukesha
CFR engine
Year of construction
1949
Ignition
Spark ignition (SI)
Bore
mm
82.55
Stroke
mm
114.3
Connection rod length
mm
254
Displacement
cm3
612.5
Compression ratio (CR)
Variable
Intake valve opening (IVO)
CAD ATDC
10
Intake valve closing (IVC)
CAD ABDC
34
Exhaust valve opening (EVO)
CAD BBDC
40
Exhaust valve closing (EVC)
CAD ATDC
15
3.2
Engine controls
The control of the engine and all data acquisition is performed using a LabVIEW program
modified from the one used by Carsten Jespersen, Østerby Holst Rasmussen, and Ivarsson
in their work [12]. The speed of the engine is controlled manually and kept constant at
1100 rpm for most experiments conducted to minimize pressure pulses in the exhaust system
influencing the amount of trapped residual gas in the cylinder [12]. The airflow is set with an
Omega Engineering FMA 2600A mass flow controller while the cylinder pressure is measured
with a Kistler 6044A pressure pick-up and a Kistler 5018 amplifier. An optical encoder with
0.1 CAD resolution is used to measure the crankshaft position. Both, position and pressure
signals are sampled at a rate of 250 kHz to provide high angular resolution. All temperatures
are measured with type-K thermocouples. An overview of the engine controls is given in
Figure 3.2.
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: Engine controls schematic.
3.3
Injection system
The used injector (Bosch HDEV-5-2LS) is a solenoid direct-acting injector with a six-hole
nozzle creating a spray cone with an angle of 30°. The advantages of this injector are, that it
can operate at relatively low pressures (20 bar to 100 bar), as it is desired for PFI, and that
there is no return fuel flow. In their work, Bjørgen, Emberson, and Løvås investigated the
nozzle geometry of this injector discovering that the center axis of the total spray cone is off
from the injector axis (6.1°) [6]. Furthermore, they retrieved the dimensions of the injector
tip [5], from which a computer aided design (CAD) model could be created in section 3.5 of
this study. The injector is operated by a driver from Life Racing Ltd, UK.
The PFI adaption of the CFR engine necessitates a fuel supply at pressures higher than
ambient (1 atm). The injector is therefore fueled from a high pressure tank during engine
operation. This tank is pressurized by introducing helium (He) at the desired operating
pressure of the injector, driving the fuel from the tank to the injector. The tank itself is
placed on a balance, allowing fuel consumption to be monitored by monitoring weight loss.
An additional reservoir of 150 cm3 is placed in the fuel line right before the injector after
initial experiments showed a high pressure variation in the fuel line upon operation of the
injector.
3.3.1
Calibration of injector
Calibration of the injector is done to calculate the air-fuel equivalence ratio (λ) which controls
the combustion inside the cylinder. The mass of fuel injected per one injection (minj) is
dependent on the injection duration (∆tinj), the pressure in the fuel supply system pinj, and
injector specific characteristics. For this work an empirical correlation between ∆tinj and
minj for various constant pressure levels is established.
Therefore, the injector is tested detached from the engine with multiple injection durations
ranging from 100 µs to 5000 µs. The fuel is collected in a container and weighted using the
==PAGE:21==
Sartorious 1712 MP8 Analytical Balance with a range of 0.01 g to 30 g and a readability of
0.00001 g. The bias (b) of the balance is investigated by measuring known weights distributed
over the expected result range (20 g to 30 g, see subsection A.1.1). To eliminate the influence
of residuals in the bottle from a previous measurement the container is also weighted before
each measurement and sealed at all times except during injection. This approach also leads
to the total bias of the balance being suppressed once the measured masses are deducted from
each other only leaving the variation of b as error source. For each injection duration, multiple
injections are performed so that the fuel in the container accumulates to a mass slightly below
the limit of the balance respecting the additional mass of the container. Consequently, more
injections are required with shorter injection durations than with longer ones. The total fuel
mass is divided by the number of injections (N) to retrieve minj:
minj = mcontainer, full −mcontainer, empty
N
.
(3.1)
The frequency of the injections was set to 9.17 Hz resembling an engine speed of 1100 rpm.
Figure 3.3 shows the calculated mass at the pressure levels of 20 bar, 50 bar, and 100 bar.
These results are given with an expanded uncertainty (U) (Ugas < 0.0011 g) estimated by
applying an uncertainty budget that can be found in subsection A.1.1. Also shown is the
shape of the injection signal (black). A linear relation (first order polynomial) is established
between minj and ∆tinj for ∆tinj > 300 µs. Smaller opening times fall below the time needed
to fully open the solenoid off the injector, thus not following the linear trend. The pressure
levels displayed are taken from an analog pressure gauge installed in the line. To upgrade
the system a Gems 3100 Series pressure transducer covering a span of 0 −160 bar, with an
accuracy of 0.25 % of span (0.4 bar) is installed to monitor the pressure in the fuel line. All
following pressure values are acquired by the transducer.
Figure 3.3: Discharged fuel mass from the injector for gasoline at finj = 9.17 Hz given
as tendency line excluding durations smaller than 300 µs. Also shown is the shape of the
injection signal (black) adapted from [23].
==PAGE:22==
0.6
0.8
0.8
1
1
1.2
1.2
1.4
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
(a) Gasoline
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.5
2.5
3
3
3.5
3.5
4
4
6
6
8
8
(b) Methanol
Figure 3.4: Equivalence ratio (λ) of utilized fuels depended on fuel line pressure and injection
length (∆tinj) with finj = 9.17 Hz and ˙nair = 0.165 mol/s
Applying the information of linearity from Figure 3.3 a λ map is established by the means
of interpolation. λ correlates linear to the fuel mass assuming a constant air flow which
is accounted for by the mass flow controller and is defined as the ratio of the AFR to the
stoichiometric AFR:
λ ≡
AFR
AFRstoich
[59, p. 93],
(3.2)
where the air-fuel ratio then again is denoted as the ratio between the air and fuel:
AFR ≡mair
mfuel
=
˙mair
˙mfuel
[59, p. 91].
(3.3)
It can be calculated on mass (kg/kg) and molar (kmol/kmol) basis or by using fuel and air
flows instead. The stoichiometric AFR for all common fuels is well known (cf. Table 2.1).
For gasoline, measurements are taken for 300 µs < ∆tinj < 3000 µs at four pressure levels
11 bar < pinj < 103 bar. The resulting map is shown in Figure 3.4a. For methanol more
precise measurements are taken for 300 µs < ∆tinj < 5000 µs at seven equally distributed
pressure levels ranging from 1 bar < pinj < 101 bar and the map is presented in Figure 3.4b.
3.4
Ignition system
The engine is equipped with an intelligent ignition coil (8289 Smart Coil from MSD Ignition)
with an integrated ignition circuit. This enables external control of the ignition timing and
dwell time of the coil.
A spark plug by Denso with an iridium center electrode and a
platinum-coated ground electrode VK20Y Iridium Plus is used as it has been proven to
withstand excessive electrode erosion during testing with sparks of longer duration [12]. The
dwell time is set to 5 ms and the gap to 0.7 mm unless otherwise specified.
3.5
Manifold model
The manifold geometry is modeled by using the CAD software Solidworks. The geometry
includes the manifold itself, an attachment to facilitate the mounting of the injector as well as
==PAGE:23==
the injector itself. For the attachment two versions are examined, a longer (I) and a shorter
(II) one. For the shorter one, the injector nozzle extends 10 mm further into the manifold
compared to the longer one. The geometry is shown in Figure 3.5a and Figure 3.5b. The
spray cone of the injector is dominated by the geometry of the six-hole nozzle. The holes
have a counterbore geometry with a small diameter inside and a larger diameter outside
as well as an individual angle from the center axis of the injector. These dimensions were
measured by Bjørgen, Borsheim, and Løvås using computed tomography (CT) images [5].
The CAD model of the injector in this study is built on that basis.
3-D simulations are conducted to investigate the spray cone interference with the manifold
geometry, using the inbuilt software package FLOW Simulation of Solidworks. Methanol is
set as fluid at the injector inlet at an arbitrarily high pressure while the manifold volume
is kept at atmospheric conditions. This allows for the spray trajectories to be discovered
since they are independent of the back pressure (pressure in the manifold volume) as well
as fuel pressure. The simulations present a convenient approach to study spray targeting as
the geometry of the manifold as well as the alignment of the injector nozzle can be easily
altered.
By combining the manifold with a CAD model of the cylinder head the complete intake
geometry is visualized in Figure 3.5c. The cylinder head geometry is taken from a standard-
ized single-cylinder Waukesha CFR F1/F2 engine at Argonne National Laboratory, which is
similar in geometry to the engine used in this work [44].
==PAGE:24==
(a) Transparent view of manifold geometry with
attachment version II. Injector nozzle closest
possible towards airflow.
(b) Transparent view of manifold geometry with
attachment version I. Injector nozzle reposi-
tioned 10 mm back.
(c) Section view of manifold and cylinder head based on a 3-D scan of a similar CFR engine [44].
Flow is entering from the left into the cylinder during intake stroke. Valves are not pictured.
Figure 3.5: CAD model showing injector position.
==PAGE:25==
3.6
FTIR gas analysis
To evaluate emissions the exhaust gas composition is analyzed by using Fourier-transform
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), a technique used to obtain an infrared spectrum of the ab-
sorption of gases, which in turn can be used to draw conclusions about the presence of
pollutants [24]. The concentration of individual species in a sample gas is quantified by
fitting a composite spectrum, consisting of absorption spectra of individual species to the
measured absorption spectrum of the sample gas, using a least squares routine [12]. FTIR
analysis is convenient since multiple pollutants can be measured with the same method re-
ducing the complexity of the experimental setup and the measuring procedure. The accuracy
of the measurement is mainly dependent on the quality of the calibration spectra. Informa-
tion on this can be found in the work of Carsten Jespersen, Østerby Holst Rasmussen, and
Ivarsson [12]. Only the oxygen content in the exhaust gas is obtained individually using an
oxygen probe (GreenView G36) by Green Instruments.
3.7
Data processing and combustion analysis
All data processing is performed using Matlab and derived from the cylinder pressure which
is based on the average of fifty consecutive cycles unless otherwise specified. In the following
relevant correlations and parameters used for a simplified combustion analysis are introduced.
The purpose of this analysis is to investigate some of the relative effects of timing and
duration of combustion and heat transfer throughout the cycle. The assumptions underlying
these calculations are:
1. The in-cylinder properties are considered uniform, which means that one pressure and
temperature is used to describe the complete charge at a certain time.
2. The in-cylinder mass is constant for the time the valves are closed.
3. The gasses can be described as ideal gasses, that obey the ideal gas law pV = mRT ,
which also implies that cv is a function of temperature alone.
Combining the measured pressure pickup and the known combustion chamber geometry (see
3.1) it is possible to calculate the work produced for the cycle, called the indicated work
Wi. For a four-stroke engine, this is the work from the start of compression to the end of
expansion:
Wi =
Z BDCexp
BDCcomp
p · dV
.
(3.4)
Normalizing the indicated work with the displacement volume Vd of the engine gives the
indicated mean effective pressure (IMEP) in units of pressure:
IMEP = Wi
Vd
.
(3.5)
The indicated efficiency (ηi) can be calculated from the indicated power (IP), which is just
the indicated work multiplied by engine speed.
Dividing by the fuel flow and the lower
heating value (LHV) gives:
ηi ≡
IP
˙mfuel · LHV
[59, p. 24].
(3.6)
While the indicated efficiency represents the ideal theoretical energy conversion within the
combustion chamber, the brake thermal efficiency (ηbth) represents the actual power delivered
to the crankshaft after accounting for all mechanical losses. ηbth can be calculated similar to
==PAGE:26==
ηi by applying the brake power (BP) that is derived from engine speed (N) and torque (τ),
which both are measured (cf. Figure 3.2):
BP = 2 π · τ · N
60
,
(3.7)
when N is given in rounds per minute (rpm). Consequently, ηbth is then given by:
ηbth ≡
BP
˙mfuel · LHV
[59, p. 24].
(3.8)
The amount of work performed per cycle (Wi) depends highly on the amount of fuel burned
in that cycle. Since combustion requires much larger amounts of air compared to fuel, the
amount of air drawn into the cylinder is very important in determining the power output
of an engine. The volumetric efficiency (ηv) is used to compare the effectiveness with which
the cylinder is filled with air during the intake stroke. It is defined by:
ηv ≡
˙mair
Vd · ρin · N
120
[59, p. 270],
(3.9)
where N is again given in rounds per minute (rpm). ηv is based on the intake conditions
of the engine and means of regulating the intake pressure, such as throttling or pressure
charging, are taken into consideration in the density ρin. It is important to know which
definition for volumetric efficiency is used, especially when applying methanol, as there will
be substantial differences depending on whether the fuel vapor fraction has been included or
not [63]. This is due to methanol’s high oxygen content leading to a low stoichiometric air
requirement as previously pointed out (cf. Table 2.1). ρin is derived from the intake pressure
pin and intake temperature Tin using ideal gas law.
ρin = pin · Mair
R · Tin
.
(3.10)
Thereby it is accounted for the gaseous fuel, as pin and Tin are changing with fuel evaporation
in the manifold. Tin will decrease due to evaporative cooling and pin will rise as the intake flow
is mass controlled, meaning the set mass of air will be supplied at all times, thus the additional
gaseous fuel in the manifold will lead to pressure increase by the vapor pressure of the fuel.
This may seem counterintuitive but the effect can be clearly seen in Figure 4.2 showing the
manifold pressure when injection is active and inactive respectively. The evaporation process
however can be better quantified than by comparing the volumetric efficiency. Knowing the
(constant) air flow as well as pin and Tin at active and inactive injection, the molar intake
flow including gaseous fuel can be found using ideal gas law:
˙nin = ˙nair ·
pin
pin,mot
· Tin,mot
Tin
,
(3.11)
where “mot” denotes motoring conditions without injection obtained from a baseline run.
The evaporated fuel flow can now be obtained by subtracting ˙nair from ˙nin. Ultimately, the
mass fraction of fuel vapor can be established providing a good basis for comparison.
˙mv
˙mfuel
= Mfuel ( ˙nin −˙nair)
˙mfuel
.
(3.12)
Furthermore, the air-fuel ratio for the vapor phase is given by ˙mair/ ˙mv. The vapor phase
mixture ratio is important because it is the one available at the spark for ignition. At low
temperatures, where fuel volatility is low, a substantial portion of fuel might be left in the
==PAGE:27==
manifold and only the mixtures of vapors will be entering the cylinder. Note that the tem-
perature dependent variation of vapor pressure for a single species fuel can be alternatively
obtained by empirical correlations [59].
The heat release rate (HRR) is calculated using the first law of thermodynamics:
˙QAHR =
γ
γ −1pdV
dθ +
γ
γ −1V dV
dθ
,
(3.13)
where ˙QAHR is the apparent heat release rate, γ is the heat capacity ratio, p is the cylinder
pressure, V is the cylinder volume, and θ is the crank angle degree. Integrating this gives
the apparent heat release (AHR). To account for heat losses before combustion, the apparent
heat release rate from a non-firing baseline run is subtracted from the AHR of the combusting
case. The cumulative heat release (CHR) of the combustion can then be found by taking
the difference in AHR during combustion. Following good practice, combustion duration is
defined as the crank rotation from 10 % heat release (CA10) to 90 % heat release (CA90).
Normal combustion is given by the trace in Figure 3.6 showing the heat release rate with the
crank angle positions for ignition (θign) as well as 10, 50, and 90 % heat release. Since the
cylinder pressure is averaged from multiple consecutive cycles a variation can be identified in
the result. This is expressed as the coefficient of variation (CoV) of IMEP as a percentage:
CoV of IMEP = σIMEP
µIMEP
.
(3.14)
These calculations present the most basic analysis of engine cycle simulation implemented
from Sorenson [59]. The calculations are therefore not valid for transient operation of the
engine since effects of engine speed variation on airflow and power are not included. Neither
will it be possible to accurately calculate the details of the combustion process, where one
should resort to more complex combustion models. Sorenson discusses in more detail the
trade-offs between model complexity and simulation needs [59]. Nevertheless, the correlations
are sufficient to discuss trends.
In addition to the combustion analysis a correlation for the air-fuel equivalence ratio (λ),
a main operating parameter, is set up. The information of λ can be derived from knowing
the injected mass of fuel and the intake air flow as already introduced in subsection 3.3.1.
Another way of acquiring it is by analyzing the exhaust gas composition. There are rudimen-
tary formulas estimating λ either based on the oxygen or CO2 concentration in the exhaust
gas. For a more reliable evaluation both, the oxygen and the total carbon concentrations
can be used. Looking at the combustion reaction for methanol for lean conditions including
side-products the process can be written:
c1 CH4O +c2 (O2 + 3.76 N2) →a CO2 +b CO +c CHx +d O2 +e H2 +f H2O +c2 3.76 N2
.
(3.15)
Here, c1 and c2 as well as a−f are unknowns. From these, only c1 and c2 are of interest which
can be easily solved for since the composition of methanol (CH4O) is known. Denoting the
carbon and oxygen balance gives:
C : c1 = a + b + c
(3.16)
O : c1 + 2 c2 = 2 a + b + 2 d + f
.
(3.17)
The AFR can be solved by applying c1 and c2:
AFR = c2 · 4.76 mol · Mair
c1 · 1 mol · MMeOH
(3.18)
==PAGE:28==
While the air-fuel ratio characterizes the input mixture, the resulting emissions also require
quantification in standardized terms. Brake specific (BS) emissions is used to specify mass
of emissions per unit of mechanical energy output (g/kWh). As with efficiencies, this is done
to ensure comparability over different engine sizes. Raw emissions measured by FTIR are
stated in volume fractions either as percentages or in parts per million (ppm) which is the
same as mole fractions when assuming ideal gas law. For an emission species i (CO, NO,
NO2, CH2O, CH4, CH4O, HC) the brake specific emission can be calculated by:
BSi = ˙mexh · xi · Mi
Mexh · BP
,
(3.19)
where ˙mexh is the mass flow rate of the exhaust gas determined by summation of ˙mair and
˙mfuel, xi is the volume fraction of species i, Mi is the molecular weight of species i, Mexh is
the molecular weight of exhaust gas and BP is the brake power.
Figure 3.6: Apparent heat release rate ( ˙Q =
dQ/dθ) at different crank angles. Crank po-
sition for 10, 50, and 90 % heat release as
well as ignition (θign) is also shown.
Figure 3.7: Apparent heat release rate ( ˙Q)
showing autoignition of end-gases where ˙QF
is attributed to flame propagation and ˙Qmax
is the maximum heat release rate. ˙Qmax−˙QF
describes the autoignition event.
3.7.1
Autoignition of end-gases
Normal combustion in a spark-ignited engine starts with the spark plug igniting the fuel-
air mixture, creating a flame front that travels steadily across the cylinder until the charge
is fully consumed. As the flame propagates across the combustion chamber, the unburned
mixture ahead of the flame (so called end-gases) are compressed. This is causing its pressure,
temperature, and density to rise. Some of the end-gas air-fuel mixtures potentially reach self-
ignition conditions before the regular flame front reaches them, they autoignite. When this
happens, the end gas burns very rapidly, releasing its energy at a rate five to 25 times that
characteristic of normal combustion [28]. This causes high-frequency pressure oscillations
inside the cylinder that produce the sharp metallic ringing noise called “knock”.
Autoignition and knock are not identical. Autoignition is usually, but not invariably, followed
by knock. A benign autoignition is possible, in which the acoustic disturbance is much less
than that with knock, which is a consequence of a relatively low heat release rate [35, 8].
==PAGE:29==
Therefore, the autoignition intensity can be stated from the heat release rate. The trace in
Figure 3.7 resembles a cycle with an autoignition event.
˙QF is attributed to normal flame
propagation and ˙Qmax is the maximum value of the heat release rate which coincides with
the autoignition peak. Since this peak is stretching over a few crank angle degrees only, ˙QF
is calculated as the median heat release rate during combustion (CA10 to CA90). The heat
release rate solely from autoignition is obtained by subtracting ˙QF from ˙Qmax. Dividing this
by ˙QF gives a non-dimensional parameter expressing the intensity of autoignition.
Intensity of autoignition (IoA) =
˙Qmax −˙QF
˙QF
.
(3.20)
This simple expression of the autoignition intensity could be improved by a more sophisti-
cated approach coupling heat release rate with the chemical kinetics of a developing detona-
tion, as done by Bradley et al. [9], but this is refrained from in this work since the intensity
is found sufficient to discuss autoignition events.
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
A large range of experiments have been conducted to investigate the operation limits of the
CFR engine on methanol as well as to explore optimal operating conditions for port fuel
injection of methanol. In this work, only static engine operation is investigated. The engine
is kept at a constant speed of 1100±15 rpm during sampling. Higher deviations occurred for
operation close to the operating limits. The fuel injection process for all experiments delivers
fuel into the in-flowing fresh air of the intake manifold only when the inlet valve opens. This is
called open valve injection (OVI). Warm-up is performed until the oil temperature is at 60 °C
and the exhaust sample location (coldest point in the exhaust) is above water condensation
temperature. The results of the experiments are presented and discussed in the following
sections. A complete test matrix stating the experiments conducted in the present work can
be found in section A.2.
• First, in section 4.1, results are presented verifying the proper function of the injection
system as it is described in section 3.3. These were obtained using gasoline as fuel.
Furthermore, an appropriate ignition time is determined for methanol combustion in
section 4.2.
• Operational limits and emission characteristics of the setup are investigated and pre-
sented in section 4.3.
• Injection strategies are discussed after, starting with the alignment of the spray cone in
section 4.4, followed by injection timing in section 4.5. Additional injection strategies
are considering pressurization of intake air in section 4.7 and adapting for multiple
injections in section 4.8.
• Cycle-to-cycle variation of the combustion is investigated in section 4.6 by examination
of the heat release.
4.1
Uncertainty considerations
Initial testing with gasoline indicated high pressure variations in the fuel line originating
from a standing wave induced by injection. The used injector is intended for installation in
a common rail setup, which means that every injector is supplied from one common pressure
line [48]. For this study, a common rail is not applicable, since there is only one cylinder
at the CFR engine, but the usually larger volume of a common rail can be archived by the
installation of a reservoir close to the injector. The added fuel reservoir succeeds in reducing
the pressure variation in the fuel line significantly for both tested pressures. Table 4.1 shows
the pressure variation (∆p) with and without the reservoir installed, at set pressures of
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a spark ignition engine
21
==PAGE:31==
24.1 bar and 52.7 bar respectively. Also stated is the pressure present in the fuel line at
the start of injection (SOI) as well as the average cycle pressure (pinj,avg). Figure 4.1 shows
exemplary the pressure in the fuel line over one cycle (two engine revolutions) pinj,avg =
52.7 bar. The opening of the injector induces a pressure wave, turning into a standing wave
in the fuel line. For an installed reservoir this wave eventually dies off over the course of the
cycle and does not interfere with injection in the following cycle. Ultimately the pressure
at SOI remains stable. The remaining variation at the time of injection is small enough
to not interfere with engine operation. The induced uncertainty is calculated as stated in
subsection A.1.1. The fuel line pressure at SOI will be stated for the following experiments
simply referred to as injection pressure.
Table 4.1: Variation of fuel line pressure (∆p) as well as the pressure present at start of
injection (pavg @ SOI) with and without additional reservoir installed. All values ± 0.4 bar.
pinj,avg is the average pressure in the fuel line without ongoing injection.
No reservoir
Reservoir
pinj,avg [bar]
∆p [bar]
pinj @ SOI [bar]
∆p
pinj @ SOI [bar]
24.1
14.1
22.0
0.7
24.0
52.7
20.2
53.0
7.1
52.5
Figure 4.1: Pressure in the fuel line (injection pressure) for the full four-stroke cycle at
pinj,avg = 52.7 bar, finj = 9.17 Hz, SOI = −340 CAD ATDC and ∆tinj = 1.2 ms.
Just as with the fuel line, also the manifold is subjected to varying pressure over the engine
cycle. Here this is caused by the opening and closing of the intake valve. It does not sig-
nificantly affect engine operation since it is not exposed to changes when varying operation
parameters. Figure 4.2 displays this pressure wave exemplary with and without active in-
jection for a set pressure of pin = 1 bar as it is the setting for most of the experiments. The
pattern of the wave does not vary significantly other than that active injection increases the
pressure, which is set by controlling the mass flow of air (cf. Figure 3.2). This is caused by
evaporation of fuel in the manifold as was discussed in section 3.7. Again the uncertainty
estimation for intake pressure variation is stated in subsection A.1.1.
Now the equivalence ratio calculated from mass balance (cf. Equation 3.3) using average
injection pressure (pinj,avg) and the one using the pressure value at SOI (pinj) can be compared
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.2:
Intake pressure for the full four-stroke cycle at pinj = 100 bar, SOI =
−280 CAD ATDC and ∆tinj = 1.8 ms.
with the one approximated by the exhaust gas oxygen content. Note, that the estimation of
λ including all available exhaust gas species as described in section 3.7 is only conducted for
methanol measurements. Satisfactory alignment can be found between the three estimations
as presented in Figure 4.3. For the following sections λ based on exhaust gas composition is
displayed if not stated otherwise.
Other operating parameters subjected to uncertainty, such as compression ratio, start and
end of injection, as well as ignition timing are not investigated further. Their uncertainty
is either deemed insignificant or not relevant to the interpretation of the findings.
The
uncertainty for engine speed (1100 ± 15 rpm) given in the introduction of this chapter is
valid for all experiments. A general note on the uncertainty of the pressure parameters (pinj
and pin) should be added here: While Figure 4.1 and 4.2 show a rather large variation over
the cycle, the repeatability of those cycles under identical conditions is given, quantified by a
low uncertainty. At certain operating points, the equivalence ratios calculated from different
approaches might deviate significantly.
However, this deviation is explained by physical
considerations and is not due to poor repeatability in most cases. In other words, the same
settings will show consistent errors, while the uncertainty for both individual calculations
remains low.
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.3: Equivalence ratio for gasoline.
λ from exhaust gas composition is esti-
mated based on oxygen content only (λ ≈
0.21/ (0.21 −xO2))
Figure
4.4:
Maximum
brake
torque
(MBT) in relation to 50 % heat release
(CA50) at pinj = 59.7 ± 0.3 bar, pin =
1.00 ± 0.02 bar,
CR
=
8,
SOI
=
−360 CAD ATDC.
4.2
Ignition timing
The ignition time for all conducted experiments is set to achieve maximum brake torque
(MBT) in order to provide maximum power output. Instead of using the crank angle degree
of MBT for the spark timing, the corresponding CAD when 50 % of the heat is released
(CA50) is used, since it is a more precise criterion to use, ensuring consistent emission
trends for parameter sweeps of injection timing, air excess ratio, and compression ratios.
Previous work on the CFR engine with gaseous fuel showed MBT when CA50 is between
8 and 9 CAD ATDC [12].
Using this as an initial best guess, CA50 ignition timing is
then advanced and retarded by ±5 CAD and ±10 CAD respectively. Figure 4.4 shows the
obtained torque for different equivalence ratios. MBT can be located at CA50 between 11
and 12 CAD ATDC. Consequently, CA50 at 12 CAD ATDC is chosen as the set point since
a slightly retarded spark timing creates a small safety margin to prevent knocking that may
occur at MBT operation [28].
4.3
Operation limits
The newly designed injection system necessitates the reevaluation of operating limits of the
CFR engine. One is the so-called “knock limit”, which is an expression for an operating point
beyond which abnormal ignition occurs at an inopportune time in the cycle [59]. Knocking
is described in the autoignition of end-gases section (cf. subsection 3.7.1). It sets a limit to
the increase of the compression ratio, which otherwise favors efficiency. Figure 4.5 shows ηi
over a variation of CR, which can be changed on the CFR since the original purpose of its
design was to standardize knock measurement [4]. The knock limit when using methanol (@
==PAGE:34==
CR = 13) exceeds that of gasoline (@ CR = 9), which is plotted as an initial reference, even
though the gasoline measurement is conducted with a higher λ, somewhat extending the
knock limit. Knock is commonly reported as a CoV limit of 5% IMEP [40]. This, however,
is not clearly distinguishable from other effects causing a high CoV. Therefore, in addition
to monitoring the CoV, knock is also obtained acoustically since it is associated with a very
distinguishable noise and by reviewing the in-cylinder pressure.
Knock limit
Gasoline
Knock limit
MeOH
Figure 4.5:
Indicated efficiency together
with knock limit for methanol and gasoline
respectively at pinj = 60.0 ± 0.6 bar, pin =
0.98 ± 0.02 bar, SOI = −300 CAD ATDC.
LBL MeOH
(CoV > 5% IMEP)
LBL Gasoline
(CoV > 2% IMEP)
Figure 4.6:
Indicated efficiency with lean
burn limit shown for both fuels at pinj =
60.0 ± 2.1 bar, pin = 1.00 ± 0.03 bar, SOI =
−300 CAD ATDC.
A high CR is favorable for efficiency but is limited by knocking. Thus, the variation of
equivalence ratio is conducted at a CR slightly below the identified “knock limit” as shown
in Figure 4.6. As the air-fuel mixture becomes increasingly lean, there is a limit beyond
which the mixture cannot be reliably ignited. This limit is commonly denoted as the lean
burn limit (LBL) or “extinction limit” and can be again reported as a CoV limit, although
the thermodynamic limitations of combustion are much more complex (cf. Quader [46]). For
methanol, it is found around λ ≈1.8 on the CFR engine, while for gasoline it is significantly
lower, even neglecting the lower CR (LBL @ λ ≈1.45).
From an efficiency point of view, it is unreasonable to operate close to the LBL since peak
indicated efficiency is reached before.
However, lean operation is the key parameter in
reducing NOx emissions without adapting exhaust gas after treatment systems. Figure 4.7a
shows the raw emission concentrations for various λ obtained by the FTIR measurements,
while the brake specific adaptions of each species are stated in Figure 4.7b. A significant
reduction of especially NO (blue) but also NO2 (pink) can be observed for increasing λ. The
current firmest limit for NOx emissions in the marine sector is stated by the International
==PAGE:35==
(a) Raw emissions.
(b) Brake specific emissions and IMO Tier III
limit (grey) for NOx (2 g/kWh).
Figure 4.7: Emissions of relevant species for methanol operation at pinj = 60.0±2.1 bar, pin =
1.00 ± 0.03 bar, CR = 12, SOI = −300 CAD ATDC.
Maritime Organization (IMO) of 2 g/kWh1 is only reached for λ > 1.75 (see Figure 4.7b).
Güdden has found a similar limit of λ > 1.65 on a large bore, single cylinder engine [25].
HC emissions (red) are increasing for leaner mixtures due to quenching effects introduced
in subsection 2.2.2.
The steeper increase seen for the brake specific emissions is due to
decreasing power output when moving towards leaner mixtures and it is affecting all species.
Unburned methanol (orange), as well as formaldehyde emissions (purple), rise with increasing
λ as combustion and exhaust temperatures, displayed in Figure 4.10, drop. The formaldehyde
produced is proportional to the unburned methanol. Since formaldehyde is toxic, exhaust
gas aftertreatment in form of appropriate catalysts is considered mandatory even if it is not
required to comply with certain current emission standards. The rise in CO (dark blue) can
be traced to the competition between temperature and O2 concentration, determining the
oxidation of CO to CO2. It can be seen that when λ keeps growing, also CO potentially
increases. Methane emissions (green) proved to be insignificant.
In an effort to extend the LBL the intake pressure is increased to pin = 1.2 bar and addi-
tionally for one measurement series the compression ratio is raised from 12 to 13. Figure 4.8
shows that an operation beyond the previous LBL is possible. However, for higher λ the
CoV, shown in Figure 4.9, exceeds by far what is previously defined as LBL. Thus adhering
to the definition of CoV < 5% IMEP for LBL no gain can be reported. The high CoV and
the deviations of single data points from the overall displayed trend in Figure 4.8 can be
traced to high cycle-to-cycle variations an inherent phenomenon in SI engines even under
1Annex VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution From Ships (MARPOL 73/78),
the major international convention that regulates air pollutants from ships, introduces a stepwise approach
to the reduction of emissions of NOx from new marine vessels [29].
==PAGE:36==
steady-state and stoichiometric conditions but especially for lean burns [28]. This highlights
a major concern as reliable operation expressed by a somewhat low CoV is the foundation
of any practical applications beyond research. section 4.6 will provide a detailed analysis of
the cycle-to-cycle variation.
Figure 4.8: Brake thermal efficiency at pinj =
60 ± 2.1 bar, SOI = −300 CAD ATDC.
Figure 4.9: Coefficient of variance at pinj =
60.0 ± 2.1 bar, SOI = −300 CAD ATDC.
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.10:
Maximum in-cylinder and
exhaust temperature at pinj
=
60.0 ±
2.1 bar,
pin
=
1.00 ± 0.03 bar,
CR
=
12, SOI = −300 CAD ATDC.
4.4
Spray targeting
Due to the intake valve of the CFR engine sitting deep in the cylinder head (cf. Figure 3.5c)
a direct targeting of the intake valve is not possible without altering the design of the
cylinder head, which is ruled out for this work.
Instead, the spray is targeted towards
the intake air stream, which is also more reasonable considering the injection spray angle.
The asymmetric injector hole alignment allows to identify an optimal position.
For the
rotational alignment, this occurs when the center axis of the spray cone is tilted downwards
to the air stream.
Concerning the axial alignment, Figure 4.11a shows the spray in the
manifold with the injector nozzle positioned as close as possible to the air stream while still
respecting manufacturing limitations. Compared to placing the injector 10 mm further back
(Figure 4.11b), this position shows less wall impingement from the spray. In particular, it
reduces the spray impact on the upper wall area that lacks direct airflow, which is expected
to negatively impact the mixture formation in the manifold.
Note that Figure 4.11 only shows the spray trajectories and does not model an actual in-
jection. Therefore, it only gives accurate information on the spray direction. The spray
penetration, describing the distance that the liquid spray travels from its injection point into
a surrounding environment, can be adapted from literature. Song and Park report a maxi-
mum spray penetration of 100 mm at pinj = 100 bar with an opening time of 3 ms [58]. The
injector used in their study has a comparable design with six nozzle holes, producing three
pairs of spray plumes by having different angles to spread the fuel. These findings align with
the ones from Costa, Sorge, and Allocca using a predecessor injector (Bosch HDEV 5.1)
[16]. From this, a direct impingement of the manifold wall opposite of the nozzle cannot be
precluded, while some interference with the manifold wall is certain due to the spray angle.
This analysis opens up charge mixing improvements by tuning the spray penetration, which
will be discussed more in section 4.8.
==PAGE:38==
(a) Injector nozzle positioned closest possible to the air stream (attachment version II).
(b) Injector nozzle repositioned 10 mm further away from intake air stream compared to (a).
Figure 4.11: Visualization of spray trajectories in the CFR engine manifold for two different
attachment lengths, effectively moving the nozzle closer to and away from the air stream.
The air is moving from the left to the right where the engine intake is located.
==PAGE:39==
4.5
Injection timing
As previously discussed in section 2.1 mixture formation in the PFI engine can be optimized
by tuning several factors. Spray-targeting has already been improved by moving the injector
nozzle closer to the air stream and is otherwise constrained by manifold and engine geometry.
The injection strategy for static engine operation therefore comes down to the investigation
of injection timing as well as fuel-line and intake air pressure. The emission concentrations of
advancing injection time during the intake stroke are displayed as an absolute concentrations
in Figure 4.12a and brake specific in Figure 4.12b. This initial test series is conducted at
λ = 1.15 allowing for a comparison of the results with the works of Güdden and Wei et al.
who were testing on stoichiometric or close to stoichiometric air-fuel ratios [25, 66].
(a) Raw emissions.
(b) Brake specific emissions.
Figure 4.12: Emissions of relevant species for advancing EOI at pinj = 58.9 ± 0.9 bar, pin =
1.03 ± 0.02 bar, CR = 12. The set value of λ ≈1.15 varies largely for displayed data (cf.
Figure 4.13). Also shown is the duration of the intake valve being open.
Injection through the open intake valve finds an optimum shortly before maximum piston
speed (−270 CAD ATDC), where CO as well as methanol and formaldehyde emissions are
lowest. Maximum piston speed associated with maximum suction during the intake cycle
supports mixing and charge transportation into the cylinder resulting in a low CoV presented
in Figure 4.14. At the present λ and intake pressure sufficient fuel transportation is the
dominant influence on emission formation as it influences the actual λ of the charge that
in turn primarily controls emission species [28]. Figure 4.13 compares the equivalence ratio
based on AFR obtained from mass balance (cf. Equation 3.3) with the one using exhaust
gas composition (cf. Equation 3.18). It is evident that the set operation point of λ = 1.15
is not maintained for all injection times. When suction is highest most fuel is reaching the
cylinder resulting in a rich charge, while otherwise, the charge is more lean. The extreme is
reached for injection close to IVC where not all of the injected fuel is reaching the cylinder in
the current cycle. Methanol’s low volumetric energy content as well as stoichiometric AFR
==PAGE:40==
must be considered here leading to large volumes of fuel injected at richer operating points
overstraining charge transport. This can be remedied by increasing the intake pressure or
moving to leaner mixtures.
Figure 4.13: Equivalence ratio from exhaust
gas composition and set value (dashed) at
pin ≈1 bar.
Figure 4.14: Coefficient of variance at pin ≈
1 bar. Parameters given in the legend from
Figure 4.13 apply.
The difference in AFR can be expressed as the mass flow of fuel not reaching the cylinder,
assuming the intake airflow to be constant:
˙mloss = ˙mair

1
AFRmass
−
1
AFRexh

.
(4.1)
For the three settings shown in Figure 4.13, the maximum ˙mloss is 0.05 g/s (red), 0.03 g/s
(green), and 0.12 g/s (cyan) respectively. The mass accumulated after 10 minutes of engine
operation then is 30 g (red), 18 g (green), and 72 g (cyan) for the three cases. Considering
the volume of the inlet duct including the manifold and the short continuous operating
times of the CFR engine during experiments (usually shorter than 10 minutes before an
operating parameter is changed) it is possible that a share of the fuel is non-participating in
charge formation and only evaporating after injection is turned off. This is later observed
qualitatively in Figure 4.27f.
Figure 4.15 shows again the brake specific emissions over advancing injection time for λ =
1.70, while Figure 4.16 displays them for λ = 1.83 and increased injection pressure pinj =
100 bar. For both operation points λ is fairly stable and the previously described effects
disappear. Charge inhomogeneities as they are identified by Güdden and Wei et al. as the
main reasoning for an optimum do not play an overly important role when moving to high
injection pressures as mixture homogeneity is benefited by spray atomization [25, 66]. The
emission species are therefore not varying significantly over an advance of injection time. The
CoV, however, maintains its optimum independent of the predominant λ (cf. Figure 4.14).
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.15: Brake specific emissions of rel-
evant species for advancing EOI at pinj =
59.7 ± 0.8 bar, pin = 1.01 ± 0.02 bar, CR =
13, λ = 1.70 ± 0.04.
Figure 4.16: Brake specific emissions of rel-
evant species for advancing EOI at pinj =
98.3 ± 0.5 bar, pin = 1.00 ± 0.02 bar, CR =
13, λ = 1.83 ± 0.05.
To further lower the CoV, the focus is directed towards the ignition system. The combus-
tion of somewhat stratified mixtures is improved by increasing the ignition coil dwell from
previously 5 ms to 8 ms.
Implications of this on the CoV and for additionally doubling
the spark gap are shown in Figure 4.17. Both measures are hardly convincing taking into
account that higher dwell has a negative impact on the wear of the ignition coil. Figure 4.18
displays the intensity of autoignition of end-gases as described in subsection 3.7.1 for the
individual cycles sampled. This is plotted against the cumulative heat release from CA10
to CA90 of the cycles. What can be observed is that autoignition of end-gases only occurs
for individual cycles showing a higher heat release which are suspected to be of richer mix-
ture. No significant differences between the three ignition setups can be seen. Looking at
this index of autoignition from the three discussed λ settings as pictured in Figure 4.19 it
becomes evident, that the phenomenon is indeed connected to the equivalence ratio. For
the richer setting of λ = 1.70 more cycles are subjected to autoignition of end gases while
for leaner operation λ = 1.83, this is significantly reduced to the point, that only two out of
fifty cycles show autoignition. The intensity of these autoignition events is also reduced for
leaner mixtures. The result suggests that the at optimum remaining level of cycle-to-cycle
variation is not caused by ignition but rather by uneven fuel delivery over the cycles. This
will be discussed in detail in the next section.
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.17: CoV for ignition system adap-
tions at pinj = 100.0 ± 0.9 bar, pin = 0.99 ±
0.02 bar, CR = 13, λ = 1.81 ± 0.02.
Figure 4.18: Intensity of autoignition for ig-
nition system adaptions at pinj = 100.0 ±
0.9 bar, pin = 0.99±0.02 bar, CR = 13, λ =
1.81 ± 0.02.
Figure 4.19:
Intensity of autoignition at
pin ≈1 bar.
Parameters are given in the
legend from Figure 4.13. IoA for λ ≈1.15
is not shown due to inconsistencies in AHR
not allowing a statement about autoignition
based on Equation 3.20.
==PAGE:43==
4.6
Cycle-to-cycle variation
Taking up the findings of the last section on injection strategies a profound investigation
of the cycle-to-cycle variation is necessary. Most parameters are only measured for every
sample rather than every cycle. The cumulative heat release however can be calculated for
every individual cycle in the sample. Therefore, the CHR presents a good choice to analyze
cycle-based combustion.
Figure 4.20: Distribution of cumulative heat release for different pinj over 250 cycles at
pin = 1.02 ± 0.02 bar, CR = 12, EOI @ best CoV.
Figure 4.20 shows the cumulative heat release distribution of 250 samples. All three distri-
butions can be approximated with a bell curve (Gaussian) shape. However, the shape is not
completely symmetrical as there are more cycles showing lower CHR compared to the peak
as there are ones with higher CHR. This is particularly pronounced for pinj ≈25 bar. A shift
in the peaks is connected to λ differing from its set value, which is shown in Figure 4.22 and
will be discussed at a later point. For higher injection pressures the distribution width gets
smaller and concentrates more around the maximum.
Furthermore, the autoignition intensity is shown again in Figure 4.21 for the different in-
jection pressures. As expected, none of the three injection pressures show signs of end-gas
autoignition at the given lean operating condition. The average as well as the area of vari-
ation of the apparent heat release shown in Figure 4.23 resembles the distribution shown
in Figure 4.20 with only the lowest injection pressure of pinj ≈25 bar showing exceptional
delayed heat release, while the higher pressures showing more even fluctuations around the
mean as they where also closer to being normal distributed in Figure 4.20. The start of
ignition commonly stated at CA10 provides additional insights into the combustion process.
A delayed ignition hints at the air-fuel mixture near the spark plug lacking optimal composi-
tion for reliable ignition. Usually, inhomogeneities lead to fuel-rich clouds and otherwise lean
mixture in the cylinder. This late CA10 in turn leads to a nonuniform, possible incomplete
combustion resulting in a lower CHR. Figure 4.24 states this correlation, which appears to
be only valid to some extent for pinj ≈25 bar.
Overall these results suggest no significant correlation between a variation in heat release
and the variation in start of combustion or autoignition of end-gases. Variation in λ can
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.21:
Intensity of autoignition at
pin = 1.02±0.02 bar, CR = 12, EOI @ best
CoV.
Figure 4.22: Equivalence ratio agreement of
exhaust gas based value and set-point at
pin = 1.02±0.02 bar, CR = 12, EOI @ best
CoV.
be identified as the greatest influence not only on formation on emission as discussed in
section 4.5 but also on accumulated heat release and thus on cycle-to-cycle variation.
The agreement between set (mass-ratio based AFR) and exhaust composition based λ, as
given in Figure 4.22 emphasizes the findings from the previous section and suggests that
for pinj ≈25 bar and pinj ≈100 bar a much leaner mixture is present in the cylinder and
therefore the peak heat release is lower (cf. Figure 4.20). Note that also in Figure 4.13 the
equivalence ratio calculated from exhaust gas composition always states a leaner mixture
compared to the λ set-point.
A qualitative analysis of the fuel transport into the cylinder was conducted by capturing
recordings of the port injection during engine operation shown in Figures 4.27b to 4.27e, while
Figure 4.27a pictures the manifold without ongoing injection and a view of the intake valve.
The injector tip is not visible, as it is out of frame. Two different fuel transport mechanisms
into the cylinder are identified. With open valve injection, highly atomized fuel is transported
into the cylinder by the air-steam. A majority of the fuel however is deposited at the manifold
walls and pockets that host various sensors. The wall film stays after IVC and is unable to
evaporate fully over the course of one cycle, so after IVO of the following cycle, the liquid
fuel film from the previous cycle is strip atomized into the cylinder as charge starts to flow
forward (first forward flow atomization). Little information is available on the re-atomization
process of methanol deposits in an intake manifold. Therefore, the process is best compared
with gasoline PFI during cold start where low temperatures cause low evaporation rates
and thus wall film buildup [39]. Here re-atomization has been found to cause large droplets
and ligaments to enter the combustion chamber, resulting in poor combustion [34]. The fuel
portion accumulated as wall film and eventually as puddles in the manifold and subsequently
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.23:
Apparent heat release along
with the upper and lower limits of cycle-
to-cycle
variability
at
pin
=
1.02 ±
0.02 bar, CR = 12, EOI @ best CoV.
Figure 4.24:
Heat release dependency on
start
of
combustion
at
pin
=
1.02 ±
0.02 bar, CR = 12, EOI @ best CoV.
not forming a charge is found to cause the observed leaner mixtures measured by the FTIR. In
Figure 4.27f significant wall wetting is seen even thirty seconds after the injection is stopped.
The wall film buildup and its evaporation are furthermore dependent on the predominant
pressure and temperature in the manifold, which in turn is influenced by fuel evaporation.
The amount of fuel evaporated can be quantified by comparing the molar intake flow of
an air-only cycle (non-injecting baseline run) with the one of a combusting cycle. Applying
Equation 3.12 gives the mass fraction of evaporated fuel in the manifold shown in Figure 4.26
using measured intake temperature shown in Figure 4.25 and pressure. For all three injection
pressures only about half of the injected fuel is evaporating in the manifold explaining the
observed wall film buildup. The independence of the mass fraction evaporated from pinj
suggests that better spray atomization does not result in more evaporation. This raises the
question if the intake air is fully saturated with gaseous methanol posing a limit to more
evaporation. A minimal working example of a mixture of air and fuel in a container with
liquid fuel in equilibrium with the mixture is considered. The temperature and pressure
in the container resemble the intake conditions in the manifold. In a mixture of gasses,
assuming Dalton’s law is valid, the total pressure is the sum of the partial pressures of the
species and the partial pressure for a species i is equal to the mole fraction xi of the species:
pi =
ni
PN
i=1 ni
· p = xi · p
[59, p. 183],
(4.2)
where p = pin is the intake pressure and the mol fraction for methanol can be calculated
from the molar flows: xMeOH = ( ˙nin −˙nair) / ˙nin. The temperature dependent vapor pressure
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.25:
Intake temperature Tin and
manifold surface temperature (dash-dotted)
at pin = 1.02 ± 0.02 bar, CR = 12, EOI
@ best CoV.
Figure 4.26: Mass fraction of fuel vapor in
the manifold at pin = 1.02 ± 0.02 bar, CR =
12, EOI @ best CoV.
pv of a single species fuel can be described by an empirical function:
ln (pv) = a
T + b
[59, p. 184],
(4.3)
where a and b are empirical constants. For methanol a = −4602 and b = 18.22. pv is given
in kPa and T = Tin in K. If the partial pressure of methanol in the container is higher than
the vapor pressure, complete evaporation is impossible under given conditions as the air is
fully saturated. This can be expressed as saturation ratio ϕ = pi/pv. For ϕ < 1, the vapor
is undersaturated and for ϕ = 1, it is saturated. For ϕ > 1, it is supersaturated, resulting in
an unstable condition that typically leads to condensation. The average saturation ratio for
the three injection pressures discussed is stated in Table 4.2. Also shown is a reference based
on gasoline operation (for Equation 4.3 the empirical constants of a = −4572 and b = 15.94
are used [59]). While the values given in Table 4.2 are based on a minimal working example
only roughly reflecting reality and should therefore treated with uttermost caution, they
nevertheless allow the assessment that under methanol operation, in contrast to gasoline,
the charge is saturated if not supersaturated. This is inevitable leading to liquid fuel in the
manifold.
Methanol’s high latent heat as well as high stoichiometric AFR compared to gasoline explains
a lower saturation ratio when gasoline is used as fuel since less fuel needs to be injected to
archive the same equivalence ratio and the injected fuel evaporates faster from the manifold
walls leading to lesser or completely suppressed wall film buildup (during warm engine op-
eration). The CFR engine has no valve overlap. The seen effects are expected to be even
more severe if a high speed engine with valve overlap is used where short-circuiting2 would
2Short-circuiting describes the intake charge going directly out of the exhaust port during scavenging [59].
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.2: Saturation ratio ϕ = pi/pv based on mixture equilibrium averaged from three λ
settings ranging from 1.6 to 1.8. Only for pinj = 25.4 bar an increase of ϕ over the λ-range
is calculated (from 1.0 to 1.5). Gasoline reference is calculated at λ ≈1.4 (LBL).
Fuel
pinj
ϕ
MeOH
25.4
1.3 ± 0.3
MeOH
58.4
1.3 ± 0.1
MeOH
99.6
1.0 ± 0.1
Gasoline
24.1
0.4 ± 0.1
lead to additional fuel loss through the exhaust valve during intake stroke.
At this point, a note on the volumetric efficiency should be allowed. Fuel vaporization is
caused mainly by absorbing heat from the manifold walls rather than the intake air. This can
be seen from the cold manifold surface temperature in Figure 4.25 (ambient temperature for
all experiments is around 22°C) and by comparing the heat associated with the temperature
drop in the intake air with the latent heat of the fuel share evaporated.
The heat flow
˙Qmot→in needed for the temperature reduction of the intake air is approximated by applying
the first law of thermodynamics and ideal gas law:
˙Qmot→in = cp · ˙mair · (Tin −Tmot)
.
(4.4)
Here, cp is the specific heat capacity of the fuel at constant pressure, ˙mair the intake airflow,
and Tin, Tmot are the temperatures of the air stream, with and without injection, respectively.
The heat flow ˙Qv needed for evaporating a given mass flow of fuel is then calculated using
the latent heat:
˙Qv = ˙mv · L
,
(4.5)
where ˙mv is the vaporized mass flow (cf. Equation 3.12) and L is the latent heat of the fuel
(LMeOH = 1103 kJ/kg at 25°C [59]). The heat associated with the temperature drop of the
intake air accounts for maximum 4 % (for pinj = 25.4 bar) of the latent heat at the given
evaporating mass flow. This results in little or no gain in volumetric efficiency since the
incoming air is not significantly changing density. When fuel vaporizes, it increases the gas
volume in the air stream and has the effect of restricting the airflow. This lowers volumetric
efficiency, offsetting any advantage gained by air cooling.
Research on the impact of the injection position on CoV of diesel methanol dual fuel (DMDF)
operation, which is reported here due to the absence of similar studies on pure methanol
operation, find superior injection positions either at the intake port or further downstream
at greater distance to the valve in the inlet duct [15, 18]. Although not investigated by the
authors these findings align well with the mechanisms of fuel transport where a wall film
buildup in the inlet duct gives more time for the charge to become homogeneous prior to
entering the cylinder. Spray-targeting on the intake valve with open valve injection causes
the majority of fuel to travel with the intake air flow directly into the cylinder leading to wall
wetting only at the valve seats. Investigation on preheating intake air for DMDF operation
shows that an increase in brake thermal efficiency can be archived with higher intake air
temperatures, but this also overcomes the charge cooling effect of methanol at some point
again negatively impacting efficiency [36, 64].
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.27: Recordings without injection (a), injection at pinj = 100 bar, pin = 1 bar, λset =
1.6 (b-d), injection at pinj = 100 bar, pin = 1 bar, λset = 1.15 (e) and 30 sec after injection
stop (f).
==PAGE:49==
4.7
Air flow
As stated in the last section, the intake pressure affects the amount of fuel build-up in the
manifold, which in turn affects the fuel pooling and cycle-to-cycle variation. Higher intake
pressures tend to reduce undesired carry-over of fuel into successive cycles [39]. Figure 4.29
gives evidence for this as it shows λ based on exhaust gas composition approaching its set
value (estimated from mass balance) for increasing intake pressure, and the CoV dropping
below 3 % IMEP. This is the lowest value of all conducted experiments. The reduced fuel
loss is reflected in an increase in volumetric efficiency shown in Figure 4.30. A higher intake
airflow allows a larger portion of the fuel to vaporize but simultaneously necessitates more
fuel being injected to maintain the same AFR. Therefore, it cannot be finally concluded if
the increase of intake pressure is benefiting the volumetric efficiency other than by securing
sufficient fuel transport into the cylinder.
Figure 4.28: Equivalence ratio from exhaust
gas composition and set value (dashed) at
CR = 13, EOI @ best CoV.
Figure 4.29: Coefficient of variance at CR =
13, EOI @ best CoV.
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.30: Volumetric efficiency at CR =
13, EOI @ best CoV.
4.8
Multiple (Split) injections
Charge homogeneity can be improved by using multiple (shorter) injections over a single
injection as the interaction between the first and successive injections promotes evapora-
tion by widening the spray plume and enhancing turbulence of the mixture. This concept
is generally known for direct injection engines and reported in several studies[20, 33, 56].
Especially relevant for PFI is the potentially lowered fuel impingement on manifold surfaces.
The spray characteristics of split injection show shortened total spray penetration length as
well as reduced spray impingement on the impact wall. Longer waiting intervals between
injections affect the rate of fuel film development on the walls. They tend to reduce fuel film
buildup.
In this work, only double injection is facilitated as more injections cause a sharp rise in electric
noise tempering with data acquisition and engine controls. It is investigated primarily as
a means to reduce cycle-to-cycle variation, benefiting from enhanced evaporation in the
manifold. However, as Figure 4.32 shows there are no benefits over the previous experiments
with single injection. A likely explanation is that the intake air is saturated and therefore
the theoretical benefit of improved evaporation does not take effect. Another problem arises
from bad injection timing for at least one of the two injections, as it is only possible to place
one injection at the best injection time during the intake stroke (a minimum wait time is
prescribed to 0.4 ms due to noise). The observations on the equivalence ratio displayed in
Figure 4.31 match the previously obtained results (cf. Figure 4.13, 4.22, and 4.28). Note
that lower λ-set (dashed) values are likely caused by fuel carry-over from preceding cycles.
Even if the presented results on double injection do not succeed in reducing cycle-to-cycle
variation the potential of multiple injections is not fully exhausted. A conceivable approach
would be to further shorten injection times and simultaneously increase the number of in-
jections. This would allow three things: First, operation at lower intake pressures (pin <
1.3 bar), which was not possible because minimum injection length limits the AFR on the
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.31: Equivalence ratio and set value
(dashed) for double injection at pinj = 57.4±
0.3 bar, pin = 1.32 ± 0.02 bar, CR = 12.
Figure 4.32:
CoV for double injection at
pinj
=
57.4 ± 0.3 bar,
pin
=
1.32 ±
0.02 bar, CR = 12.
leaner end. At lower intake pressure more fuel buildup was observed implying the need for
improved evaporation. Second, it allows to maintain operation at high injection pressure
over the full λ range again benefiting primary-droplet spray (fuel atomization). Third, very
short injection times resulting in a partial lift of the injector needle are reported to drastically
reduce the liquid phase penetration of the spray [45]. A shorter liquid length most definitely
results in less wall impingement. The electronic controls and the injector itself allow for an
operation at short opening times (cf. Figure 3.3 for ∆tinj < 300µs). This effect presents a
powerful tool to avoid wall impingement. A success of these measures mandatorily requires
an overhauled manifold design facilitating a larger volume reducing the saturation ratio in
the intake charge. A lowered saturation ratio is believed to pave the way for the discussed
measures to take effect. By this, a significant decrease in CoV is expected.
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In this work, engine performance, combustion characteristics, and emissions of high-pressure
PFI on methanol have been experimentally investigated. A CFR engine was therefore mod-
ified to run on methanol by installing an electronically controlled injector at the intake
manifold. First, operation limits on methanol were established namely knocking in depen-
dency of CR and LBL. These were compared with baseline measurements taken on gasoline.
Injection strategies have been extensively tested and refined to evaluate benefits regarding
performance and pollutant formation. Given that early results showed a high variance of
IMEP over successive cycles a thorough investigation into heat release and fuel transport
mechanisms was conducted. Throughout the tests, the engine was warmed up and fixed at
1100 rpm. Ignition timing was adjusted to provide 50 % heat release at 12 CAD ATDC.
The investigation results are summarized as follows:
• Pure methanol PFI was successfully adapted to a CFR engine by altering its manifold
design. Knocking occurred for compression ratios higher than 13, with a lower intensity
for leaner mixtures. The lean burn limit was found at λ = 1.8 for optimal operation
but extensions to λ > 2 are possible.
• Best indicated efficiency ηi = 0.44 was reported at λ ≈1.7 with a corresponding brake
thermal efficiency of ηbth ≈0.30.
• NOx emissions decreased drastically as λ was varied from 1.1 to 2.0 meeting IMO Tier
III limits at λ > 1.7. Emissions of HC, CO, and unburned methanol emissions were
meanwhile increasing. Formaldehyde and methane emissions were below 2 g/kWh for
all test.
• High injection pressures of 60 bar or 100 bar enabled open valve injection for methanol.
Injection timing for open valve injection was found to be best (lowest CoV) when the in-
jection ends some degrees before the highest piston speed at EOI = −270 CAD ATDC.
• High injection pressures were found to support fuel atomization and premixing in the
manifold but saturated intake air was hindering higher evaporation rates.
• Severe wall film buildup was observed in the manifold resulting in uneven fuel trans-
port into the cylinder over successive cycles and a therefore high CoV between 3 to
5 % IMEP for most test conditions. CoV < 3 % IMEP was possible for increased in-
take pressures (pin > 1.35 bar). The actual equivalence ratio of the operating point
was strongly affected by this leading to only λ measurements from exhaust gas com-
position being reliable. This posed difficulties for λ controlled operation of the engine
and negatively impacted efficiency.
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a spark ignition engine
43
==PAGE:53==
Future investigations on the setup of this work should focus on optimization of methanol-air
mixing in the manifold eliminating carry-over of fuel to successive cycles. Promising ap-
proaches are given by revising the manifold design and controlling the intake air temperature
to improve evaporation and ensure a broader stable operating range with low cycle-to-cycle
variations. Pulsing the injection signal can possibly support arising improvements. Methanol
operation enables notably higher efficiencies than gasoline when burned in a spark ignition
engine. This extends to the efficiencies including production and supply. Therefore, for those
applications where fuels synthesized from renewable sources make sense, methanol is more
attractive versus for instance synthetic gasoline from a production efficiency point of view. A
major drawback comes with its need for larger vehicle fuel tanks for a similar range, or that
with the same size of vehicle tank operating range decreases. Port fuel injection systems, as
they are less complex in design and potentially lower in maintenance requirements, present
a good choice for the marine sector where engine service lifespans are long and have proven
to be a promising retrofit solution for vessels.
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S. 2022 Sustainability Report. 2022. url: https : / / www .
maersk.com/~/media_sc9/maersk/corporate/sustainability/files/resources/
2024/ (visited on 08/15/2024).
[2]
A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S. 2023 Sustainability Report. 2023. url: https : / / www .
maersk.com/~/media_sc9/maersk/corporate/sustainability/files/resources/
2022/ (visited on 08/15/2024).
[3]
Marc Alvarado. The changing face of the global methanol industry. 2016. url: https:
//www.methanol.org/the-methanol-industry/ (visited on 10/22/2024).
[4]
Ivan Baxter and Bruce Yeo. An International Historic Mechanical Engineering Land-
mark - The Waukesha CFR Fuel Research Engine. 1980. url: www.asme.org/about-
asme/engineering-history/landmarks/50-cooperative-fuel-research-engine
(visited on 08/24/2024).
[5]
Karl Oskar Bjørgen, N Borsheim, and Terese Løvås. “Momentum Flux Measurements
of Liquid Injection of Ammonia using a GDI Injector”. In: 11th European Combustion
Meeting 2023. May 2023.
[6]
Karl Oskar Pires Bjørgen, David Robert Emberson, and Terese Løvås. “Combustion of
liquid ammonia and diesel in a compression ignition engine operated in high-pressure
dual fuel mode”. In: Fuel 360 (Mar. 2024), p. 130269. issn: 0016-2361. doi: 10.1016/
j.fuel.2023.130269.
[7]
T. A. Boyd. “PATHFINDING IN FUELS AND ENGINES”. In: SAE Technical Paper
Series. GMDMEETING. SAE International, Jan. 1950. doi: 10.4271/500175.
[8]
D. Bradley, G. T. Kalghatgi, and M. Golombok. “Fuel Blend and Mixture Strength
Effects on Autoignition Heat Release Rates and Knock Intensity in S.I. Engines”. In:
SAE Transactions 105 (1996), pp. 2224–2237. issn: 0096736X, 25771531. url: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/44729205 (visited on 12/11/2024).
[9]
D. Bradley et al. “Heat release rates due to autoignition, and their relationship to knock
intensity in spark ignition engines”. In: Symposium (International) on Combustion 26.2
(1996), pp. 2653–2660. issn: 0082-0784. doi: 10.1016/s0082-0784(96)80100-7.
[10]
Matthew Brusstar et al. “High Efficiency and Low Emissions from a Port-Injected
Engine with Neat Alcohol Fuels”. In: SAE Technical Paper Series. FFL. SAE Interna-
tional, Oct. 2002. doi: 10.4271/2002-01-2743.
[11]
Katherine Calvin et al. IPCC, 2023: Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contri-
bution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, H. Lee and J. Romero
(eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland. Ed. by Paola Arias et al. July 2023. doi: 10.
59327/ipcc/ar6-9789291691647.
[12]
Mads Carsten Jespersen, Thomas Østerby Holst Rasmussen, and Anders Ivarsson.
“Widening the operation limits of a SI engine running on neat ammonia”. In: Fuel 358
(Feb. 2024), p. 130159. issn: 0016-2361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2023.130159.
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a spark ignition engine
45
==PAGE:55==
[13]
M. Bahattin Çelik, Bülent Özdalyan, and Faruk Alkan. “The use of pure methanol as
fuel at high compression ratio in a single cylinder gasoline engine”. In: Fuel 90.4 (Apr.
2011), pp. 1591–1598. issn: 0016-2361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2010.10.035.
[14]
Zhifang Chen et al. “Effect of fuel temperature on the methanol spray and nozzle
internal flow”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 114 (Mar. 2017), pp. 673–684. issn:
1359-4311. doi: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.12.025.
[15]
Zhifang Chen et al. “The impact of methanol injecting position on cylinder-to-cylinder
variation in a diesel methanol dual fuel engine”. In: Fuel 191 (Mar. 2017), pp. 150–163.
issn: 0016-2361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2016.11.072.
[16]
M. Costa, U. Sorge, and L. Allocca. “Numerical study of the mixture formation pro-
cess in a four-stroke GDI engine for two-wheel applications”. In: Simulation Mod-
elling Practice and Theory 19.4 (Apr. 2011), pp. 1212–1226. issn: 1569-190X. doi:
10.1016/j.simpat.2010.07.006.
[17]
Banglin Deng et al. “The effect of air/fuel ratio on the CO and NOx emissions for a
twin-spark motorcycle gasoline engine under wide range of operating conditions”. In:
Energy 169 (Feb. 2019), pp. 1202–1213. issn: 0360-5442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.
2018.12.113.
[18]
Jeroen Dierickx et al. “Retrofitting a high-speed marine engine to dual-fuel methanol-
diesel operation: A comparison of multiple and single point methanol port injection”.
In: Fuel Communications 7 (June 2021), p. 100010. issn: 2666-0520. doi: 10.1016/j.
jfueco.2021.100010.
[19]
GL Dnv. “Maritime Forecast to 2050, Energy Transition Outlook 2019”. In: DNV GL,
Høvik, Norway (2019). url: https://www.dnv.com/maritime/hub/decarbonize-
shipping/ (visited on 12/22/2024).
[20]
Qimeng Duan et al. “Improving the lean burn performance of a high compression ratio
methanol engine by multiple-injection”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 236 (Jan.
2024), p. 121481. issn: 1359-4311. doi: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2023.121481.
[21]
Simon Elias Eberhard. “CFD modelling of crevice flow and flame propagation of pre-
mixed methane combustion in a CFR engine, CFD modellering af strømning fra stem-
pelhulrum og flammeubredelse ved forbrænding af forblandet metan i CFR motor”.
und. 2023.
[22]
European Commission. “Directive 2014/94/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council on the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure of 22 October 2014”.
In: Official Journal of the European Union (2014). [Online; accessed 22/12/2024].
url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:
32014L0094&from=EN (visited on 12/22/2024).
[23]
GDI Driver Datasheet. v. 2.1. Life Racing. Essex, UK, Apr. 2021.
[24]
Peter R. Griffiths. Fourier transform infrared spectrometry. Ed. by James A. De Haseth.
2nd ed. Chemical analysis v. 171. Includes bibliographical references and index. Hobo-
ken, N.J: Wiley-Interscience, 2007. 1529 pp. isbn: 9780471194040.
[25]
Arne Güdden. “Methanol combustion systems for heavy-duty and large bore high-speed
engine applications”. en. PhD thesis. 2023, p. 2023. doi: 10.18154/RWTH-2023-04284.
[26]
Ömer L. Gülder. “Laminar burning velocities of methanol, ethanol and isooctane-air
mixtures”. In: Symposium (International) on Combustion 19.1 (Jan. 1982), pp. 275–
281. issn: 0082-0784. doi: 10.1016/s0082-0784(82)80198-7.
[27]
Ellen Hage et al. White Paper: Weighing in Legal Metrology- Use and testing of labo-
ratory balances in legally regulated environments. July 2020.
[28]
John Heywood. Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals 2E. 2nd edition. Includes
bibliographical references and index. - Description based on e-Publication PDF. New
York, N.Y.: McGraw-Hill Education, 2019. 11056 pp. isbn: 1260116107.
==PAGE:56==
[29]
IMO. International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution From Ships (MARPOL
73/78) Annex VI. 2016. url: https://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/
Pages/Decarbonization%5C%20and%5C%20Clean%5C%20air%5C%20in%5C%20shipping.
aspx (visited on 11/25/2024).
[30]
Uncertainty of measurement - Part 3: Guide to the expression of uncertainty in mea-
surement (GUM:1995). Standard. Geneva, CH: International Organization for Stan-
dardization, Apr. 2009.
[31]
Tae-Hwan Joung et al. “The IMO initial strategy for reducing Greenhouse Gas(GHG)
emissions, and its follow-up actions towards 2050”. In: Journal of International Mar-
itime Safety, Environmental Affairs, and Shipping 4.1 (Jan. 2020), pp. 1–7. issn: 2572-
5084. doi: 10.1080/25725084.2019.1707938.
[32]
Mahmut Kaplan. “Influence of swirl, tumble and squish flows on combustion character-
istics and emissions in internal combustion engine-review”. In: International Journal
of Automotive Engineering and Technologies 8.2 (Sept. 2019), pp. 83–102. issn: 2146-
9067. doi: 10.18245/ijaet.558258.
[33]
Jason King and Oliver Böcker. “Multiple Injection and Boosting Benefits for Improved
Fuel Consumption on a Spray Guided Direct Injection Gasoline Engine”. In: Proceed-
ings of the FISITA 2012 World Automotive Congress. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Nov.
2012, pp. 229–241. isbn: 9783642338410. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-33841-0_18.
[34]
K R Koederitz et al. “Break-up of liquid fuel films from the surfaces of the intake port
and valve in port-fuel-injected engines”. In: International Journal of Engine Research
3.1 (Feb. 2002), pp. 37–58. issn: 2041-3149. doi: 10.1243/1468087021545522.
[35]
G. Konig and C. G. W. Sheppard. “End Gas Autoignition and Knock in a Spark Igni-
tion Engine”. In: SAE Transactions 99 (1990), pp. 820–839. issn: 0096736X, 25771531.
url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/44580422 (visited on 12/11/2024).
[36]
Dhananjay Kumar et al. “Experimental investigations of methanol fumigation via port
fuel injection in preheated intake air in a single cylinder dual-fuel diesel engine”. In:
Fuel 324 (Sept. 2022), p. 124340. issn: 0016-2361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2022.124340.
[37]
David R. Lancaster. “Effects of Engine Variables on Turbulence in a Spark-Ignition
Engine”. In: SAE Transactions 85 (1976), pp. 671–688. issn: 0096736X, 25771531. url:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/44644063 (visited on 08/13/2024).
[38]
Karl E Ludvigsen. Classic Racing Engines: Expert Technical Analysis of Fifty of the
Greatest Motorsport Power Units. Bentley Publishers, a division of Robert Bentley,
Incorporated, 2017.
[39]
Robert Meyer and John B. Heywood. “Liquid Fuel Transport Mechanisms into the
Cylinder of a Firing Port-Injected SI Engine During Start Up”. In: SAE Transactions
106 (1997), pp. 1276–1290. issn: 0096736X, 25771531. url: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/44730755 (visited on 12/07/2024).
[40]
Robert Mitchell, Graham Conway, and Yanyu Wang. “A New Methodology for Com-
paring Knock Mitigation Strategies and Their Stability Margin”. In: SAE Technical
Paper Series. ANNUAL. SAE International, Apr. 2023. doi: 10.4271/2023-01-0248.
[41]
C.S. Mørch et al. “Ammonia/hydrogen mixtures in an SI-engine: Engine performance
and analysis of a proposed fuel system”. In: Fuel 90.2 (Feb. 2011), pp. 854–864. issn:
0016-2361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2010.09.042.
[42]
Roberta J. Nichols. The methanol story: A sustainable fuel for the future. Article. Cited
by: 85. 2003. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
0037230686&partnerID=40&md5=fa2ee4084c181ca3461deb077ddc3360.
[43]
George A. Olah, Alain Goeppert, and G. K. Surya Prakash. Beyond Oil and Gas:
The Methanol Economy. Wiley, Sept. 2009. isbn: 9783527627806. doi: 10 . 1002 /
9783527627806.
==PAGE:57==
[44]
Pinaki Pal et al. “Development of a Virtual CFR Engine Model for Knocking Combus-
tion Analysis”. In: SAE International Journal of Engines 11.6 (Apr. 2018), pp. 1069–
1082. issn: 1946-3944. doi: 10.4271/2018-01-0187.
[45]
Raul Payri et al. “Study liquid length penetration results obtained with a direct acting
piezo electric injector”. In: Applied Energy 106 (June 2013), pp. 152–162. issn: 0306-
2619. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.01.027.
[46]
Ather A. Quader. “What Limits Lean Operation in Spark Ignition Engines-Flame
Initiation or Propagation?” In: SAE Technical Paper Series. GMDMEETING. SAE
International, Feb. 1976. doi: 10.4271/760760.
[47]
K. Subba Reddi, H. B. Mathur, and M. K. Gajendra Babu. “Aldehyde Emissions Of
A Methanol Fueled Spark Ignition Engine”. In: SAE Technical Paper Series. FISITA.
SAE International, Jan. 1984. doi: 10.4271/845025.
[48]
Konrad Reif. Gasoline Engine Management. Systems and Components. SpringerLink.
Description based upon print version of record. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wies-
baden, 2015. 354336 pp. isbn: 9783658039646.
[49]
Konrad Reif. Ottomotor-Management im Überblick. Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden,
2015. isbn: 9783658095246. doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-09524-6.
[50]
Gregory Roberts, Bernard Johnson, and Chris Edwards. “Prospects for High-Temperature
Combustion, Neat Alcohol-Fueled Diesel Engines”. In: SAE International Journal of
Engines 7.1 (Apr. 2014), pp. 448–457. issn: 1946-3944. doi: 10.4271/2014-01-1194.
[51]
A. Romano and Z. Yang. “Decarbonisation of shipping: A state of the art survey for
2000–2020”. In: Ocean & Coastal Management 214 (Nov. 2021), p. 105936. issn: 0964-
5691. doi: 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2021.105936.
[52]
MSC Mediterranean Shipping Company SA. 2023 Sustainability Report. 2023. url:
https://www.msc.com/- /media/files/sustainability/reports/ (visited on
08/16/2024).
[53]
Pajarla Saiteja et al. “NOX reduction through various low temperature combustion
technologies”. In: NOx Emission Control Technologies in Stationary and Automotive
Internal Combustion Engines. Elsevier, 2022, pp. 423–459. isbn: 9780128239551. doi:
10.1016/b978-0-12-823955-1.00014-0.
[54]
S. Mani Sarathy et al. “Alcohol combustion chemistry”. In: Progress in Energy and
Combustion Science 44 (Oct. 2014), pp. 40–102. issn: 0360-1285. doi: 10.1016/j.
pecs.2014.04.003.
[55]
J. Sauter. Die Grössenbestimmung der im Gemischnebel von Verbrennungskraftmaschi-
nen vorhandenen Brennstoffteilchen: (Mitteilg aus d. Laboratorium f. techn. Physik d.
Techn. Hochschule München). Forschungsarbeiten auf dem Gebiete des Ingenieurwe-
sens. VDI-Verlag, 1926.
[56]
Lars Schmidt et al. “Multiple Injection Strategies for Improved Combustion Stability
under Stratified Part Load Conditions in a Spray Guided Gasoline Direct Injection
(SGDI) Engine”. In: SAE Technical Paper Series. ANNUAL. SAE International, Apr.
2011. doi: 10.4271/2011-01-1228.
[57]
Andrea Schreiber et al. “Comparative well-to-tank life cycle assessment of methanol,
dimethyl ether, and oxymethylene dimethyl ethers via the power-to-liquid pathway”.
In: Journal of CO2 Utilization 82 (Apr. 2024), p. 102743. issn: 2212-9820. doi: 10.
1016/j.jcou.2024.102743.
[58]
Jingeun Song and Sungwook Park. “EFFECT OF INJECTION STRATEGY ON THE
SPRAY DEVELOPMENT PROCESS IN A SINGLE-CYLINDER OPTICAL GDI
ENGINE”. In: Atomization and Sprays 25.9 (2015), pp. 819–836. issn: 1044-5110. doi:
10.1615/atomizspr.2015012018.
==PAGE:58==
[59]
Spencer C. Sorenson. Internal combustion engine principles. With vehicle applications.
Copenhagen: Automatic Press / VIP, 2017. 519 pp. isbn: 9788792130570.
[60]
Erik Svensson et al. “Potential Levels of Soot, NOx, HC and CO for Methanol Com-
bustion”. In: SAE Technical Paper Series. ANNUAL. SAE International, Apr. 2016.
doi: 10.4271/2016-01-0887.
[61]
Shell International B. V. All Hands on Deck 2.0 Decarbonising Shipping. 2023. url:
https://www.shell.com/business-customers/marine/decarbonising/ (visited
on 08/14/2024).
[62]
J. Vancoillie et al. “The potential of methanol as a fuel for flex-fuel and dedicated
spark-ignition engines”. In: Applied Energy 102 (Feb. 2013), pp. 140–149. issn: 0306-
2619. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.05.065.
[63]
Sebastian Verhelst et al. “Methanol as a fuel for internal combustion engines”. In:
Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 70 (Jan. 2019), pp. 43–88. issn: 0360-
1285. doi: 10.1016/j.pecs.2018.10.001.
[64]
Quangang Wang et al. “Effect of intake pre-heating and injection timing on combustion
and emission characteristics of a methanol fumigated diesel engine at part load”. In:
Fuel 159 (Nov. 2015), pp. 796–802. issn: 0016-2361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2015.07.
032.
[65]
Yanju Wei et al. “Formaldehyde and Methanol Emissions from a Methanol/Gasoline-
Fueled Spark-Ignition (SI) Engine”. In: Energy & Fuels 23.6 (Apr. 2009), pp. 3313–
3318. issn: 1520-5029. doi: 10.1021/ef900175h.
[66]
Yanju Wei et al. “Investigation on injection strategy affecting the mixture formation
and combustion of a heavy-duty spark-ignition methanol engine”. In: Fuel 334 (Feb.
2023), p. 126680. issn: 0016-2361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2022.126680.
[67]
T. Weimer et al. “Methanol from atmospheric carbon dioxide: A liquid zero emis-
sion fuel for the future”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 37.6–8 (June 1996),
pp. 1351–1356. issn: 0196-8904. doi: 10.1016/0196-8904(95)00345-2.
[68]
Fredrik R. Westlye, Anders Ivarsson, and Jesper Schramm. “Experimental investigation
of nitrogen based emissions from an ammonia fueled SI-engine”. In: Fuel 111 (Sept.
2013), pp. 239–247. issn: 0016-2361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2013.03.055.
[69]
Feng Wu et al. “Experimental study of methanol atomization and spray explosion char-
acteristic under negative pressure”. In: Process Safety and Environmental Protection
161 (May 2022), pp. 162–174. issn: 0957-5820. doi: 10.1016/j.psep.2022.03.029.
[70]
Andy Yates, Arthur Bell, and Andre Swarts. “Insights relating to the autoignition
characteristics of alcohol fuels”. In: Fuel 89.1 (Jan. 2010), pp. 83–93. issn: 0016-2361.
doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2009.06.037.
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A
Supplementary data
A.1
Uncertainty contributors
The calculations of uncertainty contributors considered in this work are given in the following.
A.1.1
Uncertainty budget injector calibration
Figure A.1 shows the weight reading from the Sartorious 1712 MP8 balance of three mea-
suring probes used to evaluate the bias b of the balance.
Figure A.1: Sartorious 1712 MP8 balance reading of three probes with a weight of 20 g,
25 g and 30 g respectively. Black line indicates perfect agreement.
The expanded uncertainty is evaluated applying ISO 98-3:2008 “Guide to the Expression of
Uncertainty in Measurement” (GUM) [30]. Table A.1 shows the uncertainty budget associ-
ated with the calibration measurements.
50
Experimental investigation of high-pressure methanol port fuel injection in a spark ignition engine
==PAGE:60==
Table A.1: Uncertainty budget.
1 Maximum permissible error (MPE) from manufacturers specification [27].
Contributor
Estimate
Distribution
Uncertainty
Relative con-
[g]
u [g]
tribution [%]
Readability
ur
0.00001
Rectangular
0.00001
0.01
Reference
up,1
0.00004
Normal
0.00004
0.42
Instrument (MPE 1)
um
0.00050
Normal
0.00025
20.57
Repeatability (procedure)
up,2
0.00049
Normal
0.00049
79.00
Combined uncertainty
uc
0.00055
100
Coverage factor (95% confidence interval) k
2
Expanded uncertainty
U
0.00110
The uncertainty budget is estimated taking the instrument uncertainty and the measuring
procedure into account.
U = k·uc = k ·
q
u2r + u2
p,1 + u2m + u2
p,2
with
k = 2, factor for 95 % confidence level
ur = balance resolution = 0.00001 g
for weight x : 0 g < x < 30 g
up,1 =
v
u
u
t
1
n −1
n
X
i=1
(yi −y)2
with n = 3 and yi from Figure A.1
um = MPE from [27]
up,2 = max


v
u
u
t
1
n −1
n
X
i=1
(yi −y)2

with n = 5 and yi from Equation 3.1
A.1.2
Equivalence ratio from mass balance AFR
Uncertainty from the injector calibration is deemed insignificant and therefore not con-
sidered for the experiments. The contributions included in the uncertainty estimation of
the equivalence ratio calculated from mass balance are given in Table A.2.
The uncer-
tainty is then calculated using the combined uncertainty uc by applying a coverage factor
k = 2 factor for 95 % confidence level:
U = k · uc = k ·
q
u2
λ + u2pinj
Table A.2: Uncertainty contribution for mass balance based air-fuel equivalence ratio.
Contributor
Distribution
λ variance of measurement series
uλ
Normal
pinj variance of measurement series @ SOI
upinj
Normal
A.1.3
Equivalence ratio from exhaust-gas concentration AFR
The contributions included in the uncertainty estimation of the equivalence ratio calculated
from from exhaust-gas concentration are given in Table A.3. The error introduced by the
==PAGE:61==
imperfect fit of the measured spectrum to the calibration spectra of the FTIR is not consid-
ered. The uncertainty is then calculated using the combined uncertainty uc by applying a
coverage factor k = 2 for 95 % confidence level:
U = k · uc = k · uλ
Table A.3: Uncertainty contribution for exhaust-gas concentration based air-fuel equivalence
ratio.
Contributor
Distribution
λ variance of measurement series
uλ
Normal
A.1.4
Manifold pressure
The contributions included in the uncertainty estimation of the manifold pressure are given
in Table A.4.
The uncertainty is then calculated using the combined uncertainty uc by
applying a coverage factor k = 2 for 95 % confidence level:
U = k · uc = k · upin
Table A.4: Uncertainty contribution for manifold (intake) pressure.
Contributor
Distribution
pin variance of measurement series
upin
Normal
A.1.5
Injection pressure
The contributions included in the uncertainty estimation of the injection pressure are given
in Table A.5.
The uncertainty is then calculated using the combined uncertainty uc by
applying a coverage factor k = 2 for 95 % confidence level:
U = k · uc = k · upinj
Table A.5: Uncertainty contribution for injection pressure.
Contributor
Distribution
pinj variance of measurement series @ SOI
upinj
Normal
A.1.6
Engine speed
The contributions included in the uncertainty estimation of the engine speed are given in
Table A.6. The uncertainty is only evaluated once and believed to remain unchanged for all
experiments. It is then calculated using the combined uncertainty uc by applying a coverage
factor k = 2 for 95 % confidence level:
U = k · uc = k · uspeed
Table A.6: Uncertainty contribution for engine speed.
Contributor
Distribution
Speed variance of measurement series
uspeed
Normal
==PAGE:62==
A.2
Complete test matrix
The complete test matrix (Table A.7) displays all conducted experiments in this study. It
states the parameter settings for the investigation of one varied parameter per test series.
Initial testing of system functionality is excluded.
Table A.7: Complete test matrix. Only λ-set value is stated.
*Ignition system altered.
No.
Fuel
SOI
λset
CA50
CR
Aiflow (pin)
pinj
[CAD
[-]
[CAD
[-]
[mol/s]
[bar]
ATDC]
ATDC]
1
Gas.
-360
1.0 ... 1.5
9
6
0.165
25
2
Gas.
-360
1.3
9
6 ... 9
0.165
25
3
Gas.
-360 ... -200
1.3
9
6
0.165
25
4
MeOH
-360
1.0 ... 1.4
9 ± 5
8
0.165
60
5
MeOH
-360
1.15
12
6 ... 14
0.165
60
6
MeOH
-360
1.15 ... 1.85
12
12
0.165
60
7
MeOH
-360 ... -140
1.15
12
12
0.165
60
8
MeOH
-300
1.15 ... 2.1
12
12
0.2
60
9
MeOH
-360 ... -140
1.15
12
10
0.165
60
10
MeOH
-300
1.6
12
13
0.15 ...0.215
60
11
MeOH
-300
1.6 ... 2.15
12
13
0.2
60
12
MeOH
-360 ... -140
1.6
12
13
0.165
60
13
MeOH
-360 ... -140
1.6
12
13
0.165
100
14*
MeOH
-360 ... -160
1.6
12
12
0.165
100
15
MeOH
-280
1.6
12
13
0.165 ... 0.23
100
16
MeOH
-320 ... -280
1.6 ... 185
12
12
0.165
25 ... 100
17
MeOH
-330 ... -315
1.45 & 1.7
12
12
0.165 & 0.23
60
A.3
Fuel supply system
The fuel supply system is designed to supply the Injector with pressurized fuel from a tank.
The design is necessary, since the CFR engine is not equipped with a setup handling liquid
fuels. Originally it was fitted with a carburetor that has been removed to benefit gaseous
fuel usage. A hydraulic sketch of the system is given in Figure A.2. Its original design has
been constructed in a separate work prior to the thesis but improvements where implemented
during this work. A fuel reservoir was placed in the line leading to the injector (red) and
additional drainage valves where added in the pump (black) as well as the injector (red) line.
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.2: Fuel system layout for injector (INJ) operation with fuel tank (TK) supplied by a pump (PMP), pressurized by nitrogen (N) and
depressurized through a needle valve (V4) leading to an exhaust (EXH). Also shown is the setup, to ensure monitoring and safety: the pressure
gauges (G1 - G3) and a pressure transducer (PT) as well as control valves (V1, V2 and V4), check valve (CHK), and pressure relief valve
(PRV1 and PRV2). A filter (F) and a separator (SEP).
==PAGE:64==
A.4
Setup photographs
Figure A.3: Modified single cylinder 1949 Waukesha CFR engine used in this work.
Figure A.4: Custom manifold of the CFR engine showing the injector and air supply as well
as two connections for feeding gaseous fuels (not used in this work).
==PAGE:65==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Alle, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.construct.dtu.dk
