==PAGE:1==
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezo­
cone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure
Measurements
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pres­
sure Measurements
Master Thesis
January, 2025
By
Ioana Popescu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for DTU Sustain, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of geotechnical engi­
neering.
Ioana Popescu ­ s222692
Signature
Date
ii
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Poor saturation of the piezocone is an ackwnoledged source of error and it can con­
tribute significantly to CPT data uncertainty. The main problem with this uncertainty is
that piezocone saturation and related CPT data quality can only be assessed once the
test is completed and time and resources have been spent. Despite this, there is relatively
little documentation about the main reasons associated with poor saturation and their fre­
quency. This projects analyses a large CPT database from the Netherlands to investigate
the frequency with which different factors result in poor saturation conditions, namely the
operators, the setup, the stratigraphy. The frequency of this source of error is compared
to others (such as tip resistance and sleeve friction).
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ioana Popescu, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Heartfelt appreciation goes to Irene Rocchi and Efthymios Panagiotis for their continuous
guidance and unwavering support throughout the journey of this thesis.
To my cherished family and friends, your constant support and belief in my capabilities
were the cornerstone of this academic pursuit.
iv
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Introduction to Piezocone Testing (CPTu)
3
2.1
Cone Penetrometer and Filter Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Saturation of Piezocone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Hydrostatic Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Dissipation Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
CPT Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Data Collection Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Summary of Fieldwork . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Ground Conditions/ Stratigraphy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
Geotechnical Drill Rig
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.6
CPTU Testing Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.7
Operational Practices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.8
CPTu Interpretation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.9
Pore Water Pressure Dissipation Testing (PPDT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.10 Tools and Software Used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Results
19
4.1
Examples of Tests with Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Occurrences of Cavitation and Excess Pore Pressure
. . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Occurrences of Cavitation and Excess Pore Pressure by Type of Soil
. . . 24
4.4
Analysis of Sources of Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.5
Stratigraphy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.6
Sources of errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.7
Dissipation Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Conclusions
39
Bibliography
41
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Civil Engineering plays a crucial role in infrastructure development, and it continually
seeks innovative methods to improve the current techniques, including geotechnical in­
vestigations. Cone penetration testing with pore pressure measurements (CPTu) is widely
employed in site investigation, as it allows for the accurate characterization of the subsoil
conditions and the estimation of various geotechnical properties, both mechanical and hy­
draulic. Both accurate subsurface characterization and reliable estimation of geotechnical
parameters are critical for the design of geotechnical structures. Hence, it is of upmost im­
portance to obtain accurate measurements of the tip resistance, sleeve friction and pore
pressure in order to ensure reliable infrastructure designs. Usually, when structures are
designed, safety factors are taken into account in order to avoid uncertainties. Although,
these safety factors enhance reliability, they also lead to increased construction cost and
a higher environmental impact because of increased resources used.
Poor saturation of the piezocone is an acknowledged source of error, and it can con­
tribute significantly to CPT data uncertainty. The main problem with this uncertainty is
that piezocone saturation and related CPT data quality can only be assessed once the
test is completed, and time and resources have been spent. Despite its acknowledged
impact, there is relatively little documentation about the main reasons associated with
the primary causes of poor saturation and their frequency in piezocone testing scenarios
[1]. Addressing this gap is crucial for advancing the understanding of CPTu practices and
improving the reliability and the sustainability impact of geotechnical designs.
The degree of saturation in porous filters play a vital role in the reliability of pore pressure
measurement [1]. It has been reported that the incomplete saturation is known persistent
problem. It affects tht measurements of pore pressure and also the derived parameters
such as tip resistance corrections and the stratigraphy [1]. Incomplete saturation often
leads to inaccuracies in mechanical and hydraulic property estimations, particularly in
layered or highly variable soil profiles [2].
1.1
Problem Statement
Cone Penetration Testing with pore­pressure measurements (CPTU) offers information
regarding stratigraphy, mechanical and hydraulic properties of soils. There are poten­
tial errors in the measurements due to malfunctioning of the piezocone equipment, poor
calibration and maintenance, but also a lack of complete saturation [1]. Accurate mea­
surements of the pore pressure are essential to get reliable results. One acknowledged
sources of errors behind poor measurements are the lack of saturation of the porous filter
of the piezocone. The main problem is that the issue can be assessed at the end of the
test. Additionally, there could be other error sources in piezocone testing with respect to
pore pressure measurements.
Regardless of the size of the project, these uncertainties could cause drastic problems,
as unreliable measurements can lead to conservative or unsafe designs, that could cause
structural failure. Despite the importance of this issue, there is limited research that ad­
dresses the frequency, causes, and effects of poor saturation in CPTu testing. This study
addresses the following key problem: how do different operational practices, equipment
configurations, and geological conditions contribute to incomplete saturation during CPTu
testing, and what is the impact of this issue on the accuracy of pore pressure measure­
ments and subsequent geotechnical designs?
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Objective of the Study
By shedding light on factors contributing to poor saturation, this research aims to en­
hance the accuracy of CPT results, and therefore improve the reliability of the geotechni­
cal data enabling both a sustainable and cost­effective engineering practices. Added to
that, understanding the causes of poor saturation conditions opens the door to optimize
testing protocols, improved training for operators, better equipment design and mainte­
nance along with a refined testing approach which can contribute to a more consistent
and accurate set of results. This has broader implications for reducing material wastage,
minimizing environmental impact, and lowering the overall costs associated with infras­
tructure development.
The study builds on recent findings that highlight the role of saturation conditions in de­
termining data quality [1]. For example, poorly saturated piezocones often produce un­
reliable pore pressure profiles, which complicates the classification of soil stratigraphy
and the estimation of consolidation parameters [3]. Improved saturation practices have
the potential to resolve these issues, as demonstrated in controlled experiments and field
tests.
This project analyses three large CPT database from the Netherlands, the United King­
dom and Belgium to investigate the frequency with which different factors result in poor
saturation conditions, namely the operators, the setup and the stratigraphy.
The fre­
quency of this source of error is compared to others (such as tip resistance and sleeve
friction). By determining the factors that lead to poor pore pressure measurements, this
research aims to reduce uncertainties in geotechnical data and providing actionable in­
sights for both the scientific community and practicing engineers.
1.3
Thesis Structure
This thesis is divided in 5 main sections with their own section.
• Section 1: Introduction
It provides a short overview of the background, the problem statement, the research ob­
jectives and the scope of this study.
• Section 2: Theoretical Background
In this chapter, the current studies and theories related to the interpretation of CPTu mea­
surements and the problems related to errors in pore pressure measurements are dis­
cussed.
• Section 3: Methodology
It outlines the steps undertaken in order to collect the data, to interpret the results, to
perform the statistical analysis and the factors affecting the pore pressure measurements.
• Section 4: Results
Here are presented the outcomes from the statistical analysis of the CPTu data, identifying
key factors contributing to poor saturation and their impact on data accuracy.
• Section 5: Conclusion
This section summarizes the key findings and provides recommendations for improving
CPTu testing practices.
2
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:11==
2
Introduction to Piezocone Testing
(CPTu)
The purpose of geotechnical investigations is to identify the soil layers, the ground water
condition and implicitly to determine the physical and mechanical properties of the soil.
The main advantages of the Cone Penetration Test (CPT) over other in situ tests are
efficiency, continuous soil data measurement, and repeatability [2]. The test can be used
both onshore and offshore, providing a wide range of applications. The first CPT was first
developed in 1932 as a mechanical cone. Throughout the years it has been continuously
improved to be operated as an electric cone. Furgo developed the first electric cone in
1965 and later in 1974, the cone was further improved and it included measurements
of pore water pressures. Over the last decades, Cone Penetration Test with pore water
mesurements (CPTu) have seen considerable growth in its use [2].
A cone­shaped probe is driven into the ground at a constant rate during the test, which
measures the cone resistance (qc), the friction (fs) and the pore water pressure (u2) as
the probe penetrates the soil. Different dimensions of the cone penetrometers can be
used to perform the tests depending on the soil conditions. The most common used cone
penetroeters have a size of 10cm2 and 15cm2 [4]. Figure2.2 illustrated the different sizes
of the cone and their manufacturing and operating tolerances. The qc value reflects the
soil’s resistance to the cone’s penetration, providing information on soil strength. The fs
represents the friction along the sleeve. Lastly, u2 is the pore water pressure, crucial for
assessing drainage conditions during penetration, especially in fine­grained soils. These
parameters are essential for geotechnical analysis and soil classification [4]. Figure 2.1
presents the elements of a CPT as well as the location of the filter elements which measure
the pore pressures: u1, u2, and u3, where:
• u1: measured on the face of the cone.
• u2: measured on the cylindrical section of the cone (in the gap between the cone
and the sleeve).
• u3: measured just behind the friction sleeve.
Figure 2.1: Terminology for cone penetrometers [5]
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Dimensional tolerances for 10 cm2 and 15cm2 piezocone tips [6]
The measurements of the porous element located behind the tip cone u2 presents more
advantages over the other locations as these values will be used in to determine the
correction of the cone resistance qt, presented in Equation 2.5. Additionally, the element
is less prone to damage and has fewer compressibility effects. Though, in shallow layers
of dense sands the measurements of the pore pressure u2 may present cavitation due to
a zone of dilatation behind the cone in drained soils [6].
Figure 2.3: Designs for cone penetrometers (a) tip and sleeve load cells in compression,
(b) tip load cell in compression and sleeve load cell in tension, (c) subtraction type load
cell design [4]
4
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:13==
The resistance to penetration is measured using strain gauge load cells. The measure­
ment of the tip resistance and sleeve resistance can be measured using either separate
load cells or subtraction load cells. The subtraction cones determine the sleeve friction by
subtracting the tip load from the tip and friction load. The subtraction cones experiences
an inadequate measurement of the sleeve resistance due to variable zero load stability
of the two load cells [5]. Figure 2.3 illustrates the difference between compression and
substraction cones.
The filter’s surface should have the same dimensions as the shape of the cone. The filter
should be placed in the middle third of the conical part. Usually, the cone resistance has
high values in sand layers and low values in clays, whereas the friction ratio experiences
the opposite trend [5].
2.1
Cone Penetrometer and Filter Element
The cone penetrometer usually has internal load sensors which measure the cone resis­
tance, the sleeve friction and the pore pressure at least in one point on the surface of
the cone penetrometer, as already presented in Figure 2.1. According to the Eurocode
[5], the measurements of the pore pressure are influenced by the soil type, in situ pore
pressure and the location of the filter on the cone penetrometer surface. The value of
the pore pressure is made up of the original in situ pore pressure and the excess pore
pressure due to the penetration of the cone into the ground. In order to get accurate
results, all the sensors should be calibrated prior to penetration.
The filter element used to measure the pore pressure consists of plastic, sintered steel or
bronze, or ceramic. Pore sizes typically range from 20 to 200 microns. Each material used
present its own benefits. Hard soil grains can smear metallic element apertures, reducing
the system’s dynamic response, therefore they are usually used for the shoulder filter
positions. When loaded, the ceramic elements are prone to being cracked due to their
brittle behaviour. Polypropylene plastic elements are used in practice, specifically at the
shoulder. High­density polyethylene, HDPE, or high­density polypropylene, HDPP should
not be used when the aim to to detect contaminants [6].
The filter for the measurement of pore pressure u2 should be placed in or behind the
cylindrical part of the cone. At the onset of the tests, the filter’s initial diameter should be
the same as the diameter of the friction sleeve and the cylindrical part of the cone, with a
tolerance limit of ­0.1 mm to 0 mm [5].
(d2 −0.1) ≤dfil ≤dc
(2.1)
The filter should be located as close as possible to space between the cone and the friction
sleeve. Significant deformation during loading it is not expected. During loading, the
sensor is not expected to show considerable deformation. It is connected to the porous
filter on the surface of the cone penetrometer through a liquid­filled chamber. To get
accurate results, the measuring system should be as rigid as possible [5].
Negative pore pressure measurements when the filter is located behind the cone u2 might
occur when the cone penetrates very dense sand or over­consolidated clay layers. This
can lead to occurrences of cavitation and de­saturation of the pore pressure measurement
system. The layer below might have errors in the measurements [2].
Moreover, it was figured out that the size of the filer may have an impact on the pore
pressure measurements, however there is not enough data to know the impact of this
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
5
==PAGE:14==
factor [Lunne].
2.2
Saturation of Piezocone
The pore pressure measuring system should be rigid and complete saturation of the fol­
lowing elements is required:
• the filter
• the channel or tube between the filter and the transducer
• the transducer housing cavity
Prior to the test, the filter has to be saturated and should be kept saturated throughout the
testing, even in the deep layers that are unsaturated. There are different fluids that can
be used for the saturation of the porous filter element: such as glycerine or silicone oil,
because they are stiff viscous layers that present less changes for cavitation to occur. Ad­
ditionally, water can also be used as a fluid, only if the entire sounding will be submerged
or if the dynamic response does not play a significant role [6].
The electronic piezocone penetrometer tip determines the pore water pressures on its
exterior side by a pressure transfer through a de­aired fluid system to an internal pressure
transducer. For accurate data, the system should be fully saturated before performing the
test. All the air that enters the system should be eliminated, otherwise the results will be
inaccurate due to the lag in response caused by the compression of air bubbles [6].
There are different methods to fully saturate the transmitting fluid and the porous element.
One method is to place the cone tip and element inside a pressurized chamber and then
to slightly expose them to pressure fluctuations. The system is properly saturated if the
comparison between the applied pressure and sensor response are the same. Immersing
the elements in pure glycerin or silicone oil bath, where vacuum is applied at 90% of one
atmosphere. The vacuum should be applied until the air bubbles are eliminated, as well
as using ultrasonic vibration and low heat. The process takes between 4 hours up to 24
hour. The outcome varies depending on the viscosity of the fluid and the pore size of the
filter element. Another way is to boil the elements in water for at least 4 hours, however
damages can be seen or to acquire pre­saturated filer elements. The de­aired elements
can be stored until being ready to be used. In the case of water, the elements need to be
de­aired again one day prior to use [6].
When the test is performed, it should follow the manufacturer recommendations. All the
elements of the piezocone should be put together and the fluid chambers should be im­
mersed in the same fluid used to de­air the elements. By tightening the cone tip, the flat
surfaces are sealed. When water is used as a saturation liquid, the system is protected
from evaporation by placing the porous element in a plastic bag filled with fluid [6].
When the cone penetrates first an unsaturated soil, it is not possible to keep the filter
saturated and therefore different practices could be applied such as: pre­boring or drilling
a small hole to reach the water table. In most of the situations, the piezocone fluid sys­
tem experiences cavitation when the cone penetrated layers of unsaturated soil or sand
layers that have a dilative behavior below the water table. The system can recuperate
the saturation with depth, as the air bubbles are forced back into solution [6]. Filters that
become obstructed should not be used [5].
6
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Hydrostatic Pressure
The groundwater conditions are considered to be hydrostatic, however there are situations
when this is not possible, such as an inclined terrain where there is lateral flow [7]. The
behavior of non­plastic fines content on excess pore water pressure was explored, and
it was concluded that the bigger the fines content in sand­silt mixtures, the higher the
excess pore water pressure will be [8]. From the dissipation tests, it was observed that
the equilibrium pore pressure is reached in a short time for cohesiveness soils, whereas
for clays it takes longer. In the case where the hydrostatic pressure is different than the in
situ pore pressure, it is ideal to carry out dissipation tests to comprehend the piezometric
profile better [7].
2.4
Dissipation Tests
When the cone penetrometer is held stationary at any depth, any existent pore water
pressure will dissipate. Hence, the dissipation tests measure the change of pore pressure
with time during a halt in penetration [5]. When performing cone penetration tests in
fine­grained soils such as: clays and silts, pore pressures will be generated and their
measurement is important.
In the case of soils with low OCR, the measurements of the pore pressure with the element
located both on the cone u1 and behind the cone u2 are reliable. Nevertheless, in stiff
soils with high OCR the u2 measurements can be affected by local equalization, making
it challenging to interpret the dissipation data[2].
The IRTP guidelines issued by ISSMFE suggest that the u2 position is the most suitable
for pore pressure measurements. However, in cases where a stiff, high OCR, fine­grained
soil is encountered, and the pore pressures measured at behind the cone are significantly
low, it may be advantageous to switch to measuring pore pressures at the u1 position
during field operations. When interpreting pore pressures recorded at u1 in stiff soils, it
is crucial to either prevent, reduce, or account for potential inaccuracies caused by the
compression of the filter element [7].
Depending on the soil type, the pore pressure behaves in different ways depending on
the type of soil. For example, the pore pressure located behind the code u2 can give the
following:
• soft to medium stiff clays can give very high pore pressures
• very stiff overconsolidated clays can give very low or negative pore pressures
• very dense fine or silty sands can give very low or negative pore pressures
• contractive silts can give high positive pore pressures
• dilative silts can also give low or negative pore pressures [7]
2.5
CPT Interpretation
One of the vital utilization of the CPT is for determining the stratigraphy of the soil and
its type. The method used to predict the soil type based on CPT is called Soil Behavior
Type (SBT) [7]. In more recent studies, Robertson (2009) introduced an updated stress
normalization technique that allows for variation in the stress exponent (n) based on the
soil behavior type and the effective overburden stress. To make the application of SBTn
chart easier, the normalized cone parameters Qtn and Fr can be combined to result in
one equation leading to the Soil Behavior Type index, Icn.
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
7
==PAGE:16==
Icn =
[
(3.47 −log Qtn)2 + (log Fr + 1.22)2]0.5
(2.2)
Where: Fr = The normalized friction ratio
The soil type will be classified according to the obtained Icn value as follows:
Table 2.1: Soil Behavior Type Table
Zone
Soil Behavior Type
Ic
1
Sensitive, fine grained
N/A
2
Organic soils – clay
> 3.6
3
Clays – silty clay to clay
2.95 −3.6
4
Silt mixtures – clayey silt to silty clay
2.60 −2.95
6
Sands – clean sand to silty sand
1.31 −2.05
7
Gravelly sand to dense sand
< 1.31
8
Very stiff sand to clayey sand*
N/A
9
Very stiff, fine grained*
N/A
When the stress exponent n is smaller than 1, the value is adjusted iteratively to improve
soil behavior characterization. For n = 1, the normalized tip resistance Qtn simplifies to
the corrected tip resistance Qt.
n = 0.381 · Icn + 0.05
(σ′
v0
Pa
)
−0.15
(2.3)
Qtn =
(qt −σv0
Pa
) ( Pa
σ′
v0
)n
(2.4)
The cone resistance qc needs to be corrected because pore pressure is developed behind
the cone, and the cone resistance measured during test is smaller. To account for this,
the cone resistance is adjusted to obtain the corrected tip resistance qt, using the formula
in (2.5). This adjustment ensures that the soil parameters used in design are reliable and
accurate.
qt = qc + u2 · (1 −α)
(2.5)
The net area ratio a is determined from laboratory calibration. It is the ratio of the cross­
sectional area of the shaft of the cone penetrometer above the cone.
Once the cone resistance has been corrected, it is also important to adjust the friction ratio,
Rf. This is done by factoring in the sleeve friction, fs, and applying Equation Equation 2.6.
The friction ratio is expressed as a percentage, representing the ratio of sleeve friction to
cone resistance at the same depth [4].
Rf = (fs/qt) · 100
(2.6)
8
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:17==
The unit weight of the soil γ can be approximated using the CPT results, following the
relationship below:
γ/γw = 0.27 [log Rf] + 0.36
[
log
( qt
Pa
)]
+ 1.236
(2.7)
Where:
γw = unit weight of water
qt = corrected tip resistance
Pa = reference atmospheric pressure, 1 atm
Vertical stresses exerted by the soil is the penetration depth multiplied by the unit weight
of the soil as in the following equation:
σv0 = γs · zsoil
(2.8)
Where:
γs = unit weight of the soil
zsoil = depth of the soil layer
While the vertical effective stress is the vertical stresses less the in­situ equilibrium pore
pressure u0:
σ′
v0 = σv0 −u0
(2.9)
The normalized friction ratio Fr is defined as the ratio of sleeve friction to the net cone
resistance expressed as a percentage, as in the equation below:
Fr =
(
fs
qt −σv0
)
× 100
(2.10)
2.5.1
OCR Interpretation
The OCR is the ratio of the maximum effective consolidation stress that the soil has en­
countered σ′
p over the current efective overburden stress σ′
v [2]. The following approach
can be applied (Agaiby and Mayne, 2019):
OCR = σ′
p
σ′v
(2.11)
where:
σ′
p = 0.33 · qm′
n
(2.12)
The yield stress exponent m‘ depends on the type of soil.
m′ = 1 −
0.28
1 +
( Icn
2.65
)2.5
(2.13)
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
9
==PAGE:18==
The net cone resistance is:
qn = qt −σv
(2.14)
2.6
State of the Art
Since the cone penetration with pore pressure measurements was proposed, there have
been defects associated with the saturation of the piezocone. A study has shown concern
for the good saturation of the pore pressure measurement system. Figure 2.4 shows the
different measured results of the pore pressure [2]. In order to obtain reliable
This is due to either incomplete saturation or loss of saturation of the pore­pressure system
[9]. Although this problem is long acknowledged, little research has been carried out [3].
Therefore, this issue is a paramount source of uncertainty and the inaccuracies continue
to affect the results. Additionally, despite the availability of well described practices to be
followed in order to achieve the full saturation of the piezocone­system, the data quality
is poor.
Figure 2.4: Different measurements of pore pressure measurements [2]
For more resent information, I. Rocchi and A.D. Zhelezova [1] discussed about the current
challenges and practices related to piezocone saturation. To better understand the current
practices used by engineers, they have performed a survey in different countries such
as Norway, Sweden, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, France, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom, and Australia. The outcomes of the study suggested that many practitioners
encounter issues related to pore pressure measurements, in particular saturation issues.
Although these issues are known, there is no methodology to ensure proper saturation.
Hence, this study emphasises the importance of taking careful attention to fully saturating
the elements before performing the tests, as this could potentially minimise the errors [1].
10 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:19==
3
Methodology
This project primary focus on how often data quality issues associated with filter saturation
are encountered and investigates factors contributing to these issues (e.g., stratigraphy,
different cone types etc.). The CPTu data utilized in the present piece of work was col­
lected from several countries, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium and Ger­
many. The reason behind incorporating data from these different locations is to provide a
broader dataset, making it possible to investigate the frequency with which different fac­
tors result in poor saturation conditions, such as operational practices, equipment setup
variations, and geological stratigraphy. The focus is on identifying similarities within the
processed data from each location. Additionally, the frequency of this error source will
be then compared to other factors, such as variability in tip resistance and sleeve friction,
to provide a more comprehensive understanding of its relative impact on the accuracy of
CPTU results. The methodology section sheds light on the adopted approach throughout
the present research work to analyse and present the study outcomes, beginning with
data preparation, preliminary analysis, and concluding with the final outcomes.
3.1
Data Collection Process
Various open­access data portals were accessed to source the original dataset utilized in
this research project. The portals are presented in Table 3.1. The initial phase focused
on the acquisition of databases containing both site­specific as well as interpretation re­
ports. One significant challenge in this phase was the fact that the initial datasets were
presented in diverse formats. To address this matter, the files containing the datasets
were all standardized into the ’.xlsx’ format making sure that uniformity is present across
all datasets. This resulted in a consolidated database enabling consistency and compa­
rability between the examined regions. Only significant error free datasets were selected
for analysis.
Table 3.1: Data Portals
Location
Portal
UK
marinedataexchange.co.uk
Belgium
offshore.digital­database.economie.fgov.be
Germany
pinta.bsh.de
Netherlands (Ijmuiden Ver Wind Farm)
offshorewind.rvo.nl
Netherlands (Amsterdam)
dinoloket.nl
Discontinuous CPTu tests were performed in Germany where data gaps were noted re­
sulting in the exclusion of these tests. Additionally, for the Amsterdam region, subsurface
information for the entire country were provided rather than project­specific datasets which
presented a challenge in identifying tests with pore pressure measurement. Among the 50
initially selected tests, only one included the relevant pore pressure measurement data. A
subsequent selection of another 50 tests resulted in no pore pressure results. In a broader
effort to obtain the required data, a larger pool of 1000 tests was thoroughly examined, but
only 30 included pore pressure measurement, and these were distributed across multiple
locations rather than being concentrated in a single area. Therefore, Amsterdam region
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
11
==PAGE:20==
was completely excluded from the analysis. Focusing on only 3 sites, ensured that the
results have a high degree of reliability and consistency.
Table 3.2: Tests Performed across All Sites
Country
The United Kingdom
Belgium
The Netherlands
CPTu tests
147
70
238
Company
Danish Geotechnical Institute
Geoquip Marine
Fugro
3.2
Locations
This section presents the locations for each country involved in the study: the United
Kingdom, Belgium, and the Netherlands.
The data from the UK is part of the geotechnical investigation for The Greater Gabbard
Offshore Wind Farm Project. The site is located approximately 26 km off the Suffolk
Coast at Felixstowe/Hollesley Bay, as it can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Location of The Greater Gabbard Offshore Wind Farm Project [10]
In Belgium, the dataset belongs to the design and installation of a windfarm in the Princess
Elisabeth Zone, which comprises three areas designated for renewable energy production
and electricity transmission: Noordhinder Noord (Zone 2), Noordhinder Zuid (Zone 3), and
Fairybank (Zone 4). These zones are located approximately 40 km northwest of the Port
of Zeebrugge. The site is divided into two geotechnical survey areas: the Northern zone
(Zone 2) and the Southern zone (Zones 3 and 4) as it can be seen in Figure 3.2.
12 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: Geotechnical Survey Areas: Northern and Southern Zones of the Princess
Elisabeth Windfarm [11]
Moreover, dataset from the Netherlands is associated with the geotechnical site investi­
gation and installation of a windfarm at the IJmuiden Ver (IJV) Wind Farm Zone, located
in the Dutch sector of the North Sea. The IJV WFZ is situated around 62 km off the west
coast of the Netherlands, as shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Location of the IJmuiden Ver Designated Wind Farm Site [12]
The site is divided into four distinct regions, labeled I, II, III, and IV. The zones are classified
as either high­priority or low­priority areas, as shown in Figure3.4.
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: Priority Zones at the IJmuiden Ver Wind Farm Site [12]
3.3
Summary of Fieldwork
In the United Kingdom, a number of 138 CPTu were carried out, along with 9 CPTus used
for the Cable Route Corridors. In Belgium, the tests included CPTUs, and Downhole
CPTUs. In Netherlannds, there have been performed seafloor piezocone penetration
tests (PCPTs). All the tests are presented in the Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Tests Performed
Test Type
UK
Belgium
Netherlands
Seabed PCPT
147
­
252
Seafloor SCPTs
­
­
61
Continuous Sampling BH
­
17
­
CPTUs
­
75
­
Total
147
92
313
The completed fieldwork are summarized for the UK, Belgium and the Netherlands in
Appendix A, B and C.
3.4
Ground Conditions/ Stratigraphy
3.4.1
Belgium
The project is divided into two regions: northern zone and south zone. Both zones present
similar site conditions. The superficial sediments are made up of gravelly to dense sands,
alternating with layers of sands. It has a variable thickness, being up to approximately 35
meters in some areas while the average is around 7.5 meters. These sediments are
underlain by clay and silt mixtures soils.
14 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:23==
3.4.2
The Netherlands
The stratigraphy consists of sand layers. From around 20m depth there are also prominent
layers of clays. In some areas the clay and sand layers alternate. Additionally, in some
locations there are some layers of clay and silt between 10m and 25m and 40 and 60m.
3.4.3
The United Kingdom
In the initial 4 meters there are layers of sands and sand mixtures. Some of the locations
present sand mixtures in the first 3.5 meters, while in some locations there are sand and
gravelly to dense sands in the initial 4 meters. The underlain layers consists of silt mixtures
and clays.
3.5
Geotechnical Drill Rig
CPTU and sampling locations were completed using the GMR600, GMR602 and SCOPE
rigs. The GMR600 and GMR602 are heave­compensated marine drill rigs, while the
SCOPE is a heavy­duty seabed CPT­rig.
Table 3.4: Drilling Rig
Location
UK
Belgium
Netherlands
2*Drill Rig
SCOPE
GMR600
2*non­drilling deployment mode
GMR602
The main details of the drill rigs are summarised in Table 3.6.
Table 3.5: Drilling Rigs Specifications
Country
Belgium
Belgium
UK
Drilling Rig
GMR600
GMR602
SCOPE
Type
Rotary marine drill
Rotary marine drill
Heavy marine CPT
rig,
modular,
8­20
ton ballast, suitable
for
depths
up
to
350m
Heave Compensation
4.0m passive stroke
with nitrogen buffer
0­4m
effective
stroke for drill string
and seabed unit
Up to 10◦
inclina­
tion adjustment on
seabed
Drill Mud
Seawater­miscible
biodegradable Guar
Gum
4,000L mix, 8,000L
storage, Guar Gum
seawater­miscible
Not specified
Seabed Frame
12t,
hydraulic
clamps,
sub­sea
transponder, limited
to 6◦
12t,
hydraulic
clamps, 4.0m com­
pensation
Adjustable up to 10◦
Downhole Tools
Hydraulic
piston/­
push
sampler,
percussion/hammer
sampler
Wireline piston/push
sampler, heavy­duty
percussion
Not specified
Downhole in situ Testing
WISON CPT, 3.0m
stroke,
10
cm2
cones
APB
Wison
CPT,
measures pore pres­
sure
and
seismic
velocity
CPT rods with 10
cm2 cones
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 15
==PAGE:24==
3.6
CPTU Testing Procedure
The tests were performed in agreement with different procedures as presented in Table
3.6.
Table 3.6: Testing Procedures
Netherlands
Belgium
UK
ISSMGE (1999)
ISO 19901­8
ISOPT1 (1988)
ASTM (2020)
GEOQUIP procedures
ISO (2012)
ISO (2014)
Eurocode 7 (CEN,2007)
3.7
Operational Practices
Table 3.7 outlines the key specifications of the CPTU cones used in the project.
Table 3.7: Specifications of CPTU Testing Cones in Different Countries
Country
Belgium
Netherlands
United Kingdom
2*Cone Type
Compression
2*Piezo­cone penetrometers
2*Van den Berg
Subtraction
Cone Area
10 cm2
15 cm2
10 cm2
Angle
60 deg
Not specified
60 deg
2*Calibration Standard
2*Local Standards
Contract Specifications
2*Fugro Procedures
GEO Procedures
2*Calibration Details
All CPTU cones calibrated
2*Not available
2*Not available
prior to the project
Penetration Rate
2 cm/s
2 cm/s
2 cm/s
Pore Pressure
2*Not specified
2*Not specified
Saturated in glycerine
Filter Saturation
prior to deployment
Filter Location
Behind the cone tip
Behind the cone tip
Behind the cone tip
3.8
CPTu Interpretation
The analysis process focuses on showing the steps taken in order to interpret the tests.
For each location, a spreadsheet was structured with the measured results of each tests:
the depth (z), the cone tip resistance (qc), sleeve friction (fs), and pore pressure (u). Also
the X and Y coordinates of each test was included in the spreadsheet. The soil was
interpreted following the steps outlined in the Theoretical Background. For better data
visualization, different plots have been realized, such as
• Cone tip resistance (qt) versus depth (z)
• Sleeve friction (fs) versus depth (z)
• Pore pressure (u2) versus depth (z)
• Stratigraphy
The hydrostatic pressure was plotted on top of the pore pressure plot and it is marked by
a red line. The cavitation and hydrostatic pressure occurrences have been showed on
the plot. Cavitation is considered to occur when the pore water pressure u2 is negative
with a tolerance of 0.05 MPa, while hydrostatic points are considered when the in­site
pore pressure u2 is different than the hydrostatic pressure u0 for sand mixtures and silt
mixtures. A tolerance of 0.005 has been taken into account. At some locations, the test
16 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:25==
was interrupted and therefore another test has been performed. Hence, the results of
both tests have been plotted. Figure 3.5 illustrates the results of the CPTu interpretation.
Figure 3.5: Example of CPTu interpretation
Different plots have been created for each location: individual ones for each test and a
combined graph of all the tests. The individual pltos also included the stratigraphy.
3.9
Pore Water Pressure Dissipation Testing (PPDT)
PPDT testing consists of stopping a CPT test mid­push and recording the pore pressure
over time. The analysis of pore water pressure dissipation tests (PPDT) was carried out
in order to determine the consolidation behavior of soil under varying stress conditions.
At 2 of the locations, pore water pressure dissipation tests have been performed. In
Belgium, 9 PPDT tests were performed at 7 locations, whereas in the Netherlands, 137
PPDTs at 108 locations at selected depths within a PCPT or SCPT stroke have been
carried out.
Table 3.8: Summary of PPDT Tests Conducted in Belgium and the Netherlands
Country
Number of PPDT Tests
Number of Locations
Belgium
9
7
Netherlands
137
108
Due to slow drainage properties of the clay, only the dissipation tests that have been
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 17
==PAGE:26==
performed in a layer of clay were analyzed in this study. Also, for these tests, the OCR
ratio has been determined. As the tests did not present normally consolidated soils, just
the lightly over­consolidated soils (1 < OCR < 2) have been considered. Table 3.9 presents
the number of tests performed in clay layers.
When the pore water pressure reaches constant values, the tests measures the equilib­
rium values, u0 [6].
Table 3.9: Summary of PPDT Tests in Clay Layers
Country
Number of PPDT Tests in Clay
Belgium
3
Netherlands
39
3.10
Tools and Software Used
Data analysis and processing was a major and important step in this research. So to help
with data organizing, visualizing and performing the preliminary statistical calculations
Microsoft Excel was used, while Python along with its extensive libraries was utilized for
more advanced data manipulation, statistical analysis and not to forget automation of
repetitive tasks throughout the research journey.
18 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
Based on the data analysis, the results section will be divided in two parts.
The first part focuses on explaining the potential causes behind cavitation and excess
pore pressure, in an attempt to better understand the data. This analysis will examine
factors such as soil layers, operational practices and testing procedures that can lead to
these errors.
The second part represents a general overview of the main issues observed in the data
with respect to pore pressure measurements. This section will comprise of bar plots show­
ing how these errors vary across the 3 sites.
4.1
Examples of Tests with Errors
By investigating the CPTu plots presented in Appendix D, E, and F, it can be noticed that
there are significant errors related to cavitation and excess pore pressure, mostly because
of saturation issues of the pore pressure filter. One reason could be incomplete saturation
of the pore pressure filter before carrying out the tests, as this could lead to cavitation and
non­hydrostatic values from the beginning of the tests. This is illustrated in Figure 4.2 for
excess pore pressure and Figure 4.3 for cavitation. As it can be observed in Figure 4.1,
from the beginning of the tests there are points of non­hydrostatic values. This highlights
that the pore pressure filter was not fully saturated prior to testing.
Another reason could be the loss of saturation during penetration through sands and grav­
elly to dense sands layers. Figure 4.2 is an ideal example of how saturation was lost
during penetration at an approximate depth of 5m. Initially, the pore water filter can be
considered fully saturated, as there are no issues with the hydrostatic pressure.
The tests from the UK also present a similar trend, as depicted in Figure 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5.
In the Netherlands, the tests experience the same trends: excess pore pressure happens
either from the beginning of the test or it starts after a couple of meters In most of the
tests, excess pore pressure is observed either at the very beginning or after a few meters
of penetration, indicating the incomplete saturation of the filter element.
Cavitation is expected to occur in layers of dense sands or gravelly sands, when the pen­
etration rate is higher than 2cm/s or when the corrected tip resistance is high. However,
this is not the case. These findings suggest that while soil composition plays a significant
role, preparation procedures and equipment design also contribute to the recurring errors.
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.1: Example of CPTu with excess pore pressure due to a loss of saturation prior
to testing in Belgium
Figure 4.2: Example of CPTu with excess pore pressure due to a lack of saturation prior
to testing in Belgium
20 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: Example of CPTu with cavitation due to a lack of saturation prior to testing in
the UK
Figure 4.4: Example of CPTu with cavitation due to a loss of saturation during penetration
in the UK
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.5: Example of CPTu with excess pore pressure due to a lack of saturation prior
to penetration in the UK
Figure 4.6: Example of CPTu with excess pore pressure and cavitation in the Netherlands
22 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:31==
4.2
Occurrences of Cavitation and Excess Pore Pressure
It is worth noticing that in Belgium there are no occurrences of cavitation. Figure 4.7
shows a comparative analysis of the tests that present cavitation and the tests that do not
encounter issues with cavitation. The plot is a stacked bar chart, which is represented on
the x­axis by the different locations and on the y­axis by the percentages of the total tests
performed in each location. Cavitation is indicated by orange, while the tests without cav­
itation are indicated by blue. The figure shows that in the UK the cavitation occurrences
are 96%, considerable higher than the Netherlands, which has 63%.
Figure 4.7: Cavitation vs No­Cavitation Percentages across all Locations
Figure 4.8 presents the same concept, however, now are illustrated the non­hydrostatic
and the hydrostatic values. In this case, 95% of the tests in the Netherlands experiences
excess pore pressure, whereas in the UK only 9%. In Belgium 45% of the tests are non­
hydrostatic.
Figure 4.8: Non­Hydrostatic vs Hydrostatic Percentages across all Locations
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 23
==PAGE:32==
From the data presented above, it results that the tests performed in the Netherlands are
not as susceptible to cavitation as the ones in the UK. Also, it is worth paying attention
to the tests in the Netherlands as they exhibit the highest percentages of excess pore
pressure.
62.86% 
Cavitation 
Belgium 
45.3% 
Non-Hydrostatic 
Netherlands 
39.74% 
57.57% 
Non-Hydrostatic 
UK 
91.04% 
8.96% 
Non-Hydrostatic 
Cavitation 
Figure 4.9: Occurrences of Cavitation and Non­hydrostatic Tests
Figure 4.9 shows the tests that present cavitation and excess pore pressure, represented
as percentages out of the total tests analyzed. Additionally, on the plot there are also
presented the amount of tests that have simultaneously cavitation and non­hydrostatic
values. The results suggest considerable variability across locations. Netherlands in­
dicates a high overlapping area of 40%, in the UK all the tests that have excess pore
pressure also have cavitation. This outcome suggests that there are site specific factors
that can produce these errors.
4.3
Occurrences of Cavitation and Excess Pore Pressure by
Type of Soil
It was worth investigating in which type of soil cavitation and excess pore pressure oc­
curs in order to obtain more information into the underlying factors contributing to their
occurrences.
Figure 4.10 presents the occurrences of cavitation in different soil types relative to the
maximum occurrences of cavitation across all soil categories in each location, whereas
Figure 4.11 presents the occurrences of excess pore pressure.
The results present variability across the regions. Around 90% of the tests are in silt
mixtures and sand mixtures for both locations. In Netherlands, a high percentage of cav­
itation occurs in sands. Clay layers are in a moderate amount ranging from 50% to 80%.
24 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:33==
In contrast, gravelly to dense sand consistently shows negligible cavitation across all two
regions. Finally, Organic Soils have minimal cavitation in Belgium and the Netherlands
( 0%), whereas the UK records a small occurrence ( 10%).
Figure 4.10: Occurrences of Cavitation by Type of Soil
Figure 4.11 highlights the occurrences of excess pore pressure across the two soil types
that are not expected to exhibit excess pore pressure: Gravelly to Dense Sand and Sands.
In Gravelly to Dense Sand, Belgium and the UK report almost similar occurrences, both
reaching approximately 100%, whereas the Netherlands has a significantly lower occur­
rence at around 50%. On the other hand, for Sands, all three regions present consistently
high occurrences of excess pore pressure, with values approaching 100%.
These findings suggest that both types of soil are highly susceptible to excess pore pres­
sure and apart from the Netherlands that preset less occurrences in gravelly to dense
sands, there is little variability.
Figure 4.11: Occurrences of Excess Pore Pressure by Type of Soil
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 25
==PAGE:34==
4.4
Analysis of Sources of Error
It is worth investigating further the reasons behind excess pore pressure and cavitation by
taking a closer look at the variations of pore water pressure u2. Figures 4.12, 4.13, 4.14,
4.15 and 4.16 present the u2 measurements of the tests that present cavitation or non­
hydrostatic values for the three locations. Only regions with a consecutive depth of 50 cm
of cavitation or excess pore pressure were assumed to be faulty. The x­axis represents
the pore pressure in kPa, while the y­axis is the depth in meters. On the plots where
excess pore pressure is represented, the hydrostatic values are marked by a continuous
black line, while the 5 kPa tolerance is represented by dashed black line. Each test has
been plotted individually in order to observe better the trend of each test and they can be
found in Appendix G, H, I, J, and K.
As previously mentioned, the tests from Belgium do not present cavitation, however they
still present issues related to non­hydrostatic values. Figure 4.12 presents the pore pres­
sure measurements u2 of the non­hydrostatic values. In shallower depths up to 10m
a considerable amount of tests present excess pore pressure with fluctuations ranging
from ­450 kPa to 200 kPa. These high values are due to spikes in the measurements
suggesting a transition across soil layers, or errors to do operational practices. A notice­
able number of tests are following the hydrostatic line, with a higher tolerance, but without
noticeable anomalies. At grater depths of more than 10 m, the u2 profiles show reduced
anomalies and less tests presenting excess pore pressure, indicating more stable pore
pressure conditions. However, there are three tests represented by red, light and dark
blue at approximately 6m, 7m and 8m that present significant deviations in pore pres­
sure, with sharp spikes reaching a maximum of 550 kPa and a minimum of ­420 kPa.
They indicate anomalies.
Figure 4.13 and 4.15 illustrate excess pore pressures of the tests in the UK and the Nether­
lands, whereas Figure 4.14 and 4.16 presents the tests with cavitation defects in the same
two locations.
Figure 4.13 shows that some of the tests with excess pore pressure errors present linear­
ity in the pore pressure measurement, with values slightly above the tolerance. However,
several anomalies are evident: a few tests exhibit significant deviations, including sharp
negative spikes below ­150 kPa and isolated positive deviations exceeding 50 kPa. These
extreme values could result from localized soil conditions, such as gas pockets or abrupt
changes in permeability, or operational factors, such as rapid cone penetration or incom­
plete saturation of the transducer.
In Figure 4.14, the x­axis spans to a maximum of ­450 kPa. Cavitation is evident as many
of the pore pressure profiles show sharp drops to significantly negative values, particularly
below ­100 kPa. Several tests exhibit pronounced fluctuations, with spikes suggesting
that the cone might have encountered a piece of hard rock. The scatter in the data is
most pronounced in the shallow to mid­depth range (0–15 meters), where stratigraphic
transitions between layers of varying permeability, such as sands and silts, may create
differential drainage conditions. Deeper profiles (>20 meters) tend to show less extreme
variation.
Graph 4.16 displays u2 profiles for the tests conducted in the Netherlands presenting is­
sues with cavitation. They cover depths up to 60 meters, with u2 values up to ­500 kPa.
The graph shows a dense cluster of data, with significant scatter and spikes in pore pres­
sure observed throughout the depth range. The upper layers (0–20 m) exhibit greater
variability and frequent sharp drops in pore pressure, suggesting cavitation caused by
rapid penetration through low­permeability or unsaturated soil layers. These fluctuations
26 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:35==
likely indicate heterogeneity in the soil properties, such as transitions between sands,
silts, and clays, which affect drainage behavior and hydraulic connectivity. In the deeper
layers (20–60 m), the profiles become more consistent, but occasional spikes still per­
sist, possibly due to localized gas pockets or variations in stratigraphy. The widespread
cavitation throughout the graph, characterized by extreme negative pore pressure values,
highlights the influence of incomplete transducer saturation or transient soil conditions on
the measurements.
Figure 4.15 presents the pore pressure profiles from the tests conducted in the Nether­
lands that present non­hydrostatic values. They are plotted alongside the hydrostatic
pressure line and its ±5 kPa tolerance range. The x­axis spans from ­500 kPa to 2000
kPa, and the depth reaches 60 meters. Most measurements cluster closely around the
hydrostatic line within the tolerance limits, particularly at shallow depths (0–20 meters),
indicating consistent pore pressure responses. However, beyond this range, notable de­
viations and outliers emerge. Several profiles exhibit sharp spikes, with extreme positive
values exceeding 1000 kPa, especially in deeper layers. These spikes could reflect local­
ized overpressure zones caused by dense or impermeable soil layers that restrict water
dissipation. Conversely, occasional negative spikes near the hydrostatic line suggest
transient drainage effects or potential errors in transducer saturation. The variability is
particularly evident in deeper layers (>30 meters), where stratigraphic transitions and soil
heterogeneity influence drainage and pore pressure measurements. The overall consis­
tency around the hydrostatic line indicates the reliability of most tests, but the observed
anomalies necessitate further investigation into soil stratigraphy, equipment calibration,
and potential operational inconsistencies to understand and mitigate such outliers.
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.12: Combined Tests with Excess Pore Pressure ­ Belgium
28 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.13: Combined tests with hydrostatic ­ UK
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.14: Combined tests with cavitation ­ UK
30 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.15: Combined tests with hydrostatic ­ Netherlands
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.16: Combined tests with cavitation ­ Netherlands
32 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:41==
4.5
Stratigraphy
Figure 4.17 represents an example of soil stratigraphy in Belgium. The stratigraphy for
each test location was carefully plotted to identify differences and assess subsurface vari­
ability. They can be found in Appendix L, M, and N. The analysis revealed considerable
differences in the soil layers between the test locations, reflecting changes in depositional
environments or geological processes. This poses challenged in determining clusters of
errors behind the different locations. However, within each individual location, the stratig­
raphy demonstrated a high degree of consistency.
Figure 4.17: Stratigraphy Example from Belgium
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 33
==PAGE:42==
4.6
Sources of errors
In order to determine further the potential sources of errors, the tests have been analyses
individually. The results for each location are presented in Figure 4.18, 4.19 and 4.20
as bar plots, where the x­axis is represented by the different sources of errors, while the
y­axis represents the percentages of cavitation vs no cavitation and non­hydrostatic vs
hydrostatic values.
Figure 4.18 highlights the two sources of errors found in Belgium related to excess pore
pressure. Incomplete saturation is the main source of error, which represents 77%, while
the loss of saturation through the layers during penetration is only 20%. Incomplete satu­
ration means that the tests present excess pore pressure from the beginning of the test,
while loss of saturation means that after a certain depth during penetration the tests start
to present non­hydrostatic values.
Figure 4.19 presents the errors associated to both cavitation and excess pore pressure.
In this case there are 6 potential reasons behind cavitation. One of them is incomplete
saturation of the piezocone system, where negative pressure is observed from the onset
of test, being represented by 89%. There have been observed individual spikes in qt and
fs that are causing cavitation at a deep depth, of around 45% of the tests. Moreover,
34% of the tests present simultaneously incomplete saturation in the initial layers which
recovers the positive pressure and spikes in qt and fs, leading again to cavitation in the
deep layers. For 3% of the tests no reason could be found and only 1% presents loss of
saturation. Excess pore pressure occurs at 9% of the tests in the initial depths when the
cone is inserted and the system stabilize. After the system has reached equilibrium the
pore pressure measurements reflect the in­situ conditions.
Figure 4.18: Sources of Errors in Belgium
The tests from the Netherlands posed more challenges in identifying clear issues regard­
ing cavitation. Deep Layers* refers to the tests that present cavitation in the initial depth
due to a loss of saturation caused by changes in the layers and in the deep layers cav­
34 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:43==
itation appears again after the pore pressure measurement recover the positive values,
being represented by 61% of the tests. On the other hand, Deep Layers** highlights the
tests that have cavitation only in the deep layers, probably due to highly permeable or
dense materials or presence of natural gas pockets or other anomalies. It is 20% of the
tests. 35% of the tests experiences a lost of saturation after the first 10m of penetration.
1% experience incomplete saturation. Additionally, excess pore pressure is represented
by 69% of the tests that experience loss of saturation and 28% with incomplete saturation.
Figure 4.19: Sources of Errors in UK
Figure 4.20: Sources of Errors in the Netherlands
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 35
==PAGE:44==
4.7
Dissipation Tests
In two of the locations dissipation tests have been performed. In the Netherlands out of ...
dissipation tests 3 were performed in lightly overconsolidated clay, while in Belgium out
of 10 tests 3 were performed in clay, with OCR between 5 and 7.
Figure 4.21 presents the dissipation test results conducted in slightly overconsolidated
clay layers in the Netherlands, having an OCR of 2. The y­axis presents the excess pore
pressure dissipation (∆u = u2−u0) over time in seconds on the x­axis. Additionally, Table
4.1 presents the depths at which each test was performed, the type of soil and the OCR.
Tests IJV147 and IJV304 have been performed at shallower depths (10.50m and 11.14m)
and it can be seen that they reach stabilization, which indicate that the drainage is efficient.
They also present the lowest values of initial excess pore pressure of 0.2 MPa and 0.39
MPa respectively. In contrast, test IJV041 has been carried out at a greater depth of
17.58 m. It shows slower dissipation and does not fully stabilize, suggesting reduced
permeability or higher stiffness at deeper depths. Also, this test presents a higher initial
excess pore pressure of 0.75 MPa. The constant OCR across the tests implies similar
conditions, however due to different depths and clay properties the pore pressure show
different behaviour.
Figure 4.21: OCR between 1 and 2 in the Netherlands
Table 4.1: OCR for overconsolidated clays ­ Netherlands
Test
Depth (m)
Soil type
OCR
IJV147­PCPT
10.50
Clay
2
IJV304­08­PCPT
11.14
Clay
2
IJV041­PCPT_PPDT
17.58
Clay
2
Figure 4.22 shows the dissipation results in Belgium. The x­axis represents time on a log­
arithmic scale in seconds, ranging from approximately 100 to 104, while the y­axis shows
the excess pore pressure in kPa, ranging from 200 kPa to 600 kPa. Table 4.2 comprising
the soil type, OCR and the depth.
36 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:45==
The profiles for the three tests, PEZ_CPT_05, PEZ_CPT_07A, and PEZ_CPT_09, reveal
distinct dissipation behaviors. However, none of the tests fully stabilize or approach a
value of zero within the recorded time, indicating that complete dissipation is not achieved
during the tests. This could be due to the fact that the OCR is higher compared to the
other location and the interpretation of higher OCR is difficult.
Test PEZ_CPT_05 exhibits an uneven curve, where the pore pressure initially rises to a
peak of approximately 600 kPa before gradually dissipating, reflecting variability in the
data. Test PEZ_CPT_07A follows an unusual trend, where the pore pressure initially de­
creases but then increases slightly before stabilizing. Test PEZ_CPT_09 shows a steady
decrease in pore pressure over time, starting from around 350 kPa, but it does not reach
equilibrium. These trends highlight the influence of overconsolidation and variability in
permeability, as well as possible testing irregularities or stratigraphic effects. The results
indicate the complexity of pore pressure dissipation in overconsolidated clay, with none
of the tests achieving full equilibrium during the observation period. The higher OCR
layers generally retain pore pressure longer due to lower permeability, underscoring the
influence of mechanical state and stratigraphy on drainage behavior.
Figure 4.22: OCR between 1 and 2 in the Belgium
Table 4.2: OCR for overconsolidated clays ­ Belgium
Test
Depth (m)
Soil type
OCR
PEZ_CPT_05
10.70
Clay
5
PEZ_CPT_07A
11.78
Clay
7
PEZ_CPT_09
11.45
Clay
6
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 37
==PAGE:46==
38 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:47==
5
Conclusions
The aim of the study was to investigate the error sources in piezocone penetration testing
with respect to pore pressure measurements u2. The outcomes reveal insights into the
frequency and distribution of errors.
The results of this study shows widespread cavitation and excess pore pressure across
tests. It suggests a combination of factors, including incomplete saturation of the pore
pressure filter, rapid penetration through low­permeability soils, or the presence of gas
pockets. The variability emphasizes the need for careful calibration, pre­saturation, and
an understanding of local soil stratigraphy to accurately interpret these anomalies and
minimize errors during testing.
The main sources of error is related to incomplete saturation of the piezocone’s porous el­
ement, as the tests indicate either cavitation or excess pore pressure from in the majority
of the tests in the initial meters of penetration. This has a significant influence on the ini­
tial pore pressure reading, which introduces errors which will propagate across the whole
depth of a test. This means that the results are inaccurate and, therefore, the stratigra­
phy interpretation. Furthermore, in some situations, the transitions between different soil
layers was found to influence pore pressure responses, resulting in localized deviations,
which also affects the pore pressure measurements u2 under that depth.
The calibration of cones data unavailability in the United Kingdom and the methods by
which the pore pressure filter was saturated in Belgium and the Netherlands make it diffi­
cult to properly identify the reasons behind these errors. As presented in Table 3.6, there
are different procedures used to perform the tests, which creates some limitations when
comparing the tests. The lack of information regarding the exact method used for de­
airing the liquid and the porous element leads to limitations in comparing the results from
the different locations.
In general, the data indicate that sand mixtures, sands, and silt mixtures are the most vul­
nerable soil types to cavitation, particularly in the UK and the Netherlands, while gravelly
to dense sand and organic soils show strong resistance. Regional trends highlight the
UK’s susceptibility in clay and the Netherlands’ dominance in sands and sand mixtures,
with Belgium generally showing lower cavitation occurrences except in silt mixtures.
Moreover, the results suggest that is variability across the three locations, meaning that
the way the elements were saturated and the operational practices have a considerable
effect on the outcomes. Across all locations, these errors impact the reliability of the tests,
in particular the interpretation of the soil. The high number of tests with issues, indicate
the need for further investigations in order to determine the sources of errors.
Expanding the dataset to include more geographical regions would improve the general­
izability of the findings and refine error mitigation strategies. These advancements would
contribute significantly to the field of geotechnical engineering by ensuring higher accu­
racy in subsurface investigations.
It is of utmost importance to investigate further the issues related to pore pressure mea­
surements and to have all the needed procedures of how the tests have been performed
and also the saturation procedure of the piezocone system, as these information are cur­
rently missing or not exactly specified in detail. The study emphasizes the importance of
addressing these errors to ensure the safety and performance of geotechnical structures.
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 39
==PAGE:48==
40 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
I. Rocchi and A. D. Zhelezova. “A Survey Study of the Engineering Practice of Piezo­
cone Devices with Regards to Saturation Conditions”. In: Proceedings of the 19th
Nordic Geotechnical Meeting (2024).
[2]
T. Lunne, P. K. Robertson, and J. J. M. Powell. Cone Penetration Testing in Geotech­
nical Practice. CRC Press, 1997.
[3]
G. De Backer et al. Evaluation of parameters inducing desaturation of a piezocone:
Saturation liquid viscosity and exposure to dry sand. Ed. by G. Gottardi and L.
Tonni. Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Cone Penetration Testing
(CPT’22). Bologna, Italy: CRC Press, 2022, pp. 121–126.
[4]
K. L. Cabal and P. K. Robertson. Guide to Cone Penetration Testing for Geotech­
nical Engineering. 2015.
[5]
Geotechnical investigation and testing – Field testing – Part 1: Electrical cone and
piezocone penetration test (ISO 22476­1:2022). Licensed to DTU Bibliotek – Dan­
marks Tekniske Informationscenter, 2024­08­11 13:08. Göteborg Plads 1, DK­2150
Nordhavn, Denmark: Dansk Standard, Jan. 17, 2023.
[6]
ASTM International. Standard Test Method for Electronic Friction Cone and Piezo­
Cone Penetration Testing of Soils. D5778­12. Designation: D5778–12. West Con­
shohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2012.
[7]
P. K. Robertson and K. Cabal. Guide to Cone Penetration Testing. 7th. Gregg Drilling
LLC, Dec. 2022.
[8]
Mohammad Hassan Baziar and Mohammad Hossein Mollahassani Lashkajani. “Pre­
diction of Excess Pore Water Pressure Generation in Sand–Silt Mixtures During
Cyclic Loading: A Dissipated Energy­Based Model”. In: Geotechnical and Geolog­
ical Engineering 42 (2024). Received: 8 January 2024; Accepted: 21 May 2024;
Published online: 18 June 2024, pp. 5209–5228. DOI: 10.1007/s10706-024-02837-x.
[9]
Laura Tonni Irene Rocchi and Guido Gottardi. “Quantitative Assessment of Tip Sat­
uration for High Quality Piezocone Testing”. In: (2024). Corresponding author: ire­
roc@dtu.dk.
[10]
Thomas Rasmussen and Lars Rasmussen. Greater Gabbard Offshore Wind Farm:
Geotechnical Site Investigations. Sea Bed CPT. Watchmoor Park, Riverside Way,
Camberley, Surrey GU15 3YI, England, July 2006.
[11]
Geoquip Marine Operations AG. Volume I ­ Field Operations and Preliminary Re­
sults: Princess Elisabeth OWF, Belgium. Geoquip Marine Ref: OP22­G­007­FLD­
01, COMPANY Document No: BE4341H­22005P EZ −OR −03. Mühlenplatz 12,
CH­6004 Lucerne, Switzerland, Aug. 2023. URL: https://www.geoquip-marine.com.
[12]
Henning Hoffmann Michael Wagner and Erik Asp. Certification Report: Site Con­
ditions ­ Geotechnical Investigations at IJmuiden Ver Wind Farm Sites I­IV. Pre­
pared for the Netherlands Enterprise Agency, Croeselaan 15, 3521 BJ Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Applicable contract(s): 202007034 / WO22200210. Tuborg Parkvej 8,
2900 Hellerup, Denmark, June 24, 2022.
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 41
==PAGE:50==
42 Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements
==PAGE:51==
Statistical Analysis of Error Sources in Piezocone Testing with respect to Pore Pressure Measurements 43
==PAGE:52==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
