==PAGE:1==
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
Morphological Development and
Sediment Budget at Husby Klitplantage
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
Morphological Development and Sediment Budget at Husby Klitplantage
Master Thesis
January, 2025
By
Cosima Serafina Kaiser
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Luftfoto provided by Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Effektivisering, accessed
on krak.dk, 28-12-2024.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Alle, Build-
ing 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The danish west coast is subject to significant changes, in many locations leading to substan-
tial shoreline retreat, which is addressed by various coastal development measures. However,
the understanding of local coastal dynamics is crucial to effective protection measures, and
intense research on the processes in different areas along the west coast has been conducted
and is ongoing.
This thesis investigates the coastal development and dynamics within a
selected local stretch at the center of the west coast at Husby Klitplantage. is evaluated
in-depth, revealing significant erosion along all the profiles up to approximately 20 m wa-
ter depth and a shoreline retreat of roughly 70-100 m over 66 years, with high spatial and
year-to-year variability. Using a data set on long-term cross-shore profile bed level mea-
surements together with cross-shore and longshore transport models, the concepts of closure
depth and sediment budget are applied to the study area. Results reveal chronic erosion
and significant bed level changes throughout the study area, with notable year-to-year and
spatial variations. The analysis highlights limitations in applying the classical closure depth
concept but suggests its utility in delineating nearshore areas dominated by storm-induced
longshore transport. Longshore sediment transport models successfully reproduce nearshore
volume changes and shoreline retreat, providing a robust framework for developing sediment
budgets. However, addressing sediment pathways beyond the nearshore zone remains critical
for achieving a comprehensive understanding of the system. This research offers insights into
local coastal dynamics, supporting the understanding of morphological development required
to adapt coastal management strategies along the Danish west coast.
ii
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Bjarke Eltard-Larsen, Thesis Supervisor, Senior Researcher, Department of Civil and
Mechanical Engineering, Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering.
Thank you for the close guidance throughout this thesis work, for taking the time and energy
for all the discussions, for all the valuable input and ideas, and for giving honest opinion on
my work.
Per Sørensen, Thesis Co-Supervisor, Head of coastal research at Kystdirektoratet.
Thank you for sharing knowledge on the Danish coasts and the data set, and for giving a
helpful opinion on which direction to go when I was overwhelmed by all the interesting things
to observe in the data and all the possible topics to work on.
Erik Damgaard Christensen, Thesis Co-Supervisor, Professor, Head of section, De-
partment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and
Maritime Engineering.
Thank you for sharing several reports on sediment budget studies at the Danish West Coast.
Baran Öz, M.Sc. Civil Engineering.
Thank you for becoming my courses and thesis buddy. Thank you for all the little and big
things you helped me with, and for sharing the time together. Thank you for proof-reading
this thesis.
Rolf Wilhelm, M.Sc. Mechanical Engineering.
Thank you for sharing so many discussions, for listening to the same things over and over
again, and for always cheering me up. Thank you for proof-reading this thesis.
Natalie Gadelrab and Hannah Heutz, M.Sc. Ocean Engineering
Thank you for your support, for the talks, and for sticking around.
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal
and Maritime Engineering, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Cosima Serafina Kaiser - s222657
Kongens Lyngny, Denmark
January 1st, 2025
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
4
2.1
Coastal Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Sediment Transport Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
The Concept of Depth of Closure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
The Concept of Sediment Budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Study Area and Data Sets
12
3.1
Study Area - The Danish West Coast
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Cross-shore Bathymetry Profile Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Wave Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Description of Models
24
4.1
Cross-shore Transport Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Longshore Transport Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results and Analysis
30
5.1
Observations on Morphology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Depth of Closure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Sediment Budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Discussion and Conclusion
71
6.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A Appendix
81
A.1 Cross-shore Profile Data format and recorded variables . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
iv
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
α
Wave angle
β
Mean slope between dune top and closure depth
B
Dune height above sea level
c
Instantaneous sediment concentration
D
Grain size
di
Outer depth of closure
dl
Inner depth of closure
D50
Median grain size
ϵs
Diffusion coefficient
E
Momentum exchange coefficient
Fm
Momentum part of radiation stresses
g
Gravity
¯Hm0
Mean significant wave height
¯Hs
Mean significant wave height
¯Tp
Mean significant wave period
¯Ts
Mean significant wave period
H
Wave height
h
Water depth
Hs
Significant wave height
Hm0,1/3
Mean of largest third of significant wave heights
Hm0,RMS
Root-Mean-Square significant wave height
Hm0
Significant wave height
Te
Extreme wave period
Tp,1/3
Period related to mean of largest third of significant wave heights
Tp,RMS
Period related to Root-Mean-Square significant wave height
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
v
==PAGE:7==
k
Turbulent kinetic energy
L
Distance from dune peak to depth of closure
L
Wave length
ν
Kinematic viscosity
νT
Eddy viscosity
ϕ
Phase
ΦB
Non-dimensional bed load
Qb
Bed load
qB
Bed load transport rate
Qs
Suspended load
qS
Suspended sediment transport rate
ρ
Water density
R
Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient
R
Shoreline retreat
r
Nonlinearity parameter
S
Sea level rise
s
Relative particle density
Sxy
Shear component of radiation stresses
τ
Shear stress
τb
Bed shear stress
θ
Shields parameter
θ′
Skin friction component of Shields parameter
θ′′
Form drag component of Shields parameter
θc
Critical Shields parameter
t
Time
u
Instantaneous velocity
Uf
Friction velocity
U1m
Amplitude of free-stream velocity signal
v
Vertical velocity
Vy
Longshore current velocity
ws
Settling velocity
x
Cross-shore distance
y
Longshore direction
z
Vertical direction
vi
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The evolution and change of coastlines is a phenomenon that is just as old as the coasts
themselves, shaping the coastlines as they exist today (Van Rijn, 2011). However, due to
human settlement of coastal regions and the construction of vulnerable infrastructure, the
natural processes of coastline evolution have become a problem. This is true specially in
terms of coastal erosion, which at the same time is intensified by human activities (Van Rijn,
2011). Thus, the erosion of sandy coastal systems has been an area of research interest for
the last decades. Today, they have also become an integral part of civil engineering and
political debates. With sea level rise accelerating, the attention to coastal regions has in-
tensified even further (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2022). Current
research and efforts are focused on coastal protection by employing diverse coastal develop-
ment strategies (Faragò et al., 2018). To implement measures effectively and in a targeted
manner, it is necessary to understand the processes responsible for the movement of sed-
iment thoroughly.
These processes typically involve the forces and mechanisms that set
single sediment grains in motion and cause the migration of sand masses. This includes
the interplay of a variety of physical processes and prevailing local wave, tide, storm surge,
and current conditions, resulting in an extremely complex and sensitive balance with large
variability (Komar, 1983). Although a considerable amount of research has already been
dedicated to this topic (Van Rijn, 2011), it is still very challenging to describe sediment
transport processes by equations and numerical models and to predict them accurately. The
processes involved are often case-specific, making it difficult to transfer research results from
one location to another. Consequently, engineering work in this area can be very complex. A
sensible strategy for coastal protection can only be developed and implemented when there
is a clear understanding of why a specific area behaves in a certain way and what key factors
influence its behavior (Van Rijn, 2011).
Many different projects have been implemented and are currently underway to protect coasts
from excessive erosion, and many of those have been proven effective, however, others have
shown large side effects (Faragò et al., 2018). Recently, beach nourishment received a lot
of attention for its potential for coastal protection. This method involves artificially adding
large amounts of sand to coastal systems that are normally characterized by sand loss, such
that the loss of sand will be artificially compensated for (Van Rijn, 2011). However, this
strategy only works sustainably if the added sand remains in the coastal system and is not
simply washed away and moved to other, undesirable locations or is lost in the depths. It
is therefore crucial for an economically effective strategy to understand the local transport
processes (Van Rijn, 2011).
In Denmark some coastal areas have experienced a shift in the coastline of several hundred
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
1
==PAGE:9==
meters over the past 100-200 years, with the more exposed West Coast being particularly
affected, experiencing seasonal shifts of up to 4 m/year (Faragò et al., 2018). To protect the
habitat, infrastructure, and communities (the majority of which are located in the proximity
of the coast) from damage, preserving the coastline is given priority. The first system of
dikes was initiated back in 1553. Since then, many coastal protection measures, including
nourishment, have already been implemented and tested in many places along the Danish
West Coast (Faragò et al., 2018).
However, the effects and exact processes of transport
patterns in this region have not yet been fully evaluated and understood, posing a challenge
to effective coastal erosion strategies.
1.1
Problem Statement
The dynamics of coastal morphology are driven by a complex and sensitive interplay of
multiple processes and influencing factors, making it difficult to predict or even explain their
temporal development. Nevertheless, understanding these dynamics along the Danish Coasts
is crucial for developing and adapting effective coastal protection strategies. To support this,
the Danish Coastal Authority (KDI) started collecting morphological data along the Danish
West Coast over 100 years ago, resulting in a valuable data set of coastal profiles documenting
both spatial characteristics and temporal changes.
Analysis of coastal evolution and assessment of the impact of processes typically rely on
sediment budgets for the area in question (Christensen et al., 2000). A sediment budget
describes the balance between sediment transported into and out of the system and the
resulting gain or loss in sediment volume, leading to accretion or erosion. However, estimating
sediment budgets comes with challenges, such as defining system boundaries and quantifying
sediment fluxes across these boundaries.
The concept of closure depth is often used to
define the offshore limit, assuming minimal sediment transport beyond this depth, but its
application also has limitations.
The morphological changes and underlying processes vary considerably along the Danish
West Coast due to local conditions, making it difficult to examine the entire coast and draw
conclusions in a single study. In addition, large areas are affected by human activities such
as sand mining and nourishment, which introduces additional uncertainties that are often
difficult to quantify. To reduce these complexities, this research focuses on one specific area
along the coast, chosen where natural processes have remained largely undisturbed, allowing
for an in-depth assessment of local natural morphological evolution.
This work aims to thoroughly investigate the insights provided by the available profile data on
local morphological changes at the study site. It also assesses how well classical concepts and
sediment transport models capture the observed changes over time. Although the conclusions
are drawn for a local site and time frame, the results can provide valuable perspectives for
addressing challenges associated with sediment transport processes along the entire Danish
West Coast in the future. The following three research questions guide this investigation:
1) What characterizes the morphology in the study area, and how does it evolve over
time?
2) How does the concept of closure depth apply to the study area?
3) How well can the theoretical sediment budget capture the morphological changes ob-
served in the study area?
2
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Strategy
The research questions stated above will be addressed by applying several tools, allowing to
look at the coastal system from different perspectives, with the intent to understand how
the applied methods support each other in their findings, and how they are able to capture
the situation found at the study site.
The foundation of this thesis is a comprehensive investigation of the cross-shore profile data
set within the study area. Before applying any analytical or modeling methods, it is essential
to first understand the actual changes that have occurred over the period under investigation
and to identify the key characteristics and trends shaping the region. This in-depth study
of temporal development serves not only as a significant finding in its own right, offering a
detailed observation of the area’s behavior over time, but also as a critical preparation for
subsequent analyses. The results derived from this initial study provide information against
which the tools applied later can be validated and compared.
Besides the data set on morphology, a long-term wave hindcast data set is utilized, providing
information on relatively local conditions that the study area was subject to, allowing for
evaluations based on representative conditions and time series. The wave data, extracted as
offshore wave conditions, is utilized as input for applying wave theory and wave parametriza-
tion methods to describe the wave conditions at every point along the profiles, required for
different calculations and models.
In the study, two state-of-the-art models will be applied to describe cross-shore and long-
shore sediment transport processes, respectively. These models will be utilized in two key
components: first, to analyze the depth of closure by modeling the depths at which significant
transport processes are theoretically predicted under varying conditions and compare the
results to empirical expressions, and second, to address the sediment budget by providing
theoretical estimates of sediment transport rates at the system boundaries.
1.3
Outline
A background on the central topics of this research is given in chapter 2, where the main
principles in coastal dynamics are outlined together with a basic description of sediment
transport process and the introduction to the concept of sediment budgets.
The selected study site is described in chapter 3, including its location and environmental
characteristics. This section also presents the data sets used in the study, specifically the
cross-shore profile measurements and the wave hindcast data.
The sediment transport models applied to address the research questions are presented in
chapter 4, together with a description of the model setups used for the study.
In chapter 5 the results of this research are presented, where the findings in terms of the
morphological development, documented by the profile measurements, and the concepts of
closure depth and sediment budget in the context of the study area are analyzed.
An overarching discussion of the results, reflecting on the overall implications of the findings
and the limitations of this study, is given in chapter 6, together with a final conclusion.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
3
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Background
Before presenting the work that has been carried out, a short introduction to the theoretical
background of the most central topics in this study is given in the following. While hydro-
dynamics is the main driving force behind coastal development, this chapter focuses on the
implications of hydrodynamic action in coastal areas. This chapter provides a description of
the general aspects of coastal dynamics, the basic mechanisms in sediment transport, and
the widely used concepts of Depth of Closure and Sediment Budget.
2.1
Coastal Dynamics
Coastal areas are dynamic systems, with their evolution varying across different temporal
and spatial scales, shaped by an interplay of processes that we still have limited capability
to understand and predict (Sui et al., 2021). Coastal dynamics are influenced by geological
conditions, waves, currents, tides, storm surges, sea level change, wind, and human activities,
but in some cases also estuaries and river inflow, forming a complex and variable physical
system. The shoreline position is a widely accepted indicator of coastal change and belongs
to one of the most frequently monitored parameters in coastal dynamics (Morton, 1996),
where the identified shoreline position also depends on the measurement technique and the
exact definition of the shoreline (Pianca et al., 2015). The shoreline and dune positions are
important parameters in calculating erosion rates and providing information on the mobilized
beach volume. While on a long-term trend, dune position and shoreline migration align up
to a certain degree, on shorter time scales the shoreline and dune position can develop
independently from each other. In literature, it is often stated that the shoreline position
has a seasonal component, with the winter shoreline being moved in the onshore direction
compared to the summer shoreline, which is related to larger storms occurring in winter,
evacuating sand from the beach in the offshore direction. However, it is assumed in this case
that the beach after some time recovers from the storms, moving the shoreline to its pre-
storm position (Shepard, 1950). Chronic erosion and loss of sand volume, however, can lead
to permanent and continuous shoreline retreat, driven by a deficit in the sediment transport
balance of the area, or other factors such as sea level rise Many efforts have been taken
in trying to quantify shoreline variability, however, the ability to understand and predict
shoreline migration has been limited by the availability of long-term observation data (Price
et al., 2013). Yet, the individual factors on shoreline migration may be modeled, such as the
sea level rise by the Bruun Rule (Bruun, 1962), or the gradients in sediment transport rates
by wave models, transport models, and a sediment budget.
A large variety of strategies and measures to manage coastal areas that are facing a retreat
in shoreline have been applied over the last centuries, with the measures evolving over time
4
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:12==
based on observations of their effectiveness and potential drawbacks. Besides the accom-
modation with the changes, or a managed retreat from the area, coastal protection is one
approach to coastal management, with the goal of defending the coastal area against ero-
sion and flooding. Protection includes hard structures (groynes, breakwaters, dikes, walls,
elevated buildings) and soft structures (sand dunes, re-vegetation, sand nourishment) or a
combination of those, with the intention to “hold the line” (Faragò et al., 2018). While
hard solutions have shown to be effective in protecting some areas, they often can be related
to increased erosion and accelerated shoreline retreat in neighboring regions. Shoreface and
beach nourishment have the potential to overcome these problems . If they are well managed
and the location and amount of deposited sand is suitable, they can be part of an effective
and efficient coastal management strategy. The application of these soft measures requires a
good knowledge of local processes and is a central part of current research, investigating the
influence of timing, amount, and positioning of nourishment on coastal development. In a
Danish context, the annual nourishment by 2012 was about 3 million m3 per year (Van Rijn,
2010), and in 2022, over 4.5 million m3 of sand were delivered on the most exposed stretches
of the West Coast from Lodbjerg to Nymindegab (Dredging Today, 2023).
2.2
Sediment Transport Processes
Typically, sediment migration and changes in coastal systems are dominated by wave-driven
long-shore and cross-shore sediment transport processes. Additionally, changes in sediment
volumes are influenced by currents not related to changes in wave climate, such as large-scale
current systems, tidal currents, or interactions with river outlets, as well as aeolian transport,
describing wind-driven sediment migration on beaches and dunes. In the following, the focus
is set on wave-driven transport processes, describing the main contributions in cross-shore
and long-shore sediment transport after discussing the basic concept of sediment motion.
2.2.1
Basic Concepts of Sediment Transport
Sediment transport describes the process of sediment particles being set in motion and trans-
ported over certain distances, before eventually settling again. Generally, it is distinguished
between three modes of sediment transport: Bed load, suspended load, and wash load. Bed
load describes the part of the bed material that is set in motion by the water, but remains
close to the bed during its movement and frequently, more or less continuously, is in contact
with the bed, thus describing particles that roll, slide, or jump along the bed (Fredsøe and
Deigaard, 1992). In contrast, typically the case for smaller grain sizes, the suspended load
gets lifted up by turbulence in the water and moves for some time before settling and getting
in contact with the bed again. The third fraction, wash load, is typically not included in
sediment transport calculations and describes very fine particles that are continuously in
suspension and not part of the bed (Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992). The sheet flow regime
describes a status between bed load and suspended sediment transport, where sediment is
transported in several layers as bed load. This is typically the case for coarse sediment,
which will even for large bed shear stresses and turbulent fluctuations not be in suspension.
The modes of transport and mechanics are mainly determined by the characteristics of the
sediment and the dynamics of the water. The settling velocity, ws, describes how fast a grain
would typically settle given its gravitational force relative to the fluid and the drag forces
acting on it.
The coastal zones are usually characterized by transporting sediments in the range from
gravel (2 mm to 20 mm) over sand (0.06 mm to 2 mm) to very fine materials, such as
silt or clay. The following considerations only consider non-cohesive materials. For trans-
port processes, some of the most important characteristics of sediments are their grain size
distribution, shape, and density. While in many sediment transport formulations, one rep-
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
5
==PAGE:13==
resentative grain size is considered, usually the median grain size D50, the gradation of
sediment composition may strongly influence the amount of transported fractions, for exam-
ple by shielding effects, where larger grains remain on the bed surface, protecting smaller
grains below.
A sediment particle is set in motion if the driving forces of the fluid overcome the stabilizing
forces. The Shields parameter, θ, plays a central role in sediment transport formulations and
was first introduced by Shields (1936). It is a dimensionless parameter describing the ration
of instantaneous driving and stabilizing forces acting on the particles. It is defined as
θ =
U2
f
(s −1)gD
,
(2.1)
where Uf =
p
τ/ρ is the friction velocity calculated from the shear stress, τ, and the water
density, ρ, s is the relative density of the particle, and D its diameter, assuming a spherical
shape.
The contributions on the Shields parameter are both from skin friction of water
masses moving along the bed, θ′, and form drag on a body like dunes and ripples, θ′′, such
that θ = θ′ + θ′′.
The critical skin friction component of the Shields parameter, θc, at
which incipient motion is expected, is related to the grain Reynolds number, Re = (U′
fD)/ν.
The Shields diagram (Shields, 1936) gives an empirical relation between the grain Reynolds
number and the critical skin friction component of the Shield parameter in the form of a
diagram, modified later by Yalin and Karahan (1979). An explicit formulation of the relation
is provided by Sui et al. (2021).
The bed load transport rate, qB, is typically estimated based on the Shields parameter,
where several widely used equations, such as those suggested by Engelund and Fredsøe
(1976), Meyer-Peter (1948), or Wilson (1987), provide expressions for the bed load transport
rate, qB, in terms of the non-dimensional bed load,
ΦB =
qB
p
(s −1)gd3
.
(2.2)
ΦB is typically expressed in some form similar to ΦB = A(θ′ −θc)1.5, with large differences
between the individual expressions for A, such that the predicted bed load can vary with a
factor of around five between the formulas.
The suspended sediment transport calculations are based on the estimation of an instanta-
neous vertical distribution of the suspended sediment concentration, c(t), and the instan-
taneous velocity profile, u(t) over a wave period. The instantaneous suspended sediment
transport rate is described at each water depth as the product of concentration and velocity,
and the total suspended transport rate across the water column, qS, becomes
qS =
Z
z
u · c dz
.
(2.3)
Several approaches of varying complexity to finding a suitable estimation of velocity and
concentration profiles are available, considering different assumptions and cases.
Sediment transport under waves is firstly driven by the oscillating velocities created by the
wave motion, where sediment is set into motion when the shear stresses at the bottom become
high enough.
2.2.2
Cross-Shore Sediment Transport Processes
Wave-induced cross-shore sediment transport describes the processes of waves setting sedi-
ment into motion and moving it on period-average onshore or offshore. With waves generally
6
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:14==
being oscillatory processes, the wave motion itself only sets particles into motion and possibly
in suspension, leading to an oscillatory forward and backward movement of the sediments.
The period-averaged transport, however, occurs due to asymmetries between onshore and
offshore directed motion. Usually, the resulting onshore or offshore directed transport results
from a complex interplay of multiple effects, making it difficult to quantify the magnitude
of influence of those effects and the resulting transport rates or even directions. Processes
that typically lead to an average onshore transport include streaming, converging-diverging
effects, wave skewness and wave asymmetry, while processes usually leading to offshore trans-
port include the bed slope effect, return currents, and undertow.
Wave skewness and asymmetry describe the deviation of the wave from a sinusoidal shape,
with skewed waves resulting in higher, shorter crests and less deep, but longer troughs. This
results in larger bed shear stresses below the crest, such that possibly, sediment is only moved
by the corresponding positive bed shear stresses, but typically not or with lower intensity
mobilized back during lower negative bed shear stresses under the trough, leading to net
onshore transport. However, fine sediments might get stirred up under the crest and go into
suspension, and are then washed away with the offshore directed velocities under the trough,
leading to offshore directed transport of finer sands. In asymmetric waves, with the front
face of the waves being steeper than the back face, the velocities change very quickly from
negative to positive below the steep front face, forcing the shear stresses to change quickly,
too. This leads to the boundary layer during positive bed shear stresses not having much
time to grow, resulting in a smaller boundary layer with higher velocity gradients and higher
shear stresses, also contributing to increased onshore transport. Streaming results from the
velocities under a wave not being uniform in x-direction, such that due to local continuity,
the vertical velocity must be non-zero, which means that the momentum transfer rate is no
longer zero, and the mean momentum transfer must be balanced by a mean bed shear stress
associated to a mean onshore current.
The converging-diverging effect results from the typical decrease in water depth towards the
shore, such that velocities become higher towards the shore, and the mean pressure reduces
due to the convective mean acceleration towards the shore. As the pressure inside the wave
boundary layer equals the pressure outside the boundary layer, this results in a mean pressure
gradient in x-direction inside the boundary layer, which is balanced by a mean bed shear
stress corresponding to a mean onshore flow. The bed slope effect describes the increased
difficulty of transporting sediment upwards a slope, thus favoring offshore transport over
onshore transport. Return currents are related to the fact that the water depth is not equal
under a crest and a trough, resulting in a slight mean onshore displacement of water particles
with the wave movement near the surface. Assuming a steady state, no net water transport
over the water depth is possible, such that the return current, directed offshore, balances this
mean onshore movement near the crest. The undertow, similarly, is related to the onshore
transport of water masses in breaking waves, often referred to as rollers. As these water
masses are pushed onshore in the wave breaking, the undertow again balances this effect by
an offshore-directed mean velocity, assuring zero net velocity over the water column.
Typically, the transport outside the surf zone is dominated by onshore driving processes,
and inside the surf zone the transport processes are directed offshore. Because sediment is
transported toward the breaking point from both offshore and onshore directions, it converges
and deposits at this location, leading to the formation of a sandbar. As wave conditions
change, the breaking point shifts. This causes the sandbar to move to the new breaking
point, typically oscillating between the locations associated with calm and stormy wave
conditions.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
7
==PAGE:15==
Usually, all effects relevant outside of the surf zone are also present inside the surf zone,
but their significance is smaller because the energy dissipation in the wave boundary layer is
smaller compared to the energy loss caused by the wave breaking. The influence of different
effects is not equal for the bed load and suspended load, which might lead to different
magnitudes or directions in transport for different fractions of the sediments, which results
in sorting of grain sizes, leading to changing bed compositions at different depths.
2.2.3
Long-Shore Sediment Transport Processes
Wave-induced longshore sediment transport is caused by waves approaching at an angle to-
wards the coast, resulting in a longshore current in the surf zone. This current may transport
sediments stirred up by the wave motion, in many locations leading to considerable amounts
of sediment transport, often dominating the erosion and accretion processes observed at
coasts (Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992).
Longshore currents arise from the decrease in wave energy and radiation stresses towards the
coasts after waves start to break. The momentum balance in the cross-shore direction thus
results in a slope in the water surface, the wave set-up. However, in the momentum balance
in the longshore direction, the momentum flux cannot be balanced by a slope in the surface
but instead must be balanced by a mean bed shear stress, associated with a mean current.
The momentum balance in the longshore y-direction reads
∂Sxy
∂x
= τb −∂
∂x

ρEh∂Vy
∂x

,
(2.4)
where the first term describes the gradient in the flux of shore-parallel momentum, the shear
component of the radiation stress, Sxy = Fm sin α cos α, with Fm being the momentum part
of the radiation stresses. The second term describes the bed shear stress, and the third
term is the momentum exchange, expressed by the product of the velocity gradient and
the momentum exchange coefficient, E.
For waves traveling perpendicular to the coast,
as well as close to parallel to the coast, the longshore current will result in being close to
zero, while the maximum current is typically observed for waves arriving under an angle of
approximately 45 degrees. The suspended sediment transport resulting from the longshore
current can be expressed equally as in the cross-shore case, by the product of the suspended
sediment concentration and the velocity profile, as in Equation 2.3.
A widely used formula to estimate the longshore transport rates, the so-called CERC-formula
suggested by the Coastal Engineering Research Center, US (1984), describes the long-shore
transport based on the wave characteristics, independent from the grain size or the coastal
profile. Advanced models are able to approximate the longshore velocities and suspended sed-
iment concentrations along a profile, allowing to estimate the transport rates along a coastal
profile. However, still, longshore transport rates remain extremely difficult to model accu-
rately, as the nearshore hydrodynamics and sediment transport processes are very complex
and the influence of the variability in wave climate, sediment composition, and morphology
is relatively high (Kahl et al., 2024).
2.3
The Concept of Depth of Closure
The depth of closure (DoC) is a key concept in coastal engineering works and represents an
empirical limit of cross-shore sediment transport relevance in sandy beaches, and is often
used in calculations and estimations on coastal dynamics, also referred to as “active depth”.
It is defined as “ the most landward depth seaward of which there is no significant change
in bottom elevation and no significant net sediment transport between the nearshore and
the offshore” (Kraus and Harikai, 1983), defining “a fundamental morphodynamic boundary
8
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:16==
separating a landward active zone from a seaward less active zone over the period defined by
the profile observations used to define closure” (Nicholls et al., 1996). This description leaves
uncertainties in the formulation of “significant” or “active” /“less active” and doesn’t provide
clear limits, and the selection of threshold values and time spans is up to the individual
researcher or engineer. Additionally, the DoC doesn’t represent a limit of sediment transport.
Therefore, it is expected to see significant cross-shore transport outside the depth of closure
(Wright, 1995) and across the boundary between nearshore and offshore during storms. A
thorough discussion of the concept of DoC and suggestions for addressing its challenges is
given by Aragonés et al. (2019).
The typical description of closure depth goes back to Hallermeier (1980), who divides the
coastal profile into three zones, illustrated in Figure 2.1:
• The Littoral Zone, where intense bed activity takes place, caused by complex non-linear
processes due to near-breaking waves and breaker-related currents, up to a water depth
of dl.
• The Shoal Zone, where waves have moderate effects on the bed and are likely to cause
little sand transport, stretching from a water depth dl to a water depth di.
• The Offshore Zone, seawards from a water depth di, where the water depth is relatively
large in terms of the surface wave effects on the bed.
Figure 2.1: Annual zonation of seasonal sand beach profile, where dl is the maximum water
depth for motion initiation by median wave condition, and di is the maximum water depth
for nearshore erosion by extreme (12 hours per year) wave condition. Figure taken from
Hallermeier (1980).
The boundary of the Littoral Zone, dl, is defined such that typically, significant longshore
transport and intense cross-shore transport is limited to the Littoral Zone. An analytical
approximation for the inner depth of closure, dl, has been given for quartz sand in seawater
by Hallermeier (1978) as
dl = 2.28He −68.5
 
H2
e
gT 2e
!
,
(2.5)
where He is the local extreme wave height and Te the extreme wave period, which is suggested
to be selected as the wave height and corresponding period that are not exceeded more than
12 hours per year in agreement with different data sets, according to Hallermeier (1978).
Birkemeier (1985) re-evaluated the relation suggested by Hallermeier (1978) based on profile
data and suggested an improved approximation for the inner DoC,
dl = 1.75He −57.9
 
H2
e
gT 2e
!
.
(2.6)
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
9
==PAGE:17==
For the outer DoC, di, marking the transition from the shoal zone to the offshore zone,
Hallermeier (1983) suggest the use of
di = 0.013 · HsTs
s
g
(s −1)D50
,
(2.7)
where Hs and Ts are the significant wave height and period, and D50 is the median grain
size.
All equations don’t consider the local profile, and only di is calculated considering the sedi-
ment grain size, while Equation 2.5 and Equation 2.6 only depend on the wave parameters.
This means that the closure depth calculations presented here are very generic and not
adapted to local conditions, but seem to match measurements at various locations reason-
ably well, as stated by Birkemeier (1985).
2.4
The Concept of Sediment Budget
The basic concept behind the sediment budget is the application of the conservation of mass
to a defined cell of a coastal area, the control area, with volumes or volume rates of sediments
entering and leaving the cell through different pathways over a specific period of time, leading
to a surplus or deficit of sediment in the control area. This corresponds to accretion or erosion
within the coastal area. The sediment budget can be evaluated on different scales, from local-
scale sediment budgets in the order of tens to hundreds of meters for individual locations and
projects to large-scale sediment budgets for regions, in the scale of several hundred meters
to kilometers. The time scale can range from short-term evaluations for individual events or
seasons, to long-term analysis representing historical time periods (Rosati, 2005).
The sediment budget calculations require the definition of the area boundaries, typically
represented by an onshore and offshore boundary together with two lateral boundaries. The
“conceptual sediment budget”, discussed by Kana and Stevens (1992), describes qualitatively
the processes, especially wave-driven pathways, that are expected to contribute significantly
to the sediment budget of the area. The “sediment pathways” describe the transfer pro-
cesses into and out of the cell, and relevant pathways may be identified and estimated with
knowledge of the site (Rosati, 2005). Typical pathways include wave-driven longshore and
cross-shore sediment transport processes, movement of bedforms, aeolian transport, river
inlets, erosion of bluffs, nourishment and deposition, dredging works, losses to submarine
canyons, and sea level change (Rosati, 2005). The sediment budget describes the balance of
sediment gains and losses, also referred to as sources and sinks, through the pathways for
the control area, where the difference between the terms equals the volume change in the
area. Mathematically, the sediment budget can be described, either in terms of volumes or
rates, following Rosati (2005):
X
Qsource −
X
Qsink −∆V + P −R = Residual
,
(2.8)
where Qsource/sink are the source and sink terms, ∆V is the net volume change in the area,
and P/ R are the amounts of sand manually placed or removed from the cell. The residual
represents the difference between the system calculations and the observed volume changes,
thus describing the degree to which the system is balanced (Kraus and Rosati, 1998). If the
system is balanced, also referred to as “closed”, the residual is zero. Several approaches to
calculating a sediment budget for different cases and purposes have been developed, however,
generally applying Equation 2.8.
In many regions, the sediment budget is strongly influenced by the longshore transport
quantities. The quantities can be described as leftward-directed, QL, and rightward directed
10
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:18==
transport rates or volumes, QR. The longshore net transport is defined as Qnet = QR −QL,
and the gross transport volume, describing the total transported volume over the period, as
Qgross = QL+QR (Rosati, 2005). A positive net longshore transport means more sediment is
transported towards the right (typically seen from the beach looking offshore) than sediment
is transported towards the left over the period under study. The ratio between the net and
gross volumes Qnet/Qgross, describes the asymmetry in the longshore transport process. The
extreme cases are the longshore transport being balanced over the period, which is the case
if the ratio is close to zero, or the longshore transport being unidirectional, in case the ratio
is close to one. Similar net and gross volume definitions apply to the cross-shore transport
volumes.
The sediment budget describes a concept widely used in coastal engineering, representing a
fundamental element of studies on coastal sediment transport processes for a large variety
of applications (Komar, 1998), and “serve as a common framework to evaluate alternative
project designs, develop an understanding of sediment transport pathways through time, or
estimate future rates of sediment accretion or erosion” (Rosati, 2005). The general sediment
budget was first introduced by Bowen et al. (1966) and applied to the southern Californian
coast.
For a comprehensive sediment budget model, the magnitudes of the individual terms de-
scribing the pathways are required, posing a challenge in applying a sediment budget to a
specific area, besides the initial selection of considered pathways and its boundaries. In order
to account for the uncertainties, the relative magnitude and direction of pathways may be
varied, resulting in a range of possible sediment budget solutions (Rosati, 2005). Bowen
et al. (1966) discuss the diffusive behavior of sediment movement especially in coastal areas,
concluding that there might be limitations to purely deterministic sediment budget models
in capturing the volume changes observed in reality.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
11
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Study Area and Data Sets
This chapter introduces the study area at the Western Danish Coast in terms of the location
and the conditions characterizing the region and presents the data sets used to analyze the
local morphological changes and underlying sediment transport processes. Specifically, a
data set on long-term bed level measurements along several cross-shore transects represents
the core of this study. A wave hindcast data set is used as input for a model approach to the
coastal dynamics, allowing to compare observed and theoretical estimates of morphological
changes in the study area.
3.1
Study Area - The Danish West Coast
The West Coast of Denmark, stretching along several hundred kilometers from north to
south, is part of the eastern coast of the North Sea. Consequently, it is exposed to harsh
climate and intense wave actions due to the strong westerly winds created by the weather
fronts over the North Sea, making it a largely vulnerable part of the Danish Coastline. This
coastal zone represents a highly dynamic environment, where sediment transport is strongly
influenced by tidal and wave-induced currents (Leth et al., 2004).
3.1.1
Selected Study Site - Husby Klitplantage
As the Western Coast is characterized by changing conditions along the coastline, inheriting
varying processes shaping the coastline and resulting in different morphological develop-
ments, it is challenging to make statements on processes and sediment budgets for the full
coast, as local conditions have a large influence on the coastal system. Therefore, this study
focuses on a selected study site in the center of the Western Danish Coast: A stretch of
approximately 7.1 km length near Husby, located in front of a nature reserve, the Husby
Klitplantage. A map illustrating the location and surroundings of the study site is given in
Figure 3.1. At this coastal stretch, no coastal protection measures have been carried out,
and the coast develops naturally (Vestjylland, 2024). This makes it an ideal location to
study the natural processes and sediment budget conditions, without having to consider the
influence of significant human activities that are often difficult to track and evaluate.
3.1.2
Environmental Characteristics
In the following, a short description of the environmental conditions characterizing the coastal
evolution at the Western Danish Coast and the study area in particular is provided.
3.1.2.1
Wave Climate
With strong westerly winds, especially prevalent in autumn and winter due to low-pressure
systems along the polar front, and a fetch along the North Sea of approximately 400-600
km, the Danish North Sea coast is exposed to a high-energy, storm-dominated wave climate,
12
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:20==
with a mean significant wave height of approximately 1.5 m along the coast (Aagaard, 2010).
The coasts are micro-tidal, with a tidal range of approximately 0.8 m near the study area,
such that the near-shore morphological development is strongly wave-dominated (Aagaard,
2010). The wave climate in the study area will be discussed in more detail when presenting
the wave climate data set in section 3.3.
54°N
55°N
56°N
57°N
58°N
 8°E
10°E
12°E
 50 mi 
 50 km 
56°05'N
56°10'N
56°15'N
56°20'N
8°E
8°10'E
8°20'E
8°30'E
8°40'E
8°50'E
Esri, HERE, Garmin, USGS, NGA
 2 mi 
 5 km 
56°14'N
56°16'N
56°18'N
7°55'E
8°E
8°05'E
8°10'E
8°15'E
8°20'E
Earthstar Geographics
 1 mi 
 1 km 
Figure 3.1: Maps illustrating the selected study location (red squares) in terms of (a) the
location within Denmark, and (b) the location in the near region. In (c), a satellite map
displays the study transects introduced in section 3.2 for reference.
3.1.2.2
Sea Level
Denmark has in the past experienced large changes in sea level due to isostatic elevation of
the land after the end of the last glaciation, around 2 mm/year in Northern Denmark (Su
et al., 2021), and eustatic changes in the sea level. According to Su et al. (2021), Denmark
experiences a long-term relative sea level rise of > 2 mm/year and will experience a mean
sea level rise between 0.4 and 0.6 m by 2070-2100 relative to 1980-2010, with the rate in sea
level rise predicted to increase in the future. Since 1990, in the area of the study site, a sea
level rise of 7.8 cm has been documented (Thomas Jacobsen, 2021).
3.1.2.3
Current
According to Christensen et al. (2000), an oscillating current driven by tides and winds is
present along the Western Coast of Denmark, on average directed northwards and indepen-
dent of the wave-generated current close to the coast, intensified during storms due to wind
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
13
==PAGE:21==
guts. It has been shown that the current is able to transport sediment in water depths where
the wave-induced currents are not expected to have any significant influence on sediment
transport. This indicates that the coastal current, combined with wave action, can trans-
port large amounts of sediment (Christensen et al., 2000). Measurements taken in 1992 and
displayed in Figure 3.2 show current velocities in the order of approximately 0.5 m/s at water
depths of 13 m.
Figure 3.2: Modeled (red) and measured (blue) tidal current velocity at 13 m water depth
in 1992 at Fjaltring, approximately 20 km north of Husby, where positive values represent
northgoing currents. Figure taken from Christensen et al. (2000).
Figure 3.3: Measurement data on median grain size, D50 (here d50), at different depths, h,
(“Dybde”) and locations along the Western Coast, where the “Linie nr.” represents positions
along the entire West Coast line, with the numbers increasing from north to south. Husby
Klitplantage corresponds to a location of approximately 5300. Figure taken from Christensen
et al. (2000).
3.1.2.4
Sediment Characteristics
Christensen et al. (2000) compile measurement data of median sediment grain size along the
Western Danish Coast at various water depths, as given in Figure 3.3, providing valuable
14
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:22==
information for the estimation of grain size distribution along a profile depending on its
location, and the grain sizes used in this report are based on this data. For the region of
the study area, the median grain size ranges between D50 = 0.15 mm at a water depth of
h = 10 m and D50 = 0.35 mm at a water depth of h = 1 m.
3.1.2.5
Morphology
The natural retreat of the shoreline along the Western Coast is in the order of 2-5 m/year,
where the development of the coast has been closely related to the geological conditions in
the subsurface (Leth et al., 2004). The geology in the area is strongly related to the last
glacial period. The coast at Husby Klitplantage consists of glacial hills covered by wind-
blown sand with well-developed sand dunes, and the coast is documented to be subject to
chronic erosion over the long-term, mainly driven by strong sediment transport processes in
longshore direction (Vestjylland, 2024). The harsh climate along the Western Danish Coast
results in a strongly dynamic coastline, with large amounts of transported sediments all along
the Western Coastal zone (Vestjylland, 2024). While the wind impact on the land area can
relocate significant volumes of sediment, constantly reshaping the dune areas (Karlsson and
Larsen, 2021), the largest impact on the coastal zone is represented by the ocean. Resulting
from differences along the shoreline in wave exposure, relative sea level rise and geological
conditions, the Western Coastline experiences substantial chronic changes.
Figure 3.4: Typical representation of the longshore transport rates and gradients along the
Danish West Coast, here taken from Agger (2024). The large brown arrows represent the
magnitude and direction of net transport, and the brown numbers indicate the yearly net
sediment transport volume in m3/year. The location of the study site is marked in red.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
15
==PAGE:23==
The longshore sediment transport volumes are large, with a point of divergence located near
Lodbjerg. North of that point, the net transport is northwards with increasing rates, while
south of the point, the southward-directed net transport increases up to 2.3 million m3 at
Nymindegabe (Aagaard, 2010), which can be seen in Figure 3.4. As a result of the increasing
transport rates southwards from Lodbjerg, the region experiences substantial volume loss and
erosion, which is also evident at Husby Klitplantage.
3.2
Cross-shore Bathymetry Profile Data
The data set representing the basis of this study, obtained by Kystdirektoratet in July 2024,
compiles a large amount of long-term bed level measurements of cross-shore profiles along nu-
merous transects at the Western Danish Coast and gives an understanding of morphological
changes over time.
Figure 3.5: Map showing all profile transects available in the data set Lodbjerg-Nymindegab
of the West Coast measurements. The transects are numbered from north to south (“LocId”),
where only every tenth number is displayed. The approximate total length of the stretch is
indicated. The location of the study site is indicated by the red box.
16
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:24==
3.2.1
Data Specifications
It covers the stretch referred to as Lodbjerg-Nymindegab, shown in Figure 3.5, and is part
of the “West Coast measurements” transect data set covering the complete Western Danish
Coast with a spacing of approximately 1 km. The transects extend typically from either the
dunes, beach, or shoreline to varying depths, some transects only covering shoal zones, other
measurements reaching up to around 5 km offshore.
In the profile data set of the West Coast measurements, both land measurements and bed
level measurements are conducted, combining beach and dune topography with bathymetry
data. The methods RTK GPS1 or total station, or a combination of both, are used for land
measurements. For measurements, at least two inland fixed points are used for controlling,
where one point is used as a reference station and the other one represents a control point,
such that the biased error is below 3 cm.
Measurements underwater use echo sounder
multibeam scans obtained from a boat, with an expected biased error in height varying
between 2 cm and 4 cm (Ofelia Rivero, 2018). Information on the data format in which the
profile data is provided can be found in Appendix A.
3.2.2
Availability of Data for the Study
The data available for this research covers the stretch of Lodbjerg-Nymindegab and contains
profiles at 146 different locations. This contains only locations with a coastal area number
(Area, see Appendix A) of 12, and a longshore offset value (Transect, see Appendix A)
ranging from 4010 to 5880. For simplicity, the locations will in this report be enumerated
starting at the north, referred to by Location Identification Number (LocId) in the following.
In Figure 3.5 all the profile locations are mapped together with the LocId for every 10th
location. Each location reference point is plotted, and all available profiles at each location
are plotted on top of each other. This means that the lines in the map describe the maximum
extent of all profiles together at the given transect location. The reference points are located
with approximately 1 km spacing along a stretch of around 114 km. However, only after
1957 all the locations were covered. Before 1936, only LocIds 1 to 58 were covered. The
locations covered in every year are compiled in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Visualization of all combinations of Location and year for which profile data is
available, where green represents that profile data is available, and light red that data is
missing. Between the red lines, the data on profiles within the study area is given.
The temporal distribution of data is also given in Figure 3.6. The first profiles were measured
in 1874, followed by measurements from 1879 to 1938, where data sampling took place
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
17
==PAGE:25==
approximately every second year. Between 1939 and 1953, no measurements were taken.
After that, the measurements were taken up again and carried out every 1-2 years, and from
1998 to 2023, measurements were taken every year at nearly all locations. The matrix shows
that data availability depends both on the location and year, making it important in the
analysis of the profiles to consider if for a specific selection of time periods and locations data
is available for all possible combinations. Otherwise, years that miss data for some selected
locations, or vice versa, might need to be excluded from analysis.
3.2.3
Profiles selected for the Case Study
For the evaluation of the Husby Klitplantage case study, the profiles with LocId 88 to 95
were selected to be part of the analysis.
This choice is not based on specific criteria or
boundaries, but rather on a general sense of which profiles might be considered to be part
of the area of interest. For the selection of years to be studied, it was chosen to include all
years where data is available for all eight locations in the study area. This results in data
for 48 individual years, ranging from 1957 to 2023 (cf. Figure 3.6) and covering a time span
of 66 years. The selected transects are displayed in Figure 3.7. Again, the transect lines
represent all profiles at the location for the selected years plotted on top of each other, thus
the maximum stretch where data is available from at least one year.
56°14'N
56°16'N
56°18'N
56°20'N
8°E
8°05'E
8°10'E
8°15'E
SDFE, Esri, HERE, Garmin, USGS, NGA
 1 mi 
 2 km 
Figure 3.7: Location reference point and transects for the profiles selected to be part of the
Husby Klitplantage study area. All profiles included in the study period are plotted on top
of each other for each location, thus indicating for each transect all positions where at least
one profile contains data. Additionally, the grid points of the wave data set are indicated,
and the grid points used for each transect’s offshore wave conditions are marked in red.
18
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:26==
3.2.4
Pre-processing of Profile Data
The profile grid points vary in spacing and are not recorded for constant positions between
years. To facilitate the analysis, therefore, the profile data is linearly interpolated to 1 m
evenly spaced grid points for all years. Additionally, in many analysis, it might be more
useful, especially when comparing across different transects, to refer to the position along
the transect as the distance from the shoreline rather than the distance from a reference
point unique to every transect. When the interest is to look at developments over time,
it is crucial to keep a fixed x-location, such that instead of using the distance from the
shoreline in each specific year, the distance to the shoreline during the first year included in
the study is used, in the following referred to as the distance from the “initial shoreline”. In
the following analysis, it is always clarified what the x-position refers to. For some analysis
in the following, the profile data was interpolated to a 2D grid, allowing to visualize the full
area rather than single profile lines.
3.3
Wave Data
Information on the wave climate in the study area is required to perform calculations on
closure depth and sediment transport quantities. This section describes the data set used to
represent the wave climate conditions in the study area.
3.3.1
The Copernicus Marine Service Wave Data Set
A long-term hindcast wave model data source is used in order to obtain information on
the wave climate during different periods of time, also allowing to extract data at different
positions.
The data set is taken from the “Atlantic- European North West Shelf- Wave
Physics Reanalysis” product provided by the European Union-Copernicus Marine Service
(2020) (CMEMS) and contains data with a spatial resolution of 0.0135◦× 0.0303◦produced
by the wave model WAVEWATCH III, with the atmospheric forcing taken from the ECMWF
ERA-5 Numerical Weather Prediction reanalysis.
Figure 3.8: Time series extracted from CMEMS at the grid point closest to the offshore points
at LocId 88, as indicated in Figure 3.7, for the full years 2000 and 2023. The figure shows 3
hours intervals of significant wave height, Hm0, together with the wave height only exceeded
on average 12 hours per year, He, and corresponding data points, as well as statistical wave
parameters barHm0, Hm0,RMS, and Hm0,1/3 derived from the time series.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
19
==PAGE:27==
Wave data set: European Union-Copernicus Marine Service (2020)
Product Name
Atlantic - European North West Shelf
- Wave Physics Reanalysis
Product Identifier
NWSHELF_REANALYSIS_WAV_004_015
Data Set
MetO-NWS-WAV-RAN
Data Type
Long term hindcast outputs from a wave model
Period
01.01.2000 00:00 - 31.12.2023 21:00
Time resolution
3 hours
Grid resolution
0.0135◦× 0.0303◦
Extracted Variables
Sea surface wave significant height, VHM0 [m]
Sea surface wave from direction, VMDR [◦]
Sea surface wave period at variance spectral
density maximum, VTPK [s]
Data accessed
24.11.2024
Data extracted for grid point offshore from LocId 88 (see Figure 3.7)
Location (Latitude, Longitude)
56.2743◦N, 8.0634◦E
Location (Easting, Northing)
436237.59 m , 6239645.5 m (UTM 32)
He, Te
5.43 m, 12.32 s
barHm0, ¯Tm0,
1.41 m, 5.73 s
Hm0,RMS, Tm0,RMS
1.68 m, 6.31 s
Hm0,1/3, Tm0,1/3
2.44 m, 7.82 s
Table 3.1: Specifications on wave data set used in the study, together with derived statistical
wave parameters extracted for LocId 88.
The used data set contains three-hour interval data from January 1, 2000, to December 31,
2023, thus providing data on wave climate for the most recent 24 years. For this study, the
variables VHM0 [m], describing the sea surface significant wave height (Hm0), VTPK [◦],
describing the sea surface wave direction, and VTM10 [s], describing the sea surface wave
period at variance spectral density maximum (Tp), are used. The exact locations of grid
data points in relation to the profile data set are indicated in Figure 3.7. To present the
general wave conditions in the study area, it is selected to show in this section the wave data
extracted for the grid point close to the furthest offshore transect point recorded for transect
LocId 88, however, in further analysis later, wave data is also extracted from different grid
points. The selected grid points corresponding to each LocId are marked in Figure 3.7. The
three-hour interval significant wave height, Hm0, for LocId 88 is displayed as a time series
over the 24 years in Figure 3.8 and as a wave rose, combining measured wave heights with the
wave direction, in Figure 3.9. The specifications of the data set are compiled in Table 3.1.
While Figure 3.8 provides information on the temporal distribution of wave heights, Fig-
ure 3.9 visualizes the wave heights in terms of the direction from which waves are coming, in
nautical convention. As expected, with the ocean located to the west of the coast, the vast
majority of waves are arriving from the west, typically between around 210◦to 330◦. While
most wave bins in that range show a comparable amount of wave intervals counting to that
direction, a clear peak in the wave direction is observed for the wave direction bin between
300◦and 315◦, with more than twice as many incident waves coming from that direction
compared to the other bins.
In Figure 3.8 the significant wave height ranges between close to 0 m and almost 8 m. A
yearly rhythm of smaller wave heights during summer and stormy conditions with larger
20
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:28==
wave heights in winter can be recognized, where in almost all years significant wave heights
of at least 4-5 m are reached during winter, however, in many cases much larger waves, up to
7-8 m, are observed. Looking at the wave heights in Figure 3.9, over half of the three-hour
intervals show significant wave heights of less than 2 m, with the distribution of wave heights
being relatively similar across the bins. As can also be seen from Figure 3.8, a considerable
amount of intervals show significant wave heights between 3 and 4 m, but only a small
fraction reaches waves above 4 m.
Figure 3.9: Wave Rose indicating relative frequency of mean wave direction and significant
wave height, Hm0, for 3 hours intervals for the years 2000 to 2023, extracted from the
Copernicus Marine Service data for the wave grid point at LocId 88, as marked in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.10: Monthly mean of (a) wave height, (b) period and (c) direction over the years
2000-2023 at the grid point offshore from LocId 88, indicated in Figure 3.7.
In (c), the
orientation of transect LocId 88 is indicated in red to allow a comparison between transect
orientation and wave direction.
To get a better overview of the seasonality already detected, but difficult to quantify in
Figure 3.8, Figure 3.10 compiles the data set variables wave height, wave period, and wave
direction as a mean over the 24 years for each month individually. As expected, the wave
heights are larger in winter than in summer, with an average difference of 0.9 m between
January and July.
Equally, the wave period decreases during the summer months, with
6 s in July compared to 8 s in January. The mean wave direction reaches its maximum
in April, decreasing until October, before increasing again. The figure also indicates the
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
21
==PAGE:29==
angle of the transect, showing that waves arrive in all months under an angle from north to
the beach, only October and November practically traveling perpendicular to the coast. In
April, waves on average arrive under an angle of 26.6◦to the coast. As longshore transport
processes increase both with wave height and the angle between waves and coast, Figure 3.10
indicates that the average longshore transport rates undergo a trade-off between largest wave
heights in winter, decreasing during summer, and incident wave angles, largest during spring
and early summer.
3.3.2
Representative Wave Height
While for specific applications, it is very useful to consider a time series of wave data, it is
in other cases more practical and efficient to use statistical wave parameters derived from
a wave time series. The application-specific suitable choice of a representative wave height
based on the time series is crucial for the calculations, as it significantly influences the results
depending on which wave parameters are selected.
The wave heights available from the data set are not given as individual wave heights but
already represent statistical wave parameters, derived as wave parameters integrated from
the modeled two-dimensional (frequency, direction) wave spectrum. In the case of the wave
height, the significant wave height for each three-hour interval is given as Hm0, which is
related to the zero-moment of the wave spectrum, m0, representing the area under the
spectrum curve by
Hm0 = 4√m0
.
(3.1)
Another typical form of describing significant wave heights is given as Hs, calculated from
the largest third of the total N individual wave heights, Hi by
Hs = H1/3 =
1
1
3N
1/3N
X
i=1
Hi
.
(3.2)
While both methods are trying to capture the significant wave height based on different
approaches, and typically result in similar values, especially in deep water, they are different
measures and do not necessarily result in identical values, where the calculation of Hm0
typically results in 5% larger values (Govaere and Alfaro, 2024).
There are several ways, depending on the application, to find a representative wave height
for a time series of significant wave heights, where the most common methods are the Root-
Mean-Square wave height and the mean significant wave height. The Root-Mean-Square
significant wave height, HRMS is calculated by
Hm0,RMS =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
H2
m0,i
(3.3)
giving more weight to intervals of larger wave heights. This is in many cases appropriate
as the transport processes are dominated by more energetic waves. This effect can even be
increased by applying the mean to the largest third of the interval significant wave heights,
similar to Equation 3.2, by
Hm0,1/3 =
1
1
3Nintervals
1/3Nintervals
X
i=1
Hm0,i
.
(3.4)
However, if the focus is more on understanding the transport processes under average con-
ditions, the use of the mean significant wave height might be useful, though in general
22
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:30==
underestimating the influence of periods of larger waves on the processes:
Hm0 = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Hm0
.
(3.5)
For calculations where the extreme wave heights are of major interest, the extreme wave
height, He, is estimated as the significant wave height that is on average not exceeded for
more than twelve hours per year.
All representative wave heights calculated based on the just described methods over the
selected 24-year time series are compiled in Table 3.1 and visualized in the time series plot
in Figure 3.8 for the grid point offshore from LocId 88.
3.3.3
Representative Wave Period
The representative wave period, corresponding to a selected representative wave height, is
typically calculated in relation to the found representative wave height. Usually, the peak
wave period is related to the significant wave height, Hs, by
Tp = αHβ
s
.
(3.6)
The parameters α and β, which will be applied to wave data extracted at all grid points
and for all time intervals, are estimated based on the wave data extracted for the grid point
offshore from LocId 88 as indicated in Figure 3.7 for the full period of 2000 to 2023. The
constants are selected based on a visual fit of the relation to the selected data set, as seen
in Figure 3.11, where significant wave height and period are plotted against each other for
each time interval. Even though Equation 3.6 in general uses the significant wave height
Hs, which is not available for the CMEMS data set, it is assumed that the available Hm0 is
closely enough representing the required variable and the equation holds true.
Figure 3.11: Peak wave period, Tp, plotted over significant wave height, Hm0, for each interval
within the 24 years wave data time series as scatter, where data density is indicated by color.
The fitted relation between wave period and wave height is displayed.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
23
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Description of Models
Besides the pure analysis of observations on the morphological changes documented by the
cross-shore profile measurements, this research also includes the application of sediment
transport models to the study area, supporting the understanding of the local distribution
and significance of processes ongoing in the coastal area under study and their implications
on the concepts of depth of closure and sediment budget. This chapter is dedicated to giving
a brief introduction to the two models used for analyzing the cross-shore and longshore
transport rates expected along the profiles, including a description of the model setup used
for the studies.
4.1
Cross-shore Transport Model
For the estimation of cross-shore transport processes in this study, the MatRANS model
provided by Fuhrman (2019) has been applied for selected wave conditions and along various
water depths.
4.1.1
The MatRANS Model
The MatRANS model is MATLAB-based and solves the cross-shore horizontal component of
the incompressible Navier Stokes equations together with the k−ω turbulence closure model
described by Wilcox (2008), allowing to simulate boundary layer behavior in wave plus cur-
rent cases. The cross-shore sediment transport description is coupled to this hydrodynamic
model, which allows to account for several features believed to have the most significant
impact on cross-shore transport rates. These include, among others, non-sinusoidal wave
shape, streaming in the boundary layer, bed slope modification to the Shields parameter,
converging-diverging effects, and hindered settling. The model solves the equations for a
fixed wave condition (H, T, L) at a fixed water depth by the resulting total amplitude of
free stream velocity signal, U1m, and wave shape parameters (r and ϕ), h. This means the
solution is calculated for a specific point along a cross-shore transect.
The hydrodynamic model in MatRANS solves a simplified version of the horizontal compo-
nent of the incompressible Reynolds-averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) equation,
∂u
∂t = −1
ρ
∂p
∂x + ν ∂2u
∂y2 + ∂
∂y

νT
∂u
∂y

−

u∂u
∂x + v∂u
∂y

−2
3
∂k
∂x
,
(4.1)
where u is the horizontal velocity in cross-shore x-direction, v is the vertical y-velocity, ν
is the kinematic viscosity, νT is the eddy viscosity, and the turbulent kinetic energy, k,
is calculated from the k −ω model.
The model is solved assuming constant form wave
propagation and applying local continuity to the leading order terms. Second-order terms,
24
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:32==
responsible for phenomena such as wave boundary layer streaming, can optionally be included
or excluded, while all third-order terms are neglected. The equations are usually solved from
the initial condition of a motionless water column, requiring a warm-up phase until reaching
the equilibrium state. The bed is considered a friction wall with no-slip boundary condition.
The bed load can be calculated from several options of bed load formulas, all based on the
bed shear stress obtained from the hydrodynamic model. The suspended sediment model
solves the turbulent diffusion equation given in Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992),
∂c
∂t = ∂(wsc)
∂y
+ ∂
∂y

ϵs
∂c
∂y

−

u ∂c
∂x + v ∂c
∂y

,
(4.2)
for the instantaneous concentration of suspended sediment, c, in the water column, and the
suspended sediment transport for each time is then calculated as
qs =
Z hm
2D
ucdy
,
(4.3)
where ws is the settling velocity, ϵs is the diffusion coefficient, D is the grain diameter and
hm is the total height of the modeled domain. For the bottom boundary condition of the
suspended sediment concentration, several options are implemented.
4.1.2
Simulation Setup
The MatRANS model gives many options to select between different equations to be applied
and gives the possibility to include or exclude several effects.
This study on cross-shore
transport rates doesn’t focus on the in-depth understanding of the difference in the appli-
cation of equations but uses the cross-shore sediment transport model as a tool to compare
the magnitude of cross-shore sediment transport expected at the Danish Western Coast at
different positions. Therefore, most of the model options are kept constant across different
runs and their influence on the results is not further investigated here. Even though the set-
tings might have a significant influence on the magnitude and possibly direction of transport
rates, the focus is to compare results between different water depths and wave conditions
and get an overview of the order of magnitude in transport rates along the transects. When
interpreting results, the influence of possible deficiencies in the tuning of the model setup is
to be considered.
4.1.2.1
Model Settings
All model runs include the influence of a turbulence model, streaming effects, as well as
calculations on suspended sediment, while a bed slope effect is neglected due to relatively
mild slopes at the areas of interest, and converging-diverging effects are not considered based
on the same reasoning. For calculations on bed load, the Engelund-Fredsøe bed load formula
(Engelund and Fredsøe, 1976) is applied. The method for suspended sediment concentration
boundary condition is taken from Einstein (1950), and hindered settling is considered. The
model is always run for 13 wave periods, and only results for the last wave period are
considered for analysis.
4.1.2.2
Wave Description
For the simulations, the CMEMS wave data set described in section 3.3 is used. For each
run, the data at the grid point in the CMEMS data set for the simulated transect as given
in Figure 3.7 is extracted. From the 24-year time series, a representative sea state according
to subsection 3.3.2 and subsection 3.3.3 is selected, as given in Table 3.1. The wave condi-
tions for a certain depth are then calculated by refracting and shoaling the waves from the
extracted offshore wave conditions to the desired water depth following linear wave theory,
as described for example by Fredsøe (2008).
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
25
==PAGE:33==
Rather than applying a sinusoidal wave shape, it is intended to include the influence of a
non-linear wave shape in the sediment transport calculation in the model setup, such that
the wave input parameters require to describe both asymmetry and skewness and must
be calculated before starting the MatRANS calculation.
This is done according to the
parametrization of the free-stream non-linear wave orbital motion described by Ruessink
et al. (2012), providing a method to estimate the non-linearity parameter, r, and the phase,
ϕ, which can be used as input for the MatRANS model.
4.1.2.3
Sediment Description
A sediment grain size of D50 = 0.15 mm is used based on the findings of Christensen et al.
(2000) as described in subsubsection 3.1.2.4. As the model is used mainly to investigate the
behavior of sediment around the depth of closure, the results of sediment samples at a water
depth of 10 m seem to be a reasonable estimate. The bed roughness is taken as kN = 2.5D,
and the relative sediment density is assumed to be s = 2.65. The critical Shields Parameter
is assumed to be 0.045, and the fall velocity is calculated from
ws =
v
u
u
t
4(s −1)gD50
3

1.4 +
36
wsD50/ν

,
(4.4)
where g is gravity, s is the relative density and ν is the kinematic viscosity.
4.2
Longshore Transport Model
As the longshore transport gradients are expected to play a significant role in the sediment
budget of the study area, the modeling of wave-induced longshore currents and related sedi-
ment transport is a central part of the analysis. In the first step, the longshore current model
described by Deigaard et al. (1986a) was implemented to understand the formation and dis-
tribution of wave-induced longshore currents depending on different wave conditions and
bed profile shapes, especially related to bar positions. Coupling the implemented longshore
current model with a flow resistance based on Fredsøe (1984) and the suspended sediment dif-
fusion equation (cf. Equation 4.6), obtaining the eddy viscosity from Fredsøe et al. (1985) in
combination with the flow description by Fredsøe (1984) in case of non-breaking waves, and
from Deigaard et al. (1986b) in case of breaking waves, would allow modeling suspended sed-
iment transport rates. While firstly, it had been intended to implement the full suspended
sediment transport model, the MIKE Littoral Processes FM (LITPACK) software (DHI,
2024), in principle implementing the relations just described, was made available with cour-
tesy of DHI, such that it was possible to shift the focus on analyzing the modeled sediment
transport rates rather than the implementation of the underlying model. Results between
the self-implemented longshore current model and the LITPACK software were compared,
showing very good agreement along different transects and for various wave conditions. In
this report, however, only results obtained by the LITPACK model will be presented and
discussed.
4.2.1
The MIKE Littoral Processes FM Software
The Littoral Processes FM (DHI, 2024) module is part of the MIKE Powered by DHI soft-
ware, simulating non-cohesive longshore sediment transport.
In this report, the Littoral
Drift module has been used, which allows the calculation of longshore transport rates along
a cross-shore transect based on wave and current conditions, as well as bed level and sediment
characteristics, with the possibility to tune a variety of calculation parameters. The model
is mainly composed of two calculation parts: The calculation of wave-induced longshore cur-
rents, and the calculation of sediment transport rates. The wave height, wave setup, and
longshore currents are calculated at every point along the arbitrary profile by the momentum
balance equations in longshore and cross-shore directions, implemented to allow solving the
26
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:34==
equations for regular and irregular waves, wave refraction, shoaling, directional spreading,
and wave breaking.
The governing equation for the calculation of the longshore current velocity corresponds to
the equation described by Deigaard et al. (1986a). It describes the equilibrium between the
gradient in the shear component of the radiation stresses, Sxy, the flow resistance in the form
of the bed shear stress in the longshore y-direction, and the momentum transfer by velocity
gradients in the cross-shore x-direction, as given in Equation 2.4, allowing for a description
of the longshore current velocity, V , along the cross-shore direction x with water depth,
h. The boundary conditions are represented by the assumption of zero longshore current
velocity both at h = 0 and h →∞. The momentum exchange coefficient, E, in Equation 2.4
is calculated following Jonsson et al. (1975),
E = 4a2
T cos2(α)
,
(4.5)
where α is the wave angle relative to the shoreline, T is the wave period and a = U1m/ω
is the near bed amplitude of the wave orbital motion calculated from the near-bed velocity
amplitude, U1m, and the angular frequency, ω.
The sediment transport based on the wave action and the resulting longshore currents is
calculated from the sediment transport module (STPQ3D) for combined wave and currents,
with quasi three-dimensional approach (DHI, 2022). It is using the calculated hydrodynamic
parameters, and calculates bed load and suspended load separately. The model solves for
temporal and vertical variations in shear stress, turbulence, flow velocity, and sediment
concentration. The bed load is calculated as suggested by Engelund and Fredsøe (1976)
from the instantaneous Shields parameter. The suspended sediment transport is based on
the vertical sediment diffusion equation,
dc
dt = w dc
dy + ∂
∂y

ϵs
∂c
∂y

,
(4.6)
where t is time, w is the settling velocity, y is in vertical direction from the sea bed, ϵs
is the turbulent exchange factor, and the suspended sediment concentration, c, is obtained
from Fredsøe et al. (1985). The suspended sediment transport is then calculated from Equa-
tion 4.3. Detailed documentation of the equations applied to model the physical processes
can be found in DHI (2018) and DHI (2022).
The model output is available separately for suspended transport and bed load at each point
or in the form of net and gross transport. It can be selected to represent instantaneous
variables as well as values accumulated over the simulation period and integrated along the
transect from the shoreline.
4.2.2
Simulation Setup
As this study is not intended to find the optimum setup of the software and evaluate the
influence of model parameters, but rather to allow the comparison of magnitudes along the
transect and between different transects, the LITPACK model is applied using mainly the
default setup. The Littoral Drift module, which evaluates the equations along a profile and
gives the transport rates at each point, is used.
4.2.2.1
Simulation Periods
With a relatively short runtime, the software allows running simulations for time series
representing several years in a reasonable time. Therefore, it is decided to run the model
for all eight transects within the study area for a long time series. For the wave input, the
three-hour interval time series of the CMEMS wave data set (cf. section 3.3) is extracted at
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
27
==PAGE:35==
the wave model grid points displayed in Figure 3.7 for the individual transects, defining for
simplicity a reference depth of 20 m for all grid points. With the time series spanning 24
years, it would have been a very crude assumption to take the measured profile in 2000 as
bed level for the whole time span, as the LITPACK module doesn’t include morphological
update. Therefore, the full simulation period is split up into individual simulation periods,
going from the day of profile measurement in one year to the day of profile measurement in
the following year. This way, for each simulation period, the measured profile in each year
can be used as bed level input for the simulation period starting that day. This results in
a total time series starting from the 28th of April, 2000, to the 22nd of May, 2023, spanning
approximately 23 years.
By defining the start and end of each simulation period to correspond to the profile mea-
surement intervals, the comparison between simulated transport rates and observed bed level
changes over the same period becomes possible. This simulation setup results in 8 transects
× 23 simulation periods = 184 simulations, each simulation representing approximately one
year’s wave conditions in intervals of 3 hours. To obtain results accumulated over the full
period, the results of each simulation period are first accumulated over the three-hour time
steps within the simulation period (if not already given as accumulated output variables),
and then accumulated over the simulation periods. This way, the output variables can be
obtained to represent the full 23-year-long study period, while updating the profile shape
each year.
4.2.2.2
Parameter Choices
The bathymetry input uses the measured profiles interpolated to the 1 m spaced grid to allow
equal resolution for all profiles with improved comparability and accumulation of individual
results. The angle of the bathymetry profile is defined by each transect angle taken from the
profile data, such that the slight differences in profile orientation between the transects (cf.
Figure 3.7) are considered.
Bed resistance, water level, and current conditions are kept to the default values. In the
sediment settings, only grain diameter and fall velocity are adapted, where the input is set
to vary along the transect. The grain size is defined based on each point’s water depth,
following the sediment grain size measurements in Christensen et al. (2000), where the grain
sizes defined for specific depths are displayed in Table 4.1, and for depths between 1 m and
10 m, linear interpolation is applied. The settling velocity, ws, is then for each position
calculated based on the grain size from Equation 4.4.
Water Depth, h
[m]
≥10
5
2
≤1
Grain Size, D50
[mm]
0.15
0.25
0.32
0.35
Table 4.1: Grain size definition along the transects for the LITPACK simulations. Between
the depths, linear interpolation is applied.
4.2.2.3
Model Output and Relation to Profile Data Analysis
Outputs are chosen as profile outputs representing values accumulated over the simulation
period, allowing to only output the results of the last time step, both for point-specific vari-
ables and those integrated along the transect. For some specific analyses, several individual
simulations are run again with other settings or extracting output for each time step, which
will be specified when discussing the corresponding results.
In the analysis, the individual simulation will usually be referred to by the transect location
(LocId) and the year in which the simulation starts, as this year corresponds to the profile
28
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:36==
that is used for the simulation. However, the results in this thesis are referring to the year
in which the simulation ended, especially when talking about accumulated results, as the
changes between that year’s measured profile and the initial profile represent the results of
that period. For example, the first simulation, starting in 2000 and using the profile measured
in 2000, simulates the changes up to the profile measured in 2001, and when comparing the
simulation to observed bed level changes, the difference between the profile from 2001 to the
initial profile gives the “true” changes corresponding to the simulation period.
4.2.2.4
Setup Limitations
It may be repeated again that it is not claimed that the simulation setup represents the
optimal settings to model the physical processes happening in the study side in the most
realistic way, but is more oriented on capturing trends along transects and between transects,
and it should always be considered that by tuning parameters with better knowledge of the
very local conditions, conclusions made in the analysis might be refined. In any way, changing
parameters can largely change the results in different ways for different cases, such that also
the result of comparison between different cases might give a different picture.
In the following, it is assumed that the results to a certain extent are able to represent the
differences in physical conditions in such a way that it can be concluded on main trends, but
always keeping in mind that the model setup is relatively scarce and not tuned or validated
extensively. This is, based on the same argument, also true for the MATRANS simulations
carried out.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
29
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Results and Analysis
In this chapter, the results of the research are presented and discussed in terms of their
individual implications on the coastal dynamics in the study area. After an in-depth study
of the observations that can be made in regards to the profile data available for the study
area and the changes in morphology documented by them, the concept of closure depth and
its applicability to the study area is investigated both by the use of the changes in profile
data, empirical formulas, and model results. After that, the concept of sediment budget is
analyzed using the profile data and transport models, and the question of how a sediment
budget for the area might be represented in a suitable way is explored.
5.1
Observations on Morphology
Observing and understanding the characteristics and evolution of the morphology in the
study area is the groundwork and starting point for further analysis regarding sediment
transport processes. In a first step, the available data for measured bed level along the eight
selected transects at Husby Klitplantage is therefore analyzed thoroughly, before applying
calculations or interpretation at a later stage, in section 5.2 and section 5.3. This section
presents visualization and comparison of selected profiles, shoreline and contour line inspec-
tion, and consideration of seasonal influence. The observations are made based on the years
between 1957 and 2023, in which profile data is available at all locations.
5.1.1
Morphological Characteristics in 2023
To get a quick overview of the general characteristics of the bathymetry and beach condition,
the most recent profile data from 2023 is plotted in Figure 5.1 for the 1 m interpolated profiles
in distance from the shoreline for each of the eight transects in the study area. To allow
better observation and comparison of profile shapes, the profiles x-coordinates are recentered,
with x = 0 at the shoreline of each profile and positive values going offshore.
The profiles in Figure 5.1 (a) reach from heights of around 20 m to a depth of approximately -
20 m, spanning from approximately 150 m inland up to 4 km offshore, where the northern four
profiles reach further offshore than the rest. Going from offshore towards the shoreline, the
bed level increases with a mild slope of around 5 m/km. It is clearly visible that this relatively
constant sloping profile is then followed by a bar and trough system starting several hundred
meters from the shoreline. Behind the shoreline, the slope becomes significantly steeper,
rapidly reaching elevations of around 20 m. Looking at the full area plot in Figure 5.1 (a),
all eight profiles seem to follow the described pattern, and the shape of bathymetry seems
to be relatively consistent in longshore direction, even though especially the bar-trough area
appears to vary for the different profiles.
30
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:38==
A better observation of the bar-trough area is possible through a zoom-in on the near-shore
area in Figure 5.1 (c). It can be seen that in all profiles, a bar is formed in the area between
the shoreline and 500 m offshore, even though the intensity and location of bar formation
changes along the different transects. Additionally, after the first trough (coming from the
offshore) in some of the profiles, a second bar is built up.
The significant variations in
bar position between the different profiles indicate a variable near-shore area, and that the
variability between different transects should always be considered, rather than concluding
from single transects on the full area.
Figure 5.1 (b) focuses on the beach and dune zone in 2023, where the plot maintains a
realistic aspect ratio, allowing to understand how the beach and dunes look in reality. The
measured profiles suggest a flat beach of around 50 m to 85 m in length emerging from the
shoreline, followed by relatively steep dunes with a nearly horizontal plateau on top of the
dunes.
Figure 5.1: Bed level data for the eight transects in the study area in the year 2023, showing
(a) the full profiles, and zooms on (b) the beach and dune section in true aspect ratio and
(c) the near-shore area.
This beach and dune shape matches qualitatively very well with the pictures in Figure 5.2
and Figure 5.3 taken at the beach in 2019 and 2020, confirming a slightly sloping beach
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
31
==PAGE:39==
area followed by relatively steep dune cliffs. The pictures also show that the top of the
dunes is at many locations covered with dune grass up to the steep, cliff-like drop in height.
The pictures also show that the cliff shape is not uniform and changes significantly within
several meters in longshore direction as well as along the slope, including grass-protected
small hills along the cliff, such that the profile depends on where exactly measurements have
been taken. Figure 5.3 also shows that at the time when the picture was taken, an around
1-2 m high cliff at the dune foot was present. Additionally, the apparently sandy beach is
covered with several stripes of gravel pile-ups, reaching far inland. Both the abrupt end of
the dunes and the gravel piles along the beach indicate that the beach might be influenced
by storms and high water levels with associated erosion and deposition mechanisms.
Figure 5.2: Picture taken in July 2019 at the beach within the Husby Klitplantage study
area, looking southwards along the beach. Source: Photo by Ralph Hoffmann via Google
Maps, accessed on 23/12/2024.
Figure 5.3: Picture taken in March 2020 at the beach within the Husby Klitplantage study
area, looking southwards along the dunes. Source: Photo by Jørgen Eggert via Google Maps,
accessed on 23/12/2024.
5.1.2
Single Transect Evolution
After examining the relevant bed level characteristics of the eight transects in 2023, the focus
now shifts to how the morphology has evolved over time. Even though it has already been
observed that the profiles at the eight locations differ in details, it is chosen to only look at
one of the locations for a detailed description of the individual profile evolution, assuming
that general trends hold true for all transect locations in the study area.
Furthermore,
32
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:40==
the trends found in this single transect examination will afterward be examined again from
another perspective including all profiles, then allowing to spot differences between locations
and discuss their implications.
Figure 5.4: Profile data at LocId 89 for all years included in the study for (a) the full transect
(b) and a zoom on the land and near-shore area. Legend description for both plots is only
displayed for approximately every 10 years profiles. Separately, (c) approximately every 20th
year is plotted for a zoomed area. The area below z = 0 m is shaded in blue for all plots.
The second profile from the north in the study area, LocId 89, is chosen for observing the
evolution of a single transect over time. In Figure 5.4 (a), all profiles at LocId 89 for all years
included in the study are plotted together in full length. It becomes apparent that significant
bed level changes took place not only near the shore, but all along the transect: The profiles
show differences in bed elevation of at least 1-2 m at almost all positions. It must be noted
that not all profiles cover the same stretch, such that it depends on the x-position how many
profiles are actually available and which time span they cover. This means that the envelope
of bed elevation also depends on the availability of profiles at each distance. Especially in
the far offshore area, fewer and only more recent profiles are available compared to other
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
33
==PAGE:41==
stretches.
While at distances larger than 700 m, the collection of profiles seems relatively smooth,
suggesting an increase or decrease of the profile over larger stretches, the plotted profiles
between x = −100 m and x = 600 m seem very chaotic, with bars and troughs forming at
different locations. Figure 5.4 (b) shows a zoom-in on this very dynamic area, including the
beach and dunes. Even in the zoomed view, the profiles below z = 0 m still give a very chaotic
picture, and it is difficult to see a trend in evolution or understand the development over
time. This might be related to the formation and translocation of sand bars, not following
a long-term trend over the years, but dynamically developing on a short-term basis.
As it is still difficult to recognize the shapes of individual profiles in Figure 5.4 (b), Figure 5.4
(c) displays only four single profiles, selected for around every 20 years. This plot suggests
that the bed level tends to decrease over the years very close to the shoreline (x = −20 to 100
m) and build up at around x = 200 m. The near-shore decrease in bed elevation over the years
seems to correspond to the retreat of the coastline, shifting the profile around 60 m backwards
from the first to the last of the four plotted profiles. The mentioned increase in bed level
at around 200 m might then represent the backwards migration of the corresponding sand
bar into the area of the earlier trough. Comparing the first and last profile, the profile from
2023 shows a bar where in 1961 the trough was located, supporting this theory. However,
the evolution of the shoreline is not that straightforward and linear and already becomes
more complicated when considering only the given four profiles. It becomes clear that the
near-shore area with its bar system is very dynamic and the shape, position and sizes of
the system change significantly over time, not following a clear pattern and challenging to
capture with just one profile measurement per year. Consistency in the four profiles can be
found in the backwards migration of the shoreline and dunes, the presence of a bar system
between the shoreline and x = 500 m, and a decreased change in bed level after x = 600 m.
Looking at the onshore part of the transect in Figure 5.4 (b), the profiles give a relatively
clear picture. The beach at LocId 89 shows a nearly constant form with a relatively flat
beach of a length between around 40 m to 80 m. Over the 66 years covered by the study,
the shoreline, as well as the dunes, have moved backwards, where the maximum distance
between the shorelines is over 100 m, while the maximum distance between measured dune
locations is 60 m. However, the shoreline was always included in the profile measurements,
while the oldest profiles didn’t include data on the dune position. Therefore, the backwards
migration of the dunes might have been larger over the total time span than it can actually
be seen from the profile data. The top and back sides of the dunes apparently stay relatively
fixed, which seems reasonable considering the coverage with dune grass seen in Figure 5.2
and Figure 5.3.
5.1.3
Contourline Migration
It has already been observed in Figure 5.4 that the shoreline for LocId 89 migrates backwards
over the study period. The retreat of theshoreline in the study area can also be confirmed by
comparing historical images with more recent satellite images. In this case, the “historical
ortophoto 1954” map (Krak, 2024) has been used to compare the shoreline in 1954 and 2020,
which is displayed in Figure 5.5.
Both images show the shoreline at the time when the
photograph was taken, and it becomes apparent that the shoreline has migrated backwards
around 60 m between the two pictures. Of course, the images show a snapshot of the exact
time, and the shoreline position depends especially on the water level at that moment, but
even considering this circumstance, a clear migration backwards is stated by the pictures.
Similarly, Figure 5.6 allows to compare the position of the dunes, where a retreat of the
dunes of over 70 m between 1954 and 2020 is documented. In that case, the conclusion on
34
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:42==
dune position is even more reliable, as it doesn’t vary on a short-term basis in the same way
as the shoreline position does.
Figure 5.5: Overlay of photographs taken in 1954 (black and white) and 2020 (color), both
aligned to the same coordinate system, showing the shoreline positions in each respective
year at a location within the Husby Klitplantage study area. Picture taken from Krak (2024).
Figure 5.6: Overlay of photographs taken in 1954 (black and white) and 2020 (color), both
aligned to the same coordinate system, showing the dune positions in each respective year
at a location within the Husby Klitplantage study area. Picture taken from Krak (2024).
However, to understand and quantify more in-depth the migration of contour lines for all
profiles, the location of the shoreline in the profiles has been plotted over the years in
Figure 5.7 (a) to (h) for every transect in the study area, as well as the position where the
bathymetry reaches a level of z = −10 m for the first time, indicated for every transect
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
35
==PAGE:43==
LocId and year in Figure 5.7 (i) to (p). The contour line position of -10 m has been chosen
as the closure depth is typically estimated to be of that order (Christensen et al., 2000). The
distance axes cover the same stretch for (a) to (h) and (i) to (p), respectively, which allows
to compare visually the magnitude of contour migration between the different locations.
Figure 5.7: Position of (a) to (h) the shoreline at each location for all available years together
with a linear fit (red line) to the data, where the slope, RMSE and R2 for the fitted line is
given. In (i) to (p), the position of the -10 m contour line at each location for all available
years is given. The gaps in the dotted blue line indicate missing values, meaning that the
profile in some years didn’t reach -10 m depth.
The plots describing the shoreline positions show a clear trend of backward migration of the
shoreline in all eight transects, giving a relatively uniform picture of shoreline behavior over
the years for the different locations, indicating similar processes taking place at all transects.
However, the magnitude of shoreline retreat is slightly different for the individual locations.
While at LocId 93, the difference between maximum and minimum distance is over 120
m, the maximum difference at LocId 92 is below 80 m. The dotted lines, connecting the
data of consecutive measurement years, allow to track more easily how the shoreline position
36
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:44==
changed from one measurement year to the next. Even though the trend in shoreline position
is very clear, it becomes apparent that the process is not constant. Strong fluctuations are
present between the individual years, where a migration in the order of decameters back and
forth from one measurement year to the next is no exception.
This behavior can also be observed when fitting a linear regression to the data, given as
red lines, with the slope, indicating the mean yearly change in shoreline position, the Root
Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and the Coefficient of Determination (R2) indicated in every
plot. While for a visual inspection, the linear fit seems to represent the trend of the data
very well, the errors are relatively high, as the variability between years is large and the
data is scattered. Yet, it shows both that the overall trend of a relatively constant backward
migration matches the data at all locations quite well, and that the yearly recession in
shoreline position differs from location to location, even though the magnitude is comparable.
While at LocId 91 the shoreline retreats around 74 cm per year, the trend in shoreline retreat
is more than double just around 2 km further south, at LocId 93, with a backward migration
of 1.55 m per year.
Some differences in the migration behavior can be observed for the -10 m contour line in Fig-
ure 5.7: Even though in all cases, the most recent positions have moved backward compared
to the oldest measurements, the trend in the -10 m contour migration is not as clear and
uniform as it is the case for the shoreline position, and the pattern seems very different from
location to location. A short description of some observations in Figure 5.7 (i) to (p) might
illustrate this point: While at LocId 90 the -10 m contour line has moved constantly back-
ward (more than 350 m) over the last approximately 15 years, the contour line at location
89 has moved 150 m further offshore in the same time. At that location, the shoreline has
migrated constantly backward and forward over longer periods of time. After migrating 160
m backward over 35 years, the contour line moved offshore again, even slightly surpassing its
original position, in only 10 years. After that period of constant offshore migration, the con-
tour line sharply retreated again over 220 m during the following less than 10 years, before
migrating offshore again from then on. At LocId 93, the position of the -10 m contour has
been relatively stable during most of the period, only migrating strongly backward during
the last 5 years, while at LocId 92, backward migration was observed during the first 30
years, then leveling out and remaining almost constant since 2000.
Compared to the shoreline position with a constant backward trend but high variation be-
tween individual years, the -10 m positions mostly show less variability between consecutive
years, but strongly changing trends over decades. Additionally, the scale of migration in the
-10 m plots is larger, with maximum differences up to 400 m, while the maximum difference
in position for the shoreline is below 130 m. The larger scale, however, might be explained
by the lower bed slope at -10 m. For small slopes, even low changes in bed level lead to large
shifts in the x-position of the contour line. Even when accounting for the effect of a gentle
slope, the significant shift in the 10 m contour line suggests that relevant sediment transport
processes are still active at this depth. This indicates that assuming -10 m as the closure
depth is likely not a reliable estimate if the interest is capturing all significant transport pro-
cesses. The difference in migration pattern between the 0 m and -10 m contour lines might
be related to the difference in governing transport processes between the depths. Especially
the deeper area might be more influenced by large-scale processes such as the migration of
sand dunes or a shift in current systems, leading to the several-year-long, switching trends.
The fluctuations in shoreline might be related to individual storm events and periods of calm
conditions, influencing the shoreline position at the time of measurements.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
37
==PAGE:45==
5.1.4
Seasonality
The profile data measurements have not been following a fixed schedule, but profiles have
been measured at different months over the years considered in the study. Therefore, it is
important to understand the influence of seasonality on the measured profile data. In liter-
ature, a seasonal change of profile shape and corresponding shoreline position is frequently
described, for example by Hallin (2019), where the winter profile is characterized by a retreat
in shoreline position compared to the summer profile, transporting sediment volumes from
berm and dunes offshore and building an offshore bar.
Figure 5.8: Compilation of months in which data measurement took place for every of
transect location (LocId) in each year available in the Husby Klitplantage data set.
Figure 5.8 compiles for every year in which month the measurement has been taken at each
location. As can be seen, the measurements have always been taken in the same month
for all locations in each year. This increases comparability between profiles at the different
locations for a specific year, as they are taken in the same month and don’t refer to different
points in time. However, when comparing data across different years, the difference in season
between the measurements might have an influence on the comparison. Most measurements
over the years were taken during summer months, but several have also been taken during
early spring and late autumn.
Figure 5.9: Position of the shoreline at each LocId over the years and the fitted trend line
(equivalently to Figure 5.9 (a)-(h)), with the month in which the data has been collected
indicated by color. Positive distances are directed towards the offshore.
38
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:46==
The shoreline position in Figure 5.7 showed a high variability between individual measure-
ment years, and one possible explanation for the high variability could be the seasonality
of the shoreline position, meaning that the variability stems from different seasons in which
the measurements were taken. Figure 5.9 shows, similar to Figure 5.7, the position of the
shoreline at each location for all years. However, the data is now following a color scheme
indicating the month of measurements, following the same color scheme as Figure 5.7. If the
shoreline measurements follow a trend in seasonality, it should be visible that for example
winter months tend to be below the fitted line, and summer measurements above the line.
However, no clear trends regarding the season of the year can be identified visually from the
plot.
Trying to quantify the possible seasonal influence on the shoreline position, Figure 5.10 (a)
displays the mean difference between all data points measured in a specific month and the
fitted line. The mean is not taken for each location separately, but together for all locations.
Figure 5.10 (b) displays the count of years in which measurements have been taken during
the specific month. Methods to quantify the deviation of measured shorelines from the trend
line depending on the month of measurement also didn’t show significant relations between
season and relative shoreline position. This might however also be partially due to the fact
that not enough data per month is available.
Thus, there is not a clear seasonal trend
to be identified, and more data representing all months in a comparable manner would be
required to possibly draw reliable conclusions on the dependence of the shoreline position
on the season. However, it might still be seen as a result in itself that no clear trends in
seasonality can be seen from Figure 5.9, such that apparently the theory of summer and
winter profiles doesn’t very well explain the fluctuations of the shoreline in the study area.
Figure 5.10: Mean difference between shoreline position and fitted trend in Figure 5.9 for all
years and locations where measurements have been taken during each month (left), as well
as number of years in which measurements have been taken for each month (right).
To see if the seasonality has an apparent influence on the profile shape near the shore, all
profiles since 2010 are plotted in Figure 5.11 from the shore to 500 m offshore for the eight
locations individually, with the color scheme indicating the month of measurement. However,
also here no clear pattern in seasonality regarding the profile shape or bar formations can
be identified, and it is difficult to make out an equilibrium profile shape depending on the
season.
Overall, the analysis carried out does not give enough evidence to identify a seasonal pattern
in the profile data, which however could also be due to the under-representation of winter
profiles and the relatively small sample size in general. Either way, it should always be kept
in mind that the profile measurements are only snapshots of the apparently dynamic bed
level.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.11: Zoom on near-shore stretches of all profiles after 2010 for each location, with
the month of measurement indicated by color.
5.1.5
Bed Elevation Development
A first look at the overall bed level changes within the study area is now taken, which will
be deepened in subsection 5.3.1 when analyzing the observed sediment budget of the study
area. This section is focused more on the overall picture of bed level development over the
study area, trying to give an understanding of the overall changes.
Figure 5.12 shows the difference in bed elevation between the years 2003 and 2023 over the
full study area. Shown is the difference in the 2D-interpolated bed elevation data of the
two years, where blue colors indicate a lower bed level in 2023 compared to 2003, and red
colors correspond to an increased level in 2023. From the last 20 years, a good estimate
of the long-term trend based on more recent conditions can be concluded, compared to the
measurement periods further back in time. However, the analysis has also been conducted
for longer periods, and the overall trend remained similar.
40
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.12: Difference in 2D-interpolated bed elevation of the Husby Klitplantage tran-
sects between 2003 and 2023 as shaded areas (blue-red), where negative values indicate a
decrease in bed elevation, together with selected contour lines for both years (pink, green),
respectively. The difference and contour lines are only displayed at locations where inter-
polated data was available for both years. The transects, where measured data is available,
are displayed for reference for both years (pink and green straight lines) together with the
corresponding transect LocId. The color bar for the differences (red-blue) is only diplayed
from -3 to 3 m to allow easier reading of the smaller differences values.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
41
==PAGE:49==
As expected from the previously described analysis, it becomes apparent that in large parts,
the study area has experienced a decrease in bed level over the last 20 years. However, along
all eight transects, there can be observed an increase or at least constant bed level at around
15 to 17.5 m water depth, where the increase is most pronounced in the northern transects
and becomes less clear in the southern ones. Even more, along large parts of the two most
northern profiles, at LocId 88 and 89, an increased bed level is observed, which is not present
in the other profiles, where a decrease or relative stability in bed level clearly dominates the
development between the years 2003 and 2023.
Close to the shoreline, the largest differences in bed elevation occur, both for accretion and
erosion. This is related to the dune erosion and movement of sand bars and troughs between
a depth of approximately -6 m and the shoreline. The bar movement, again, is not uniform
along the eight transects, but similarities between neighboring transects can be observed,
where for example LocId 91 to 93 show similar patterns in elevation difference close to the
shoreline, as well as LocId 94 and 95 do. At the offshore boundary, beyond the shoreline, a
strong decrease in elevation is stated, corresponding to the backward dune migration.
The most pronounced migration in both the -10 m and -15 m contour lines took place at
LocId 90, with a retreat of several hundred meters. The neighboring profiles, however, showed
almost no movement in the - 10 m contour line, and at LocId 89, the - 15 m contour even
experienced a significant shift in the opposite direction. The -17.5 and -20 m contour lines,
however, remained relatively stable, showing only minor shifts, except for the very offshore
parts at LocId 89. Regarding the interpolated data between the individual transects, it must
be mentioned again that it is only an approximation to the real bed elevation and might not
be able to capture correctly specific features or connectivity between features of neighboring
transects.
Generally, Figure 5.12 shows clearly that changes in the bed level over time do not take place
uniformly along the different transects, such that individual transects show different patterns
of erosion and accretion, even though the distance between single transects is only around 1
km. This also implies that it must be carefully considered when drawing conclusions from
the analysis of one transect location to other locations.
5.1.6
Bed Slope Evolution
As has been observed in Figure 5.7, the distance of migration of the -10 m contour line is
significantly larger over the study period than the maximum distance of migration of the
shoreline. Consequently, the difference in migration distance must result in a changed bed
slope. Figure 5.13 displays the averaged bed slope from the shoreline to -10 m water depth
over the years for all locations separately, calculated as s = ∆h/∆x. Similarly, the average
bed slope for the deeper parts, from -10 m to -18 m is given, as well as the average bed slope
along the full distance from the shoreline to -18 m.
At all locations and over all years, the slope between the shoreline and the -10 m contour
is steeper than the slope in the further offshore part, matching the typical shape of beach
profiles. However, the difference in the slope between the two parts is not very high, with
only around or even below double the steepness in the part from -10 m to the shoreline. This
matches well the profiles seen in Figure 5.4, where the bed slope from the sand bar region
up to x ≈2800 m remains relatively constant, and only significantly reduces offshore from
that point for the displayed transect LocId 89.
42
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.13: Bed slope, β, over three different stretches covering the near shore area, the
deeper area, and the full area, given for each study year.
The evolution of the 0 m to -10 m bed slope over time in Figure 5.13 resembles strongly the
migration of the 10 m contour in Figure 5.7, which is expected as the 10 m contour changes
are larger than the changes in the shoreline, thus dominating the change in bed slope. The
-20 m and -17.5 m contour line in Figure 5.12 remain relatively stable at the same location,
thus indicating only smaller contour line changes in deeper waters, matching well with a
relatively stable slope from -18 m to the shoreline at all locations over time in Figure 5.13.
Consequently, an increase in bed slope between -10 m and the shoreline results in a decrease
in bed slope between -18 m and -10 m, and vice versa, as the -10 m contour line migrates
strongly, while the -18 m and 0 m contour lines remain relatively stable.
This can be seen very clearly for example at LocId 89 and 90, where to total bed slope
remains almost constant, and the bed slopes in the two parts develop in opposite directions.
At LocId 88 and 92, significant and sudden changes in the total bed slope are observed
around 1990 and 1995, respectively, indicating a shift in the -18 m contour line in those
years, as the -18 to -10 m bed slope shows a similar jump.
In general, it can be concluded that the bed slope especially changes with the migration
of the 10 m contour line, but remains in a similar order of magnitude of around 0.5-1%,
thus most probably not causing strong changes in hydrodynamic conditions and sediment
transport mechanisms due to changed bed slope.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
43
==PAGE:51==
5.2
Depth of Closure
In this section, the concept of depth of closure as defined in section 2.3 is evaluated in the
context of the available profile data. As has already been seen before, changes in bed level
have been recorded almost across the full profile, indicating active sediment transport mech-
anisms also in areas of larger water depth. Besides the typical empiric relations introduced
in section 2.3, the closure depth is also evaluated based on the changes in the bed level
and from the modeled intensity of cross-shore and longshore transport processes, and the
applicability of the concept of closure depth to the situation in the study area is discussed.
5.2.1
Difference (FDC) and Standard Deviation Method (SDDC)
Typical measures to estimate the DoC from profile data are the Fixed Depth Change (FDC)
and the Standard Deviation of Depth Change (SDDC) criteria. Both measures take the
closure depth as the point where either the difference in bed levels between two profiles at
the same location from two points in time or the standard deviation of several profiles over
a time span reach either their minimum, or are lower than a defined threshold, or become
zero. Often, the threshold is chosen to represent the error of measurement of the profile
surveys (Aragonés et al., 2019).
A FDC criterion of 2 cm is suggested by Ghazali and Hisham (2007), however, Aragonés et al.
(2019) additionally implemented prefixed values of 30 cm, 15 cm, and 6 cm, corresponding
to measurement accuracies with different survey techniques. Typically, the FDC is applied
to exactly two profiles as the start and end profiles over a specific time span. However,
in this study, the difference in bed level has been calculated as the difference between the
overall measured maximum and minimum bed level at a specific location over all profiles
available within the selected time period, as the comparison of only two profiles often leads
to identifying low (zero) bed level change at positions obviously not suitable as the depth of
closure, for example where the shapes of bedforms that had moved back or forth between
the two years intersect.
In Figure 5.14, the FDC at each location along the transects is plotted over the distance from
the initial shoreline position for each location in the study area. Here, the study time has
been selected to include all available years of profiles at each location, which are, depending
on the location, 50 or 51 profiles between 1957 and 2023. The same profile set as for the
FDC evaluation is also used for the SDDC calculations, also given in Figure 5.14. While
Hinton and Nicholls (1998) suggest for the SDDC criterion to define the DoC as “that point
at which the standard deviation reaches a constant, non-zero tail”, Ghazali and Hisham
(2007) apply prefixed threshold values, and Aragonés et al. (2019) define the DoC candidate
point where the SDDC reaches it’s minimum. In Figure 5.14, larger absolute differences in
bed levels also correspond to larger standard deviations, indicating a morphologically active
region and the trend in SDDC follows the trend in FDC. In this study, no specific criterion
to find a suitable DoC is selected, both for FDC and SDDC, as rather the overall trends and
the identification of regions of lower activity are of interest.
In general, both FDC and SDDC measures are relatively high close to the coast and tend to
decrease further away, which corresponds to the expected pattern. However, the magnitudes
of both measures are higher compared to typical values found in other studies. This can for
instance be seen from the FDC parameter only reaching the prefixed values several kilometers
away from the shoreline at a depth of 15-20 meters (for 30 cm threshold), in general not
reaching the suggested 2 cm threshold at locations where several profiles are available. This
is partially due to the fact that a relatively long time span is observed, but shows that the
bed has undergone transport processes up to deep areas in the last 66 years.
Most profiles show first a decrease in both FDC and SDDC with increasing distance from
44
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:52==
the shoreline, followed by a more or less pronounced area of again increased morphological
activity at around 1000 to 2000 m from the shoreline. This is especially pronounced at LocId
89 and 92, where the large FDC and DOC correspond to a water depth of around 15 m, with
a total bed level difference of approximately 3 m and a standard deviation of 1 m. While at
LocId 92, the parameters then decrease rapidly further offshore, at LocId 89 a sharp decrease
is observed, however followed by an again relatively constant, high level of FDC and SDDC
over around 1000 m at a water depth of 20 m. Looking at the transect location 88, which
includes the longest profiles, it can be seen that the FDC and SDDC continue fluctuating
around relatively constant levels of 0.7 m and 0.2 m, respectively, at distances of 3000 m
to 5500 m from the shoreline, showing that significant profile changes can be observed all
along that distance, and might also be expected at the other locations. After that, the level
reduces rapidly to a very constant level of 30 cm for FDC and 0.1 for SDDC, which, however,
also correlates to the location where the number of available profiles reduces from 15 to 7.
At LocId 88, the first significant dip in the parameters is observed at x ≈1200 m, cor-
responding to a water depth of around -11 m, also visible in the reduced thickness of the
profile envelope. It might be concluded that a zone of less pronounced transport mecha-
nisms is located here, which might be considered a candidate point for the DoC. However,
the variation increases again, reducing only at a bed level below 20 m, which also sets a
depth of around 20 m as a possible candidate for DoC. With a similar approach, the FDC
and SDDC parameters have been evaluated for the remaining seven profiles, and the position
and approximate mean water depths of possible DoC points are compiled in Table 5.1. This
shows that the transects show a first area of local minimum bed level change at a depth in
the range between 6.5 to 15 m, and a second area of lower changes at depths between 16
and 22 m. The ranges are relatively wide between the profiles, not indicating very clear DoC
values shared by the locations. This compares well to the large difference of FDC and SDDC
patterns between different transects in Figure 5.14, indicating that the transport pattern
depends to a certain degree on very local conditions, as the transects are only 1 km apart
from each other.
In general, the results of the FDC and SDDC calculations indicate relatively large bed level
changes up to relatively large water depths. This matches the previous findings of large
variability in contour lines and clear bed level changes over the full transects.
It is not
possible to clearly identify a DoC that might reasonably be selected as a boundary to the
offshore area where there is no significant change in bottom elevation, as the DoC has been
defined earlier from literature. The results indicate pronounced transport processes in deeper
areas, such that it might be doubted whether under these circumstances the classical concept
of closure depth is applicable to the study area.
LocId
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
mean
Distance
x1 [m]
1150
1000
600
600
700
1400
1700
900
1006
Water Depth
z1 [m]
10
11.5
8.5
6.5
8.5
13
15
8.5
10.2
Distance
x2 [m]
3600
2200
3300
1900
2200
3100
3000
2200
2688
Water Depth
z2 [m]
22
17.5
21.5
16
17.5
20
20
16
18.8
Table 5.1: Two selected DoC canditate points found from evaluation of the FDC and SDDC
parameters in Figure 5.14 for each transect.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.14: All available bed level profiles (z in meters, black axis), maximum difference in
bed elevation at each point (FDC) and standard deviation in bed level (SDDC) over distance
from initial shoreline for each transect.
46
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:54==
5.2.2
Empirical Formulas for Depth of Closure
In order to investigate the concept of depth of closure and its applicability to the study site
further, the most commonly used equations of empirically estimating the DoC are consid-
ered, as described in section 2.3. Figure 5.15 gives the results for the depths dl and di found
from Equation 2.5, Equation 2.6, and Equation 2.7, respectively, both for wave parameters
extracted from the full time span between 2000 and 2023, representing long-term wave con-
ditions, as well as the depths found from wave parameters for each individual year. For all
locations, the same wave conditions have been used, extracted at the point offshore from
LocId 88 displayed in Figure 3.7, assuming that the change in offshore wave conditions be-
tween the different transects is minor. A sediment grain size of D50 = 0.15 mm, determined
from findings by Christensen et al. (2000) and detailed in subsubsection 3.1.2.4, is selected
for the purpose, corresponding to findings for a water depth of 10 m, which is assumed to
coincide best with the expected depth of closure. Figure 5.15 presents all profiles available
at each location, together with the calculated water depths dl and di, allowing a comparison
between the observed profile variability and the theoretical boundaries of profile zonation.
The figure shows that in general, Equation 2.5 gives smaller closure depths compared to
Equation 2.6, where depending on the locations, either one or the other of the two equations
evaluated for the full time period seems to fit better to the observed changes in bed levels.
Figure 5.15: All available profiles at selected locations together with the values for dl and di
calculated from Equation 2.5, Equation 2.6, andEquation 2.7 for wave parameters calculated
for the complete period between 2000 and 2023 (bold lines), as well as wave parameters
calculated for each year in the period individually (thin lines), where the calculations for the
year 2023 are highlighted by dashed lines.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
47
==PAGE:55==
Interestingly, the year 2023 wave conditions suggest a dl larger than the one calculated
for the 24-year period wave conditions, with the 2023 wave parameters representing larger
waves, while the opposite is true for the di values, resulting in a shoal zone with boundaries
stretched in both directions for the long-term wave parameters compared to the year 2023.
This is due to the fact that Equation 2.5/ Equation 2.6 and Equation 2.7 don’t scale in the
same way with wave conditions, as they are based on different criteria, and only Equation 2.7
considers the grain size. This leads to inconsistencies, where in some cases it can even result
in the inner DoC, dl, being larger than the outer DoC, di, (Mcfall et al., 2021).
Looking at the distribution of the closure depths calculated for all individual years, it can
be seen that the theoretical depth of closure changes significantly between the years: The
closure depths dl calculated from Equation 2.6 range between -6.4 m and -10 m, and for
Equation 2.5 between -8.4 m and -13.2 m, while the outer closure depth, di, calculated from
Equation 2.7 lies in a range between -15.9 m and -23.8 m, depending on the yearly wave
conditions. This apparently large variability in wave conditions influencing the position of
boundaries of sediment transport significance might contribute to the fact that there doesn’t
seem to be a clear position where the bed level changes become smaller.
In general, the values for dl compare reasonably well with the mean values of the z1-points
identified as possible closure depths in Table 5.1, where for some locations, Equation 2.5
seems to give a better fit to locations of lower bed level variability, while for others Equa-
tion 2.6 seems to match better the observations in profile changes. This match indicates that
the candidate DoC points z1 found from the profile inspection might correlate to the bound-
ary of the littoral zone, indicating that intensive wave-induced sediment transport processes
only take place onshore from that boundary, matching the reduction in bed level changes
at the boundary location. Additionally, the area where breaker bar movement takes place,
visible in the first 500 m of the profiles in Figure 5.15 as areas of very high variability, is in
this case located within the defined littoral zone, matching the typical pattern of the profile
zonation suggested by Hallermeier (1980).
However, as opposed to the theory of less sediment transport offshore from the littoral zone,
the change in bed level increases again in several profiles. This, however, doesn’t necessarily
negate the validity of the concept of DoC and the coastal zones, as this concept only refers to
wave-induced sediment transport processes. The identified locations of decreased variability
in bed level coincide reasonably well with the calculated boundary dl, which supports the
significantly increased influence of wave-induced sediment transport processes onshore of
that boundary, thus making the boundary a valid feature to describe the zonation of the
profile. Yet, it doesn’t make a statement about transport processes not directly related to
wave-induced cross-shore and long-shore transport processes.
Thus, the increased, in several cases heavy changes in bed level further offshore from the
defined littoral zone might rather indicate the presence of additional transport mechanisms,
not captured in the classical concept of DoC. This additional activity offshore from the
littoral zone might also explain why the values of the further offshore z2-points of decreased
bed level changes don’t really coincide on average with the calculated theoretical water depth
of the offshore boundary of the shoal zone, di. As can be seen from Figure 5.15, di actually
in many cases refers to areas of strong changes in bed level, especially at LocId 88 and 92.
The large variability of profiles offshore from the boundaries dl and di, not corresponding with
the theory of closure depth and reduced transport rates, might be influenced by the additional
activity of the coastal current along the coast, as described in subsubsection 3.1.2.3. This
would mean that the concept of closure depth is applicable to the study area in terms of
intense influence from wave-induced sediment transport rates in the littoral zone onshore
48
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:56==
from the upper depth of closure, dl, but not in terms of “no significant” sediment transport
processes and bed level changes further offshore from that boundary.
In the following two chapters, the wave-induced cross-shore and long-shore sediment trans-
port processes are investigated using transport models, giving more insights into the areas
of expected increase in related transport rates and bed level changes. This again contributes
to understand from which depth on the wave-induced transport processes become relevant
and how well this compares to the estimated depth of closure and the concept behind it.
5.2.3
Modeled Cross-shore Transport Rates along the Profile
In this section, the MatRANS model is used to understand the change in the theoretical cross-
shore sediment transport rates along a transect. The model is applied to a setup representing
conditions at various water depths along a profile, where the offshore wave height is selected
as the mean of the Hm0 intervals between 2000 and 2023, ¯Hm0, and the mean of the largest
third of significant wave heights, Hm0,1/3 (cf. Table 3.1). This gives the mean wave conditions
representing the calmer sea conditions, and the rougher conditions, which are expected to
be more active in shaping the bed. Figure 5.16 (e) shows the selected water depths and
corresponding positions along the profile at LocId 88 in 2022, and Figure 5.16 (a)-(d) show
the parameters free stream velocity U0, Shields parameter θ, bed load transport rate qB and
suspended sediment transport rate qS over one wave period for each water depth for the
mean wave heights, and (f)-(i) for the rougher wave conditions.
The magnitude of free stream velocity in (a) and (f) seems to increase moderately, becoming
less than 5 times larger at the smallest depth compared to the values for the deepest position,
with the non-linearity in wave shape becoming more and more apparent in shallower water,
especially for the larger waves given in (f). Compared to the changes in velocity, the Shields
parameter in (b) and (g) increases more pronounced along the transect, with the increase in
Shields parameter becoming clearly stronger at smaller depths, which is due to non-linear
relation of the Shields parameter to free stream velocities.
While the bed load transport rates, qB, in (c) and (h) increase moderately at water depths
smaller than 12 m, the suspended sediment transport rates, qS, in (d) and (i) increase
significantly stronger with each meter of decreased water depth in that region. While in case
of the mean wave conditions qB only increases by a factor of 3.2 between h = 10 m and
h = 7 m, qs increases by a factor of approximately 9.2, and doubles in maximum transport
rate just between 8 m and 7 m water depth. The maximum suspended sediment transport
rates are larger than the bed load transport rates, here by a factor of 2 in the shallower
region for the mean wave conditions and by a factor of 20 for the rougher conditions. From
Figure 5.16 (d) and (i), it can be seen that both at a water depth of h = 20 m and h = 16
m, the suspended sediment transport rates in deeper areas are insignificantly small, only
increasing significantly for shallower depths.
Especially for the suspended sediment transport processes, the large asymmetry between
onshore and offshore transport patterns during the wave cycle at smaller depths seen in
(c),(d),(h) and (i) must be pointed out, where the maximum onshore transport is twice
as large as the maximum offshore transport rate.
The differences between onshore and
offshore quantities are the driving mechanism behind cross-shore transport, resulting in
period averaged onshore or offshore velocities and transport rates.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.16: Results of MatRANS simulations for (a)-(d) ¯Hm0 and (f)-(i) Hm0,1/3 conditions
(cf. Table 3.1) evaluated at different positions along the profile at LocId 88 in 2022, showing
selected parameters over one wave period as well as (e) a cross-section on the profile and
positions of the evaluated water depths.
The position where the period averaged, total transport rates, qT = qS +qT , start to strongly
increase might be considered to correspond to the boundary of the littoral zone as discussed
in subsection 5.2.2, with significant sediment transport processes only taking place onshore
from that point. Figure 5.17 (a) compiles the net sediment transport rate over the wave
period found for each water depth, clearly indicating a significant increase in transport
rates at depths shallower than 12 to 10 m. It is not possible to indicate one specific water
depth as the boundary from which “significant” sediment transport takes place. Yet, the
results support that the closure depth, dl, in terms of the cross-shore sediment transport
50
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:58==
rates, should be located somewhere around 12 m to 10 m.
The results depends on the
threshold that is selected as significant transport rate and the selected representation of
wave conditions, in this case considering the significant wave height Hm0. The identified
matches quite well to previous results found from the profile inspection and the empirical
formulas in section 5.2.
The net transport rates depend on the small differences between onshore and offshore di-
rected transport rates over the period, governed by a very delicate and sensitive interplay
between several effects, as described in subsection 2.2.2. This leads to the net transport
likely not captured correctly in the simulations. Therefore, Figure 5.17 (b) gives the bulk
sediment transport rate mobilized over the period, reducing the influence of the interplay
between effects, and instead of evaluating the balance between onshore and offshore trans-
port rather indicating whether significant sediment mobilization is expected at the depths.
The interpretation remains relatively similar to the one drawn from (a), but it might be
concluded that sediment is mobilized slightly earlier than expected from (a), with a notable
increase in bulk transport between 16 and 12 m.
Figure 5.17 (c) and (d) show the net and bulk transport rates for the rougher wave conditions,
showing significantly larger transport rates to be expected for those conditions, with (c)
showing an earlier significant increase in the net transport than (a), such that from that, the
littoral zone might be considered at a depth between 16 m and 12 m. In (e), the bulk and net
transport rates under extreme wave conditions, He, (cf. Table 3.1) are displayed, showing
significant cross-shore transport rates even at 25 m water depth, which could match the
shoal zone described by Hallermeier (1980), where during some rare storm events sediment
gets mobilized.
Figure 5.17: Period-averaged net and bulk sediment transport rates at various water depths
evaluated by the MatRANS model for mean significant wave height, ¯Hm0, in (a) and (b), for
the mean of largest 1/3 of significant wave heights, Hm0,1/3, in (c) and (d), and for extreme
wave heights, He, in (e), where the wave conditions are taken from Table 3.1.
5.2.4
Modeled Long-Shore Sediment Transport Rates along the Transects
After investigating the transport rates in cross-shore direction at different water depths, a
similar analysis is carried out in the following for the longshore transport rates, again with the
aim to identify at which water depths this transport mechanism becomes significant and to
compare to the previous findings regarding the concept of closure depth. Figure 5.18 provides
some results from the longshore transport model simulations, where (a)-(c) give information
on the transect LocId 88, and (d)-(e) compare results between the eight transects in the
study area.
In Figure 5.18 (a), the net drift accumulated from the start of the simulation in the year
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
51
==PAGE:59==
2000 to the end of each simulation part representing the period between the moment at
which the profile measurements were taken in that year and the following year, is displayed
in logarithmic scale over the distance to the shoreline in 2000, x. In the first 250 m of the
nearshore area, the largest longshore transport volumes are observed, with a maximum of
40345 m3 being transported over the 23 years per meter distance and width at x ≈155 m,
starting from transport volumes close to zero at the shoreline and becoming close to zero
again 500 m offshore. As can be seen, comparing the individual years, the accumulated
volumes increase at different locations during different years, which is, besides varying wave
climates, due to the fact that in each simulation year the bed profile has been updated to
match the measured profile of the year, leading to the bar position and bed levels changing
between simulation parts, leading to the changed position of strong transport rates. A second
peak in net drift results between 350 and 500 m, separated by a stretch of very low transport
rates from the first peak, with a maximum value half as large as the first peak.
However, an increase in accumulated volumes only happens during some years at that lo-
cation, suggesting that the transport here is driven by large storms in that period, or the
profile having a large bar at that position, leading to earlier wave breaking and transport
rates further offshore than in the other years. As can be seen from the profiles plotted in
Figure 5.18 (b), those two peaks correspond to areas of water depths up to approximately 5-7
m. Beyond that, the transport volumes increase again gradually up to a relatively constant
level of around 100 m3/m/m over the 23 years, which is between 1 to 2 orders of magnitude
smaller than the transport volumes in the shallower zone.
Transport volumes integrated from the shore to each distance are given in Figure 5.18 (c),
where the two step-wise increases correspond to the two peaks in (a), and the incline in the
volume between 1000 and 2500 m distance corresponds to the plateau in that region in (a).
This means that even though the transport rates in that region are significantly smaller than
very close to the beach, they still have a significant impact on the total transport volume
across the profile, as it is present over a large distance along the transect, increasing the
total volume gradually. After the full simulation period of 23 years, this gradual increase
adds an extra 2·105 m3 of transport volume and makes up for approximately 10 % of the
total volume.
In Figure 5.18 (b), the share of bed load, Qb, and suspended load, Qs, in the total load is
compiled for each x-position. This gives insight into the difference between the two transport
peaks near the shore, apparently almost purely driven by suspended sediment transport, and
the area further offshore which is strongly dominated by bed load transport, making up for
around 90% of the transport volume between x = 500 m and 1400 m, gradually increasing
to nearly 100% offshore from that. Only where fractions of waves are breaking, a longshore
current transporting suspended sediments can exist, which indicates that some wave braking
occurs starting in relatively deep water, increasing towards the shore.
Strong longshore
currents are restricted to the very near-shore area up to 250 m from the shore, and in some
occasions up to 500 m from the shore.
Figure 5.18 (d) and (e) show for each of the eight transects in the study area the net drift
and integrated net drift over the water depth, respectively. It can be seen from (e) that
the absolute values of longshore transport volumes are significantly different between the
individual transects by a factor of up to two, however, the general development over the
water depth is similar, corresponding to the observations made in (c), with a strong increase
in volumes between 0 and 3-7 m water depth, and slight but constant and still significant
increase offshore from that. In Figure 5.18 (d), a large variability in net drift is seen for
depths up to around 7 m, probably due to the very different shapes in bed for this shallower
52
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:60==
region, being very different both across different profiles and different years and leading to
a very complicated picture, where no statement on the transport volume can be made just
based on the water depth.
Figure 5.18: Results of the LITPACK simulations, where (a)-(c) show results at LocId 88,
accumulating over time, and (d)-(e) show the accumulated results at the end of the total
simulation period for all eight transects in the study area. (a) presents the absolute net
drift accumulated from the simulation start in 2000 to each year over the x-distance from
the shoreline in 2000. In (b), the share of suspended sediment load and bed load in the
total load over the full study period is illustrated along the transect, together with the bed
levels of the yearly profiles corresponding to each x-position. (c) shows again the net drift
accumulated over time as given in (a), but now integrated from the shore along x. For each
transect of the study area, the net drift accumulated over the full simulation period from
2000 to 2023 is given over the water depth in 2000 in (d), as well as the net drift integrated
from the shoreline along the transect over the corresponding water depth in (e).
However, beyond a water depth of 7 m, the results give a very clear picture: Between 7
m and 10 m water depth, the transport volumes of individual transects become relatively
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
53
==PAGE:61==
stable and stop fluctuating but follow a clear line, increasing from around 5-10 m3/m/m to
around 200 m3/m/m, with differences between different transects still visible. Between 10 m
and 15 m water depth, the transport rates between all transects become surprisingly aligned
and decline sightly towards larger depths, indicating that the model predicts the longshore
transport processes at those depths being relatively uniform across the full study area. This
might be explained by the wave parameters in those depths being still very similar across the
transects, corresponding to the more large-scale offshore wave climate, where with decreasing
depth, the bottom is more impacted by the waves, increasing the bed load gradually, which
is observed between 15 m and 10 m water depth.
The decrease in transport volumes from 10 to 7 m water depth might be due to the wave
angle aligning gradually with the shoreline, reducing the longshore component of orbital
wave velocity and thus also the shields parameter in the y-direction, which means that not
necessarily the bed load itself, but its longshore component is decreased at those depths. The
sudden increase in transport rates onshore from 7 m water depth is then due to sediments
transported in suspension. Beyond a depth of around 15 m, the transport rates start to
decrease significantly, with the waves not being able to impact the deep bed. It should be
mentioned that here, the curves lose the very uniform picture across the transects, which
is also related to the logarithmic scale, where for smaller transport rates, small differences
appear more pronounced.
In terms of the closure depth, the discussed findings from Figure 5.18 might indicate the
following: Up to a water depth of around 7 m, all transects show strong transport activities,
related to suspended sediment transport processes. While most years show large transport
rates in the first 250 m from the shore, some years also have large transport volumes up to
500 m distance, which is probably related to storms and bar positions. This picture matches
well with the definition by (Hallermeier, 1980) of the littoral zone and inner closure depth
as the maximum water depth for intense nearshore erosion during extreme events.
A closure depth of around 7 m also matches well with the results of the empirical formulas,
especially the ones by Birkemeier (1985). Also, the extreme profile variability reduces at
a distance of around 500 m from the shore for all profiles, as seen in Figure 5.14, which is
supporting this analysis. The spacious, bed-load-driven transport volumes in depths up to
15 m might then correspond to the shoal zone, where waves are expected to have a moderate
effect on the bed. This finding on longshore-transport-based outer closure depth of ≈15,
however, is somewhat smaller than the values found from profile inspection (see Table 5.1)
and the empirical relations based on Hallermeier (1983) (see Figure 5.15).
54
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:62==
5.3
Sediment Budget
In this section, the results of the profile analysis and modeling efforts in terms of the concept
of sediment budget are presented. The goal is to analyze how well and in which terms the
sediment budget setups match the observations on volume gains and losses in the study area.
In the first step, the volume changes that occurred in the study area are investigated from
the bed level measurements. After that, the longshore transport model is used to analyze the
suitability of a sediment budget only considering wave-induced longshore transport. Finally,
the influence of further pathways and processes that might be relevant to consider in terms
of the sediment budget at the study site are discussed.
5.3.1
Volume Changes observed in the Study Area
In this section, the changes in measured bed levels and associated estimates of volume changes
are analyzed more closely. Figure 5.12 already illustrates the differences in bed levels on an
interpolated mesh representing the full study area and already gives a first impression of the
changes that the area has undergone over the years. The current section aims to investigate
more closely and quantitatively the gains and losses of sediment volumes that occurred in the
study area. The bed levels interpolated to the 2D mesh, as shown in Figure 5.12, depend on
the interpolation method and are influenced by the low resolution in the longshore direction,
with data transects spaced 1 km apart. Given these limitations, it is more appropriate to base
the quantitative evaluation of bed level differences on the measurement data from the eight
individual transects, rather than on the interpolated 2D area. By comparing the bed levels
along a transect for different points in time, the volume loss or gain is obtained as cubic
meter volume per meter longshore width and meter cross-shore length per corresponding
period.
Figure 5.19 shows the difference in bed levels along each of the eight transects in the study
area individually and as a mean between the transects. The difference is given from the
year 2000 to 2023, matching the full period that was investigated by the longshore transport
model.
Figure 5.19: Difference in measured bed levels between profiles in 2000 and 2023 for each
transect, ∆z = z2023 −z2000, over the distance from the shoreline position in 2000 at each
transect, and as mean over all eight transects. The color scale has been limited to ±4 m
difference.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
55
==PAGE:63==
While the distance between neighboring transects is only 1 km, significant differences between
transects are apparent in Figure 5.19, and the transects changes over the 23 years seem
relatively non-uniform.
All transects show strong changes close to the beach, related to
larger steepness, bar movement, and dune erosion. The position of accretion and erosion
in that section is differently distributed, probably largely related to bar movements. Most
transects show only erosion onshore from the initial shoreline, but at LocId 94, accretion is
observed on the beach. While most transects show only moderate changes more than 500 m
offshore, at LocId 90 a large area of bed level lowering of around 2 m is documented, with
one of its neighboring transects in the meantime gaining sediment in that section. Overall,
most transects seem to be dominated by sediment loss over the largest parts, but transect
LocId 88 shows large areas of bed level increase. Most transects, except LocId 95, show
areas of bed level increase also at deeper areas, where often, areas of gain and loss alternate
in cross-shore direction. On average between the transects, the transects are dominated by
areas of moderate volume loss, with an area of volume gain 300 m to 400 m from the initial
shoreline, as well as between 1800 m and 2400 m. The mean integrated sediment volume
difference between 2000 and 2023 results in -1263 m3/m longshore width, such that overall,
the area experiences substantial volume loss.
The variability in bed level difference along transects and between transects also imposes a
large variability on the corresponding volume changes, suggesting that the estimated volume
changes depend strongly on which transects and transect sections are considered. Figure 5.20
gives the accumulated volume change per meter longshore width, integrated from the most
onshore point along the distance from the initial shoreline in 2000, presenting the volume
changes over time and along the transects.
Figure 5.20: Accumulated volume difference per meter width since 2000, integrated from the
most onshore point to each distance along the transects, extracted from the profile data for
each transect individually.
The difference in volume changes between the eight transects is extremely pronounced, in
direction, magnitude, and spatial and temporal development. While transect LocId 90 shows
56
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:64==
a very clear picture of relatively constant sediment loss over the years, by far losing the most
volume compared to the other transects, many other transects show changing trends over
the years. At LocId 88, contrarily, a continuous gain in sediment along the transect was
observed, however, strongly reversing the trend over the last three years. Especially visible
at LocId 93 and 94, but true for all transects, the impact of the integration distance is strong.
The observed changes don’t follow the intuitive concept that if for a certain section from the
beach, some volume loss or gain is observed, then when integrating further offshore, the loss
or gain will increase, though, possibly with a smaller rate as less changes occur in deeper
waters. When integrating up to 1500 m offshore at LocId 93 for 2023, a volume loss will be
obtained in the order of 1000 m3/m, however, when considering the full transect, the total
volume loss will be 30% smaller. At LocId 94, only minor volume changes are calculated
when integrating up to 1000 m distance for 2023, but integrating over the full transect leads
to 500m3/m sediment loss.
Figure 5.21: Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient, R, between the yearly volume
changes across the full transect distance for all transects in the study area.
In Figure 5.21, the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient, R, for the volume
changes across the full transects from one year to the following year of the eight tran-
sects is compiled. This means examining whether, in general, a volume gain at one transect
during a given year is associated with a volume gain or loss at another transect during the
same year, or if there is no discernible relationship between the annual volume changes of
different transects. No transects show a strong association (|R| > 0.6, Buda and Jarynowski
(2010)) in the volume changes, but in general, the area seems to be dominated by weak
(0.2 < |R| < 0.4) and moderate (0.4 < |R| < 0.6) positive associations in yearly volume
changes. However, even between the two neighboring transects 88 and 89, no correlation is
seen, which is also true for the neighboring transects 90 and 91. LocId 89 shows the least
correlation to any other transect, showing no or even negative correlation to 4 out of 7 other
transects. Overall, Figure 5.21 shows that there is a general tendency for transects to show
yearly gains and losses in a partly similar way across the transects, but this relation is only
weak to moderate. Even several neighboring transects don’t show similarities in yearly gains
or losses.
This adds again to the very complex and transect-specific behavior of the bed level changes,
making it difficult to generalize findings for all transects and indicating a complex, very
localized behavior. The significant variability among closely spaced and relatively parallel
transects - resulting in presumably similar transport conditions - represents a substantial
challenge for accurate representation in modeling efforts.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
57
==PAGE:65==
5.3.2
Sediment Budget Estimation based on Longshore Transport Gradi-
ents
After examining the volume changes observed at the Western Danish Coast near Husby
Klitplantage over the last 23 years, the predictions on sediment transport volumes by the
longshore model for the area are considered.
As a starting point, the sediment budget is considered to be purely driven by wave-induced
longshore transport, such that the onshore and offshore boundaries are assumed to have
zero net transport, and the volume change is based on the difference in volume transport
across the lateral boundaries. As described in subsection 3.1.2, the literature supports this
assumption that erosion processes along the Western Danish Coast are dominated by gradi-
ents in longshore transport processes. To examine the longshore transport rates, again, the
results of the LITPACK model runs for the eight transects between the years 2000 to 2023
are explored.
5.3.2.1
Modeled Longshore Transport Volumes across Wave Conditions
Before analyzing the transport gradients, a quick look is taken at the relation between wave
heights, wave directions, and transport volumes. Figure 5.22 presents exemplary wave condi-
tions and resulting transport volumes at LocId 95 for the period between the measurements
in 2020 to the measurements in the following year. The wave rose in Figure 5.22 (a) compiles
the fraction of time intervals characterized by a certain mean wave direction and significant
wave height, Hm0. The largest share of waves, during 27 % of the year, arrived from the
northwest, presumably driving a southward longshore current during that time. A total of
around 47 % of the time, waves arrived under an angle from the south, while the rest of
the time, waves arrived under an angle from north. This, at first sight, would indicate a
relatively balanced north- and southbound transport, moderately dominated by southward
transport. However, the sediment transport rose in Figure 5.22 (b) indicates that over 82%
of the transport volume is driven by waves coming from the north, thus being transported
southwards. Only approximately 18% of the total transport volume is directed northward,
which leaves an approximate net transport of 64m3 directed southward for every 100 m3
gross transport volume.
Looking at the wave heights associated with volume transport, the comparison between Fig-
ure 5.22 (a) and (b) gives a clear picture: Even though the wave climate is dominated by
moderate and relatively calm wave conditions, the sediment transport volumes are clearly
dominated by large significant wave heights. Figure 5.23 visualizes this observation quantita-
tively, showing the accumulated percentage of hours and gross transport of the total period
over the significant wave height, also comparing the results for the location and year repre-
sented in Figure 5.22 to another year and location. For LocId 90 from 2020 to 2021, 96 % of
the significant wave heights were below 3 m, and only 15 % of the gross transport volume was
mobilized during those wave conditions. Only 0.4 % of the time, waves are larger than 4.5
m, but 11 % of the gross transport is associated with those conditions, and 84 % of the gross
transport occurs during significant waves larger than 3.5 m, which represents less than 4 %
of the time intervals. This states that according to the simulations the longshore transport
volumes are strongly dominated by the transport happening during extreme events. While
the result is based on local and temporal conditions, results for other locations and years
have been inspected, leading to similar conclusions.
The transport behavior varies both
between locations and years but follows the overall conclusion of mostly stormy conditions
being responsible for the simulated longshore transport volumes. This also indicates that
year-to-year differences in transport volumes might largely be influenced by the individual
storm conditions.
58
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.22: For LocId 95 for the period between profile measurements in 2020 and 2021, (a) a
wave rose indicating frequency of significant wave height and wave direction combination read
from the CMEMS data set, and (b) results of the LITPACK simulation in form of a transport
rose, relating significant wave height and direction combinations to the corresponding gross
transport volume as fraction of the total gross transport volume over the period.
Figure 5.23: Comparison between the percentage of hours showing wave conditions smaller
than a specific significant wave height, Hm0, and the percentage of total gross sediment
transport volume related to those conditions, for three simulation cases, respectively.
5.3.2.2
Modeled Longshore Transport Gradients
The observed loss of sediment volume within the study area indicates, assuming the deficit
is mainly driven by longshore transport processes, that a gradient in longshore transport
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
59
==PAGE:67==
volumes between the transects must exist. In fact, when each transect undergoes sediment
volume loss, the transport volume must increase from transect to transect. However, due to
the very dynamic and variable changes in individual transects, it is not necessarily expected
to identify such a clear and uniform gradient between every single transects but more a large
scale gradient over a certain longshore distance. In the following, the transects LocId 88 and
95 are inspected more closely, considering the transport rates at those transects as lateral
boundary conditions for the sediment budget area spanning over the eight transects in the
study area.
Figure 5.24: Results of the LITPACK simulations, showing (a) the accumulated net transport
volume integrated across the full transect for LocId 88 and LocId 95 for each simulation
period, (b) the integrated net transport volume across the transects accumulated over the
individual simulation periods for each transect in the study area, and (c) the difference in
accumulated net transport volume integrated across the full transect between LocId 88 and
95 for each individual period, as well as difference accumulated over the periods, both given
as total volume difference between the two transects (left axis) and as volume difference per
meter longshore distance (right axis).
60
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.24 compares modeled longshore transport volumes across different transects, cap-
turing differences especially between transect LocId 88 and 95 over the study period. In
Figure 5.24 (a), the accumulated net transport volumes for each simulation period integrated
along the transects are compiled for LocId 88 and LocId 95. For around half of the periods,
the predicted net longshore transport volumes are significantly larger at LocId 95, while the
others show either similar transport volumes for both transects or larger volumes at LocId
88, however, with a less pronounced difference between the two transects. The figure also
supports what has already been concluded from Figure 5.22 (b): The net longshore transport
is directed southwards for both transects and during all years, except for an extremely small
northward net transport for the first period at LocId 88. The variability in magnitudes of
transport volumes is extremely large, with a factor of up to 40 between different years for
the same transect. This might be explained by the strong dominance of storms in transport
rates, making the yearly transport rates largely dependent on the number, duration, and
strength of extreme events.
Additionally, the simulations of each year are based on one
fixed bed profile corresponding to the profile measured at the start of the simulation period,
and the corresponding nearshore profile shape and bar positions might strongly influence
the modeled transport rates, even though in reality, the profile might have developed after
the measurements. The simulations are thus probably exaggerating the difference in bed
conditions and their influence on differences in transport rates between individual years.
In Figure 5.24 (b), the modeled transport volumes per period given in (a) are accumulated
over the years, supporting clearly that over the years, significantly more longshore transport
volume is modeled to be transported across LocId 95 than across LocId 88, with the total
transport volume being approximately twice as large. While this indicates a clear longshore
transport gradient southwards, the picture is not as clear when considering all transects in
the study area, which are also shown in Figure 5.24 (b). It must be noted that the simulation
at LocId 94 in 2021 showed issues and could not be included, such that the accumulation at
this transect ends in 2020. While the most northern (LocId 88) and most southern (LocId 95)
transects match the idea of increasing southward transport rates leading to a net southward
sediment transport gradient and resulting erosion in the area, the profiles in between don’t
follow exactly the picture of gradually increasing net transport the further south they are
located. For example, LocId 90 shows larger southward transport volumes than LocId 93
after 23 years, which should result in increased sediment volume in the area between the
transects.
This variability in gradients between individual transects’ transport rates matches well the
large variability across the transects in the observed bed level changes. This, however, also
means that the modeled sediment budget depends largely on the choice of the transects to
be used as lateral boundaries. If for example transect LocId 90 would have been chosen as
the northern boundary of the study area instead of LocId 88, over the first 17 years no or
only very small net loss or gain would have been predicted, contrary to the situation when
using LocId 88. Of course, the change in lateral boundaries in the simulation would also
come with a decreased distance between boundaries, obviously resulting in lower expected
differences, and findings from observed volume changes could support this modeled behavior,
but the large variability between transects could also stem from simulation issues. Either
way, it is important to keep in mind in the following analysis, that the results are based on
the specific, relatively random choice of LocId 88 and 95 to be the lateral boundaries of the
control area, and both measurement and simulation conclusions might change for a different
choice.
Figure 5.24 (c) compiles the difference in modeled transport volumes between LocId 88 and
95, both per individual simulation period and accumulated from the start throughout the
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
61
==PAGE:69==
study period. The volume difference between the transects corresponds to the volume that is
gained or lost from longshore transport processes within the full area between the transects.
Even though several periods show volume gains, the overall trend of volume loss becomes
very clear over the 23 years, strongly driven by several years of large volume losses. The
resulting total lost volume of 2.2 million m3 along the 7.1 km coastal stretch over the 23
years corresponds to approximately 315 m3 volume loss per longshore meter width, which
- given the large variability in observations and model results and the simple approach of
considering the full transects - in its order of magnitude is reasonably comparable to the
1263 m3 observed loss per meter width in the study area (cf. subsection 5.3.1).
5.3.2.3
Choice of Boundaries for the Sediment Budget based on the Longshore
Transport Model
After discussing the volume changes observed in the study area and modeled for longshore
transport with the LITPACK software, the focus is now set on the comparison between these
two results. Here, the sediment budget is considered to be purely represented by gradients
in longshore transport volumes, such that the match of the modeled sediment budget and
the observed budget can be analyzed by comparing solely the LITPACK model results and
the volumes from observed bed level changes.
As a representative result of the observed volume changes, the mean of all eight transects in
the study area is chosen, including the transects LocId 88 and LocId 95, which are selected
to be used as lateral boundaries of the sediment budget. In Figure 5.25 (a), the observed
volume changes integrated along the full transects are given for all individual transects and
as a mean of the transects, underlying again the variability already observed in Figure 5.20
between individual transects. However, in the following, it is assumed that the mean between
the transect is representative of the “true” volume changes within the area. All following
analyses are based on lateral boundaries at LocId 88 and 95, both for the longshore model
and observations.
When setting up a sediment budget and comparing model results with observed changes, one
of the crucial choices is the definition of the offshore boundary. This might especially be true
in the case of this specific study area, as bed level and volume changes have been observed up
to large depths, such that moving the offshore boundary at any depth will have an influence,
and no convergence up from a specific depth might be expected. The LITPACK model,
however, only predicts large volume changes relatively close to the shoreline, as discussed
in subsection 5.2.4. Therefore, no large difference in volume changes will result in different
choices of offshore boundaries from a certain depth, which from Figure 5.18 (e) might be
settled to depths of around 7 m. This means, obviously, that the longshore transport model
will never be able to capture the considerable volume changes observed in deeper areas.
In Figure 5.25 (b), the volume changes per meter width calculated by the longshore model are
integrated along the full transects and accumulated from the first simulation period starting
in 2000 to each year’s simulation end. In the same plot, the mean of observed volume loss
per meter width along the full profiles between the eight transects is given again as case (1),
identically to the mean given in (a). Comparing the modeled and observed volumes, along
the full transect, the observed volumes are significantly larger, confirming the problems of
the model capturing the volume changes along the full transect. However, Figure 5.25 (b)
also gives the volume changes in the measured profiles for different sections of the full profile,
referred to as comparison cases (2) to (8), representing a change in the onshore and offshore
boundaries of the sediment budget. The sections are defined by the x-positions where each
transect’s profile of the year 2000 reached a certain depth. It can be seen that by reducing the
water depth that is considered to be included within the control area, the observed changes
become closer to the modeled longshore transport volume changes.
62
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:70==
Figure 5.25 (c) and (d) give the correlation of year-to-year volume changes between LITPACK
and each comparison case, as well as the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the accumulated
volume change time series (i.e. the lines shown in Figure 5.25 (b)) between LITPACK results
and each comparison case, respectively. It can be seen that for both measures, cases (5) to
(7) seem to be the most promising cases, with case (6) representing the optimal choice of
boundaries in terms of R, meaning that it can capture best both the yearly volume changes
with its magnitude and sign. Case (5) represents the best boundary choices to capture the
accumulated volumes, indicated by the lowest RMSE. In both cases, a correlation coefficient
of R ≈0.6 indicates moderate correlation, and the RMSE is still fairly high. Yet, given the
large variability in the observation and model results and the very simplified sediment budget
only calculated by longshore transport neglecting all other pathways, the model seems to
give a relatively good estimate of the situation in the study area.
Figure 5.25: Comparison of profile data and LITPACK results.
(a) Volume change per
meter longshore width across the full profiles between 2000 and each year, obtained from
bed level differences in profile measurements, shown separately for each transect and as
a mean between the eight transects.
(b) The volume change per longshore meter width
from the difference in bed level measurement as a mean between the eight profiles, evaluated
along different stretches of the profiles, referred to as case (1) to (8), and the modeled volume
loss per meter longshore width from LITPACK, considering the full profile. (c) Correlation
coefficient, R, between the yearly volume changes calculated from the LITPACK model and
observed from profile data for the cases (1) to (8). (d) Root-Means-Square-Error, RMSE,
between the accumulated volume change from the LITPACK model and the observed bed
level changes for cases (1) to (8).
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
63
==PAGE:71==
For case (6), the boundaries are selected to go from 0 m to 7 m water depth (in the profile
in 2000), and for case (5) from 0 m to 10 m. This matches very well with the findings in
Figure 5.18 (d) and (e), where it can be seen that the longshore transport volumes reduce
drastically at that depth, with only relatively small transport outside those water depths.
It is thus reasonable that a sediment budget boundary choice at that depth leads to the
best results: Within this area, the volume changes are strongly influenced by wave-induced
longshore transport, which can be captured well by the model.
Outside of that, other
processes influence the volume change stronger than the wave-induced longshore transport
does, such that the longshore model cannot provide reasonable estimates here. Also, the
setting of the onshore boundary to only consider positions offshore from the shoreline reduces
the additional influence of transport processes occurring at the onshore part of the profile,
such as aeolian transport, beach maintenance, dune collapse, which also are not captured in
the longshore transport model.
Figure 5.26: Measured bed levels in 2000 and 2023 for the eight transects in the study area,
over distance from the shoreline in 2000. The position of the shoreline, 7 m water depth and
10 m water depth are indicated for both years.
The choice of the offshore boundary in terms of water depths based on the bed levels in
2000 inherits some issues, becoming larger for results of later years: With erosion taking
place and the shoreline moving, in tendency backward, the profile also translocates, such
that the stretch that initially corresponded to depths of for example 0 to 10 m water depth,
several years later might correspond to locations of 3 to 15 m water depth, such that for
those profiles, some depth-related processes might be included or excluded compared to the
64
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:72==
first profiles.
Figure 5.26 illustrates these changes in depth positions between the years
2000 and 2023, showing in many cases significant shifts in water depths. However, it is also
not possible to just include for each year the section from for example 0 to -10 m in that
specific year’s profile, or at transect spanning a fixed distance from each year’s shoreline,
as then the calculation of bed level differences of profiles between different years becomes
corrupt. For example, for profiles with a constant, fixed slope, when analyzing changes over
the years by comparing the volume between the shoreline position of each year (instead of
the shoreline position of the first year) and a reference point 1000 m seaward (or up to
the 10 m depth contour in that year), no volume change would be detected. This is true
even though significant volume loss would have occurred due to the shoreline retreating
backward over time. Thus, in defining which sections are supposed to be used for bed level
change calculations, meaning defining onshore and offshore boundaries, a trade-off between
consistency in stretch position and water depths is inevitable.
Even though it is only a crude estimation of the complex full picture, a sediment budget
solely based on the longshore model results can already serve coastal information purposes:
Over the period between 2000 and 2023, the longshore model predicted a volume loss of 314
m3/m, which as just explained is considered to correspond to observed changes at water
depths up to around 10 m. As can be seen from Figure 5.26, this corresponds to a distance
of approximately 1200 m from the shoreline for the eight transects. With 314 m3/ volume
change along a cross-shore distance of 1200 m, this results in a mean bed level change of
0.26 m within that section. Assuming a linear profile between the shoreline and 10 m water
depth, the average bed slope is 10 m / 1200 m = 0.0083. The shoreline retreat corresponding
to the mean bed level change and the mean slope in the area then results in 0.26 m / 0.0083
= 31 m. This matches very well with the observed shoreline retreat over the 23 years, seen in
Figure 5.26, which as a mean between the eight transects amounts to 27 m. When doing the
calculations for an offshore boundary water depth of 12 m, the calculated retreat becomes
26 m, matching even better the observed retreat, indicating that in terms of the shoreline
retreat, an offshore boundary of 12 m fits best.
This indicates that the optimal choice of the offshore boundary also depends on the purpose of
the sediment budget study, and which parameters are supposed to be modeled, may it be the
yearly volume change (cf. Figure 5.25 (c)), accumulated volume change (cf. Figure 5.25 (d)),
or the shoreline retreat. For the purpose of a nourishment or sand mining investigation, the
exclusive use of the wave-induced longshore model results may not be representative enough,
as depending on the type of nourishment or mining, the processes going on in deeper waters
or on the shore as well as cross-shore transport most probably will have increased influence
on the volume redistribution, not captured by the longshore model. This means the purely
longshore-driven sediment budget may be perfectly sufficient for some applications, but will
not deliver satisfactory results for other purposes.
5.3.3
Considerations on further Pathways in the Sediment Budget
After analyzing the fit of a sediment budget only based on gradients in longshore transport
modeled by the LITPACK software to the observed bed level changes, the considerations are
now expanded to other possible pathways in the study area.
5.3.3.1
Capturing Processes in Deeper Areas
In subsubsection 5.3.2.3, it has been determined that the modeled longshore transport rates
can only describe the sediment in an area relatively close to the shore, up to a water depth
of approximately 7 to 12 m, considered the depth of closure for the strong wave-induced
longshore transport processes. Figure 5.27 (a) illustrates this sediment budget that is set
up exclusively by the use of the longshore current model: The sediment budget control area
only describes the nearshore area, from the shoreline up to the considered depth of closure
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
65
==PAGE:73==
for wave-induced longshore transport, ignoring the beach and dunes as well as the deeper
area. The gradients in transport rates found in Figure 5.20, leading to a net volume loss,
are qualitatively indicated in Figure 5.27 (a) by the brown arrows. This relatively simple
approach to sediment budget has been found sufficient for describing the observed volume in
that area and estimating shoreline retreat in the study area. However, this obviously does
not represent the sediment budget of the complete coastal area, and a more detailed picture
is required for other applications.
The significant observed bed level changes and associated volume changes further offshore
can not directly be described by the wave-induced longshore transport model, and need to
be considered in a different way.
This means that it is required to sub-divide a control
area into two sections if setting up a sediment budget that also considers deeper regions’
bed level changes, where net sediment transport is estimated from wave-induced longshore
currents near the shore, while further offshore, the sediment transport is estimated from
other methods. This is illustrated in Figure 5.27 (b), assuming that the bed level changes in
deeper regions are mainly driven by transport in the longshore direction (purple arrows).
Figure 5.27: Qualitative sketches of possible setups of a sediment budget for the area, where
the study area is divided up into three sub-areas, the beach and dunes, the nearshore area,
and the deeper area. The control areas for the sediment budget setups are indicated by the
gray boundaries. The considered pathways for the sediment budget setups are indicated by
arrows, and the excavators represent both source and sink terms due to human activities.
According to Christensen et al. (2000), the sediment transport in the deeper area is related
to the tidal current along the Western Danish Coast as described in subsubsection 3.1.2.3.
The insights from the MatRANS model might support the understanding of the process. As
has been described in subsubsection 3.1.2.3, the current is expected to transport sediments
in combination with waves acting on the ground. While waves alone might not be able to
transport sediments in longshore direction at those depths, the wave-induced velocities near
the bed might still exert forces on the bed, possibly setting fractions of the sediment in
motion and suspension, which then may be transported by the current velocities.
The results in Figure 5.16 for a water depth of 20 m seem to support this theory: While
the maximum transport rates in (c), (d), (h), and (i) calculated only for wave action are
very small, the maximum Shields parameter in (b) and (g) during the wave cycle reaches
approximately θ = 0.1 for the mean significant wave height and θ = 0.3 for Hm0,1/3. Consid-
ering the (skin friction component of) critical Shields parameter for incipient motion to be
66
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:74==
in a range between 0.02 and 0.2, typically taken 0.045 for hydraulically rough regimes, these
Shields parameters might very well lead to incipient motion of sediments, especially when
considering that the bed shear stress might even be increased when taking into account the
presence of the current. From Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992), it can be found that substantial
suspension of sediment might be expected starting from a Shields parameter of θ ≈0.3,
which is fulfilled by the Shields parameter found at 20 m water depth in Figure 5.16 (g) for
the mean of the largest third of significant wave heights, especially when considering that
the presence of the current also leads to turbulence in the full water column.
According to Christensen et al. (2000), measurements indicate that the current velocity is on
average directed northwards, which on first sight suggests the net transport to be northwards.
However, it might as well be towards the south, depending on the interplay of processes in
the area. For example, it can be assumed that concentrations and transport rates depend
on the wave conditions, increasing the impact on the bed significantly, and also the currents
velocities increase during storms. Depending on the timing of storm conditions within the
tidal cycles during a year, it is also possible that the storms occur during southward directed
currents, leading in that year to southward-directed net transport. Besides the transport
direction, the gradients in net transport are also unclear, as it depends on the difference in
wave climate, coast orientation, and current conditions between the lateral boundaries, at
which boundary the magnitude of net transport is larger. From the observed volume loss in
the deeper area, however, at least it might be concluded that more sediment is leaving than
entering the area. This observed volume loss suggests larger net transport in the south for
southward-directed net transport, or larger net transport in the north for northward-directed
net transport, however, would not rule out the case for northward-going net transport in the
north and southward-directed net transport at the southern boundary. The unknown net
transport direction and gradients along the coast are indicated by the thicker and thinner
lines for the solid and dashed purple arrows in Figure 5.27 (b).
To qualitatively and quantitatively asses these transport rates and gradients in the deeper
area, a more profound study on what drives sediment transport in those depths is required.
Several LITPACK simulations integrating a current have been carried out, but the results
seemed to depend largely on small changes in the setup conditions, such that for a reli-
able conclusion on model results for the deeper area, a more profound modeling effort and
parameter tuning are required.
Besides the longshore transport gradients that have been discussed in Figure 5.27 (a) and
(b), sediment transport pathways at the beach area and across the boundaries in cross-shore
direction may also significantly contribute to the sediment budget of the area, as well as
source and sink terms due to human activity, as indicated in Figure 5.27 (c). Following
such a setup and considering as many possible pathways as possible together with describing
the corresponding transport volumes and gradients in the most accurate way possible could
provide a very comprehensive and relatively complete representation of the sediment budget
of a given area, but requires extensive knowledge on all processes ongoing in the area and
intense modeling efforts.
5.3.3.2
Relevance of Cross-Shore Transport Volumes
While the reliable quantitative estimation of net cross-shore transport volumes lies outside
the scope of this research, at least considering the relative importance of cross-shore transport
processes is essential, and can for example be used to define offshore boundaries. While
during storms, cross-shore transport rates might be significant up to deeper depths, as seen
from Figure 5.17 (e), and can move large volumes of sand, calmer periods typically lead to a
re-establishment of the initial profile over time, such that cross-shore transport rates might in
many cases be considered to contribute more to a temporal redistribution of sand within the
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
67
==PAGE:75==
control area rather than evacuating sediment. If the offshore boundary is selected such that
the net cross-shore transport across the boundary (i.e. along the blue arrows in Figure 5.27
(c)) is negligible compared to the longshore transport rate, the cross-shore transport within
the control area (i.e. along the orange and green arrows in Figure 5.27 (c)) might not affect
the overall sediment budget of the total control area. Figure 5.28 shows the results on net
transport rates of the MatRANS simulations for wave heights corresponding to Hm0 and
Hm0,1/3 as given in Table 3.1 at several water depths. In the plot, the average volume loss
per meter longshore width within the study area as calculated from the LITPACK model is
indicated, calculated from the approximately 320 m3 volume loss over 23 years, as given in
Figure 5.20, resulting in 4·10−7 m3/s.
As can be seen from Figure 5.28, at 12 m, 16 and 20 m water depth the estimated net
cross-shore transport rates during mean wave conditions account for only 10 %, 1 %, and
less than 0.1 % of the estimated longshore transport rates, respectively. This suggests the
cross-shore transport processes to be less important than longshore transport rates in the
sediment budget during those average conditions. During the rougher conditions, however,
the cross-shore transport rates are larger than the longshore transport rates, except for a
depth of 20 m. This at first glance suggests that the cross-shore transport rates should have
an important contribution to the sediment budget.
However, it must be considered that the MatRANS model did not take into account several
effects, such as return current and bed slope effect, which would decrease or even reverse the
transport rates. Additionally, the net transport rate calculated from the longshore model
is a result of a 23-year-long, varying wave climate, where many times, transport rates have
been changing directions. Gradients between the lateral boundaries have also varied in direc-
tions, reducing the overall net transport. This means that the instantaneous net longshore
transport rates that would correspond to the fixed wave conditions used for the cross-shore
transport rates, are most likely larger than the 23 year average, and the long-term longshore
transport rate is not directly comparable to the cross-shore transport rates calculated from
fixed wave conditions. For a long-term time series of changing wave climates, the varying
interplay of onshore and offshore directed processes, as described in subsection 2.2.2, and
changing magnitudes would most probably also lower the net cross-shore transport rates.
Figure 5.28: Net cross-shore transport rates as calculated from the MatRANS model for
mean significant wave height, ¯Hm0, and wave conditions representing the mean of the largest
third of significant wave heights, Hm0,1/3, taken from Table 3.1 as offshore conditions, for
various water depths. The average net volume loss per second and meter longshore width as
calculated from the longshore transport LITPACK model over the 23-year period is indicated
by the red line.
68
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:76==
Those reasons indicate that at least at water depths of 20 m, more likely also at somewhat
shallower depths, it may be assumed that even during rougher conditions, the longshore
transport rates are more important to the sediment budget than the cross-shore transport
rates. This indicates that the blue arrows in Figure 5.27 should be relatively small and not
contribute in a very significant way to the sediment budget. This doesn’t mean that at all
times the cross-shore transport at these depths would be small compared to longshore trans-
port rates. Even though the cross-shore transport rates in the long term might be considered
relevant, they are at least less important than longshore transport rates in estimating the
long-term sediment budget.
If the redistribution of sediment within the control area is important to the purpose of the
sediment budget, the direction and magnitude of the cross-shore processes might be consid-
ered very relevant. Especially volume translation from the beach area to the nearshore area
(i.e. along the green solid arrow in Figure 5.27 (c)) could result in substantial shoreline re-
treat. For the purpose of considering those pathways, a more advanced cross-shore transport
estimation would be required.
Obviously, while only presented for the holistic sediment budget setup in Figure 5.27 (c),
selected cross-shore pathways or source and sink terms may also be considered in a relatively
simple setup following setups similar to Figure 5.27 (a) or (b).
5.3.3.3
Transport Processes in Land Area
So far, sediment budget considerations have only touched processes below the water level.
However, as can be seen from measured profile data, substantial changes also occur on land,
with dune fronts moving backward (cf. Figure 5.4), corresponding to significant volume loss
on land. This loss may be related, among others, to aeolian transport, wash-out during
large storms destabilizing the cliffs, and sea level rise. The pink arrows in Figure 5.27 (c)
represent all sediment that is leaving or entering the control area from the beach or dunes, for
example by aeolian transport, not specifying between transport in longshore and cross-shore
direction, while the green arrows represent all sediment lost from the beach to the ocean, or
brought from the ocean onto the beach area.
While it is challenging to calculate volume change on the land area from the profile data,
as measurements cover varying stretches of the beach and dunes, an estimate can be made:
With the cliff migrating backward around 30 m between 2000 and 2023, and a mean dune
height of approximately 17 m (cf. Figure 5.4), this corresponds to a volume loss of on-land
sand of approximately 510 m3 per meter width over the 23 years.
From Figure 5.4 it can be seen that the slope of the cliff as well as the shape of the beach area
remain relatively constant over time, indicating that the erosion corresponds to a backward
movement of some sort of equilibrium profile. With the long-term volume loss in the surf zone
due to longshore sediment transport gradients, and the associated migration of the shoreline,
the beach becomes affected, becoming shorter. This also allows for larger waves and storm
surges to reach further onshore and towards the dunes, increasing sediment washout within
the land area, also eroding and shifting backward the land profile.
A study conducted by Karlsson and Larsen (2021) at a coastal stretch in the northern part
of the Danish Western Coast showed that aeolian sediment transport is a complex process,
where “multiple factors, such as sediment availability, a saturation of the beach, lag deposits,
armoring, etc. affect the potential sediment transport”. This also leads to large challenges
in trying to model aeolian dune erosion and accretion based on environmental knowledge,
such as sediment characteristics and wind condition time series.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
69
==PAGE:77==
5.3.3.4
Influence of Sea Level Rise
Sea level rise contributes to a backward movement of the equilibrium profile, as stated by
Bruun (1962). For the influence of sea level rise on the shoreline retreat, Bruuns Rule can
be applied :
R =
SL
h + B =
S
tan(β)
,
(5.1)
where R is the shoreline retreat, S is the sea level rise, L is the the distance from dune peak
to the depth of closure, h, B is the dune height above sea level, and β is the mean slope
between the dune top and closure depth, following Komar et al. (1991). As an estimate, a
sea level rise of approximately 8 cm over the 23 years can be assumed based on an analysis
by Su et al. (2021). For LocId 88, assuming a closure depth, h, of around 11 m, and a
corresponding active length of L = 1400 m, this results in a calculated shoreline retreat
due to a sea level rise of 4 m from 2000 to 2023. This, obviously doesn’t explain the full
observed shoreline retreat of approximately 30 m in that period, but represents a significant
share in it and should be considered in sediment budget analysis in general, especially for
future predictions, where the rate in sea level rise is predicted to increase, thus increasing
the related shoreline retreat.
Overall, various processes and pathways contribute to the volume loss or gain within a
specific control volume, and depending on the purpose and location of a sediment budget
study, considering one or the other might be of more benefit in estimating the budget.
70
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 6
Discussion and Conclusion
The individual results obtained from the different methods applied in this study have already
been analyzed and discussed in chapter 5. The following discussion therefore sets a focus
on connecting the individual results from the different study aspects, putting them into
perspective and elaborating on conclusions that can be drawn. A short conclusion on the
work presented in this thesis is provided in the end.
6.1
Discussion
The first key point to highlight is that the study of the profile data and state-of-the-art
numerical models applied to the area match the descriptions of the coastal dynamics of the
Danish West Coast found in literature: The Husby Klitplantage area showed to be subject
to chronic erosion driven by large storm events and the resulting intense longshore sediment
transport in a southward direction.
The modeled gradients in longshore transport rates
match reasonably well the observed bed level changes in the surf zone and can be used
effectively to predict the shoreline retreat. The transport processes due to tidal currents
in deeper regions, as described in the literature, could not be captured in the longshore
model, but the associated bed level changes in deeper regions are clearly supported by the
profile data. In the study area, the concept of closure depth can be understood as a boundary
where wave-induced nearshore transport processes - effectively modeled by classical numerical
approaches - primarily shape the morphology. Beyond this closure depth, however, other
processes lead to significant bed level changes, necessitating alternative methods to estimate
volume changes. In terms of the concept of sediment budget, this may be addressed by the
control area to be subdivided into one part onshore from the closure depth, where volume
changes are defined by gradients in wave-induced longshore sediment transport rates, and
a second part offshore from the closure depth, where volume changes are defined by the
action of the tidal current together with the wave action. Depending on the application,
it may be enough to consider only the near-shore section with the wave-induced longshore
transport gradients, as has been shown for example for the retreat in the coastline, while for
other applications, it might be crucial to consider also the processes in deeper areas or the
cross-shore transport, such as it might be the case for nourishment-related calculations.
Comparing the typical portrayal of the Danish West Coast transport scheme as given in
Figure 3.4 to the results of this study, a reasonable match is found: The net transport
volumes at the coast near the study area according to Figure 3.4 amount to approximately
1-2 million m3/year, while the longshore transport model predicts 2.5-4.5 million m3 in 23
years (cf. Figure 5.24), which corresponds to 0.1-0.2 million m3/year, thus only 10 % of
the amount given in Figure 3.4. However, the longshore model only accounts for near-shore
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
71
==PAGE:79==
transport and doesn’t include the transport volumes in deeper areas, such that a smaller
prediction is expected. The changes in profile data cannot be employed for an estimation of
net transport volumes, as they only show the result of gradients in transport volumes, which
does not allow to conclude on transport rates. Yet, a comparison of the observed volume
loss across the full profiles to the modeled volume loss can be employed to make a statement
on the significance of the offshore processes: Figure 5.24 shows that the volume loss across
the full profile is around three times larger than the volume loss within the area of influence
of the wave-induce longshore model. Therefore, it might be expected that the net transport
along the full profile is also several times larger than the one suggested by the longshore
model, bringing the numbers closer to the net transport stated by Figure 3.4. In terms of
the large uncertainties associated with sediment transport processes, this can be considered
a good match. Obviously, this is only true if considering the deeper area’s transport is also
going southwards.
Besides the longshore transport gradients, the sediment budget may be influenced by cross-
shore pathways.
In literature, the sediment budget and coastal dynamics in general are
described as dominated by the gradients in longshore transport, which also matches reason-
ably well the findings of a relative good match between the longshore transport model and
the observed bed level changes in the area. However, it was found that cross-shore transport
rates may be important, even though in general considered less important for the overall
sediment budget than longshore transport. Considering for example the typical picture of
summer and winter profiles due to changes in cross-shore processes, it is assumed that cross-
shore transport processes are more relevant to the redistribution of sediment within the study
area rather than evacuating or providing large amounts of sand to the sediment budget.
Nevertheless, the cross-shore processes are still relevant to shaping the coastal dynamics,
especially in combination with longshore transport. In case of storm conditions with large
waves and storm surge, immense amounts of sediment can be washed out from the beach
area. These volumes of short-term erosion in theory can be brought back during calmer
conditions, but in the case of the study area, these sand volumes can be taken away by the
longshore currents, and are not available anymore to be brought back to the beach area,
thus have been permanently evacuated by the combination of cross-shore and longshore
processes. The impact of cross-shore transport during storms, however, does not necessarily
have a negative effect. As demonstrated by Harley et al. (2022) in several locations, storms
can cause significant beach erosion while simultaneously contributing large quantities of
sediment to the sediment budget through input from deeper areas.
In some cases, this
process can even result in a net gain in the sediment budget due to the storms.
The interplay between cross-shore and longshore processes, as discussed in the case of the
storms, can also be considered when assuming an equilibrium profile shape: As has been
shown, the longshore transport erodes sediment in an area between the shoreline and ap-
proximately 7-12 m water depth, while onshore and offshore from that region, the bed is
not affected by the longshore current.
This local erosion changes the profile shape, and
cross-shore processes might be active in transporting sediment towards the area both from
onshore and offshore to even the profile out and reestablish the equilibrium profile. This
is then eroded again by the longshore processes, leading to a cross-shore driven supply of
sediment from onshore and offshore towards the longshore-active zone, and the cross-shore
processes thus chronically leading to erosion onshore and offshore from the longshore trans-
port zone.
The assumption of cross-shore processes redistributing sediments rather than evacuating
also can only hold in case of the profile being in equilibrium. However, it is possible that for
72
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:80==
the area, no equilibrium profile exists, leading to chronic erosion or deposition. This is for
example true in the case of a changing wave climate or changing sea levels, both expected to
change even more significantly in the future due to climate change. Therefore, it is relatively
safe to assume that in the long-term, the profiles in the study area are not in equilibrium,
and cross-shore processes in this case will contribute to the chronic erosion of the shoreline.
For a better understanding of the effect of the cross-shore transport processes’ contribution
to the sediment budget and the coastal dynamics in the study area, a more refined model of
the processes would need to be set up, tuning parameters and carefully selecting considered
effects. Here, it should be mentioned again that the cross-shore model used in this research
did not include return currents, which would add an important offshore-directed effect to the
transport. For a better comparison, the model setups of cross-shore and longshore models
would be required, for example running both for wave time series or fixed wave conditions.
In this study, cross-shore transport has been evaluated using fixed wave heights arriving
perpendicular to the coast, while longshore rates have been calculated by the gradients
between two transects for a time series of changing wave conditions, making it difficult to
compare the relevance of magnitudes and not allowing to evaluate the interplay between the
cross-shore and longshore transport processes for the sediment budget.
Across all analyses performed, a large variability both between different transects and dif-
ferent years has been detected. The large differences between years might be related to the
transport processes being largely dominated by storm events, subjecting the morphological
changes strongly to the extreme wave conditions of the individual years. By choosing ade-
quate sections of comparison, the longshore mode using wave time series was able to capture
with moderate correlation these year-to-year differences observed in the profile data. The
large variability between different transects, both seen in the profile data and model results,
indicated that the study area is a highly dynamic area, where processes or their implica-
tions are location-individual and results from one transect can not simply be transferred to
neighboring transects. This large variability between transects must also be considered when
defining lateral boundaries for the sediment budget, strongly influencing both the gradients
in modeled longshore transport and observed bed level changes.
As already mentioned during the model description and analysis, the modeling efforts carried
out for the study area are intended to qualitatively describe gradients along different transects
and differences between water depths and individual years, and it is not claimed that they
capture the physical conditions and processes within the study area optimally. Therefore,
the results should be interpreted with caution, taking into account both the limitations of the
model setup and the inherent fact that even a well-calibrated model can never fully replicate
reality. Both the cross-shore and longshore models did not undergo an intense tuning of
model parameters and are mainly based on default values, and the model results might
likely be heavily altered when changing input parameters. Here, the selection of included
effects in the cross-shore model or the choice of the bed roughness and variability in water
level in the long-shore model needs to be mentioned. An improved representation of real
physics could change the derived interpretation of the study area, especially concerning the
relative importance of processes and the magnitude of transport volumes and gradients at
different depths.
As seen from the results of the longshore transport model, the large waves during storms
almost solely account for the transport volumes, such that the wave heights and duration of
storms in the wave time series used as input have a large influence on the model results. The
wave data used for the simulations is taken from a large-scale wave model, and it was not
verified whether the model performs well and is in agreement with observed wave conditions
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
73
==PAGE:81==
on a local level in the study area.
Another weakness in the model results is represented by the bathymetry input using the
yearly measured profiles. An effort was made to consider the changing profile in the sim-
ulation by sub-dividing the long-term simulation in simulation periods between the profile
measurements and updating the profile in each period rather than running a 23-year-long
simulation on the initial profile. However, considering the same profile for approximately
one full year is still a relatively crude approach, especially considering the large variability
in profiles.
The profile that has been measured might not be very representative of the
bed level condition during that year, yet, the measured profile goes as fixed input into the
simulation, and the shape, steepness, and position of bar and shoreline largely influence the
transport processes simulated for that year. This might be especially critical because most
profile measurements have been taken during summer, while most of the transport happens
during storms in the winter when the bed supposedly has transformed.
While from the
profile data set, a clear summer-winter profile trend could not be verified, a change in profile
shape during the winter season is likely to influence the current and transport conditions
significantly. The lack of morphological updating also means that the effects of storms hap-
pening relatively consecutive compared to singular storms, as well as backfilling processes,
are not considered.
In this study, the measured profile data was assumed to represent the natural coastal devel-
opment in the study area, uninfluenced by any sort of human activity in terms of structures,
construction works, nourishment, or sand mining.
However, it can not be asserted with
certainty that human activities did not influence the observed bed level changes. This might
be activities within the study area, but also further north or south along the coast, still
influencing the availability of sediment, transport volumes, or gradients.
Also, the large
variability between neighboring transects brings uncertainty to the “real” volume changes in
the study area, as a lot might have been ongoing between the transects, not captured in the
data. Taking the mean of only eight transects as a representative estimation of the volume
changes is coarse given the large variability between transects and along transects.
This research focused on the very local results obtained for the coastal stretch at Husby
Klitplantage, and a large variability between individual transects was discovered. Therefore,
it is not expected to be able to make statements about mechanisms in neighboring regions,
not speaking of conditions along the full Western Danish Coast. However, the combination of
the analysis of profile data and longshore and cross-shore models proved to help understand
relations in the area and could be adapted to other locations’ specific characteristics. As
the West Coast data set collects profiles all along the West Coast, similar studies could be
carried out anywhere, possibly supporting coastal protection works. The methods applied
provide an important tool to be able to understand the implications of future challenges such
as increased storm strength and frequency, sea level rise, or changes in current systems due
to climate change on local coastline stretches.
The immense long-term and large-scale collection of profile data along the Western Danish
Coast is extremely valuable, and this study was limited to a very small fraction of insights
that could be gained and research topics that may arise from this data set. In combination
with the wide variety of concepts and models describing the effects and processes along coast-
lines, the data can be used to approach questions on the mechanisms and details shaping the
coastline, yet to be answered. This could support decision making for coastal development
strategies. About the analysis performed in this study, a variety of directions for further
investigation opens up, that would allow to refine the results and understand even better
the coastal dynamics of the area. As the modeling efforts didn’t include a proper tuning
74
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:82==
process, more in-depth cross-shore and longshore model studies better adapted to the specific
local conditions have the potential to provide more reliable results. A selection of additional
software offering different options and process descriptions might be of value, for example,
models incorporating morphological updating. The large availability of bed level data might
also be valuable in return for more general research on the model and forecast development
on for example the impact of extreme events or sea level rise on coastal development.
Further studies could also investigate the development and implications of the bar system,
as well as the dune erosion. To improve the sediment budget representation of the area,
a qualitative and quantitative study on the sediment transport within the beach and dune
area would be necessary, capturing effects such as aeolian transport processes, the influence
of vegetation, dune collapse, and processes during a storm surge. To expand the findings
on a more general level, the examination of other study sites along the West Coast might
be carried out, investigating similarities between locations and understanding the factors
that are responsible for differences between them, to describe a general pattern of bed level
dynamics at the Danish West Coast. For shoreface nourishment, a detailed study of the
processes occurring at various depths could offer valuable insights. It would be crucial to
understand which processes drive sediment movement at each depth, the conditions under
which this occurs, the directions and magnitudes of sediment transport, and how these
processes interact under different morphological and hydrodynamic conditions.
6.2
Conclusion
This study addressed the investigation of sediment transport processes and volume changes
along a very local stretch in the center of the Western Danish Coast by an in-depth ex-
amination of long-term profile data and the application of sediment transport models. The
analysis of the profile data revealed chronic erosion accompanied by the retreat of the shore-
line and dunes within the study area. Significant bed level changes were observed along the
transects, extending to depths greater than 20 m. The results also highlighted substantial
variations in development both between the individual transects and across different years.
The significant bed level changes observed along the profiles posed challenges to applying
the concept of closure depth in the study area. However, it was found that the closure depth
could be interpreted as a boundary defining a nearshore zone dominated by storm-driven,
wave-induced longshore transport. These are processes that can be reasonably modeled us-
ing longshore transport models. Beyond this boundary lies an offshore area influenced by
other transport mechanisms, which are assumed, at least to some extent, to be associated
with tidal currents. The longshore model can be employed to establish a simplified sediment
budget for the nearshore area, extending to a depth assumed to correspond to the closure
depth in this context. Driven by gradients in longshore transport rates, the model effectively
represents the observed bed level changes and aligns closely with the shoreline retreat ob-
served in the study area. However, to close the sediment budget within the full coastal area
at Husby Klitplantage, more insights into different pathways, both cross-shore and in the
deeper areas also in the longshore direction, need to be gained.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
75
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
Troels Aagaard. Denmark, pages 649–664. Springer Netherlands, 2010. ISBN 9781402086397.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-8639-7_109.
Peder Agger. Det åbne lands fremtid, 2024. Accessed 7-10-2024.
L. Aragonés, J.I. Pagán, M.P. López, and J.C. Serra. Cross-shore sediment transport quan-
tification on depth of closure calculation from profile surveys. Coastal Engineering, 151:
64–77, September 2019. ISSN 0378-3839. doi: 10.1016/j.coastaleng.2019.04.002.
William A. Birkemeier. Field data on seaward limit of profile change. Journal of Waterway
Port Coastal and Ocean Engineering-asce, 111:598–602, 1985.
A.J. Bowen, D.L. Inman, and Coastal Engineering Research Center (U.S.). Budget of Littoral
Sands in the Vicinity of Point Arguello, California. Technical memorandum. U. S. Army
Coastal Engineering Research Center, 1966.
Per M. Bruun. Sea-level rise as a cause of shore erosion. Journal of the Waterways and
Harbors Division, 88:117–132, 1962.
Andrzej Buda and Andrzej Jarynowski. Life time of correlations and its applications. [Vol.
1], volume 1. 01 2010. ISBN 9788391527290.
Erik Damgaard Christensen, Ann Skou, and Kim Jørgensen. Sedimentbudget, Vestkysten.
Technical report, DHI Institute for vand og Miljø, 2000.
Coastal Engineering Research Center, US. Shore protection manual, volume 1. Department
of the Army, Waterways Experiment Station, Corps of Engineers, 1984.
Rolf Deigaard, Jørgen Fredsøe, and Ida Brøker Hedegaard. Mathematical model for littoral
drift. Journal of waterway, port, coastal, and ocean engineering, 112(3):351–369, 1986a.
Rolf Deigaard, Jørgen Fredsøe, and Ida Brøker Hedegaard. Suspended sediment in the surf
zone. Journal of Waterway, Port, Coastal, and Ocean Engineering, 112(1):115–128, 1986b.
doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-950X(1986)112:1(115).
DHI.
Littoral
processes
fm,
all
modules,
scientific
documentation.
https:
//manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/latest/Coast_and_Sea/LittoralProcessesFM_
ScientificDoc.pdf, 2018.
DHI.
Mike 21 & mike 3 flow model fm, sand transport module, scientific documenta-
tion. https://manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/latest/Coast_and_Sea/MIKE_FM_ST_
Scientific_Doc.pdf, 2022.
DHI. Mike littoral processes fm, 2024. URL https://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com. Numer-
ical modeling software for coastal sediment transport and morphology.
76
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:84==
Dredging Today.
Record-breaking year for beach nourishment in denmark, 2023.
URL
https://www.dredgingtoday.com/2023/01/26/record-breaking-year-for-beach-
nourishment-in-denmark/. Accessed: 2024-12-23.
Hans Albert Einstein. The bed-load function for sediment transportation in open channel
flows. Number 1026. US Department of Agriculture, 1950.
Frank Engelund and Jørgen Fredsøe. A Sediment Transport Model for Straight Alluvial
Channels. Hydrology Research, 7(5):293–306, 10 1976. ISSN 0029-1277. doi: 10.2166/nh.
1976.0019.
European Union-Copernicus Marine Service.
Atlantic- european north west shelf- wave
physics reanalysis, November 2020.
Maria Faragò, Eva Sara Rasmussen, Ole Fryd, Emilie Rønde Nielsen, and Karsten Arnbjerg-
Nielsen. Coastal protection technologies in a Danish context. Vand i Byer, 2018.
Jørgen Fredsøe. Hydrodynamics. 2008.
Jørgen Fredsøe. Turbulent boundary layer in wave-current motion. Journal of Hydraulic
Engineering, 110(8):1103–1120, 1984. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9429(1984)110:8(1103).
Jørgen Fredsøe and Rolf Deigaard. Mechanics of coastal sediment transport. World Scientific
Publishing, 1992.
Jørgen Fredsøe, Ole H. Andersen, and Steen Silberg. Distribution of suspended sediment in
large waves. Journal of Waterway, Port, Coastal, and Ocean Engineering, 111(6):1041–
1059, 1985. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-950X(1985)111:6(1041).
David R. Fuhrman.
Matrans.zip, 2019.
URL https://data.dtu.dk/articles/code/
MatRANS_zip/8166854?file=15219245.
M Ghazali and N Hisham. Determination of depths of closure along the Kelantan coast. PhD
thesis, MS Thesis Master of Engineering (Coastal and Maritime), Ph. D. dissertation, 2007.
Georges Govaere and Henry Alfaro. Spectral wave characterization of the pacific coast of
costa rica. CoastLab 2024: Physical Modelling in Coastal Engineering and Science, April
2024. ISSN 2710-1509. doi: 10.59490/coastlab.2024.700.
Robert J. Hallermeier. Uses for a Calculated Limit Depth to Beach Erosion, pages 1493–1512.
1978. doi: 10.1061/9780872621909.090.
Robert J. Hallermeier.
A profile zonation for seasonal sand beaches from wave climate.
Coastal Engineering, 4:253–277, January 1980.
ISSN 0378-3839.
doi: 10.1016/0378-
3839(80)90022-8.
Robert J Hallermeier. Sand transport limits in coastal structure designs. In Coastal Struc-
tures’ 83, pages 703–716. ASCE, 1983.
Caroline Hallin. Long-term beach and dune evolution Development and application of the
CS-model. PhD thesis, 05 2019.
Mitchell D. Harley, Gerd Masselink, Amaia Ruiz de Alegría-Arzaburu, Nieves G. Valiente,
and Tim Scott.
Single extreme storm sequence can offset decades of shoreline retreat
projected to result from sea-level rise. Communications Earth and Environment, 3(1),
May 2022. ISSN 2662-4435. doi: 10.1038/s43247-022-00437-2.
Claire Hinton and Robert J. Nicholls. Spatial and temporal behaviour of depth of closure
along the holland coast. volume 3, page 2913 – 2925, 1998. Cited by: 41.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
77
==PAGE:85==
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
The Ocean and Cryosphere in a
Changing Climate: Special Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, February 2022.
ISBN 9781009157971.
doi:
10.1017/
9781009157964.
Ivar G Jonsson, Ove Skovgaard, and Torben S Jacobsen. Computation of longshore currents.
In Coastal Engineering 1974, pages 699–714. 1975.
Daniel T. Kahl, Lawrence M. Vulis, Jochen E. Schubert, and Brett F. Sanders. Characterizing
longshore transport potential and divergence of drift to inform beach loss trends. Coastal
Engineering, 189:104473, April 2024. ISSN 0378-3839. doi: 10.1016/j.coastaleng.2024.
104473.
Timothy W. Kana and F. David Stevens. Coastal geomorphology and sand budgets applied
to beach nourishment. 1992.
H. V. Karlsson and B. G. Larsen. Aeolian sediment transport and dune development in
natural and managed dunes, krogen, denmark, 2021.
Paul D Komar.
Beach processes and erosion—an introduction.
In Handbook of coastal
processes and erosion, pages 1–20. CRC Press, 1983.
P.D. Komar. Beach Processes and Sedimentation. Prentice Hall, 1998. ISBN 9780137549382.
PD Komar, N Lanfredi, M Baba, RG Dean, K Dyer, T Healy, AC Ibe, JHJ Terwindt, and
BG Thom. The response of beaches to sea-level changes: A review of predictive models.
Journal of Coastal Research, 7(3):895–921, 1991. ISSN 07490208, 15515036.
Krak.
Historic map of denmark, 2024.
URL https://map.krak.dk/?c=56.282200,8.
197689&z=13&l=historic. Accessed: 2024-12-23.
Nicholas C. Kraus and Soichi Harikai. Numerical model of the shoreline change at oarai
beach. Coastal Engineering, 7(1):1–28, February 1983. ISSN 0378-3839. doi: 10.1016/0378-
3839(83)90024-8.
Nicholas C. Kraus and Julie Dean. Rosati. Estimation of uncertainty in coastal-sediment
budgets at inlets. 1998.
Jørgen O. Leth, Birger Larsen, and Dennis Anthony. Sediment distribution and transport in
the shallow coastal waters along the west coast of denmark. Geological Survey of Denmark
and Greenland Bulletin, 4:41–44, July 2004. ISSN 1904-4666. doi: 10.34194/geusb.v4.4779.
Brian Mcfall, Katherine Brutsché, Anthony Priestas, and Douglas Krafft. Evaluation tech-
niques for the beneficial use of dredged sediment placed in the nearshore. Journal of Water-
way Port Coastal and Ocean Engineering, 147, 05 2021. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)WW.1943-
5460.0000648.
R. Meyer-Peter, E.; Müller. Formulas for bed-load transport. IAHR, 1948.
Robert Morton. Geoindicators of coastal wetlands and shorelines, pages 207–230. 01 1996.
Robert J Nicholls, William A Birkemeier, and Robert J Hallermeier. Application of the
depth of closure concept. In Coastal Engineering 1996, pages 3874–3887. 1996.
Anni Lassen Ofelia Rivero, Sofie Kamille Astrup. Shoreface nourishment effects - an analysis
of the 2011 nourishment performed at skodbjerg. Building with Nature (EU-InterReg),
2018.
78
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:86==
C. Pianca, R. Holman, and E. Siegle. Shoreline variability from days to decades: Results
of long-term video imaging. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 120(3):2159–2178,
March 2015. ISSN 2169-9291. doi: 10.1002/2014jc010329.
T. D. Price, B. Castelle, R. Ranasinghe, and B. G. Ruessink. Coupled sandbar patterns
and obliquely incident waves. Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface, 118(3):
1677–1692, September 2013. ISSN 2169-9011. doi: 10.1002/jgrf.20103.
Julie Rosati. Concepts in sediment budgets. Journal of Coastal Research, 21:307–322, 03
2005. doi: 10.2112/02-475A.1.
B.G. Ruessink, G. Ramaekers, and L.C. van Rijn. On the parameterization of the free-stream
non-linear wave orbital motion in nearshore morphodynamic models. Coastal Engineering,
65:56–63, July 2012. ISSN 0378-3839. doi: 10.1016/j.coastaleng.2012.03.006.
Francis Parker Shepard. Beach cycles in southern california. 1950.
Albert Shields.
Application of similarity principles and turbulence research to bed-load
movement. Technical report, Soil Conservation Service, 1936.
Jian Su, Elin Andrée, Jacob W. Nielsen, Steffen M. Olsen, and Kristine S. Madsen. Sea level
projections from ipcc special report on the ocean and cryosphere call for a new climate
adaptation strategy in the skagerrak-kattegat seas. Frontiers in Marine Science, 8, May
2021. ISSN 2296-7745. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2021.629470.
Titi Sui, Leon Heine Staunstrup, Stefan Carstensen, and David R Fuhrman. Span shoul-
der migration in three-dimensional current-induced scour beneath submerged pipelines.
Coastal Engineering, 164:103776, 2021.
Jacob Woge Nielsen Jian Su Thomas Jacobsen, Carlo Sørensen. Historical extreme high
water levels along the coastline of denmark. DMI Report No. 21-28, 2021.
L. C. Van Rijn. Coastal erosion control based on the concept of sediment cells. 2010.
LC Van Rijn. Coastal erosion and control. Ocean & Coastal Management, 54(12):867–887,
2011.
Geopark
Vestjylland.
The
west
coast
geosite,
2024.
URL
https://www.
geoparkvestjylland.com/geopark/geosites/west-coast. Accessed: 2024-12-11.
David C Wilcox. Formulation of the kw turbulence model revisited. AIAA journal, 46(11):
2823–2838, 2008.
Kenneth C Wilson. Analysis of bed-load motion at high shear stress. Journal of Hydraulic
Engineering, 113(1):97–103, 1987.
L Donelson Wright. Morphodynamics of inner continental shelves. 1995.
Mehmet Selim Yalin and Emin Karahan. Inception of sediment transport. Journal of the
hydraulics division, 105(11):1433–1443, 1979.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
79
==PAGE:87==
80
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:88==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Cross-shore Profile Data format and recorded variables
The data is compiled in Jarkus format, which is a format primarily used by the dutch
authority Rijkswaterstaat and Deltares [reference to be included]. A Jarkus data file (.jrk)
compiles the data for multiple transects at different locations and times. The data for single
profile measurements is given by a “profile attribute record” row, compiling information on
the transect and measurement, followed by the data points, typically stretching over several
rows. The profile attribute record points out the location and time of measurements, the
measurement type and the number of data points. This statement is followed by the data
point pairs of distance x and z-level. Schematically, the file is structured as follows:
[Area] [Year] [Transect] [Type] [Date1] [Date2] [NumPts]
x1 z1 x2 z2 x3 z3 x4 z4 x5
z5
x6 z6 x7 z7 x8 z8 x9 z9 x10 z10
...
[Area] [Year] [Transect] [Type] [Date1] [Date2] [NumPts]
x1 z1 x2 z2 x3 z3 x4 z4 x5
z5
x6 z6 x7 z7 x8 z8 x9 z9 x10 z10
...
The information given in the profile attribute record and data points of a .jrk file follows a
fixed scheme, where an overview is given in Table A.1.
Name
Description
Format/Unit
Area
Coastal Area Number
Year
Year
yyyy
Transect
Transect Number
Type
Profile code number
1-3
Date1
Date of Height Measurement
ddmm
Date2
Date of soundings
ddmm
NumPts
Number of points
x
x-Location of data point
m to reference point
z
z-value of data point
[cm to NAP][code nr.]
Table A.1: Overview on Information specified in the profile attribute record and data point
statements in the Jarkus file.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
81
==PAGE:89==
The attributes Year, Date1 and Date2 describe the time when measurements have been
carried out. Date1 describes the day and month of when height measurements of beach and
dune took place, while Date2 gives the day and month when soundings were taken, both
taking place in the year defined by Year.
The Profile code number (Type) gives insight on the measurement type and can take values
from 1-3, where the meaning is specified in Table A.2. However, in the available data set,
the profile code number is always set to zero, thus not giving information of the profile type.
Type
Description
1
annual cross-shore measurement profile
2
groyne transect
3
auxiliary groyne transect
Table A.2: Overview on Information specified by the Type value in the profile attribute
record in the Jarkus file.
The number of points is given in every profile attribute record statement, describing how
many data points discretize the given profile. Stating the number of points facilitates reading
in the data: First, the statement is read in and the expected number of points following the
statement is extracted. In a next step, the number of points can be read in, and it is known
at which point the next profile attribute record will be given. In the given data set, the
number of points ranges between 3 and 5459 per profile.
The profile data points are each specified by an x-value describing the distace in meters
to the location reference point, followed by the corresponding z-elevation, indicating the
vertical distance to Amsterdam Ordnance Datum (NAP) in centimeters, with positive values
upwards. However, the last character in the z-value is not part of the elevation specification,
but a code for the measurement method underlying the given data point. This means, a
z-value of 2051 indicates an elevation of 205 cm above NAP, and a code number 1. The
meaning of the code numbers is specified in Table A.3.
Code nr.
Description
1
Height measurements (by optical leveling)
2
Height measurements, for which sounding data from the same area
is also present in the file
3
Manually-added interpolated values in the zones where leveling and
sounding data overlap
4
Soundings, for which height measurements from the same area are
also present in the file
5
Soundings
6
Modified coordinate
Table A.3: Overview on information specified by the code number appended to the z-values
in the Jarkus file.
The location of a profile in the .jrk file is defined by the values of Area and Transect
in coded format. The corresponding translation of those codes is specified in a separate
file, the .grd file, allowing to specifying clearly the position of the measurements reference
82
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
==PAGE:90==
point along the coastline. It compiles the Coastal Area Number (Area) and Transect Num-
ber (Transect), which are both referred to in the .jrk files, together with information on
the location. The .grd file contains the x- and y-coordinates of the corresponding location
reference point in a geographic (RD) coordinate system, as well as the bearing of the tran-
sect. With the coordinates of the reference point and transect angle, the coordinates of the
measurement data points in the .jrk file, given in distance from the reference point, can
be determined clearly. The .grd file compiles the required information on all transects in
tabular csv format, where the first line gives the vale names, allowing to understand which
information is given. Besides additional information on the long names of Ids and areas, it is
possible to specify information on Measure, Authority, Country, Department, Community,
Watername, and Barrier. However, for a clear identification and description of the transects,
it is sufficient to specify the variables compiled in Table A.4.
Name
Description
Format/Unit
Area
Number of coastal area
Transect
Longshore offset relative to the zero point of coastal area
decameter
X
X-coord. of location reference point, RD coordinate system
m
Y
Y-coord. of location reference point, RD coordinate system
m
Bearing
Transect bearing relative to north, positive clockwise
0.01 deg
Table A.4: Overview on Information specified in the reference location definition in the .grd
file.
Sediment Transport at the Western Danish Coast
83
==PAGE:91==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Alle, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.construct.dtu.dk
