==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
MSc Thesis
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
Authors
s222954 - Behr, Ewa Magdalena
s222741 - Fürstenheim, Joaquin Ignacio
DTU Supervisor
Pisinger, David
Company Supervisors
Albrechtsen, Mathias Nikolaj Linderod
Serrano Raposo, Cristiana
December 30, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
Preface
This master thesis project has been done in collaboration with Novo Nordisk, which has
provided insights on its batch production and specifically on the purification process. Novo
Nordisk A/S is a global healthcare company which originated in Denmark as a manufacturer
of insulin. Nowadays, the company leads within diabetes care, haemophilia care and obesity
care, bringing their products to 170 countries.
i
==PAGE:3==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
Abstract
We study the batch production scheduling problem with unit maintenance and possibility
of allocating extra time to production tasks. It is a complex problem, which currently is
approached manually by Novo Nordisk’s schedulers. In this thesis, we explore operations
research methods suitable for modeling the production line and creating a detailed produc-
tion schedule for time horizons of up to two weeks (336 hours). We discuss and test various
network-based models found in literature and ultimately decide to develop a model based
on the continuous-time unit-specific event-based resource-task network formulation. Mod-
els found in literature are expanded with variables and constraints aimed at appropriately
scheduling both time- and batch-dependent maintenance, as well as extra time to provide
flexibility and robustness to the solutions. Furthermore, to enhance the ability of this model
to provide solutions for longer time horizons, we combine it with a rolling horizon approach,
creating the resource-task network with rolling-horizon method (RTN-RH). It is based upon
complex assumptions regarding the cut-off points for each iteration, to increase the quality
of the overall solution through close-to-optimal maintenance event allocation.
The RTN-RH method is validated for various production lines, multiple combinations of
KPIs, planning horizon lengths and extraordinary events, such unavailability of a production
unit. It produces high-quality production schedules and computationally outperforms both
the current manual planning method, as well as the RTN model without the rolling horizon
approach.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Studied Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Outline of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Production Process Description
4
3
Literature Review
7
3.1
Pharmaceutical Batch Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Pharmaceutical Supply Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Production Scheduling and Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Mathematical Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.1
Model Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4.2
Time Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.3
Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.4
Solution Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Methodology
18
4.1
Problem Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Key Performance Indicators: Objective Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.1
Discrete-time RTN Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.2
Continuous-time RTN: Base Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.3
Time Representation Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.4
Continuous-time RTN Model: Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Heuristic for a Lower Bound for N ′ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Recursive Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Experiments and Results
39
5.1
Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Time Representation Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
iii
==PAGE:5==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
Contents
5.2.1
Experiment Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.2
Discrete-time Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.3
Continuous-time Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.4
Discussion and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Detailed Example of RTN-RH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Computational Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4.1
Results: Parameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4.2
Results: Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4.3
Results: Varying Time Horizon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.5
Comparison to Currently Used Solution Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6
Limitations and Future Recommendations
77
7
Conclusion
80
8
Acknowledgments
82
References
83
Appendices
88
A Methodology: Full Models
88
A.1 Continuous RTN Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.2 Discrete RTN Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
B Heuristic for a Lower Bound of N ′
91
C Supplementary results
97
C.1 Run time and Objective per Subiteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
C.2 CIP Allocation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
iv
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Production scheduling and planning is a core component for any supply chain’s proper design
and performance. The correct synergy of parties through a supply chain, in combination
with complex regulatory systems and batch production implications pose a challenge for
any pharmaceutical company, making their production especially interesting to study from
a modeling and analytical perspective.
Production of insulin is a complex, multi-stage and expensive process, which must be done
in compliance with strict regulatory guidelines for pharmaceutical production. Each inter-
mediate product has a specified minimum and maximum holding time - time it may spend
in a tank after a production step is completed - to ensure product quality. Additionally,
the equipment must be maintained at appropriate intervals. Traditionally, these planning
operations have been performed by either assuming a standard operation time for every
batch or by manually adjusting the holding time at different steps in production to spread
out operations. However, as detailed production plans must be available for several days in
advance, manual adjustments are time consuming. Furthermore, planning of maintenance
on specific equipment with limited impact on production can be a daunting task.
Novo Nordisk achieved DKK 133.4 billion sales in first half of 2024, with an associated cost
of goods sold of DKK 20.19 billion, and DKK 28.19 billion being attributed to sales and
distribution costs [29]. These numbers are tightly related to production efficiency and effec-
tiveness, as scheduling optimization may lead to a fuller utilization of production capacity
with less resources and fewer disruptions, contributing to the profit of the company.
1.2
Studied Problem
Novo Nordisk’s production is based on a batch setup, with multiple constraints regarding
task timing and maintenance.
The current method encompasses manual planning, con-
1
==PAGE:7==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
sidering the sequence of tasks and their associated processing times. It also contains the
allocation of extra time and maintenance for each unit, but their placement in the schedule
must be adjusted daily due to the manual planning process. These updates require a lot of
the planners’ time and likely result in suboptimal solutions for short- and mid-term planning.
For these reasons we decided to use operations research to model the production system.
The desired model had to optimize both the production and maintenance tasks concur-
rently, while also considering the extra time availability. The desired planning horizon was
two weeks.
Furthermore, in every company there exist multiple objectives which should be minimized
or maximized. In a production line, it may be the desired output, specific costs, or any other
related key performance indicator. For this reason, the developed method should be easily
adaptable depending on which KPI is being prioritized.
The points listed above create a problem worthy of investigating in this thesis.
1.3
Goals
The goal of this thesis is to create a batch production planning method, capable of scheduling
holding time, maintenance, and use of resources. It should be able to create schedules for
periods between one and two weeks in reduced computational time compared to the currently
used method of planning.
1.4
Contribution
The main contributions of this thesis are centered around the development of a method
combining a resource-task network model with a rolling horizon approach. In addition, the
development of a heuristic to find the lower bound for the number of event points used in
the resource-task network model improves the suggestions of Castro, Barbosa-Póvoa, and
Novais [3] and Perez et al. [31]. Lastly, given the production conditions in Novo Nordisk, three
main characteristics were added to the RTN formulation: batch splitting between parallel
units, extra time availability and both time- and batch-dependent maintenance tasks. The
obtained RTN-RH approach results in a comprehensive model with lower running times than
the currently used method, capable of creating a detailed schedule for horizons of up to two
weeks.
1.5
Outline of the Thesis
This thesis is organized as follows: in chapter 2 we provide background information about
pharmaceutical production and purification. Chapter 3 is dedicated to the literature re-
view.
It describes the relationship between the pharmaceutical industry and production
2
==PAGE:8==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
problems and supply chains. Subsequently, it contains an introduction into the production
scheduling problem, followed by a discussion of the available models and solution methods
for them. Chapter 4 contains the methodology. It begins with the motivation for the model
selection and assumptions. Subsequently, we introduce the RTN-RH method developed in
the course of this thesis project, which consists of a resource-task network-based model, a
heuristic algorithm, and a rolling horizon formulation. Chapter 5 contains the descriptions
of instances, the results of computational experiments and their discussion. In chapter 6
we discuss the limitations of the presented method and suggest future extensions. Finally,
chapter 7 contains the conclusion.
3
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Production Process Description
This chapter describes purification processes in pharmaceutical manufacturing. The following
sections can be understood without this information and the modeling frameworks discussed
later are applicable for general manufacturing processes and not specifically for purification.
Therefore, the reader may choose to skip to chapter 3.
The main objective of this thesis project is developing a model for a purification process of
one of Novo Nordisk’s insulin products. In this section we provide background information
about the process in question.
According to the definition by Behme [2], the goal of purification is to achieve a pharma-
ceutical grade active ingredient (target protein) from the fermentation output by applying
several separation steps (isolation and purification). The process itself is highly automated,
with several resources, such as solvents and additives, used throughout the process, although
some manual maintenance tasks are required.
The basic pattern of purification comprises three major steps: cell separation, concentration-
isolation, and final purification. During every step, product losses are inevitable and are
expressed by the process yield percentage in equation 2.1.
Y ield = 100 × ProductOutput
ProductInput
(2.1)
In the purification process, the final yield will be the product of all individual separation
yields, thus the number of steps should be kept to a minimum to achieve a higher yield and
purified product quantity.
Furthermore, the yield is determined by the similarity between the impurities and the target
protein, as the more similar they are, the harder it is to separate them. When dealing with
pharmaceutical products, some impurities can be life-threatening and must be removed by
all means. In general, the impurities can be classified into three groups [2]:
• Process-related: formed in each step due to the nature of the process or as a result of
4
==PAGE:10==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
additives used for the step. Some examples are endotoxins, leachables, and ions.
• Product-related: comprised of degradation products of the target protein, if there is a
change in biological activity.
• Contamination: can be both biological and particulate. Such impurities are avoidable
and if they occur, they lead to batch rejection.
There are a few different ways of eliminating impurities. Undissolved particles from the fer-
mentation broth, also referred to as biosuspensions or solid suspended matter, are removed
through filtration or by chemical or mechanical accelerated settling, for example centrifu-
gation. Furthermore, the remaining dissolved molecules can be separated using different
processes like ultra- or diafiltration, chromatography, extraction and crystallization.
We will now discuss the three aforementioned purification steps. The first one is cell sepa-
ration and is achieved by filters, centrifuges or decanters. In this case, both centrifuges and
decanters achieve a higher yield (95-98%) compared to filters and prevail as the first sepa-
ration unit. Afterwards, the cell is disrupted by either mechanical or physicochemical units.
While mechanical disruption generates heat and can degenerate the protein, physicochemical
disruption works with additives that can be harmful for the final product. This intermediate
step has a low yield and uses centrifuges to remove the cell debris. The second major step
consists of stabilizing the product and concentrating it in order to reduce the volume. The
stabilization is carried out by adsorption processes or two-phase extraction depending on the
similarity between the target protein and the undesired protein degradation products. In
addition, both adsorption and extraction serve a dual purpose for concentrating the product.
The final step in the process is final purification, for which chromatography, crystallization,
precipitation and membrane processes are commonly used [2].
The described process is a generic purification process, while the one in analysis will be
presented with more details regarding steps. The production line in question consists of the
following steps in different combinations and blocks, that repeat themselves throughout the
entire process [6].
• Dissolution: a soluble solute is dissolved in a solvent. In this case the solute is the initial
material coming from the recovery department, and the solvent is a mixture of two
substances. The objective is for the solute particles to split and become encased with
the solvent particles, forming a solution. Once a state is reached where the solution is
homogenized, meaning that a uniform concentration is achieved in the whole mixture,
the solution is moved to the next step.
• Application Tank: in this step, solvents or reagents are mixed with the protein-impurity
suspension to achieve optimal conditions for the next step.
• Reversed-Phase - High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (RP-HPLC): chromatog-
raphy consists of a stationary phase and a mobile one. The first one is typically a bed
5
==PAGE:11==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
of solids or an immobilized liquid, while the latter is a flow of carrier gas or liquid
mixed with the material to be separated. Reversed-phase means that the stationary
phase is less polar than the solvent, and in this case the one used is resin. There is a
limit to how many batches can be processed before the resin must be replaced, in order
to adhere to the quality standards and avoid product loss and increased production
time. Therefore, it can be a planning decision to either pack or repack in order to
increase output.
• Collection Tanks: their purpose is to store the batch mixture.
• Crystallization: it refers to the process of solid particles forming in a homogeneous
phase. The two main benefits from this process is that crystals are easier to pack and
store.
• Centrifugation: is a mechanical operation with the purpose of isolating components
from a suspension based on their density or size. It is achieved by applying a centrifugal
force field (principle of sedimentation). In this way crystals are formed and separated
from the suspension.
• Freezing/drying: it is used to stabilize the target product and hold or store it for
the next step. This process together with centrifugation is often the last step before
creating an intermediate or final product, which can be stored until it is used at a later
point in the production process.
6
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 3
Literature Review
This chapter begins with a description of possible setups of pharmaceutical production lines,
followed by an explanation of the relationship of supply chains to the pharmaceutical indus-
try and their importance. After that, the production planning and scheduling problem is
introduced. Finally, different approaches to modeling the problem and solution methods are
presented, along with their characteristics and key points.
3.1
Pharmaceutical Batch Production
The traditional way of manufacturing is batch production, where raw materials are fed into
the system at the beginning, and once all tasks in the production process are complete, a
batch of product is released. A more modern approach is continuous manufacturing (CM),
where raw materials are constantly fed into the system and product is constantly being re-
leased. There also exists a less popular semi-continuous approach, where some parts of the
process run in a continuous way, while others are done in batches [18].
CM offers numerous opportunities, but comes with challenges too. Compared to batch man-
ufacturing, it allows faster up-scaling in case of sudden increases of demand, and is generally
more efficient. On the other hand, batch manufacturing enables simple quality control - if
any deviations from norms are detected, the entire batch is discarded, which is not possible in
continuous production. Producing high quality product in a continuous way is possible but
it requires continuous monitoring and decisions on how much product must be discarded in
case of irregularities. The FDA supports the utilization of carefully designed continuous pro-
cesses for pharmaceutical manufacturing [18]. Both FDA [4] and EMA [5] have endorsed the
continuous manufacturing guidelines issued by The International Council for Harmonisation
of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals (ICH). According to the FDA document, in
a continuous manufacturing line an appropriate "reactor design can effectively reduce for-
mation and build-up of impurities, resulting in fewer purification steps" [4].
Nevertheless, Novo Nordisk continues to manufacture their products in batches. That be-
ing said, the design of their production line enables them to enjoy some of the benefits
7
==PAGE:13==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
characteristic of continuous production - such as a shorter makespan, and reduced storage
and transport costs. This is because the tanks where subsequent steps of the process are
performed are connected to each other - this means that after one stage of the process is
complete, the contents of the tank which was used for this stage may be drained directly
into the next tank, where they will undergo the next stage of the process.
The company’s choice of batch production comes with operational challenges in the supply
chain typical for the entire pharmaceutical industry. According to Shah [33], three of the
main issues are demand management, inventory management and distribution planning and
production planning and scheduling. Other relevant categories include capacity utilization,
cost management and waste management.
All these challenges require careful planning
and use of advanced tools, as they directly impact the cost and overall performance and
are therefore highly relevant for Novo Nordisk. To enable the reader to understand their
importance, in section 3.2 we provide information on what supply chains are and their
relevance to the analyzed problem.
3.2
Pharmaceutical Supply Chains
When discussing supply chains (SC) and supply chain management (SCM), multiple defini-
tions of the same concept may be commonly used. For this analysis, the definitions will be
taken from Stadtler [39]:
’...a supply chain is a network of organizations that are involved, through upstream and
downstream linkages in the different processes and activities that produce value in the form
of products and services in the hand of the ultimate consumer.’
’...supply chain management is the task of integrating organizational units along a SC
and coordinating materials, information and financial flows in order to fulfil (ultimate)
customer demands with the aim of improving competitiveness of the SC as a whole.’
From both definitions, it is clear that multiple parties play key roles in the successful deliv-
ery of the product or service. Furthermore, all activities along the SC should be designed
accounting for needs of both internal and external customers, in the most time- and cost-
efficient manner [16]. These definitions are in line with those from Jaberidoost et al. [14].
They additionally provide one from the Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals,
which puts planning and management of sourcing, procurement, conversion and logistics
activities as the core of supply chain management.
This is further reiterated by the SCM house from Stadtler [39], which puts logistics and
operations research as foundations for advanced planning, which supports and helps achieve
the goal of competitiveness and customer service, shown in figure 3.1.
8
==PAGE:14==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Figure 3.1: Supply chain management house. Stadtler [39].
Pharmaceutical supply chains are no exception, as they aim to provide products in the right
quantity, with the desired quality, at the right time in the right place and for the right
customer at the optimal cost; all while keeping the coordination among all parties [14, 22].
These supply chains present strategic challenges in their effort to reach desired competi-
tiveness and success. These strategic issues can be aggregated in three clusters: resources,
processes and performances [37].
The resources are all the assets whose effective utilization brings a SC closer to a competitive
state. One to highlight is new process development capability, which correctly applied may
lead to a reduction in manufacturing costs. However, for the new product to have a better
process development and design, it is crucial for an optimal process planning and scheduling
to happen beforehand.
Correct planning and scheduling of processes contained in the supply chain’s end-to-end flow
will determine its responsiveness and agility [37]. The scheduling stretches from inventory
to outsourcing logistics and reverse logistics, all of these being important for the overall
behavior and performance.
There are various aspects of optimization concerning both resources and processes, such as
line balancing, facility location, inventory and capacity programming, routing analysis, and
others [14]. Production planning and scheduling is listed as a core component to achieve
the desired performance and efficiency through the supply chain, and it can be defined as
a broader domain that comprises either directly or indirectly the optimization problems
mentioned above.
9
==PAGE:15==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
3.3
Production Scheduling and Planning
Supply chain planning encompasses long-term, medium-term, and short-term strategies to
optimize the flow of goods, information, and finances across the supply chain [23]. Long-term
planning focuses on strategic decisions like facility location, network design, and capacity
expansion, aiming to align the supply chain with general business goals over several years.
Medium-term planning involves tactical decisions such as production planning, inventory
management, and workforce scheduling, typically over months or quarters, to balance supply
and demand efficiently. Short-term planning is operational, dealing with daily or weekly
activities, such as order fulfillment, transportation scheduling, and inventory replenishment,
ensuring smooth and responsive day-to-day operations [27]. Together, these planning levels
ensure a cohesive and agile supply chain, capable of meeting both strategic objectives and
immediate market demands. In particular, Stadtler in [39] splits advanced planning into
multiple layers according to the time horizon and area of effect, presented in figure 3.2.
Although they are disaggregated into blocks, it does not mean that they are isolated plans;
all of them are related by their inputs and outputs as information needs to flow between
areas [23].
Figure 3.2: Diagram of supply chain planning. Stadtler [39].
Short-term production planning and detailed production scheduling focus on the daily or
weekly management of manufacturing processes to meet immediate demand efficiently. This
involves detailed planning of production activities, including the assignment of tasks to spe-
cific machines or workstations, sequencing operations, and allocating resources, such as labor
and materials. The goal is to ensure that production runs smoothly, minimizing downtime
and bottlenecks, while maximizing output and quality. Short-term scheduling also involves
quick adjustments to accommodate changes in demand, machine breakdowns, or other dis-
ruptions, ensuring timely order fulfillment and maintaining customer satisfaction. In this
sense, planning and scheduling go hand-in-hand when dealing with production efficiency
and batch allocation and they require the coordination of operations in all stages of a supply
chain [16].
However, production planning and detailed scheduling present some differences such as their
scope, inputs and desired output. Planning typically comprises several stages and facilities
10
==PAGE:16==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
and considers additional costs and parameters, while using more aggregate information and
optimizing over the cost. On the other hand, scheduling is usually only concerned with a
single stage or facility and takes more detailed information to optimize the total time or out-
put (number of batches produced) [16]. In this sense, both Pantelides [30] and Shamik [28]
agree that short-term scheduling is a decision-making process which aims to establish the
optimal manner of allocating and utilizing the plant shared resources to different activities
given a time horizon, while satisfying production requirements and aiming to optimize one
or multiple objectives.
Scheduling problems can be solved through models depending on their characteristics. Kreipl
[16] discusses that for both continuous- and batch-manufacturing supply chains there are
multiple solution techniques, depending on the problem characteristics. When dealing with
batch production, the processes become more complex due to the need to manage multiple
products, varying batch sizes, and the timing of production runs [28].
This complexity
necessitates the use of mathematical models, which can optimize batch production scheduling
by considering various constraints and objectives, such as minimizing set-up times, reducing
inventory costs, and ensuring timely delivery. These models translate the strategic goals of
planning into precise, actionable schedules which maximize efficiency and productivity in
batch manufacturing environments.
3.4
Mathematical Models
Batch production scheduling problems are concerned with planning the steps of a production
process within a certain time horizon, usually with the main objective of maximizing profit
or to minimizing the makespan [43]. The decision variables are typically related to:
• the assignment of tasks to units they will be performed on (allocation),
• the timing of tasks,
• the size of batches.
The constraints are mostly related to the production recipe (task precedence, material re-
quirements), the makeup of the production line (compatibility between units and tasks,
storage capacity) or timing of tasks (finishing a task before another task may begin on the
same unit). There may be further constraints due to required maintenance - for example, a
unit may have to be cleaned after a number of uses, or within a certain time frame.
Several ways of modeling batch production scheduling have been described in literature.
In the following sections, we will review some classes of models, as well as possible time
representations.
11
==PAGE:17==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
3.4.1
Model Classification
The two main classes are sequential models and network models, with the latter class con-
sisting of state-task network (STN) and resource-task network (RTN) models [11].
The simplest and least general are sequential models, which are only applicable to sequen-
tial production environments [11]. They are characterized by the set of tasks which has to
be performed on each batch, as well as the set of available machines for each task. There
are multiple variants of sequential models of varying complexity. The simplest version only
contains a single task and a single machine. Once it is extended to include multiple tasks in
a fixed sequence, with one machine available for each task, it is a flow-shop environment. If
there are multiple jobs, and each must be processed in a specific sequence on a subset of ma-
chines, this is called a job-shop environment. It is also possible to include multiple machines
of the same type in parallel, or to allow tasks to be performed in an unspecified order - this
is called an open-shop environment. Sequential models are also suitable for combinations of
the environments described above [25, 40].
Network models, mainly represented by state-task network and resource-task network, are
more versatile than sequential models. As described by Harjunkoski et al., these models
rely on "modeling of materials, tasks, units and utilities" [11], and hence can be used for
production recipes which include cycles, like in figure 3.3 below. As they rely more on tasks
and materials, the material balance equations gain importance and dictate the sequencing
of tasks through the line [40].
Figure 3.3: Example of a network production environment. Kondili, Pantelides, and Sargent
[15].
The state-task network model was first described by Kondili, Pantelides, and Sargent in
[15]. It was developed due to the need to unambiguously represent relationships between the
tasks and the states (components and intermediates), which the tasks consume or produce.
In this model, the vertices of the network are the tasks and states, while the edges denote
topological relationships between them. Typically, in graphical representations the tasks are
represented as rectangles, and states as circles, like in figure 3.3. The production units are
not a part of the network, but are present in the model’s constraints - each task i has a set
12
==PAGE:18==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
of units Ji which is capable of performing this task, and must be assigned one of these units
at a specific time for the task to be performed.
By generalizing states to resources, such as utilities and equipment, Pantelides created the
resource-task network model (RTN), first published in [30].
In this model, each task is
characterized by resources it uses and produces. While the handling of states is similar to
STN, the two models differ in how they handle the use of equipment and other resources -
in the RTN model, they are a part of the network and are treated very similarly to states.
For example, if task i is performed in unit j, it is modeled as task i consuming one unit j
when it starts, and producing one unit j once it is completed. This representation allows
easy inclusion of both renewable and nonrenewable resources in the model - including labor,
electricity, cooling water or heat.
Despite the differences in the way tasks are assigned to units, the STN and RTN are rather
similar. They have almost identical constraints regarding material balance, capacity and
batch size, time horizon, and task sequencing.
3.4.2
Time Representation
Both Kondili, Pantelides, and Sargent [15] and Pantelides [30] use discrete time representa-
tions in their papers. This means that the time between 0 and the planning horizon H is
divided into intervals of equal length δt. Although this approach is simple and intuitive, it
poses major limitations related to choosing the size of the time step. In the original model
by Kondili, Pantelides, and Sargent [15], tasks may only have a duration which is a multi-
ple of δt, so the time step must be sufficiently small to match the duration of the tasks in
the process - Floudas and Lin suggest the greatest common factor of processing times [8].
Nonetheless, some of the major advantages of discrete-time formulations are that models are
scalable, results are traceable and the common time grid is a good reference to all the shared
resources [28].
On the other hand, a large number of time points leads to an increased number of variables,
which increases the computational complexity of the model. For this reason, continuous-time
representations have been created, notably by Ierapetritou and Floudas [13], which also lead
to more accurate and flexible models [31]. This formulation employs the concept of event
points, which are moments when events, such as the start of a task, may potentially occur.
Nonetheless, a major challenge for this formulation lies in determining the number of event
points required for each problem, as the optimal number is not known a priori. The number
is typically determined using heuristics [17, 31].
According to Hazaras, Swartz, and Marlin [12] and Shaik, Janak, and Floudas [35], the
continuous-time formulations can be classified into three categories depending on how the
event slots are determined: slot-based, global event-based and unit-specific event-based. For
the first, time is represented by ordered blocks of unknown length (slots). For the other
two, specific continuous variables are used to represent the timing of event points. In global
13
==PAGE:19==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
event-based representation the set of event points is shared between all units and therefore
there is a global time grid. In the unit-specific representation, each unit has its own set of
event points, which are assigned independently of the other units, and therefore there are
separate time grids for each of the units. Particularly for the latter representation, assigning
event points separately for each unit lowers the required number of event points and hence
the problem size, which may result in a major decrease in computational effort [11, 36]. In
figure 3.4, the different approaches are illustrated to facilitate their understanding.
Figure 3.4: Time representation in discrete and continuous formulations. Shaik, Janak, and
Floudas [35].
In particular, Maravelias and Grossmann describe a global event-based STN approach in
their 2003 paper [26], in which the time between 0 and H is "divided into intervals of un-
equal and unknown duration", and the time grid is shared between the units. Moreover,
they present two slightly different continuous-time representations: in the first one, events
must start and end on event points, while in the second one, events must only start on
event points but may finish in-between time points - in this case, the states produced as
a result of a task must remain in the unit that the task was performed in until the next
event point. It is even possible to combine both time representations in the same model,
where the first representation applies to states with a zero-wait policy - with no possibility
of storage in-between tasks - and the second representation to others. In addition, Vieira et
al. [43] consider a mixed-integer linear-programming (MILP) model based on the RTN using
continuous-time with a single time-grid representation, but including several more consider-
ations on the operational and logistics matters.
On the other hand, Shaik and Floudas present a continuous time representation in their
2008 paper [34], where they formulate an RTN model which uses the unit-specific event-
based approach. Each unit has its own set of events within the planning horizon, making
the required number of event points lower than in the global event-based models [8]. In
the analysis by Shaik and Floudas, the proposed RTN achieves optimal results faster than
14
==PAGE:20==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
other formulations, while having a simpler modeling approach. The model includes zero-
wait policy constraints and storage and balancing constraints, and is used for both profit
maximization and makespan minimization separately.
The continuous-time representation is of particular interest for the problem in question due
to stringent regulations in pharmaceutical production. There are strict requirements on how
long the states may stay in a reactor after a task is completed, and continuous-time rep-
resentations allow greater flexibility for the timing of subsequent tasks. There used to be
a consensus that continuous-time models were computationally more efficient than discrete
time models - however, this was disproved by a computational study by Sundaramoorthy
and Maravelias [41]. It showed that, contrary to the prior belief, the CPU time does not
dramatically increase with reducing the size of the time step in discrete-time formulations,
and that generally discrete-time formulations outperform continuous-time formulations com-
putationally. This is an important reason to consider employing a discrete-time formulation,
despite the benefits of continuous-time formulations described above.
3.4.3
Maintenance
In the scope of this analysis, two maintenance regimens are intended to be included in the
model. The first one is batch-dependent maintenance, which means there is a maximum
number of batches which may be processed on a unit before it must undergo maintenance.
The other one is frequency-dependent, which means that time periods between subsequent
maintenance events may not exceed a certain length. The same approaches with slight mod-
ifications may be used for both STN and RTN models, thus we largely discuss the two types
of models together. In literature on both of these types of models, maintenance tasks are
treated in the same way as production tasks. Thus, the main difference is in the way main-
tenance teams are handled and how it is ensured that they do not have overlapping tasks. In
RTN models they are treated as a resource and are made available for the duration of their
tasks by resource balance constraints. In STN it is necessary to add a constraint for that
purpose, similar to the constraints which ensure that tasks taking place in the same unit do
not overlap.
In the same paper which introduced the STN model (with a discrete time representation),
Kondili, Pantelides, and Sargent did consider the inclusion of what we call batch-dependent
maintenance (confusingly, in this paper it is referred to as frequency-dependent) [15]. They
implement it using a nonnegative integer decision variable for each unit, whose value de-
notes how many batches have been processed on the unit since the most recent maintenance
event. Its value is reset to zero whenever maintenance on that unit takes place, and may
never exceed the maximum permissible number of batches processed between maintenance
events. A similar but more complex approach is employed by Vieira et. al. [42] in their
global continuous-time RTN model. Their model requires 15 sets of constraints to include
batch-dependent maintenance - however, it is important to state that the model contains
variables which track the identity of the batch processed at each event point and some of
the constraints could be eliminated in their absence.
15
==PAGE:21==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Frequency-dependent maintenance is fairly easy to include in models with discrete time rep-
resentation. For example, Sundaramoorthy and Maravelias [40] use a binary variable XM
ijt
which is equal to one if maintenance task i on unit j at time t. In order to ensure that
maintenance is carried out a specific time frame [Tl, Tu], the sum of XM
ijt for t ∈[Tl, Tu] must
be at least equal to one. If maintenance should take place at least once every T m periods,
then the planning horizon may be divided into intervals of length no more than T m each
and the constraint can be enforced for each of these intervals. A different approach was
presented in [38] and [32] for discrete-time RTN models. Each of the units which require
frequency-dependent cleaning has a variable tracking the time since the most recent main-
tenance event. The variable increases by one every time period when maintenance is not
performed and is reset to zero if it is, and its value may not exceed the maximum permissible
number of periods between maintenance events.
Much less attention has been paid to frequency-dependent maintenance in models with
continuous time representation. Hazaras, Swartz, and Marlin present an approach using
forward and backward slack variables for models with a shared time grid in [12].
Each
maintenance task c has some ideal timing, TCc, but may be performed in a time frame
[TCc −θc, TCc +ηc]. The forward and backward slack at event point n for task c are denoted
with ˜Tcn ≤ηc and ˆTcn ≤θc. If the task is performed at event point n, then it begins at time
TCc −ˆTcn + ˜Tcn . To our knowledge this is the only work concerning frequency-dependent
maintenance for either STN or RTN models with continuous time representation.
3.4.4
Solution Methods
At the time of writing, solution methods consisting of MILP-based formulations have been
the core for solving the scheduling problem. However, a diverse array of methodologies has
been described. In the realm of scheduling and planning, these methodologies encompass
a spectrum of techniques like mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP), constraint
programming, metaheuristics, decomposition-based approaches, and hybrid methods, each
offering distinct advantages and posing unique computational intricacies [11].
The choice of methodology hinges not only on the nature of the scheduling problem at hand,
but also on the specific real-world constraints it entails. For example, certain production
limitations may pose formidable hurdles when addressed within the confines of a particular
method, necessitating a more flexible or adaptive approach. In recognition of this, it be-
comes evident that a purist approach may not always be the most efficacious. Instead, a
strategic combination of them, where the complementary strengths of each one can be used
in synergy, will yield the best results.
In their comprehensive review, Harjunkoski et al. [11] expound upon the diverse applicabil-
ity of these methodologies, their advantages and implications. For instance, metaheuristics
- such as simulated annealing, evolutionary algorithms and particle swarm optimization -
are useful for hard to solve problems by helping the solutions escape local minima and thus
16
==PAGE:22==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
improving their quality. An advantageous feature is their facility to be integrated with sim-
ulation models. However, some constraints or combination of them can make it difficult to
find a feasible solution heuristically.
Another subset are decomposition-based methods, which convert a large problem into tractable
sub-problems, and it can be done from a time, resource, order or hierarchical-based approach.
In particular, Bassett, Pekny, and Reklaitis [1] handle the joint use of time-based decom-
position approaches with rolling-horizon and heuristics and compare it to resource-based
decompositions, stating that the former approach manages to better reduce the combinato-
rial complexity of the problem. That combination presented by Bassett, Pekny, and Reklaitis
is a hybrid method, which is also addressed by Harjunkoski et al. Harjunkoski et al. Hybrid
methods appear as a combination of multiple tools, such as two-stage stochastic program-
ming when dealing with uncertainty, coupled with metaheuristics and MILP models to solve
different stages of the decision process. These methods are not predefined, and for each real
problem there can be multiple possible combinations of methods leading to good results [11].
17
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Methodology
This chapter presents a comprehensive framework for developing an optimization model
aimed at addressing the intricate scheduling challenges within a batch production line. This
model encompasses various critical characteristics of the production line, including mainte-
nance schedules, extra time allocation, and other essential operational elements.
Central to this methodology is the recursive application of the optimized model that allows
for an adaptable scheduling approach, while remaining responsive to evolving production re-
quirements. Subsequently, heuristic algorithms are utilized to initially compute parameters
and reduce the computational time of the problem. Moreover, the developed optimization
model incorporates a wide array of production line characteristics, including maintenance
schedules, extra-time flexibility and other operational characteristics which will be described
later. By integrating these diverse elements into the model, it becomes adept at addressing
the multifaceted nature of batch production scheduling, thereby enabling comprehensive and
efficient decision-making across the production process.
The following sections include an introduction to the problem and some general assumptions,
followed by a description of each stage of the proposed method and the reasons behind the
specific decisions made for them.
4.1
Problem Definition
Prior to any discussion on which model was selected and the reasons behind it, we describe
the problem at hand and explain which constraints and assumptions must be adhered to. It
is important to note that for the remainder of this thesis the terms maintenance, cleaning
and CIP (clean-in-place) will be used interchangeably, as mathematically these actions are
equivalent.
We make the following assumptions for the production scheduling problem:
• A unit can only be assigned to one task at a time - that task may be a production task
or a maintenance task.
18
==PAGE:24==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
• Production tasks have to be performed on each batch in a specific sequence. No batch
can overtake a previous batch in production.
• There is unlimited stock of raw material and unlimited capacity to store the finished
product.
• There is unlimited demand, thus the final product can always be sold at the arranged
price.
• The batch size is fixed and known, not a decision variable.
• Besides production units, CIP units are also present and in charge of cleaning the
production units. Each production unit will have only one CIP unit assigned. A CIP
unit may only clean one production unit at a time.
• The production line has a zero-wait policy in all intermediate states.
• Some tasks may be assigned extra time, where material stays in a unit after a task
has been completed. This can be used to avoid overlaps between tasks, to wait for
the previous batch to exit the next unit, or due to a breakdown at a later production
stage.
• At some stages, batches can be split between parallel units - in this case each unit
performs the process on part of the batch, resulting in a shorter processing time. If
batches are split between parallel units, each of the units involved will receive the
same fraction of the batch. This means that if there are two units, three scenarios are
possible: a batch may be split evenly between the two units, it may be fully processed
on the first unit, or it may be fully processed on the second unit.
If the batch is
split, then each of the units will process half the batch and the production task time
is also reduced by half. This will be modeled by task i1 representing the batch being
fully processed in unit u1, task i2 representing the batch being fully processed in unit
u2, and task i3 representing the batch being split between units u1 and u2. Thus, at
each step which permits batch splitting the number of tasks is equal to the number of
combinations of the available parallel units.
• Each production unit has a set of tasks it can be used for, and in this case it may
include production tasks related to only one step in the process.
• Split batches must be merged back together and cannot be mixed with other batches.
• To transfer from one step to the next one, pouring takes place through pipes. If two
batches are being processed in one step, then only one of them can be transferred at
a time to avoid batch mixing, due to the fact that the pipes connecting the steps are
shared.
• We assume that the yield is 100% at each step, meaning there is no product loss.
• All units have zero set-up or changeover times between batches.
19
==PAGE:25==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
All of these constraints and restrictions need to be satisfied in the complete optimization
model, and are crucial to the type of time representation selection, which will be discussed
in section 4.3.3.
4.2
Key Performance Indicators: Objective Function
As briefly mentioned in chapters 1 and 3, the scheduling and planning problem can be opti-
mized with different objective functions to target different KPIs. This will depend majorly
on the company’s and management’s priorities. The objective can be to maximize through-
put independent of cost, to fulfill a specific demand with minimum cost, or a combination
of both with more considerations such as reducing waiting times, balancing operators shifts
and minimizing quality controls [20].
In the objective functions for the models described in section 4.3, a specific set of KPIs is
considered. The following list of indicators was created as a result of a discussion with Novo
Nordisk’s operation and planning team, and reflects the companies goals and priorities.
• Batch sales: revenue obtained from selling the obtained final product in the process.
• Extra time cost: penalty for having extra time assigned to a production task. It can
also be compared with the ideal duration of a task within the indicator. It may also
be combined with the next point, to minimize operational costs related to manpower.
• Manpower balance: penalty or incentive for having a task assignment at a specific
time during the day, as shifts can have different associated costs: for example, night
or weekend shifts tend to be more expensive.
• CIP cost: cost incurred when performing a CIP on a production unit - it can be
higher or lower than the selling price for a batch, depending on the production line
and profitability of the product.
• Production and holding cost: applied to utilities, such as solvents and additives, to
avoid overproducing and stocking.
• Splitting incentive: fictitious revenue for output states from split tasks. Novo Nordisk’s
operation always favors splitting a batch whenever possible, and that is the reason for
this KPI’s inclusion.
• Time gap penalty: fictitious cost for time between event points, in order to minimize
idle time between tasks.
The indicators related to extra time and time gap act in opposite ways - the penalty on extra
time incentivizes tasks to start as early as possible, while the extra time penalty encourages
delaying tasks until a batch can be produced without incurring extra time. Hence, their
prioritization needs to be clear from the start. The same antagonism occurs betwen the
20
==PAGE:26==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
splitting term and the number of CIPs. Additionally, the extra time cost is usually lower
and insignificant when compared to the CIP cost, but it can be used to benefit from assign-
ing tasks in specific shifts. In addition, there may be cases where the CIP cost exceeds the
revenue from a batch sale, and thus the end goal is to produce a specific amount of batches
even if the profit is negative.
The specific weights that affect each indicator in the objective function determine which
terms will be prioritized when optimizing. However, due to aforementioned conflicts between
KPIs it may be impossible to achieve all objectives in their own individual optima.
In
classical multi-objective problems, different objectives have similar importance when the
optimization takes place - in these cases, metaheuristics are applied so that the solution
found is the optimal one by taking into consideration all weights and terms, as discussed
by Lei D. [19] and Ma et al. [24]. However, in this particular problem there will always
be one dominant term (e.g. maximizing production or minimizing cost) and the rest will
accompany it by modifying the solution in subtle ways (e.g. reducing gaps between starting
times without changing the amount being produced), as discussed and assumed with Novo
Nordisk’s operation.
4.3
Model Selection
Out of the models described in the literature review (section 3), we have chosen to use the
resource-task network framework. This choice was motivated by its ability to offer a more
flexible and robust representation of the production process than the state-task network
framework. The arguments below substantiate the choice of RTN over STN, without ac-
counting for the time representation - this will be selected later in the course of the thesis.
When considering the modeling of a batch production plant with different production units
and inspection units, the resource-task network model emerges as better suited for capturing
the intricacies of such a complex production environment compared to the state-task network
model.
The RTN model, as pioneered by Pantelides [30], excels in its ability to effectively represent
the interactions between tasks and resources (states and units). This is particularly pertinent
in a batch production setting where multiple types of units and processes are involved. By
characterizing each task - including production and maintenance tasks - with the resources
it uses and produces, the RTN model offers a comprehensive view of the production line.
This feature is crucial in capturing the dynamic nature of batch production, where the al-
location and utilization of resources play a pivotal role in the efficiency and effectiveness of
the production process.
In contrast, the STN model, while effective in representing the relationships between tasks
and states, may not fully capture the intricate interactions between different units and inspec-
tion machines. Its focus on tasks and states, without the explicit incorporation of resource
21
==PAGE:27==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
utilization and production unit dynamics, may limit its ability to provide a comprehensive
and detailed representation of a complex batch production environment.
Overall, the RTN model’s capacity to encapsulate the interactions between tasks, resources,
and production units, coupled with its flexibility in integrating diverse resources and their
associated tasks, positions it as the more suitable modeling approach for effectively capturing
the complexities inherent in a batch production plant with different production and utility
units, with also inspection machines.
Following this decision, when considering the choice between discrete and continuous time
representations for the model, it is essential to weigh the benefits and limitations of each.
Initially, we formulate both a unit-specific continuous-time and a discrete-time model in their
simplest forms, which only include scheduling production tasks. Afterwards, we select one
of these models and extend it to include maintenance and use of extra time.
4.3.1
Discrete-time RTN Model
This model is based on the original RTN model published by Pantelides in 1994 in [30].
The main difference is that in the model by Pantelides the batch size is a decision variable
and may be different for each batch, while in our model the batch size B is a parameter
and is fixed for all batches. The initial resource balances are also known and fixed. More-
over, in our model there is only one production/consumption matrix, while in the model
by Pantelides there is one for resources whose consumption or production depends on the
batch size (states), and one for those which are independent of the batch size (units). In the
production/consumption matrix in the model below, the given values are for batch of size
one. However, to accommodate for different batch sizes, there are two sets of constraints for
resource balance - one for units (independent of batch size), and one for states, where the
production/consumption parameter is multiplied by B.
Sets:
• I - set of tasks.
• Ir - set of tasks related to resource r, either consuming or producing it.
• R - set of resources.
• M - set of materials, subset of R.
• U - set of units, subset of R.
• N - set of time periods with cardinality N ′ = |N|. Therefore, N = {1, 2, . . . , N ′}.
Parameters:
• H and δt - planning horizon and length of time step - indirectly present in the model,
defining the number of time periods N ′ := H
δt.
22
==PAGE:28==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
• Cmin
r
, Cmax
r
- minimal and maximal quantity of resource r in storage at any time.
• E0
r - initial amount of resource r ∈R.
• W 0
i - initial assignment of task i ∈I.
• τi - number of periods of duration of task i ∈I, including transfer time at the end.
• κi - number of periods required to transfer material at the end of task i, which overlaps
with the next task.
• µr,i,θ - amount of resource r ∈R produced by task i ∈I at θ ∈0, . . . , τi time periods
from the time the task was started - negative values indicate consumption.
• Pr - market price of resource r.
• B - batch size.
Variables:
• wi,n - binary variable, equal to 1 if and only if task i ∈I is started in period n ∈N.
• er,n - amount of resource r ∈R available in period n ∈N.
Remark about the resource usage parameter µ
The parameter µr,i,θ is the amount
of resource r that task i consumes θ time periods after the task begins, θ = 0, . . . , τi. This
will be used for modeling the overlap between tasks due to transfer time. Suppose that task
i uses unit u ∈R \ M and material m ∈M and produces material m′ ∈M. In this case,
both material m and unit u are consumed when the task begins, so µu,i,0 = µm,i,0 = −1.
The unit is in use throughout the entire duration of the task, therefore it is released upon
the tasks completion and hence µu,i,τi = 1. However, material m′ is available for the next
task when the transfer time begins - that is, µm′,i,τi−κi = 1.
As mathematically consumption is negative production, the word produce will be used to
mean produce or consume in the context of the discrete-time model.
The constraints ensure the correct resource balance, initialization and task sequencing. They
are listed and discussed below.
• Resource Balances:
There is one set of constraints for the units and one for the materials, as the latter is
dependent on the batch size while the first one is not. The excess resource balance at time
n for resource r is equal to the sum of balance at time n and the amount of the resource
23
==PAGE:29==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
produced at θ time units for all tasks i ∈I which begun at time n −θ. For the units, the
constraint has the following form:
er,n = er,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
τi
X
θ=0
µr,i,θwi,n−θ
∀r ∈U, n ∈N \ {1}.
(4.1)
For the materials, the amount of resource produced is multiplied by the batch size, resulting
in the following equality:
ern = er,n−1 + B
X
i∈Ir
τi
X
θ=0
µr,i,θwi,n−θ
∀r ∈M, n ∈N \ {1}.
(4.2)
• Initial Resource Balances:
As above, but for the first time period. The decision variables are equal to the initial values
(parameters) that will represent the state at which the operation is currently. For the tasks
and resources (units and materials) respectively, we have the following two sets of constraints:
wi,1 = W 0
i
∀i ∈I
(4.3)
er,1 = E0
r
∀r ∈R
(4.4)
• Capacity constraints:
For any resource r at any time n the available amount must be greater than the required
minimum and smaller than the capacity:
Cmin
r
≤er,n ≤Cmax
r
∀r ∈R, n ∈N
(4.5)
• Time Boundary Constraint:
The following constraint needs to be incorporated to ensure that a task may only be scheduled
to begin during time period n if it can be finished during or before time period N ′.
n ≤N ′ −(τi + 1)wi,n
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(4.6)
• Domains:
The variable win marks whether task i begins at time n and hence is binary, while er,n denotes
the amount of resource r available at time n and therefore is continuous and nonnegative.
Thus we have:
wi,n ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(4.7)
er,n ≥0
∀r ∈R, n ∈N
(4.8)
24
==PAGE:30==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
• Objective function:
The objective is to maximize the profit and thus the amount of the final product in storage
at time N ′. The resource balance constraint at time N ′, er,N′, includes all materials released
in period N ′ by tasks started before this time period, therefore including a term specifically
for resources released at period N ′ would lead to counting them twice.
max
X
r∈M
Prer,N′
(4.9)
4.3.2
Continuous-time RTN: Base Model
The model with continuous-time representation below is based on Shaik and Floudas [34]
with some modifications. The two major changes are that the batch size is fixed, and that
initial amounts of resources are known from past operation, and thus they are parameters
and not decision variables. Moreover, the production/consumption matrices (µp
ri and µc
ri) are
not separate for equipment and materials, and are signed binary with the entries reflecting
whether a task produces or consumes material, rather than displaying the exact amounts.
Similarly to the discrete model above, to account for the batch size, there will be separate
resource balance constraints for the resources which are dependent and independent of the
batch size.
The basic model presented now will be the one used to compare performance and choose
between continuous- and discrete-time representation.
Sets:
• N - set of event points with cardinality N ′ := |N|, therefore N = {1, 2, . . . , N ′}.
• I - set of tasks.
• Ir - set of tasks related to resource r, either consuming or producing it.
• R - set of resources.
• U - set of equipment (units), subset of R.
• M - set of materials (states), subset of R.
• M n - set of materials (states) that cannot allow pouring at the same time in the next
tasks, subset of M.
Parameters:
• H - planning horizon.
• Cmin
r
, Cmax
r
- minimal and maximal quantity of resource r in storage at any time.
25
==PAGE:31==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
• E0
r - initial values of er,n for event n = 1 and for each resource r ∈R.
• W 0
i , T 0
i - initial values for decision variables wi,n and ti,n for event n = 1 for each task
i ∈I.
• B - batch size.
• τi - duration of task i ∈I, including transfer time at the end.
• ϕi - maximum duration of extra time available for task i ∈I.
• κi - earliest transfer start for task i ∈I.
• µp
ri - binary matrix, equal to 1 if resource r ∈R is produced by task i ∈I.
• µc
ri - signed binary matrix, equal to -1 if resource r ∈R is consumed by task i ∈I and
0 otherwise.
• Pr - market price of resource r.
Variables:
• er,n - amount of resource r ∈R available or in storage at time n ∈N.
• wi,n - binary variable, equal to 1 if and only if task i ∈I is started at event point
n ∈N.
• ti,n - start time for task i ∈I at event point n ∈N.
The unit-specific event-based continuous-time RTN model is presented below. Each con-
straint will be presented with its purpose, and the objective function at the end.
• Resource Balances:
For the equipment, the excess resource available at event point n is given by the excess
in the previous event point, adding the amount produced at (n −1) and subtracting the
consumption for the current event point n. In this case, as the units are either available or
not - er,n = 1 or er,n = 0, respectively - it is related to wi,n in the equation.
er,n = er,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
µp
riwi,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
µc
riwi,n
∀r ∈U, n ∈N, n > 1
(4.10)
For states, the excess resource available at event point n is given by the excess in the
previous event point, adding the amount produced at event point (n −1) and subtracting
the consumption for the current event point n. It is affected by the batch size, and the tasks
already incorporate if the batch is being split or not.
er,n = er,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
Bµp
riwi,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
Bµc
riwi,n
∀r ∈M, n ∈N, n > 1
(4.11)
26
==PAGE:32==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
• Resource Balances - Initialization for n = 1:
The initial values for all decision variables are assigned by input parameters on the first
event point n = 1.
er,1 = E0
r
∀i ∈R
(4.12)
wi,1 = W 0
i
∀i ∈I
(4.13)
ti,1 = T 0
i
∀i ∈I
(4.14)
• Capacity Storage:
For all event points and resources, the available resource balance needs to be within the
minimum and maximum capacity. For all resources the minimum balance is zero. For the
equipment the maximum balance is one, and for the states and utilities is equal to the storage
capacity. As storage of intermediate states is not permitted, the maximum capacity for them
is zero.
Cmin
r
≤er,n ≤Cmax
r
∀r ∈R, n ∈N
(4.15)
• Sequencing Constraints:
The original constraints from the model presented by Shaik and Floudas [34] do not take
into account the transfer time between sequenced tasks, nor they consider possible splitting
and batch-dependent duration of the tasks. Therefore, the constraints from their model have
been modified to suit our problem.
For sequencing of the same task in the same unit, only the task duration is considered, as
the next task can only start when the previous one finishes.
ti,n+1 ≥ti,n + τiwi,n
∀i ∈I, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(4.16)
For sequencing of a different task in the same unit, only the task duration is considered,
following the same logic as before.
ti,n+1 ≥ti′,n + τi′wi′,n
∀r ∈U, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir,
n ∈N \ {N ′}
(4.17)
The constraint for sequencing a different task in a different unit is for the case when task i
consumes resource r, and task i′ produces it. The transfer time is subtracted from the task
i′ duration, as the subsequent task i may begin as soon as transfer starts. This will only
take effect if the previous task is active (wi′,n = 1).
27
==PAGE:33==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
ti,n+1 ≥ti′,n + τi′wi′,n −κi′wi′,n
−H(1 −wi′,n)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(4.18)
• Time Boundary Constraints:
There are two constraints to help comply with the time horizon, and these are:
ti,n ≤H
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(4.19)
ti,N′ + τiwi,N′ ≤H
∀i ∈I
(4.20)
All starting times need to be within the horizon, and the finishing time for the tasks at the
last event point also needs to be within H.
• Finite Storage Constraint:
The material states have a zero-wait policy, so the constraints below are included to enforce
this policy, together with with constraint (4.18). The effect is that the start time for the
next task will be exactly the same as the finish time for the previous task in the sequence if
both tasks are assigned.
ti,n+1 ≤ti′,n + τi′wi′,n −κi′wi′,n
+H(2 −wi′,n −wi,n+1)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N, n < N ′
(4.21)
Additionally, a constraint is needed to enforce finite storage and avoid inconsistencies when
producing and consuming at the same event point n, and avoid miscalculations in er,n. The
modeling of it is done in the same way as constraint (4.21) by sequencing times of tasks
related by a common resource.
ti,n ≤ti′,n + τi′wi′,n −κi′wi′,n
+H(1 −wi′,n)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N, n < N ′
(4.22)
• Non Pouring Constraint:
The following constraint prevents two batches from being poured at the same time in parallel
units as it is assumed that only one flow can occur at a time due to the pipes’ construction.
This is done by relating producing and consuming tasks of a desired material state, and in
our case it will be the preceding state for the split tasks. The equation enforces that the
starting time of any consuming task needs to have a time gap with the other consuming tasks
of at least the transfer time of the producing task, if both consuming tasks are assigned.
28
==PAGE:34==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
ti,n ≥ti′,n′ + κj
−H(2 −wi′,n′ −wi,n)
∀r ∈M n, j ∈Ir, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µc
ri′ < 0, µc
ri < 0, µp
rj > 0, n′ ∈N, n′ ≤n ≤N ′
(4.23)
• Tightening Constraint:
This constraint has the sole purpose of giving a better LP relaxation of the model.
It
represents the sum of durations of all tasks done in each piece of equipment, and establishes
that it cannot exceed the time horizon.
X
n∈N
X
i∈Ir
τiwi,n ≤H
∀r ∈U
(4.24)
• Domains:
The domains for each of the decision variables.
er,n ≥0
∀r ∈R, n ∈N
(4.25)
wi,n ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(4.26)
ti,n ≥0
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(4.27)
• Objective Function:
The objective value is the sum of market prices of all materials in storage at event point N ′,
as well as those which are being produced at event point N ′.
max
X
r∈M
Prer,N′ +
X
r∈M
Pr
 X
i∈Ir
Bµp
riwi,N′
!
(4.28)
4.3.3
Time Representation Selection
While both continuous and discrete time representations offer unique advantages, it is im-
portant to consider the specific needs of the production scheduling problem at hand.
The RTN event-based unit-specific model, as introduced by Shaik and Floudas [34], stands
out for its high-quality results and computational efficiency when compared to other for-
mulations [8].
The unit-specific event-based approach limits the number of event points
compared to the global approach, leading to faster computations and simpler modeling per-
spectives. Furthermore, it incorporates features such as extra time, zero-wait policy, storage,
29
==PAGE:35==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
and balancing constraints, making it well-equipped to address the complexities of production
scheduling.
In the context of pharmaceutical production, where strict regulations dictate the timing of
subsequent tasks and the time intermediate products may stay in a reactor after a task is
completed, the continuous-time representation offered by the event-based unit-specific RTN
model proves to be advantageous. This flexibility in timing aligns well with the specific
requirements of pharmaceutical production processes, allowing for greater adaptability and
compliance with regulatory standards.
The discrete-time model requires an extremely small step size to precisely reflect the task
durations, especially if transfer times are considered too. If the time step is small enough
for the number of periods to be expressed precisely, the number of time periods is very high,
leading to long computation times. On the other hand, attempts at approximating task du-
rations and transfer times by rounding them either up or down to the nearest full period lead
to infeasible schedules - an example of this is discussed in section 5.2.2. Continuous-time
models are able to assign the timing of event points as needed and thus have the ability
to sequence tasks one after another without idle time in-between, resulting in more precise
schedules.
Furthermore, the continuous-time representation holds particular advantages due to the spe-
cific intricacies of the production process. The ability to allow extra time for tasks, repre-
sented by a continuous variable, aligns well with the dynamic nature of production processes,
where unforeseen delays or variations may occur. Unlike discrete time representations, the
continuous model acknowledges the potential for tasks to require additional time, reflect-
ing the inherent uncertainty in task durations and providing a more realistic framework for
planning and scheduling.
Moreover, the inclusion of inspections and maintenance activities, such as CIP procedures,
presents a crucial consideration for which the continuous-time representation offers a more
natural fit. These activities need to be performed in each production unit after a certain
number of batches or within specific time intervals. By utilizing a continuous-time model,
the scheduling framework can more accurately account for these periodic maintenance re-
quirements, allowing for seamless integration of such constraints into the overall production
schedule.
Additionally, the concept of batch splitting, where parallel units can produce the same batch,
introduces complexities that are better handled within a continuous-time framework. This
scenario affects processing times and requires a modeling approach that can effectively cap-
ture the dynamic nature of parallel production. The continuous-time representation provides
the necessary flexibility to accommodate and address such complexities, allowing for a more
accurate portrayal of the production process.
30
==PAGE:36==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Overall, the theoretical advantages of the continuous-time representation, combined with the
specific requirements of the production process, emphasize its suitability for effectively ad-
dressing the dynamic and multifaceted nature of batch production scheduling. In section 5.2
results of a comparative study of both models are presented to complement this theoretical
discussion.
4.3.4
Continuous-time RTN Model: Extensions
In this part, the continuous-time RTN model is extended with parameters and constraints
to be considered in order to portray the full problem. Almost everything that follows will
need to be considered in addition to the previously presented model, as together they will
build the complete model that will be used for the experiments and analysis. The only
exception are the time variable constraints, (4.16) through (4.18) and (4.20) through (4.24)
are replaced by constraints (4.33) through (4.39).
The main additions in this part are the CIP events, extra time availability and new KPIs in
the objective function.
Sets:
• I - set of tasks: batch production and CIP.
• Ip - set of tasks related to main production line, excluding CIP tasks.
• Ic
r - set of CIP task for equipment r, subset of Ir.
• U p - set of production equipment (units), subset of U that now contains both produc-
tion and CIP units.
• U cf - set of equipment (units) that have frequency dependent CIP, subset of U p.
Parameters:
• TR0
r, B0
r - initial value of decision variables trr,n and br,n for event point n = 1 and for
resource r.
• Bcip
r
- maximum allowed quantity of batches processed before CIP for resource r.
• Fr - upper time limit for frequency dependent CIP, only for r ∈U cf.
• P f
i - splitting incentive, taking a positive value for split tasks and being 0 for all other
tasks. This pushes a batch further in production, with an incentive to take a path with
a splitting task.
• µp
ri - binary matrix, equal to 1 if resource r ∈R is produced by task i ∈I.
• µc
ri - signed binary matrix, equal to -1 if resource r ∈R is consumed by task i ∈I and
0 otherwise.
31
==PAGE:37==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
• α, β, γ - objective function weights for time gap penalty, CIP cost and extra time cost,
respectively.
Variables:
• xi,n - variable between 0 and 1, equal to the percentage of permissible extra time used
in task i ∈I at event point n ∈N.
• trr,n - time remaining until next CIP for unit r ∈U cf at event point n ∈N. It resets
to the maximum time between CIPs when a CIP is performed on that unit.
• br,n - nonnegative integer variable, equal to the number of processed batches since
the most recent CIP on unit r ∈U p at event point n ∈N. It resets to zero when
performing a CIP on that unit.
• li,n - time between event points for each production task i ∈Ip, can be greater than
or equal to 0.
The additional constraints with their respective explanation and the new objective function
are described below.
• New Variables - Initialization for n = 1:
The initialization applied is equivalent as for the base model but for the new variables in
consideration:
trr,1 = TR0
r
∀r ∈U cf
(4.29)
br,1 = B0
r
∀r ∈U p
(4.30)
The decision variable xi,n will not be initialized due to lack of benefit in doing so.
• Extra Time Constraint:
To allow and determine the percentage of extra time added to a task, it will be activated if
the subsequent task cannot start immediately due to the previous batch being processed or
a CIP taking place. Extra time may only be assigned if a task is active:
xi,n ≤wi,n
∀i ∈T, n ∈N.
(4.31)
Moreover, if a subsequent task finishes before the previous one due to duration and input
parameters, the model needs to ensure that the finish time for the subsequent task is equal
or higher than the previous one.
ti,n+1 + τiwi,n+1 + ϕixi,n+1 ≥ti′,n
+τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n
−H(2 −wi′,n −wi,n+1)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(4.32)
32
==PAGE:38==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
• Time Variable Constraints:
All time related constraints (sequencing, tightening, finite storage and time boundary) will
need to consider the new decision variable: xi,n as now extra time is active and can be used
to add flexibility in the production sequencing.
ti,n+1 ≥ti,n + τiwi,n + ϕixi,n
∀i ∈I, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(4.33)
ti,n+1 ≥ti′,n + τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n
∀r ∈U, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir,
n ∈N \ {N ′}
(4.34)
ti,n+1 ≥ti′,n + τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n
−κi′wi′,n −H(1 −wi′,n)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(4.35)
ti,n+1 ≤ti′,n + τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n −κi′wi′,n
+H(2 −wi′,n −wi,n+1)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(4.36)
ti,n ≤ti′,n + τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n −κi′wi′,n
+H(1 −wi′,n)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(4.37)
ti,N + τiwi,N + ϕixi,n ≤H
∀i ∈I
(4.38)
X
n∈N
X
r∈Ir
(τiwi,n + ϕixi,n) ≤H
∀r ∈U
(4.39)
• CIP Batch Dependent Constraint:
The CIP is the cleaning or inspection of equipment, and may be performed based on the
number of batches processed or based on frequency (time). In this constraints, the batch de-
pendent CIP is modeled. No more than Bcip
r
batches may be processed between subsequent
CIPs on unit r ∈U. The CIP task requires a specific CIP unit to be available.
For this reason, variable br,n keeps track of the number of batches since the most recent CIP
and resets to zero whenever a CIP is performed on that unit - represented by constraints
(4.40) and (4.41). Constraint (4.42) enforces that the counter never exceeds the batch limit.
br,n ≥br,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir,i/∈Icr
wi,n −N ′wicr,n
∀r ∈U p, n ∈N \ {1}, ic
r ∈Ic
r
(4.40)
br,n ≤N ′(1 −wicr,n)
∀r ∈U p, n ∈N \ {1}, ic
r ∈Ic
r
(4.41)
br,n ≤Bcip
r
∀r ∈U p, n ∈N \ {1}
(4.42)
• CIP Frequency Dependent Constraint:
In this second case, the CIP depends on the time between inspections (frequency). A unit
can have one or both, meaning that these constraints will work in addition to those for batch
dependency.
33
==PAGE:39==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
For this reason, variable trr,n keeps track of the remaining time for the CIP tasks at event
point n in unit r. Constraints (4.43) and (4.44) update the maximum remaining time until
the next CIP procedure, depending on the last time the procedure was performed. If a CIP
takes place, they will set the value of trr,n to Fr. As only one type of CIP task is assigned per
production unit, wIcr,n is used as shorthand notation for wi,n, i ∈Ic
r. In addition, constraint
(4.45) and (4.46) set the limit for the maximum time between CIP events.
trr,n ≤trr,n−1 −(ti,n −ti,n−1) + FrwIcr,n
∀r ∈U cf, i ∈Ir, n ∈N \ {1}
(4.43)
trr,N ≤trr,N−1 −(τiwi,N + ϕixi,N) + FrwIcr,n
∀r ∈U cf, i ∈Ir
(4.44)
trr,n ≥FrwIcr,n
∀r ∈U cf, n ∈N \ {1}
(4.45)
trr,n ≤Fr
∀r ∈U cf, n ∈N \ {1}
(4.46)
• Time Gap:
It calculates the time between subsequent event points, which will be included as a term in
the objective function.
ti,n −ti,n−1 ≤li,n
∀i ∈Ip, n ∈N
(4.47)
• Domains:
The domains for each of the decision variables.
0 ≤xi,n ≤1
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(4.48)
trr,n ≥0
∀r ∈U cf, n ∈N
(4.49)
br,n ∈Z+
⊬
∀r ∈U p, n ∈N
(4.50)
li,n ≥0
∀i ∈Ip, n ∈N
(4.51)
• Objective Function:
The objective value is the sum of market prices of all materials in storage at time N ′, as well
as those which are being produced at time N ′, and additionally some penalty terms. They
include incentives to split and penalties for time gaps between events (pushing production to
begin as early as possible), number of CIPs performed, and amount of extra time used. We
penalize the percentage of extra time used rather than the absolute amount for robustness
purposes: in case extraordinary events happen, having additional extra time available is
crucial as it can be used as a tool to mitigate the effects.
Hence, the aim is to avoid
allocating extra time to tasks with a short available duration of extra time. For tasks with a
long duration of extra time avoiding its use is less crucial as allocating a considerable amount
of it still leaves a lot of hours to be allocated later on, allowing for greater flexibility. This
34
==PAGE:40==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
objective function is one of the many that can be used in this type of problem, as it depends
on the management decisions and priorities when taking decision on production.
max
X
r∈M
Prer,N′ +
X
r∈M
Pr(
X
i∈Ir
Bµp
riwi,N′) +
X
i∈Ir
X
n∈N
P f
r Bµp
riwi,n
+α
X
i∈Ip
X
n∈N
li,n + β
X
r∈Up
X
i∈Icr
X
n∈N
wi,n + γ
X
i∈Ip
X
n∈N
xi,n
(4.52)
4.4
Heuristic for a Lower Bound for N ′
The optimal number of event points N ′ is a parameter which affects the quality of the so-
lution. If the number is too low, it limits the number of production tasks performed and
therefore the objective value - as described by Castro, it may act as a "hidden constraint" [3].
On the other hand, the complexity of the model increases with increasing value of N ′, thus
the optimal value of N ′ is the smallest value maximizing the objective value. It is commonly
found by successively solving the problem for increasing values of N ′ until the objective
value stops significantly improving [3, 31]. Unlike in the classic RTN models, in our problem
we observe that the objective value starts decreasing after surpassing a certain value of N ′
due to the inclusion of maintenance - this phenomenon is described in more detail in section 5.
In order to avoid solving the problem for unreasonably low values of N ′, we have constructed
a heuristic to estimate the lowest number of event points which would allow ongoing pro-
duction until the end of the planning horizon. It is centered around the notion that once the
bottleneck is reached, it dictates how many batches can be produced - hence, the smallest
reasonable value of N ′ is the sum of the number of steps required to reach the bottleneck
and the number of times the bottleneck task can be performed. We assume that there is
only one bottleneck in the production process.
In the heuristic we make use of groups of tasks. A group is a set of tasks where exactly one
of them must be performed during production of a batch. For example, if state s must be
transferred either into tank u1 or u2, and the associated storage tasks are i1 and i2, respec-
tively, then i1 and i2 form a group together.
The general approach is as follows:
1. Identify the bottleneck of the process as the group of tasks with the longest minimum
duration. Let b be the task from that group with the shortest duration.
2. Find the number of steps from the start of the process until the bottleneck is reached
nb−(bottleneck excluded) and their combined minimum duration tb−(excluding the
pouring at the end).
35
==PAGE:41==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
3. Find how many times the bottleneck task may be performed in the remaining time:
nb =
jH−tb−
τb
k
.
4. The smallest reasonable value of N ′ is nb−+ nb.
A detailed pseudocode is presented in appendix B.
In the model with CIP more event points are required so that the cleaning tasks may take
place. Moreover, if the CIP procedure for a unit has a long duration, it might make the task
on this unit a bottleneck. Thus, the heuristic for the variant of the model including CIPs
requires a few changes compared to the procedure described above.
Most importantly, when finding the bottleneck task, we consider the time that needs to be
allocated to CIPs. If task i can be done on k batches between two subsequent CIPs, then
we will estimate the duration of a task including CIP using τ ′
i := τi + τ CIP
i
k , where τ CIP
i
is
the duration of a CIP on the unit which task i is performed on. If multiple units are used
for task i, τ CIP
i
is the longest of the durations of CIPs on all these units. This duration
is used for finding the bottleneck in step 1 above. Similarly, we use τ CIP
i
instead of τi in
step 3. Finally, based on the computed value of nb we estimate the value of nCIP, which
denotes how many times CIP must be performed at the bottleneck, and thus N ′ at step 4 is
calculated as nb−+ nb + nCIP.
4.5
Recursive Optimization
Given the complex nature of the problem at hand and the increasing computational com-
plexity and time with higher H and N ′, it is necessary to break the problem down in smaller
sub-problems. The approach can be aimed towards either or both of those parameters. As
described before, the lower bound on N ′ for a selected H is calculated through a heuristic and
later the model is only solved for subsequent values of N ′ until no significant improvement
is found. In order to reduce the computational time by targeting H, we iteratively solve
the model in a rolling-time horizon manner. This methodology is mentioned by Glomb et
al. [10], Li et al. [21] and Dimitriadis et al. [7] as being used for scheduling problems when
other tools - such Dantzig-Wolfe or Lagrangian Decomposition - cannot be used given the
problem’s structure or data. The rolling-horizon method consists of repeatedly optimizing
the model for a certain time scope, but in each iteration the time horizon is shifted and the
variables are re-optimized again in a specific manner [7, 9, 10, 21]. For the remainder of this
thesis, H will denote the horizon used for each iteration, while Hmax will be used for the
planning horizon of the full problem.
In order to use the rolling-horizon approach, a method of relating subsequent iterations
through their outputs and inputs need to be designed. Remembering constraints (4.12)-
(4.14) and (4.29)-(4.30), the model already takes into consideration a recursive manner, as
they imply a starting point for the production given past decisions and outputs. For these
36
==PAGE:42==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
variables, their initial values will be equal to the values at the cut-off point of the previous
iteration (or an input value for the first iteration). It is important to note that the variables
li,n and xi,n are not initialized - the values at the first event point of a new iteration become
a part of the final solution.
To fully understand how to build this rolling-horizon iteration, first the model’s output needs
to be discussed. The generated schedule will contain some fully processed batches, and pos-
sibly some that reached a certain point in the production line but are not completed - this
will depend on the chosen time horizon H. All unfinished batches will be discarded from
the solution and the starting point for the next iteration will be determined by the event
point ep, at which the second to last fully processed batch enters the system, meaning the
event point where its first task takes place. The reason behind this is that the CIP and time
allocations can be suboptimal for those unfinished batches if a higher H is considered, but
are optimal for the specific set of parameters. By removing one fully processed batch, the
model can recalculate all the task starting points and find the optimal allocation with an
increased horizon. It is important to note that all initialized decision variables will take the
values for the solution values at event point ep without any modification.
As the cutting point of the solution is the event point where the second to last completed
batch starts being processed, we impose the requirement that at least three batches must
be processed during time horizon H. If only two batches are completed, the algorithm will
reoptimize from the first event point in every iteration and never move to the next rolling
horizon. If fewer than two batches are completed, no second-to-last batch exists and ep
cannot be found. Hence, if fewer than three batches are completed during a specific horizon,
the iteration is considered failed and reattempted with a larger H.
After each iteration, we obtain a partial solution - that is, the solution for the subproblem
solved in this iteration. It is then truncated at event point ep, to obtain the truncated solu-
tion. The truncated solution is then appended to the complete solution, which is the solution
for the whole problem, obtained by combining the solutions for the sub-problems.
The general approach is as follows:
1. Select the planning horizon for first iteration or sub-problem (H), and also fix the full
problem horizon (Hmax). Initialize the values of decision variables at the first event
point according to the input. Initialize complete solution matrices as empty.
2. Find the lower bound for N ′ based on the heuristic described in the section 4.4 above,
also presented in algorithm 5 in Appendix B.
3. Solve the continuous RTN model with consecutive values of N ′, starting with the value
found in the previous step, until no significant improvement occurs for subsequent
values of N ′ - this can be adjusted so that the condition is an integer number of
subsequent values. Save the best solution and the value of N ′ used to obtain it.
37
==PAGE:43==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
4. With the obtained solution, calculate the total number of processed batches (K). If
it is smaller than three, return to step 1 with an H increased by a factor. Otherwise
continue to find the event point (ep) where the first task is assigned (w1,ep = 1) for
batch K −1.
5. Truncate obtained decision variables: discard all variables from event point ep (inclu-
sive) until N. Append the truncated solution to the complete solution.
6. Set the initial values of the decision variables for the next iteration to those obtained
for event point ep. The planning horizon H is updated to H + maxi∈I{ti,ep}.
7. If Hmax has not been exceeded with the new starting point for all time grids, return
to point 3. Else, return complete solution matrices.
For the remainder of the thesis, each instance of solving the model for a particular value of
N ′ at step 3 will be referred to as a subiteration, while the term iteration will refer to solving
the problem for a specific rolling horizon (steps 1 through 6).
At step 5 the event point ep is excluded from the truncated solution. This is because ep
is used to initialize the next iteration, thus if the truncated solution included the values of
variables at ep, they would be duplicated in the complete solution.
This algorithm is for the case with only one production line, meaning that there is one start-
ing task and one finish task for each batch. For cases with multiple production lines, K and
ep will be set to the minimum values between all the lines.
In step 6, by using the maximum time for the calculation then for each of the tasks the
new planning horizon in the sub-problem will be either equal or higher than the original H
used to calculate the N ′
min. In other words, by doing this a recalculation of N ′
min on every
sub-problem is avoided, but it can result in more iterations needed in step 3.
This concludes the methodology. In the following section, the instances and experiments
will be addressed.
38
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5
Experiments and Results
This chapter presents a detailed analysis and discussion of the conducted experiments. It
begins with a description of the instances used. It is followed by a comparison between
the continuous- and discrete-time model from sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2, and an illustrative
explanation of the recursive algorithm introduced in section 4.5. Finally, it contains exten-
sive experimentation involving parameter tuning and method testing for different scenarios,
and eventually a comparison of the proposed method - which from now on will be referred
to as resource-task network with rolling horizon or RTN-RH - with the currently used
operational model. This chapter serves to provide a comprehensive understanding of the
performance of RTN-RH and its relevance for practical applications.
All computational experiments were conducted on a machine with 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-1365U, 1800 Mhz, 10 Core(s), 12 Logical Processor(s) and 32.0 GB ram. They were solved
in a Gurobi 12.0.0 solver with an academic license, using the default MIPgap parameter value
(0.0001).
5.1
Instances
To perform the experiments and test the model’s functionality, five synthetic instances were
created with Novo Nordisk’s supervision. Their structure resembles that of real production
lines, despite having different parameters and production task sequence. For each of them,
a combination of units described in Chapter 2 is used.
Each instance reflects a different production setup, enabling the analysis of the impact of
the production environment on the model’s performance and results. The common char-
acteristic is that a raw material enters the production, is processed in several units until a
finished product (API) is obtained after processing in the last production unit. At some
parts of a line, there exist units referred to as parallel. Their names include two numbers, for
example T1_1 and T1_2 - first unit T1 and second unit T1. When these are represented by
pentagons in the diagrams, it means that these units do not allow batch splitting and exist
39
==PAGE:45==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
to gain capacity in that step by allowing more than one full batch to be processed. On the
other hand, if these units are represented by rectangles, it means that a batch can be split
between them in equal parts and later on merged back together. In subsequent sections,
when results are represented on Gantt charts, U standing for unit is added before the unit’s
name on the y-axis.
The instance’s description is accompanied by a process flow diagram to better understand
the production process.
The first instance (Instance 1) has seven steps, in which a batch can follow different paths
at some points through the line. The raw material enters unit A1, then is transferred either
to T1_1 or T1_2, followed by the possibility of splitting in Z1_1 and Z1_2. The portion of
batch processed in Z1_1 and Z1_2 will continue into T1_1 and T1_2, respectively. Next,
the batch is merged back together and transferred to Z2, followed by either T3_1 or T3_2.
Lastly, the batch enters C1 and leaves the system as API. This process is shown in figure
5.1.
Figure 5.1: Instance 1 process flow diagram.
In order to perform a CIP on a specific unit, the appropriate CIP unit must be used. A
CIP unit may only be involved in one task at a time, therefore some CIP tasks cannot be
performed simultaneously - this will be important for the understanding of the Gantt charts
in the upcoming sections. The table 5.1 below shows the correspondence between the two
available CIP units and all the production units for this instance.
Unit
A1
T1_1
T1_2
Z1_1
Z1_2
T2_1
T2_2
Z2
T3_1
T3_2
C1
CIP_1
X
X
X
X
X
CIP_2
X
X
X
X
X
X
Table 5.1: CIP-production unit allocation for Instance 1.
Instance 2, graphically represented in figure 5.2, presents a similar structure to Instance 1,
but its main function is to test the effect of the presence of three parallel units at two points
in the production process. A batch may be split in equal parts between all three Z1 units,
between any two of the three, or not be split and be fully transferred into one of the three
units. The other parallel group, T1, does not allow for splitting - the batch will have to be
fully transferred into one of the three parallel units. For this instance, two CIP units are
used and assigned to production units as shown in table 5.2.
40
==PAGE:46==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Figure 5.2: Instance 2 process flow diagram.
Unit
A1
T1_1
T1_2
T1_3
Z1_1
Z1_2
Z1_3
T2_1
T2_2
C1
CIP_1
X
X
X
X
X
CIP_2
X
X
X
X
X
Table 5.2: CIP-production unit allocation for Instance 2.
Instance 3 serves to investigate the impact of having two distinct splitting sections at
different stages of the production process - at Z1 and Z2. The process flow diagram and CIP
assignment are presented below in figure 5.3 and table 5.3, in the same manner as for the
previous instances.
Figure 5.3: Instance 3 process flow diagram.
Unit
A1
Z1_1
Z1_2
T1
Z2_1
Z2_2
T2
T3_1
T3_2
C1
CIP_1
X
X
X
X
X
CIP_2
X
X
X
X
X
Table 5.3: CIP-production unit allocation for Instance 3.
Instance 4 presents the most distinct structure compared to the rest, as it is composed of
two separate production lines. Each of them handles a different raw material and obtains
a different finished product, but their schedules are related through the shared set of CIP
units. The goal is to analyze how the model prioritizes and assigns the CIP tasks when
simultaneously scheduling more than one production process. The graphical representation
is provided in figure 5.4 and the CIP unit correspondence in table 5.4.
41
==PAGE:47==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Figure 5.4: Instance 4 process flow diagram.
Unit
A1
T1_1
T1_2
C1
A2
T2_1
T2_2
C2
CIP_1
X
X
X
X
CIP_2
X
X
X
X
Table 5.4: CIP-production unit allocation for Instance 4.
Lastly, similarly to Instance 2, Instance 5 presents a structure with a splitting choice with
three units.
However, similarly to Instance 1, each of the splitting units is followed by
another unit (T2_X, X ∈{1, 2, 3}), which stores portions of split batches before they can be
combined again. The process flow diagram and CIP allocation is presented below in figure
5.5 and table 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Instance 5 process flow diagram.
Unit
A1
Z1_1
Z1_2
Z1_3
T1_1
T1_2
T1_3
T2_1
T2_2
C1
CIP_1
X
X
X
X
X
CIP_2
X
X
X
X
X
Table 5.5: CIP-production unit allocation for Instance 5.
The instances presented above are used for all the conducted experiments, described in
subsequent sections.
5.2
Time Representation Comparison
In this section we describe the experiments which aided our selection between a continuous
and discrete time representation for the resource-task network model.
A review of time
42
==PAGE:48==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
representations described in literature was presented in section 3.4.2. Furthermore, in section
4.3.3 we argued for superiority of continuous time representations. The arguments presented
in that discussion, along with the results of this section, have determined our choice of a
continuous-time representation.
5.2.1
Experiment Setup
For the purpose of this experiment, one discrete-time and one continuous-time RTN model
was implemented. The specific variant of the continuous-time RTN is the unit-specific event-
based RTN. Both of these models are in their simplest forms, as described in sections 4.3.1
and 4.3.2, respectively. The objective values in both models consist exclusively of the market
price of all produced materials without any penalty terms, CIPs are absent and there is no
possibility of adding extra time to a task’s duration. This setup is due to the fact that
the purpose of this experiment was to aid the selection of a time representation at an early
stage of this project, so that only the best performing of the simple models would be further
developed.
The tests are performed on Instance 1 described in section 5.1. In the sections below we
provide the results of testing both models with time horizons of 72, 240 and 336 hours. We
evaluate the running times and solution quality. Finally, we compare the performance of
both models and conclude which of the models is a better candidate to proceed with.
5.2.2
Discrete-time Model
As previously argued in section 4.3.1, the discrete model requires a well thought out selection
of interval length δt, which for an accurate solution should be a divisor of all task durations
and transfer times. In Instance 1 the greatest common divisor of these values is 30 minutes,
therefore δt = 1
2 hours is the optimal interval length [8]. For demonstration purposes, we
will also present results for a smaller resolution δt = 1
4 hours, as well as δt = 1 hour. The
latter is too large to yield an accurate schedule, therefore we will discuss the implications
and usefulness of the solution. In this case, we will round the task durations and transfer
times up to the nearest full period duration.
Let us remark that there may be multiple optimal solutions if the processing time on the
bottleneck does not exactly match the planning horizon. If there is idle time in the system,
it may be placed after any of the batches is completed or sometimes at more than one mo-
ment. For example, in this instance the last task is the bottleneck and the earliest time it
may begin is at 17.5 hours from the start. Its duration is 10 hours. With a planning horizon
of 72 hours, it may be completed five times, which leaves 4.5 hours of idle time, which may
happen after any batch. Consequently, a greater number of time periods means that this idle
time may be divided into more intervals and a greater number of schedules, which results in
a polynomial number of feasible solutions.
43
==PAGE:49==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
In figure 5.6 we present the Gantt charts for δt = 1 h, 1
2 h, 1
4 h. All of them appear to be
presenting equivalent optimal solutions, with five completed batches and an objective value
of 30,000$. The solutions for δt = 1
2 h and δt = 1
4 h are indeed equivalent, as these time
resolutions are small enough that all task times and transfer times are multiples of δt, and
therefore may be expressed as a number of whole time periods. However, although the solu-
tion for δt = 1 h appears correct, it in fact is not a feasible solution for this instance due to
transfer times being too long, as will be demonstrated below.
Let us consider the time inconsistencies for δt = 1 h. Note that period n lasts from time
n −1 until time n by construction. Let us consider tasks 3 and 4 on the fifth (turquoise)
batch for time resolution δt = 1 h. Task 3 lasts 4 hours and has a transfer time of 0.5 h - as
these numbers are rounded up to a full hour for this time period duration, we have τ3 = 4
and κ3 = 1. Task 4 lasts 10 hours, therefore τ4 = 10. In this solution, task 3 on batch 5
begins at the start of time period 46 and ends at the start of time period 50 (four periods).
Task 4 begins at the start of period 49 and ends at the start of time period 59 (10 periods).
The two tasks overlap for one period (period 49), which is consistent with the duration of κ3
. However, note that in reality the transfer time is only 30 minutes. This means that if task
3 begins at time 45 h (beginning of period 46), then the transfer begins 30 minutes before the
task ends, so at time 48.5 h - 30 minutes later than the solution would imply. This should
also be the starting time of task 4, which in this case would end at time 58.5 h - 30 minutes
later than what is observed in the solution. Thus, we conclude that rounding the transfer
duration to a full period may lead to tasks being completed too early due to overestimated
overlaps between subsequent tasks. On the other hand, if the transfer times are rounded
down to a full time period, the duration of an overlap is underestimated, meaning that tasks
may begin later than they should. In this case a unit may appear to be available at times
when it should be reserved for material transfer from the previous task. Hence, we conclude
that δt equal to the greatest common divisor of the task times and transfer times is indeed
the largest time step that guarantees feasible solutions.
Figure 5.6 displays the Gantt charts of the solutions obtained for different values of δt.
44
==PAGE:50==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
(a) Gantt chart for δt = 1 h.
(b) Gantt chart for δt = 1/2 h.
(c) Gantt chart for δt = 1/4 h.
Figure 5.6: Gantt charts for time horizon H = 72 hours with different time steps.
45
==PAGE:51==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
In the figures above, the task on unit T2_1 or T2_2 finishes before the subsequent task
on unit Z2. This is related to the instance data. The default option is splitting each batch
between parallel units. In case a batch is not split, the earliest transfer time remains the
same, leading to the task finishing too late compared to the next task. In practice, this
is solved by allocating extra time on the later task so that they both finish at the same
time. For this reason it is crucial to include the possibility of allocating extra time in the
final model. This effect occurs both for the basic discrete-time and continuous-time model
described in this section, therefore it will be disregarded at this stage. However, the ease
of extending the model with the addition of extra time is a part of the discussion on time
representation in section 4.3.3.
Figure 5.7 displays the relationship between the planning horizon and the run time for the
different values of δt. Evidently, larger time steps are strongly preferred as long as they
are small enough to provide accurate solutions, especially for longer time horizons. For 336
hours, the run time for δt = 1
2h was 15.6 seconds, while for δt = 1
4h was 136.7 seconds -
an almost nine-fold increase without any improvement in the solution. For this reason it is
crucial to choose the largest δt which permits an accurate schedule representation - that is,
δt equal to the greatest common divisor of the task times and transfer times.
Figure 5.7: Run times plotted against the time horizon. Each color denotes a different value
of δt.
5.2.3
Continuous-time Model
Unlike the discrete-time model, the continuous-time RTN does not require that we choose a
time resolution. It does, however, require the number of event points (N ′) as input, whose
selection may be challenging. As previously described in section 4.4, too low a value for
N ′ may act as a "hidden constraint" in the model, and therefore the common approach is
selecting a low value of N ′ and resolving the model for subsequent values of N ′ until the
objective value no longer significantly increases [3, 31]. On the other hand, a greater number
46
==PAGE:52==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
of event points contribute to greater model complexity and running times. Both of these
effects are visible in the plots in figure 5.8, which display the objective value and run time
for the model for a varying time horizon.
(a) Plot of objective value and running times
against N′ for time horizon of 72 hours.
(b) Plot of objective value and running times
against N′ for time horizon of 240 hours.
(c) Plot of objective value and running times against N′ for time horizon of 336 hours.
Figure 5.8: Plots of objective values and running times against N ′.
In each of the plots the objective value first displays a linear relationship to the number of
event points, until it reaches its maximum and stagnates. This is due to the fact that until
maximum production capacity is reached, the addition of each event point leads to the pos-
sibility of outputting one more batch. However, once the maximum number of batches for
that time horizon is being produced, adding more event points cannot contribute to increas-
ing the objective value. On the other hand, the running times appear to be exponentially
related to the number of event points, which supports the assertion that N ′ should be the
smallest possible number for which the objective value attains its maximum. By inspecting
the graphs we find that the optimal N ′ for time horizons 72, 240 and 336 hours is 11, 28
and 37, respectively. The run times for these values are 0.038, 0.231 and 0.226 seconds,
respectively, which is remarkably low compared to the discrete-time model - a summary of
47
==PAGE:53==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
the run times for both models is provided in table 5.6.
If N ′ is lower than a value which maximizes production, it limits the number of batches
which can be processed and there inevitably is idle time in the system. The constraints do
not dictate that the next batch must be initiated as soon as possible after the previous one,
therefore there may be gaps between subsequent batches. As the timing of the event points
is continuous, if there is idle time, there are infinitely optimal solutions which differ by when
the idle time takes place.
The behavior of the solution for four different values of N ′ and time horizon of 240 hours
can be observed in figure 5.9.
(a) Chart for 240 hours, 11 event points.
(b) Chart for 240 hours, 18 event points.
(c) Chart for 240 hours, 19 event points.
(d) Chart for 240 hours, 28 event points.
Figure 5.9: Gantt charts for the continuous-time model with planning horizon of 240 hours
and varying number of event points.
With 11 time events (subfigure 5.9a) only five batches are manufactured, while with 18 event
points (subfigure 5.9b) the number of batches is 12. In both of these solutions all batches
are processed at the earliest possible moment, unlike in the example with 19 event points
(subfigure 5.9c), where there is a gap after the sixth batch is completed and the remaining
seven batches are processed towards the end of the planning horizon. As discussed above,
48
==PAGE:54==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
this solution is equally good as if all batches were produced as early as possible after one
another - it is one of infinitely many optimal solutions permitted by N ′ = 19, resulting in 13
batches being output. In figure 5.9d with the optimal number of event points N ′ = 28, we
observe a small gap after the second batch is completed - this is due to the fact that the time
horizon does not exactly match the processing times of the tasks on the bottleneck, meaning
that removing the gap would not lead to the possibility of outputting more batches.
5.2.4
Discussion and Conclusion
Both the discrete-time RTN and the continuous-time RTN are able to produce optimal
production schedules. Depending on the chosen time horizon, both of them may output
schedules with idle periods in-between batches, which may be problematic when the solu-
tion is a part of a long-term production plan. This effect may be mitigated by including
in the objective function a term which penalizes the difference between start times of sub-
sequent batches - this is done in the continuous-time RTN extension presented in section
4.3.4. Adding such a term encourages each batch to be scheduled as early as possible, so
that the idle time takes place after all the batches have been produced, which aids an easy
integration of the solution with a solution for a later time period.
The running times of the continuous-time model are considerably shorter than those of the
discrete-time model.
It is important to consider that in the continuous-time model the
optimal number of event points is unknown, so arguably all the runs performed in order to
find the optimal N ′ should be considered. Suppose that N ′
opt is the optimal value of N ′, and
the smallest value that the model is solved for is N ′
min. We do not know that N ′
opt is the
optimal value before the model is solved for N ′
opt + 1 and we observe a lack of increase in
the objective value. This way, if tn is the running time for the model with N ′ = n, then the
time that was required to determine the optimal value of N ′ is
T =
N′
opt+1
X
n=N′
min
tn.
(5.1)
In table 5.6 below we present the running times for the discrete-time model with δt = 1
2 h,
as well as running times for individual runs of the continuous-time models for the optimal
value of N ′, as well as the values of T calculated based on equation 5.1.
49
==PAGE:55==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Discrete-time
Continuous-time
Time horizon (H)
Run time (s)
Run time single (s)
Run time sum T (s)
72
0.147
0.038
0.224
240
5.494
0.231
2.263
336
15.539
0.226
2.942
Table 5.6: Comparison of run times. For the discrete-time model: solving time for δt = 1
2 h.
For the continuous-time model: solving time for the optimal number of event points, as well
as values of T as described by equation 5.1.
When considering single solving times, the continuous-time model outperforms its discrete-
time counterpart for each of the planning horizons. When considering the total run times
required to find the optimal N ′ for the continuous-time model, we notice that for time hori-
zon of 72 hours the value of T is about 52% greater than the running time of the discrete
model - it is, however, worth noting that both values are very small, less than 0.25 seconds.
On the other hand, the value of T is considerably smaller than the run time of the discrete
model for the remaining two time horizons - for time horizon of 336 the difference is more
than five-fold. Moreover, the value of T could be reduced by an appropriate choice of the
starting value of N ′ and hence avoiding runs for unreasonably small values of N ′. A heuristic
method of finding a lower bound for N ′ was described in section 4.4.
Based on this computational performance, coupled with the theoretical arguments in fa-
vor of the continuous-time model presented in section 4.3.3, we choose to proceed with
the continuous-time representation. In the subsequent sections we present the results of a
rolling-horizon method based on the continuous-time resource-task network model including
maintenance and possibility of allocation of extra time to tasks.
5.3
Detailed Example of RTN-RH
In this section we present an example of the resource-task network with rolling-horizon
(RTN-RH) method described in section 4.5. The model contains the possibility of allocating
extra time to tasks, as well as the requirement of performing CIP procedures after a set
number of batches or after a specified amount of time since the latest CIP.
In the Gantt charts below, CIPs are denoted with red rectangles of width corresponding to
the duration of the procedure. Extra time is denoted with a darker color - for example, the
third batch is colored purple, so the darker shade of purple after the first task on this batch
denotes the extra time allocated to this task.
In figure 5.10 below we present two iterations in order to illustrate the functioning of the
method. The title of the Gantt chart contains:
• the instance title,
50
==PAGE:56==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
• Hmax - the total planning horizon which has to be reached at the end of the last
iteration,
• DeltaH - the length of the planning horizon which is used for each iteration,
• Nmin - the starting value of N ′ (number of event points, computed with the heuristic
described in 4.4,
• N - number of event points (denoted with N ′ elsewhere), counted from the start of the
solution up until the current iteration,
• parameters tol and max_it - irrelevant for this discussion, will be explained in section
5.4,
• it - iteration number.
As previously mentioned in section 4.5, at each iteration the cutting point of the solution is
the event point ep when the second-to-last completed batch enters production. That event
point is excluded from the solution for this iteration but is the first event point of the solution
for the next iteration. In figure 5.10, each row corresponds to one iteration, with the left plot
displaying the full solution after this iteration, while the right plot displays the truncated
solution after event points from ep onward have been excluded.
As seen in subfigure 5.10a, in iteration 1 the second-to-last completed batch is the ocher one
(fourth batch), so ep is the event point when task 1 is performed on that batch. The events
kept in this solution are up to and including ep −1, while ep becomes the first event point
of the solution for iteration 2. Thus, in the cut solution for iteration 1 in subfigure 5.10b
the ocher batch is absent and so are all tasks which were scheduled at or after event point
ep. The planning horizon is then shifted by 80 hours and the model is solved with this new
horizon and ep as the starting point. The tasks which are visible in the cut solution will not
be reoptimized and thus will remain the same for the upcoming iterations.
In iteration 2 tasks which occur at event point ep are the same as they were in iteration 1 due
to the fact that the values of decision variables at the first event point of the new iteration
are fixed to be identical to the values at ep (with the exception of the variable denoting extra
time). Subsequent tasks may differ, as they are being re-optimized - comparing subplot 5.10a
and 5.10c we notice that on the blue batch in solution of iteration 1 a task is performed on
unit T3_1, while in the solution of iteration 2 it is instead performed on unit T3_2. The
last completed batch is the green-blue one, therefore the new ep is the event point at which
task 1 is performed on the orange batch.
The recursion continues until the times at event point ep are greater than the total planning
horizon Hmax on all units.
51
==PAGE:57==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
(a) Chart for iteration 1, full.
(b) Chart for iteration 1, truncated.
(c) Chart for iteration 2, full.
(d) Chart for iteration 2, truncated.
Figure 5.10: Gantt charts for the recursive algorithm, both complete and cut.
For the sake of testing and validating the proposed recursion, Instance 4 was run with
and without recursion, with the tuned parameters in the baseline scenario - the description
of both tuning and scenarios can be found in section 5.4 - with an Hmax = 96 h.
In
the recursion experiment, the optimal solution was found in 14.114 seconds, while for the
experiment with the model being solved all at once for the whole horizon it took 944.624
seconds. This difference of more than 15 minutes proves to be significant as both of them
achieve comparable solutions with 20 fully processed batches. More analysis and discussions
on experiments will be presented from section 5.4.2 onward.
5.4
Computational Experiments
Before discussing the experiments, we present their structure and background information
on how they were performed. This includes both the parameters to tune and the different
scenarios used.
52
==PAGE:58==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
The developed model contains a number of parameters, some of which are defined for each
production line and remain the same throughout all scenarios - like task processing times
and CIP-production unit relation. On the other hand, there are parameters whose alteration
affects solution quality and should be tuned to achieve the best results. In RTN-RH, there
are three main parameters that were identified to fall under the latter case and need to be
tuned for each instance individually. This tuning is desired for each instance, or in reality
for each production line, as they are independent from each other and the planning will be
done to maximize the quality of each individual solution. For this reason, the objective of
the parameter tuning is to overfit each instance and not to try and obtain a unique value
for each parameter. The three parameters to tune are listed below.
• max_it: to describe the impact of this new parameter, we recall the step 3 in Section
4.5, where in order to find the optimal value of N ′ the model is solved until no significant
improvement occurs for subsequent values of N ′. This parameter defines how many
more iterations will be performed if the objective values for subsequent values of N ′
show no significant improvement. The reason behind the inclusion of this parameter is
because the objective function can present local maxima, which the max_it parameter
helps escape if it is greater than 0.
• tol: defines the threshold of minimum change in percentage between objective values
of subiterations with subsequent values of N ′. A lower tol value will require more runs
with N ′, as the solution will need to be more precise and thus increases the overall
running time.
• H: refers to the initial time horizon used to perform an iteration - also defined in the
models in section 4.3, which will be defined based on the minimum processing time for
a batch and minimum number of batches for the recursive algorithm to perform. This
parameter directly affects the N ′
min in the heuristic, greatly influencing the model’s
running time.
These parameters will be tuned one by one in the same order as they were listed above and
using a short total planning horizon (Hmax), as the aim is not to solve the complete planning
problem in this step. The tuning was done on a selected set of values for each one - presented
in tables 5.7 and 5.8. The sets were defined by us to analyze their impact - the values can be
modified and chosen from a larger set with smallest differences between subsequent value,
resembling continuous tuning for tol and H.
max_it
tol
Values
0, 1
0.05, 0.01, 0.005
Table 5.7: Sets of possible values for max_it and tol.
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
Instance 4
Instance 5
H
50, 60, 70
30, 35, 40, 45
55, 70, 80
40, 50, 60, 70
65, 70, 80
Table 5.8: Sets of possible values for H for each instance.
53
==PAGE:59==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
After tuning and defining these parameters, the experimentation and analysis phase begins.
To better explain the scenarios used, the chosen terms for the objective function for the full
RTN model are discussed below.
1. Batch sales [$/unit]: profit per unit of finished good, both finished and in production
when the planning horizon is reached.
2. Splitting incentive [$/unit]: only different from zero for splitting tasks, to incentivize
batch splitting when possible.
3. Time gap penalty [$/time unit]: incentive to assign tasks as early as possible.
4. CIP cost [$/CIP]: cost incurred by each CIP task performed.
5. Extra time cost [$]: cost incurred by extra time percentage allocated.
All of them were discussed and agreed upon with Novo Nordisk’s operators to be relevant
for planning the operation. Their specific values were also agreed with Novo Nordisk and
used to define the base scenario or Scenario 1. The rest of the scenarios were created by
us to test the RTN-RH method and gain insights into its behavior. The specific parameter
values for all scenarios can be found in table 5.9 below.
Scenario
1
2
3
4
5
6
Batch Sales
100
100
100
100
100
100
Splitting Incentive
10
10
10
10
10
10
Time Gap Penalty
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.00
0.05
CIP Cost
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
100
Extra Time Cost
0.00
0.25
2.50
5.00
50.0
0.00
Table 5.9: Objective function weights and their values for each scenario.
The scenarios differ from one another in the last three parameters: time gap penalty, CIP
cost and extra time cost. As mentioned before, Scenario 1 refers to the baseline, and the
current values for the real operation. Scenarios 2 through 4 explore the trade-off between
the time gap penalty and extra time cost through varying values and ratios of the two pa-
rameters. Scenario 5 takes this trade-off to an extreme, with no cost associated with time
gaps and a very high extra time cost. Lastly, Scenario 6 assigns more weight to the number
of CIPs done, ideally leading to minimizing it.
All the scenarios were tested with a horizon Hmax of 120 hours, except for Instance 4, for
which the horizon was 96 hours.
In addition to the experimentation with these scenarios, we analyze some more aspects
unrelated to the weights in the objective function, with the aim of answering the following
questions:
54
==PAGE:60==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
1. How do the batch splitting decisions change when forcing downtime on specific units?
Is RTN-RH resilient against it?
2. How does RTN-RH perform when the Hmax is greatly increased?
3. How does RTN-RH compare to the currently used solution method?
The first question addresses periods with long maintenance, which units can incur and which
may affect the production. The second question aims to test the method’s performance with
different horizons and to study its behavior and running times. Lastly, the proposed method
RTN-RH is compared with the current tool to validate it in terms of solution quality and
running time. The three questions are addressed through experiments performed with the
tuned parameters obtained in this section. The results are discussed in sections 5.4.2, 5.4.3
and 5.5, respectively.
5.4.1
Results: Parameter Tuning
Tuning max_it
The procedure to tune the three parameters described above begins with tuning the value of
max_it. This is because the value of this parameter depends on the shape of the objective
function with respect to N ′ and is independent of the selected values of tol and H : in some
instances the objective value may stagnate for a few consecutive values of N ′ but increase
later, which makes attempting a few more subiterations worthwhile even if there is no sig-
nificant improvement between objective values for consecutive N ′. Generally, the value of
max_it should be set as low as possible unless increasing it leads to improvement of the
solutions, as higher values of the parameters increase the number of performed subiterations
and hence the solution time. The experiments aimed at tuning the value of max_it were
run with tol = 0.01 and a value of H chosen arbitrarily from the set of possible values for
that instance (see table 5.8). In order to choose the optimal value for this parameter, the
first and the last iteration must be analyzed.
Investigating the solutions for the first iteration allows us to determine whether the num-
ber of event points is high enough to utilize the horizon to its fullest. If there clearly is a
possibility of outputting more batches, it is a sign that the value of N ′ used for the output
solution is a local optimum and not the global one. This effect is visible for Instance 3 in
figure 5.11. In subfigure 5.11c, the last of the four batches is completed at time 60.5 hours,
despite the horizon for this iteration being 80 hours. The duration of the last task (the bot-
tleneck) is 10 hours, so clearly one more batch could be output if the number of event points
was sufficient. When the parameter max_it is increased to 1, in case there is no significant
improvement between two subsequent values of N ′, another subiteration is performed and if
an improvement is found, then the iteration continues. For Instance 3, setting the value of
max_it to 1 results in one more batch being completed compared to max_it = 0, which is
visible in subfigure 5.11d . The last batch is completed at time 75 h, thus it is impossible to
output more batches within this horizon, so increasing the value of max_it further will not
55
==PAGE:61==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
result in improved solution quality for this instance.
On the other hand, for Instance 1, max_it = 0 and max_it = 1 result in the same solution
for the first iteration - the horizon for an iteration is 50 hours and in both cases the last
batch is completed at time 49.5, so no more batches could potentially be output. In this
case, its value will be set to 0 unless the analysis of the last iteration suggests setting it to
a different value.
(a) Chart for Instance 1, with max_it = 0.
(b) Chart for Instance 1, with max_it = 1.
(c) Chart for Instance 3, with max_it = 0.
(d) Chart for Instance 3, with max_it = 1.
Figure 5.11: Gantt charts for the max_it selection for Instances 1 and 3 after the first
iteration.
The second criterion is the appearance of the complete solution after the last iteration. We
visually assess the solutions for the different values of max_it and inspect how they differ
from each other in terms of batch splitting, solution gaps and CIP allocation. In figure 5.12
there are two examples - Instance 1 and Instance 5 - where this analysis leads to different
conclusions.
56
==PAGE:62==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Subfigures 5.12a and 5.12b display the solutions for Instance 5 with max_it = 0 and
max_it = 1, respectively. In general, the preferred behavior is splitting batches between
parallel units whenever possible. In the solution for max_it = 0, the ocher and pink batches
are not split, while in the solution max_it = 1 they are. Therefore, the latter solution is of
higher quality and we set the value of max_it to 1. On the other hand, both solutions for
Instance 1 (subfigures 5.12c and 5.12c) are identical, so the value of max_it is set to 0.
(a) Chart for Instance 5, with max_it = 0.
(b) Chart for Instance 5, with max_it = 1.
(c) Chart for Instance 1, with max_it = 0.
(d) Chart for Instance 1, with max_it = 1.
Figure 5.12: Gantt charts for the max_it selection for Instances 1 and 5 after the last
iteration.
Table 5.10 details the times when the last batch is completed for both max_it equal to 0
and 1. The value of H′
X is the time of completion of the last batch for max_it = X for
X ∈{0, 1}, and H is the planning horizon per iteration.
57
==PAGE:63==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
Instance 4
Instance 5
H′
0
49.5
30
60.5
40
61
H′
1
49.5
30
75
40
61
H
50
30
80
40
70
Selected max_it
0
0
1
0
1
Table 5.10: Selection of max_it values per instance.
Instance 5 is the only one for which the decision on the value of max_it was made based
on the second criterion - based on the quality of the solution being better with max_it = 1
than max_it = 0. For the remaining instances the solution quality was inspected but did
not lead to changing the decision made based on the first criterion.
The selected values for max_it are now fixed for the rest of the experiments.
Tuning tol
The next step is tuning the values for tol. For this stage, a value of H is arbitrarily selected
from the set of available values for each instance (table 5.8). The parameter tol affects the
solution at the end of each iteration, as it defines the quality of the cutting point after each
one of them. The value is determined by comparing the solutions for each value of tol and
choosing the largest value of those which produce solutions of the highest quality. This is
because smaller values of tol lead to longer computation times and hence should only be
selected if they help produce better solutions. In figure 5.13 we present a comparison of the
solutions for different values of tol for Instance 1 and 3.
From inspecting Instance 1, it is apparent that in the solution with tol = 0.05 some batches
are not split between parallel units, despite it being possible (purple and blue batch). On
the other hand, the solutions obtained with tol = 0.01 and tol = 0.005 are identical and all
batches are split whenever possible. For Instance 3, we notice that there are gaps between
batches processed on the last task for tol = 0.05 and tol = 0.01, but not for tol = 0.005.
Therefore, we choose the last of the values, as it may potentially lead to more batches being
output for longer planning horizons. The remaining Instances 2, 4 and 5 are inspected
similarly and the optimal value is found to be tol = 0.01 for each of them.
58
==PAGE:64==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
(a) Chart for Instance 1, with tol = 0.05.
(b) Chart for Instance 3, with tol = 0.05.
(c) Chart for Instance 1, with tol = 0.01.
(d) Chart for Instance 3, with tol = 0.01.
(e) Chart for Instance 1, with tol = 0.005.
(f) Chart for Instance 3, with tol = 0.005.
Figure 5.13: Gantt charts for the tol selection for Instances 1 and 3 after the last iteration.
59
==PAGE:65==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Tuning H
Finally, the value of H must be tuned for each instance. A prerequisite for this value is
that it must be large enough to allow at least three batches to be completed in order to
allow appropriate cutting of the solution. The rationale for that was previously discussed
in section 4.5. In order to reduce the number of failed iterations, it is worth choosing an
appropriately large H from the start. The value of H also affects the computational time of
the experiments, as previously described in the introduction of section 5.4, due to the fact
that it is linked to the number of event points required to achieve optimality. This means
that the value of H should be high enough to guarantee that at least three batches can be
produced, but low enough to allow for short solution times. As the value of this parameter
impacts the composition of the solution for the whole planning horizon, we inspect the com-
plete solutions for each of the values. In figure 5.14 we provide an example for Instance 2.
(a) Chart for Instance 2, with H = 30 h.
(b) Chart for Instance 2, with H = 35 h.
(c) Chart for Instance 2, with H = 40 h.
(d) Chart for Instance 2, with H = 45 h.
Figure 5.14: Gantt charts for the H selection for Instance 2 after the last iteration.
We notice that for H = 30 and H = 40 (subfigures 5.14a and 5.14c) nine batches are com-
pleted, while for H = 35 and H = 45 (subfigures 5.14b and 5.14d) the number of batches is
60
==PAGE:66==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
10. The differences can be attributed to the splitting decisions and the placement of CIPs.
Hence, the choice is between the latter pair of values. Comparing the solutions for H = 35
and H = 45, we notice that the ninth batch (green) is split between three units for H = 45
and only two units for H = 35. As splitting between as many parallel units as possible is
the preferred behavior, we set the value of H to 45 hours.
In figure 5.15 we provide another example - tuning H for Instance 4. There are two separate
production lines - one includes units A1 through C1 (top portion of the charts) and the other
one includes units A2 through C2 (bottom portion of the charts).
(a) Chart for Instance 4, with H = 40 h.
(b) Chart for Instance 4, with H = 50 h.
(c) Chart for Instance 4, with H = 60 h.
(d) Chart for Instance 4, with H = 70 h.
Figure 5.15: Gantt charts for the H selection for Instance 4 after the last iteration.
For this instance, we must carefully consider both of the two production lines. Both of the
final products have the same value, therefore we consider the total number of batches. At
the first sight, H = 70 in subfigure 5.15d looks promising because the bottleneck on the
second production line is fully utilized. However, on the first line, only 10 batches are com-
pleted, leading to 18 batches in total. For H = 50 and H = 60 (subfigures 5.15b and 5.15c,
respectively) there is one less completed batch on the second line, but one more on the first,
61
==PAGE:67==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
so the number of completed batches is 18 too. On the other hand, for H = 40 (subfigure
5.15a), the number of completed batches on the second line is the same as for H = 70, but
there is one more batch completed on the first line, meaning the total number of batches is
19. Hence, H = 40 is considered optimal for this instance.
We similarly determine the value of this parameter for the other instances. A summary of
all tuned parameter values is displayed in table 5.11.
Parameter Tuning: Summary
All parameters have now been tuned for all instances. The results are presented in table 5.11
below. The set of parameters is unique for each of the instances due to differences in the
structure of the production lines. The value of H varies especially significantly because of
the different number and duration of tasks in each instance. This highlights the importance
of tailoring the parameters to a specific production line, rather than using generic parameters.
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
Instance 4
Instance 5
max_it
0
0
1
0
1
tol
0.01
0.01
0.005
0.01
0.01
H
60
45
55
40
70
Table 5.11: Tuned parameters for each instance.
Figure 5.16 displays the solution for each of the instances with the values of these parameters
as in table 5.11 for Scenario 1. These solutions will be used as a baseline that other scenarios
will be compared to in the next section 5.4.2. It is worth noting the behavior of the instances
with the tuned parameters, especially how sometimes batch splitting is avoided to fit the
CIPs while maximizing the production of batches - for example in Instance 2 (subfigure
5.16b).
62
==PAGE:68==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
(a) Chart for Instance 1.
(b) Chart for Instance 2.
(c) Chart for Instance 3.
(d) Chart for Instance 4.
(e) Chart for Instance 5.
Figure 5.16: Gantt charts for the final iteration with tuned parameters for all instances, with
the baseline (Scenario 1) weights.
63
==PAGE:69==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
5.4.2
Results: Scenarios
With the tuned parameters for each instance, experiments were performed for different sce-
narios to obtain insights on the performance of the RTN-RH method and to validate its
applicability to real production planning. This section contains an analysis and discussion
of the experiment results. It should be noted that the focus of the analysis will be on the
quality of the created schedules, for example on the amount of extra time and number of
CIPs, and not on the objective value. This is due to the fact that the RTN-RH creates a
schedule for some time beyond the planning horizon, which may differ for the different sce-
narios, making the objective values incomparable even if all the penalty terms are excluded.
Moreover, the purpose of the scenarios is investigating how the schedules differ depending
on the weight parameters, rather than the changes in the objective value.
Extra Time Allocation
The first analysis aims to test the model’s response to changes in the extra time cost by
considering how much extra time is allocated in the different scenarios for each instance. For
this, the cost of extra time for each scenario is presented in table 5.12. At baseline (Scenario
1) there is no cost on extra time. For scenarios 2-5 the cost of extra time increases, hence
we expect the amount of allocated extra time to decrease. Scenario 6, like Scenario 1, has
no cost associated with the extra time and therefore is irrelevant for this analysis.
Scenario
1
2
3
4
5
6
Extra Time Cost
0.00
0.25
2.50
5.00
50.0
0.00
Table 5.12: Objective function extra time weight for every scenario.
The specific results for the amount of extra time allocation are presented in table 5.13. The
most significant changes between the five scenarios occur for Instances 1, 3, 4 and 5. It is
important to note that each of the instances has different process structure and ϕi value,
meaning that the responses to the changing weights will also be different. In Instance 1,
the amount of allocated extra time generally decreases with the cost of extra time, although
for Scenarios 4 and 5 it remains unchanged. Contrarily, for Instance 4 no extra time is
allocated for Scenario 5, where the cost is the highest.
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
Instance 4
Instance 5
Scenario 1
7.27
0.32
3.85
5.40
10.23
Scenario 2
0.79
0.19
0.86
0.38
2.23
Scenario 3
0.43
0.19
0.73
0.26
0.50
Scenario 4
0.40
0.19
0.72
0.26
0.38
Scenario 5
0.40
0.18
0.50
0.00
0.12
Scenario 6
5.86
0.66
3.40
3.68
4.56
Table 5.13: Amount of extra time allocated for each instance in each scenario.
64
==PAGE:70==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Let us recall that in section 4.3.4, when the term in the objective function denoting the extra
time was introduced, it was explained that it was preferred to assign extra time to tasks with
high extra time availability to avoid compromising the productivity if extraordinary events
occurred. This effect is clearly demonstrated by Instance 5, as depicted in figure 5.17. The
allocation of extra time is reduced with increasing weight, and ultimately only a small part
remains for the tasks (associated to units T2_1 and T2_2) that have the greatest available
extra time - 100 hours for each of them - validating the initial goal of including that term
to the objective function.
Figure 5.17: Gantt charts for the last iteration of Instance 5, Scenario 6.
The expected behavior when increasing the extra time cost is that the allocated amount de-
creases, and this is seen for all instances except Instance 2. In this case, the amount stays
constant through scenarios 2 to 4, only decreasing slightly for Scenario 5. This behavior can
be explained by the amount of extra time being low already at baseline, where the amount is
comparable to what other instances reach by Scenario 5 with the increased weight. Another
argument is that the extra time allocated is already minimized for the maximum number of
batches and unless the extra time cost exceeds the profit from a batch, the planning will not
be affected.
In figure 5.18, four scenarios for Instance 4 are presented to show how the allocation changes
between them, until in Scenario 5 no extra time is allocated. The differences in the amount
of extra time affect the way in which production tasks are placed, which is evident by one
less batch being completed for Scenario 5.
65
==PAGE:71==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
(a) Chart for Instance 4 in Scenario 1.
(b) Chart for Instance 4 in Scenario 2.
(c) Chart for Instance 4 in Scenario 4.
(d) Chart for Instance 4 in Scenario 5.
Figure 5.18: Gantt charts for the last iteration with four scenarios for Instance 4.
CIP Tasks
The second analysis addresses minimization of the number of CIP tasks.
It is done by
analyzing solutions for Scenario 6 and comparing them to Scenario 1.
The CIP cost is
increased to a point where it is greater than the splitting incentive, allowing for changes
in the planning. These changes can occur if CIP frequency is dependent on the number of
batches processed in a unit: if some batches are split differently, then the total number of
inspections can be reduced. For example, if a whole batch is processed in one unit instead
of splitting between two parallel units, the number of processed batches since last CIP will
only increase for one unit, rather than both of the parallel units. However, the modifications
may not compromise total batch production, which may happen if lack of splitting between
parallel units leads to the creation of a new bottleneck in the production line. An example of
an instance where the number of CIPs can be reduced through avoiding splitting is Instance
5 shown in figure 5.19. In the solution for Scenario 6 (subfigure 5.19b), the purple and the
pink batch are not split, unlike in the solution for Scenario 1 (subfigure 5.19a). The number
of CIPs is reduced from 35 to 30. For the rest of the instances there is also a decrease in the
66
==PAGE:72==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
total amount of CIPs, but although it does not lead a change in the splitting decisions, as
shown in table 5.14.
(a) Chart for Instance 5 with Scenario 1.
(b) Chart for Instance 5 with Scenario 6.
Figure 5.19: Gantt charts for the last iteration on Scenario 1 and 6 for Instance 5.
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
Instance 4
Instance 5
Scenario 1
46
49
53
39
35
Scenario 6
45
45
52
37
30
Table 5.14: Number of assigned CIPs for each instance.
Given the continuous time grids, there exist marginal differences in the solutions if the same
experiment is run several times. As a result, a CIP can fall barely inside or outside of Hmax,
meaning that a CIP is included or excluded from the total number, although it needs to be
performed at that point in the schedule. This is the cause of the marginal changes of 1 unit
67
==PAGE:73==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
between some other scenarios (2-5), despite them having the same CIP cost. The number of
CIPs per instance for all scenarios are shown in table C.3 in appendix C.2.
Unit Removal
A major point in the developed RTN model and in the instances is the possibility to split a
batch between parallel units to reduce the total production time and thus achieve a higher
output. Furthermore, the CIP tasks may be batch- or time-dependent, which can greatly
affect the splitting decisions. Another critical action is identifying the bottleneck, as avoid-
ing splitting may shift it to a different point in the production process. For this reason, we
analyze how the removal of selected parallel units that allow splitting impacts the schedule.
The removal of a unit represents long maintenance or a breakdown, and may or may not be
planned in advance.
Let us recall the structure of Instance 5: it has three units on the second step of the process
in which a batch can be split - Z1_1, Z1_2 and Z1_3. Given its structure, if any of these
three is removed, it will imply that the associated succeeding unit will also be unavailable
- for example, if Z1_1 is down, then so is T1_1.
For this analysis, three cases will be
presented:
1. Case A: Instance 5 is run with Scenario 1 without any disturbances.
2. Case B: Instance 5 is run with Scenario 1 with unit Z1_3 removed for the entire
horizon.
3. Case C: Instance 5 is run with Scenario 1 with units Z1_2 and Z1_3 removed for
the entire horizon.
In practice, the unavailability of unit r ∈U is signified by introducing additional constraints
in the model, namely setting the resource balance for that unit to 0 at all event points:
er,n = 0
n ∈N.
(5.2)
Figure 5.20 displays the solutions found for the first two cases of Instance 5. In optimal
solution found for this instance with Scenario 1, all batches are split among the three units
throughout the whole horizon. When Z1_3 is removed, the batches predictably only split
between two remaining units. This is because the position of the bottleneck does not change
- it remains on the final task. In addition, fewer CIPs will be performed as two units will
not be active (Z1_3 and T1_3), and less extra time will be used as the tasks will have a
higher duration.
68
==PAGE:74==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
(a) Chart for last iteration of Case A.
(b) Chart for last iteration of Case B.
Figure 5.20: Gantt charts for Instance 5 with all units available and with unit Z1_3 removed.
However, when two units are removed and only one remains active for production, the
situation changes drastically. This case is presented in figure 5.21, where it is clearly visible
that the total number of processed batches is reduced due to the bottleneck being located
elsewhere on the line - the exclusion of units Z1_2 and Z1_3 has caused the task on unit
Z1_1 to become the new bottleneck. The two units which remain active, Z1_1 and T1_1,
are still required to undergo CIP procedures, which creates gaps in the production that
cannot be avoided. In a real production setting, if one or more units are removed during a
long period of time, the planning should be analyzed more carefully beforehand and actions
should be considered to mitigate the consequences.
Figure 5.21: Gantt chart for last iteration of Case C, Instance 5.
In table 5.15, the running times for each case are compared and there is a clear reduction when
removing the units and thus, removing possible tasks from the model. The reason behind
this is that there are fewer available combinations of tasks for each batch, greatly reducing
the number constraints and feasible values of variables, which simplifies the decisions.
69
==PAGE:75==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Case A
Case B
Case C
Running Time (s)
206.33
140.56
33.35
Table 5.15: Running times for each case, Instance 5.
The RTN-RH method proves to be robust against these cases. It should be noted that as
excluding units may increase the processing time of a batch, longer horizons per each it-
eration (H) may be required - however, the method includes a safety mechanism for these
situations. If H is not large enough to meet the minimum number of processed batches with
the new bottleneck, then it will be increased by a factor and the model will be resolved in
order to allow for the recursion to continue. This procedure will happen as many times as
necessary to produce the required number of batches per iteration.
Alternatively, these big maintenance events can be included in the model within the input
configuration and parameters in the same way as CIP tasks are.
5.4.3
Results: Varying Time Horizon
In this section we analyze the run times of the presented method for each of the five instances
for Scenario 1. Let us recall that each iteration serves to find a solution for a particular rolling
horizon, while each subiteration serves to find the optimal number of event points for that
rolling horizon.
In figure 5.22 we present the plots of objective value and run time for each subiteration for
planning horizon Hmax = 120 hours. Each data point is labeled with the iteration number
and number of event points N ′. For example, in subfigure 5.22a there are two values of N ′
for iteration 1, meaning that this iteration had two subiterations. The exact running times
can be found in table C.1 and C.2 in appendix C.1.
The value of parameter max_it is equal to 0 for Instance 1 and to 1 for Instance 3,
which causes the two instances to be especially interesting to compare against each other.
For Instance 1, whenever there is no significant improvement in the objective value for two
subsequent values of N ′, the second-to-last value is assumed to be optimal and the next
iteration begins. For Instance 3, if there is no significant improvement for two subsequent
values of N ′ but there was an improvement immediately before that, another subiteration
with the next consecutive value of N ′ is attempted. As a result of this, in subfigure 5.22b
in iteration 4, the objective value is lower for N ′ = 14 than N ′ = 13, but another subit-
eration is performed and an improvement is found with N ′ = 15, thus the iteration continues.
70
==PAGE:76==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
(a) Objective value and run time per subiteration. Instance 1, Hmax = 120 h.
(b) Objective value and run time per subiteration. Instance 3, Hmax = 120 h.
Figure 5.22: Objective value and run time per subiteration for Instance 1 and 3.
Generally the running time of a subiteration increases exponentially with the number of
event points, hence usually the run time will start at a low value at the start iteration and
increase for subsequent subiterations until a new iteration begins. In some cases the run
time is higher for the first subiteration than for the second - this is likely due to randomness
during solution search by the solver.
The result which is particularly interesting is the total run time for each instance and each
planning horizon - that is, the total time required to obtain a solution. They are presented
in table 5.16.
71
==PAGE:77==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Run time per instance (s)
Time horizon (h)
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
Instance 4
Instance 5
120
69.058
1513.014
128.95
14.114 (*)
206.333
240
74.737
2602.398
179.544
64.185
588.783
336
100.151
3044.37
206.786
87.085
721.52
Table 5.16: Total run times per instance and planning horizon for scenario 1.
(*) Made with Hmax = 96 h.
As expected, the running times are higher for longer planning horizons for the same in-
stance. Instances 1, 3 and 4 can be solved in less than 3.5 minutes (210 seconds) for all
the planning horizons considered. Instance 4 is the quickest to solve despite having two
separate production lines, as they are both very simple and do not involve any parallel units
that batches might be split between. Instance 1 and 3 both involve splitting between two
parallel units: on one occasion in the first one and on two separate occasions in the latter,
which results in a higher complexity and solution time for Instance 3.
Instances 2 and 5 unsurprisingly require the most time, as they involve splitting between
three parallel units, while in the other instances there are maximum two parallel units. In-
stance 2 additionally involves a choice of a tank for storage, which is absent from Instance
5, which results in a higher complexity and run time. For Instance 5 the solution time
for the planning horizon of 336 hours is about 12 minutes. For instance 2 it is about 51
minutes. It should, however, be noted that these tests were completed using an academic
license, while the company has access to the full commercial license, which enables faster
computation. Moreover, in this case the model could be run once a week with the horizon
of 336 hours and for more frequent re-optimization the horizon of 120 hours could be used.
Instances with larger solution spaces due to a greater number of choices between parallel
units result in longer solution times, especially if these choices occur multiple times in a
production line. For such complex instances, there exist ways to reduce the total run time
at the cost of solution quality if a solution must be generated faster. One of them is setting
a time limit on each iteration. This way, after a pre-set amount of time has passed, an
iteration will terminate and output the best number of event points which has been found,
even if the termination condition due to lack of improvement in the objective value has not
been reached. Another possibility could be setting a time limit on the MIP solver, so that
each subiteration would have a maximum run time, eventually contributing to a lower total
run time.
5.5
Comparison to Currently Used Solution Method
The proposed model, RTN-RH, was compared to solutions produced with the currently
used method in Novo Nordisk’s operation. Two of the synthetic instances (Instance 3 and
4) were solved with Novo Nordisk’s model in collaboration with the company’s planners. To
72
==PAGE:78==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
ensure comparability, the planning horizon Hmax was set to be the same in both approaches.
The current solution method (SM) differs from the RTN-RH mainly as it is done manually
in a linear way - scheduling batches one at a time, and setting the difference between the
starting time of consecutive batches to be the duration of the bottleneck task. Furthermore,
in case a CIP is scheduled and affects the starting time of a production task, this will change
the starting time of the affected batch by delaying it sufficiently so that the CIP and pro-
duction task do not overlap. The last condition leads to refraining from using extra time
and reserving it for situations in which extraordinary events occur where it is necessary for
a batch to wait longer than expected in a tank. Furthermore, in case extra time is used,
it will be allocated to tasks with a high availability of variable time, where it would not
compromise the total processing time in case a disturbance occurs at another point in the
production. In this sense, this method is comparable to RTN-RH for Scenario 5, which puts
a high penalty on extra time but still allows it to be used if necessary.
In figures 5.23 and 5.24, the Gantt charts for both Scenario 1 and Scenario 5 are compared
with the current solution method. For Instance 3 there is a clear difference in the total
number of processed batches within the planning horizon - eight for the SM and ten and nine
for Scenario 1 and 5, respectively, using RTN-RH. The reason behind this is the scheduling
of CIP tasks and the use of extra time in the planning. It can be seen in subfigure 5.23b
that in Scenario 5 extra time is only used for tasks in units T3_1 and T3_2, which occur
before the bottleneck. This flexibility in extra time allows for more batches to be produced
compared to the SM. Furthermore, RTN-RH solves the problem considering the period for
each iteration as a whole and not solving it linearly batch by batch, allowing for the CIP
placing to be done optimally and without unnecessarily delaying new batches.
73
==PAGE:79==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
(a) Chart for Instance 3 solved with RTN-RH, for
Scenario 1.
(b) Chart for Instance 3 solved with RTN-RH, for
Scenario 5.
(c) Chart for Instance 3 solved with current solution method.
Figure 5.23: Gantt charts for Instance 3 with Hmax = 120 h, with RTN-RH and current
solution method.
Instance 4 presents a different structure, as it is composed of two distinct production lines
with two profitable products. In this case, both products have the same profit and no priority
is placed in either one of them. As a result, the SM solution is created without prioritizing
one product over the other, but solely by considering the bottleneck duration.
In this case, there is a clear difference between the solutions as the SM has no idle capacity
on the second product’s bottleneck (C2 unit), while the RTN-RH model maximizes the pro-
duction of the first line by leaving gaps on C2. This results in the SM having an output of
17 batches overall, whereas the RTN-RH has a production of 20 batches for Scenario 1 and
19 for Scenario 5.
Regarding the extra time allocation, both in RTN-RH for Scenario 5 and the SM there is
no extra time. However, as mentioned before, two more batches are scheduled in the plan
74
==PAGE:80==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
created with RTN-RH, meaning that this planning is more profitable.
(a) Chart for Instance 4 solved with RTN-RH, for
Scenario 1.
(b) Chart for Instance 4 solved with RTN-RH, for
Scenario 5.
(c) Chart for Instance 4 solved with current solution method.
Figure 5.24: Gantt charts for Instance 4 with Hmax = 96 h, with RTN-RH and current
solution method.
Lastly, we consider the time required to obtain a solution - that is, the running time for
RTN-RH, and the time an operator needs to make a production plan using SM. On average,
Novo Nordisk’s weekly plan takes between 90 and 120 minutes and it is done by the end of
each week for the upcoming one. In addition to that, the operator creates a detailed plan
for every operating day - equivalent to the one presented in this section - and this requires
additional 30 minutes. Specifically for this study, the operators incurred a planning time of
around 90 minutes for each one of the instances. On the other hand, RTN-RH generates
solutions significantly faster, all while covering both the detailed plan and the scope of one
week - or even more if needed - as it was analyzed in Section 5.4.3. Instance 4 is notoriously
fast to solve - RTN-RH generates a solution for Scenario 1 with a planning horizon of 96
hours in a little over 14 seconds. For Instance 3 in Scenario 1 with 120 hours’ of planning
75
==PAGE:81==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
horizon, the RTN-RH found a solution in a little more than two minutes. Even for Instance
2 in Scenario 1 with a horizon of 336 hours, which was the one which required the most time
to solve with RTN-RH, the running time was 50 minutes and 45 seconds. The implication
of this difference is that the operation would be able to run the proposed RTN-RH often
enough in order to keep the planning robust and detailed at the same time.
76
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 6
Limitations and Future
Recommendations
While the current study has provided valuable insights, it is important to acknowledge its
limitations and consider potential avenues for future research and improvement. The pro-
posed continuous RTN model combined with a rolling-horizon approach has proven useful
and adaptable to the problem at hand, outperforming the currently used solution method
and providing multiple approaches to optimization with regards to the objective function.
However, it is also clear that limitations to the model exist and certain aspects can still be
improved.
The selection of a unit-specific RTN model creates a separate time grid for each unit in
the system, which brings forth challenges. They became apparent when we attempted to
develop a model incorporating the use of utilities - solvents, additives or extra components
used during the production process. Utility production, similarly to the main production,
requires tasks to be scheduled at specific times, which should be planned together with the
main production so that sufficient amounts are available whenever necessary. However, the
challenge lies in the fact that if a production task consumes both intermediate product states
and utilities, then the constraints concerning the starting times will inherently link the main
production tasks with the utilities production tasks, binding their time grids. Thus, the
utility’s inclusion can cause the appearance of forced gaps in the planning because multiple
resources being linked to a task. This issue requires specific considerations and potential
adjustments to how the utilities should be incorporated to ensure seamless coordination
between utility production and the operational efficiency of other production units. Presum-
ably a global time grid instead of multiple unit-specific time grids would be more suitable
for this type of a model.
Furthermore, the unit-specific time grids in combination with the continuous time variables
limit the ability to incorporate manning and operation shifts to the model. In the presented
model and instances the operation runs for the whole horizon without breaks, including
at night and during weekends. However, breaks occur in practice when resources such as
operators are needed for the activation of production tasks, resulting in additional time con-
77
==PAGE:83==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
straints appearing in the model. However, the presence of multiple times grids at each event
point impedes time coordination between the units. Ideas to introduce these constraints
were discussed but the resulting models were always non-linear and thus this topic requires
further investigation.
The RTN-RH model has as an initial assumption that when a batch is split, it will be done
evenly between the selected units. Even though this was discussed and agreed with Novo
Nordisk as to mimic production, it would be interesting to analyze the possibility of splitting
between parallel units in non-equal parts, determined by the MIP model. This implies the
incorporation of splitting decision variables. However, careful consideration must be given at
how this is modeled. Throughout this project multiple approaches were attempted without
success, as challenges appeared when merging the batches back together later in the process,
also adding the need for a batch tracking mechanism to avoid batches being mixed.
In addition, an assumption made from the beginning was the fact that the production line
would perform with a yield equal to 100% at every step, implying that no intermediate
products were lost through the whole process. Another assumption that was stated is that
raw materials and final products had infinite storage. Removal of either of the assumptions
would make the model a better representation of real systems, impacting the overall produc-
tion planning.
When discussing all possible KPIs and analyzing the different scenarios, the topic of multi-
objective optimization appeared. Although the studied objective function includes terms
representing a set of KPIs, it would be interesting to investigate more into this area, allow-
ing for an improved robustness of the model and obtaining better solutions when including
multiple objective functions. In some cases production systems have different goals than
profit maximization, such as minimizing cost while maintaining some minimal number of
batches produced, or maximizing production with balanced work shifts while disregarding
costs. Modeling such systems involves changes in the RTN-RH constraints and objective
function.
The distinctive features of RTN-RH are the development of a recursive model with a rolling
horizon and its integration with heuristics, applied to the RTN model. Nonetheless, heuris-
tics can be defined in a plethora of ways, each of them having a different impact on the
solutions and optimization process. We suggest further investigating different approaches
for the N ′ lower bound calculation and for the criteria used when running the recursive
model and setting the intermediate starting points. In relation to the latter, different de-
composition methods could be further studied and compared with the aim of improving the
rolling horizon approach.
Finally, we suggest that multiple runs of RTN-RH are performed when tuning the parameters
and solving the model. Replications increase the accuracy of results, and given the continuous
nature of some variables and the marginal changes that can appear in the solutions, they
are important for robustness of the parameters. However, replications are also resource-
78
==PAGE:84==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
intensive as they require a high number of of runs, and their use is a subject to an individual
assessment of the balance between quality and computational time. In addition, to further
improve the tuning process, we consider expanding the sets of possible parameters with more
values to obtain more precise models.
79
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, we have addressed the complex challenge of detailed scheduling of production
plans in pharmaceutical batch production. The motivation behind this work stemmed from
the need to optimize production processes, minimize costs, and ensure efficient resource uti-
lization. The studied problem required a comprehensive understanding of pharmaceutical
batch production, supply chains, production scheduling and planning, and mathematical
models to represent the problem.
The batch production scheduling problem at hand was approached through state-task net-
work and resource-task network models, resulting in a selection of the latter one. This thesis
suggested two possibilities for modeling an RTN: with discrete and continuous time repre-
sentations. Each of them had benefits and disadvantages depending on the problem. After
both theoretical and practical comparisons, and given the additions of extra time availabil-
ity and CIP tasks, the continuous model was chosen as the more suitable one. It posed less
complexity in the modeling, while also reducing the computational times of larger instances.
The two main contributions of the thesis are the inclusion of flexibility of task duration
through possibility of assigning extra time, and maintenance dependent either on the num-
ber of batches or time. These additions to the basic RTN model were a turning point when
the continuous-time formulation was chosen, as the discrete formulation posed multiple bar-
riers in order to achieve the desired planning flexibility and agility.
Our algorithm, combining an RTN model with a rolling horizon approach and thus called
RTN-RH, proved to be computationally better than the RTN model solved for the whole
horizon - for the simplest instance, the reduction was over 66-fold (from 944.624 seconds to
14.114 seconds). Presumably, for more complex instances with higher running times, the
change in running time would be even greater. Furthermore, the inclusion of a heuristic to
find the lower bound on N ′
min rather than starting from an arbitrary low number of event
points, resulted in countless iterations saved. The combination of these methods was not
found in the studied literature and is a contribution of our research.
Multiple instances with diverse production setups were presented and used to validate the
80
==PAGE:86==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
model’s performance and robustness in various scenarios. The scenarios incorporate the dif-
ferent KPIs used in the objective function. These KPIs were selected from a larger set, and
their particular inclusion or exclusion from the model’s objective will depend primarily on
the planning priorities.
The scenarios showed that the model can handle changes in the KPIs, allowing for different
optimal solutions and changing the priorities of the production planning. In the scenario
analysis, each instance reacted differently to the scenario changes but for all of them the
amount of extra time used or the number of CIPs allocated would decrease if the associated
cost increased, validating the assumed behavior of the model.
Furthermore, the model was tested against changes in the production setup. This quality
allows for an operation to be able to still use the model even when extraordinary events
occur in the process line, forcing downtime in an unit.
The RTN-RH model was also compared to real solutions from the linear method currently
used in Novo Nordisk, and proved its ability to generate significantly better schedules in
shorter amounts of time. In the analyzed instances, our method provided better results in
terms of the number of batches produced and a significant reduction of running times - from
90 minutes to two minutes for the same instance and setup. The maximum running time of
RTN-RH for an instance with a planning horizon equal to 336 hours was 51 minutes, which
is significantly less than the manual method, although the planning horizon for the current
solution method was shorter.
Although the unit-specific event-based continuous-time RTN model presents multiple bene-
fits and promising results, it has certain limitations regarding future extensions to the model
for real planning and scheduling situations. First of all, multiple runs of the experiments
should be performed to further improve results and accuracy. Secondly, the selected model’s
inherent characteristics - such as the unit-specific time grids - made the development of some
desired extensions complex. This applies particularly to utility production and manning.
Therefore, it is suggested that another heuristic or decomposition methods are researched
and tested to further improve the performance of the RTN-RH.
It can therefore be concluded that the proposed RTN-RH approach to solve the detailed
batch production scheduling and planning problem performs well in multiple setups, and
outperforms the current method in terms of solution quality and computational time. The
results proved that it is a robust model which can manage different scenarios and situations,
thus proving worth in being used for real-life production systems.
81
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 8
Acknowledgments
Ewa Magdalena Behr: Mathematical Modeling and Computation Engineering, DTU.
Joaquin Ignacio Fürstenheim: Transportation and Logistics Engineering, DTU.
We would like to thank our DTU supervisor David Pisinger for his guidance and support,
and also for challenging us to do better at every step. We are also grateful to Novo Nordisk’s
supervisors, Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen and Cristiana Serrano Raposo,
for their feedback and excellent insights regarding the operational perspective of the thesis.
Finally, we would like to send our appreciation to our friends, families and life partners for
their help and support through these months.
82
==PAGE:88==
References
[1]
Matthew H. Bassett, Joseph F. Pekny, and Gintaras V. Reklaitis. “Decomposition
Techniques for the Solution of Large-Scale Scheduling Problems”. In: AIChE Journal
42.12 (Dec. 1996), pp. 3373–3387. issn: 00011541. doi: 10.1002/aic.690421209.
[2]
Stefan Behme. Manufacturing of Pharmaceutical Proteins: From Technology to Econ-
omy: Third Edition. Wiley-VCH GmbH, Jan. 2022. doi: 10.1002/9783527833818.
[3]
Pedro M. Castro, Ana P. Barbosa-Póvoa, and Augusto Q. Novais. “A design and
scheduling RTN continuous-time formulation”. In: Computer Aided Chemical Engineer-
ing 20.C (2005), pp. 1213–218. issn: 15707946. doi: 10.1016/S1570-7946(05)80044-
6.
[4]
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. Q13 Continuous Manufacturing of Drug
Substances and Drug Products Guidance for Industry. Tech. rep. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration, Mar. 2023. url: https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/
search-fda-guidance-documents/q13-continuous-manufacturing-drug-substances-
and-drug-products.
[5]
Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use. ICH guideline Q13 on continuous
manufacturing of drug substances and drug products. Tech. rep. European Medicines
Agency, Mar. 2023. url: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-
guideline/ich-guideline-q13-continuous-manufacturing-drug-substances-
and-drug-products-step-5_en.pdf.
[6]
Faidra-Maria Deke. Statistical investigation of possible yield optimization in the Bio-
pharmaceutical industry. Tech. rep. Kalundborg: University College Absalon, Jan.
2023.
[7]
A. D. Dimitriadis, N. Shah, and C. C. Pantelides. “RTN-based rolling horizon al-
gorithms for medium term scheduling of multipurpose plants”. In: Computers and
Chemical Engineering 21.Supplement (May 1997), S1061–S1066. issn: 00981354. doi:
10.1016/s0098-1354(97)87643-0.
[8]
Christodoulos A Floudas and Xiaoxia Lin. “Continuous-time versus discrete-time ap-
proaches for scheduling of chemical processes: a review”. In: Computers & Chemical
Engineering 28.11 (Oct. 2004), pp. 2109–2129. issn: 0098-1354. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2004.05.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0098135404001401.
83
==PAGE:89==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
[9]
Alexandre Forel and Martin Grunow. “Dynamic stochastic lot sizing with forecast
evolution in rolling-horizon planning”. In: Production and Operations Management 32.2
(Feb. 2023), pp. 449–468. issn: 19375956. doi: 10.1111/poms.13881.
[10]
Lukas Glomb, Frauke Liers, and Florian Rösel. “A rolling-horizon approach for multi-
period optimization”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 300.1 (July 2022),
pp. 189–206. issn: 03772217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2021.07.043.
[11]
Iiro Harjunkoski et al. “Scope for industrial applications of production scheduling mod-
els and solution methods”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 62 (Mar. 2014),
pp. 161–193. issn: 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2013.12.001.
[12]
Matthew J. Hazaras, Christopher L.E. Swartz, and Thomas E. Marlin. “Flexible main-
tenance within a continuous-time state-task network framework”. In: Computers and
Chemical Engineering 46 (Nov. 2012), pp. 167–177. issn: 00981354. doi: 10.1016/
j.compchemeng.2012.06.028. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.
2012.06.028.
[13]
M. G. Ierapetritou and C. A. Floudas. “Effective continuous-time formulation for
short-term scheduling. 1. Multipurpose batch processes”. In: Industrial and Engineer-
ing Chemistry Research 37.11 (Oct. 1998), pp. 4341–4359. issn: 08885885. doi: 10.
1021/ie970927g.
[14]
Mona Jaberidoost et al. “Pharmaceutical supply chain risks: A systematic review”.
In: DARU, Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 21 (Dec. 2013). issn: 15608115. doi:
10.1186/2008-2231-21-69.
[15]
E. Kondili, C. C. Pantelides, and R. W.H. Sargent. “A general algorithm for short-term
scheduling of batch operations-I. MILP formulation”. In: Computers and Chemical
Engineering 17.2 (Feb. 1993), pp. 211–227. issn: 00981354. doi: 10.1016/0098-
1354(93)80015-F. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/0098-1354(93)80015-F.
[16]
Stephan Kreipl and Michael Pinedo. “Planning and scheduling in supply chains: An
overview of issues in practice”. In: Production and Operations Management 13.1 (Mar.
2004), pp. 77–92. issn: 10591478. doi: 10.1111/j.1937-5956.2004.tb00146.x.
[17]
Hojae Lee and Christos T. Maravelias. “Combining the advantages of discrete- and
continuous-time scheduling models: Part 3. General algorithm”. In: Computers and
Chemical Engineering 139 (Aug. 2020), p. 106848. issn: 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.
compchemeng.2020.106848.
[18]
Sau L. Lee et al. “Modernizing Pharmaceutical Manufacturing: from Batch to Contin-
uous Production”. In: Journal of Pharmaceutical Innovation 10 (Mar. 2015), pp. 191–
199. issn: 19398042. doi: 10.1007/s12247-015-9215-8.
[19]
Deming Lei. “Multi-objective production scheduling: A survey”. In: International Jour-
nal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 43 (Aug. 2009), pp. 926–938. issn: 02683768.
doi: 10.1007/s00170-008-1770-4.
[20]
Wei Li et al. “Balancing trade-offs in one-stage production with processing time un-
certainty”. In: Procedia Manufacturing 53 (2021), pp. 8–15. issn: 23519789. doi: 10.
1016/j.promfg.2021.06.004.
84
==PAGE:90==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
[21]
Zukui Li and Marianthi G. Ierapetritou. “Rolling horizon based planning and schedul-
ing integration with production capacity consideration”. In: Chemical Engineering Sci-
ence 65.22 (Nov. 2010), pp. 5887–5900. issn: 00092509. doi: 10.1016/j.ces.2010.
08.010.
[22]
Simon B. Lindahl et al. “Holistic Capacity Management and Production Planning
in the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain”. In: Computer Aided Chemical Engineering 51
(2022), pp. 925–930. issn: 15707946. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-95879-0.50155-7.
[23]
Simon B. Lindahl et al. “Integrated capacity and production planning in the pharma-
ceutical supply chain: Framework and models”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineer-
ing 171 (Mar. 2023), p. 108163. issn: 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2023.
108163.
[24]
Huijuan Ma et al. “Multi-objective production scheduling optimization and manage-
ment control system of complex aerospace components: a review”. In: International
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 127 (July 2023), pp. 4973–4993. issn:
14333015. doi: 10.1007/s00170-023-11707-4.
[25]
Christos T. Maravelias. “General framework and modeling approach classification for
chemical production scheduling”. In: AIChE Journal 58.6 (2012), pp. 1812–1828. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.13801.
[26]
Christos T. Maravelias and Ignacio E. Grossmann. “A new continuous-time state
task network formulation for short term scheduling of multipurpose batch plants”.
In: Computer Aided Chemical Engineering 14 (2003), pp. 215–220. issn: 15707946.
doi: 10.1016/S1570-7946(03)80117-7. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1570-
7946(03)80117-7.
[27]
Christos T. Maravelias and Charles Sung. “Integration of production planning and
scheduling: Overview, challenges and opportunities”. In: Computers and Chemical
Engineering 33.12 (Dec. 2009), pp. 1919–1930. issn: 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.
compchemeng.2009.06.007.
[28]
Shamik Misra and Christos T. Maravelias. “Overview of Scheduling Methods for Phar-
maceutical Production”. In: Optimization and Its Applications. Vol. 189. Springer In-
ternational Publishing, 2022, pp. 355–371. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-90924-6_13.
url: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-90924-6_13.
[29]
Novo Nordisk AS. Novo Nordisk AS H1 2024 Financial Report. Tech. rep. Aug. 2024.
url: https://www.novonordisk.com/content/nncorp/global/en/news-and-
media/news-and-ir-materials/news-details.html?id=169510.
[30]
Constantinos C Pantelides. “Unified frameworks for optimal process planning and
scheduling”. In: Proceedings on the second conference on foundations of computer aided
operations. 1994, pp. 253–274. url: https://www.eq.uc.pt/~marco/eps/Edicao_
2016_2017/Aulas_12_15/Pantelides_1994.pdf.
85
==PAGE:91==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
[31]
Hector D. Perez et al. “Applications of the RTN scheduling model in the chemical in-
dustry”. In: Simulation and Optimization in Process Engineering: The Benefit of Math-
ematical Methods in Applications of the Chemical Industry. Elsevier, 2022. Chap. 14,
pp. 365–400. isbn: 978-0-323-85043-8. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-85043-8.00006-4.
[32]
Frederik Schulze Spüntrup et al. “Integration of maintenance scheduling and plan-
ning for large-scale asset fleets”. In: Optimization and Engineering 23.3 (Sept. 2022),
pp. 1255–1287. issn: 15732924. doi: 10.1007/s11081-021-09647-7.
[33]
Nilay Shah. “Pharmaceutical supply chains: Key issues and strategies for optimisa-
tion”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 28.6-7 (June 2004), pp. 929–951. issn:
00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2003.09.022.
[34]
Munawar A. Shaik and Christodoulos A. Floudas. “Unit-specific event-based continuous-
time approach for short-term scheduling of batch plants using RTN framework”. In:
Computers and Chemical Engineering 32.1-2 (Jan. 2008), pp. 260–274. issn: 00981354.
doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2007.05.007.
[35]
Munawar A. Shaik, Stacy L. Janak, and Christodoulos A. Floudas. “Continuous-time
models for short-term scheduling of multipurpose batch plants: A comparative study”.
In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 45.18 (July 2006), pp. 6190–6209.
issn: 08885885. doi: 10.1021/ie0601403.
[36]
Munawar A. Shaik and Ramsagar Vooradi. “Unification of STN and RTN based models
for short-term scheduling of batch plants with shared resources”. In: Chemical Engi-
neering Science 98 (July 2013), pp. 104–124. issn: 00092509. doi: 10.1016/j.ces.
2013.05.019.
[37]
Rajesh Kr Singh, Ravinder Kumar, and Pravin Kumar. “Strategic issues in pharmaceu-
tical supply chains: a review”. In: International Journal of Pharmaceutical and Health-
care Marketing 10.3 (Sept. 2016), pp. 234–257. issn: 17506123. doi: 10.1108/IJPHM-
10-2015-0050.
[38]
Frederik Schulze Spüntrup et al. “Optimal Maintenance Scheduling for Washing of
Compressors to Increase Operational Efficiency”. In: Computer Aided Chemical Engi-
neering 46 (2019), pp. 1321–1326. issn: 15707946. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-818634-
3.50221-6.
[39]
Hartmut Stadtler. “Supply chain management and advanced planning - Basics, overview
and challenges”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 163.3 (June 2005),
pp. 575–588. issn: 03772217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2004.03.001.
[40]
Arul Sundaramoorthy and Christos T. Maravelias. “A general framework for process
scheduling”. In: AIChE Journal 57.3 (Feb. 2011), pp. 695–710. issn: 00011541. doi:
10.1002/aic.12300.
[41]
Arul Sundaramoorthy and Christos T. Maravelias. “Computational study of network-
based mixed-integer programming approaches for chemical production scheduling”. In:
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 50.9 (Feb. 2011), pp. 5023–5040. issn:
08885885. doi: 10.1021/ie101419z.
86
==PAGE:92==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
[42]
Miguel Vieira, Tânia Pinto-Varela, and Ana P Barbosa-Póvoa. “Production and main-
tenance planning optimisation in biopharmaceutical processes under performance de-
cay using a continuous-time formulation: A multi-objective approach”. In: Comput-
ers & Chemical Engineering 107 (Dec. 2017), pp. 111–139. issn: 0098-1354. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2017.03.008. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0098135417301199.
[43]
Miguel Vieira et al. “Optimal planning and campaign scheduling of biopharmaceutical
processes using a continuous-time formulation”. In: Computers and Chemical Engi-
neering 91 (Aug. 2016), pp. 422–444. issn: 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.
2016.04.009.
87
==PAGE:93==
Appendix A
Methodology: Full Models
A.1
Continuous RTN Model
max
X
r∈M
Prer,N′ +
X
r∈M
Pr(
X
i∈Ir
Bµp
riwi,N′)
+
X
i∈Ir
X
n∈N
P f
r Bµp
riwi,n
+α
X
iinIp
X
n∈N
li,n + β
X
r∈Up
X
i∈Icr
X
n∈N
wi,n
+γ
X
i∈Ip
X
n∈N
xi,n
(A.1)
er,n = er,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
µp
riwi,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
µc
riwi,n
∀r ∈U, n ∈N, n > 1
(A.2)
er,n = er,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
Bµp
riwi,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
Bµc
riwi,n
∀r ∈M, n ∈N, n > 1
(A.3)
er,1 = E0
r
∀i ∈R
(A.4)
wi,1 = W 0
i
∀i ∈I
(A.5)
ti,1 = T 0
i
∀i ∈I
(A.6)
trr,1 = TR0
r
∀r ∈U cf
(A.7)
br,1 = B0
r
∀r ∈U p
(A.8)
Cmin
r
≤er,n ≤Cmax
r
∀r ∈R, n ∈N
(A.9)
xi,n ≤wi,n
∀i ∈T, n ∈N
(A.10)
ti,n+1 + τiwi,n+1 + ϕixi,n+1 ≥ti′,n
+τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n
−H(2 −wi′,n −wi,n+1)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N, n < N ′
(A.11)
88
==PAGE:94==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
ti,n+1 ≥ti,n + τiwi,n + ϕixi,n
∀i ∈I, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(A.12)
ti,n+1 ≥ti′,n + τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n
∀r ∈U, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir,
n ∈N \ {N ′}
(A.13)
ti,n+1 ≥ti′,n + τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n
−κi′wi′,n −H(1 −wi′,n)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(A.14)
ti,n+1 ≤ti′,n + τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n
−κi′wi′,n + H(2 −wi′,n −wi,n+1)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(A.15)
ti,n ≤ti′,n + τi′wi′,n + ϕixi′,n
−κi′wi′,n + H(1 −wi′,n)
∀r ∈M, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µp
ri′ > 0, µc
ri < 0, n ∈N \ {N ′}
(A.16)
ti,n ≤H
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(A.17)
ti,N + τiwi,N + ϕixi,n ≤H
∀i ∈I
(A.18)
X
n∈N
X
r∈Ir
(τiwi,n + ϕixi,n) ≤H
∀r ∈U
(A.19)
ti,n ≥ti′,n′ + κj
−H(2 −wi′,n′ −wi,n)
∀r ∈M n, j ∈Ir, i ∈Ir, i′ ∈Ir, i ̸= i′,
µc
ri′ < 0, µc
ri < 0, µp
rj > 0,
n′ ∈N, n′ ≤n ≤N ′
(A.20)
br,n ≥br,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir,i/∈Icr
wi,n −N ′wIcr,n
∀r ∈U p, n ∈N, n > 1
(A.21)
br,n ≤N ′(1 −wIcr,n)
∀r ∈U p, n ∈N, n > 1
(A.22)
br,n ≤Bcip
r
∀r ∈U p, n ∈N, n > 1
(A.23)
(A.24)
trr,n ≤trr,n−1 −(ti,n −ti,n−1) + FrwIcr,n
∀r ∈U cf, i ∈Ir, n ∈N \ {1}
(A.25)
trr,N ≤trr,N−1 −(τiwi,N + ϕixi,N) + FrwIcr,n
∀r ∈U cf, i ∈Ir
(A.26)
trr,n ≥FrwIcr,n
∀r ∈U cf, n ∈N \ {1}
(A.27)
trr,n ≤Fr
∀r ∈U cf, n ∈N \ {1}
(A.28)
ti,n −ti,n−1 ≤li,n
∀i ∈Ip, n ∈N
(A.29)
er,n ≥0
∀r ∈R, n ∈N
(A.30)
wi,n ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(A.31)
ti,n ≥0
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(A.32)
0 ≤xi,n ≤1
∀i ∈I, n ∈N
(A.33)
trr,n ≥0
∀r ∈U cf, n ∈N
(A.34)
br,n ∈Z+
0
∀r ∈U p, n ∈N
(A.35)
li,n ≥0
∀i ∈Ip, n ∈N
(A.36)
89
==PAGE:95==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
A.2
Discrete RTN Model
max
X
r∈M
Prer,N
(A.37)
er,n = er,n−1 +
X
i∈Ir
τi
X
θ=0
µr,i,θwi,n−θ
∀r ∈U, n ∈{2, . . . , N}
(A.38)
ern = er,n−1 + B
X
i∈Ir
τi
X
θ=0
µr,i,θwi,n−θ
∀r ∈M, n ∈{2, . . . , N}
(A.39)
wi,1 = W 0
i
∀i ∈I
(A.40)
er,1 = E0
r
∀r ∈R
(A.41)
Cmin
r
≤er,n ≤Cmax
r
∀r ∈R, n ∈{1, . . . , N}
(A.42)
n ≤N −(τi + 1)wi,n
∀i ∈I, n ∈{1, . . . , N}
(A.43)
wi,n ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, n ∈{1, . . . , N}
(A.44)
er,n ≥0
∀r ∈R, n ∈{1, . . . , N}
(A.45)
90
==PAGE:96==
Appendix B
Heuristic for a Lower Bound of N′
This appendix contains a detailed description of the heuristic whose sketch was given in
chapter 4.4.
First, the bottleneck task is found using algorithm 2, along with its duration including CIP,
and the number of batches which can be processed on the bottleneck between subsequent
CIPs.
The times including CIP for each task are output by algorithm 1, called inside
algorithm 2.
91
==PAGE:97==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Algorithm 1: find_cip_time_for_task. Finds task time including average CIP
time, which is calculated as CIP duration divided by the estimated number of
batches which can be made between CIPs. If more than one unit is used for a
task, then the longest of the calculated times is taken.
Data: i - task for which time including CIP is being found
τi - time of task i (excluding CIP)
Ui - set of units required for task i
icip
r
- CIP task for unit r ∈Ui
τ cip
r
- duration of the CIP task for unit r ∈Ui
Bcip
r
- maximum number of batches between batch dependent CIPs, r ∈Ui
Fr - maximum length of time period between CIPs, set to infinity if not defined,
r ∈Ui
U cf - set of units which require frequency-dependent CIP
Result: T i - time of task i including CIP
bi - number of batches to be done between CIPs
Initialize:
bi ←NIL
T i ←0
for u ∈Ui do
/* Find number of batches which can be processed between CIPs.
*/
if u ∈U cf then
/* Time available for batch processing:
the difference between
period length and CIP duration.
*/
tr ←Fu −τ cip
u
bfreq
u
←⌊tr
τi ⌋
end
/* Number of batches - minimum of the number allowed by
frequency-dependent and batch-dependent CIP.
*/
bu ←min{bfreq
u
, Bcip
u }
/* Average task duration including CIP.
*/
T cip
u
←τi + τ cip
i
bu
/* If T cip
u
is greater than the current value of T i - update T i.
*/
if T cip
u
> T i then
T i ←T cip
u
bi ←bu
end
end
return T i, bi
92
==PAGE:98==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Algorithm 2: find_bottleneck. Finds the group of tasks which has the longest
minimum duration. The task of the shortest duration in that group is the
bottleneck. The output is the bottleneck and its duration
Data: groups - groups of tasks, where exactly one of them must be performed
in the process
τ - task times (excluding CIP)
U, icip, τ cip, Bcip, F, U cf - as above
Result: bottleneck - bottleneck task
bottleneck_duration - duration of the bottleneck task
num_batches_bottleneck - number of batches which can be processed on the
bottleneck task between subsequent CIPs
Initialize:
bottleneck ←NIL
bottleneck_duration ←0
num_batches_bottleneck ←NIL
/* In each group, we are looking for the task with the shortest
duration.
*/
for group ∈groups do
/* Task in the group with the shortest duration.
*/
shortest_task_group ←NIL
/* The duration of the shortest task.
*/
shortest_dur_group ←∞
/* Number of batches which can be done for this group between
subsequent CIPs.
*/
num_batches_group ←NIL
for task in group do
task_duration, num_batches_task ←
find_cip_time_for_task(task, τtask, Utask, icip, τ cip, Bcip, F, U cf)
/* If the task is shorter than the shortest found in this
group so far, set it as the new shortest task in this
group.
*/
if task_duration < shortest_dur_group then
shortest_dur_group ←task_duration
shortest_task_group ←task
num_batches_group ←num_batches_task
end
end
/* If the shortest task in the group is longer than the current
bottleneck, it becomes the new bottleneck.
*/
if shortest_dur_group > bottleneck_duration then
bottleneck_duration ←shortest_dur_group
shortest_task_group ←shortest_task_group
num_batches_bottleneck ←num_batches_group
end
end
return bottleneck, bottleneck_duration, num_batches_bottleneck
93
==PAGE:99==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Afterwards, we find the minimum duration from the start of the process until the bottleneck
task is reached. For that purpose we define a graph (M, E). The set of vertices is the same
as the set of states. An edge between two states s1 and s2 exists if there is a task i which
uses state s1 and produces state s2 - that is, µc
s1,i < 0 and µp
s2,i > 0. The travel time on edge
(s1, s2) is equal to τi −κi. If there is more than one such task, we define the travel time
on edge (s1, s2) as the duration excluding transfer time of the shortest of these tasks. The
parameters for the graph are computed using algorithm 3, and then the number of steps and
the duration of the shortest path from the start until the bottleneck is found by algorithm
4.
Algorithm 3: shortest_path_parameters. Finds the adjacency matrix between
the states, as well as travel times between them. If task i is the shortest task which
consumes state sc and produces sp, then the travel time from sc to sp is defined as
τi −κi.
Data: M - set of materials
Ip - set of production tasks
µp, µc - production and consumption matrix
τ, κ - task and transfer times
Result: time - travel time matrix
incidence - incidence matrix
Initialize:
timem,n ←∞for (m, n) ∈|M| × |M|
incidencem,n ←0 for (m, n) ∈|M| × |M|
for i ∈Ip do
/* Find materials consumed and produced by task i.
*/
sc = s : s ∈M ∩µc
s,i < 0
sp = s : s ∈M ∩µp
s,i > 0
/* There exists edge (sc, sp).
*/
incidencesc,sp ←1
/* Find the duration of task i.
*/
ti ←τi −κi /* If this task is shorter than the currently known edge
between sc and sp, update timesc,sp.
*/
if ti < timesc,sp then
timesc,sp ←ti
end
end
return time, incidence
94
==PAGE:100==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Algorithm 4: Dijkstra. Shortest path algorithm which outputs the duration and
number of edges on the shortest path from the first state to the state consumed by
the bottleneck task.
Data: M - set of materials
incidence - incidence matrix
time - travel time matrix
s∗- state consumed by the bottleneck task
Result: yt
s∗- time from start to reaching the bottleneck
ys
s∗- number of steps from start until the bottleneck
Initialize:
T ←∅- nodes processed
/* Time and number of steps from state 1 until other states -
initialized as 0 for s = 1 and infinity for others.
*/
yt
1 ←0, ys
1 ←0
yt
s ←∞, ys
s ←∞, s ∈M \ {1}
while M \T ̸= ∅do
/* Find state s ∈V \ T which minimizes yt
s and the set of neighbors
of s.
*/
s ←argmins′∈V \T{yt
s′}
N s ←{s′ : incidences,s′ = 1}
/* For all neighbors which are not in the set of processed nodes,
update yt
s′ if the route to s′ through s it is faster than the
current route.
*/
for s′ ∈N s \ T do
if yt
s′ > yt
s + times,s′ then
yt
s′ ←yt
s + times,s′
ys
s′ ←ys
s + 1
end
end
/* Add s to the set of processed nodes.
*/
T ←T ∪{s}
end
return yt
s∗, ys
s∗
Finally, algorithm 5, using the previously listed algorithms, finds and computes the sum of:
• steps from the start until the bottleneck (exclusive),
• number of batches possible to process on the bottleneck before the end of the planning
horizon,
• number of CIPs necessary to perform before the planning horizon.
This sum is the sought after lower bound on N ′.
95
==PAGE:101==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Algorithm 5: find_min_N. Consolidates the algorithms above to find a lower
bound on N.
Data: H - planning horizon
groups, τ, κ, M, T p, µc, µp - as above
Result: N ′
min - lower bound on N ′
/* Find the bottleneck task and its duration.
*/
bottleneck, bottleneck_duration, num_batches_bottleneck_cip ←
find_bottleneck(groups, τ, Ui, icip, τ cip, Bcip, F, U cf)
/* Find the time and incidence matrix for Dijkstra’s algorithm.
*/
time, incidence ←shortest_path_parameters(M, Ip, µp, µc, τ, κ)
/* Find which material is consumed by the bottleneck task.
*/
sb
c ←s : s ∈M ∩µc
s,bottleneck < 0
/* Find the amount of time and number of steps required to reach the
bottleneck task.
*/
timeb, stepsb ←Dijkstra(M, incidence, time, sb
c)
/* Find the time remaining after the bottleneck task is reached.
*/
trem ←H −timeb
/* Find how many batches the bottleneck task can be performed.
*/
num_batches ←
j
trem
bottleneck_duration
k
/* Find number of CIPs on the bottleneck.
*/
num_cip ←⌊
num_batches
num_batches_bottleneck_cip⌋
/* Compute the minimum number of event points.
*/
N ′
min ←stepsb + num_batches + num_cip
return N ′
min
96
==PAGE:102==
Appendix C
Supplementary results
C.1
Run time and Objective per Subiteration
Iteration
N’
Objective Value ($)
Running Time (s)
12
27571.24
2.697
1
13
27571.75
2.255
12
38970.88
1.814
13
39566.59
1.965
2
14
39567.35
2.815
12
44971.09
2.332
13
50969.24
1.986
14
51565.98
5.208
3
15
51564.41
5.57
12
56972.97
2.014
13
62971.12
1.766
4
14
63567.88
5.775
12
68971.44
1.816
13
74968.26
2.066
5
14
75566.77
4.312
12
80373.58
3.191
13
86371.71
3.731
6
14
86968.47
7.703
12
92972.19
2.509
13
98971.27
1.021
7
14
98970.05
3.167
Table C.1: Table of run times and objective values for Instance 1, planning horizon of 120
hours.
97
==PAGE:103==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Iteration
N’
Objective Value ($)
Running Time (s)
10
14983.14
5.005
11
15580.64
0.248
12
21878.15
0.401
13
21876.8
0.965
14
22472.53
1.696
15
22472.38
3.675
1
16
22470.71
5.41
10
21578.82
0.498
11
21578.31
0.335
12
28472.5
0.454
13
28471.34
0.823
14
29068.02
0.679
15
29067.04
1.848
2
16
29067.2
1.676
10
27580.34
0.231
11
28177.01
0.359
12
34174.95
0.674
13
34472.7
0.584
14
34473.38
1.728
15
35367.26
1.983
16
35366.21
4.429
3
17
35365.49
5.239
10
33281.04
0.179
11
33580.07
0.486
12
39575.72
0.347
13
40473.33
0.438
14
40472.58
1.264
15
40770.39
2.004
16
40770.41
2.59
4
17
40467.63
0.737
10
38981.56
0.247
11
39577.31
0.364
12
45575.28
0.736
13
45874.47
0.782
14
45874.55
1.25
15
46470
3.524
16
46469.37
4.041
5
17
45869.62
3.616
10
45280.7
0.238
11
45577.96
0.385
12
51575.58
0.447
Continued on next page
98
==PAGE:104==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
December 30, 2024
Iteration
N’
Objective Value ($)
Running Time (s)
13
52473.38
0.547
14
52473.28
1.264
15
53068.93
0.949
16
53368.34
2.173
17
52469.08
3.925
6
18
52469.41
3.313
10
50981.69
0.376
11
51577.43
0.37
12
57576.13
0.501
13
57873.86
0.6
14
57875.33
1.301
15
58768.61
3.019
16
58766.39
3.835
7
17
58766.55
4.403
10
56979.99
0.399
11
57579.77
0.431
12
63275.78
0.785
13
64473.82
1.05
14
64473.27
1.398
8
15
64770.58
3.472
10
62980.26
0.193
11
63578.43
0.348
12
69576.42
0.485
13
69874.67
0.529
14
75573.46
2.135
15
76770.03
1.478
16
76768.53
2.018
9
17
76769.39
6.033
10
75581
0.256
11
76177.75
0.24
12
82176.12
0.668
13
82473.78
0.633
14
88471.69
0.546
15
89368.96
1.518
16
89368.61
1.417
10
17
89367.46
4.966
Table C.2: Table of run times and objective values for Instance 3, planning horizon of 120
hours.
99
==PAGE:105==
Detailed Scheduling of Production Plans
Appendix
C.2
CIP Allocation
Instance 1
Instance 2
Instance 3
Instance 4
Instance 5
Scenario 1
46
49
53
39
35
Scenario 2
46
46
52
38
36
Scenario 3
46
47
53
38
37
Scenario 4
46
45
52
38
36
Scenario 5
45
46
51
36
38
Scenario 6
45
45
52
37
30
Table C.3: Number of assigned CIPs for each Instance.
100
