==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master Thesis
Characterization of lime stabilised clay till
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Characterization of lime stabilized clay till
Authors:
Maria Storm, s193833
Mikkel William Grebin, s193846
Project number:
113161
Project period:
01.08.2024 - 01.01.2025
University:
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Supervisor:
Varvara Zania
Caroline Hejlesen (External)
Signature:
Maria Storm, s193833
Signature:
Mikkel William Grebin, s193846
Preface
This project is the MSc Thesis in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU) for Maria Storm and Mikkel William Grebin. The project took place from
August the 1st 2024 to January the 1st 2025. The project supervisor is Varvara Zania
and Caroline Hejlesen (external).
All experimental work took place in the laboratories at DTU. Classification and stabilisa-
tion tests were carried out in Building 129. The oven in Building 130 was used for drying
the soil, and one of the machines in Building 119 was used for the unconfined compression
test.
==PAGE:3==
01.01.2025
Abstract
In this report, the properties of lime-stabilised Danish clay till are investigated, primarily
for road structures, with a focus on how the delayed compaction time and curing time
influence soil performance.
In this report, four different clay tills from various areas of Denmark are analysed during
the project period. The tests conducted can be divided into 3 parts; classification, sta-
bilisation, and soil performance. Classification is done on all four unstabilised materials,
while stabilisation and soil performance tests are conducted on three of the materials,
moreover, it is tested both as unstabilised and stabilised. In addition, the materials are
tested for three different delayed compaction times, with a curing period of 7 and 28 days
for each unique sample preparation.
The results found in this report illustrate a significant increase in strength and stiffness
when comparing the unstabilised and stabilised soil. It further shows differences between
the delayed compaction times, where results indicate that the strength and stiffness are re-
duced with increasing delay in compaction. Based on the experimental work, the strength
and stiffness appear to correlate with the compacted dry density achieved in the proc-
tor method, as the MDD decreases while the OMC increases. Similarly, the curing time
increases the strength and stiffness of the soil, particularly within 7 days of curing. How-
ever, since the project is focused on the sub-base layer, the compaction delay seems to
have a minimal effect. Therefore, conservatively, all the materials could be suitable for
soil improvement for a sub-base layer except HI, based on the requirements of 100 MPa
of dynamic stiffness.
Page ii of 91
==PAGE:4==
01.01.2025
Symbol list
MDD
Maximum Dry Density
[Mg/m3]
OMC
Optimal Moisture Content
[%]
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscope
ODD
Optimal Dry Density
[Mg/m3]
OWC
Optimal water content
[%]
TDD
Target Dry Density
[Mg/m3]
TWC
Target water content
[%]
UCS
Unconfined compression strength
[kPa]
HI
Soil from Hillerød
HOR
Soil from Horsens
HER
Soil from Herning
RI
Soil from Ringsted
Lom
Optimal lime additive for maximum increased
[-]
LS
Linear shrinkage
[%]
wL
Liquid limit
[%]
wP
Plastic limit
[%]
IP
Plasticity index
[%]
ρs
particle density
[Mg/m3]
fn
Fraction passing a given sieve
[%]
w
Water content
[%]
as
Specific surface area
[m2 g−1]
ρ
Compacted bulk density
[Mg/m3]
ρd
Compacted dry density
[Mg/m3]
δerror.n
Measurement error for a given n
[-]
σn
Measurement uncertainty for a given n
[-]
n
Average of a given n
[-]
ε
Strain
[-]
fc
Compressive strength
[kPa]
E
Youngs modulus, static E-value, stiffness
[MPa]
Page iii of 91
==PAGE:5==
01.01.2025
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Review of previous literature
3
2.1
Lime Stabilisation Reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Influencing Factors and outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
Soil Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.2
Atterberg limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Lime Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.4
Moisture content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.5
Compaction timing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.6
Compaction effort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.7
Curing conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Material
10
4
Methodology
12
4.1
Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.1.1
Particle density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.1.2
Particle size distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.3
Atterberg limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.4
Permeability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Stabilisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Soil Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.2
Mixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.3
pH-measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.4
Proctor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Soil Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
Unconfined compressive strength (UCS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Results
30
5.1
Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.1
Particle density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.2
Particle size distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.3
Atterberg limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.4
Permeability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Stabilisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
pH-value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.2
Proctor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Soil Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.1
Specimens properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion
49
6.1
Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Stabilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2.1
Proctor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2.2
Effect influencing the soil stabilisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Page iv of 91
==PAGE:6==
01.01.2025
CONTENTS
6.3
Soil Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3.1
Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3.2
Stiffness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3.3
Factors under investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Stabilisation used in practise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Conclusion
61
8
Future investigation
62
Page v of 91
==PAGE:7==
01.01.2025
1
Introduction
Lime stabilisation has been used in construction worldwide for centuries and regarding
its application in highway construction, the concept is not new. In Roman times, lime
was used in the construction of roads with lime alone or with pozzolanic materials [8].
However, the systematic use of lime is fairly recent and was introduced in the USA in the
1920s. Subsequently, millions of m2 have been lime stabilised, and since then, our expe-
rience has expanded worldwide [13]. Earth in general is also used in other construction
areas such as building blocks. Because of its availability, it has been used for housing
systems in the form of burnt bricks. However, lately, research has been done to use it for
rammed earth and compressed stabilised earth blocks (CSEBs) to make it more sustain-
able [14]. For such applications, the curing conditions will be more controlled compared
to in situ road applications.
In Denmark, soil stabilisation is not as widespread, but for some parts of the construc-
tion industry such as the construction of rail- and highways this technique has been used
more often over the last decades. The lime stabilisation eliminates the transport of suit-
able high-quality soils and the transporting and disposal of the existing unsuitable soil.
Instead, fine-grained soils can be improved by adding lime, making them favorable for
earthen applications. An improvement whose cost is equivalent to or less than the tra-
ditional construction materials [7].
Lime is generally a product that is manufactured
cheaply in most countries, which makes the lime solution for pavements a possible eco-
nomic benefit both for developed and underdeveloped countries [8]. With a greater focus
on CO2-emission and due to a lack of suitable sand and gravel, this technique will only be
used on a larger scale going forward. Even though the carbon footprint of quicklime has
to be considered, it is a more sustainable alternative compared to the additional transport
and materials for soil replacement [18]. For these reasons, it is necessary to focus on the
knowledge of this subject, such as how the soil reacts to the lime, and which of the soils
in the Danish underground could benefit from the stabilisation.
This project investigates soil stabilisation for different Danish clay tills intending to use
them mainly for a sub-base layer. It should be noted, that the term ”soil improvement”
describes the short-term changes in the soil such as changes in the soil properties, while
the term ”soil stabilisation” typically describes the long-term change in strength and stiff-
ness. The requirement for a sub-base layer is mainly to maintain a frost-free environment,
which is secured with a requirement that the soil needs a dynamic E-module of 100 MPa.
Looking at the bearing layer for road and rail construction, the requirements are mainly
on the soil bearing capacity, which is interesting to investigate if the soil can obtain the
required strength. There is no specific requirement for the bearing capacity because it
depends on how much traffic there will be on the specific road [12].
A lot of literature has focused on investigating the influence of lime on various soils and
the factors affecting the properties of soil stabilisation. It is well established that the
lime reaction can be divided into a short-term reaction of aggregation and flocculation
and a long-term pozzolanic reaction. The lime effectiveness of the reactions depends on
several factors [2, 3, 7]. First of all, soil composition is a key parameter affecting lime
stabilisation. Various clay minerals react differently with lime where for instance mont-
morillonite reacts rapidly while illite and kaolinite react slower. The gradation of soils
Page 1 of 91
==PAGE:8==
01.01.2025
also plays a role as soils with a higher amount of clay respond better to lime stabilisation
[6, 9]. The short-term reaction which often is referred to as the lime improvement im-
pacts the Atterberg limits. It reduces the plasticity and improves several other properties
of the soil. To achieve an optimal reaction, the plasticity indexes of the soils are often
considered, with different recommendations for different applications [13, 15, 16, 17]. For
the reaction to happen optimally, the appropriate lime content is relevant to consider.
Different soils have different lime consumptions due to their composition, consequently,
the strength potential is affected by the the added lime content. The optimal lime is
typically determined from pH measurements [2, 6]. In practice, the optimal moisture
content (OMC) is used to achieve the highest density and ensure the reaction to process.
The moisture is thus a major factor, as the behavior of the soil is highly dependent on it
[8]. Finally, the curing conditions also have a major role which include the curing time,
the curing temperature, and the pH value. Curing time allows the pozzolanic reaction
to develop more strength, Temperature accelerates the reactions, and a pH above 12.4
ensures that the lime reactions proceed effectively. Every condition has a unique influence
and is essential to consider [4, 8, 10, 15].
Until now, there have been limited studies about compaction delay. For a long period,
it was generally believed, that the interval of time between mixing and compaction was
not critical for strength, which was one of the practical advantages.
It was believed,
that the mixed material could stand for two days without huge detrimental effects [5].
Furthermore, some even believed that the delay was necessary to decline the clay clods
before compaction to meet pulverization requirements [15]. However several studies have
found results indicating that the strength decreases with delay in compaction [5, 7, 15].
On the other hand, a study found that the delay is not detrimental if the same density
was obtained by providing ekstra compaction effort. It is therefore also worth considering
types of machines to assess different compaction energies [5]. Looking at the execution in
practice it is therefore interesting to investigate the influence of delay in compaction. As
the procedure is now, the compaction should be done right after the mixing and ideally
within the first hour to avoid any risk. In the literature, different clay materials have been
investigated such as expansive clay, clay with a high content of montmorillonite, and silty
clay. The clay till from Denmark contains roughly equal amounts of Smectite, Illite, and
Kaolinite [20]. An investigation of how the Danish clays react with the lime is therefore
interesting to get the knowledge of its potential.
This report contributes to a broader understanding of how lime-stabilised soil can be used
for in-situ constructions, as a part of a more sustainable method. For in-situ construction,
the compaction time can vary due to unforeseen problems at the site, therefore the impact
of the soil properties as a result of delayed compaction time is important to investigate.
This problem is investigated through experimental work where clay till from different
areas of Denmark will be used for the tests.
This project includes a literature study with a focus on lime stabilisation reaction and
the influencing factors and outcomes. A methodology section with the relevant methods
being described and a brief description of the used materials. A collection of the results
from the experimental work performed during the project period together with analysis
and discussion where the results are compared with the knowledge from the literature.
At last, a conclusion based on the experimental work and a proposal for further work will
be presented.
Page 2 of 91
==PAGE:9==
01.01.2025
2
Review of previous literature
2.1
Lime Stabilisation Reactions
When lime is added to the soil, two main reactions occur: short-term and long-term.
The short-term is the process of hydration of the lime which happens immediately when
the lime reacts with water molecules, which follows the reaction [1]:
CaO + H2O →Ca(OH)2 + 15.5kcal
(1)
From the above, the quicklime or burned lime is hydrating, forming calcium hydroxide and
heat energy. The heat energy also results in small vaporization, which means the overall
soil moisture content will be reduced. Simultaneously, calcium hydroxide dissolves slightly
in water due to its chemical properties. It will induce a strongly alkaline medium of a pH
reaching 12.4 and also some divalent calcium cations (Ca++) [2]. Due to the dissolving
of the hydroxide ions (OH −), the pH will therefore increase and the free cations will at
the first point be fixed to the clay surface resulting in cation exchange of the existing
negative charge sites on the clay particle surface (The number of exchange sites increases
with pH). The exchange promotes an aggregation and flocculation of the mineral particles
which lowers the plasticity index. The hydration reaction and the cation exchange both
contribute to the workability improvements of the soil [7].
Next, the long-term pozzolanic phenomena happen.
The dissolution of lime leads to
hydroxyl ions which causes an alkaline environment in the water. If the pH is high enough
which also means there is a significant amount of lime, the silica and alumina which are
present in the clay and quartz will be more soluble. The silica and alumina ions induce
a reaction with the calcium ions from the lime and eventually forming the cementious
compounds; calcium-silicate-hydrates (CSH), Calcium-aluminate-hydrates (CAH), and
also calcium-aluminate-silicate-hydrates (CASH). From this point, the strength of the soil
will increase, as it continues forming cementitious compounds from the resulting hydrates
mainly from the calcium silicates which therefore is time-dependent. So in general, cement
and lime form some of the same products, but they exhibit different properties influenced
by the characterization of the soil [3, 15]. Researchers have different opinions about where
the pozzolanic reactions happen (at the surface, in solution, or at the edges of the clay
particles), however, they agree on the improvements in strength and compressibility of
the soil [7].
Another process that can happen is carbonation when lime reacts with carbon dioxide
from the air. In the worst case, it can weaken the strength, as it produces less cementitious
products. Although, it can be mitigated by a good design and control of the curing [3].
2.2
Influencing Factors and outcomes
2.2.1
Soil Composition
Mineralogy
The lime reaction is first of all affected by the mineralogical composition, as various kinds
of clay minerals tend to react differently. Clay soil consists of minerals such as kaolinite,
illite, montmorillonite, and non-clay minerals such as quartz and organic matter. Each
Page 3 of 91
==PAGE:10==
01.01.2025
2.2
Influencing Factors and outcomes
small or high amount of the minerals contributes to the properties of the clay soil and each
mineral has different degrees of crystallinity. The properties of the minerals are mainly
based on the activity levels on the surface of the clay particle, named cation exchange
capacity (CEC). Furthermore, the properties are together with CEC also connected to
the specific surface area of the minerals. In Table 2.1 the different surface areas for some
common clay minerals are shown.
Clay mineral
Layer
structure
Surface area
[m2/g]
Swelling
properties
Kaolinite
1:1
10
None
Smectite
2:1
800
Extensive
Illite
2:1
20
None/very little
Chlorite
2:2
10
None
Table 2.1: Properties of some common clay minerals by (By Rowell 1994) [11]
F.G.Bell (1996) investigated different tests of 3 frequent clay minerals: kaolinite, mont-
morillonite, and quartz. Moreover, he looked at a till and a laminated clay similarly,
and an X-ray diffraction analysis suggested that the highest amount of illite and kaolinite
was present for both. Regarding strength, montmorillonite responded more rapidly in
strength gain, while kaolinite showed a slower but more pronounced gain over time, with
the most significant improvement for the fine quartz. A significant increase in strength
with the addition of lime was found for the till and laminated clay which had the optimum
strength gain with a lime content of 4-6 % lime. Based on the tested minerals, the till
and the laminated clay can be most comparable to the kaolinite mineral results [6].
Another investigation indicated based on the unconfined compressive strength, that lime
stabilisation for montmorillonitic and kaolinitic clayey soils was well stabilised, and on
the other hand, illitic-chloritic clayey soils required fly ash to achieve significant strength
[9].
Soil gradation
Soil graduation is also considered an influencing factor. The particle distribution is an
important factor in the assessment of lime suitability of soil.
For Compressed stabilised earth blocks (CSEBs) it is already known that too much clay
results in cracks and too much sand results in weak early strength after preparation with
cement as stabilizer. Clay-rich soils, therefore, need to be blended with sand which is
inappropriate. On this behalf, N.B Nagaraj investigated whether it was possible to have
more flexibility of soil for CSBEs. The investigation showed that high proportions of clay
can still be favorable for CSEBs by combining lime and cement in regards to strength and
durability. The results for high lime content furthermore showed that strength increased
with higher clay contents [14].
Generally, a rule is that cement is better for sandy soils and lime is better for clayey
soils, which seems applicable [13].
On Table 2.2 the different soil classes are shown,
and the lime requirement for modification and stabilisation of soils are listed. In this
context, modification is similar to ”Lime improvement” which needs a smaller quantity
of lime. According to the recommendations, lime is more fitted for clayey soils and not
recommended for sand and sandy clays.
Page 4 of 91
==PAGE:11==
01.01.2025
2.2
Influencing Factors and outcomes
Soil Class
Lime Requirements for
Modification (WT %)
Lime Requirements for
Stabilisation (WT %)
Slaked
Unslaked
Slaked
Unslaked
Well graded clay gravels
1-3
3 and over
Sand
Not Rec.
Not Rec.
Sandy clay
Not Rec.
5 and over
Silty clay
1-3
2-4
Heavy clay
1-3
3-8
Very heavy clay
1-3
3-8
Organic soil
Not Rec.
Not Rec.
Table 2.2: An overview of the recommendations for lime requirements [13].
The book by Houben and Guillaud (1994) has established guidelines for stabilisation in
the form of nomograms. It primarily focuses on earth structures but their nomograms
are based essentially on information from the road engineering field. Figure 2.1 illustrates
an area of which particle size and quantity are recommended for lime stabilisation. It
visually emphasizes that the highest quantities of passing particles should be around the
clayey size. However, it should be noted, that the criteria area is far from final, and should
not be too literally interpreted. It is better to use it as qualitative information as it not
always is for a universal scale. The book is more focused on earth-bearing constructions,
and the results are therefore adapted to that focus.
Figure 2.1: An illustrated recommended area for soil graduation with the use of lime
stabilisation [13]
2.2.2
Atterberg limits
The rapid improvement of the properties of the soil is often referred to as ’Lime improve-
ment’. There are two aspects of the improvement. First of all, it is to lower the fill
towards the OMC. Moreover, it is related to the chemical alteration of the surface of the
clay particles which decreases the volume change potential of the clay minerals. As a
result of cation exchange and soil structure change, the shrink/swell is therefore reduced
[11]. From that perspective, when the lime is added to the soil, the flocculation begins.
It starts because the lime changes the electric charges of the clay and modifies the inter-
Page 5 of 91
==PAGE:12==
01.01.2025
2.2
Influencing Factors and outcomes
granular electric fields. One outcome is the increase in the plasticity limit which changes
the behavior of the soil from being plastic and sticky to being more solid and brittle. In
practice, this improves the workflow, making it easier to load, transport, and spread the
material [1].
While the plasticity index decreases, the plastic limit increases until a certain point with
a specific amount of lime. This point is normally referred to as the ’Lime fixation’ point
and is the amount of lime responsible for changing PL. Hilt and Davidson (1960) found
an equation that finds the optimum lime additive for maximum increase in plastic limit
[9]:
Lom = % of 2 µ clay
35
+ 1.25
(2)
Equation 2 indicates that the amount of fixation Lom is proportional to the 2-micron clay
present. An additional point is that the amount of fixation only contributes to the soil
improvement while the amounts added above the lime fixation point cause the formation
of cementing materials for clayey soils.
The before mentioned book by Houben and Guillaud (1994) has established guidelines
for the plasticity index and the liquid limit using lime. The hatched area on Figure 2.2
shows that the interval of the plasticity index (PI) approximately is from 20 % to 30 %
while the liquid limit (LL) is from approximately 35 % to 50 %.
Figure 2.2: An illustrated recommended area for PI and LL with the use of lime stabili-
sation [13]
It is commonly understood, that the highly plastic soils are more reactive with lime.
Whereas less plastic soils tend to react less with lime. On that basis, other researchers
have also suggested plasticity as a criterion for stabilisation [15, 16]. For road construction,
soil suitable for lime stabilsation is generally considered as fine-grained clayey soil (reactive
clays) with a minimum of 25 % mass passing the 74 µm sieve and a PI greater than 10.
Soils of medium to high plasticity can also be lime stabilised to decrease plasticity, increase
workability, reduced swell, and increase strength [17].
Page 6 of 91
==PAGE:13==
01.01.2025
2.2
Influencing Factors and outcomes
2.2.3
Lime Content
In continuation of the reaction of lime, one of the main factors influencing the improve-
ment of the soil is the content of lime. Generally, lime can be categorized as quicklimes
or hydrated limes. Where quicklimes chemically are calcitic (CaO) or dolomitic (CaO
+ MgO) and hydrated limes are divided into calcitic [Ca(OH)2], dolomitic monohydrate
[Ca(OH)2+MgO] and dolomitic dihydrate [Ca(OH)2]. The calcium-magnesium ratio de-
fines whether it is a calcitic or dolomitic hydrated lime [8]. Quicklime is produced by
direct burning of limestone and has some limits for storage and maintenance, as it should
be protected from moisture and handled carefully. The hydrated limes are widely used
for stabilisation in practice, as it is more user-friendly and easier to handle [13].
The optimal lime content is to be used to gain the most benefit and thereby strength
from the soil, as both underuse and excessive addition of lime can reduce its strength.
According to Ingles (1997), a rule of thumb is to use 1 % for every 10 % of clay in the
soil [6].
A study by Muzahim Al-Mukhtar (2014) furthermore compares lime consumption for
several soil types to study the mechanisms for the short-term and long-term reactions.
In this context, it was found that the kinetics of the lime treatment highly depended
on the mineralogy, the amount of lime available, and the temperature. Specifically, the
samples containing smectite had a high consumption of 4-5 % lime for the immediate
cation exchange reaction and almost zero for samples with kaolinite and illite. The slow
pozzolanic reaction was tested for 6 months where smectite had the highest consumption
for 20 ◦C, followed by illite, and then kaolinite. This is mainly explained by their cation
exchange capacity.
For a temperature of 50 ◦C, all of the available lime (10 %) was
consumed for all clays, showing that the pozzolanic reaction can be accelerated [2].
2.2.4
Moisture content
As briefly mentioned, the moisture content for lime stabilisation is reduced partly due
to the hydration reaction and thus also vaporisation. Furthermore, lime flocculates the
soil, making it more fluffy and thereby increasing the natural aeration of the soil which
leads to additional moisture loss. This is in agreement with the optimal moisture content
(OMC), as it increases with the addition of lime as the soil needs more water because of
the moisture loss. The OMC increases even further for delayed compaction, as the lime
reactions have more time to occur. Generally, the OMC for the maximum dry density
(MDD) for most soils is near the OMC for strength [8].
It emphasizes the importance of moisture content in practice, as it is necessary to achieve
the desired strength. From a practical view, the natural moisture content in situ must
not be less than 0.9 OMC. If this condition is not fulfilled it may be necessary to wet
the soil or conversely, to dry it through aeration or adding more quicklime. The moisture
conditions must therefore be assessed in engineering and cost terms and can be a decisive
factor for using lime stabilisation [1].
2.2.5
Compaction timing
Generally, it is known that both the MDD and the OMC decrease with the addition of
lime for the same compaction effort. An explanation for the decrease in dry density is the
immediate formation of cementitious products, which will strengthen the soil and reduce
its compactibility, resulting in lower densities. Although the density may decrease, the
Page 7 of 91
==PAGE:14==
01.01.2025
2.2
Influencing Factors and outcomes
increase in strength will more than compensate for this loss, making it an insignificant
concern [6].
Furthermore, several literature studies have shown that altering the timing between the
mixing and compaction of the soil will change the properties after compaction, specifically
the MDD, and OMC for different soil types. However, there is still no complete agreement
on the impact of the timing on the unconfined ultimate strength (UCS).
According to Di Sante et al. (2015), the delayed compaction causes a systematical and
significant reduction of the dry unit weight. In their stabilisation experiment, a clayey
soil with a high amount of montmorillonite is investigated. The results visualize among
others some Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) observations where aggregation of the
particles occurs both for the lime stabilisation with and without delay of compaction due
to the cation exchange. However, the size of the aggregates with delay of compaction is
higher which also leads to larger inter-aggregate pores. An explanation for the outcome
is the beginning of the pozzolanic reaction which already has started and consequently
offers a higher resistance against compaction and causes greater porosity [7].
Another study from J.K Mitchell and D.R. Hooper confirms the same tendency, just now
for an expansive clay, namely a decrease in MDD, OMC, and UCS with the delay of
compaction. From their results, they found on a percentage basis that if the compaction
was delayed by 24 hr, the strength decrease would be 30 percent compared to the sam-
ples compacted immediately after mixing with lime for an expansive clay. It should be
mentioned, that the samples had aged for 215 days before testing and the expansive clay
which was tested also was stabilised with a commercial composition of dolomitic hydrated
lime. Similarly, it was concluded that a delay in compaction was not detrimental if ekstra
compaction effort was provided to obtain the same desired density. Even though, ekstra
compaction effort means additional costs. In this case, the behavior of the soil is explained
primarily by the flocculation of the soil structure, which increases with time when the lime
is added, resulting in a more open structure [5]. At the same time, a lateritic soil was
tested, and the same observations were found, namely, a reduction in MDD and UCS.
Lastly, Mateos, M (1964) has done soil lime research, where he among other aspects,
investigated the impact of delayed compaction of a silty clay with the addition of dolomitic
monohydrate lime.
The same tendencies were found for the MDD and the OMC. In
contrast to the last mentioned articles, he found no changes in the maximum compressive
strength [8].
2.2.6
Compaction effort
As mentioned by J.K Mitchell and D.R. Hooper (1961), the delay in compaction was not
detrimental provided extra compaction effort was exerted. In this context, another study
also found, that the strength increased by 50 % to 250 % for 7 days and 28 days curing
period. This strength increase was obtained by an increase of maximum dry density of
10 %. Therefore, it should be evaluated whether the extra cost of higher compaction is
justified by the increase in strength, if it is possible [8].
Page 8 of 91
==PAGE:15==
01.01.2025
2.2
Influencing Factors and outcomes
2.2.7
Curing conditions
One of the main conditions for lime stabilisation is curing time. As the pozzolanic reac-
tion depends on time, the stabilised soil will develop strength over time as long as lime
is available and the environment is alkaline. Asma Muhmed and Dariusz Wanatowski
(2013) investigated the effect of lime stabilisation on the strength of a kaolinitic clay with
5 % hydrated lime. They states that the strength of the kaolinitic soil increases with cur-
ing time. The strength increase is already visible at 0 days for added lime and increases
with higher curing time. Their SEM-micrographs indicate the formation of cementitious
materials resulting in the strength increase [4].
Another curing condition that significantly influences the lime stabilised soil is temper-
ature, which has already been briefly mentioned. Elevated temperatures promote the
pozzolanic reaction and improved strength can be reached by a relatively small increase
in temperature. However, if the temperature decrease below 4 ◦C the reactions are re-
tarded and can cease [6]. Since lime stabilisation relies on cementation, which is highly
influenced by temperature, it is recommended that any soil stabilisation is performed in
the early part of the summer. The higher temperature enhances the cementation reaction
leading to improved strength [8]. In the context of compaction delay, Ali and Mohamed,
2017 investigated the immediate and long-term effects of compaction delay under the two
environmental temperatures of 20 ◦C and 40 ◦C for a high plastic and expansive clay.
Firstly, it showed, that UCS and ODD decreased with prolonged delay in compaction.
Correspondingly, this observation was more significant for the temperature increase, as
the soil experienced an elevated reduction in ODD and UCS at a higher temperature. Ad-
ditionally, the study suggested that the first 12 hours of delay was the most crucial period
of aggregation and flocculation, and consequently also the time affecting the long-term
strength the most. Another aspect investigated from the study is the strain compared to
the delayed compaction time and curing time for the 2 temperatures. The strain increased
with longer mellowing periods, while it decreased for longer curing periods. Notably, the
strain reduction was most significant for the first 7 days and was also dependent on the
ambient temperature [15].
It is known, that lime is a strong base with a low coefficient of solubility in water, resulting
in a pH of 12.4. Such an alkaline environment is necessary for the dissolution of silica
and alumina from the clay minerals of the soil. In this context, a pH measurement at one
hour would be a quick and easy method to investigate the lime necessary to accomplish
an optimum lime improvement. At the same time, it can be performed with unskilled
workers. To investigate the lime requirement for the continued pozzolanic reaction they
can be determined for varying conditions of time [10].
Page 9 of 91
==PAGE:16==
01.01.2025
3
Material
In this section, the different materials used in the project are described. All the soil types
are silty clay, but the soil is from different areas of Denmark. On Figure 3.1 the surface
map from Denmark together with the 4 origin areas of soil is marked. The surface maps
show which soil is found at 1 m depth where it can be seen that most of Denmark is
covered with clay till (Brown). This is a good indication of the type of soil present in the
area, although, a deeper understanding of the geology will be necessary.
Clay till emerges directly from the glacier under the ice age, and the mineral composition
can vary a lot both locally and globally but is roughly a third of the minerals; Illite, Kaoli-
nite, and Smectite. The clay minerals influence the plasticity and how water is bound to
the material. Illite and Kaolinite do not bind water as well as smectite, therefore are clay
with smectite more plastic, and have a greater ability to expand. [20]
The research on clay minerals in Denmark is limited, but Smectite is generally more
dominant in younger deposits. [21] Although the mineral composition is not investigated
for this project, it should be considered to better understand how the different soils react
with the lime.
Figure 3.1: Surface map of Denmark with the soil origin marked. [19]
The soil for this project is all characterized as clay till. At Figure 3.2 are more detailed
maps of the surface around the 4 different areas of the test soil. The surface maps from
all areas show that the dominant soil type in most areas is clay till. The area around
Hillerød has the most mixed surface and is expected to be the most sandy clay till. The
area around Herning has a large area of Freshwater peat nearby, and the expectation
could be that there would be more organic material in the clay till. The areas around
Horsens and Ringsted are similar to each other, it is expected that the soil has the highest
content of clay as the surface areas are not mixed with a lot of other soil types.
Page 10 of 91
==PAGE:17==
01.01.2025
(a) Hillerød
(b) Herning
(c) Horsens
(d) Ringsted
Figure 3.2: Surface maps around the 4 different areas of the test materials [19]. Color
code for the different soil minerals is: Clayey till (brown), Freshwater peat (dark green),
Meltwater gravel (pink), Meltwater sand (orange) and ”Town” (grey)
At Figure 3.3 the 4 different soil is shown in their natural state. As the soil is placed
outside in big bags and the pictures are taken after a full day of rain, allfour soils are
saturated, so it isn’t easy to see a big difference between them. From the figures, it can
be seen that there is organic soil in the bags, especially in Herning and a bit in Ringsted.
When the soil is collected, it is important to remove the organic soil parts.
(a) Hillerød
(b) Herning
(c) Horsens
(d) Ringsted
Figure 3.3: Soil material in natural state (saturated)
Page 11 of 91
==PAGE:18==
01.01.2025
4
Methodology
This section describes the different test methods used in the project and presents the
equations. Each test follows a specific Eurocode, which is referred to at the beginning
of the method description. The section is divided into classification, Stabilisation, and
Soil performance. Each sub-section has a small introduction explaining why the tests are
performed and their purpose.
4.1
Classification
The classification test indicates and predicts how suitable the soil will be for lime stabili-
sation from the understanding of their properties and behaviour. The following tests have
been made; pycnometer, sieve analysis, hydrometer, Atterberg limit test, and permeability
test (BET method).
4.1.1
Particle density
To determine the particle density, the pycnometer test was used. The test has been per-
formed according to the DS/EN ISO 17892-3:2015 [22]. The pycnometer was already
calibrated, but a control calibration was made to ensure the calibration was valid.
At first, the soil was oven-dried and crushed down into smaller particles. The specimen
shall be able to pass through a 4 mm sieve, to be used. Then at least 10 g of specimen is
transferred into the pycnometer with a funnel and the exact mass is found. The control
fluid, demineralized water, is added to the pycnometer so the specimen is covered with
10-20 mm of fluid. The pycnometer is mixed and placed in a vacuum with a bottle of
control fluid for at least 30 minutes. This procedure is important for removing air from the
coarse specimens. Afterwards, the pycnometer is filled with the control fluid and the mass
is determined. The pycnometer is now placed in the water bath and left overnight. At
last, the weight is measured a second time, it is important to ensure that the pycnometer
is filled.
(a) Pycnometer with specimens
(b) Pycnometer with lid
(c) Pycnometer in vacuum
Figure 4.1: Pycnometer test
Page 12 of 91
==PAGE:19==
01.01.2025
4.1
Classification
The following equation was used to determine the particle density
ρs =
m4
[(m1 −m0) /ρL1] −[(m3 −m2) /ρL3]
(3)
Where,
ρs is the density of soil particles [Mg/m3]
m0 is the mass of the dry pycnometer [g]
m1 is the mass of the pycnometer filled with control fluid [g]
m2 is the mass of the pycnometer with dry specimen [g]
m3 is the mass of the pycnometer with specimen and control fluid [g]
m4 is the mass of the dry specimen [g]
ρL1 is the density of the control fluid at the temperature at which m1 is determined
ρL3 is the density of the control fluid at the temperature at which m3 is determined
4.1.2
Particle size distribution
The particle size distribution is performed according to DS/EN ISO 17892-4:2016 [23].
For the particle size distribution, there will be made a sieve- and sedimentation analysis.
Sieve analysis
First, the soil is oven-dried and weighted, afterwards, the preparation for the sieve anal-
ysis is done following the wet preparation method. For the wet preparation, the soil is
covered with water and dispersing agent for an hour, it is important to frequently stir
the soil solution. Secondly, the soil solution is washed through a 2 mm and a 0.036 mm
sieve until the water is clear of soil particles. The sieve must not be overloaded. The soil
retained on the 2 mm and 0.063 mm sieves is retained, oven-dried, and weighed.
The sieve analysis can now take place. The sieves are placed on top of each other with the
large sieve on top and a tray to collect the particles passing all the sieves to the bottom.
In this analysis the following sieves are used; 16 mm, 11.2 mm, 5.6 mm, 4 mm, 2 mm, 1
mm, 0.5 mm, 0.25 mm, 0.0125 mm, and 0.063 mm. The sieves are placed in a mechanical
shaker for 5 minutes and afterwards each sieve and the collected soil are weighed.
Page 13 of 91
==PAGE:20==
01.01.2025
4.1
Classification
Figure 4.2: Sieves placed in the mechanical shaker
Equation 4 calculates the fraction passing a given sieve size, which is used to make the
particle size distribution curve. The curve is a semi-logarithmic scale with particle size
on the x-axis and the fraction and the y-axis.
fn = 100% −
m′
ss1 + m′
ss2 + ... + m′
ssn
m
· 100%

(4)
where,
fn is the fraction passing the given sieve size, n [%]
m′
ss1, m′
ss2 Are the masses of soil retained on each sieve size greater than the given sieve [g]
m′
ssn Is the mass of soil retained on the given sieve size [g]
Hydrometer test
Before the hydrometer test, the soil is prepared. It is important that only particles pass-
ing the 0.063 mm sieve are to be used. The ideal concentration of soil is 25 g of soil per
litre of solution.
The soil is weighted and placed in a container, and 10 % of the final volume is added as
a solution of water and dispersing agent. The solution is stirred frequently, the solution
should stay for at least 4 hours before the hydrometer test begins.
After the 4 hours, the testing can begin. First, the hydrometer is placed in a cylinder
filled with reference solution and a calibration reading is made. Afterward, the solution
is transferred to the test cylinder and the cylinder is filled with the rest of the solution,
and the sedimentation cylinder is turned end-over-end about 60 times in 2 minutes.
The test starts and a timer is turned on. The hydrometer is placed in the soil solution
and the readings are taken after 0.5 min, 1 min, and 2 min (The exact time is noted).
After the last reading, the hydrometer is removed rinsed with distilled water, and placed
Page 14 of 91
==PAGE:21==
01.01.2025
4.1
Classification
in the reference solution. Further readings were done after 4 min, 8 min, 30 min, 1 h, 2
h, 6 h, and 24 h. The hydrometer is placed in the solution 15 s before the reading gently,
and after the reading, the hydrometer is removed and rinsed. Further, the temperature
of the solution is measured within the first 15 minutes and then after each reading.
(a) Preparation of the soil solution
(b) Test set-up with reference- and soil solutions
Figure 4.3: Hydrometer test
First of all some calibration calculations are done
The reading needs to be corrected due to the meniscus effect by using Equation 5
Rh = R′
h + Cm
(5)
where,
Rh is the true hydrometer reading
R′
h is the observed hydrometer reading
Cm is the meniscus correction
The modified hydrometer reading for the reference solution is calculated from Equation 6
Rd = Rh −R0
(6)
where,
Rd is the modified hydrometer reading
Rh is the true hydrometer reading
R0 is the observed hydrometer reading in the reference solution corrected for meniscus.
The effective depth is calculated from Equation 7
Hr = H + 0.5

h −Vh
900L

(7)
where,
Hr is the effective depth [mm]
Page 15 of 91
==PAGE:22==
01.01.2025
4.1
Classification
H is the length from the neck of the bulb to the graduation, Rh [mm]
Vh is the volume of the bulb [ml]
L is the distance between the 100 ml and the 1000 ml scale marking on the sedimen-
tation cylinder [mm]
After the calibration calculation, the equivalent particle diameter is calculated from Equa-
tion 8
di = 0.005531
s
η · Hr
(ρs −ρw) · t
(8)
where,
di is the equivalent particle diameter [mm]
η is the dynamic viscosity of water at the temperature of the test [mPa·s]
Hr is the effective depth of the hydrometer [mm]
ρs is the particle density [Mg/m3]
ρw is the density of the sedimentation fluid at the temperature of the test [Mg/m3]
t is the time of the reading [min]
The density of the sedimentation is assumed to be 1.00 Mg/m3 according to the standard.
Last, the fraction smaller than equivalent particle diameter is calculated from Equation 9
K =
100 · ρs
m(ρs −1)Rd
(9)
where,
K is the fraction smaller than equivalent particle diameter [%]
ρs is the particle density of the soil [Mg/m3]
m is the dry mass of specimen [g]
Rd is the modified hydrometer reading
And a correction for material larger than 2 mm
Kc = K · f2.00
100
(10)
where,
f2.00 is the fraction passing the 2 mm (%) from the sieve test.
Page 16 of 91
==PAGE:23==
01.01.2025
4.1
Classification
4.1.3
Atterberg limits
The Atterberg limits is determined according to DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-12 [24]
About 450 g of soil passing through the 4 mm sieve is prepared to be sure that there is
enough soil for the three tests; plastic-, liquid-, and shrinkage limit. The soil is placed
in a container and distilled water is added to it form a paste. The paste must be mixed
thoroughly.
For the Atterberg limits the main calculation is the water content calculated as
w = mloss
mdry
· 100%
(11)
where,
w is the water content [%]
mloss is the mass loss of the soil after 24 h in a 105◦oven
mdry is the dry soil after 24 h in a 105◦oven
Plastic limit
About 20 g of paste is set aside will the liquid limit test is made. Then it is time for
the plastic test, the specimen is moulded into a ball by rolling it between the palms and
fingers. Then the ball begins showing cracks it is separated into 2 sub-specimens at 10 g
each. Each sub-specimen is then divided into 4 pieces, each piece shall be rolled between
the hand and a gypsum plate. The pressure of the roll should reduce the thread to a 3
mm thread in 5 to 10 rolls, where one roll is from the fingertip to the second joint. If this
is not fulfilled the specimen is either too dry or too wet. The thread is accepted when
the tread crumbles. Then the specimen is accepted it is placed in a container so that the
water content can be determined.
Liquid limit
The fall-cone method is used to determine the liquid limit. The mixed soil is transferred
to a small cup, no air must be trapped inside, to prevent that from happening the cup is
filled little by little, and for the sides first. At last, the surface is smoothed out. From
the standard specific requirements should be fulfilled according to the specific cone used,
the requirements are shown in Table 1 in DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-12 [24]. In this project,
the 60 g/60◦cone was used, which has the following requirements the initial penetration
should be around 7 mm, the penetration rate is 7-15 mm, the maximum difference between
two successive tests is 0.4 mm, and at last, the wL determined from penetration of 10 mm.
When the soil fulfils the requirement the test must be repeated until the difference be-
tween the two readings is within the requirement, an average of the two last readings is
then calculated and a small portion of the soil is set aside for the water content measure-
ment.
Page 17 of 91
==PAGE:24==
01.01.2025
4.1
Classification
Figure 4.4: Fall-cone penetration test
The test should be repeated, but before the soil is ready a small amount of distilled water
is added and the soil is mixed thoroughly.
Shrinkage limit
This test is not mentioned in DS/EN ISO 17892-4:2016. Instead, the linear shrinkage
test is performed according to BS 1377: Part 2:1990: 6.5. [25]
When the liquid limit is fulfilled in the fall-cone penetration test, the sample for the
shrinkage limit is ready. the sample is filled in the mould, to avoid air the mould is gently
tapped against the table. The mould is left on the table until the sample has shrunk away
from the sides, after that the mould is placed in an oven at first 60◦and later 150◦, after
that the sample is taken out of the oven and measured.
(a) Sample in the mould before oven-dried
(b) Sample in the mould after oven-dried
Figure 4.5: Linear shrinkage test
The linear shrinkage is calculated with Equation 12
LS = L0 −LD
L0
· 100%
(12)
where,
LS is the Linear shrinkage [%]
L0 is the initial length [mm]
LD is the dried length [mm]
Page 18 of 91
==PAGE:25==
01.01.2025
4.1
Classification
4.1.4
Permeability
BET method
To determine the specific surface area the Brunauer, Emmett and Teller method (BET
method) will be performed according to DS/ISO 9277:2022 [26]. The principle of this
test is to find the required amount of adsorptive gas to cover the external and accessible
internal pore surface.
To prepare the sample for the BET method. The samples will first be degassed, to remove
potentially absorbed material from the sample, this is done by vacuum. The degassing is
complete when the pressure is constant for 15-30 minutes.
Different measuring techniques can be used, in this project the most common method
is used, the static manometric (volumetric) method. This technique will apply a known
amount of gas to the sample bulb. Then the gas adsorption onto the sample will occur,
resulting in a pressure drop until the adsorbate and adsorptive are in equilibrium. In this
process, the pressure, temperature, and volume of the system are measured.
For data processing the multipoint determination is used. This requires that at the plot
with
(p/p0)
[na(p/p0)] on the y-axis and (p/p0) x-axis are made, from the plot, a straight line within
the pressure range of 0.05 to 0.3 should be created, the interception with the y-axis must
be positive. The monolayer capacity and the BET parameter can be found from linear
regression. The monolayer capacity and the BET parameter are connected to the slope
and intercept which is shown at Equation 13 and 14.
b = ∆y
∆x = C −1
nmC
and
a =
1
nmC
(13)
Where,
nm is the monolayer capacity
C is the BET parameter
nm =
1
a + b
and
C = b
a + 1
(14)
The specific surface area per unit mass of the sample is calculated from Equation 15
as = nm · am · L
(15)
Where,
as is the specific surface area [m2 g−1]
nm is the monolayer capacity [mol g−1]
am is the molecular cross-sectional area, often is nitrogen at 77.3K used the value is
from in Appendix A in the standard (am = 0.162) [nm2]
L is Avogadro constant (L = 6.022 · 1023) [mol−1]
Page 19 of 91
==PAGE:26==
01.01.2025
4.2
Stabilisation
4.2
Stabilisation
Before the actual stabilisation can take place the soil needs to be prepared, and tests
need to be done to find the optimal water content for the specific soil at the different
compaction delay times.
4.2.1
Soil Preparation
The soil preparation used for the experimental work includes drying and crushing the soil
so that the water content can be controlled under the proctor test.
Drying of soil
To prevent a change in the soil’s mechanical properties, the soil is dried at a low tem-
perature, 50◦. The soil is dried for 48-72 hours, depending on how wet the soil is at the
beginning and how much soil there is in the oven. The drying is done in the Lyzten oven,
which uses hot air to dry the soil, from the display of the oven the specific temperature
and time can be set.
Figure 4.6: Lyzten oven with soil
Crushing of soil
After drying, the soil is gathered in huge lumps because of the clay particles. The lumps
need to be broken down to ensure that the soil can be mixed homogeneously. A concrete
mixer is used for that. The soil is mixed for 2-6 hours. To ensure that the soil is crushed
and large stones are removed, the mixed soil is sieved through a 4 mm sieve.
Page 20 of 91
==PAGE:27==
01.01.2025
4.2
Stabilisation
(a) Dried soil before mixing
(b) Concrete mixer
(c) Dried soil after mixing
Figure 4.7: Stages throughout the crushing
4.2.2
Mixing
Under with project, two types of mixing have been used first the mixing was done by
hand and later the mixing was done by a machine called ”Lynhakker”.
Mixing by hand
The hand mixing was done in a washing tray and with spatulas to crush the lumps formed
when water was added. To prevent larger lumps a ”spray bottle” was used to add the
water, the water was added gradually, and in between the soil was mixed. This technique
is only used for unstabilised soil.
Figure 4.8: Hand mixed soil
Mixing with machine
The mixing with a machine is done by a Lynhakker, to get a proper mixing. The soil and
water are mixed quickly by hand before transferring to the machine. Under the mixing,
the Lynhakker is stopped the soil is mixed, lumps of clay are crushed between spatulas,
and the soil is gathered for the Lynhakker can mix it.
When the soil and water are
homogeneous the lime will be added and the Lynhakker will again mix the soil until it is
homogeneous.
Page 21 of 91
==PAGE:28==
01.01.2025
4.2
Stabilisation
(a) Soil mixing in the Lyn-
hakker
(b) Soil mixed by the Lyn-
hakker
Figure 4.9: Mixing by Lynhakker
4.2.3
pH-measurement
The preparation for the pH measurement is performed according to Standard Test Method
for Using pH to Estimate the Soil-Lime Proportion Requirements for Soil Stabilization,
D6276-19 [28]. The pH measurements and sample deviate from the standard. This is
done because the pH measurements should investigate what happens to the pH under the
pre-curing period instead of finding the required soil-lime proportion.
For each soil two solutions are prepared, unstabilised, and stabilised. The solution con-
sists of 25 g of oven-dried soil, 0.25 g of lime, and 100 ml of water if stabilised otherwise
the lime is not added. The soil is required to pass through a 500 µm sieve.
The soil and lime are placed in a bottle container with a screw cap and mixed, afterwards,
the water is added. To ensure the solution is well-mixed the containers are shaken for a
minimum of 30 s, this is repeated every 10 min for the next hour.
The pH and temperature of the solution are measured after 1h, 5h and 24h.
Figure 4.10: pH-measurement
Page 22 of 91
==PAGE:29==
01.01.2025
4.2
Stabilisation
4.2.4
Proctor
The proctor machine is used to find the optimal water content and create the final sam-
ples for the unconfined compression test. The procedure for the proctor test is similar,
so the difference between the sample for the optimal water content and the unconfined
compression test is how the samples are processed after production. The proctor test is
made according to DS/EN 13286-2 [27].
The classic proctor test with a proctor mould A is performed. This means that the mass
of the used rammer is 2.5 kg, the diameter of the rammer is 50 mm, the fall height is 305
cm, the number of layers is 3, and the number of blows per layer is 25.
To ensure that the sample is filled properly, a mould extension is used. For the first
layer, the soil is filled up to 2/3 of the original mould. The soil is filled up for the second
layer, leaving 2-3 cm of the extension free. For the third layer, the soil is filled up to the
extension.
(a) First layer
(b) Second layer
(c) Third layer
Figure 4.11: The three stages of filling the mould for the proctor
When the three layers are made, the extension is removed gently, and the soil above the
mould is straightened with a straightedge. After the mould is straightened, the mould
filled with soil is measured.
Page 23 of 91
==PAGE:30==
01.01.2025
4.2
Stabilisation
(a) Before straightening
(b) After straightening
Figure 4.12: straightening of the soil
The rest of the procedure will be described in the sections below, as the next step will
depend on the sample used.
Optimal water content and dry density
The sample is removed from the mould and split vertically. Samples from the top, middle,
and bottom are used to determine the average water content of the sample determined
from Equation 11.
For data processing the dry density of the soil is calculated, which is found by first
calculating the compacted bulk density and afterwards the compacted dry density.
Compacted bulk density
ρ = (m2 −m1)
V
(16)
Where,
ρ is the compacted dry density [Mg/m3]
m1 is the mass of the mould and base plate [g]
m2 is the mass of the mould, baseplate, and compacted soil [g]
V is the volume of the mould [ml]
Compacted dry density
ρd = (100 · ρ)
(100 + w)
(17)
Where,
ρd is the compacted dry density [Mg/m3]
ρ is the compacted bulk density [Mg/m3]
w is the water content of the soil [%]
Page 24 of 91
==PAGE:31==
01.01.2025
4.2
Stabilisation
When the calculations are made, a graph with the water content on the x-axis and the
dry density on the y-axis is created. To determine the optimal water content and the
corresponding dry density, two linear trend lines are created, one for the inclined part
and one for the declined part of the curve. The cross-section between the two trend lines
represents the optimal water content and the associated dry density
Standard deviation and measurement error
To evaluate the precision of the results, the measurement error is calculated based on the
used equipment for the water content and dry density. Further, is the standard deviation
from the average water content determined from the Excel function STDEV.P().
Measurements errors
δerror.WC =
σw
mcon.
· 100%
(18)
δerror.DD =
 σw
msoil
+ 2 · σD
D + σh
h + (δError.WC/100)
(1 + (w/100))

· ρd
(19)
Where,
δerror.WC is the measurement error of the calculated water content
σw is the measurement uncertainty of weight
mcon. mass of the container the soil is measured in
δerror.DD is the measurement error of the calculated dry density
msoil is the mass of the compacted soil
D is the average diameter of the mould
σD is the standard deviation of the diameter of the mould
h is the average height of the mould
σh is the standard deviation of the height of the mould
w is the average of the water content
ρd is the compacted dry density
The measurement error is found from the relative uncertainty. For the water content,
a conservative consideration is made to simplify the calculation, where only the weight
container is taken into account which will result in a slightly higher measurement error.
For the measurement error of the compacted dry density, the relative uncertainty for all
measured values is combined to find a more precise error.
Page 25 of 91
==PAGE:32==
01.01.2025
4.2
Stabilisation
Samples
The sample is removed from the mould, covered in plastic wrapping paper, placed in a
plastic bag with a wet cloth, and placed in a temperature-controlled room. This procedure
prevents the sample from drying out during the curing period and maintains humidity.
As a control, the water content and dry density are determined before and after the curing
period.
(a) First layer of wrapping
(b) Second layer of wrapping
(c) Curing of samples
Figure 4.13: Stages of wrapping sample for curing
On Table 4.1 an overview of all samples created for the soil performance is shown. The
table sample name includes soil type, compaction delay, curing time, dimensions, target
water content (TWC), target dry density (TDD), and Notes. The Target water content
and dry densities are equivalent to the Optimal water content at dry densities. For the
specific case of HOR with a compaction delay of 1 hour, the TWC vary from the OWC as
it is 0.5 %-point lower than the optimal, this is determined based on the previous proctor
tests.
In the column with notes a number code is to be found, this code corresponds to the
following notes; 1: Large deviation from OWC, 2: Large deviation from ODD, 3: The
sample broke in the making of the sample. Uneven top surface, 4: Extra sample, and 5:
First sample after proctor broke down.
Page 26 of 91
==PAGE:33==
01.01.2025
4.3
Soil Performance
Table 4.1: Overview of samples created for UCS test.
Sample
Soil
Compaction
delay
Curing
Time
Dimensions
[mm]
TWC
[%]
TDD
[Mg/m3]
Notes
HER-US (1)
HER
-
1 days
Ø101x117
14.9
1.75
-
HER-US (2)
HER
-
1 days
Ø101x117
14.9
1.75
-
HER-1h-7d (1)
HER
1 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
15.7
1.73
5
HER-1h-7d (2)
HER
1 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
15.7
1.73
-
HER-1h-28d (3)
HER
1 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
15.7
1.73
-
HER-1h-28d (4)
HER
1 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
15.7
1.73
-
HER-5h-7d (1)
HER
5 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
16.6
1.67
-
HER-5h-7d (2)
HER
5 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
16.6
1.67
-
HER-5h-28d (3)
HER
5 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
16.6
1.67
-
HER-5h-28d (4)
HER
5 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
16.6
1.67
-
HER-24h-7d (1)
HER
24 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
17.1
1.65
-
HER-24h-7d (2)
HER
24 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
17.1
1.65
-
HER-24h-28d (3)
HER
24 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
17.1
1.65
-
HER-24h-28d (4)
HER
24 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
17.1
1.65
-
HOR-US (1)
HOR
-
1 days
Ø101x117
9.6
2.02
1
HOR-US (2)
HOR
-
1 days
Ø101x117
9.6
2.02
1
HOR-1h-7d (1)
HOR
1 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
11.6*
1.90
-
HOR-1h-7d (2)
HOR
1 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
11.6*
1.90
-
HOR-1h-28d (3)
HOR
1 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
11.6*
1.90
-
HOR-1h-28d (4)
HOR
1 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
11.6*
1.90
3
HOR-5h-7d (1)
HOR
5 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
12.3
1.88
-
HOR-5h-7d (2)
HOR
5 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
12.3
1.88
-
HOR-5h-28d (3)
HOR
5 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
12.3
1.88
-
HOR-5h-28d (4)
HOR
5 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
12.3
1.88
-
HOR-24h-7d (1)
HOR
24 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
12.4
1.80
3
HOR-24h-7d (2)
HOR
24 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
12.4
1.80
-
HOR-24h-28d (3)
HOR
24 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
12.4
1.80
-
HOR-24h-28d (4)
HOR
24 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
12.4
1.80
-
HI-US (1)
HI
-
1 days
Ø101x117
8.4
2.11
2
HI-US (2)
HI
-
1 days
Ø101x117
8.4
2.11
2
HI-1h-7d (1)
HI
1 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
10.5
2.01
-
HI-1h-7d (2)
HI
1 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
10.5
2.01
1
HI-1h-28d (3)
HI
1 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
10.5
2.01
-
HI-1h-28d (4)
HI
1 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
10.5
2.01
-
HI-5h-7d (1)
HI
5 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
10.9
1.99
-
HI-5h-7d (2)
HI
5 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
10.9
1.99
-
HI-5h-28d (3)
HI
5 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
10.9
1.99
-
HI-5h-28d (4)
HI
5 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
10.9
1.99
-
HI-24h-7d (1)
HI
24 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
11.3
1.96
-
HI-24h-7d (2)
HI
24 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
11.3
1.96
-
HI-24h-28d (3)
HI
24 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
11.3
1.96
-
HI-24h-28d (4)
HI
24 hour
28 days
Ø101x117
11.3
1.96
-
HER-1h-7d (5)
HER
1 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
15.7
1.73
4
HOR-1h-7d (5)
HOR
1 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
12.1
1.90
4
HI-1h-7d (5)
HI
1 hour
7 days
Ø101x117
10.5
2.01
4
4.3
Soil Performance
After the stabilisation, the unconfined compressive test is used to determine the soil’s
performance.
From this test, the unconfined compressive strength and the static E-
modulus will be determined.
Page 27 of 91
==PAGE:34==
01.01.2025
4.3
Soil Performance
4.3.1
Unconfined compressive strength (UCS)
The unconfined compressive strength is performed according to DS/EN ISO 17892-7:2018.
[29]
Figure 4.14: UCS test machine set-up
The sample is placed in the machine, the sample must be centralised so the compression
is uniform and to prevent too much eccentricity. Moreover, the placement should include
latex gloves to prevent moisture loss from the sample. When the sample is placed the jog
is moved upward until no air is in between the sample and the pressure head. No force
must be added to the sample when the placement of the sample is adjusted.
The UCS test is performed with a strain rate of 0.8 mm/min. The test is stopped when
the force is stagnated. The data is saved and used to find the maximum strength, plot
the stress-strain curves, and estimate the stiffness from the tangent of the linear part of
the curve.
From the test, the machine provides the time, displacement, and force in a CSV file. The
data calculates the stress and strains from Equation 20 and 21. The data is afterwards
presented as a stress-strain curve.
Strain
ε = ∆L
L
(20)
Where,
ε is the strain [-]
∆L is the displacement [mm]
L is initial length of the sample [mm]
Page 28 of 91
==PAGE:35==
01.01.2025
4.3
Soil Performance
Stress which accounts for the change in surface area.
fc =
F
(Ac)/(1 −ε) · 106
(21)
Where,
fc is the compressive strength [kPa]
F is the force [kN]
Ac is the cross-section of the sample [mm2]
(1 −ε) is the correction for the change of surface area
Bedding effect
The raw data is corrected for the bedding effect, resulting from when the sample is not in
full contact with the pressure head. The bedding effect is difficult to avoid because small
grains rough the sample surface on Figure 4.15 an example of how the raw- and corrected
data can be seen. The data is simply shifted to the left so the strains from the bedding
period should be neglected. From the linear part of the curve, a trendline is made which
illustrates the theoretical stress-strain relation at the beginning.
E-modulus
From the function of the trendline, the Youngs modulus is estimated as the slope of the
linear curve representing the linear elastic part of the material and the Youngs modulus
is defined as Equation 22
E = Stress
Strain
(22)
(a) Raw data
(b) Corrected data
Figure 4.15: Example of corrected data due to bedding effect.
Page 29 of 91
==PAGE:36==
01.01.2025
5
Results
In this section, the results of the experimental work will be presented. The section is
divided into the following parts; Classification where the result from particle densities,
particle size distribution, Atterberg limits, and permeability forms the basis for the phys-
ical properties. Stabilisation where the results from the pH test together with the proctor
test present the optimal parameters for the stabilisation. The data from the proctor test
will be presented as the raw data first, afterwards the data will be processed and the
cleared data will again be presented. At last, Soil performance were the results from
the unconfined compression test form the basis for the mechanical properties, and each
sample will be compared to the target regarding the OWT and ODD. For all sections,
the results will be commented on and further analysed and compared in the discussion
section.
5.1
Classification
In the following, the results of the classification will be provided. Four different soils have
been tested; Hillerød (HI), Herning (HER), Horsens (HOR), and Ringsted (RI).
5.1.1
Particle density
The pycnometer results are summarised in Table 5.1. The results from the four different
soil types are similar, indicating that the soils are the same type.
Table 5.1: Particle density for the four soils
Soil
Particle density, ρs
Mean
[g/sm3]
[g/sm3]
HI
2.55
2.58
2.60
2.58
HER
2.57
2.60
2.53
2.57
HOR
2.62
2.62
2.60
2.61
RI
2.57
2.53
2.62
2.57
5.1.2
Particle size distribution
The sieve analysis and the hydrometer test results are combined into a grain distribution
curve shown at Figure 5.1. The results show that all soils are categorized as clay with at
least 20 % of the soil passing through the 0.063 mm sieve.
Page 30 of 91
==PAGE:37==
01.01.2025
5.1
Classification
Figure 5.1: Grain distribution of the four soils
5.1.3
Atterberg limits
The results from the Atterberg test and linear shrinkage are summarised in Table 5.2. The
results show that the different parameters vary a lot between the various soils, and result
in different plasticity indices. The soil HOR and RI are the most comparable regarding
the Atterberg limits.
Table 5.2: Atterberg limits for the four soils
Soil
Shrinkage limit, SL
Plastic limit, PL
Liquid limit, LL
Plasticity index, IP
[-]
[-]
[-]
[-]
HI
2
15.6
18.1
2.5
RI
7
12.6
26.3
13.7
HOR
8
10.8
28.0
17.2
HER
11
18.4
43.1
24.7
From the table is noticed that the plastic limits for all soil are close to each other, so
the big difference in the Plasticity index is a result of a large span in liquid limit. Which
could be explained by a difference in mineral composition.
5.1.4
Permeability
The results from the BET analysis are shown in Figure 5.2 as the multipoint with the
trendline for each soil. At Table 5.3 the slope, A, interception, B, and calculated values
of the BET parameter, C , monolayer capacity, nm, and surface area, as, are summarised
for each soil.
Page 31 of 91
==PAGE:38==
01.01.2025
5.2
Stabilisation
Figure 5.2: Data used to calculate the surface area by multipoints
Table 5.3: Value from the BET analysis
Soil
A
B
C
nm
as
[1/g]
[1/g]
[-]
[mol/g]
[m2g]
HI
387.23
1.9256
202.054
0.9173 · 10−4
8.949
HOR
245.88
2.139
115.951
1.439 · 10−4
14.041
HER
128.01
0.1199
1068.64
2.786 · 10−4
27.192
The results show a variation in the surface area between the three materials, with the
highest surface area found in HER and the lowest in HI. The lowest surface area fits the
other classifications’ results as HI has the lowest clay content and acts more sandy. Also,
the high surface area from HER fits the other classification results as HER has the highest
plastic limit, liquid limit and plasticity index.
An indication of the clay minerals can be assumed by comparing the found surface area
with the surface area of the clay mineral from Table 2.1. The surface area of HI indicated
more sand in this, and the dominant clay mineral is kaolinite. The surface area from HOR
indicates that the clay minerals are a combination of Kaolinite and Illite. The results of
HER indicate that the mineral smectite could be present in the soil, but the dominant is
probably still Illite.
5.2
Stabilisation
The stabilisation tests have been performed on the soils Hillerød (HI), Herning (HER),
and Horsens (HOR). Due to the time limit of this project, the soil from Ringsted (RI) will
not be tested. RI was removed based on its classification of Atterberg and the expectation
that the results would be similar to those of Horsens (HOR).
Page 32 of 91
==PAGE:39==
01.01.2025
5.2
Stabilisation
5.2.1
pH-value
The results from the pH test are collected in Table 5.4, and the pH values over time are
plotted in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Results of measured pH values over time. The dotted line represents a pH
value of 12.4
From Figure 5.3 a significant change in the pH is observed for all soils, this is a result of
the cation exchange coursed by the lime. In the graph, a dotted line is placed at a pH
value of 12.4, which represents the pH value needed for the pozzolanic reaction to take
place. It is noticed that the pH value for HER drops after 1 hour, this means that the
lime content is too low to continue the pozzolanic reactions after 1 hour.
From the figure, there is also observed a pH drop from 1 hour to 5 hours for the unsta-
bilised soil, which was expected to be constant. An explanation for this could be that the
machine used to measure the pH is calibrated to a pH value of 12, therefore the measure-
ment around 6-10 is not as precise.
By looking at the pH-value and the temperature from Table 5.4 it is noticed that all
samples drop from around 24◦to 22◦after 1 hour.
This could also influence the pH
measurement, but it is assumed that this could be neglected due to the small temperature
change and that the changes are observed for all samples.
Page 33 of 91
==PAGE:40==
01.01.2025
5.2
Stabilisation
Table 5.4: Measured pH and temperature
HER S
HER US
HOR S
HOR US
HI S
HI US
pH value
1h
12.60
6.22
12.45
8.81
12.53
9.37
5h
12.15
5.59
12.51
8.54
12.59
8.15
24h
12.05
5.61
12.44
8.33
12.52
7.30
Temperature
1h
24.2
24.2
24.6
24.1
24.3
24.1
5h
22.2
23.2
22.3
22.2
22.2
22.4
24h
22.2
22.5
22.1
22.4
22.3
22.3
At last, a visible observation is made during the test. Before the 5-hour and 24-hour
pH measurements, a clear difference between the unstabilised and stabilised samples is
observed. At Figure 5.4 the different samples before the 24-hour measurements can be
seen, here it is clear that flocculation of the clay particles of the stabilised soils has taken
place, while the clay for the unstabilised soil still is separated and the water is thus more
clear.
Figure 5.4: Samples before 24-hour pH-measurements
5.2.2
Proctor
Raw data
The raw data is presented on Figure 5.5-5.7. For each figure, the unstabilised and the
3 stabilised soil proctor results are plotted on individual sub-figures. The graphs are in-
dividually scaled to match the tested water content, and the associated compacted dry
density, which means the graphs are not visibly comparable.
In the following graphs, some points are marked as unfilled red points. This represents
the data that is not accepted based on one of the following criteria.
1. The water content is too low compared with the target water content.
2. The deviation between the water content is too large.
3. The bulk density is too high/low compared to the other results.
Page 34 of 91
==PAGE:41==
01.01.2025
5.2
Stabilisation
Criteria 1 and 2 are the results of the problems under the mixing of the soil and water,
while Criteria 3 is a result of problems during the compaction.
(a) Unstabilised
(b) 1% Lime, 1h
(c) 1% Lime, 5h
(d) 1% Lime, 24h
Figure 5.5: Raw data of unstabilised and stabilised soil from HER
At Figure 5.5 it is shown that many points are not accepted. The points are removed
based on different criteria indicating that the soil is difficult to work with.
Page 35 of 91
==PAGE:42==
01.01.2025
5.2
Stabilisation
(a) Unstabilised
(b) 1% Lime, 1h
(c) 1% Lime, 5h
(d) 1% Lime, 24h
Figure 5.6: Raw data of unstabilised and stabilised soil from HOR
At Figure 5.6 a few points are removed from the raw data. The points are mainly being
removed based on the criteria connected to the soil mixing, as the soil created many lumps
when the soil and water were mixed.
Page 36 of 91
==PAGE:43==
01.01.2025
5.2
Stabilisation
(a) Unstabilised
(b) 1% Lime, 1h
(c) 1% Lime, 5h
(d) 1% Lime, 24h
Figure 5.7: Raw data of unstabilised and stabilised soil from HI
At Figure 5.7 none of the points were removed, this indicates that the soil was easy to
mix, and the target water content was fulfilled.
Standard deviation and measurement error
In the figure, the measurement error is plotted as the standard deviation of the graphs.
The standard deviation of the water content is the biggest value of the calculated standard
deviation of the measurement error.
Looking at Figure 5.5-5.7 it is noticed that the
standard deviation from the dry density is close to constant, while the standard deviation
from the water content varies.
The large standard deviation from the water content is a result of the mixing gone wrong
and therefore a large difference between the calculated water contents.
Processed data
The processed data together with the trends line for the inclined and declined parts
of the graph, the intersection between the two trends line represents the optimal water
content and the following optimal compacted dry density. The results are presented at
Figure 5.8-5.10, and the optimal values are summarised at Table 5.5.
Page 37 of 91
==PAGE:44==
01.01.2025
5.2
Stabilisation
Figure 5.8: Results of unstabilised and stabilised soil from HER
Figure 5.8 shows the proctor curves for HER. From the curves the following trends are
found; the dry density is decreased, and the water content is increased as the lime is added
and further when the compaction delay is increased.
If raw data from Figure 5.5 and the processed data Figure 5.8 are compared it is not
noticed that a lot of data points are removed, this is because the soil is very sensitive
regarding the water content which results in some problems under the mixing.
Figure 5.9: Results of unstabilised and stabilised soil from HOR
Figure 5.9 shows the proctor curves for HOR. From the curves the following trends are
found; the dry density is decreased, and the water content is increased as the lime is added
Page 38 of 91
==PAGE:45==
01.01.2025
5.2
Stabilisation
and further when the compaction delay is increased.
From the figure, it also noticed that the optimal water content between the three delayed
compaction times is close to each other.
Figure 5.10: Results of unstabilised and stabilised soil from HI
Figure 5.10 shows the proctor curves for HI. From the curves the following trends are
found; the dry density is decreased, and the water content is increased as the lime is
added and further when the compaction delay is increased.
If raw data from Figure 5.7 and the processed data Figure 5.10 are compared it is not
noticed that nearly no data points are removed, which illustrates that the mixing of these
sample was the easiest regarding to match the target water density.
Table 5.5: Optimal water content and dry densities for the different soil samples
HER
HOR
HI
Mixing
OWC
[%]
ODD
[Mg/m3]
OWC
[%]
ODD
[Mg/m3]
OWC
[%]
ODD
[Mg/m3]
Unstabilized
14.9
1.75
9.6
2.02
8.4
2.11
1% Lime, 1h
15.7
1.73
12.1
1.90
10.5
2.01
1% Lime, 5h
16.6
1.67
12.3
1.88
10.9
1.99
1% Lime, 24h
17.1
1.65
12.4
1.80
11.3
1.96
On Table 5.5 a summary of the optimal water content and compacted dry densities for
the different mixing times are found from the different soils. These values will be used to
create the samples used for further testing, and later be the reference values to compare
how well the samples is mixed.
Page 39 of 91
==PAGE:46==
01.01.2025
5.3
Soil Performance
5.3
Soil Performance
5.3.1
Specimens properties
This section is divided into the following sections; unstabilised soil, stabilised HER (Ta-
ble 5.7 and Figure 5.11+5.12), stabilised HOR (Table 5.8 and Figure 5.13+5.14), and sta-
bilised HI (Table 5.9 and Figure 5.15+5.16). For each section, a table with the achieved
water content, compacted dry density, and percentage deviation of the values are pre-
sented and evaluated with the acceptance criteria of a percentage deviation within 5%.
The corrected data regarding the bedding effect for the 7-day and 28-day UCS tests is
shown and commented on for each stabilised soil.
At the end of this section, a summary of the maximum compressive strength and the
E-modulus is presented at Table 5.10 and a ratio of the values between the unstabilised
and stabilised soil is presented at Table 6.1.
For the individual stress-strain curved corrected for the bedding effect and with the tan-
gent applied to find the E-modulus refer to Appendix G1 to Appendix G6.
Load rate
All stabilised samples are tested with a 0.8 mm/min load rate. The unstabilised sample
represented with a straight line is tested with a 0.8 mm/min load rate, while the dotted
line is tested with a 1.0 mm/min load rate.
The stabilised soil is compared with the unstabilised soil exposed to the same load rate.
This is done because it can be seen that all unstabilised samples exposed to higher loading
rates result in higher compression strength, so it is expected that the same will happen
to the stabilised soil.
Page 40 of 91
==PAGE:47==
01.01.2025
5.3
Soil Performance
Unstabilised soil
Table 5.6: Percentage deviation between optimal and achieved values before and after
curing for unstabilised soil samples.
Soil Type
HER
HOR
HI
Sample
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
Optimal water content
14.9
14.9
9.6
9.6
8.4
8.4
Before curing
Achieved Water Content
15.8
15.6
10.1
9.4
10.2
9.8
Percentage Deviation
Water Content
6.4
4.9
19.9
11.9
5.9
2.1
After curing
Achieved Water Content
15.8
15.2
10.0
10.0
10.3
9.8
Percentage Deviation
Water Content
6.0
1.8
19.0
19.5
6.8
2.1
Optimal Dry Density
1.75
1.75
2.02
2.02
2.11
2.11
Before curing
Achieved Dry Density
1.71
1.74
2.02
2.04
1.86
1.89
Percentage Deviation
Dry Density
-2.1
-0.6
0.0
1.2
-11.7
-10.6
After curing
Achieved Dry Density
1.71
1.75
2.02
2.03
1.86
1.88
Percentage Deviation
Dry Density
-2.4
-0.3
0.0
0.6
-12.0
-10.8
Looking at the unstabilised soil one by one. HER is the one closest to the acceptance
criteria and compared with the stabilised soil the percentage deviation is at the same
level. For HOR the deviation in the water content is very high, while the compacted
dry density is close to the target. This could result from many small lumps in the dried
soil, and thereby the soil is not mixed completely homogeneously. This can entail that
the lime can react optimally, but taking the dry density into account the soil should be
well-mixed. For HI the deviation is largest at the compacted dry density which can result
in lower strength under testing.
Looking at the deviation before and after curing, it shows that the deviation of the com-
pacted dry density is relatively small, and is mainly a result of a small part falling of the
sample, due to the samples being moved. The deviation of the water content varies a bit
more, as a result of the mixing, maybe the soil is not completely homogenous or the water
content sample could have a larger stone which would influence the small samples used
for the determination.
Due to lack of time, none of the above has been redone.
Page 41 of 91
==PAGE:48==
01.01.2025
5.3
Soil Performance
Stabilised HER
Table 5.7: Percentage deviation between optimal and achieved values before and after
curing for stabilised HER samples.
Delayed Compaction
1 hour
5 hours
24 hours
Curing Time
7 days
28 days
7 days
28 days
7 days
28 days
Sample
(1)
(2)
(5)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Optimal water content
15.7
15.7
15.7
15.7
15.7
16.6
16.6
16.6
16.6
17.1
17.1
17.1
17.1
Before curing
Achieved Water Content
15.4
15.6
16.3
16.4
16.4
17.1
17.0
16.6
17.1
17.0
16.8
16.7
17.4
Percentage Deviation
Water Content
-1.9
-0.8
3.7
4.2
4.2
3.2
2.4
0.2
3.3
-0.8
-2.0
-2.6
1.8
After curing
Achieved Water Content
15.7
15.8
16.1
16.4
16.5
17.0
17.0
16.8
17.1
17.2
17.2
17.5
17.5
Percentage Deviation
Water Content
0.0
1.0
2.8
4.2
5.0
2.5
2.6
1.1
3.0
0.4
0.4
2.3
2.3
Optimal Dry Density
1.73
1.73
1.73
1.73
1.73
1.67
1.67
1.67
1.67
1.65
1.65
1.65
1.65
Before curing
Compacted Dry Density
1.62
1.65
1.63
1.64
1.64
1.63
1.62
1.61
1.60
1.60
1.61
1.61
1.61
Percentage Deviation
Compacted Dry Density
-6.1
-4.6
-6.1
-5.2
-5.1
-2.4
-3.0
-3.9
-4.0
-3.1
-2.2
-2.4
-2.4
After curing
Compacted Dry Density
1.62
1.64
1.63
1.64
1.64
1.62
1.62
1.60
1.60
1.59
1.61
1.60
1.61
Percentage Deviation
Compacted Dry Density
-6.5
-4.9
-6.0
-5.5
-5.2
-3.2
-3.0
-3.9
-4.0
-3.4
-2.6
-3.1
-2.6
Overall most of the samples are in the accepted range except 1h-7d (1) and 1h-7d (5)
which deviates from the compacted dry density with -6.1 %. The table shows that the
water content is achieved better than the dry density, and the deviation is larger for the
samples with a delayed compaction of 1 hour.
The deviation of the compacted dry density before and after curing is negligible and can
be explained by small parts falling off when the samples are moved or due to measure-
ment errors from the weight. The water content before and after curing is similar, but it
is noticed that for most of the samples, the water content is inclined a bit, which is not
expected, no good explanation is found other than it is assumed that measure uncertain-
ties.
Due to their lower dry density, the samples are expected to achieve a lower unconfined
compression strength than their potential. However, overall, there are no concerns re-
garding the samples’ performance.
Page 42 of 91
==PAGE:49==
01.01.2025
5.3
Soil Performance
(a) HER-1h-7d
(b) HER-5h-7d
(c) HER-24h-7d
Figure 5.11: Corrected data of all HER-samples from the UCS tests after 7 days
(a) HER-1h-28d
(b) HER-5h-28d
(c) HER-24h-28d
Figure 5.12: Corrected data of all HER-samples from the UCS tests after 28 days
Figure 5.11 and 5.12 the UCS show a similar result with the 1h delay compaction achiev-
ing the highest strength after that the 5h delay compaction, and lastly the 24h delay
compaction. The figures show that the 24h delay time benefits the most from the extra
curing time, but overall the strength between the 7 and 28 days of curing does not change
significantly.
Figure 5.11 show that sample HER-1h-7d (1) differs in strength, but not at Young’s
modulus from the other samples. Both HER-1h-7d (1) and (5) deviate with -6.1% from
the CDD, looking at the water content (1) on the dry side of the OWC while sample
(5) is on the wet side of the OWC. This could indicate that it is more critical to be at
the dry side of the OWC because there is not enough water for the lime to react optimally.
The ratio between the unstabilised and stabilised values from Table 6.1 shows that HER-
1h-7d (1) is the only one that differs significantly regarding compression strength. The
Page 43 of 91
==PAGE:50==
01.01.2025
5.3
Soil Performance
ratio regarding Young’s modulus varies more between the samples, this could be explained
by the values being estimated from the linear elastic part of the curve which can be difficult
to identify precisely.
Stabilised HOR
Table 5.8: Percentage deviation between optimal and achieved values before and after
curing for stabilised HOR samples.
Delayed Compaction
1 hour
5 hours
24 hours
Curing Time
7 days
28 days
7 days
28 days
7 days
28 days
Sample
(1)
(2)
(5)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Optimal water content
12.1
12.1
12.1
12.1
12.1
12.3
12.3
12.3
12.3
12.4
12.4
12.4
12.4
Before curing
Achieved Water Content
11.5
11.5
12.0
11.4
11.4
11.5
11.7
11.7
11.6
11.9
11.8
12.0
11.7
Percentage Deviation
Water Content
-5.3
-5.1
-0.7
-6.1
-5.4
-6.5
-4.8
-4.7
-5.6
-4.0
-4.8
-2.9
-5.5
After curing
Achieved Water Content
10.9
10.9
11.9
11.4
11.3
11.7
11.7
12.0
12.1
11.7
11.7
11.8
11.9
Percentage Deviation
Water Content
-9.6
-10.0
-1.6
-6.1
-6.9
-4.8
-4.9
-2.0
-1.9
-5.7
-5.7
-4.6
-4.0
Optimal Dry Density
12.1
12.1
12.1
12.1
12.1
12.3
12.3
12.3
12.3
12.4
12.4
12.4
12.4
Before curing
Compacted Dry Density
1.78
1.78
1.80
1.80
1.71
1.76
1.76
1.75
1.77
1.67
1.71
1.72
1.73
Percentage Deviation
Compacted Dry Density
-6.1
-6.4
-5.4
-5.4
-10.1
-6.2
-6.5
-7.1
-5.8
-7.3
-4.9
-4.3
-3.9
After curing
Compacted Dry Density
1.79
1.79
1.80
1.80
1.71
1.76
1.76
1.74
1.76
1.67
1.71
1.72
1.73
Percentage Deviation
Compacted Dry Density
-5.8
-6.0
-5.3
-5.5
-10.1
-6.4
-6.5
-7.4
-6.2
-7.4
-5.0
-4.3
-4.1
Most of the samples are close to but still over the acceptance criteria. For the 1-hour de-
lay compaction it should be mentioned that sample (1)-(4) is mixed with a water content
of 11.6% instead of the target of 12.1%, this was done due to the results from the tests
performed to find the optimal water content, as the sample created their all achieved a
higher water content then the target water content. Looking at the percentage deviation
of the CDD samples HOR-1h-28d (4) and HOR-24h-7d (1) differ the most because the
sample broke in the extrusion process, so the sample does not have the full volume and
therefore this results in lover CDD.
The deviation of the compacted dry densities before and after curing is neglectable. The
deviation of the water content on the other hand is larger, most of the sample has a
lower water density which could indicate that the lime has bound extra water during the
curing period, another reason could be that the sealing of the samples was not successful,
however, this is not a concern. In a few cases, the water content is increased which could
be a result of the inhomogeneous of the soil, or large stone in the samples for water content.
It is expected that the two samples which were damaged in the extrusion process, will
have results that stand out, this is mainly because the compression is not uniform due to
the uneven surface of the sample. Because the deviation from the OWC and ODD of all
samples is in the same range, the results will be expected to be comparable.
Page 44 of 91
==PAGE:51==
01.01.2025
5.3
Soil Performance
(a) HOR-1h-7d
(b) HOR-5h-7d
(c) HOR-24h-7d
Figure 5.13: Corrected data of all HOR-samples from the UCS tests after 7 days
(a) HOR-1h-28d
(b) HOR-5h-28d
(c) HOR-24h-28d
Figure 5.14: Corrected data of all HOR-samples from the UCS tests after 28 days
Figure 5.13 shows that sample HOR-1h-7d (5) achieves the highest strength, second the
HOR-5h-7d, followed by HOR-1h-7d (1) and (2) and lastly the HOR-24h-7d. There is no
obvious reason why the HOR-5h-7d achieves a higher strength than HOR-1h-7d (1) and
(2), but the results, shows that with a water content closer to the OWC as HOR-1h-7d
(5) the highest strength is achieved why it would be expected that the other samples also
would achieve higher strength. It is still difficult to know if HOR-5h would result in the
highest strength because all samples except HOR-1h-7d (5) differ from approximately the
same from the target.
Figure 5.14 show expected results with the maximal strength found from HOR-1h-28d,
secondly HOR-5h-28d and lastly HOR-24h-28d.
By comparing Figure 5.13 and 5.14 is can be seen that the compression strength benefits
from the extra curing time, which indicates that the pozzolanic reaction in the soil contin-
Page 45 of 91
==PAGE:52==
01.01.2025
5.3
Soil Performance
ues after the 7 days. The graphs HOR-24h-7d (1) and HOR-1h-28d (3) show curves that
are significantly different from the other soils which are because of the uneven surfaces.
Especially HOR-1h-28d (3) curve is especially interesting as it looks like there are two
bedding periods of the sample.
Stabilised HI
Table 5.9: Percentage deviation between optimal and achieved values before and after
curing for stabilised HI samples.
Delayed Compaction
1 hour
5 hours
24 hours
Curing Time
7 days
28 days
7 days
28 days
7 days
28 days
Sample
(1)
(2)
(5)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Optimal water content
10.5
10.5
10.5
10.5
10.5
10.9
10.9
10.9
10.9
11.3
11.3
11.3
11.3
Before curing
Achieved Water Content
11.1
11.7
11.4
10.1
10.1
10.7
10.6
10.6
10.7
11.2
11.2
11.5
11.2
Percentage Deviation
Water Content
5.6
11.1
8.7
-3.6
-3.8
-1.8
-2.9
-3.2
-2.1
-1.2
-1.2
2.1
-0.6
After curing
Achieved Water Content
10.8
11.8
11.3
10.3
10.2
10.0
10.0
10.3
10.3
10.6
10.6
11.3
11.0
Percentage Deviation
Water Content
3.3
12.1
7.5
-1.9
-2.9
-7.8
-8.0
-5.6
-5.1
-5.8
-5.8
0.4
-2.4
Optimal Dry density
2.01
2.01
2.01
2.01
2.01
1.99
1.99
1.99
1.99
1.96
1.96
1.96
1.96
Before curing
Compacted Dry Density
-
1.96
2.0
-
1.94
1.91
1.92
1.92
1.92
1.94
1.94
1.93
1.93
Percentage Deviation
Compacted Dry Density
-
-2.3
-0.4
-
-3.3
-4.2
-3.4
-3.5
-3.7
-1.0
-1.3
-1.7
-1.8
After curing
Compacted Dry Density
1.95
1.96
2.0
1.93
1.94
1.92
1.93
1.92
1.92
1.95
1.94
1.93
1.93
Percentage Deviation
Compacted Dry Density
-2.9
-2.5
-0.3
-4.2
-3.6
-3.7
-3.0
-3.3
-3.5
-0.5
-0.9
-1.5
-1.7
Overall the samples are within the acceptance criteria and the soil is closest to the target
values. That said the sample with a 1-hour delay time and curing time for 7 days all
samples are at the wet side of OWC and higher than the 5%-acceptance.
Two compacted dry densities are missing from the table before curing, this is because they
were not weighed, but comparing the other samples the deviation is negligible, and it can
be assumed that the compacted dry density is nearly the same before curing as after. The
water content shows again a larger deviation, where the water content decreases after the
curing period which is assumed to be a result of the lime binding extra water.
The samples are assumed to be comparable, with a concern of HI-1h-7d (2) and (5)
because the achieved water content is far from the target water content, which could
influence the results.
Page 46 of 91
==PAGE:53==
01.01.2025
5.3
Soil Performance
(a) HI-1h-7d
(b) HI-5h-7d
(c) HI-24h-7d
Figure 5.15: Corrected data of all HI-samples from the UCS tests after 7 days
(a) HI-1h-28d
(b) HI-5h-28d
(c) HI-24h-28d
Figure 5.16: Corrected data of all HI-samples from the UCS tests after 28 days
Figure 5.15 and 5.16 show similar results with the highest compression strength found
from the samples with a compaction delay of 1 hour, followed by 5 hours compaction
delay, and at last the 24 hours compaction delay.
Figure 5.15 shows as expected that the samples HI-1h-7d (2) and (5) curves differ from
the rest, this can be seen as the slope of the two curves are not as steep which results in
lower Young’s modulus.
Figure 5.16 shows that HI-24h-28d (3) result in a low Young’s modulus, this can not be
explained by the values of the samples. Maybe the reason can be found in the installation
of the sample in the machine, but nothing notable was observed.
Page 47 of 91
==PAGE:54==
01.01.2025
5.3
Soil Performance
Summary
At Table 5.10 the achieved values of the maximum compressive strength and the estimated
stiffness are gathered. From the table, it is clear that there is a big difference between
the three different soil unstabilised parameters. It also noticed the difference between
the unstabilized and stabilized soil varies a lot - the comparison between the different
soils together with potential explanations and effects that can influence the results will
be discussed in section 6
Table 5.10: Values of the maximum compressive strength and the E-modulus found from
the UCS-tests
HER
HOR
HI
Mixing
fc
[kPa]
E-modulus
[MPa]
fc
[kPa]
E-modulus
[MPa]
fc
[kPa]
E-modulus
[MPa]
Unstabilized
269.3
81.32
260.8
29.5
139.3
1.643
1% Lime, 1h - 7d (1)
286.5
118.2
489.7
175.0
405.9
34.00
1% Lime, 1h - 7d (2)
385.7
114.6
523.8
177.6
344.9
12.74
1% Lime, 1h - 7d (5)
411.1
124.11
630.2
191.8
254.2
7.043
1% Lime, 5h - 7d (1)
353.0
129.2
527.8
184.2
367.7
45.66
1% Lime, 5h - 7d (2)
330.4
99.91
563.9
222.8
376.6
45.44
1% Lime, 24h -7d (1)
317.2
111.5
276.4
85.0
340.3
26.81
1% Lime, 24h -7d (2)
334.5
101.8
427.2
188.0
319.5
20.50
1% Lime, 1h - 28d (3)
368.9
109.5
843.0
311.9
419.8
49.71
1% Lime, 1h - 28d (4)
413.2
160.8
417.2
19.3
443.1
51.86
1% Lime, 5h - 28d (3)
328.4
96.33
737.8
244.3
421.6
50.46
1% Lime, 5h - 28d (4)
352.9
120.6
745.0
265.8
418.0
52.92
1% Lime, 24h -28d (3)
349.1
120.2
655.0
226.9
309.8
24.53
1% Lime, 24h -28d (4)
350.6
100.3
696.6
242.0
338.3
33.52
Page 48 of 91
==PAGE:55==
01.01.2025
6
Discussion
In this section the different results will be compared, discussed, and connected to the
theory. the section is divided into the following parts: Classification, which discusses the
soil improvements. Stabilisation, which compares the results of the stabilisation between
the different soils and to the theory.
Further, the effects influencing the stabilisation
will be discussed. Soil performance which compares the results of the soil stabilisation,
discusses how the factors of compaction delay and curing time influence the result, and
how the results fit with the theory. At last, Soil stabilisation in practice which discusses
how the found results are relevant for practice use.
6.1
Classification
Gradation
On Figure 6.1 the sieve analysis from Figure 5.1 is plotted in the graph showing the
recommended grain size distribution. It is necessary to emphasise that the graph is only
a recommendation, not a requirement or standard.
Figure 6.1: Grain size distribution - recommendation
The figure shows that not all of the obtained grain size distributions are within the shaded
area. The recommended area is primarily established for a particle size of 0.002 to 0.2
mm. The sandy particles of 0.2 mm seem to have high passing quantities regarding all
materials. RI and HI have lower quantities than recommended for particle sizes of 0.02
mm and 0.002 mm. On the other hand, HOR and HER are placed within the area of
recommendation with their clay content of approximately 27 %. The high clay contents
contribute to the pozzolanic reaction which improves the overall stabilisation which cor-
responds with the theory, as lime is known to react well with high-clay soils. This can
also support why the HOR soil leads to a more significant reaction and strength gain.
Although based on the grain size distribution, it is expected for HER to react more in-
tensively, it can be explained by the lime content. For HI, the clay content is 14.5 %,
significantly lower than HOR and HER. Compared with HOR, the lower strength gain
for HI, especially from 7 to 28 days, is clear, which can be associated with the lower clay
content.
Page 49 of 91
==PAGE:56==
01.01.2025
6.1
Classification
The result of this project seems to suggest that the graph is very conservative. That being
said, the graph is adjusted for stabilised soil as a construction material, and therefore,
there might be some stricter requirements for the obtained strength. Even though the
book’s data is based on road engineering, its focus is earthen structures, which have higher
stabilisation requirements.
With the results in mind and the book’s second graph of grain size distribution from
cement stability, it seems the soil does not need as high a clay content to benefit from the
soil improvement as first thought.
Atterberg limits
On Figure 6.2 the results of the Atterberg limits are plotted in the graph showing the
recommended PI. It is necessary to emphasise that the graph is only a recommendation,
not a requirement or standard.
Figure 6.2: Plasticity index - recommendation
The figure shows that only HER is within the shaded area. From the result of the achieved
strength it is obvious to question how reliable this graph is. That said the graph is only a
recommendation, and it should be mentioned that there is a difference between how the
samples are made in this project and how the book describes the method of mixing.
The results of this project show that all types of clays can be stabilised, but there is
a difference in the amount that can be achieved.
Further, it could be investigated if
there is a correlation between the plasticity index and the amount of lime needed. The
results of this project suggest that soil with high plasticity needs a higher content of
lime if the reaction should last for 24 hours. According to the general theory, highly
plastic soils are more reactive with lime. Therefore recommendations are made for the
lower limit for the plasticity index. Meanwhile, the upper limits are assessed as being
due to complications with compaction for highly plastic soils. For HER the complication
of mixing and compaction was already present for the unstabilised soil. As visualized in
Figure 5.5, it was harder to establish the density curve, and the points deviated more
significantly.
Mineral composition
In this project, the mineral composition of the soil has not been determined. The theory
shows that different minerals influence how the different materials (clay, water, and lime)
Page 50 of 91
==PAGE:57==
01.01.2025
6.2
Stabilization
react. From the results of BET, one can get an indication of the clay minerals. However,
mineral identification requires additional specific techniques. Table 5.3 which shows the
specific surface of the three materials can indicate that HER among others contains illite
or smectite, while HOR and HI with lower specific areas can indicate kaolinite, illite, and
chlorite.
Another parameter pointing towards the lime contents being too low in HER is the results
from the surface area of the unstabilised soil. From the theory, it is known, that with
a larger surface area, the lime content should be higher as the lime has more surface to
react with. Another consequence of high surface area, is the rate of reaction, as it happens
faster when there are more available surfaces. The surface areas for the soils also align
with the plasticity, as the highest values of those properties are found for HER, HOR, and
then HI, respectively. One would also expect the water adsorption capacity to be higher
for more surface area, and in the same way, the plasticity to be higher as well.
6.2
Stabilization
6.2.1
Proctor
Proctor curves
(a) 1 hour delayed compaction
(b) 5 hours delayed compaction (c) 24 hours delayed compaction
Figure 6.3: Comparison between the different soils regarding the delayed compaction
The Figure 6.3 shows that the compacted dry density decreases and the optimal water
content increases when the delayed compaction time increases.
This tendency is also
found in studies by F.G. Bell, Di Sante, J.K., and Mitchell and D. R. Hooper [5, 6, 7].
From the literature, it is pointed out that the compaction was difficult due to the high
plasticity of the soil [15], the same has been an issue in this project.
Page 51 of 91
==PAGE:58==
01.01.2025
6.2
Stabilization
Optimal values
(a) Optimal Water Content
(b) Optimal Compacted Dry Density
Figure 6.4: Optimal values of the different delay times and soil
Figure 6.4 illustrates the optimal values found in the above proctor curves, and in these
graphs, the unstabilised soil values are included. The values show that the biggest changes
happen when the soil goes from unstabilised to stabilised. The figure shows that the
change between unstabilised and stabilised for HER is not as significant as for HOR and
HI; this could indicate that the soil needs a higher lime content to meet its potential
stabilisation.
Chemical reactions between the lime, water and clay particles can explain a reason why
the optimal dry density decreases with increased compaction delay. When the clay par-
ticles begin to flocculate as a result of the lime being added the chemical bond between
the clay particles grows stronger as time goes, thereby a compaction to the same degree
of dry density will need more energy from the proctor. Because the compression energy
in these experiments is constant the dry density is decreased, some study cases show that
the sample is compacted to the same degree of dry density the compaction delay would
not influence the achieved strength.
The issue of the pozzolanic reaction taking place before the compaction could be that the
bonds will break during the compaction, and under the curing period where the pozzolanic
reaction ideally should take place to obtain the high strength could be less effective as
these reactions only take place while lime and alkaline is available.
Another aspect of the stabilisation is the mineral of the different clay, some minerals react
quicker with the lime resulting in stronger bonds between the particles quickly.
The chemical reaction can again explain a reason why the optimal water content increases
as lime needs the water to react with the clay. As there is a longer period for the chemical
reaction, additional water is necessary.
Water is an important factor for the reaction to proceed therefore it is beneficial to be at
the optimal water content or to the wet side of the proctor curve when the soil should be
stabilised for samples or in practice. The reaction is exotherm therefore some water can
evaporate if the samples are not cured properly. In this project, the samples are cured
Page 52 of 91
==PAGE:59==
01.01.2025
6.2
Stabilization
under 100% relative humidity to prevent the water content from decreasing during the
curing period. In practice this is not realistic if the construction site is too big therefore
the compaction should be done with a higher water content than the optimal so the evap-
oration does not result in a lack of water needed for the reactions to continue.
Comparing the results of how the optimal water content and optimal compacted dry
density behave regarding the delayed compaction with the known studies, this project
shows similar results and trends as the theory.
Standard deviation / Measurement errors
The importance of measurement uncertainty, particularly weight, was an issue during the
proctor tests. Due to the small amount of soil used to determine the water content the
first weight, with a measurement uncertainty of ±0.1g, resulted in a measurement error
of around ±0.25. Taking the optimal water content values into account this error has a
significant importance when the values of optimal values vary in an interval of 0.3-1.4%-
points.
Looking at the Equation 19 it can be seen that the relative uncertainty for the water
content is also a part of the measurement error for the dry density, therefore is the mea-
surement uncertainty on the scale used for the water content very important for the
precision of the result.
Later a new weight was used with a measurement uncertainty of ±0.001g, which reduced
the measurement error to ±0.0025 on the water content.
6.2.2
Effect influencing the soil stabilisation
Mixing
Mixing the soil samples was an issue during the project period because this is essential
for useful results. The issues have both been related to the mixing technique and soil
behaviour.
First, two different mixing techniques were used; by hand and machine. It is clear that
for good results, the soil needs to be homogeneous before compaction. This is needed to
ensure the water content is evenly distributed because the compacted dry density depends
on it. In addition, it is important when lime is added, because lumps of dry soil will mean
that the lime only reacts with part of the soil and thereby stabilisation will occur unevenly.
Second, some soils are difficult to mix regarding the target water density. This is partly
due to the clay particles’ binding water, which is not removed during the drying process.
Then add the lime, and some of the water will evaporate; therefore, it is important to be
on the wet side of the Proctor curve; if not, there will not be enough water for the lime
to react with.
Lime content
As mentioned in the theory there are two main methods to determine the lime content;
pH measurement and lime fixation point. In this project, a lime content of 1% is used
without any investigations. Instead, the pH measurement is used to control if the right
Page 53 of 91
==PAGE:60==
01.01.2025
6.3
Soil Performance
amount of lime is added so the pozzolanic reaction can continue for 24 hours and thereby
achieve an increased strength. The lime fixation point is calculated to compare the two
methods.
The pH measurements show that HER does not retain a pH of 12.4 after 5 hours, and
therefore the pozzolanic reactions stop between 1 and 5 hours. This means that an in-
crease in soil strength is at a minimum, which can also be seen from the ratios in Table 6.1.
HER is expected to benefit from a higher lime content, so a pH of 12.4 could be retained
for all 24 hours of the delayed compaction period, allowing pozzolanic reactions to con-
tinue. From the pH measurement, the lime content of 1 % is enough for HOR and HI.
From the study by PL. Hilt and Davidson the optimal lime content to obtain the max-
imum increase in plastic limit is found (Lime fixation point). By using Equation 2 the
optimal lime content for HER and HOR is found to be 2 % and 1.6 % for HI, and thereby
could all soil benefit from a higher lime content. The lime content found from the lime
fixation point is focused on the soil improvement and not the strength.
Though the two methods do not investigate the same reaction, the two results are somehow
comparable as the pH measurement after 1 hour also indicates the soil improvement. From
the lime fixation point, it is found that the maximum increase of the plastic limit will not
be achieved for any of the soil, but from the pH measurement, it is found that the pH is
high enough after 1 hour for all soil to obtain some soil improvement.
6.3
Soil Performance
In this section, the soil performance will be discussed based on the results from the un-
confined compression tests. The results of each soil are already compared individually,
therefore this section will focus on the soils in comparison and the further investigated
factors that can influence the results.
Figure 6.5 and 6.6 are comparing the achieved unconfined compression strength at 7 and
28 days, while Figure 6.7 and 6.8 focus on the achieved stiffness. For every sample a
duplicate is created, and the plots are thus an average value of the two. The results are
also summarised in Table 6.1 as the gained ratio compared to the unstabilised soil. The
red-marked ratios are the ones that are discarded.
Page 54 of 91
==PAGE:61==
01.01.2025
6.3
Soil Performance
Table 6.1: Ratio of the strength and E-modulus between the unstabilised and stabilised
sample
HER
HOR
HI
Mixing
fc
E-modulus
fc
E-modulus
fc
E-modulus
Unstabilized
-
-
-
-
-
-
1% Lime, 1h - 7d (1)
1.1
1.5
1.9
5.9
2.9
20.7
1% Lime, 1h - 7d (2)
1.4
1.4
2.0
6.0
2.5
7.8
1% Lime, 1h - 7d (5)
1.5
1.5
2.4
6.5
1.8
4.3
1% Lime, 5h - 7d (1)
1.3
1.6
2.0
6.2
2.6
27.8
1% Lime, 5h - 7d (2)
1.2
1.2
2.2
7.5
2.7
27.7
1% Lime, 24h -7d (1)
1.2
1.4
1.1
2.9
2.4
16.3
1% Lime, 24h -7d (2)
1.2
1.3
1.6
6.4
2.3
12.5
1% Lime, 1h - 28d (3)
1.4
1.3
3.2
10.6
3.0
30.3
1% Lime, 1h - 28d (4)
1.5
2.0
1.6
0.7
3.2
31.6
1% Lime, 5h - 28d (3)
1.2
1.2
2.8
8.3
3.0
30.7
1% Lime, 5h - 28d (4)
1.3
1.5
2.9
9.0
3.0
32.2
1% Lime, 24h -28d (3)
1.3
1.5
2.5
7.7
2.2
14.9
1% Lime, 24h -28d (4)
1.3
1.2
2.7
8.2
2.4
20.4
6.3.1
Strength
Figure 6.5: UCS for 7 days of curing for the 3 materials at different delayed compaction
times
Page 55 of 91
==PAGE:62==
01.01.2025
6.3
Soil Performance
Figure 6.6: UCS for 28 days of curing for the 3 materials at different delayed compaction
times
By comparing Figure 6.5 and 6.6 the strength development of each soil can be investi-
gated. For each soil, a change in strength is achieved from the unstabilised soil to the
stabilised soil, and a tendency of the strength to decrease with the delayed compaction
times is observed.
In addition, the figures show that HOR develops significantly more strength between 7
and 28 days, while HER and HI achieve nearly the same strength after 28 days as the 7
days strength.
6.3.2
Stiffness
Figure 6.7: Stiffness for 7 days of curing for the 3 materials at different delayed compaction
times
Page 56 of 91
==PAGE:63==
01.01.2025
6.3
Soil Performance
Figure 6.8: Stiffness for 28 days of curing for the 3 materials at different delayed com-
paction times
In Figure 6.7 and 6.8 the same tendency is illustrated for the stiffness of the soil. How-
ever, the development of the stiffness is not as significantly increasing from 7 to 28 days,
which is expected as the stiffness also is a significant result of the short-term reaction.
As stated in theory, the strain is mostly influenced in the short-term which also align
with the stiffness. It is still noticeable that all samples with a compaction delay of 1-hour
benefit the most from the extra curing time.
It is interesting to look closer at HER and HI; HER from other results indicates that
the stabilisation could benefit from a higher lime content, but the requirements are still
fulfilled for most of the samples. HI has the highest rate of achieved E-modulus compared
to the unstabilised soil, but still, not enough to fulfil the requirements, this could be
because there is not enough clay in the soil.
6.3.3
Factors under investigation
In subsubsection 6.3.1 and subsubsection 6.3.2 the main results of this study are visualised
and introduced. The main factors investigated in this report are compaction delay and
the curing periods of clay tills mixed with lime, which will be discussed further below.
Compaction delay
Focusing first on the compaction delay, there is a general tendency for the materials to
lose strength and stiffness with an increased delay in compaction. The most significant
change in UCS and stiffness is found for HOR cured at 28 days, which decreased respec-
tively by 22.3 % and 27.3 % delayed from 1 h to 24 h. The high decrease in HOR is most
likely related to its higher response and reactivity with 1 % lime. The observed decrease
in strength is according to the literature explained both by the short-term flocculation of
the soil and simultaneously by the pozzolanic reaction. The flocculation results in a more
open structure which subsequently results in lower strength and stiffness. Moreover, the
early resistance from the beginning of the pozzolanic reaction can enhance the compaction
resistance of the soil, making it more resistant to compaction and consequently resulting
Page 57 of 91
==PAGE:64==
01.01.2025
6.4
Stabilisation used in practise
in higher porosity and lower densities. The behaviour aligns with section 6.2.1 about the
proctor curves, as densities are observed to decrease with longer compaction delays.
Additionally, the strength and stiffness for HER and HOR seem to decrease more from 1
h to 5 h than from 5 h to 24 h. A possible explanation for the behaviour can be linked to
the cation exchange and the soil’s flocculation. As the cation exchange happens early in
the lime reaction, the highest effect on strength and stiffness by flocculation is expected
to be observed initially. The pozzolanic reaction is long-term but is also expected to be
active at 7 days and 28 days as long as the pH is above 12.4. This is interesting from a
practical point of view, as it is desired to accomplish the highest strength possible and
yet still be realistic in a timescale of compaction. Ali and Mohamed, 2017 had similar
observations, namely, that the first 12 hours of delay were most crucial for the strength
[15].
Curing time
Secondly, the effect of curing time is investigated with a timestep of 7 days and 28 days.
Once again, the overall most significant influence is for the soil HOR which has achieved
relative UCS and stiffness rate gains of 3.2 and 10.6 respectively, compared to the unsta-
bilised soil for HOR-7 days (1), see Table 6.1. It should however be noted, that the rate of
HI for 1 h - 28d (4) is similar for UCS and higher for the stiffness. As the values of strain
and stiffness are very low for the unstabilised HI, its relative ratio is, therefore, higher for
smaller changes. The lime stabilisation of HER is seen to have the lowest impact on the
strength and stiffness and the maximum ratio is found to be 1.5 for UCS and 2.0 for the
E-modulus according to Table 6.1.
It is furthermore clearly visualized that HOR gains significantly more strength from 7 to
28 days compared to HER which almost doesn’t react from the time interval, and to HI
which has a low increase in strength. This observation further indicates that the HOR
soil is more reactive in the long term with the conditions and with 1 % lime added.
6.4
Stabilisation used in practise
From the results found in this project and the use of stabilised soil regarding the sub-base
layer, the topic is more angled towards soil improvement, as the minerals also influence the
early properties of lime addition. A general investigation of the mineral composition can
add to a more widespread knowledge of lime stabilisation, which also includes long-term
strength gain if soil stabilisation for a base layer is investigated. For the following part, the
focus will be the soil’s ability to act as a sub-base layer for road- and railway construction.
The achieved E-modulus is the most important. As mentioned in the introduction the
sub-base layer’s purpose is to keep a frost-free environment, and this requirement is con-
trolled by the soil dynamic E-modulus. From the results the static E-modulus is found,
which is about 1/3 of the dynamic E-modulus, to be on the conservative side the found
E-modulus will be compared with the requirements. By comparing the requirements of
a dynamic E-modulus of 100 MPa with the achieved static E-modulus is found from the
results in Table 5.10 that all samples of HOR fulfil the requirements, for HER the static
E-modulus is close to the requirement with most of the samples (except 2) is accepted
due to the requirements, while for HI none of the samples fulfils the requirement for a
Page 58 of 91
==PAGE:65==
01.01.2025
6.4
Stabilisation used in practise
frost-free environment.
It is difficult to set specific requirements for the soil, lime content, and mixing times.
As all soils are classified as clay till the project shows very different results due to the
soil’s different clay content and plasticity index. That said as the soil is used for the
sub-base layer and thereby does not have strict requirements for the strength of the soil
it can be discussed if a full proctor test is necessary in all cases regarding road- and
railway constructions. With the difficulty in mind here are some recommendations of
requirements for the soil, lime content, mixing, and curing.
Soil classification
Regarding the soil classification, the biggest difference between the soils is their Atterberg
limits and thereby also plasticity index. The PI is found to be 2.5 for HI, 17.2 for HOR
and 24.7 for HER, and this characteristic seems to influence the outcome of the stabilisa-
tion.
Other studies and this project found it difficult to compact the soil properly if the PI was
too high, this could speak for a requirement of a maximum IP. On the other hand, the
problem with the PI could be solved by adding a higher lime content as this will reduce
the PI. Further, for the results it seems like the PI also can be too low, so the required
stiffness can not be achieved, though the stabilisation was successful, as for HI.
From this project, a specific PI ratio can not be concluded. However, the results point
out, that an IP of 2.5 is too low. Even though, the results point out that the stabilisation
was not optimal for HER, the requirement for a sub-base layer was fulfilled and thereby
a maximum PI can not be defined.
Lime content
Looking at the lime content regarding the soil being able to keep a pH value of 12.4 and
thereby get the full effect of the 24 hours, 1 % is not enough.
This could indicate that HER would benefit from a higher lime content, that said the
main achievement of a higher lime content would be in the strength development, and
therefore it could be discussed if it is necessary when the main goal for the sub-base layer
is an increment of stiffness.
A higher lime content should be to reduce the PI further, and thereby probably do the
compaction easier.
Compaction delay
Regarding the soil being used for the sub-base layer of road- and railway construction,
the different compaction delays do not influence the results. This is because the stiffness
development is affected by short-term reactions such as flocculation. Therefore the effect
is shown early and is a result of the soil being stabilised or unstabilised. Therefore, for
the soil being used as a sub-base layer, there will be no concerns if the lime is mixed with
the soil up to 24 hours before the compaction takes place.
It should be clarified that the soil must be covered after mixing with the lime, so the
water can’t evaporate.
Page 59 of 91
==PAGE:66==
01.01.2025
6.4
Stabilisation used in practise
Curing time
As the stiffness results from the short-term reaction, this curing time is not crucial. That
said, a test must be done to verify that the stabilisation is successful, and the static E-
modulus fulfils the requirements. Here the recommendation is to perform a light falling
weight test.
Page 60 of 91
==PAGE:67==
01.01.2025
7
Conclusion
This project has investigated different clay till from Denmark; Hillerød, Herning, Horsens
and Ringsted, as the sub-base layer in road- and railway constructions. The experiments
of the project can be divided into three parts; Classification to determine the physical
properties, Stabilisation where the soil is prepared, the optimal condition of the soil stabil-
isation is determined, and stabilised samples is created, and Soil performance to determine
the mechanical properties. The focus has been to investigate how delayed compaction and
curing times influence the properties of the soil as it is being lime-stabilised.
Based on the experimental work the main conclusions of the physical and mechanical
properties are:
• That the OWC increases and the ODD decreases when lime is added and further
when the delayed compaction time is increased.
• That soil with high PI was difficult to compact properly, and that stabilisation with
lime made the compaction easier.
• That soil with a high PI needs a higher lime content for the stabilisation to work
properly and to maintain the high pH value needed for the pozzolanic reaction to
maintain in the testing period of 24 hours.
• That the clay content is connected to the potential achieved strength, where lower
clay content has a lower strength gain and high clay content will achieve a higher
strength gain.
• That the strength and stiffness decreased when the compaction delay was increased,
as a result of the decreased dry density.
• That the strength and stiffness were increased as the curing time was increased.
The largest increase was seen in the strength.
From the practical point of view regarding road- and railway construction, the decrement
in stiffness is insignificant due to the compaction delay, and thereby this is not a concern
regarding a compaction delay of up to 24 hours of stabilised soil being used for the sub-
base layer, if the soil is covered under the mellow period. Based on the results of the
curing time, the required stiffness should be achieved within the fist 7 days.
Page 61 of 91
==PAGE:68==
01.01.2025
8
Future investigation
The future investigation of this project could be very extensive as lime stabilisation in
general has broad applications. However, in this section, the topic is narrowed down to
road applications and reflects the project’s purpose.
In the application of lime-improved soil for road and pavements, one of the most im-
portant requirements is that the environment is frost-free. When the soil is used for the
sub-base layer, it becomes crucial to investigate the capillary rise height. In the worst-case
scenario, the water can rise into the sub-base layer through capillary action and freeze,
causing frost heaving and most likely damage to the pavement structure. Therefore, the
capillary rise height is a critical property to investigate, as it can influence the durability
of the road structure. In the same context it would for future work also be essential to
investigate the permeability of lime-stabilised soil. Highly permeable soil allows the water
to infiltrate and weaken the pozzolanic reaction during the soil stabilisation, at the same
time, the drainage system of the soil should be considered. A general understanding of
the permeability is beneficial for the drainage and road design. This could be performed
by a triaxial test with falling and constant head permeability tests.
Another relevant work could be to scale up the application from a sub-base layer into a
base layer. The focus of this project has mainly been on sub-base layers which do not
have as strict requirements as base layers would have. If the soil should be applied for the
base, it should carry a heavier load from traffic, etc. In this perspective, some strength
requirements can be investigated for different categories of traffic and loads. However, it
can be challenging to set up general requirements, as it is highly dependent on individual
projects. If this focus was the case, the optimal lime content would be relevant to deter-
mine, to achieve the highest strength possible if necessary.
The overall end goal of the literature studies about lime stabilisation is to find a standard
or some guidelines for when to apply lime as a stabilizer. As earlier mentioned, several
studies have been conducted about which factors influence the performance of the sta-
bilised soil. However, some specific requirements are generally lacking for when to apply
the method. Ideally, the classification tests could serve as determining factors for when
soil is suitable for stabilisation. This will be a significant amount of future work, but it is
still important to have the end goal in mind.
Page 62 of 91
==PAGE:69==
01.01.2025
REFERENCES
References
[1] Leroy, J.-L., Chazallon, J.-M., Wendling, L., Soil Treatment with Lime and/or Hy-
draulic Binders: Application to the Construction of Fills and Capping Layers, John
Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2021.
[2] Muzahim Al-Mukhtar, M., Abdelmadjid Lasledj, and J. F. Alcover, Lime Consump-
tion of Different Clayey Soils, Journal of Soil Stabilization, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 231-245,
2023.
[3] D. Ciancio, C.T.S. Beckett, and J.A.H. Carraro, ”Optimum lime content identification
for lime-stabilised rammed earth,” Construction and Building Materials
[4] A. Muhmed and D. Wanatowski, ”Effect of Lime Stabilisation on the Strength and
Microstructure of Clay,” IOSR Journal of Mechanical and Civil Engineering (IOSR-
JMCE), Available: www.iosrjournals.org
[5] Mitchell, J. K., & Hooper, D. R. Influence of time between mixing and compaction on
properties of a lime-stabilized expansive clay, Highway Research Board Bulletin, 304,
1961.
[6] Bell, F.G., Lime stabilization of clay minerals and soils, Engineering Geology, 42,
223-237, 1996.
[7] M. Di Sante, E. Fratalocchi, F. Mazzieri, and V. Brianzoni, ”Influence of delayed
compaction on the compressibility and hydraulic conductivity of soil–lime mixtures,”
*Engineering Geology*, vol. 185, pp. 131–138, 2015.
[8] Mateos, M. (1964). ”Soil-Lime Research at Iowa State University.” *Journal of Soil
Mechanics and Foundations Division*, ASCE, 90(2), 27–153.
[9] Harrison Hilt, G., and Davidson, D. T. (1960). Lime Fixation in Clayey Soils. Iowa
Engineering Experiment Station, Iowa State University, Ames. 1st Lt, U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers; Professor of Civil Engineering.
[10] Eades, J. L., and Grim, R. E. (Year). A Quick Test to Determine Lime Require-
ments for Lime Stabilization. Research Assistant Professor and Research Professor,
Department of Geology, University of Illinois.
[11] Beetham, P., Dijkstra, T., Dixon, N., Fleming, P., Hutchison, R., and Bateman, J.,
“Lime stabilisation for earthworks: A UK perspective,” Proceedings of the Institution
of Civil Engineers - Ground Improvement, vol. 168, no. GI2, pp. 81–95, May 2015,
[12] Vejdirektoratet, H˚andbog Dimensionering - Befæstelser og forstærkningsbelægninger,
02.21.2022.
[13] Hugo Houben and Hubert Guillaud, Earth Construction: A Comprehensive Guide,
1994.
[14] H.B. Nagaraj, A. Rajesh, M.V. Sravan, Influence of soil gradation, proportion and
combination of admixtures on the properties and durability of CSEBs, 2016.
Page 63 of 91
==PAGE:70==
01.01.2025
REFERENCES
[15] Hatim Ali, Mostafa Mohamed, The effects of compaction delay and environmental
temperature on the mechanical and hydraulic properties of lime-stabilized extremely
high plastic clays, 2017.
[16] Herrin, M., and Mitchell, H., Lime-Soil Mixtures, Highway Research Board Bulletin
304, Washington, D.C., 1961.
[17] E.H. Tan, E.M.M. Zahran, and S.J. Tan, A review of chemical stabilisation in road
construction, IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 2020.
[18] Haas, S., & Ritter, H.-J. (2019). Soil improvement with quicklime–long-time be-
haviour and carbonation. Road Materials and Pavement Design, 20(8), 1941–1951.
Taylor & Francis.
[19] GEUS, Danmarks Digitale Jordartskort 1:25 000 version 7.0 - ArcMap/Ar-
cGISPro/QGIS,
Available:
https://dataverse.geus.dk/dataset.xhtml?
persistentId=doi:10.22008/FK2/HBP9VA
[20] Sørensen I., Ingeniørgeologi, Praxis, pp. 191-192, 2019.
[21] Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, Lermineralers evne til at sorbere of tilbageholde
forureningskomponenter Miljøstyrelsen, 2016.
[22] DANSK STANDARD, Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing of
soil - Part 3: Determination of particle density, DS/EN ISO 17892-3:2015, 01.08.2016
[23] DANSK STANDARD, Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing of
soil - Part 4: Determination of particle size distribution, DS/EN ISO 17892-4:2016,
05.12.2016
[24] DANSK STANDARD, Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing
of soil - Part 12: Determination of Atterberg limits, DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892-12,
29.11.2004
[25] K. H. Head, Manual of Soil Laboratory Testing, Pentech Press, vol. 2, Chapter 2,
1992.
[26] DANSK STANDARD, Determination of the specific surface area of solids by gas
adsorption - BET method, DS/ISO 9277:2022, 15.11.2022
[27] DANSK STANDARD, Unbound and hydraulically bound mixtures - Part 2: Test
methods for laboratory reference density and water content - Proctor compaction,
DS/EN 13286-2, 12.01.2011
[28] INTERNATIONAL STANDARD, Dtandard Test Method for Using pH to Estimate
the Soil-Lime Proportion Requirement for Soil Stabilization, D6276-19, 01.02.2019
[29] DANSK STANDARD, Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing of
soil - Part 7: Unconfined compression test, ISO 17892-7:2017, 22.02.2018
Page 64 of 91
==PAGE:71==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix
A
Pycnometer test - raw data
B
Hydrometer test - raw data
C
Sieve analysis tets - raw data
D
Atterberg limit test - raw data
E1
Proctor test - raw data - HER-1h
E2
Proctor test - raw data - HER-5h
E3
Proctor test - raw data - HER-24h
E4
Proctor test - raw data - HER-US
E5
Proctor test - raw data - HI-1h
E6
Proctor test - raw data - HI-5h
E7
Proctor test - raw data - HI-24h
E8
Proctor test - raw data - HI-US
E9
Proctor test - raw data - HOR-1h
E10
Proctor test - raw data - HOR-5h
E11
Proctor test - raw data - HOR-24h
E12
Proctor test - raw data - HOR-US
F1
Samples for UCS test - raw data - HER
F2
Samples for UCS test - raw data - data HI
F3
Samples for UCS test - raw data - data HOR
F4
Samples for UCS test - raw data - data US
G1
Stress-strain curves with trendline HER-7d
G2
Stress-strain curves with trendline HER-28d
G3
Stress-strain curves with trendline HOR-7d
G4
Stress-strain curves with trendline HOR-28d
G5
Stress-strain curves with trendline HI-7d
G6
Stress-strain curves with trendline HI-28d
Page 65 of 91
==PAGE:72==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix A
Pykno (4) Pykno (14) Pykno (15)
Pykno (9)
Pykno (8)
Pykno (11)
Dry pycnometer 100ml (m0)
[g]
43,3
47,5
47,7
Dry pycnometer 100ml (m0)
[g]
43
48,7
48,2
Pycnometer + controlled fluid (m1) 
[g]
142,5
149,5
148,8
Pycnometer + controlled fluid (m1) 
[g]
142,5
150,8
150,2
Callibration - volume 
[ml]
99,44
102,25
101,35
Callibration - volume 
[ml]
99,74
102,35
102,25
Vand temp. 23 grader
Vand temp. 23 grader
Pycnometer + dry soil (m2) 
[g]
57,4
62,3
61,6
Pycnometer + dry soil (m2) 
[g]
57,1
60,8
60
Pycnometer + soil + controlled fluid (m3) 
[g]
151,1
158,6
157,2
Pycnometer + soil + controlled fluid (m3) 
[g]
151,1
158,1
157,7
Dry mass (m4)
[g]
14,1
14,8
13,9
Dry mass (m4)
[g]
14,1
12,1
11,8
Density of solid particles (rho_s)
g/cm^3
2,57
2,60
2,53
Density of solid particles (rho_s)
g/cm^3
2,57
2,53
2,75
Vand temp. 24 grader
Avg.
2,57
Vand temp. 24 grader
Avg.
2,62
Pykno (1) Pykno (8)
Pykno (11)
Pykno (5)
Pykno (13) Pykno (18)
Dry pycnometer 100ml (m0)
[g]
47,6
49,1
48,2
Dry pycnometer 100ml (m0)
[g]
48
47,2
47,4
Pycnometer + controlled fluid (m1) 
[g]
149,2
150,9
150,3
Pycnometer + controlled fluid (m1) 
[g]
147,9
148
146,6
Callibration - volume 
[ml]
101,85
102,05
102,35
Callibration - volume 
[ml]
100,14
101,05
99,44
Vand temp. 22 grader
Vand temp. 23 grader
Pycnometer + dry soil (m2) 
[g]
62,6
60,7
61,3
Pycnometer + dry soil (m2) 
[g]
60,7
65,5
61,7
Pycnometer + soil + controlled fluid (m3) 
[g]
158,5
158,1
158,4
Pycnometer + soil + controlled fluid (m3) 
[g]
155,6
159,2
155,4
Dry mass (m4)
[g]
15
11,6
13,1
Dry mass (m4)
[g]
12,7
18,3
14,3
Density of solid particles (rho_s)
g/cm^3
2,62
2,62
2,60
Density of solid particles (rho_s)
g/cm^3
2,55
2,58
2,60
Vand temp. 21 grader
Avg.
2,61
Vand temp. 24 grader
Avg.
2,58
HER
HI
HOR
RI
Calibration 
Calibration 
Calibration 
Calibration 
Page 66 of 91
==PAGE:73==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix B
Start time
Time 
[hh:mm:ss]
Time 
[s]
Time 
[min]
Actual 
Reding
Corrected 
reading
Temperatur
[C]
Rh
[mm]
H
[mm]
Hr
[mm]
η
[mPa*s]
di
[μm]
Rd
[mm]
K
[%]
Kc
[%]
Cont. 
213,6
08:38
00:00:00
1 0,016667
41
20,50
23,9
20,80
37,8
96,7
0,9164
63
21,50
86,3
36,6
Cont. + soil 
239
00:00:34
34
0,57
39,5
19,75
23,9
20,05
40,3
99,2
0,9164
56
20,75
83,3
35,3
Soil sample 
Sieve analysis
25,4
00:01:00
60
1,0
39
19,50
23,9
19,80
41,1
100,0
0,9164
42
20,5
82,3
34,9
ρs
2,57
00:02:00
120
2,0
38
19,00
23,9
19,30
42,8
101,7
0,9164
30
20
80,3
34,0
ρw
1
00:04:04
244
4,1
37
18,50
23,9
18,80
44,4
103,3
0,9164
21
19,5
78,2
33,2
h
139,3
00:08:01
481
8,0
36
18,00
23,9
18,30
46,1
105,0
0,9164
15
19
76,2
32,3
Vh
61,3
09:08
00:30:04
1804
30,1
33,5
16,75
24
17,05
50,2
109,1
0,9143
8
17,75
71,2
30,2
L
315
09:38
01:00:06
3606
60,1
33
16,50
24,1
16,80
51,0
109,9
0,9122
6
17,5
70,2
29,8
Cm
0,3
10:38
02:00:32
7232
120,5
32
16,00
25
16,30
52,6
111,6
0,8935
4
17
68,2
28,9
N
7,7
14:38
06:00:09
21609
360,15
30
15,00
26
15,30
55,9
114,9
0,8734
2
16
64,2
27,2
R0
-0,7
08:38
24:04:30
86670
1444,50
29
14,50
23,8
14,80
57,6
116,5
0,9185
1
15,5
62,20
26,4
f2,00
42,36741
Start time
Time 
[hh:mm:ss]
Time 
[s]
Time
[min]
Reding, R'h
[mm]
Corrected 
Reading
Temperatur
[C]
Rh
[mm]
H
[mm]
Hr
[mm]
η
[mPa*s]
di
[μm]
Rd
[mm]
K
[%]
Kc
[%]
Cont. 
276,4
08:22
00:00:00
0
0
42
21,00
23,9
21,30
36,2
95,1
0,9164
63
22
84,3
27,3
Cont. + soil 
303
00:00:30
30
0,5
41
20,50
23,9
20,80
37,8
96,7
0,9164
59
21,5
82,4
26,7
Soil sample
Sieve analysis 
26,6
00:01:00
60
1
40,3
20,15
23,9
20,45
39,0
97,9
0,9164
42
21,15
81,0
26,2
ρs
2,57
00:02:10
130
2,2
39,5
19,75
23,9
20,05
40,3
99,2
0,9164
29
20,75
79,5
25,7
ρw
1
00:04:06
246
4,1
38
19,00
23,9
19,30
42,8
101,7
0,9164
21
20
76,6
24,8
h
139,3
00:08:04
484
8,1
36
18,00
23,9
18,30
46,1
105,0
0,9164
15
19
72,8
23,6
Vh
61,3
08:52
00:30:40
1840
30,7
33
16,50
24
16,80
51,0
109,9
0,9143
8
17,5
67,1
21,7
L
311
09:22
01:00:00
3600
60
31
15,50
24
15,80
54,3
113,2
0,9143
6
16,5
63,2
20,5
Cm
0,3
10:22
02:00:18
7218
120,3
29
14,50
24,5
14,80
57,6
116,5
0,9038
4
15,5
59,4
19,2
N
7
14:22
06:00:00
21600
360
25,5
12,75
26
13,05
63,4
122,3
0,8734
2
13,75
52,7
17,1
R0
-0,7
08:22
24:00:00
86400
1440
23,5
11,75
23,5
12,05
66,7
125,6
0,9250
1
12,75
48,9
15,8
f2,00
32,38561
Start time
Time 
[hh:mm:ss]
Time 
[s]
Time 
[min]
Reading
Corrected 
Reading
Temperatur
[C]
Rh
[mm]
H
[mm]
Hr
[mm]
η
[mPa*s]
di
[μm]
Rd
[mm]
K
[%]
Kc
[%]
Cont. 
213
08:55
00:00:00
0
0
40
20,00
24
20,30
39,5
98,4
0,9143
63
21
92,2
43,4
Cont. + soil 
236
00:00:34
34
0,57
38,5
19,25
24
19,55
41,9
100,9
0,9143
56
20,25
88,9
41,8
Soil sample
Sieve analysis
23
00:01:00
60
1,00
38
19,00
24
19,30
42,8
101,7
0,9143
43
20
87,8
41,3
ρs
2,61
00:02:07
127
2,12
37
18,50
24
18,80
44,4
103,3
0,9143
29
19,5
85,6
40,3
ρw
1
00:04:02
242
4,03
36
18,00
24
18,30
46,1
105,0
0,9143
22
19
83,4
39,2
h
139,3
00:08:00
480
8,00
35
17,50
24
17,80
47,7
106,6
0,9143
15
18,5
81,2
38,2
Vh
61,3
09:25
00:30:12
1812
30,2
32,5
16,25
24
16,55
51,8
110,7
0,9143
8
17,25
75,7
35,6
L
311
09:55
01:00:00
3600
60,0
30
15,00
24
15,30
55,9
114,9
0,9143
6
16
70,2
33,0
Cm
0,3
10:55
02:00:00
7200
120,0
28
14,00
25
14,30
59,2
118,2
0,8935
4
15
65,8
31,0
N
7
14:55
06:00:00
21600
360,00
24,5
12,25
26
12,55
65,0
123,9
0,8734
2
13,25
58,1
27,4
R0
-0,7
08:55
24:00:40
86440
1440,7
22
11,00
23,8
11,30
69,1
128,0
0,9185
1
12
52,7
24,8
f2,00
47,05665
Start time
Time 
[hh:mm:ss]
Time 
[s]
Time 
[min]
Reading
Corrected 
Reading
Temperatur
[C]
Rh
[mm]
H
[mm]
Hr
[mm]
η
[mPa*s]
di
[μm]
Rd
[mm]
K
[%]
Kc
[%]
Cont. 
275,3
09:12
00:00:00
0
0
40
20,00
24
20,30
39,5
98,4
0,9143
63
21
89,0
23,5
Cont. + soil 
299,3
00:00:30
30
0,5
38
19,00
24
19,30
42,8
101,7
0,9143
60
20
84,7
22,4
Soil sample
sieve analysis
24
00:01:00
60
1
37
18,50
24
18,80
44,4
103,3
0,9143
43
19,5
82,6
21,8
ρs
2,58
00:02:00
120
2
35
17,50
24
17,80
47,7
106,6
0,9143
31
18,5
78,4
20,7
ρw
1
00:04:00
240
4
32,5
16,25
24
16,55
51,8
110,7
0,9143
22
17,25
73,1
19,3
h
139,3
00:07:50
470
7,8
30,5
15,25
24
15,55
55,1
114,0
0,9143
16
16,25
68,8
18,2
Vh
61,3
09:42
00:30:30
1830
30,5
28
14,00
24
14,30
59,2
118,2
0,9143
8
15
63,5
16,8
L
309
10:12
01:00:14
3614
60,2
27
13,50
24,5
13,80
60,9
119,8
0,9038
6
14,5
61,4
16,2
Cm
0,3
11:12
02:03:25
7405
123,4
25,5
12,75
25
13,05
63,4
122,3
0,8935
4
13,75
58,2
15,4
N
7
15:12
06:00:00
21600
360
24
12,00
26
12,30
65,8
124,8
0,8734
2
13
55,1
14,6
R0
-0,7
09:12
24:00:50
86450
1440,8
24
12,00
24
12,30
65,8
124,8
0,9143
1
13
55,1
14,6
f2,00
26,43819
HOR
Soil
Soil 
HI
HER
Soil
Soil 
RI
Page 67 of 91
==PAGE:74==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix C
Sieve size sive weight sive w. soil soil 
Corrected m% Retained
% Passing
Sieve size sive weight sive w. soil soil 
Corrected % Retained% Passing
[mm]
[g]
[mm]
[g]
16
1293
1293
0
0
0,0
100,0
16
1293
1293
0
0
0,0
100,0
11,2
1174,1
1174,1
0
0
0,0
100,0
11,2
1174,1
1176,6
2,5
2,5
0,6
99,4
5,6
996,8
997,9
1,1
1,1
0,2
99,8
5,6
996,8
1006,6
9,8
9,8
2,2
97,3
4
981,2
982,2
1
1
0,2
99,6
4
981,2
985,7
4,5
4,5
1,0
96,3
2
982,4
985,9
3,5
3,5
0,7
98,9
2
982,4
990,3
7,9
7,9
1,8
94,5
Bakke
762,4
1063,3
300,9
300,9
60,7
Bakke
762,4
1051,1
288,7
288,7
64,1
1
380,4
387,8
7,4
7,4
1,5
97,4
1
380,4
393,7
13,3
13,3
3,0
91,6
0,500
349,4
375
25,6
25,6
5,2
92,2
0,500
349,4
371,9
22,5
22,5
5,0
86,6
0,250
304,7
384,2
79,5
79,5
16,0
76,2
0,250
304,7
358,5
53,8
53,8
12,0
74,6
0,125
294,4
380,6
86,2
86,2
17,4
58,8
0,125
294,4
397,7
103,3
103,3
22,9
51,7
0,063
340,5
422
81,5
81,5
16,4
42,4
0,063
340,5
427,3
86,8
86,8
19,3
32,4
Bakke
286,4
305,6
144,5
144,5
29,1
13,2
Bakke
286,4
294,5
145,2
145,2
32,3
0,1
Cont. 
Cont. + Soi Soil sampleCont + wet soil wet soil
Cont. + dry soil
Dry soil
Cont.
Cont. + soi Soil samplecont. + wet wet soil
Cont. + dry Dry soil
274,5
770,4
495,9
645,1
370,6
581,4
306,9
274,9
725,1
450,2
652,3
377,4
588
313,1
0,042
82,3
34,85167
0,042
81,0 26,24535
0,030
80,3
34,00163
0,030
79,5 25,74898
0,021
78,2
33,15159
0,021
76,6 24,81829
0,015
76,2
32,30155
0,015
72,8 23,57738
0,007
71,2
30,17645
0,007
67,1 21,71601
0,005
70,2
29,75143
0,005
63,2 20,47509
0,004
68,2
28,90139
0,004
59,4 19,23418
0,002
64,2
27,20131
0,002
52,7 17,06258
0,001
62,2
26,35126
0,001
48,9 15,82166
Sieve size sive weight sive w. soil soil 
Corrected m% Retained
% Passing
Sieve size sive weight sive w. soil soil 
Corrected % Retained% Passing % Retained% Passing (Modified)
[mm]
[g]
[mm]
[g]
16
1293
1293
0
0
0,0
100,0
16
1293
1325,9
32,9
32,9
7,4
92,6
0,0
100,0
11,2
1174,1
1174,1
0
0
0,0
100,0
11,2
1174,1
1174,1
0
0
0,0
92,6
0,0
100,0
5,6
996,8
1013,1
16,3
16,3
3,0
97,0
5,6
996,8
1002,3
5,5
5,5
1,2
91,3
1,3
98,7
4
981,2
984,7
3,5
3,5
0,6
96,3
4
981,2
983,7
2,5
2,5
0,6
90,8
0,6
98,0
2
982,4
992,6
10,2
10,2
1,9
94,5
2
982,4
988
5,6
5,6
1,3
89,5
1,4
96,7
Bakke
762,4
1038,8
276,4
276,4
51,0
Bakke
762,4
1068,6
306,2
306,2
69,1
1
380,4
397
16,6
16,6
3,1
91,4
1
380,4
391
10,6
10,6
2,4
87,1
2,6
94,1
0,500
349,4
376,6
27,2
27,2
5,0
86,4
0,500
349,4
371,4
22
22,0
5,0
82,1
5,4
88,7
0,250
304,7
358,5
53,8
53,8
9,9
76,5
0,250
304,7
372,4
67,7
67,7
15,3
66,9
16,6
72,1
0,125
294,4
372,5
78,1
78,1
14,4
62,0
0,125
294,4
399,1
104,7
104,7
23,6
43,2
25,6
46,5
0,063
340,5
421,7
81,2
81,2
15,0
47,1
0,063
340,5
422,4
81,9
81,9
18,5
24,8
20,0
26,4
Bakke
286,4
304,9
18,5
18,5
3,4
Bakke
286,4
303,8
17,4
17,4
3,9
20,8
4,3
22,2
Cont. 
Cont. + soi Soil Sampl Cont. + wet soil wet soil
Cont. + Dry soil
Dry soil
Cont.
Cont. + Soi Soil sampleCont. + wetwet soil
Cont. + dry Dry soil
Stor sten
274,1
816
541,9
641,8
367,7
581
306,9
276,6
719,7
443,1
691,4
414,8
629,9
353,3
34,6
408,5
318,7
0,042
87,8
41,30246
0,042
82,6 21,84016
0,030
85,6
40,2699
0,030
78,4 20,72015
0,021
83,4
39,23733
0,021
73,1 19,32014
0,015
81,2
38,20477
0,015
68,8 18,20013
0,007
75,7
35,62337
0,007
63,5 16,80012
0,005
70,2
33,04197
0,005
61,4 16,24012
0,004
65,8
30,97684
0,004
58,2 15,40011
0,002
58,1
27,36288
0,002
55,1
14,5601
0,001
52,7
24,78147
0,001
55,1
14,5601
Wet Preperration 
Wet Preperration 
Wet Preperration 
Wet Preperration 
HER
RI
From hydrometer
From hydrometer
From hydrometer
From hydrometer
HOR
HI
Page 68 of 91
==PAGE:75==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix D
L_0
[mm]
140
140
Sample 1 ((LTM/A1Sample 2 (A32)
Sample 3 (RB1)
Sample 4 (10)
Sample 5 (V8)
Sample 6 (12) 
Sample 7 (TEB) Sample 8 (2)
Sample 9 (MM1)
Sample 10 (8)
Sample 11 (11) Sample 12(M sample (3)
sample (5)
L_D1
[mm]
126,43
123,67
initial [mm]
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
L_D2
[mm]
125,76
123,15
After drop - Reding 1 [mm]
6,8
7,5
7,5
8,0
9
9,8
9,8
10
11
12,5
13
14
L_D3
[mm]
126,08
123,65
After drop - Reding 2 [mm]
6,5
7
7,2
8,0
8,5
9,5
9,8
10
10,8
12
12,8
13,3
L_D (avg.)
[mm]
126,09
123,49
After drop - Reding 3 [mm]
7,3
8,5
12
13,5
Avaverge [mm]
6,65
7,15
7,35
8,0
8,5
9,65
9,80
10,00
10,90
12
12,9
13,4
L_S
9,9
11,8
Weight - Container
[g]
39,3
43,5
41,7
40,1
40,2
41,9
41,8
40,2
41,9
42
39,7
41,7
39,9
41,7
Weight - Wet Soil + Cont.
[g]
48,4
53,5
51,6
52,9
52,9
57,8
51,6
54,7
54,6
53,4
52,3
58,8
49,5
50,8
Weight - Dry soil + Cont. 
[g]
46
50,7
48,8
49,4
49,3
53,1
48,6
50,4
50,6
49,7
48,3
53,4
48
49,4
LL
43,1
Weight - Dry Soil 
[g]
6,7
7,2
7,1
9,3
9,1
11,2
6,8
10,2
8,7
7,7
8,6
11,7
8,1
7,7
PL
18,4
Weight - Moister loss
[g]
2,4
2,8
2,8
3,5
3,6
4,7
3
4,3
4
3,7
4
5,4
1,5
1,4
SL 
11
WaterContent
[%]
35,8
38,9
39,4
37,6
39,6
42,0
44,1
42,2
46,0
48,1
46,5
46,2
18,5
18,2
PI
24,7
Standard diviation
0,2
0,2
0,2
0,0
0,2
0,2
0,0
0,0
0,1
0,2
0,1
0,3
Sample 1 (4)
Sample 2 (6)
Sample 1 (LBM)
Sample 2 (RTO)
Sample 3 (A49)
Sample 4 (E5)
Sample 5 (2)
Sample 6 (19 LBO)
Sample 7 (B)  
Sample 8 (P.1)
Sample 9 (A91)
Sample 10 (E2)
sample (LB1)
sample (4)
L_0
[mm]
140
140
initial [mm]
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
L_D1
[mm]
129,33
129,8
After drop - Reding 1 [mm]
7
7,2
8,5
9,0
9,5
10,2
11
12,5
14
14,5
L_D2
[mm]
129,37
129,58
After drop - Reding 2 [mm]
6,8
7,1
8,2
8,6
9,8
10
11
12,2
12,5
14
L_D3
[mm]
129,41
129,77
After drop - Reding 3 [mm]
12,3
14
L_D (avg.)
[mm]
129,37
129,72
Avaverge [mm]
6,90
7,15
8,35
8,8
9,7
10,10
11,00
12,35
12,40
14
Weight - Container
[g]
40
43,4
40
40,2
41,2
42,2
39,7
39,6
39,9
40,3
41,8
40
L_S
8
7
Weight - Wet Soil + Cont.
[g]
51,7
55,6
57
53,9
54,8
54,5
55,9
56,8
52,6
55,7
52,6
50,6
Weight - Dry soil + Cont. 
[g]
49,6
53,2
53,7
51,1
52
51,9
52,5
53
49,8
52,2
51,4
49,4
LL 
26,3
Weight - Dry Soil 
[g]
9,6
9,8
13,7
10,9
10,8
9,7
12,8
13,4
9,9
11,9
9,6
9,4
PL
12,6
Weight - Moister loss
[g]
2,1
2,4
3,3
2,8
2,8
2,6
3,4
3,8
2,8
3,5
1,2
1,2
SL
7
WaterContent
[%]
21,9
24,5
24,1
25,7
25,9
26,8
26,6
28,4
28,3
29,4
12,5
12,8
PI
13,7
Standard diviation
0,1
0,1
0,2
0,2
0,2
0,1
0,0
0,2
0,8
0,2
Sample 1 
Sample 2
Sample 1 (4)
Sample 2 (2)
Sample 3 (19 LBO)
Sample 4 (A49)
Sample 5 (B)
Sample 6 (LBM) 
Sample 7 (E2)
Sample 8 (RTO)
Sample 9 (A91)
Sample 10 (P.1)
sample (LB1)
sample (E5)
L_0
[mm]
140
140
initial [mm]
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
L_D1
129,09
129,05
After drop - Reding 1 [mm]
7,1
8,7
9,2
9,5
10,2
10,5
11
12,5
13,8
15,5
L_D2
129,27
129,18
After drop - Reding 2 [mm]
7,2
8,9
9
9,0
9,8
10,5
11
12,3
13,5
15
L_D3
129,13
129,25
After drop - Reding 3 [mm]
9,2
15
L_D (avg.)
[mm]
129,16
129,16
Avaverge [mm]
7,15
8,80
9,10
9,1
10,0
10,50
11,00
12,40
13,65
15
Weight - Container
[g]
40
41,2
42,1
39,9
39,9
40
40,1
43,5
39,8
39,6
41,8
40,1
L_S
7,74
7,74
Weight - Wet Soil + Cont.
[g]
55,9
57,1
56,4
54,7
56,1
56,8
58,2
62,9
58
55,5
52,1
49,3
Weight - Dry soil + Cont. 
[g]
52,6
53,9
53,4
51,5
52,5
53,2
54,1
58,3
53,8
51,7
51,1
48,4
LL
28,0
Weight - Dry Soil 
[g]
12,6
12,7
11,3
11,6
12,6
13,2
14
14,8
14
12,1
9,3
8,3
PL
10,8
Weight - Moister loss
[g]
3,3
3,2
3
3,2
3,6
3,6
4,1
4,6
4,2
3,8
1
0,9
SL
8
WaterContent
[%]
26,2
25,2
26,5
27,6
28,6
27,3
29,3
31,1
30,0
31,4
10,8
10,8
PI
17,2
Standard diviation
0,1
0,1
0,1
0,2
0,2
0,0
0,0
0,1
0,2
0,2
Sample 1  (2.)
Sample 2 (3.)
Sample 1 (A23)
Sample 2 (18 LTO) Sample 3 (CET RTM) Sample 4 (E4)
Sample 5 (E1)
Sample 6 (A52) 
Sample 7 (RTI)
Sample 8 (A20)
Sample 9 (LE B)
Sample 10 (1)
sample (E6)
sample (E8) sample (RTI)
sample (E1)
L_0
[mm]
140
140
initial [mm]
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
L_D1
[mm]
137,05
136,65
After drop - Reding 1 [mm]
8
9
9
9,5
9,5
10
10
12,5
13,5
14,5
L_D2
[mm]
136,93
136,62
After drop - Reding 2 [mm]
8
8,5
9
9,8
9,5
8,5
10
12
13,2
14,2
L_D3
[mm]
136,9
136,17
After drop - Reding 3 [mm]
8,2
9
11,5
L_D (avg.)
[mm]
136,96
136,48
After drop - Reding 4 [mm]
9
11,5
Avaverge [mm]
8,00
8,35
9,00
9,7
9,5
9,00
10,00
11,50
13,35
14,35
L_S
2,17
2,51
Weight - Container
[g]
39,9
42,4
39,8
39,9
46,7
39,8
39,6
39,7
41,9
41,6
39,6
39,3
39,7
46,7
Weight - Wet Soil + Cont.
[g]
52,1
60,5
59,1
52,0
56
53,9
51,9
51,9
54,9
54,1
50,3
47,1
49,6
55
Weight - Dry soil + Cont. 
[g]
50,4
57,7
52
50,2
54,6
51,8
50
49,9
52,9
52
49,4
46,1
48,3
53,8
LL (loga)
18,1
Weight - Dry Soil 
[g]
10,5
15,3
12,2
10,3
7,9
12
10,4
10,2
11
10,4
9,8
6,8
8,6
7,1
PL
15,6
Weight - Moister loss
[g]
1,7
2,8
7,1
1,8
1,4
2,1
1,9
2
2
2,1
0,9
1
1,3
1,2
SL
2
WaterContent
[%]
16,2
18,3
17,5
17,7
17,5
18,3
19,6
18,2
20,2
9,2
14,7
15,1
16,9
PI
2,5
HER
Skrinkage test
LL
PL
RI 
Skrinkage test
LL
PL
Skrinkage test
LL
PL
HI
HOR 
Skrinkage test
LL
PL
Page 69 of 91
==PAGE:76==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E1
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm] Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,7
941,607337 ml
error
0,18 0,11145502
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
14
15
16
16
14
15
Added water
325
350
375
400
425
450
475
350
375
400
400
350
375
Soil + Mould
5894,7
6040,4
6008,5
6058,1
6034,3
6029,6
6039,9
5923,4
5960,4
5973,3
6058,1
5912,6
5960,8
Campacted soil
1744
1889,7
1857,8
1907,4
1883,6
1878,9
1889,2
1772,7
1809,7
1822,6
1907,4
1761,9
1810,1
Compacted bulk density
1,85
2,01
1,97
2,03
2,00
2,00
2,01
1,88
1,92
1,94
2,03
1,87
1,92
Compacted dry density
1,64
1,72
1,72
1,71
1,70
1,69
1,68
1,63
1,66
1,66
1,71
1,65
1,68
Compacted dry density (Theo)
1,64
1,76
1,72
1,75
1,71
1,69
1,69
1,65
1,67
1,67
1,75
1,64
1,67
Curve: 0% air voids
1,9
1,8
1,9
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,7
1,9
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,9
1,9
Container - Top
41,8
39,6
41,8
41,8
41,7
40,1
39,8
40
39,6
39,6
41,8
22,165
22,425
Container - Middel
41,4
42,4
39,9
45,7
40,1
38,9
40
38,9
39,8
41,7
45,7
22,146
21,246
Container - Bottom
39,6
40,1
41,7
39,8
39,6
40,2
41,8
42
40
39,7
39,8
20,945
25,580
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
56,3
51,4
55,6
59,2
65
59,2
54,4
54,5
54,4
51,6
59,2
46,884
50,205
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
56,2
54,8
58,5
62
60
55,7
56,7
52,5
56,3
55
62
53,404
47,592
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
54,9
52
53,6
57,9
54
55,9
60
57,7
55,2
54,5
57,9
46,303
53,853
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
54,59
49,76
53,85
56,48
61,51
56,28
51,98
52,6
52,3
49,9
56,48
43,909
46,663
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
54,41
53,01
56,1
59,44
57,02
53,08
54
50,7
54
53,1
59,44
49,624
44,217
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
53,22
50,32
52,104
55,09
51,83
53,51
57,08
55,6
53,2
52,4
55,09
43,309
50,355
Dry soil - Top 
12,79
10,16
12,05
14,68
19,81
16,18
12,18
12,6
12,7
10,3
14,68
21,744
24,238
Dry soil - Middel
13,01
10,61
16,2
13,74
16,92
14,18
14
11,8
14,2
11,4
13,74
27,478
22,971
Dry soil - Bottom
13,62
10,22
10,404
15,29
12,23
13,31
15,28
13,6
13,2
12,7
15,29
22,364
24,775
Moist Loss - Top
1,71
1,64
1,75
2,72
3,49
2,92
2,42
1,9
2,1
1,7
2,72
2,975
3,542
Moist Loss - Middel
1,79
1,79
2,4
2,56
2,98
2,62
2,7
1,8
2,3
1,9
2,56
3,78
3,375
Moist Loss - Bottom
1,68
1,68
1,496
2,81
2,17
2,39
2,92
2,1
2
2,1
2,81
2,994
3,498
Water Content - Top
13,4
16,1
14,5
18,5
17,6
18,0
19,9
15,1
16,5
16,5
18,5
13,7
14,6
Water Content - Middel 
13,8
16,9
14,8
18,6
17,6
18,5
19,3
15,3
16,2
16,7
18,6
13,8
14,7
Water Content - Bottom 
12,3
16,4
14,4
18,4
17,7
18,0
19,1
15,4
15,2
16,5
18,4
13,4
14,1
Water Content - Avg. 
13,2
16,5
14,5
18,5
17,7
18,2
19,4
15,3
16,0
16,5
18,5
13,5
14,4
1% Lime, 1h (2. time)
1% Lime, 1h (1. time)
Page 70 of 91
==PAGE:77==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E2
Diameter [mmHeight [mm] Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,7
941,607337
ml
0,18
0,11
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
13
14
15
16
17
18
18
19
Added water
325
350
375
400
425
450
450
475
Soil + Mould
5891
5903,6
5939,8
5969,8
5982,4
5974,6
6005
5997,9
Campacted soil
1740,3
1752,9
1789,1
1819,1
1831,7
1823,9
1854,3
1847,2
Compacted bulk density
1,85
1,86
1,90
1,93
1,95
1,94
1,97
1,96
Compacted dry density
1,63
1,63
1,65
1,66
1,65
1,63
1,65
1,64
Compacted dry density (Theo)
1,64
1,63
1,65
1,67
1,66
1,64
1,67
1,65
Curve: 0% air voids
1,9
1,9
1,9
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,7
1,7
Container - Top
20,8
19,6
14,3
20,4
7,3
14,5
40,1
39,8
Container - Middel
18,7
6,4
21,2
17,6
21,4
20,2
38,9
40
Container - Bottom
14,2
14
20,2
6,2
18,5
21,3
40,2
41,8
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
32,4
29,9
26
33,7
18
26,1
54,9
54
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
30,4
16,9
35,9
29,9
32
34,2
55,9
54,3
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
25,7
25,1
33,3
20,4
30,6
33,3
55,9
55,8
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
31
28,6
24,4
31,8
16,4
24,3
52,5
51,7
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
29
15,6
33,9
28,1
30,4
32
53,2
51,9
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
24,4
23,7
31,6
18,4
28,9
31,4
53,4
53,6
Dry soil - Top 
10,2
9
10,1
11,4
9,1
9,8
12,4
11,9
Dry soil - Middel
10,3
9,2
12,7
10,5
9
11,8
14,3
11,9
Dry soil - Bottom
10,2
9,7
11,4
12,2
10,4
10,1
13,2
11,8
Moist Loss - Top
1,4
1,3
1,6
1,9
1,6
1,8
2,4
2,3
Moist Loss - Middel
1,4
1,3
2
1,8
1,6
2,2
2,7
2,4
Moist Loss - Bottom
1,3
1,4
1,7
2
1,7
1,9
2,5
2,2
Water Content - Top
13,7
14,4
15,8
16,7
17,6
18,4
19,4
19,3
Water Content - Middel 
13,6
14,1
15,7
17,1
17,8
18,6
18,9
20,2
Water Content - Bottom 
12,7
14,4
14,9
16,4
16,3
18,8
18,9
18,6
Water Content - Avg. 
13,4
14,3
15,5
16,5
17,7
18,6
19,1
19,4
1% Lime, 5h (2. time) 
Page 71 of 91
==PAGE:78==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E3
Diameter [mmHeight [mm] Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,7
941,607337 ml
0,18
0,11
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
15
16
Added water
325
350
375
400
425
450
475
375
400
Soil + Mould
5885,5
5879,7
5914,5
5965,8
5972,2
5961,1
5989,9
5916,3
5909,6
Campacted soil
1734,8
1729
1763,8
1815,1
1821,5
1810,4
1839,2
1765,6
1758,9
Compacted bulk density
1,84
1,84
1,87
1,93
1,93
1,92
1,95
1,88
1,87
Compacted dry density
1,62
1,60
1,63
1,66
1,63
1,62
1,62
1,63
1,61
Compacted dry density (Theo)
1,63
1,61
1,63
1,66
1,65
1,63
1,64
1,63
1,61
Curve: 0% air voids
1,9
1,9
1,9
1,8
1,8
1,7
1,7
1,9
1,8
Container - Top
42
41,9
39,2
41,7
40
40,1
39,6
26,421
21,951
Container - Middel
42
42,3
39,6
39,9
41,8
39,8
39,7
25,81
24,087
Container - Bottom
39,8
41,1
41,7
39,9
41,6
41,9
40
22,631
24,727
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
55,8
57,6
54,9
54,4
56,8
58,4
53,6
45,292
46,559
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
55,6
55,9
58,7
52,6
58,3
56
51,8
47,255
49,462
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
53,8
53,9
57,5
56,4
57,2
61,6
56,2
50,874
56,888
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
54,04
55,55
52,85
52,67
54,1
55,49
51,24
42,812
43,234
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
54
54,14
56,2
50,91
55,72
53,4
49,8
44,436
45,904
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
52,12
52,29
55,44
54,05
54,9
58,55
53,42
47,086
52,554
Dry soil - Top 
12,04
13,65
13,65
10,97
14,1
15,39
11,64
16,391
21,283
Dry soil - Middel
12
11,84
16,6
11,01
13,92
13,6
10,1
18,626
21,817
Dry soil - Bottom
12,32
11,19
13,74
14,15
13,3
16,65
13,42
24,455
27,827
Moist Loss - Top
1,76
2,05
2,05
1,73
2,7
2,91
2,36
2,48
3,325
Moist Loss - Middel
1,6
1,76
2,5
1,69
2,58
2,6
2
2,819
3,558
Moist Loss - Bottom
1,68
1,61
2,06
2,35
2,3
3,05
2,78
3,788
4,334
Water Content - Top
14,6
15,0
15,0
15,8
19,1
18,9
20,3
15,1
15,6
Water Content - Middel 
13,3
14,9
15,1
15,3
18,5
19,1
19,8
15,1
16,3
Water Content - Bottom 
13,6
14,4
15,0
16,6
17,3
18,3
20,7
15,5
15,6
Water Content - Avg. 
13,86
14,76
15,01
15,91
18,33
18,78
20,26
15,31
15,84
1% Lime, 24h (1. time)
Page 72 of 91
==PAGE:79==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E4
Diameter [mm] Height [mm]
Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
101,49
116,8
1682,1
101,05
116,83
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,7
941,607337 ml
0,18
0,11
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
13
14
15
16
17
Added water
250
275
300
325
350
375
400
250
275
300
325
350
375
400
325
350
375
400
425
Soil + Mould
5943
5931,8
5995,1
5993,5
6044,8
6089,2
6058,6
5946,3
5940
5982,4
5972,4
5990,9
6033,9
6013,6
6004,9
6045,8
6032,9
6023,2
6056,4
Campacted soil
1792,3
1781,1
1844,4
1842,8
1894,1
1938,5
1907,9
1795,6
1789,3
1831,7
1821,7
1840,2
1883,2
1862,9
1854,2
1895,1
1882,2
1872,5
1905,7
Compacted bulk density
1,90
1,89
1,96
1,96
2,01
2,06
2,03
1,91
1,90
1,95
1,93
1,95
2,00
1,98
1,97
2,01
2,00
1,99
2,02
Compacted dry density
1,75
1,70
1,77
1,74
1,72
1,76
1,71
1,91
1,90
1,95
1,70
1,70
1,72
1,69
1,73
1,75
1,72
1,70
1,72
Compacted dry density (Theo)
1,73
1,70
1,75
1,73
1,76
1,79
1,75
1,73
1,71
1,74
1,71
1,71
1,74
1,71
1,74
1,77
1,74
1,71
1,73
Curve: 0% air voids
2,1
2,0
2,0
2,0
1,8
1,8
1,8
2,6
2,6
2,6
1,9
1,9
1,8
1,8
1,9
1,9
1,8
1,8
1,8
Container - Top
42
39,6
41,7
41,8
40
39,7
39,6
42
39,2
41,9
39,6
40
39,8
39,8
40
39,6
39,7
43,4
41,9
Container - Middel
39
42,5
41,8
41,4
41,7
41,6
39,6
42
39,6
42,3
41,6
39,9
41,8
43,4
38,9
39,8
41,7
45,7
43,5
Container - Bottom
40,3
40,2
40
41,8
39,9
41,7
39,7
39,8
41,7
41,1
41,7
39,7
39,8
39,8
42
40
41,7
39,8
39,2
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
52
50,4
53,5
53
56,2
55,4
65,9
53,5
57,5
59,9
63,3
60,8
63,3
65,8
73,1
71,1
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
49
54,3
51,6
56,6
60,6
55,8
62,6
54,9
57,8
63,8
60,6
63,1
67,9
69,8
76,2
82,1
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
49,6
54,7
52,3
58,2
59,1
58
58,6
53,8
57,5
56,5
60
66,3
68,6
67
64,7
73,6
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
51,2
49,3
52,3
51,8
53,9
53,1
61,8
51,7
55,27
57,09
59,93
58,274
60,219
62,165
68,709
66,69
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
48,2
53,1
50,6
54,9
57,8
53,7
59
53,25
55,48
60,78
58,08
60,138
64,235
65,896
71,695
76,239
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
48,9
53,2
51,2
56,4
56,4
55,6
55,7
52,38
55,22
54,13
57,06
63,334
64,902
63,507
61,152
68,455
Dry soil - Top 
9,2
9,7
10,6
10
13,9
13,4
22,2
-42
-39,2
-41,9
12,1
15,27
17,29
20,13
18,274
20,619
22,465
25,309
24,79
Dry soil - Middel
9,2
10,6
8,8
13,5
16,1
12,1
19,4
-42
-39,6
-42,3
11,65
15,58
18,98
14,68
21,238
24,435
24,196
25,995
32,739
Dry soil - Bottom
8,6
13
11,2
14,6
16,5
13,9
16
-39,8
-41,7
-41,1
10,68
15,52
14,33
17,26
21,334
24,902
21,807
21,352
29,255
Moist Loss - Top
0,8
1,1
1,2
1,2
2,3
2,3
4,1
0
0
0
1,8
2,23
2,81
3,37
2,526
3,081
3,635
4,391
4,41
Moist Loss - Middel
0,8
1,2
1
1,7
2,8
2,1
3,6
0
0
0
1,65
2,32
3,02
2,52
2,962
3,665
3,904
4,505
5,861
Moist Loss - Bottom
0,7
1,5
1,1
1,8
2,7
2,4
2,9
0
0
0
1,42
2,28
2,37
2,94
2,966
3,698
3,493
3,548
5,145
Water Content - Top
8,7
11,3
11,3
12,0
16,5
17,2
18,5
0,0
0,0
0,0
14,9
14,6
16,3
16,7
13,8
14,9
16,2
17,3
17,8
Water Content - Middel 
8,7
11,3
11,4
12,6
17,4
17,4
18,6
0,0
0,0
0,0
14,2
14,9
15,9
17,2
13,9
15,0
16,1
17,3
17,9
Water Content - Bottom 
8,1
11,5
9,8
12,3
16,4
17,3
18,1
0,0
0,0
0,0
13,3
14,7
16,5
17,0
13,9
14,9
16,0
16,6
17,6
Water Content - Avg. 
8,5
11,5
10,8
12,2
16,8
17,3
18,4
14,09
14,73
16,23
16,98
13,89
14,90
16,11
17,10
17,76
Unstabilized - 3. time
Unstabilized - 1. time
Unstabilized - 2. time
Page 73 of 91
==PAGE:80==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E5
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm]
Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,1
941,607337 ml
Deviation
0,179691093
0,111455023
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Added water [ml]
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
Soil + Mould
5976,5
6034,2
6111,1
6175
6219,1
6224,7
6200,4
6169,9
Campacted soil
1826,4
1884,1
1961
2024,9
2069
2074,6
2050,3
2019,8
Compacted bulk density
1,94
2,00
2,08
2,15
2,20
2,20
2,18
2,15
Compacted dry density
1,82
1,87
1,92
1,96
1,99
1,98
1,94
1,88
Compacted dry density (Thoret
1,83
1,87
1,93
1,97
2,00
1,98
1,94
1,90
Curve: 0% air voids
2,2
2,2
2,1
2,1
2,0
2,0
2,0
1,9
Container - Top
40
41,7
41,6
39,9
41,9
40,2
39,6
22,397
Container - Middel
46,6
42,1
39,2
39,6
39,6
41,8
39,2
22,426
Container - Bottom
40,2
43,4
41,7
39,7
39,8
40,1
42
22,278
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
56,9
54,4
55,1
59,1
61,1
57,7
62,2
46,113
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
59
54,3
58,4
53,9
53,7
64,9
61,2
46,847
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
52,5
57
53,1
56
57,4
60,6
62,5
49,667
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
55,841
53,562
54,026
57,448
59,258
55,82
59,767
43,184
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
58,266
53,442
56,96
52,631
52,387
62,496
58,738
43,847
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
51,769
56,158
52,221
54,616
55,77
58,601
60,192
46,314
Dry soil - Top 
15,841
11,862
12,426
17,548
17,358
15,62
20,167
20,787
Dry soil - Middel
11,666
11,342
17,76
13,031
12,787
20,696
19,538
21,421
Dry soil - Bottom
11,569
12,758
10,521
14,916
15,97
18,501
18,192
24,036
Moist Loss - Top
1,059
0,838
1,074
1,652
1,842
1,88
2,433
2,929
Moist Loss - Middel
0,734
0,858
1,44
1,269
1,313
2,404
2,462
3
Moist Loss - Bottom
0,731
0,842
0,879
1,384
1,63
1,999
2,308
3,353
Water Content - Top
6,7
7,1
8,6
9,4
10,6
12,0
12,1
14,1
Water Content - Middel 
6,3
7,6
8,1
9,7
10,3
11,6
12,6
14,0
Water Content - Bottom 
6,3
6,6
8,4
9,3
10,2
10,8
12,7
13,9
Water Content - Avg. 
6,4
7,1
8,4
9,5
10,4
11,5
12,5
14,0
1% lime, 1h
Page 74 of 91
==PAGE:81==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E6
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm]
Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,1
941,607337 ml
Deviation
0,179691093
0,111455023
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Added water
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
Soil + Mould
5982,8
6065,4
6126,6
6190
6216,3
6203
6180,7
Campacted soil
1832,7
1915,3
1976,5
2039,9
2066,2
2052,9
2030,6
Compacted bulk density
1,95
2,03
2,10
2,17
2,19
2,18
2,16
Compacted dry density
1,81
1,88
1,92
1,96
1,97
1,94
1,90
Compacted dry density (Thore
1,82
1,88
1,93
1,97
1,98
1,95
1,91
Curve: 0% air voids
2,2
2,1
2,1
2,0
2,0
2,0
1,9
Container - Top
40,07
40
39
41,8
39,8
39,6
39,8
Container - Middel
41,88
39,6
39,9
42,4
42
39,7
41,8
Container - Bottom
41,74
39,6
41,5
40,1
43,5
41,7
45,7
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
54,1
55,7
60,3
64,5
66,5
64,9
69,3
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
62,9
55,7
64,6
66,3
68,1
65,5
72,9
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
62,1
54,3
60,2
57,8
65,6
66,4
71,4
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
53,2
54,4
58,5
62,3
63,8
62,1
65,9
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
61,4
54,5
62,5
64,0
65,4
62,6
69,3
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
60,7
53,2
58,6
56,1
63,4
63,7
68,4
Dry soil - Top 
13,1
14,4
19,5
20,5
24,0
22,5
26,1
Dry soil - Middel
19,5
14,9
22,6
21,6
23,4
22,9
27,5
Dry soil - Bottom
19,0
13,6
17,1
16,0
19,9
22,0
22,7
Moist Loss - Top
0,93
1,27
1,79
2,21
2,74
2,77
3,44
Moist Loss - Middel
1,50
1,18
2,12
2,28
2,72
2,85
3,62
Moist Loss - Bottom
1,41
1,12
1,56
1,67
2,23
2,71
3,02
Water Content - Top
7,1
8,8
9,1
10,8
11,4
12,3
13,2
Water Content - Middel 
7,7
7,9
9,4
10,6
11,6
12,4
13,2
Water Content - Bottom 
7,4
8,2
9,1
10,4
11,3
12,3
13,3
Water Content - Avg. 
7,4
8,3
9,2
10,6
11,4
12,4
13,2
1% Lime, 5h
Page 75 of 91
==PAGE:82==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E7
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm]
Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,1
941,607337 ml
Deviation
0,179691093
0,111455023
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Added water
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
Soil + Mould
5921,7
5968,2
6022,2
6092,8
6165,6
6201,8
6186,7
6166,6
6135,5
Campacted soil
1771,6
1818,1
1872,1
1942,7
2015,5
2051,7
2036,6
2016,5
1985,4
Compacted bulk density
1,88
1,93
1,99
2,06
2,14
2,18
2,16
2,14
2,11
Compacted dry density
1,77
1,79
1,83
1,88
1,94
1,96
1,92
1,88
1,83
Compacted dry density (Thore
1,77
1,80
1,84
1,89
1,95
1,96
1,93
1,90
1,85
Curve: 0% air voids
2,2
2,2
2,1
2,1
2,0
2,0
2,0
1,9
1,9
Container - Top
41,6
39,7
41,8
40
39,87
40,1
40
41,8
39,2
Container - Middel
41,7
41,7
42
39,8
40,04
41,7
41,6
42
41,9
Container - Bottom
39,9
39,8
39,5
39,8
42,32
41,5
41,1
39,6
43,4
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
54,9
51,5
56,1
55,3
54,8
60,3
57,4
59,6
62,1
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
54,4
56,1
55,3
54,9
58,7
63,2
65,6
62,8
62,9
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
53,1
53,5
52,7
53,7
57,1
63,3
65,2
62,3
62,9
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
54,088
50,612
55,003
53,961
53,411
58,244
55,443
57,3
59,1
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
53,629
55,107
54,229
53,559
57,162
60,96
62,811
60,3
60
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
52,283
52,487
51,658
52,458
55,464
61,104
62,575
59,5
60,3
Dry soil - Top 
12,5
10,9
13,2
14,0
13,5
18,1
15,4
15,5
19,9
Dry soil - Middel
11,9
13,4
12,2
13,8
17,1
19,3
21,2
18,3
18,1
Dry soil - Bottom
12,4
12,7
12,2
12,7
13,1
19,6
21,5
19,9
16,9
Moist Loss - Top
0,812
0,888
1,097
1,339
1,389
2,056
1,957
2,3
3
Moist Loss - Middel
0,771
0,993
1,071
1,341
1,538
2,24
2,789
2,5
2,9
Moist Loss - Bottom
0,817
1,013
1,042
1,242
1,636
2,196
2,625
2,8
2,6
Water Content - Top
6,5
8,1
8,3
9,6
10,3
11,3
12,7
14,8
15,1
Water Content - Middel 
6,5
7,4
8,8
9,7
9,0
11,6
13,1
13,7
16,0
Water Content - Bottom 
6,6
8,0
8,6
9,8
12,4
11,2
12,2
14,1
15,4
Water Content - Avg. 
6,5
7,8
8,5
9,7
10,6
11,4
12,7
14,2
15,5
1% Lime, 24h
Page 76 of 91
==PAGE:83==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E8
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm]
Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,1
941,607337 ml
afvigelse af vægt
Standard afvigelse 
0,18
0,11
0,0010
0,1
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Added water
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
Soil + Mould
5999,4
6083
6229,2
6252,2
6251,5
6222,6
6178,4
Campacted soil
1849,3
1932,9
2079,1
2102,1
2101,4
2072,5
2028,3
Compacted bulk density
1,96
2,05
2,21
2,23
2,23
2,20
2,15
Compacted dry density
1,87
1,94
2,06
2,07
2,03
1,98
1,94
Compacted dry density (Thoret
1,89
1,96
2,08
2,09
2,07
2,02
1,96
Curve: 0% air voids
2,3
2,3
2,2
2,2
2,1
2,0
2,0
Container - Top
42,3
39,6
39,9
40
43,4
40
39,9
Container - Middel
42
41,9
39,8
40,1
39,8
39,6
39,7
Container - Bottom
41,1
39,1
39,8
39,7
42
41,7
41,6
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
56,9
57,1
55
55,3
64
53
61,6
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
58,9
62,5
54,5
56,8
62,5
56,8
63,1
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
57,5
55
53,2
56,2
65,7
59,7
61,6
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
56,3
56,1
54
54,2
62,1
51,7
59,4
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
58,1
61,6
53,5
55,5
60,5
55,2
60,7
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
56,7
54,1
52,3
55
63,6
57,7
59,6
Dry soil - Top 
14,0
16,5
14,1
14,2
18,7
11,7
19,5
Dry soil - Middel
16,1
19,7
13,7
15,4
20,7
15,6
21,0
Dry soil - Bottom
15,6
15,0
12,5
15,3
21,6
16,0
18,0
Moist Loss - Top
0,6
1
1
1,1
1,9
1,3
2,2
Moist Loss - Middel
0,8
0,9
1
1,3
2
1,6
2,4
Moist Loss - Bottom
0,8
0,9
0,9
1,2
2,1
2
2
Water Content - Top
4,3
6,1
7,1
7,7
10,2
11,1
11,3
Water Content - Middel 
5,0
4,6
7,3
8,4
9,7
10,3
11,4
Water Content - Bottom 
5,1
6,0
7,2
7,8
9,7
12,5
11,1
Water Content - Avg. 
4,8
5,5
7,2
8,0
9,8
11,3
11,3
Unstabilized
Page 77 of 91
==PAGE:84==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E9
Diemenstions
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm] Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,80
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,6
941,607337 ml
Error
0,18
0,11
0,1
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Added water
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
Soil + Mould
6055
6113,4
6104,6
6154,8
6172,4
6152
6159,5
Campacted soil
1904,4
1962,8
1954
2004,2
2021,8
2001,4
2008,9
Compacted bulk density
2,02
2,08
2,08
2,13
2,15
2,13
2,13
Compacted dry density
1,85
1,88
1,86
1,89
1,88
1,85
1,85
Compacted dry density (Thoretical) 
1,9
1,9
1,9
1,9
1,9
1,9
1,9
Curve: 0% air voids
2,1
2,0
2,0
2,0
1,9
1,9
1,9
Container - Top
41,5
39,7
39,7
39,8
41,8
41,6
39,8
Container - Middel
41,7
41,7
41,7
40
42
42
39,8
Container - Bottom
40,1
41,7
41,1
40
42,3
39,8
39,5
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
55,7
58,6
53,5
58,4
60,7
57,9
61,3
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
54,1
56,4
59,7
62,6
62,9
61,8
56,3
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
54,6
55,8
54,3
55,6
61,3
52,8
60,2
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
54,44
56,76
52,08
56,29
58,37
55,82
58,47
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
53,05
54,92
57,82
60
60,3
59,01
54,1
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
53,36
54,42
52,98
53,91
58,96
51,15
57,36
Dry soil - Top 
12,94
17,06
12,38
16,49
16,57
14,22
18,67
Dry soil - Middel
11,35
13,22
16,12
20
18,3
17,01
14,3
Dry soil - Bottom
13,26
12,72
11,88
13,91
16,66
11,35
17,86
Moist Loss - Top
1,26
1,84
1,42
2,11
2,33
2,08
2,83
Moist Loss - Middel
1,05
1,48
1,88
2,6
2,6
2,79
2,2
Moist Loss - Bottom
1,24
1,38
1,32
1,69
2,34
1,65
2,84
Water Content - Top
9,7
10,8
11,5
12,8
14,1
14,6
15,2
Water Content - Middel 
9,3
11,2
11,7
13,0
14,2
16,4
15,4
Water Content - Bottom 
9,4
10,8
11,1
12,1
14,0
14,5
15,9
Water Content - Avg. 
9,45
10,94
11,41
12,65
14,10
15,19
15,48
1% Lime, 1h
Page 78 of 91
==PAGE:85==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E10
Diemenstions
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm] Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,80
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,6
941,607337 ml
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Added water
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
Soil + Mould
5965
6005,5
6030,7
6084,3
6130,6
6125,6
6112,5
Campacted soil
1814,4
1854,9
1880,1
1933,7
1980
1975
1961,9
Compacted bulk density
1,93
1,97
2,00
2,05
2,10
2,10
2,08
Compacted dry density
1,75
1,78
1,80
1,84
1,87
1,85
1,81
Compacted dry density (Tho
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,9
1,8
1,8
Curve: 0% air voids
2,1
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
1,9
1,9
Container - Top
41,6
39,6
39,7
39,9
41,8
41,5
39,8
Container - Middel
41,6
41,7
41,7
40
42
40
39,8
Container - Bottom
40,1
41,7
41,1
40,1
42,3
39,8
39,5
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
56,8
55,1
54,6
56
61,2
59,4
56,2
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
55,3
58,4
56,3
55,4
58,5
61,8
55,4
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
54,8
63,5
61,1
57,5
60,2
58,4
58,4
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
55,39
53,62
53,12
54,26
58,99
57,26
54,09
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
54,07
56,76
54,88
53,86
56,72
59,09
53,34
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
53,49
61,44
59,22
55,7
58,26
56,22
55,96
Dry soil - Top 
13,79
14,02
13,42
14,36
17,19
15,76
14,29
Dry soil - Middel
12,47
15,06
13,18
13,86
14,72
19,09
13,54
Dry soil - Bottom
13,39
19,74
18,12
15,6
15,96
16,42
16,46
Moist Loss - Top
1,41
1,48
1,48
1,74
2,21
2,14
2,11
Moist Loss - Middel
1,23
1,64
1,42
1,54
1,78
2,71
2,06
Moist Loss - Bottom
1,31
2,06
1,88
1,8
1,94
2,18
2,44
Water Content - Top
10,2
10,6
11,0
12,1
12,9
13,6
14,8
Water Content - Middel 
9,9
10,9
10,8
11,1
12,1
14,2
15,2
Water Content - Bottom 
9,8
10,4
10,4
11,5
12,2
13,3
14,8
Water Content - Avg. 
9,96
10,63
10,73
11,59
12,37
13,68
14,93
1% Lime, 5h
Page 79 of 91
==PAGE:86==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E11
Diemenstions
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm] Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,80
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,6
941,607337 ml
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
15
16
Added water
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
375
400
Soil + Mould
5906,4
5959,1
5975,9
6028,8
6054,4
6053,4
6096,9
6040,8
6064,4
Campacted soil
1755,8
1808,5
1825,3
1878,2
1903,8
1902,8
1946,3
1890,2
1913,8
Compacted bulk density
1,86
1,92
1,94
1,99
2,02
2,02
2,07
2,01
2,03
Compacted dry density
1,69
1,74
1,74
1,78
1,78
1,77
1,79
1,73
1,74
Compacted dry density (Thore
1,7
1,7
1,7
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,7
1,8
Curve: 0% air voids
2,1
2,1
2,0
2,0
1,9
1,9
1,9
1,8
1,8
Container - Top
38,9
41,8
39,8
39,6
39,8
40
40,1
39,7
43,4
Container - Middel
39,8
42,4
42
39,6
41,8
39,6
41,9
41,6
45,7
Container - Bottom
41,4
40,1
43,4
41,7
45,7
39,6
41,7
41,6
39,8
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
52,4
56,6
56
52,6
56,3
55,1
57,1
55,2
58,4
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
52,7
58
57,7
56,8
56,9
53,5
54,6
56,1
61,1
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
55
55,7
58,1
59,6
61,6
54,9
58,2
60,9
58,1
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
51,14
55,25
54,24
51,20
54,31
53,17
54,832
53,1
56,3
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
51,48
56,64
55,99
54,95
55,16
51,74
52,949
54,10
58,9
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
53,76
54,20
56,69
57,68
59,75
53,00
56,025
58,30
55,5
Dry soil - Top 
12,237
13,446
14,441
11,6
14,514
13,17
14,732
13,4
12,9
Dry soil - Middel
11,679
14,241
13,99
15,354
13,362
12,144
11,049
12,5
13,2
Dry soil - Bottom
12,358
14,104
13,288
15,979
14,054
13,404
14,325
16,7
15,7
Moist Loss - Top
1,263
1,354
1,759
1,4
1,986
1,93
2,268
2,1
2,1
Moist Loss - Middel
1,221
1,359
1,71
1,846
1,738
1,756
1,651
2
2,2
Moist Loss - Bottom
1,242
1,496
1,412
1,921
1,846
1,896
2,175
2,6
2,6
Water Content - Top
10,3
10,1
12,2
12,1
13,7
14,7
15,4
15,7
16,3
Water Content - Middel 
10,5
9,5
12,2
12,0
13,0
14,5
14,9
16,0
16,7
Water Content - Bottom 
10,1
10,6
10,6
12,0
13,1
14,1
15,2
15,6
16,6
Water Content - Avg. 
10,28
10,07
11,68
12,04
13,28
14,42
15,17
15,75
16,50
1% Lime, 24h
Page 80 of 91
==PAGE:87==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix E12
Diemenstions
Diameter [mHeight [mmMass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4150,6
941,6073 ml
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Added water
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
Soil + Mould
6073,4
6134,6
6191,2
6218,5
6224,3
6213
6183,9
Campacted soil
1922,8
1984
2040,6
2067,9
2073,7
2062,4
2033,3
Compacted bulk density
2,04
2,11
2,17
2,20
2,20
2,19
2,16
Compacted dry density
1,9
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
1,9
Compacted dry density (Thoretical) 
1,9
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
1,9
Curve: 0% air voids
2,3
2,2
2,1
2,1
2,0
2,0
1,9
Container - Top
41,7
41,8
38,9
40,1
41,9
39,9
39,8
Container - Middel
41,9
42,5
41,8
41,7
39,6
42,1
40
Container - Bottom
41,4
39,6
40
40,2
39,6
40
39,2
Wet soil + Cont. - Top
50,4
51,4
53,5
54,4
57,5
57,2
66,3
Wet soil + Cont. - Middel
54,6
59,6
55,9
53,7
56,2
60,8
65,4
Wet soil + Cont. - Bottom
51,2
56,5
61,4
53,7
54,9
60,9
66,4
Dry soil + Cont. - Top 
49,9
50,8
52,4
53,3
56
55,5
63,1
Dry soil + Cont. - Middel
53,5
58,3
55,3
53
54,7
58,8
62,5
Dry soil + Cont. - Bottom
50,7
55,4
59,6
52,5
53,4
58,7
63,3
Dry soil - Top 
8,2
9
13,5
13,2
14,1
15,6
23,3
Dry soil - Middel
11,6
15,8
13,5
11,3
15,1
16,7
22,5
Dry soil - Bottom
9,3
15,8
19,6
12,3
13,8
18,7
24,1
Moist Loss - Top
0,5
0,6
1,1
1,1
1,5
1,7
3,2
Moist Loss - Middel
1,1
1,3
0,6
0,7
1,5
2
2,9
Moist Loss - Bottom
0,5
1,1
1,8
1,2
1,5
2,2
3,1
Water Content - Top
6,1
6,7
8,1
8,3
10,6
10,9
13,7
Water Content - Middel 
9,5
8,2
4,4
6,2
9,9
12,0
12,9
Water Content - Bottom 
5,4
7,0
9,2
9,8
10,9
11,8
12,9
Water Content - Avg. 
5,7
7,3
8,7
9,0
10,5
11,5
13,2
Unstabilized
Page 81 of 91
==PAGE:88==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix F1
Mould:
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm]
Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4148,9
941,607337 ml
Mass
HER-1h-7d (1) HER-1h-7d (2) HER-1h-28d (3) HER-1h-28d (4) HER-1h-7d (5) HER-5h-7d (1) HER-5h-7d (2) HER-5h-28d (3) HER-5h-28d (4) HER-24h-7d (1) HER-24h-7d (2) HER-24h-28d (3) HER-24h-28d (4)
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
15,7
15,7
15,7
15,7
15,7
16,6
16,6
16,6
16,6
17,1
17,1
17,1
17,1
Added water
392,5
392,5
392,5
392,5
392,5
415
415
415
415
427,5
427,5
427,5
427,5
Soil + Mould
5914,5
5944,3
5946,5
5947,8
-
5947,5
5933,6
5912,2
5916,7
5909,3
5922,4
5917,2
5929,3
Campacted soil
1765,6
1795,4
1797,6
1798,9
1779,4
1798,6
1784,7
1763,3
1767,8
1760,4
1773,5
1768,3
1780,4
Compacted bulk density
1,88
1,91
1,91
1,91
1,89
1,91
1,90
1,87
1,88
1,87
1,88
1,88
1,89
Compacted dry density
1,62
1,65
1,64
1,64
1,63
1,63
1,62
1,61
1,60
1,60
1,61
1,61
1,61
Curve: 0% air voids
1,9
1,9
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
Container - A
39,807
41,737
39,697
40,259
41,682
23,175
25,833
24,085
26,255
21,73
24,726
25,581
24,087
Container - B
39,642
41,754
39,612
39,616
41,905
25,234
26,13
26,049
26,97
25,741
25,249
26,421
25,81
Container - C
39,99
41,872
39,845
39,845
40,042
25,206
24,347
37,534
24,651
24,743
25,368
22,631
21,95
Wet soil + Cont. - A
69,959
70,846
63,121
70,724
68,109
43,036
42,207
44,289
41,557
40,386
42,91
40,446
40,703
Wet soil + Cont. - B
70,401
69,878
70,137
72,909
69,166
46,338
43,884
44,691
44,015
46,434
42,341
46,306
43,789
Wet soil + Cont. - C
68,139
66,726
71,443
71,362
66,898
44,196
43,788
54,759
43,158
48,237
45,513
39,399
44,589
Dry soil + Cont. - A
65,935
66,937
59,815
66,475
64,372
40,128
39,849
41,439
39,341
37,648
40,319
38,352
38,252
Dry soil + Cont. - B
66,305
66,033
65,815
68,22
65,324
43,265
41,334
42,006
41,510
43,431
39,875
43,486
41,123
Dry soil + Cont. - C
64,369
63,415
67,054
66,898
63,203
41,407
40,907
52,301
40,431
44,876
42,616
36,957
41,212
Dry soil - A
26,128
25,2
20,118
26,216
22,69
16,953
14,016
17,354
13,086
15,918
15,593
12,771
14,165
Dry soil - B
26,663
24,279
26,203
28,604
23,419
18,031
15,204
15,957
14,54
17,69
14,626
17,065
15,313
Dry soil - C
24,379
21,543
27,209
27,053
23,161
16,201
16,56
14,767
15,78
20,133
17,248
14,326
19,262
Moist Loss - A
4,024
3,909
3,306
4,249
3,737
2,908
2,358
2,85
2,216
2,738
2,591
2,094
2,451
Moist Loss - B
4,096
3,845
4,322
4,689
3,842
3,073
2,55
2,685
2,505
3,003
2,466
2,82
2,666
Moist Loss - C
3,77
3,311
4,389
4,464
3,695
2,789
2,881
2,458
2,727
3,361
2,897
2,442
3,377
Water Content - A
15,4
15,5
16,4
16,2
16,5
17,2
16,8
16,4
16,9
17,2
16,6
16,4
17,3
Water Content - B
15,4
15,8
16,5
16,4
16,4
17,0
16,8
16,8
17,2
17,0
16,9
16,5
17,4
Water Content - C
15,5
15,4
16,1
16,5
16,0
17,2
17,4
16,6
17,3
16,7
16,8
17,0
17,5
Water Content - Avg. 
15,4
15,6
16,4
16,4
16,3
17,1
17,0
16,6
17,1
17,0
16,8
16,7
17,4
Mass
HER-1h-7d (1) HER-1h-7d (2) HER-1h-28d (3) HER-1h-28d (4) HER-1h-7d (5) HER-5h-7d (1) HER-5h-7d (2) HER-5h-28d (3) HER-5h-28d (4) HER-24h-7d (1) HER-24h-7d (2) HER-24h-28d (3) HER-24h-28d (4)
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Water content 
15,7
15,7
15,7
15,7
15,7
16,6
16,6
16,6
16,6
17,1
17,1
17,1
17,1
Added water
392,5
392,5
392,5
392,5
392,5
415
415
415
415
427,5
427,5
427,5
427,5
Soil + Mould
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Campacted soil
1762,1
1794,0
1791,5
1799,3
1778,4
1781,3
1785,1
1763,9
1768,6
1758,0
1773,2
1768,4
1778,7
Compacted bulk density
1,87
1,91
1,90
1,91
1,89
1,89
1,90
1,87
1,88
1,87
1,88
1,88
1,89
Compacted dry density
1,62
1,64
1,64
1,64
1,63
1,62
1,62
1,60
1,60
1,59
1,61
1,60
1,61
Curve: 0% air voids
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
1,8
Container - A
39,824
41,590
38,938
39,554
39,225
41,850
40,019
42,32
40,019
39,611
41,830
39,735
39,617
Container - B
39,747
39,807
41,613
41,951
39,759
41,950
40,156
41,589
39,826
39,641
39,735
41,736
39,700
Container - C
42,320
41,736
41,832
39,611
41,699
41,639
40,038
39,866
39,845
39,696
39,807
41,852
41,873
Wet soil + Cont. - A
60,572
63,294
58,801
58,907
57,019
72,330
62,139
67,937
59,812
61,680
65,315
60,727
59,437
Wet soil + Cont. - B
67,226
66,079
65,565
65,043
58,729
68,180
66,447
63,857
69,915
60,947
57,763
61,677
58,914
Wet soil + Cont. - C
68,187
60,843
66,651
66,335
66,743
64,251
65,800
66,971
60,948
57,455
56,877
64,657
63,643
Dry soil + Cont. - A
57,749
60,342
56,003
56,14
54,55
67,874
58,909
64,258
56,982
58,499
61,904
57,663
56,498
Dry soil + Cont. - B
63,435
62,505
62,193
61,802
56,12
64,434
62,582
60,675
65,525
57,748
55,094
58,645
56,058
Dry soil + Cont. - C
64,746
58,199
63,171
62,559
63,221
60,921
62,103
63,053
57,800
54,876
54,379
61,268
60,384
Dry soil - A
17,925
18,752
17,065
16,586
15,325
26,024
18,89
21,938
16,963
18,888
20,074
17,928
16,881
Dry soil - B
23,688
22,698
20,58
19,851
16,361
22,484
22,426
19,086
25,699
18,107
15,359
16,909
16,358
Dry soil - C
22,426
16,463
21,339
22,948
21,522
19,282
22,065
23,187
17,955
15,18
14,572
19,416
18,511
Moist Loss - A
2,823
2,952
2,798
2,767
2,469
4,456
3,23
3,679
2,83
3,181
3,411
3,064
2,939
Moist Loss - B
3,791
3,574
3,372
3,241
2,609
3,746
3,865
3,182
4,39
3,199
2,669
3,032
2,856
Moist Loss - C
3,441
2,644
3,48
3,776
3,522
3,33
3,697
3,918
3,148
2,579
2,498
3,389
3,259
Water Content - A
15,7
15,7
16,4
16,7
16,1
17,1
17,1
16,8
16,7
16,8
17,0
17,1
17,4
Water Content - B
16,0
15,7
16,4
16,3
15,9
16,7
17,2
16,7
17,1
17,7
17,4
17,9
17,5
Water Content - C
15,3
16,1
16,3
16,5
16,4
17,3
16,8
16,9
17,5
17,0
17,1
17,5
17,6
Water Content - Avg. 
15,7
15,8
16,4
16,5
16,1
17,0
17,0
16,8
17,1
17,2
17,2
17,5
17,5
Before curing
After curing
1% Lime, 1h
1% Lime, 5h
1% Lime, 24h
1% Lime, 1h
1% Lime, 5h
1% Lime, 24h
Page 82 of 91
==PAGE:89==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix F2
Mould:
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm]
Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4148,3
941,607337 ml
Mass
HI-1h-7d (1)
HI-1h-7d (2)
HI-1h-28d (3)
HI-1h-28d (4)
HI-1h-7d (5)
HI-5h-7d (1)
HI-5h-7d (2)
HI-5h-28d (3)
HI-5h-28d (4)
HI-24h-7d (1)
HI-24h-7d (2)
HI-24h-28d (3)
HI-24h-28d (4)
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Target Water content 
10,5
10,5
10,5
10,5
10,5
10,9
10,9
10,9
10,9
11,3
11,3
11,3
11,3
Added water
262,5
262,5
262,5
262,5
262,5
272,5
272,5
272,5
272,5
282,5
282,5
282,5
282,5
Soil + Mould
6213,1
6163,2
-
-
-
-
-
6180
6173,9
6171,3
6164,7
Campacted soil
2064,8
2014,9
2100,4
1987,6
2002,2
1998,7
1996,3
2031,7
2025,6
2023
2016,4
Compacted bulk density
0,00
2,19
0,00
2,14
2,23
2,11
2,13
2,12
2,12
2,16
2,15
2,15
2,14
Compacted dry density
0,00
1,96
0,00
1,94
2,00
1,91
1,92
1,92
1,92
1,94
1,94
1,93
1,93
Curve: 0% air voids
2,0
2,0
2,1
2,1
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
Container - A - top
41,851
39,846
40,259
40,156
42,056
41,852
39,846
40,259
40,155
40,020
39,617
41,613
41,716
Container - B - midt
41,905
39,555
39,826
41,825
41,127
41,905
39,553
39,826
41,825
42,449
39,742
41,711
46,648
Container - C - bund
41,126
39,994
39,846
40,168
41,713
41,126
39,992
39,846
40,168
39,804
41,635
39,612
39,227
Wet soil + Cont. - A
64,590
67,980
75,118
74,603
62,633
70,988
68,993
64,725
63,863
71,502
72,602
73,988
72,985
Wet soil + Cont. - B
70,240
68,823
78,685
66,537
65,864
68,337
70,331
66,794
71,32
68,701
72,164
71,038
79,096
Wet soil + Cont. - C
63,818
75,754
73,672
75,206
63,118
68,263
66,635
68,155
70,478
69,735
72,525
69,487
71,441
Dry soil + Cont. - A
62,331
65,070
71,891
71,411
60,523
68,156
66,203
62,416
61,572
68,313
69,238
70,671
69,811
Dry soil + Cont. - B
67,411
65,760
75,149
64,235
63,272
65,781
67,35
64,173
68,476
66,052
68,892
67,976
75,85
Dry soil + Cont. - C
61,545
71,987
70,558
72,075
60,979
65,651
64,119
65,471
67,562
66,771
69,487
66,396
68,172
Dry soil - A
20,48
25,224
31,632
31,255
18,467
26,304
26,357
22,157
21,417
28,293
29,621
29,058
28,095
Dry soil - B
25,506
26,205
35,323
22,41
22,145
23,876
27,797
24,347
26,651
23,603
29,15
26,265
29,202
Dry soil - C
20,419
31,993
30,712
31,907
19,266
24,525
24,127
25,625
27,394
26,967
27,852
26,784
28,945
Moist Loss - A
2,259
2,910
3,227
3,192
2,11
2,832
2,79
2,309
2,291
3,189
3,364
3,317
3,174
Moist Loss - B
2,829
3,063
3,536
2,302
2,592
2,556
2,981
2,621
2,844
2,649
3,272
3,062
3,246
Moist Loss - C
2,273
3,767
3,114
3,131
2,139
2,612
2,516
2,684
2,916
2,964
3,038
3,091
3,269
Water Content - A
11,0
11,5
10,2
10,2
11,4
10,8
10,6
10,4
10,7
11,3
11,4
11,4
11,3
Water Content - B
11,1
11,7
10,0
10,3
11,7
10,7
10,7
10,8
10,7
11,2
11,2
11,7
11,1
Water Content - C
11,1
11,8
10,1
9,8
11,1
10,7
10,4
10,5
10,6
11,0
10,9
11,5
11,3
Water Content - Avg. 
11,1
11,7
10,1
10,1
11,4
10,7
10,6
10,6
10,7
11,2
11,2
11,5
11,2
Mass
HI-1h-7d (1)
HI-1h-7d (2)
HI-1h-28d (3)
HI-1h-28d (4)
HI-1h-7d (5)
HI-5h-7d (1)
HI-5h-7d (2)
HI-5h-28d (3)
HI-5h-28d (4)
HI-24h-7d (1)
HI-24h-7d (2)
HI-24h-28d (3)
HI-24h-28d (4)
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Target Water content 
10,5
10,5
10,5
10,5
10,5
10,9
10,9
10,9
10,9
11,3
11,3
11,3
11,3
Added water
262,5
262,5
262,5
262,5
262,5
272,5
272,5
272,5
272,5
282,5
282,5
282,5
282,5
Soil + Mould
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Campacted soil
2036,9
2063,2
1999,5
2011,2
2100
1986,7
2000,9
1998,0
1995,8
2031,3
2022,7
2024,4
2014,7
Compacted bulk density
2,16
2,19
2,12
2,14
2,23
2,11
2,12
2,12
2,12
2,16
2,15
2,15
2,14
Compacted dry density
1,95
1,96
1,93
1,94
2,00
1,92
1,93
1,92
1,92
1,95
1,94
1,93
1,93
Curve: 0% air voids
2,0
2,0
2,1
2,1
2,0
2,1
2,1
2,1
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
Container - A - top
39,866
39,871
39,844
40,258
43,405
39,864
39,866
22,212
22,146
46,036
37,534
25,581
22,427
Container - B - midt
43,473
40,038
39,617
41,872
42,051
43,471
40,036
21,247
22,163
55,422
51,809
24,727
22,633
Container - C - bund
39,752
40,042
41,459
39,991
40,123
39,752
40,039
20,945
22,276
48,928
49,649
25,812
25,742
Wet soil + Cont. - A
73,335
73,313
60,847
64,152
65,075
62,744
72,015
48,080
50,930
91,493
66,251
51,745
45,824
Wet soil + Cont. - B
69,956
64,426
72,343
69,124
64,303
74,343
64,248
48,216
49,610
97,888
83,462
47,446
42,715
Wet soil + Cont. - C
67,339
65,134
67,421
66,394
63,593
59,948
66,297
45,848
50,654
81,006
86,487
49,106
49,624
Dry soil + Cont. - A
70,019
69,773
58,894
61,978
62,889
60,646
69,077
45,663
48,247
87,094
63,503
49,097
43,555
Dry soil + Cont. - B
67,407
61,830
69,281
66,563
62,005
71,539
62,06
45,689
47,009
93,795
80,412
45,110
40,679
Dry soil + Cont. - C
64,632
62,536
64,989
63,947
61,241
58,103
63,887
43,539
48,006
77,943
82,927
46,737
47,247
Dry soil - A
30,153
29,902
19,05
21,72
19,484
20,782
29,211
23,451
26,101
41,058
25,969
23,516
21,128
Dry soil - B
23,934
21,792
29,664
24,691
19,954
28,068
22,024
24,442
24,846
38,373
28,603
20,383
18,046
Dry soil - C
24,88
22,494
23,53
23,956
21,118
18,351
23,848
22,594
25,73
29,015
33,278
20,925
21,505
Moist Loss - A
3,316
3,540
1,953
2,174
2,186
2,098
2,938
2,417
2,683
4,399
2,748
2,648
2,269
Moist Loss - B
2,549
2,596
3,062
2,561
2,298
2,804
2,188
2,527
2,601
4,093
3,05
2,336
2,036
Moist Loss - C
2,707
2,598
2,432
2,447
2,352
1,845
2,41
2,309
2,648
3,063
3,56
2,369
2,377
Water Content - A
11,0
11,8
10,3
10,0
11,2
10,1
10,1
10,3
10,3
10,7
10,6
11,3
10,7
Water Content - B
10,7
11,9
10,3
10,4
11,5
10,0
9,9
10,3
10,5
10,7
10,7
11,5
11,3
Water Content - C
10,9
11,5
10,3
10,2
11,1
10,1
10,1
10,2
10,3
10,6
10,7
11,3
11,1
Water Content - Avg. 
10,8
11,8
10,3
10,2
11,3
10,0
10,0
10,3
10,3
10,6
10,6
11,3
11,0
Before curing
After curing
1% Lime, 1h
1% Lime, 5h
1% Lime, 24h
1% Lime, 1h
1% Lime, 5h
1% Lime, 24h
Page 83 of 91
==PAGE:90==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix F3
Mould:
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm]
Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4148,1
941,607337 ml
Mass
HOR-1h-7d (1)
HOR-1h-7d (2)
HOR-1h-28d (3)
HOR-1h-28d (4)
HOR-1h-7d (5)
HOR-5h-7d (1)
HOR-5h-7d (2)
HOR-5h-28d (3)
HOR-5h-28d (4)
HOR-24h-7d (1)
HOR-24h-7d (2)
HOR-24h-28d (3)
HOR-24h-28d (4)
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Taget Water content 
12,1
12,1
12,1
12,1
12,1
12,3
12,3
12,3
12,3
12,4
12,4
12,4
12,4
Added water
302,5
302,5
302,5
302,5
302,5
307,5
307,5
307,5
307,5
310
310
310
310
Soil + Mould
6020,8
6015,6
6033,2
5940,2
-
5999,9
5997,8
5985,2
6008,7
5906,4
5949,9
5964,8
5967,7
Campacted soil
1872,7
1867,5
1885,1
1792,1
1895,6
1851,8
1849,7
1837,1
1860,6
1758,3
1801,8
1816,7
1819,6
Compacted bulk density
1,99
1,98
2,00
1,90
2,01
1,97
1,96
1,95
1,98
1,87
1,91
1,93
1,93
Compacted dry density
1,78
1,78
1,80
1,71
1,80
1,76
1,76
1,75
1,77
1,67
1,71
1,72
1,73
Curve: 0% air voids
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
Container - A
39,946
40,019
40,156
40,258
39,697
40,018
39,742
41,851
40,157
39,228
41,825
42,051
22,399
Container - B
39,845
41,710
39,845
39,804
41,82
39,846
41,711
40,26
39,613
39,554
39,626
39,698
22,278
Container - C
39,611
39,740
41,849
41,639
40,041
39,848
39,804
41,64
39,946
39,616
41,126
41,905
22,211
Wet soil + Cont. - A
76,982
77,013
75,456
66,012
70,603
61,332
62,666
65,768
67,684
72,354
61,566
63,493
46,505
Wet soil + Cont. - B
74,763
79,011
75,258
75,045
74,011
59,732
60,214
62,934
65,376
71,064
58,259
63,002
50,771
Wet soil + Cont. - C
77,242
80,204
76,670
75,138
70,162
58,748
61,772
63,913
61,454
70,619
61,663
62,396
50,449
Dry soil + Cont. - A
73,140
73,156
71,833
63,380
67,283
59,147
60,263
63,234
64,831
68,781
59,468
61,176
43,965
Dry soil + Cont. - B
71,256
75,127
71,672
71,368
70,518
57,627
58,291
60,591
62,746
67,769
56,28
60,529
47,821
Dry soil + Cont. - C
73,318
76,133
73,107
71,735
66,975
56,841
59,453
61,564
59,166
67,313
59,521
60,18
47,459
Dry soil - A
33,194
33,137
31,677
23,122
27,586
19,129
20,521
21,383
24,674
29,553
17,643
19,125
21,566
Dry soil - B
31,411
33,417
31,827
31,564
28,698
17,781
16,58
20,331
23,133
28,215
16,654
20,831
25,543
Dry soil - C
33,707
36,393
31,258
30,096
26,934
16,993
19,649
19,924
19,22
27,697
18,395
18,275
25,248
Moist Loss - A
3,842
3,857
3,623
2,632
3,32
2,185
2,403
2,534
2,853
3,573
2,098
2,317
2,54
Moist Loss - B
3,507
3,884
3,586
3,677
3,493
2,105
1,923
2,343
2,63
3,295
1,979
2,473
2,95
Moist Loss - C
3,924
4,071
3,563
3,403
3,187
1,907
2,319
2,349
2,288
3,306
2,142
2,216
2,99
Water Content - A
11,6
11,6
11,4
11,4
12,0
11,4
11,7
11,9
11,6
12,1
11,9
12,1
11,8
Water Content - B
11,2
11,6
11,3
11,6
12,2
11,8
11,6
11,5
11,4
11,7
11,9
11,9
11,5
Water Content - C
11,6
11,2
11,4
11,3
11,8
11,2
11,8
11,8
11,9
11,9
11,6
12,1
11,8
Water Content - Avg. 
11,5
11,5
11,4
11,4
12,0
11,5
11,7
11,7
11,6
11,9
11,8
12,0
11,7
Mass
HOR-1h-7d (1)
HOR-1h-7d (2)
HOR-1h-28d (3)
HOR-1h-28d (4)
HOR-1h-7d (5)
HOR-5h-7d (1)
HOR-5h-7d (2)
HOR-5h-28d (3)
HOR-5h-28d (4)
HOR-24h-7d (1)
HOR-24h-7d (2)
HOR-24h-28d (3)
HOR-24h-28d (4)
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Taget Water content 
12,1
12,1
12,1
12,1
12,1
12,3
12,3
12,3
12,3
12,4
12,4
12,4
12,4
Added water
302,5
302,5
302,5
302,5
302,5
307,5
307,5
307,5
307,5
310
310
310
310
Soil + Mould
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Campacted soil
1869,9
1865,2
1882,8
1789,3
1895,2
1850,6
1848,7
1836,6
1860,5
1753,9
1799,4
1814,7
1818
Compacted bulk density
1,99
1,98
2,00
1,90
2,01
1,97
1,96
1,95
1,98
1,86
1,91
1,93
1,93
Compacted dry density
1,79
1,79
1,80
1,71
1,80
1,76
1,76
1,74
1,76
1,67
1,71
1,72
1,73
Curve: 0% air voids
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
2,0
Container - A
41,701
40,037
40,156
41,952
41,458
39,698
40,040
40,016
39,808
41,710
40,257
40,039
39,616
Container - B
39,695
39,216
41,64
39,644
39,992
41,639
39,554
41,85
39,698
39,844
39,608
41,737
41,873
Container - C
41,679
41,819
39,613
41,832
39,748
39,863
39,618
39,735
39,844
39,804
39,826
39,805
39,825
Wet soil + Cont. - A
64,043
62,301
62,748
68,982
69,215
62,037
64,155
61,262
63,662
67,641
63,694
68,404
59,593
Wet soil + Cont. - B
66,538
65,899
70,58
64,589
63,773
71,566
60,213
67,246
64,973
58,551
56,636
66,049
70,394
Wet soil + Cont. - C
68,026
70,080
67,833
69,096
65,113
68,591
58,48
62,535
66,642
59,359
70,746
65,765
65,874
Dry soil + Cont. - A
61,906
60,073
60,453
66,219
66,314
59,704
61,652
59,027
61,148
64,875
61,258
65,4
57,491
Dry soil + Cont. - B
63,867
63,309
67,598
62,054
61,208
68,428
58,028
64,515
62,192
56,579
54,864
63,484
67,354
Dry soil + Cont. - C
65,371
67,328
64,97
66,375
62,402
65,572
56,508
60,03
63,757
57,362
67,463
63,016
63,078
Dry soil - A
20,205
20,036
20,297
24,267
24,856
20,006
21,612
19,011
21,34
23,165
21,001
25,361
17,875
Dry soil - B
24,172
24,093
25,958
22,41
21,216
26,789
18,474
22,665
22,494
16,735
15,256
21,747
25,481
Dry soil - C
23,692
25,509
25,357
24,543
22,654
25,709
16,89
20,295
23,913
17,558
27,637
23,211
23,253
Moist Loss - A
2,137
2,228
2,295
2,763
2,901
2,333
2,503
2,235
2,514
2,766
2,436
3,004
2,102
Moist Loss - B
2,671
2,59
2,982
2,535
2,565
3,138
2,185
2,731
2,781
1,972
1,772
2,565
3,04
Moist Loss - C
2,655
2,752
2,863
2,721
2,711
3,019
1,972
2,505
2,885
1,997
3,283
2,749
2,796
Water Content - A
10,6
11,1
11,3
11,4
11,7
11,7
11,6
11,8
11,8
11,9
11,6
11,8
11,8
Water Content - B
11,0
10,8
11,5
11,3
12,1
11,7
11,8
12,0
12,4
11,8
11,6
11,8
11,9
Water Content - C
11,2
10,8
11,3
11,1
12,0
11,7
11,7
12,3
12,1
11,4
11,9
11,8
12,0
Water Content - Avg. 
10,9
10,9
11,4
11,3
11,9
11,7
11,7
12,0
12,1
11,7
11,7
11,8
11,9
Before curing
After curing
1% Lime, 1h
1% Lime, 5h
1% Lime, 24h
1% Lime, 1h
1% Lime, 5h
1% Lime, 24h
Page 84 of 91
==PAGE:91==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Appendix F4
Mould:
Diameter [mm]
Height [mm]
Mass [g]
Mass Base [g]
1
101,49
116,8
1682,1
2
101,05
116,83
3
101,28
117,05
Average 
101,3
116,9
4148
941,607337 ml
Mass
HER (1)
HER (2)
HI (1)
HI (2)
HOR (1)
HOR (2) 
HER (1)
HER (2)
HI (1)
HI (2)
HOR (1)
HOR (2) 
Sample size 
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
Target Water content 
14,9
14,9
9,6
9,6
8,4
8,4
14,9
14,9
9,6
9,6
8,4
8,4
Added water
372,5
372,5
240
240
210
210
372,5
372,5
240
240
210
210
Soil + Mould
6042,8
6016,1
6081,1
6097,6
6240,9
6253,1
-
-
-
-
-
-
Campacted soil
1894,8
1868,1
1933,1
1949,6
2092,9
2105,1
1892,4
1863,2
1927,3
1945,5
2092,3
2105
Compacted bulk density
2,01
1,98
2,05
2,07
2,22
2,24
2,01
1,98
2,05
2,07
2,22
2,24
Compacted dry density
1,74
1,71
1,86
1,89
2,02
2,04
1,75
1,71
1,86
1,88
2,02
2,03
Curve: 0% air voids
1,8
1,8
2,1
2,1
2,1
2,1
1,9
1,8
2,1
2,1
2,1
2,1
Container - A - top
41,953
20,945
39,551
39,865
40,015
41,85
41,873
40,258
39,827
41,588
39,616
39,992
Container - B - midt
22,165
21,247
39,804
40,039
40,155
41,829
39,644
39,844
41,458
42,32
41,756
39,844
Container - C - bund
22,277
22,146
41,711
41,639
39,944
39,733
39,697
39,807
41,99
39,748
41,737
39,611
Wet soil + Cont. - A
58,239
36,814
66,698
69,587
63,364
60,001
64,313
64,866
66,258
70,354
68,102
64,654
Wet soil + Cont. - B
40,396
36,327
71,062
72,414
58,770
61,065
65,853
63,678
70,738
68,976
69,051
72,539
Wet soil + Cont. - C
42,945
39,580
68,562
66,823
64,505
59,963
66,153
64,764
68,625
73,818
65,54
64,492
Dry soil + Cont. - A
56,068
34,579
64,201
66,953
61,248
58,438
61,298
61,471
63,831
67,802
65,516
62,368
Dry soil + Cont. - B
37,921
34,287
68,166
69,515
57,059
59,408
62,435
60,447
68,006
66,595
66,482
69,616
Dry soil + Cont. - C
40,127
37,239
66,085
64,564
62,246
58,234
62,708
61,375
66,123
70,761
63,452
62,214
Dry soil - A
14,115
13,634
24,65
27,088
21,233
16,588
19,425
21,213
24,004
26,214
25,9
22,376
Dry soil - B
15,756
13,04
28,362
29,476
16,904
17,579
22,791
20,603
26,548
24,275
24,726
29,772
Dry soil - C
17,85
15,093
24,374
22,925
22,302
18,501
23,011
21,568
24,133
31,013
21,715
22,603
Moist Loss - A
2,171
2,235
2,497
2,634
2,116
1,563
3,015
3,395
2,427
2,552
2,586
2,286
Moist Loss - B
2,475
2,04
2,896
2,899
1,711
1,657
3,418
3,231
2,732
2,381
2,569
2,923
Moist Loss - C
2,818
2,341
2,477
2,259
2,259
1,729
3,445
3,389
2,502
3,057
2,088
2,278
Water Content - A
15,4
16,4
10,1
9,7
10,0
9,4
15,5
16,0
10,1
9,7
10,0
10,2
Water Content - B
15,7
15,6
10,2
9,8
10,1
9,4
15,0
15,7
10,3
9,8
10,4
9,8
Water Content - C
15,8
15,5
10,2
9,9
10,1
9,3
15,0
15,7
10,4
9,9
9,6
10,1
Water Content - Avg. 
15,6
15,8
10,2
9,8
10,1
9,4
15,2
15,8
10,3
9,8
10,0
10,0
HI
HOR
Before curing
HOR
HI
HER
After curing
HER
Page 85 of 91
==PAGE:92==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Bilag G1
(a) HER-1h-7d (1)
(b) HER-1h-7d (2)
(c) HER-5h-7d (1)
(d) HER-5h-7d (2)
(e) HER-24h-7d (1)
(f) HER-24h-7d (2)
Fig. G1: Results from HER 7 days strength, with trendline for the E-modulus.
Page 86 of 91
==PAGE:93==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Bilag G2
(a) HER-1h-28d (3)
(b) HER-1h-28d (4)
(c) HER-5h-28d (3)
(d) HER-5h-28d (4)
(e) HER-24h-28d (3)
(f) HER-24h-28d (4)
Fig. G2: Results from HER 28 days strength, with trendline for the E-modulus.
Page 87 of 91
==PAGE:94==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Bilag G3
(a) HOR-1h-7d (1)
(b) HOR-1h-7d (2)
(c) HOR-5h-7d (1)
(d) HOR-5h-7d (2)
(e) HOR-24h-7d (1)
(f) HOR-24h-7d (2)
Fig. G3: Results from HOR 7 days strength, with trendline for the E-modulus.
Page 88 of 91
==PAGE:95==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Bilag G4
(a) HOR-1h-28d (3)
(b) HOR-1h-28d (4)
(c) HOR-5h-28d (3)
(d) HOR-5h-28d (4)
(e) HOR-24h-28d (3)
(f) HOR-24h-28d (4)
Fig. G4: Results from HOR 28 days strength, with trendline for the E-modulus.
Page 89 of 91
==PAGE:96==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Bilag G5
(a) HI-1h-7d (1)
(b) HI-5h-7d (1)
(c) HI-5h-7d (2)
(d) HI-24h-7d (1)
(e) HI-24h-7d (2)
Fig. G5: Results from HI 7 days strength, with trendline for the E-modulus.
Page 90 of 91
==PAGE:97==
01.01.2025
Appendix
Bilag G6
(a) HI-1h-28d (3)
(b) HI-1h-28d (4)
(c) HI-5h-28d (3)
(d) HI-5h-28d (4)
(e) HI-24h-28d (3)
(f) HI-24h-28d (4)
Fig. G6: Results from HI 28 days strength, with trendline for the E-modulus.
Page 91 of 91
