==PAGE:1==
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk
Prediction
A
Machine
Learning
Study
Using
Mass
Spectrometry-based Proteomics
Master Thesis
Josefine Tvermoes Meineche, s233776
DTU Biosustain
Novo Nordisk Center for Biosustainability
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
A Machine Learning Study Using Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics
Master Thesis
December, 2024
By
Josefine Tvermoes Meineche
Supervisor
Alberto Santos Delagdo
Senior researcher, NNF Center for Biosustainability, DTU
Co-supervisor
Henry Webel
Senior Data Scientist, NNF Center for Biosustainability, DTU
External co-supervisor
Majken Karoline Jensen
Professor, Institute for Public Health, UCPH
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Generated by the use of Microsoft Copilot
Published by:
DTU, Novo Nordisk Center for Biosustainability, Søltofts Plads, Building
220, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Multi-omics Network Analytics
group, Center for Biosustainability, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng in Bioinformatics and
Systems Biology.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of molecular biology and
statistics.
Josefine Tvermoes Meineche - s233776
Signature
Date
ii
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Age-related chronic diseases like dementia are an increasingly urgent public health chal-
lenge as the population continues to enjoy longer life spans. Traditionally, dementia re-
search has focused on diagnosis and treatment after disease manifestation, resulting in
limited understanding of the pathological changes in the years preceding clinical diag-
nosis. The plasma proteome offers a unique window into these molecular alterations.
Here, I present a study akin to hypothesis-free testing on a large prospective case-cohort
using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry. Through classic survival analy-
sis, I identify four potential protein biomarkers showing a protective effect on dementia
(CNDP1, F13A1, F13B, and AFM) and two associated with higher risk (IGBP2 and AL-
CAM). I hereafter demonstrate the predictive power of these proteins using random forest
models, which predict dementia onset 3-6 years in advance with mean AUCs of 0.75 (0.72,
0.79 95%CI). These biomarkers represent diverse biological functions and pathways, and
I suggest these six biomarkers as a point of entry for future research in the pathology of
dementia.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This master’s thesis has been conducted over the course of four months at the Multi-
omics Analytics (MoNA) Group at the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustain-
ability, Technical University of Denmark, in collaboration with the Bio-Epi Group at the
Section of Epidemiology, Institute for Public Health, University of Copenhagen.
I would like to thank my supervisor, Alberto Santos Delgado, for letting me be a part of the
group and for all the invaluable insights and pieces of advice throughout the whole pro-
cess. Thank you for your always kind and clever remarks and ideas. It has been a unique
learning experience, and I feel on much safer ground in the world of MS proteomics now.
Additionally, I would like to thank my co-supervisor Henry Webel for opening the doors to
good data sharing, providing instrumental advice on better coding practice, and not least
for de-mystifying git a little more. To Majken Karoline Jensen I want to express my grati-
tude for showing me the beautiful (and sometimes frustrating) world where epidemiology
and the molecular sciences meet. I am grateful that you took me under your wings and
introduced me to the niche in the academic world where I feel most at home.
I also owe a special thank you to Sebastian Ayala Ruano for his great help with generating
the Streamlit report. Your tool, VueGen, is none less than amazing, and I feel privileged
to have had direct help from the developer himself and am inspired by your excitement for
the work you do. Likewise, I am particularly grateful to Angel Luu Phanthanourak for the
invaluable help with building the Clinical Knowledge Graph on my computer. I’m in awe
at how you saved me from coding dead ends where I would have been stuck indefinitely
otherwise.
Last but not least, I am immensely grateful for all of my kind office mates from the MoNA
group, Txell, Edir, Sebas, Marco, Angel, and all of the Data Science Platform group for
providing the nicest working space environment with your always kind spirits here at Bio-
sustain. It has been a pleasure!
Josefine T. Meineche, Lyngby, December 2024
iv
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to dementia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Introduction to proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Biomarkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Mass spectrometry approaches to biomarker discovery
. . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Machine learning approaches to biomarker discovery
. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.7
Approach in this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2
Methods
13
2.1
Study design I: Data source and background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Experimental workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
Data pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
Summary statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.5
Finding protein biomarker candidates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.6
Random forest models for evaluation of predictive properties of the candi-
date biomarker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.7
Model evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
2.8
Biological annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.9
Code and folder structure and the use of GitHub
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.10 Presentation of the project using Streamlit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.11 Quality control of the proteomics data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3
Results
37
3.1
Quality control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.2
Summary statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.3
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.4
Random Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
3.5
Annotation of protein biomarker candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4
Discussion
55
4.1
Data quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.2
Cox regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4.3
Model interpretation and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4.4
Interpretation of the biomarker candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.5
Reflections on the interdisciplinarity of bioinformatics and epidemiology
. . 63
4.6
Future prospects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.7
Implications for early biomarkers for dementia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5
Conclusion
67
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
69
A Appendix
80
A.1 Expanded view of Cox results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
A.2 Cox results susceptibility of alpha penalizer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.3 Cox proportional hazards assumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.4 PRI log
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
A.5 Dimensionality reduction of un-scaled data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
A.6 Dimensionality reduction of protein median scaled data
. . . . . . . . . . . 90
A.7 Dimensionality reduction of pool scaled data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.8 Dimensionality reduction of median scales data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
A.9 Expanded view of protein importances over time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
A.10 Evaluation quantities of different discrimination thresholds over the years
. 96
A.11 SHAP values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
A.12 SHAP values, minimal model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
A.13 SHAP values, clinical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
A.14 GO-term networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
vi
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction to dementia
Dementia is a collection of conditions that cause severe cognitive decline (CD), which
impacts a person’s ability to function and live their daily life. The disorder is incapacitating,
leading to many frustrations and often adding an immense burden not only on the patients
themselves but also on the family and caregivers, giving rise to the disease’s nickname,
the “disorder of the relatives” [1] [2]. It is estimated that 57 million people worldwide
suffer from dementia (2019 numbers), and as the population continues to enjoy longer
life spans, this figure is predicted to increase threefold by 2050. The incidence (i.e., the
speed at which new dementia cases occur) is expected to remain stable within the time
frame [3].
Little is known about the underlying pathophysiology of dementia. The current pathologi-
cal targets show questionable casual relationships to the underlying disease mechanisms.
This leaves dementia research at an infantile state compared to other highly prevalent ill-
nesses. There is therefore a great need for research into both prevention, diagnosis,
treatment, and care [4].
1.1.1
Dementia subtypes and how they affect treatment and our
understanding of the disease
Traditionally, dementia is stratified into different diseases based on the known underly-
ing pathology. Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the most common form comprising 60% of all
cases, is characterized by atrophy in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. The sub-
type is characterized by proteopathies that include plaques of toxic, misfolded proteins
called amyloid-β (Aβ) and neurofibrillary tangles of phosphorylated Tau protein (pTau)
[5]. Vascular dementia (VD) evolves from atrophies in the vascular system sustaining the
brain with oxygen and distinguishes itself from AD by the absence of Aβ. Lewy body,
frontotemporal, and mixed dementia are additional forms of dementia [6].
The stratification of the diseases entails different treatments and drug targets. In the field
of dementia research, however, there is currently debate about whether dementia is a
spectrum of the current subtypes or a separate disease. Often, patients exhibit a mix of
AD and vascular damage, resulting in a group of patients with similar but ununiform patho-
logical presentations[7]. The division of AD and VD stems from a time where diagnosis
was purely clinical and done by post-mortem obdutions. In recent times, the diagnosis
is based on technological advancements such as brain scans using magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) and biomarkers such as pTau [8].
Treatment of AD and other dementias with proteinopathies targets the amyloid plaques in
the brain. However, the finding of similar plaques in old but healthy brains suggests that
plaques may not affect dementia progression as much as previously thought. Likewise,
multiple clinical studies have shown low or only moderate effects of drugs targeting these
plaques, even when applied to early stage AD [9][10]. Taken together, these pieces of
evidence suggest that our current understanding of the disease is inadequate. Thus,
pathology, diagnosis, and treatment research is even more urgent.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Lancet risk factors for dementia [11]
Current diagnosis of dementia is inadequate
The diagnosis is based on family medical history, cognitive tests, and information about a
person’s daily task abilities, memory, and behavioral changes. In recent years, dementia
diagnosis has seen a push for the use of technical biomarkers such as brain scans and
measurable markers from blood or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to be included [8]. However,
diagnosis is still time-consuming, costly, and differs immensely from clinic to clinic, doctor
to doctor, and health care sector to health care sector.
Dementia is preceded by a long prodromal phase
The diagnosis becomes even more challenging due to the slow development of demen-
tia, which includes a long prodromal phase that precedes the diagnosis. Here, a patient
shows cognitive impairment such as loss of memory and slowness of everyday tasks,
which is clinically defined as mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Changes in the brain vas-
culature are observed, supporting the hypothesis that vascular impairment is a key factor
in dementia rather than a separate diagnostic category [8].
1.1.2
The current state of dementia research
Dementia risk factors are varied and occur throughout life
A lot of research has focused on identifying factors that increase disease risk. A panel
of researchers in the Lancet Commission on Dementia proposes the official risk factors.
Their most recent report (July 2024) states the risk factors summarized in figure 1.1. The
Commission estimates that these factors have the potential to modify 42% of the total
risk (i.e., an estimation that 42% of cases can be avoided by adjusting these risk factors).
While this is good news in terms of dementia prevention, it leaves 58% yet unexplained.
This thesis aims to identify markers for early-stage dementia and contribute to the vast
body of research on filling in the remaining gaps, ultimately advancing prevention and
treatment.
2
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Fields with significant unmet needs in dementia research [4].
Diverse risk factors and inadequate diagnosis present significant challenges to
dementia research
Doing epidemiological research on dementia is, as with all other highly complex disorders,
challenging. Researchers have shown that many more risk factors, such as lack of sleep,
poor diet, and systemic inflammation, are associated with dementia onset, making the
Lancet Commission risk factors far from exhaustive [11]. The many risk factors hint at a
complex disease etiology with many possible vulnerabilities and exposures, and the risk
is based on the total exposures over a lifetime.
In addition to uncertain risk factors, data quality is an important issue. Many of the risk
factors, such as air pollution, diet, and physical inactivity, are hard to measure accurately,
and such data will likely be highly prone to errors. Even worse, the prenatal and infant risk
factors of healthy brain development are impossible to measure. The lengthy prodromal
phase is another aspect of the complexity. Additionally, neuropathological changes can
manifest up to a decade prior to diagnosis. This muddies cohorts for dementia research.
The Lancet Commission suggests researchers include the time to dementia or censoring
in their results for clarity and comparability [11].
In summary, there is a need for better and more diverse study designs in dementia re-
search. Additionally, diversity of risk exposures emphasizes the need for bigger cohorts,
ensuring representation of all possible groups.
Current dementia research disproportionately focuses on majority demographic
groups
According to the Lancet commission, dementia research is scarce in low- and middle-
income countries (LMICs), where most future cases are expected to originate. They also
note that current research focuses on societal majorities. Selective bias in studies means
only the ones most well off or best-educated participate. The risk factors themselves em-
phasize the inequity in health; exposure to lower education levels, obesity, diabetes, and
even air pollution tends to be more prevalent in lower socio-economic groups. Accord-
ingly, these groups experience a higher incidence of dementia. The Lancet commission
underscores the need for including more vulnerable and less served groups of a popula-
tion in future research for diminishing further bias in health care [11].
Dementia can be detected in peripheral tissue
Though the dementia pathology is highly suspected to occur in the central nervous system
(CNS) there are many indications the disease may be studied and detected in peripheral
tissue of the body, such as the circulatory system. Studying the CNS directly presents
significant challenges. It is difficult, costly, and requires specialized tools, skills, and tech-
nologies. Most importantly, it is highly invasive for patients.
Blood tests are both easy, minimally invasive and cheap. The CNS is protected from the
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
3
==PAGE:12==
rest of the bodily system by the blood brain barrier (BBB) which is a largely impermeable
membrane between the bloodstream and the brain, to a large extent separating the pool
of molecules between the two systems. However, evidence indicates that impermeability
worsens over time due to vascular damage from aging, systemic inflammation, and air
pollution. The damage to the BBB allows potentially toxic molecules to enter the sensitive
CNS, which may worsen neurodegenerative processes. However, this facilitates easier
access for studying the CNS through the blood [12].
Blood-based biomarkers are essential to addressing the current unmet needs in
dementia research
The World Health Organization (WHO) categorizes the research gaps into six groups: 1)
Dementia epidemiology and economics, 2) disease mechanisms and models, 3) dementia
diagnostics, 4) drug development, 5) dementia support and care, and 6) dementia risk
reduction (figure 1.2) [4].
As previously mentioned, the current diagnosis of dementia is unharmonized and inad-
equate. This complicates the uniformity of dementia patients and highlights the problem
of the lengthy period from onset to clinical diagnosis, averaging three years. Due to the
insufficient diagnosis, epidemiological research is inherently complicated by uncertainties
in the clarity between patient groups.
The disease mechanisms of dementia are poorly understood. Post-mortem studies have
revealed structural brain changes, but the actual underlying pathology leading to these
changes remains unknown. Consequently, there is no effective treatment for the disease,
and all drugs target symptoms rather than the cause.
Collectively, the first four unmet needs highlight the demand for robust, easily accessi-
ble, and objective dementia biomarkers. These biomarkers could enhance diagnostic
accuracy, improve epidemiological studies, provide insights into dementia pathology, and
potentially identify more effective drug targets [4].
1.2
Introduction to proteomics
Proteins are the functional units of cells and tissue in all living things. They cover a vast
variety of functions, from providing structure to intra-organism communication to the bio-
chemical breakdown and buildup of biomolecules. The composition and abundance of
proteins change dynamically in the body in response to health factors, environmental fac-
tors, life stage, or cell cycle stage. Thus, the unique composition of proteins at a given
time serves as a key to understanding the molecular state of a cell, tissue, or organism
and thus as a key instrument in biomedical research [13] [14].
Proteomics is the measurement of all proteins in a given biological unit. This includes
the study of expression levels, post-translational modifications, protein composition, and
connections. In comparison to other omics-fields, such as genomics and transcriptomics,
proteomics has for a while been a less mature field. However, in recent years, proteomics
technologies have developed immensely, with rapid increases in throughput, robustness,
and the accuracy of measurements. In contrast to genomics and transcriptomics, pro-
teomics allows for direct protein expression measurement and thus gives the opportunity
for looking at snapshots of the protein expression level at a specific point in time [14].
High-throughput (HT) proteomics includes multiple different methods of protein identifica-
tion and quantification, such as aptamer-based assays, microarrays, and mass spectrom-
4
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Concept of a LC MS/MS workflow. Created in https://BioRender.com.
etry (MS). The nature of the research question determines the specific advantages and
disadvantages of each method. This thesis builds on data from human plasma samples
analyzed via a MS-based workflow, described in more detail in the section below [14].
1.3
Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry
MS proteomics involves several steps to transform biological samples into protein identi-
ties and intensities. The full pipeline of LC-MS/MS from samples to tabular data ready for
downstream analysis consists of three phases: 1) sample preparation, 2) LC-MS/MS run,
and 3) subsequent peptide and protein quantification and inference [15]. In this section, I
provide a brief overview of the theory behind the workflow, starting from the specific meth-
ods used for this thesis and drawing parallels to the corresponding available approaches.
The choice of LC-MS proteomics for this study was heavily influenced by the hypothesis-
free nature of the technology, allowing for exceptionally free exploration. In brief, this the-
sis builds on quantitative, untargeted, label-free MS proteomics using data-independent
acquisition (DIA).
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
5
==PAGE:14==
1.3.1
Sample preparation
The initial step in MS is sample preparation, transforming the biological samples into spec-
imens readable by the mass spectrometer. First, the samples are homogenized, which
involves lysing the cells and breaking down larger structures. Hereafter, the proteins are
separated from other specimens such as fat and carbohydrates in a process called purifi-
cation. This is usually done by precipitation, where the solubility of the proteins is altered,
accommodating separation. Subsequently, the proteins are re-suspended in aqueous so-
lution, where they are denatured. Disulphide bonds are reduced and alkylated. Lastly,
the inert proteins are cleaved by proteases (often lysozyme, cleaving specifically on ly-
isne sites) to peptides, and any remaining detergents are washed out. Peptides have the
advantage of being more homogeneous in size and weight compared to proteins, making
the MS run more streamlined [15].
1.3.2
LC-MS/MS run
Liquid chromatography
The first step in the LC-MS/MS part of the pipeline is separating the peptides for easier
detection. This is done by liquid chromatography (LC), also sometimes referred to as
”high-performance liquid chromatography” (HPLC). In MS-based proteomics, the method
of choice is often reverse phase LC, where the column contains a hydrophobic station-
ary phase. As the peptides move through the column, they are separated according to
hydrophobicity, eluding from the column at different time points (also referred to as the
retention time, RT) [15].
The selection of length of a gradient is a choice between throughput and depth of cov-
erage. Longer gradients allow for a higher depth of the proteome (a broader span of
abundance), but not for running many samples fast, and vice versa. For an epidemiolog-
ical study like this thesis, which has a large sample size, it was preferable to choose a
shorter gradient favoring throughput [15].
The samples undergo ionization before entering the mass spectrometer. Here the elution
is sprayed into the mass spectrometer, forming aqueous droplets with the peptides. By
application of a voltage, all charged peptides are pushed into the gas phase (desolvation).
This part of the process is slightly biased in that peptides differ in their ability of ionization.
Low ionizability peptides remain stationary in the spectrometer, preventing detection [15].
In the end, what is measured by the spectrometer is the mass-to-charge ratio of a peptide
(m/z). The same peptides can end up in different charge stages and thus have multiple
possible m/z values. These are referred to as precursors and are separated and detected
differently further down the pipeline [15].
MS1 sprectra
Tandem mass spectrometry is named as such as it runs through two mass spectrometer
detections per sample. Depending on which mass spectrometer is used, the technicalities
differ slightly, but the overall idea remains the same. Here, I exemplify the MS1 and MS2
scans using a Bruker timsTOF mass spectrometer, which generated the data for this thesis
[15].
timsTOF is short for ”trapped ion mobility spectrometry” (tims) and ”time of flight” (TOF),
which refer to different major elements of the spectrometer. The first step of a MS cycle
involves scanning the entire set of peptides. The peptides enter the dual TIMS analyzer,
6
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:15==
where they accumulate for a short period of time (25–200 ms). After accumulation in
the first compartment of the dual TIMS, a gas guides them to a second compartment,
where they are positioned along a gradient according to their ability to move through gas
(mobility). From here, the peptides are eluded over another small time span (25–200
ms), which separates them further. From here, they are led over two other elements of
the analyzer, the quadrupole and a collision cell, to the TOF analyzer coupled to an ion
detector. These create the MS1 spectra [15].
Each sample was measured individually in the data used in this thesis. In MS, sam-
ples can be pooled and measured simultaneously. This approach requires labelling the
peptides with sample-specific isotopes. When measuring samples individually, labelling
is unnecessary, and the quantification is called label-free quantification (LFQ), with the
measurements referred to as LFQ-intensities [16].
MS2 spectra
The peptides from MS1 undergo further fragmentation and analysis in the MS2 part of
a cycle. This allows for deeper analysis and identification. Here, two approaches can
be used: data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA). In
DDA, the peptides to fragment in MS2 are picked from the MS1 run. In DIA, there is no
such filtering, and all m/z values from the MS1 are included in the MS2 by sliding across
so-called elusion windows of m/z ranges. This acquisition mode is known to improve data
completeness and depth [15].
In brief, the MS1 allows for quantification of the peptides, and the MS2 run improves
peptide identification.
1.3.3
Raw data handling
Peptide quantification and identification
The raw data from an LC-MS/MS run is a collection of spectra. To transform these into
values, various software using different algorithms have been developed. For the data in
this thesis, DIA-NN was used [17]. The suffix NN is short for neural networks, hinting at
the deep learning method used for transforming the MS peaks to peptide sequences and
quantities.
DIA-NN implements both library-based and library-free processing methods for peptide
identification. The first approach maps the spectra to an existing spectral library, while the
second one utilizes instead a database of protein sequences. In practice, the peptides
are digested in silico, and their spectra are predicted in a new spectral library, which are
then used on the data for peptide identification [17]. Tools for this include the MS2PIP and
Prosit software, which do in silico predictions [18][19].
Protein inference
Going from peptides to proteins, the peptides are mapped to a protein database. This
step is integrated in DIA-NN. Intuitively, if a peptide is unique to a protein, this protein is
identified. However, it often happens that a peptide maps to multiple proteins, and multiple
proteins have the many common peptides. In these cases, we cannot distinguish which
protein exactly was present and all proteins are pooled into a group, referred to as ”protein
group”. The quantification of the proteins builds on the intensities from the peptides [15].
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
7
==PAGE:16==
1.4
Biomarkers
A biomarker is an objective, measurable unit that provides information about a disease.
Biomarkers can indicate the presence of a disease and provide insights into disease pro-
gression, severity, or help in classifying disease subtypes. A well-established example is
the measure of C-reactive protein, which is a protein present in blood that is routinely mea-
sured in general medical practices as an indication of infection. This marker conveniently
provides the doctor with information on the state of the patient and aids in decision-making
on whether the patient should receive antibiotics or not [20]. This biomarker is an exam-
ple of a gold standard, as it is robust, easy to measure, cheap to analyze, and requires a
minimum of invasiveness of the patient (i.e., a finger prick of blood).
The challenges of an accurate diagnosis have driven much research into finding such a
biomarker for dementia. A handful of biomarkers for dementia are well established. They
mainly rely on proteins measurable in the CSF, or on structural brain changes measured
by MRI. Protein biomarkers have the potential of improving both differential diagnoses
within disorders and the prognosis of disease progression and aiding in personalized
medicine by pointing to better treatment and therapy for the individual [21][14]. They
distinguish themselves from genomic biomarkers by showing the current state (gene ex-
pression) of a cell or tissue rather than inherent, stable factors.
1.5
Mass spectrometry approaches to biomarker discovery
Bottom up MS-based proteomics is an optimal choice for biomarker discovery given the
inherent hypothesis-free nature. Whereas other targeted methods, such as aptamer and
microarray methods, utilize physical binding and thus require pre-manufactured, protein-
specific antibodies, MS measure peptides according to their physical abilities, thus making
the method untargeted. This quality opens the door for the discovery of new biomarkers
and pathological pathways [22].
1.5.1
Performance improvements enabling biomarker discovery by mass
spectrometry
In recent years, MS-based proteomics has seen a significant increase in performance.
For a long time, a big hurdle of MS-proteomics was the tendency to only measure highly
abundant proteins. However, especially due to highly optimized sample preparation tech-
niques, the depth of the proteome covered has become deeper. Today, even low-abundant
proteins can be detected in the same MS analysis as high-abundant proteins from only
micrograms of sample. Similarly, proteome coverage, a measure for how many proteins
are measured, has become increasingly broader with advancements in sample prepara-
tion, peptide separation, and MS instrumentation [23]. Furthermore, improved automation
for sample preparation have significantly improved the reproducibility of MS proteomics
analyses [24].
Big advancements in MS proteomics have also been seen in the data acquisition and
protein inference with progress in software such as DIA-NN [17] and Spectronaut [25],
which effectively and robustly analyse raw data [24].
Today, it is possible to run a large sample size and retrieve hundreds or thousands of
proteins. The large sample sizes are especially enabled by faster experimental work flow,
again mainly driven by advancements in the LC.
8
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:17==
1.5.2
New frontiers and current challenges of MS-based biomarkers
Given the improvement in MS-based proteomics, the field of biomarker research has ex-
ploded in recent years, with 32,516 published articles to date related to protein biomarkers,
according to PubMed (November 12th 2024). Naturally, only a few of these have been
adopted as gold standards in research and much fewer in the clinic. This has prompted
discussions on best practices and requirements for candidate biomarkers to reduce false
discoveries, improve reproducibility, and ensure the robustness of the markers [24].
Marker or markers?
Multiple researchers within the field of proteomics biomarker re-
search argue for a panel of protein biomarkers rather than single markers is advanta-
geous for enhancing robustness [21][26]. Furthermore, they provide an overview of the
challenges and possibilities of protein biomarker research.
Protein numbers and sample sizes:
As the ability to test a larger number of proteins
increases, so does the challenge of multiple testing in biomarker research. Consequently,
the sample size required to ensure adequate statistical power grows accordingly. This
poses a challenge as MS proteomics, despite the advancements, is still expensive and
time-consuming. In addition to the cost, long-running experiments due to many samples
make the runs vulnerable to changes in the instrumentation over time, adding bias to
the data (proteome drift). This thesis deals with these challenges, and much work was
done to ensure the quality of the data [13]. Large sample sizes also call for rigorous and
standardized sample collection to avoid introduction of contaminants due to, e.g., blood
clotting. In addition to this, researchers are stressing the need for ensuring population-
wide heterogeneity in biomarker studies to avoid over-specific findings [24].
1.6
Machine learning approaches to biomarker discovery
The rapid increase in measured proteins and samples, in addition to the many other omics-
fields with an equally large body of data, has pushed the biomedical sciences from softer,
small-scale methods into the world of big data. The availability and accessibility of open
and free software has further moved the general data analysis from classic biostatistics
to machine learning (ML) models (and further on with the current artificial intelligence
revolution taking place as I write). ML are models which learn and improve from the data
on which they are trained, in contrast to static statistical models. These models have the
advantage over statistical models in that they have fewer assumptions about the model
and underlying data distributions. Instead, these have been replaced by the requirement
for bigger sample sizes [27][28].
In an ”early” commentary from 2013, Swan et al. outline the best practices and guidelines
for using ML in proteomics-based biomarker identification. Here, they stress the need
for division of the dataset into a training and testing dataset, ensuring models are never
evaluated on the data which they were built on. They discuss ML approaches and their
speed of learning and ease of interpretability. In contrast to classic statistical models, ML
models are often harder to interpret, and thus, valuable knowledge of the features in the
models may be lost (this thesis also touches upon this and strategies for overcoming this
in the methods section). Lastly, they discuss approaches for post ML analyses of the pro-
teins and suggest literature mining, pathway analysis, and generation of protein-protein
interaction (PPI) networks. These downstream analyses are essential for understanding
the outcome of the models [28].
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 1.4: Overview of the overall approach for biomarker discovery and testing in this
thesis. Metadata includes clinical baseline data and socio-economic data in accordance
with the need for heterogeneity in biomarker research.
Due to the importance of reproducibility in both biomarker discovery and machine learn-
ing [27], I have made all code and analytic tools used for this thesis accessible at GitHub
DementiaProteomics (link) and all the results can be explored at https://demprotreport.streamlit.app/.
1.7
Approach in this thesis
This thesis aims at discovering plasma protein biomarker candidates for late-onset de-
mentia. Furthermore, the aim is to test the predictive performance of these candidates.
The overall approach consists of two parts: First, the protein biomarker candidates are
found in an approach akin to feature selection by use of a survival analysis. Second, the
predictive abilities of these biomarker candidates are assessed by using them as features
alongside meta-data in a predictive ML model. In this thesis, we are evaluating the per-
formance of tree-based models due to their ease of interpretation, although we could also
apply other models. The data is split in a way that prevents overlap between the data
used for feature extraction, the training of the models, and the testing of the models. The
overall approach is graphically summarised in figure 1.4.
1.7.1
Integrating MS in epidemiological studies - an interdisciplinary
approach
This thesis is akin to an interdisciplinary thesis working on the border between bioinfor-
matics and epidemiology, adopting strategies from both fields to deal with high-throughput
molecular data in a population-based setting. The primary study design reflects the epi-
demiological inheritance. To accommodate the required sample sizes for doing population-
wide epidemiological studies while keeping both economic and time costs low, this thesis
makes use of the nested case-cohort study design. This study design utilizes the inherent
10
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:19==
quality of statistical power depending solely on the number of cases (positives). From a
finite cohort, all cases were sampled (the case-cohort) as well as a completely random
sample (the sub-cohort) of a pre-specified size, allowing for overlap between the two.
The sub-cohort represents the full cohort (further conceptually extrapolated to the gen-
eral population). By mathematically weighing these samples up against the whole cohort
in downstream analyses, we achieve a study design mimicking the whole cohort but only
with a subset of samples to measure.
The bioinformatics foundation of this thesis clearly shows in its substrate: the MS pro-
teomics data and the computational tools used for its analysis. Additionally, the appli-
cation of ML models to this data highlights the use of data science principles within the
inherently interdisciplinary field of bioinformatics.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:21==
2
Methods
In this section, I outline the methods used in this thesis, presenting the workflow from
raw LFQ-intensity data to biomarker candidate proposals, covering quality control, data
preprocessing, and statistical analyses. Where applicable, I introduce the theory behind
the tools and analyses, followed by the specifics for this thesis in the green boxes.
I have gathered all tools for the analysis in a GitHub repository, which can be accessed
and used as a Python package. The repository can be found at DementiaProteomics
under the Multi-omics Network Analytics Group (MoNA).
Figure 2.1: Overview of the project.
2.1
Study design I: Data source and background
The data used in this thesis originates from the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention
Trial(SPRINT), which was a trial testing the effect of two levels of blood pressure-lowering
drugs on cardiovascular diseases, conducted in the United States [29]. The trial ran from
March 2010 through August 2015 and was discontinued early after finding that intensive
treatment provided significantly greater protection. Data from the trial was stored with the
National Institute of Health (NIH) and biological specimens in the BioLINCC biobank.
The inclusion criteria for entering the study were >50 years of age, had a systolic blood
pressure (SBP) higher than 130 mmHg, an enhanced risk of cardiovascular disease
(CVD), and no diabetes. The participants were enrolled continuously over the duration of
the trial. They underwent multiple clinical tests at baseline and were hereafter followed
with visits to the clinic every other year until the end of trial, occurrence of the primary
event (CVD), or loss to follow-up or death [29]. In this thesis, data from the baseline
visit is used in prediction models utilizing the knowledge of time to event from the day of
entering.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
13
==PAGE:22==
In this thesis: Nested case cohort study design
We requested a sub-cohort nested within the SPRINT cohort from the NIH, includ-
ing baseline plasma samples from BioLINCC. Specifically, we requested all de-
mentia and MCI cases, all cases with MRI data (for other research), and a random
sub-cohort of 1,000 people, allowing for overlap between the three. This nested
case-cohort design allows for greater power while only requiring proteomic mea-
surement of a subset of the entire cohort.
Figure 2.2: Nested case-cohort design
2.2
Experimental workflow
Plasma proteomics in population-sized studies requires careful sample preparation. Prior
to this thesis, the blood samples from SPRINT were prepped, measured in the mass spec-
trometer, and raw protein groups and intensities were inferred at the Proteomic Research
Infrastructure (PRI) at the University of Copenhagen.
In this thesis: Sample preparation and mass spectrometry
Sample preparation: The samples were prepped using PRI’s optimized sample
preparation workflow. The samples were prepared on 25 96-well plates using an
automated preparation machine. The lab were blinded to case-status and any other
meta-data on the samples. Subsequent investigation revealed the cases to be
equally and randomly distributed over all plates.
LC MS/MS: Subsequently, the samples were loaded one at a time from onto an
EvosepOne [30] for LC using a 21-minute gradient. The prepared samples were
measured in a Bruker TimsTOF [31].
Peptide and protein identification and abundance inference: The spectra from
the TimsTOF were analyzed by using the DIA-NN software [17]. Using the same
DIA-NN pipeline, the protein groups were inferred from the peptides, and overall
abundance was inferred.
Quality control: On each plate, three wells were loaded with control samples con-
sisting of a mix of a random subset of the samples. These are thus referred to as
pooled samples. Pooled samples were placed on the same spots on all plates (A1,
A12, and H12) and kept identical across all plates.
14
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:23==
2.3
Data pre-processing
Preliminary data cleaning is a crucial step when working with omics data. Data cleaning
is the process of removing and adjusting for any non-biological biases introduced during
sample collection, preparation, and inference. With the recent advances of throughput of
mass spectrometry proteomics, the technology has matured time- and cost-wise for use
on large cohort studies. Despite these advances enabling large sample sizes, the time
and rigorous lab work still cause drifts, batches, and other non-biological data differences.
In this thesis, I use the terms drift for the continuous change in LFQ intensities over time
and batch for groups of samples with similar LFQ distributions due to technical issues.
In the following paragraphs, the central preprocessing steps are presented, examplified
by the specific methods used in this thesis.
Transformation
Global log transformation reduces data skewness, making high-
and low-abundance proteins more comparable by narrowing value
ranges and ensuring proportionality in their importance in model.
Filtering
Un-targeted proteomics inescapably introduces missing values. As
detailed later in this section, we can substitute some missing values
with synthetic values, but this should be minimized. Proteins with
too few valid values pose a challenge, as most statistical tests and
models assume complete data. Additionally, unnecessary impu-
tation of non-valid values may lead to inaccurate results. Filtering
should be considered both on a protein and sample level to ensure
Drift detection
Long experimental flows introduce proteomic drift, seen as changes
in intensity distribution over time. This drift may be due to a lack
of calibration of the mass spectrometer, clogged loading columns
or similar technical issues. Proteomic drift can be detected on the
absolute intensity level and in variance and is best identified using
the following methods [32]:
• General intensity drift: Plotting sample median as a function
of the order of which the samples were quantified allows for
identification of changes in the mass spectrometer sensitivity.
• Variance drift: Likewise, arranging boxplots of sample intensi-
ties according to sample order allows for investigation of drift
of the variance.
Batch detection
Similar to drift, batches can be introduced during the MS analy-
sis. The drift plot may already reveal batches, as samples cluster
at similar intensities. Additionally, dimensionality reduction tech-
niques such as PCA and UMAP allow for graphical interpretation of
the data in fewer dimensions and detecting potential non-biologocal
clusters of samples [32].
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
15
==PAGE:24==
Drift correction
Batch and drift adjustment is widely debated in the mass spectrom-
etry community. The algorithms range from rigorous dynamic ad-
justment of each protein in every sample to simpler constant sub-
traction.
• Constant correction: This method involves subtracting a con-
stant from all intensities, either based on individual samples or
pooled samples from the experiment. For example, a global
approach subtracts the median intensity of all proteins within
a sample. Alternatively, using QC samples, the median of the
pooled sample medians within a batch can serve as the ad-
justing constant, subtracted from each protein intensity in the
batch. This approach, which relies solely on QC sample data,
corrects for technical drift while preserving biological variation.
However, it adjusts only the mean, not the variance.
• More dynamic include regression models for drift and batch
adjustment. These include LOESS regression and linear re-
gression. An example of a rigorous method is fitting a LOESS
regression curve on every protein and adjusting between all
identified batches.
This adjusts both variance and mean.
Another popular algorithm for proteomics batch- and drift-
adjustment is the Combat algorithm [33], which is an expanded
linear model popular in biomedical assays.
These methods likely also account for batch effects. A specific strat-
egy to adjust only for batches includes finding a constant that can
be applied uniformly to all proteins and samples within each batch.
In the DementiaProteomics repository, the following strategies for
correction are implemented (summarized in figure 2.3):
• Median correction: This method is done on a sample level,
subtracting the median of all intensities in a sample from the
intensities. This centers the data around 0 but does not adjust
the variance. Function: median.
• Pool correction: This method utilizes the pooled quality con-
trol samples. For each determined batch (the default is a batch
being a plate), the median of the pooled samples for each pro-
tein is calculated. These medians are then subtracted from
the corresponding protein intensities for each sample within
the batch. Function: pool.
• Per protein correction: As the most rigorous method, this func-
tion disregards pooled samples and instead takes the median
of each protein of the samples in a pre-determined batch. Like
the pool correction, the medians are subtracted from each cor-
responding protein in each sample within the defined batch.
Function: protein_median.
16
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:25==
Imputation
Imputation involves filling missing values to approximate the true,
unobserved ones.
Missing values are classified into three cate-
gories [34]:
• Missing not at random (MNAR): Missingness is explainable,
such as when one group expresses a protein while another
does not (e.g., between sexes). In mass spectrometry, low-
abundance proteins near detection thresholds often appear
as missing due to technical limitations and are regarded as
MNARs.
• Missing completely at random (MCAR): MCARs occur due to
technical issues, stochastic errors, or minor mistakes, such as
a peptide being misread during analysis.
• Missing at random (MAR): MARs occur when missingness de-
pends on observed data rather than unobserved values.
Which algorithm to use for imputation depends on the nature of
the missingness. While MCARs and MARs share similar dynam-
ics across fields and have many established algorithms, MNARs
often require field-specific methods due to their dependence on the
technology used. In bottom-up proteomics, the nature of missing-
ness can be difficult to pinpoint, making general-purpose algorithms
preferable.
Imputation Cont.
For MNARs, where missingness is linked to low abundance, an im-
putation strategy that assigns small values is suitable. For example,
the MinProb algorithm generates random values from the left tail of
the protein distribution.
For MCARs, where a true value is suspected, strategies that mimic
samples similar to the one with the missing value are ideal, assum-
ing similar samples share comparable protein profiles. For instance,
the KNN algorithm assigns the mean protein value of the K most
similar samples to the missing value. Advanced ML methods, such
as those from the PIMMS project, often outperform traditional KNN
for MCAR scenarios [34][35].
A great amount of time in working with the thesis has been spent on the data cleaning
using the methods for pre-processing described. Preferably, these steps are done at a
precursor level. However, due to the limited timeframe and scope of this thesis, it was
done on a protein group level.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.3:
Graphical illustration of the drift correction methods included in the
DementiaProteomics repository.
In this thesis: Preprocessing of the data
Raw protein group intensities were globally log2-transformed, KNN-imputed (K=5)
for missing values, and drift-corrected using median scaling across plates per pro-
tein (protein_median in the DementiaProteomics Python package). Continuous
confounders (e.g., EGFR, age) were z-score scaled to prevent them from domi-
nating the proteins, while categorical variables (e.g., education, activity, smoking)
were one-hot encoded. For binary variables, only one column was retained (e.g.,
sex was encoded as true for female, false otherwise). ...
Data quality and cleaning results using other approaches are presented in the ap-
pendix (Appendix A.5 and A.7).
2.3.1
Batch and drift detection
In this thesis: Batch and drift detection
To examine the drift in protein intensities over time, the median intensity for each
sample was plotted as a function of run order on the mass spectrometer, both prior
and after adjusting the data. Preparation plates were used as initial batches to
explore potential batch effects.
A principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the unadjusted log2-
transformed data, and the first two principal components (PCs) were visualized
in a scatter plot.
The PCs were calculated using the PCA function from the
decomposition module in SciKit-learn [36].
Additionally, a Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projections (UMAP) plot was
generated to provide an alternative view of the data. The embeddings were calcu-
lated using the manifold module from SciKit-learn.
2.3.2
Study design II: Data split and model approach
In ML, a fundamental principle is to ensure that the same data is not used for both training
and testing a model. Doing so synthetically inflates the model performance and makes
18
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.4: Overview of main work done for this thesis.
the model unfit for the rest of the world. Separating training and testing datasets also
mitigates the risk of overfitting, where the model becomes tailored to the data it was trained
on, thereby reducing its ability to perform well on external datasets [37].
In this thesis: Summary statistics
In an attempt to limit overfitting, I followed best practices and split the data into a
discovery, training, and testing dataset. The full dataset was split 30:70 between
discovery and data sets for the models. The data for the models were split 25:75
between test and training data sets (Figure 2.4, Data split pane).
2.4
Summary statistics
Epidemiological studies require an equal distribution of the confounders’ subgroups within
the cohort among the main groups under investigation. This is true, for example, for
the nested case-cohort design, where the random sub-cohort must represent the entire
dataset. Likewise, the discovery, test and training datasets must show equal distributions
of the subgroups.
In this thesis: Summary statistics
Simple summary statistics between data groups and case groups were calculated
by use of the TableOne package [38], calculating N and proportion for categorical
variables and mean and standard deviation between continuous variables.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
19
==PAGE:28==
2.5
Finding protein biomarker candidates
All features for the models were found using the discovery dataset.
2.5.1
Confounders
The overarching goal of this thesis is to find protein biomarker candidates for dementia.
Doing so requires rigorous work on limiting any changes of finding markers of anything
other than dementia. In dementia research, especially the risk of finding markers of gen-
eral ageing is high. Identifying some good and robust confounding factors to use as co-
variates in statistical models is necessary to limit the risk of finding non-dementia-specific
markers, without eliminating them.
In this thesis: Confounder selection I: Feature recoding
Risk factors for dementia were extracted from the SPRINT data. Some confounders
were recoded based on other features. Hypertension was recoded from systolic
and diastolic blood pressure according to the American Heart Association’s cate-
gories [39]. BMI was recoded from continuous to categorical according to the Cen-
ter for Disease Control’s categoreis [40]. The initial candidates for confounders
prior to filtering were based on the Lancet Commission on Dementia risk factors
(figure 1.1). The confounders are summarized in Table 2.1.
In principle, any confounder can be included as a feature if deemed relevant. However,
one should limit the number of features or covariates to avoid excessive model complexity.
In this study, I aimed to include as many confounders from the risk factor list as possible,
as the list was already quite limited, provided they were not redundant. Redundancy was
assessed using similarity measures, as highly similar confounders often reflect the same
underlying factors. The similarities between continuous confounders were assessed us-
ing Pearson’s correlation between two variables, X and Y which is given by:
ρ(X, Y ) = cov(X, Y )
σXσY
(2.1)
where ρ is the Pearson’s correlation and σ is the mean of the variables [37]. The Jaccard
score was used as a similarity measure between the one-hot endcoded confounders and
is given by:
J(x, y) =
f11
f11 + f10 + f01
(2.2)
where J is the Jaccard score between factors x and y, and fs are the number of entries
that are either positive (1) or negative (0) in class x and y respectively [37].
20
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:29==
Confounder
Type
Levels
Encoding
Education
Category
Less than high school
High School
College or above
One-hot
Ethnicity
Category
White
Black
Hispanic
Other
One-hot
Activity
Category
A little
Moderate
A lot
One-hot
Hypertension
Binary
True or False
One-hot
BMI
Category
Underweight
Normal weight
Overweight
Obese
One-hot
Smoking
Category
Current
Former
Never
One-hot
Sex
Binary
Female - true or false
One-hot
EGFR
Continuous
-
Z-score scaled
Age at baseline
Continuous
-
Z-score scaled
Table 2.1: Initial feature candidates for confounder selection.
In this thesis: Confounder selection II: Filtering
Confounders were filtered based on similarity. First, continuous variables were
correlated by Pearson’s correlation using the corr-function from Pandas[41], and
from pairs with an absolute correlation value of >0.8, one was removed. The same
approach was used on categorical variables using the Jaccard score, which was
calculated using the jaccard_score-function from SciKit-Learn[36]. “Unknown”
categories were removed immediately.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
21
==PAGE:30==
2.5.2
Cox proportional hazards regression
Analysis of survival data
The protein biomarker candidates were identified through survival analysis, aligning with
the study design, which focuses on baseline samples. This approach was chosen to
enable predictions about the future onset of MCI or dementia. Survival analyses are
common in the field of epidemiology. Despite the name, the analysis can be applied to
any event of interest. In a survival analysis, one is not interested in if or how many people
reach the event of interest, but rather in the rate in when this happens. An essential
measure here is the risk time of a person, which is the time to the event of interest from
the baseline (e.g., the first visit to the doctor). Combining this with the number of new
cases in the cohort, the best measure is not how many but how many cases happen per
cumulated risk time.
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the concept of a Cox regression. The participants contribute time
to the analysis while they are in the study. Exposure is in the case of this thesis levels of
each plasma protein measured (i.e., high LFQ-intensity versus low).
In epidemiology, one is interested in the outcome from a exposure or a set of exposures to
see if they increase the risk of a certain event. This is known as the relative risk between
two groups (exposed and unexposed). A great advantage of the survival model is the
build-in quality of dealing with censored data (i.e., people lost to follow up within the time
frame of a study). This is done by the use of incidence rate ratios instead of relative risk
of developing a disease within a group (Equation 2.3) [42]. In this way, even non-cases
who were censored early contribute valuable information to the study.
IRR =
n(cases)exposed
risk timeexposed
n(non-cases)unexposed
risk timeunexposed
(2.3)
A survival analysis returns the hazard for a person to become a case at any given time.
Thus, the output is a function rather than a single value. This is illustrated by a step-curve
of cumulated survival for the cohort of interest as a function of risk years (or similar, cu-
mulated risk over time) called a Kaplan Meier curve. The difference between two survival
curves (e.g., for exposed and unexposed) can be statistically quantified by a log-rank test
with the null hypothesis being that the two curves are identical [42].
Z =
∑(O −E)2
E
(2.4)
22
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:31==
Where O is the observed number of events, E is the estimated number of events given
that the null hypothesis is true, and Z is the log-rank value, which is given by a χ2 value
(Chi-squared value) [42].
The log rank test is extrapolated to an analysis incorporating confounding factors (i.e.,
covariates) by the Cox proportional hazards regression (from here on referred to as the
Cox regression). This regression includes additional variables by the formula [42]:
h(t) = h0(t) × eb1x1+b2x2+,...,+bnxn
(2.5)
where b = {b1, b2, …, bn} are the coefficients for the covariates x = {x1, x2, …, xn}, and
h0(t) is the baseline hazard [42]. For each covariate, a hazard ratio (HR) is given by ebi
for the ith covariate. The HR quantifies the relative change in the hazards of the event for
one unit increase [42].
Assumptions
The assumptions for a Cox regression, include the proportional hazards
assumption, which, as indicated by the name, dictates proportional hazards between the
covariates over time. This can be visually represented by Shoenfeld residuals testing
independence of error over time. Additionally, it is an assumption that the outcome is
independent of censoring and, lastly, that the confounders show no interaction. That is,
there should be a linearly additive effect of these [42].
Kampfleisch Lawless inverse probability weighing of samples
The samples were mathematically weighted by the inverse probability of being included
in the analysis. That is, cases with a 100% chance of being picked got the weight of 1.
The non-cases had a ( nnon−cases
ntotal
)−1 = ( 1293
9963)−1 chance of inclusion, thus 7.53 in weight.
For simplicity, the participants with MRI data which were not cases were regarded as
the subcohort, as the MRI-cohort is beyond this thesis (but should ideally be weighted
differently) [43].
In this thesis: Cox regression
The candidate protein biomarkers were found by fitting a Cox regression to the
discovery cohort data using the cox-function from the lifelines Python package
[44]. This was done univariately for each protein while adjusting for the chosen
confounders. The samples were weighted using Kalbfleisch-Lawless inverse prob-
ability weights [43] (in Python, encoded by robust=True), and the covariates were
penalized by an alpha-factor of 0.1. The p-values were false discovery rate (FDR)
adjusted. The significance of the proteins and the size of the effect, HR, was eval-
uated. Eventually, a cut-off of an FDR-adjusted p-value of <0.1 was chosen for
filtering proteins of interest.
The candidate biomarkers were tested for robustness by subjecting the same mod-
els to increasing values of the Cox proportional hazard’s penalizer, alpha, while
recording the change in effect (coefficient) and p-value.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
23
==PAGE:32==
2.6
Random forest models for evaluation of predictive
properties of the candidate biomarker
In this thesis, the LFQ intensities are applied as features in machine learning (ML) models
exploring their predictive capabilities. Alongside the protein intensities, the same socioe-
conomic and clinical features which were used as confounders in the Cos regression were
added as features to the models.
2.6.1
Random Forest classifiers
Classification trees
Random forest (RF) classifiers build on multiple classification trees. A classification (or
decision) tree serves as a supervised learning method for categorizing data into two or
more categories. The model is constructed by Hunt’s algorithm, which raphically resem-
bles a tree built of nodes and edges where each node contains a decision rule (Figure
2.6). Conceptually, a data point is dropped down a tree, following the decision rules, until
it reaches an ending node [37].
The trees are built by choosing the best decision rule for each data point given the training
data. Mainly two factors determine if a decision rule is good or not: First, a good question
is balanced, meaning it splits the data points into fairly equal sizes. Unbalanced questions
are often a result of being too specific. Second, a good decision rule is pure. The purity
gain of a split is the difference in impurity after and before a split, given by:
∆= I(r) −
K
∑
k=1
N(vk)
N(r) I(vk)
(2.6)
where I is the impurity measure of either the root, i or node v at branch k up to branch
K. N is the number of data points at the branch [37]. The impurity, I, can be calculated
using different approaches. The Gini impurity score, which is the default for the Python
package used in this thesis, is given by:
Gini(v) = 1 −
C
∑
c=1
p(c|v)2
(2.7)
where v is the split number, and p(c|v) is the fraction of class c of C classes in the split v.
Entropy and classification error impurity measures are other popular choices [37].
Hunt’s algorithm terminates when it reaches a pure split (i.e., when it completely splits
the data points in a split into distinct classes), unless other rules for early stopping are
given. Decision rules can build on binary, discrete, or continuous by binning the values
into meaningful categories [37].
Bagging multiple trees into a forest
In the thesis, single classification trees are not used, but rather the ensemble method
random forests. In an approach called bagging, multiple trees are combined into the
more complex random forest model. The idea of bagging is to run the classification tree
multiple times on subsets of the full training dataset, D, by randomly sampling T new
datasets D1, ..., DT from the original dataset with replacement. This creates T different
classifiers, which are combined into one by the use of majority voting. This simply means
24
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.6: Illustration of a simplified decision tree.
that for each data point subjected to the forest, every tree in the forest casts a vote for
which class to appoint the data point. Whichever gets more votes wins. This is described
by the function:
f(x) = arg max
c=1,...,C
{Number of classifiers which output ft(x) = c}
(2.8)
where c is the class predicted out of the possibilities c = 1, . . . , C for the data point x for
the classifier ft. f(x) is the final class assigned to the data point [37].
A distinctive challenge associated with random forests is the tendency to construct highly
correlated trees. I.e., there is a tendency for the algorithm to choose the same features for
the decision rules at the root and adjacent splits. As a solution to this, a different random
subset of features, where m < M of M possible features, is chosen for each node in the
trees [37].
Fitting random forest models
The act of fitting a model is to find the parameters (w) for the model. In the case of de-
cision trees, parameters are the decision rules in the splits. On top of this, the training
of the model is controlled by hyper-parameters (λ). Parameters can be learnt, but hy-
perparameters must be predefined. Hyper-parameters are parameters that control the
learning process of the models but are not a part of the model itself. They aid in reducing
overfitting by controlling the complexity of the model and improving the performance. The
hyperparameters for random forest models are summarized in Table 2.2.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
25
==PAGE:34==
Hyper-parameter
Description
Criteria
The impurity score method. Can for instance, be the Gini
impurity score.
N estimators
The number of estimators or trees added to the forest.
More trees means results in a more complex model and
vice versa.
Max depth
The maximal depth of a tree in the forest, i.e., the maxi-
mum number of splits in allowed in each tree. Shallower
trees result in less complex models, less prone to over-
fitting.
Min sample splits
The minimum number of samples to be considered in
each node of a tree.
Bigger numbers result in under-
fitting of the model, as it cannot learn enough about the
data.
Min. samples leaf
The minimal samples required at each end node of a tree
(the leaf node. As with min sample splits, too big numbers
result in under-fitting.
Max features
The maximum number of features which can be evalu-
ated in each split. Increasing this number may result in
over-fitting of the model, as it can make a very specific
rule in the node.
Table 2.2: Hyper-parameters of random forest models [45][46]
2.6.2
Selecting the best model by cross-validation
Finding the fest fitting model with the best hyperparameters for the problem is best done by
using cross validation (CV). In CV, combinations of hyperparameters are tested iteratively
on the training data. The training data is either split into smaller pieces called ”folds”. In
K-fold CV specifically, the data is split into K equal-sized chunks. The model is iteratively
fit on all chunks except one and then tested on the last, unseen chunk. Distinguishing the
best model relies on the loss function of that model, which is a measure of how good the
model is. The loss function is described below under Performance Measures (Section
2.7). The overall loss for each combination of hyperparameters is the mean of the loss of
all K folds.
In ML the act of exhaustively trying every combination of hyperparameters is known as
grid search. The total number of models that need to be trained grows multiplicatively
as you increase the number of hyperparameter configurations and the number of folds
in cross-validation. For example, if we were to test just 5 possible values for each 6
hyperparameters on a 5-fold CV, we would need to fit 5 × 6 × 5 = 150 models. To save
computing time and try out multiple values, the approach of randomized grid search can
be used. In a random search, the possible combinations are not tested exhaustively but
rather combined at random at each iteration. The number of iterations can be controlled.
This gives the advantage of more efficient model testing but also better resilience towards
overfitting as not all possibilities are tested [37][47].
26
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:35==
In this thesis: Random Forests in different time horizons
The data in this study is not suitable for a standard binary classification task given
the prospective study design. Rather, the unique data structure allows us to study
proteins dynamically, identifying which ones predict near-future cases and which
indicate long-term dementia risk.
...
To do so, the samples had to iteratively be recoded as cases and non-cases on
multiple different time horizons. The approach is exemplified in Figure 2.7. For
instance, looking three years into the future, the cases which had been diagnosed
with MCI or dementia at this time remained cases. Those which were not yet diag-
nosed were recoded as a non-case. Likwise, non-cases which were still in the study
after 3 years remained so, and those which had been censored in the meantime
were removed.
...
The RFs were built in a loop over half years between years 3 and 6.5 from
enrollment.
That is, 8 models in total were built on the training dataset using
SciKit-learn [36].
Each of these was subjected to 5-fold CV using possible
hyper-parameter combinations from Table 2.3 using RandomGridSearch with
n-iter = 75 (375 fits in total). Finally, the best model was fit to the training set and
evaluated on the test dataset.
Parameter
Possible values
max_depth
10:110 with 11 total
n_estimators
200:2000 with 10 in total
max_features
squared and auto
min_samples_split
2, 5, 10
min_samples_leaf
1, 2, 4
bootstrap
False
Table 2.3: Hyper-parameter grid for model selection using CV
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.7: Illustration of the recoding of cases and non-cases over different time horizons
for RF models.
2.7
Model evaluation
The performance of ML models can be measured and presented by a variety of measures.
Depending on the type of problem (i.e., classification or regression), different measures
are used to evaluate the models.
2.7.1
Performance measures for classification problems
A binary classification model estimates the probability of belonging to either group 0 (often
the neutral group) or 1 (often the interest group). This allows for the calculation of multiple
measures that describe different aspects; some of these are described below.
Generalization error:
Most fundamental to model performance is the magnitude of the
errors that a model makes in predicting the true value or class when tested on new, unseen
data. This error is known as the generalization error. This error is calculated from a loss
function, L(yi, ˆyi) (also known as the error function) which calculates the error between
predicting the true value yi and the predicted value ˆyi. There are multiple kinds of error
functions, and the best one to choose for the model depends on the problem type. For
classification problems, a common loss function to choose is the hinge function. The
Hinge function takes into account the true value of a data point (for binary classification,
either 0 or 1) and the predicted value in the function:
L(yi, ˆyi) = max(0, 1 −yi ∗ˆyi)
(2.9)
where L is the loss function, yi the actual value of the data point, and ˆyi the predicted
value [37].
Training error:
Not to be confused with the generalization error, the training error is the
measure of the magnitude of the error the model makes when predicting data points from
the same data as it was trained on [37].
28
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:37==
Performance measures at a specific discrimination cut-off:
In classification tasks,
one is interested in the discriminatory power of the model. This refers to the model’s
ability to distinguish between cases and non-cases. A classifier returns a probability that
a person in the case belongs to the positive or negative group. Choosing a discriminatory
threshold for classification into either group is the researcher’s task and depends on the
problem and model involved. For example, it could be of interest to consistently identify
all cases, irrespective of the subjects mistakenly classified as cases. Often however, it is
the case that we want to optimize the discriminatory power, classifying as many subjects
as possible correctly [37].
Various performance measures assist in performance discussions. The ones used for this
thesis are summarized in Table 2.4. When subjecting data to a binary classification tasks,
a data point belongs to one of four categories: true positives (TP), true negatives (TN),
false positives (FP), or false negatives (FN). Here, the sensitivity is a measure of how
well a model classifies the cases, and vice versa for the specification. The accuracy tells
us how well a model classifies samples overall. The F1-score is the harmonic mean of
the precision and recall, recall describing the ratio of correctly classified positives among
all positive cases, and precision the true positives among all data points being classified
as positive. Both of these emphasize the prediction of truly positive cases. However,
elevating the recall often penalizes the precision. Optimizing these two can be done by
optimizing the F1-score which is higher the more equal these two are [37]. In medical
studies, specificity and sensitivity are often used to describe how many positives and
negatives were correctly classified [42].
Measure
Description
Formula
Accuracy
True predictions out of all samples.
Accuracy = TP+TN
N
Precision
Proportion of true positives of all pre-
dicted positives
Precision =
TP
TP+FP
Recall (sensitivity)
Proportion of predicted positives of all
true positives in the sample
Recall =
TP
TP+FN
F1
Harmonic mean of precision and re-
call.
F1 = 2Precision×Recall
Precision+Recall
Specificity
Proportion of true negatives being
classified as such out of all true nega-
tives
Specificity =
TN
TN+FP
Table 2.4: Performance measures for binary classification tasks. Formulas from [37]
In this thesis: Model performance measures
For each year in each of the RF models, the accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score,
and specificity were calculated using the SciKit-learn metrics module. These
were plotted as a function of time for each model. The test dataset was used to
evaluate model performance by fitting test subjects into the best-fitting model and
calculating risk scores.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
29
==PAGE:38==
Receiver operating characteristics curves and area under the curve:
Confusion
matrices and accuracy are applicable when a cut-off can be chosen. However, for com-
paring models, a general measure describing the overall performance on all cut-offs is
necessary. A receiver operating characteristics ROC curve is a step curve with the true
positive rate as a function of the true negative rate. Rate indicates the percentage of truly
predicted cases at a specific cutoff. Thus, this curve is a visualization of how well the
model distinguishes between the groups on an overall level. A quantitative measure of
this is the Area Under the Curve (AUC) which is the integral of the ROC from 0 to 1. The
closer to 1 the AUC is, the more discriminating power the model has [37].
In this thesis: ROC AUC
For all RF models, a ROC curve was plotted and the AUC calculated using the
SciKit-learn metrics module. The ROC curves for the same model type (full,
minimal, clinical) were plotted in the same plots. Likewise, the AUCs were plotted
over time.
2.7.2
Explainability of black box models
There is a general trade between performance and explainability of ML models. Generally,
models that are more complex tend to conceal information about their internal workings,
and vice versa. The RF model is such a ”black box” model. A single decision tree is
straightforward to explain through its splitting rules, but forests of trees are more complex.
Generally, there are two types of explainability: the overall explainability of the model’s
features and their contributions, and the explainability of a single sample, which explains
the prediction of this sample.
Different methods for overcoming this black box problem have been developed. In this
thesis, permutation-based feature importance and SHapley Additive exPlanation (SHAP)
values are used.
Permutation-based feature importance inference
Permutation-based feature importance (PFI) is a way to empirically retrieve the impor-
tance of features in a model. The idea is to remove the relationship between the input of
the feature and the outcome. This is done by alternately shuffling the numbers in a given
feature (permuting), running the model, and recording the added error. Big errors indicate
high importance of the feature at hand, whereas smaller errors indicate less importance.
The iterative approach for this method allows for testing differences in importance predic-
tions between each round, giving rise to the calculation of a standard deviation and thus
a statistical measure of robustness [48][49][50].
In this thesis: Permutation-based feature importance
Feature
importance
was
inferred
for
each
model
using
the
permutation_importance-function from SciKit-learn with n_repeats = 15.
Feature importance provides valuable insight into the magnitude of the features in the
model. However, it does not reveal the feature’s decision-making direction. For this,
methods such as the SHAP values have been developed.
30
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:39==
Model
Description
Features
Full model
Model using all relevant con-
founders after feature selection
and all protein candidates.
All confounders from feature se-
lection, all candidate proteins.
Clinical model
More minimal model using easy-
to-measure confounders.
The
idea is that should the model
be used in the clinic, only easy-
to-measure confounders, aside
from the proteins, are preferable
to limit time and cost.
Age, education, BMI, sex and all
candidate protein biomarkers.
Minimal model
Smallest model to test perfor-
mance on simple model.
Age and sex, and all candidate
protein biomarkers.
Table 2.5: Alternative models and their features.
SHAP values
SHAP values tell us how much each feature contributes to each prediction. In other words,
what is the feature’s marginal contribution to an outcome? This gives the possibility of sin-
gling out specific data points and looking at the contribution of a feature on a microscopic
level. The values can be combined to get an overview of the whole model, e.g., in a
beeswarm plot, where all predicted SHAP values are plotted. For ensemble models such
as RF, the overall SHAP value for a feature is the average of the values from all trees in
the forest with equal weights.
A considerable shortcoming of SHAP values is the incapability of measuring the quality
of the values.
In this thesis: SHAP values
SHAP values were calculated for each model using the SHAP Python package [51].
For the RF models, the SHAP values were calculated for the testing dataset [52]
using a random subset of 10 samples from the training data as the background, as
this step was otherwise too computer power heavy.
2.7.3
Sensitivity of models
The sensitivity of the models was tested by running smaller versions of the same model
with fewer features (summarized in Table 2.5). The exact same procedures for model
building and evaluation for each model as for the full model were followed.
2.8
Biological annotation
The protein biomarker candidates were further explored independently of the data. This
was done by mapping them to a variety of databases to retrieve the known biological
functions and possible involvement in diseases.
2.8.1
Protein annotation using UniProt
The UniProt database serves as a crucial resource in the field of protein research, offer-
ing comprehensive information on all identified proteins across a wide array of species. It
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
31
==PAGE:40==
integrates several bioinformatics tools for extracting knowledge about proteins [53]. The
Gene Ontology GO is a bioinfomratical tool developmed for easy interpretaiton of gene,
transcripts and proteins. The ontology maps known pathways and connections. The on-
tology separates proteins on three different levels that are biologically meaningful: molec-
ular functions, biological pathways, and cellular components. This aids in understanding
proteins of interest and their mutual relationships and similarities [54].
The UniProt IDs of the protein candidates were loaded into the UniProt database [53].
From this, the names and taxonomy, GO terms [55][54], and known involvement in dis-
ease were retrieved.
2.8.2
STRING database
Likewise, the proteins were explored using the web-interface version of the STRING
database (version 12.0) [56]. Enrichment analysis was done using the build-in function
with the rest of the proteins identified in this data as background (N=375). Inter-protein
relationships were evaluated on a high confidence level of 0.700, using both functional
and physical protein associations, limited to experiments, databases, co-expression, gene
fusion, and co-occurrence interaction sources.
2.8.3
Clinical Knowledge Graph
To get a deeper understanding of the clinical significance of the proteins, the candidate
biomarkers were examined using the Clinical Knowledge Graph (CKG) [57]. The candi-
date biomarkers were queried, and relationships to known diseases were found. These
were filtered for neurological diseases.
2.8.4
Expression patterns using GTEx
The expression patterns of the proteins were found using the GTEx portal, which is a
bioinformatics tool which can be used for mapping proteins and other forms of expressions
to different human tissues [58]. The proteins were queried using the multi-gene query tool
and filtered for brain and blood.
32
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:41==
2.9
Code and folder structure and the use of GitHub
All code for this thesis can be found in Github under the Multiomics-Analytics-Group in the
DementiaProteomics repository. It contains four modules: quality control (QC), prepro-
cessing, analysis, and visualization, providing tools for the whole pipeline of proteomics
data analysis used in this thesis. The setup is automated, and example notebooks are
provided with the settings used for the analysis and results presented in this thesis. Au-
tomation handles folder structures for storage, data loading, processing, and analysis,
requiring only a few basic setup variables at notebook startup. For easy result separa-
tion, the setup file allows folder suffixes. Figure 2.8 illustrates the code folder structure
and saving directory creation.
Figure 2.8: Overview of GitHub repository structure, including the folder structures gen-
erated by the DementiaProteomics package.
2.10
Presentation of the project using Streamlit
To accommodate this thesis, the results and project are presented in a Streamlit app.
The app was created using the VueGen package from the Multiomics-Analytics-Group,
which is not yet publicly available. The app is stored in Github, which allows for easy and
automated building of the app. The app can be found here: DemProtReport (link).
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
33
==PAGE:42==
2.11
Quality control of the proteomics data
Given the inherent complexity of MS proteomics data, numerous challenges and potential
pitfalls exist. This section outlines the methods for evaluating the quality of the data.
2.11.1
Sample handling
The sample handling is arguably the part of the study which we, as users of the data, have
least control over. Plasma contains all blood components except cells. Unlike serum,
blood is drawn with an anticoagulant to prevent clotting while retaining fibrinogens in the
sample. However, it is hard to keep plasma pure because blood is easily affected by out-
side factors that can cause it to clot or break down, contaminating the samples with pro-
teins that are specific to erythrocytes. Despite being impossible to mitigate post-sampling,
it is good practice to assess clotting and lysis [59].
In this thesis: Sample handling QC
To examine the degree of blood clotting, the LFQ-intensity of present fibrinogens in
the data was plotted as a function of sample order. Likewise, these were grouped
into clinic IDs (site IDs) to examine site-specific sample handling.
The same was done for euthrocyte-sepcifc proteins, haemoglobin subunits A, B,
and D, to examine the levels of haemolysis.
2.11.2
Stability of the MS analysis
As outlined in the introduction, stability of the MS analysis becomes an ever-increasing
challenge as the sample size grows. To mitigate drifts and batches, the PRI keeps rigorous
track of things that may influence the stability and calibrates the spectrometer over the
run. The log can be found in Appendix A.4.
In this thesis: MS stability
The degree of drift was examined by plotting the total protein intensity from each
sample as a function of protein rank while mapping the proposed batch effect risks
from the PRI log. Likewise, the mean intensity of the samples after protein-filtering
was visualized.
Additionally, the number of detected proteins and peptides was plotted as a function
of sample order to assess equal sensitivity of the spectrometer over time.
2.11.3
Proteomic depth
In this thesis: MS stability
The proteome coverage was examined by plotting the mean intensity of all samples
per protein by rank. The mean intensity is here a proxy for the abundance of the
protein. The rank was given by ordering the proteins by abundance from highest
to lowest and then assigning the rank accordingly.
Inter- and intra-plate variability
Calculating the inter- and intra-plate (or batch) coefficient of variation (Cov) between the
technical replicates (i.e., the pooled samples) can quantify the drift. (). A maximum of 5%
Cov has been proposed for ensuring high quality and as an action point to mitigating the
reproducibility crisis in biomarker research [24].
34
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:43==
The following formula provides the coefficient of variation:
CoV = σ
µ
(2.10)
In this thesis: MS stability
Covs were calculated between the pools on each plate as well as across all pooled
samples.
2.11.4
Quality of protein group inference
Grouping precursors into proteins is challenging since identical peptides can belong to
different proteins. Protein identification relies on determining which proteins are most
likely observed. Prior to this thesis, the DIA-NN algorithm was used for this. The quality
of the call can be assessed post-hoc by assessing the coverage of the entire peptide
sequence by the precursors measured in MS. This evaluates the certainty with which we
can state that the protein is, in fact, the protein we are claiming it is by evaluating [60].
In this thesis: Protein coverage QC
The protein biomarker candidates underwent post-hoc assessment of their protein
coverage.
The full amino acid sequences for the proteins were obtained from
the UniProt database [53]. Hereafter, the sequences from the MS analyses were
aligned with this using the .find function.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:45==
3
Results
This section presents the analysis results. I begin with a summary of the basic statistics
of the data. Then, I move onto presenting the biomarker candidates. After this, I demon-
strate the performance of these candidates in prediction models, including the survival
model and time-stratified models. Finally, I show the results of the preprocessing and
quality control studies for the raw data.
All results can be explored dynamically in a Streamlit report at demprotreport.streamlit.app.
3.1
Quality control
3.1.1
Inter- and intra-batch variability
Calculating the inter- and intraplate variability serves as a proxy for inter- and intraplate
drift. Calculating the Covs of the pools showed variance well under the cut-off of <15%
Cov.
Plate
CV (%)
N pools
Inter plate
0.49
75
plate1
2.60
3
plate2
1.12
3
plate3
1.86
3
plate4
1.33
3
plate5
1.16
3
plate6
1.22
3
plate7
1.00
3
plate8
1.16
3
plate9
1.70
3
plate10
1.65
3
plate11
1.52
3
plate12
1.15
3
plate13
1.34
3
plate14
0.97
3
plate15
1.78
3
plate16
1.74
3
plate17
2.34
3
plate18
1.31
3
plate19
1.17
3
plate20
1.74
3
plate21
1.60
3
plate22
1.02
3
plate23
1.04
3
plate24
1.33
3
plate25
2.55
3
Table 3.1: Inter- and intra-plate variability. Calculated on the pooled samples.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
37
==PAGE:46==
3.1.2
Contaminants
The handling of the samples remained relatively consistent over time. A few outliers
regarding fibrinogen levels were observed (Figure 3.1ab); however, as these do not exhibit
any significant pattern, they are considered random and, therefore, should not obscure
the overall study.
(a) Fibrinogens sorted after sample order.
(b) Fibrinogens sorted after masked site ID.
(c) Erythrocyte-specific proteins sorted after
sample order.
(d) Erythrocyte-specific proteins sorted after
masked site ID.
Figure 3.1: Contaminants of plasma samples.
3.1.3
Protein sequence coverage
The spectrometer detected 1019 unique protein groups in total. After filtering on a 90%
valid value basis, 374 unique proteins remained. These cover a wide dynamic range
from tissue factor (TF) as the most abundant to Adhesion G protein-coupled receptor F5
(ADGRF5) as the least abundant, with a 2425-fold change in LFQ intensities (Figure 3.2b).
3.1.4
Batch detection
Overall drift
The MS measurements showed consistency in the number of detected peptides and pro-
teins throughout the run (figure 3.2a). However, the large sample size entails significant
drift. The PRI keeps rigorous logs of potential batch-effect events. The full list is supplied
in Appendix A.4. Notably, there seems to be a downward going drift in the overall intensi-
ties (figure 3.2c), with jumps to higher intensities at times when the MS was re-calibrated
(except for calibration at plate 9). This is especially the case for plate 1 to 4, 5 to 10, and
38
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:47==
21 to 23. The jump is evident when a pump was replaced due to overheating at the end
of plate 20, which aligns with the PRIs categorizing this event as likely to create a batch
effect (Appendix A.4). These are the drifts and technical issues that are adjusted in the
batch and drift correction further on.
(a) N proteins and peptides in samples
(b) Protein abundance plot.
(c) Total quantified peptides over the MS run. Figure made with final statistics report from DIA-NN.
Figure 3.2: QC
Dimensionality reduction
Dimensionality reduction using PCA and UMAP revealed a clearer view of the structure
of the protein data. The PCA plots indicate a uniform spread of variance in the data
(figure A.3a) and relatively close pooled samples (figure A.3b). However, the UMAP plot
shows some batches clearer. Here, plates 1-8 and 13-14 seem to belong to the same
cluster. Then plates 9 and 10 make a cluster for themselves towards the higher values
in UMAP1. Plates 15 and 21-25 cluster in the middle of UMAP1, and plates 16-19 form
a cluster towards the lower values of UMAP1. This is similar to the clusters in the drift
plot in figure 3.2c, showing one cluster until the first calibration, followed by another with
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
39
==PAGE:48==
plates 9 and 10. The last data points are clearly split between everything before and after
the pump exchange (figure A.3c-d).
There appear to be batches between calibrations, all indicating internal drift. I decided to
label each plate as its own batch. This allows for precise classification for batch and drift
correction while maintaining some roughness to minimize the risk of over-adjusting the
samples.
40
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:49==
3.1.5
Batch and drift correction
Upon correction using the protein median on a plate level adjustment, the overall means of
samples leveled and the drifts seen in the raw data (figure 3.2c) were erased. Meanwhile,
the pooled samples stayed in a cluster in a PCA plot. The clustering of plates and batches
in the UMAP plot from the raw data (figure A.3c) was erased for the adjusted data.
(a) Un-adjusted, filtered.
(b) Protein median adjusted
Figure 3.3: Caption
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
41
==PAGE:50==
3.2
Summary statistics
To examine the comparability of the discovery-, training-, and test-sets, simple summary
statistics were conducted of case status and confounding factors. Case status and con-
founders were equally distributed between the sub-cohorts (table 3.2).
Table 3.2: Summary statistics of the sub-groups in the data sets after data splitting
Missing
Overall
Discovery
Test data
Train data
n
2223
758
367
1098
PD/MCI, n (%)
False
1294 (58.2)
389 (51.3)
227 (61.9)
678 (61.7)
Unknown
127 (5.7)
127 (16.8)
True
802 (36.1)
242 (31.9)
140 (38.1)
420 (38.3)
Time to PD/
MCI (std)
127
3.9 (1.7)
3.9 (1.7)
3.9 (1.6)
4.0 (1.7)
Smoke status,
n (%)
Current
238 (10.7)
83 (10.9)
39 (10.6)
116 (10.6)
Former
955 (43.0)
325 (42.9)
170 (46.3)
460 (41.9)
Never
1029 (46.3)
350 (46.2)
157 (42.8)
522 (47.5)
Unknown
1 (0.0)
1 (0.3)
Ethnicity, n (%)
Black
663 (29.8)
216 (28.5)
110 (30.0)
337 (30.7)
Hispanic
255 (11.5)
102 (13.5)
29 (7.9)
124 (11.3)
Other
33 (1.5)
7 (0.9)
4 (1.1)
22 (2.0)
White
1272 (57.2)
433 (57.1)
224 (61.0)
615 (56.0)
Activity
level, n (%)
A lot
290 (13.0)
100 (13.2)
46 (12.5)
144 (13.1)
Little
963 (43.3)
331 (43.7)
157 (42.8)
475 (43.3)
Moderate
965 (43.4)
325 (42.9)
163 (44.4)
477 (43.4)
Unknown
5 (0.2)
2 (0.3)
1 (0.3)
2 (0.2)
Education
, n (%)
College
931 (41.9)
310 (40.9)
155 (42.2)
466 (42.4)
High school
995 (44.8)
340 (44.9)
162 (44.1)
493 (44.9)
Less than
high school
250 (11.2)
86 (11.3)
44 (12.0)
120 (10.9)
Unknown
47 (2.1)
22 (2.9)
6 (1.6)
19 (1.7)
Sex, n (%)
Female
827 (37.2)
302 (39.8)
132 (36.0)
393 (35.8)
Male
1396 (62.8)
456 (60.2)
235 (64.0)
705 (64.2)
42
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:51==
3.3
Feature selection
3.3.1
Confounders
We chose the confounders based on the risk factors for dementia. Correlation was ex-
amined by Person’s correlation for continuous confounders and Jacquard index for cate-
gorical confounders (Figure 3.4). The highest value for correlation was a Jaccard index
of 0.41 between white ethnicity and college degree. This threshold is determined to be
low enough for keeping all confounder candidates (Table 2.1).
(a) Person’s correlation between con-
tinuous confounders.
(b) Jaccard correlation between one-hot encoded con-
founders.
Hierarchically clustered based on Jaccard
values.
Figure 3.4: Test of similarity between confounders. Results from the discovery dataset.
3.3.2
Cox regression
The protein biomarker candidates were found using a Cox proportional hazards regres-
sion adjusting for the final confounders found in section 2.5.1.
Five proteins were significant on an α=0.1 level after FDR-adjustment, thus qualifying for
candidates for plasma biomarkers. 4 proteins, F13B, F13A1, AFM, and CNDP1, showed
a protective effect with HRs <1, and 2 proteins, ITIH3 and IGFBP2, showed an increase
in risk with HR >1 (Figure 3.5 and table 3.3).
UniProt
Protein
HR (95%CI)
p-value (FDR)
P43652
AFM
0.382 (0.240, 0.609)
0.015
P05160
F13B
0.300 (0.163, 0.552)
0.015
Q96KN2
CNDP1
0.608 (0.472, 0.784)
0.015
Q13740-2
ALCAM
2.174 (1.371, 3.448)
0.084
P00488
F13A1
0.524 (0.351, 0.783)
0.097
P18065
IGFBP2
1.388 (1.131, 1.704)
0.097
Table 3.3: Results of Cox regression. Models were adjusted for age, ethnicity, EGFR,
activity level, smoking status, and BMI class.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.5: Volcano plot of results from Cox proportional hazards regression.
The internal relationship among the protein biomarker candidates was assessed by cor-
relating their LFQ values using Pearson’s correlation, as shown in the heatmap below.
There appears to be a high correlation between the two fibrinogens, F13B and F13A1.
Figure 3.6: Clustered correlation map of top protein biomarker candidates
44
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:53==
3.4
Random Forests
3.4.1
Recoding of cases and non-cases
To run multiple classification tasks using RF models, the data was recoded for each half-
year time horizon. This evolution of cases, non-cases, and total is shown in figure 3.7.
Naturally, the number of cases goes down over time as we lose non-cases who were not
in the study anymore.
Figure 3.7: Evolution of N cases, non-cases, and total samples in the models after recod-
ing over time.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
45
==PAGE:54==
3.4.2
Performance evaluation
Here, I present the performance of the models for both the primary model (the full model)
and the sensitivity models (the clinical model and the minimal model). For a full summary
overview, all AUCs over time were plotted in a single plot. Here, we see that the full
model outperforms the other models with a mean AUC of 0.75 (0.72, 0.79 95%CI) in
predicting dementia and MCI. Interestingly, the model gave a higher AUC and thus better
performance the further from dementia onset the blood tests were taken (Figure 3.8a).
Figure 3.8: Dynamic AUCs over time for all models. RF = random forest.
3.4.3
Feature importance over time
This section illustrates the feature importance of the full models. Feature importance in
the clinical and minimal models are presented in Appendix A.9, Figures A.9 and A.8.
The protein biomarker candidates showed to be of great importance in the models. Age
was the all-empowering factor, but the proteins were robust in keeping their rank over the
other confounders over time. The feature importance found via PFI are presented in the
heat map in figure 3.9, annotated for feature importance rank. Appendix A.9, Figure A.7
provides a clearer view of the evolution of just protein importance over time.
To understand feature importance better, SHAP values were recorded. These showed
the same direction of association as indicated by the Cox regression. Figure 3.10 shows
the SHAP values for whole years. A full overview, including half-year time points, can be
found in Appendix A.11. Additionally, SHAP values for the minimal and clinical models
can be found in Appendix A.12 and A.13.
46
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.9: Feature importance of proteins and confounders in the time-horizon models
for the full model. Colored for importance and annotated with rank of importance in the
model.
3.5
Annotation of protein biomarker candidates
To get a better understanding of the protein biomarker candidates, they were examined
using different tools: the UniProt database for annotation, the STRING database for PPIs,
and the CKG for retrieving knowledge on other disease relationships for the proteins.
3.5.1
UniProt
The results from the UniProt list query are summarized in Table 3.4. The STRING web-
based tool did not detect any enrichment. Instead, the proteins were mapped to the re-
spective (GO) terms using the UniProt database [53]. Visualizing these with networks re-
vealed minimal similarity among the proteins, highlighting a diverse selection, particularly
at the biological process level (Appendix A.14). The networks can be found in Appendix
A.14. Additionally, the function, tissue specificity, and disease involvement are presented
in Table 3.4.
3.5.2
STRING database network analysis
Using the STRING database, PPIs of the proteins were found. The study found no inter-
actions between the six protein biomarker candidates, with the exception of F13A1 and
F13B, at a confidence level of 0.7. Furthermore, we observed no enrichment using the full
dataset as background. Adding one layer to the network revealed no relationships either.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
47
==PAGE:56==
(a) Year 3
(b) Year 4
(c) Year 5
(d) Year 6
Figure 3.10: SHAP values for whole-year models (full model) over time.
48
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:57==
(a) Highest accuracy
(b) Highest F1 score
(c) Highest threshold with recall = 1
Figure 3.11: Model performance over time for a fully adjusted model.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
49
==PAGE:58==
Protein
Protein names
Function [CC]
Tissue specificity
Disease involvement
AFM
Afamin
Carrier
of
hydrophobic
molecules;
binds
vitamin
E; may transport vitamin E
across the blood-brain barrier.
Found
in
plasma,
cere-
brospinal, and follicular fluids.
None noted.
F13B
Coagulation factor XIII B chain
Stabilizes factor XIII A subunit;
regulates clotting activity.
Mainly in plasma.
Deficiency
causes
bleeding
and impaired wound healing.
CNDP1
Beta-Ala-His dipeptidase
Hydrolyzes
Xaa-His
dipep-
tides,
especially
carnosine
and anserine.
Found in serum and CNS. Ab-
sent in homocarnosinosis pa-
tients.
None noted.
ALCAM
CD166 antigen
Mediates
cell-cell
adhesion;
promotes T-cell activation, en-
dothelial migration, and neurite
extension.
Detected in blood cells, skin,
tumors, and neurons.
None noted.
F13A1
Coagulation factor XIII A chain
Catalyzes cross-linking in fib-
rin clots; stabilizes clots and
aids wound healing.
Expressed in the liver and
plasma.
Deficiency
causes
bleeding
and impaired wound healing.
IGFBP2
Insulin-like
growth
factor-
binding protein 2
Inhibits IGF-mediated growth;
prolongs IGF half-life.
Expressed in many tissues, in-
cluding CNS.
None noted.
Table 3.4: Summary of protein functions, tissue specificity, and disease involvement. Results from the UniProt list query tool [53]. Summarized
by use of Open AI ChatGPT [61] fed with the full output from the UniProt list query results.
50
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.12: STRING PPI network.
3.5.3
CKG outputs
Associations with dementia-related diseases were extracted from the CKG. The network
in Figure 3.13 shows the overlaps and associations. AFM, CNDP2, and IGBP2 all show
previously known relations to all cause dementia, AD, or VD. F13A1 is known to asso-
ciate with other similar diseases (according to Disease-ontology – Cognitive disorders),
whereas ALCAM and F13B did not.
Figure 3.13: Output of the CKG query for the proteins and neurologic diseases.
3.5.4
Expression patterns
I used GTEx [58] to check the expression patterns of the proteins in the brain. Four of the
proteins (ALCAM, CNDP1, F13A1, and IGFBP2) showed expression in the brain, whereas
two (AFM and F13B), interestingly, are not. However, according to the UniProt database
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
51
==PAGE:60==
[53], AFM is expressed in the CNS.
Figure 3.14: Expression patterns of the protein biomarker candidates in brain tissue.
3.5.5
Sequence coverage of biomarker candidates
MS scans detect precursors and not proteins. This implies that they measure only smaller
peptide fragments. The determination of a protein depends on the number of peptides
that align with the established protein sequence and the extent of protein coverage by
these. Coverage of the protein sequence indicates our confidence that a protein is what
we think it is.
The coverage of the protein by the precursors detected during the MS analysis was fairly
high for most of the proteins. ALCAM showed the lowest coverage, with 17.71% of the
peptide sequence detected (Figure 3.15), whereas 66.8% of AFM was covered.
Protein
UniProt
Protein length (AA)
Coverage (%)
AFM
P43652
599
60.77
ALCAM
Q13740-2
570
17.72
CNDP1
Q96KN2
507
51.68
F13A1
P00488
732
40.03
F13B
P05160
661
53.40
IGFBP2
P18065
325
32.31
52
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:61==
(a) Coverage of AFM (P43652)
(b) Coverage of ALCAM (Q13740-2)
(c) Coverage of CNDP1 (Q96KN2)
(d) Coverage of F13A1 (P00488)
(e) Coverage of F13B (P05160)
(f) Coverage of IGFBP2 (P18065)
Figure 3.15: Sequence coverage of the protein biomarker candidates.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:63==
4
Discussion
In this master’s thesis, I have explored the potential of using state-of-the-art mass spec-
trometry data for identification of blood-based biomarkers for early detection of dementia.
The study was conducted using baseline blood samples from a prospective nested case-
cohort study on CVD in the United States. The baseline samples were analyzed at the
Proteomics Research Infrastructure at the University of Copenhagen and provided as a
table containing raw protein group intensities. The data was split into three sets, the dis-
covery set, which was used for identifying potential biomarker candidates by use of the
survival model Cox proportional hazards regression adjusted for relevant confounders.
Then, the top proteins were used to train predictive models using the training set and
evaluated their performance using the test set. Lastly, the proteins were annotated and
mapped to multiple databases, revealing their biological interactions, previous associa-
tions with other neurological diseases, and overall biological function.
In this section, I discuss the results and implications of this work with a critical view on the
data quality, the preprocessing steps, and the models chosen, and reflect on the use of
biomarkers like these in the clinic and their prospective impact on the patients and kin.
4.1
Data quality
The novelty of this study lies in applying MS proteomics to population-based studies.
The substantial sample size posed a significant challenge. Here I assess the quality
of the plasma proteomics data and the preprocessing steps chosen for correcting these
challenges.
4.1.1
Sample handling
The baseline plasma samples were collected at 114 different clinics around the United
States and were stored in a freezer for up to 13 years, including a transatlantic flight from
the BioLINCC biobank to the University of Copenhagen in Denmark. Some contamination
from data handling was expected. However, the blood clotting and erythrocyte-specific
proteins showed to be stable across samples (Figure 3.1). This demonstrates a high level
of rigor in sample handling throughout the trial and subsequent protein measurements at
the PRI. Furthermore, there was no evident difference across clinics. Thus, this aspect of
data quality is considered to be satisfied.
4.1.2
Mass spectrometry analysis
The large sample size was expected to pose more of a challenge for the mass spectrome-
try analysis than for sample handling. Here I review the quality checks and preprocessing
applied to the LFQ intensity data obtained from the MS.
Inter- and intra-plate variability
The inter- and intra-plate variability was quantified by calculating the Cov on and across
preparation plates. The Cov between the wells containing pooled samples on each plate
(i.e., the controls) during the MS analysis showed low levels of variation across the whole
cohort. This is surprising considering the clear dispersal of the samples in the dimension-
ality reduction analyses (Figures A.3 and A.4).
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
55
==PAGE:64==
The quality of the MS analysis is high even before adjustment, based on the proposed
cut-off of a maximum of 5% Cov[24]. It should be noted that the CVs were calculated
from the filtered dataset (i.e., only proteins with 90% valid values were included). Thus, if
the same data is intended for future analyses with less stringent valid value cutoffs, this
measure is likely to change, potentially resulting in higher CV values.
Drift and batches
Drift and batches were introduced during the mass spectrometry, as expected. Through
monitoring of the MS analysis by the lab personnel at the PRI, the bulk of the drift was
corrected by calibrations during the MS run (figure 3.2c). Additionally, correction was
done during the subsequent protein quantification by DIA-NN. However, still, batches were
identified, and inter-batch drift was seen (figure 3.2c versus figure 3.3a).
I investigated multiple drift and batch correction approaches, all of which are included
in my Python package DemenitaProteomics. The selection of the best-suited method
for a study depends on the data. After conducting literature research and analyzing the
data in this project, I recommend considering two features of the data when choosing the
correction method: 1) The number and magnitude of differences between batches, and
2) the magnitude of intra-batch drift. These can be qualitatively assessed through the
drift plots or quantitatively by calculation of CV akin to the inter- and intra-plate variability
calculated for this thesis. Thus, intra-batch variability is a proxy for intra-batch drift.
If none to little of these two factors are detected, a simple global log2 transformation is suf-
ficient, eventually followed by a global median correction. If batches are present but little
intra-batch drift is seen, the pool method is suitable, avoiding using the samples them-
selves for adjustment. However, if both high intra-batch variability and multiple batches
are seen, as was the case for this study, the more rigorous protein-median method on a
plate level is advised, as it automatically adjusts the drift as well as the batches (methods
and recommended data characteristics are summarized in Table 4.1). This method does
have the disadvantage of introducing the possibility of over-adjusting the data, as the
choice of adjustment batches (here, per plate) is pretty small. Additionally, it disregards
the quality control samples, making these otherwise valuable measurements redundant.
The best adjustment method can alternatively be investigated empirically by dimensional-
ity reduction and visualization in 2D of the samples using the final proteins. For both PCA,
UMAP and tSNE, no clustering of the plates or batches should be seen. In this thesis,
the final choice of adjustment method resolves the clusters from the unadjusted data and
shows a close relationship between the pooled samples (Figure A.4). This was not the
case for the other possible adjustment methods (Appendix A.7).
One should be aware of over-adjusting the data, as this may remove biological differ-
ences. In my work on this thesis, I have experimented with various adjustment meth-
ods, ranging from theories like using LOESS regression on each peptide to more flexible
methods like z-score adjustment. The final methods provided in the DementiaProteomics
package have been chosen based on a wish to limit the change of over-adjusting the data.
The three methods cover common data structures.
56
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:65==
Data Characteristics
Description
Function
name
Batch
effect
Intra-batch
drift
Median
Subtracts
the
overall
median
within a sample from each protein
intensity in the sample.
Thus
centers the data around 0.
median
Low
Low
Pool
median
Subtracts the median of a protein
of the pooled samples on each
plate from each protein intensity in
the samples on the same plate.
pool
High
Low
Protein
median
Subtracts the median of a protein
of all samples on each plate from
each protein intensity in the sam-
ples on the same plate.
protein_median
High
High
Table 4.1: Adjustment methods from the DementiaProteomics Python package and the
recommended data characteristics for using them.
4.1.3
Some notes on data preprocessing
Filtering
For this thesis, proteins were disregarded if they were not quantified in at least
90% of the samples. This cut-off is very strict, in this case removing 2/3 of the proteins.
The cut-off was chosen to limit the number of protein values that would need to be imputed
and favoring high-quality data over uncertainty. An exploratory analysis could benefit from
a lower cut-off.
Protein intensity adjustment
In this thesis, the data preprocessing was done on a
protein level. Ideally, this should be done on a peptide level, as adjusting on a protein
level enhances missing values and skewness [32]. Due to the time frame of this project,
the processing was done on a protein level.
4.1.4
Quality of the study design and participant inclusion
Adopting a higher-level perspective on data quality, I here consider the implications of the
study design and the inclusion of participants in the cohort.
The study’s key strength is that it did not limit the cohort to individuals at high risk of
dementia, which aligns with its goal of examining the general population rather than a
specific high-risk group. Selecting the cohort based on high-risk individuals would have
limited the model’s applicability in broader settings. However, this also means that the
models may be less effective when applied to specialized cases where there is already a
strong indication of illness. Overall, the study design focuses on biomarkers relevant for
the general, healthy, older population rather than for clinical settings with individuals who
are already unwell.
The cohort design distinguishes itself in the prospective study design. Thus, investigations
are done at an early stage of disease progression. This allows for the exploration of
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
57
==PAGE:66==
disease pathology years prior to clinical onset and the identification of early biomarkers
of the disease, ultimately leading to early diagnosis. The study’s strength is that it fills this
gap in the literature on dementia between case-cohort studies and
4.2
Cox regression
Given the prospective study design, the use of Cox regression for feature selection made
sense. This makes sense, as the groups of dementia cases were very diverse in that they
spanned years to dementia onset.
The samples were weighted using inverse probability weights. This is an epidemiological
technique employed to extrapolate the cohort in question to the larger population from
which it originates. This was by far the biggest discrepancy between this approach and
the data science/machine learning part of this thesis. Ideally, in ML, datasets should
be balanced with an equal number of positives and negatives. Otherwise, models risk
learning only how to predict the majority class. In a clinical setting, the data and models in
this thesis aim to be used to systematically screen a selected but healthy group of people.
The participants were not chosen based on any specific notion that they may be at higher
risk of dementia or because of a clinician expected dementia onset. They were, on the
other hand, a group of otherwise healthy individuals above 50 years of age. Obviously
this means there is not an equal chance of the people having or developing dementia,
but rather, the same chance as what was seen in the SPRINT study, from which the
group originates. The Cox regression can use unbalanced data because its goal is to find
proteins that could be used as markers across a population, not just on specified cases.
The imbalance of the dataset shows more clearly in the RF models, where we do indeed
see a higher recall later into the future, where more cases were included in the models.
Vice versa, the specificities were higher closer to baseline. This is discussed further down
under 4.3.3.
4.2.1
Model assumptions for Cox
I determine that the model assumptions for the Cox regression are satisfied. The pro-
portional hazards assumption was quantitatively investigated using the built-in function of
the library and the results presented in Appendix A.3. The Jaccard Index and Pearson’s
correlations for confounder similarity of the confounders were used as a proxy for inde-
pendence between the variables. Lastly, censoring from the study is independent of the
outcome, as censoring included loss to follow-up or death, both of which are assumed to
be independent of dementia.
4.3
Model interpretation and evaluation
Using the protein biomarker candidates in prediction models resulted in models that per-
formed well, with a mean AUC of 0.75 (0.72, 0.79 95%CI) for the best performing model
(the fully adjusted model) and 0.69 (0.67, 0.71 95%CI) for the worst performing model (the
minimal model). In general, removing features from the models lowered the performance.
In this section, I consider the importance of the proteins in the models, explore the dif-
ferences between the models (different feature combinations and at different times), and
discuss the results of the classification metrics.
58
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:67==
4.3.1
Protein biomarker candidate importance
Notably, the biomarker candidates showed to be of high importance compared to the other
features in all models. Age was, as expected, the highest ranked feature, and having a
college degree was likewise a strong predictor. However, the proteins generally ranked
within the top 10 features in importance (with a few drops to rank 19). Interestingly, some
of the proteins showed a gradient in importance over the years. IGFBP2 and CNDP1
were more important in predicting the near-onset of dementia, whereas F13A1 showed
higher importance in predicting dementia further into the future (Figure 3.9).
The SHAP values aligned with the directions indicated by the Cox regression. For ex-
ample, higher IGFBP2 values had positive SHAP values across all years, suggesting an
increase in predicted probability. Similarly, F13B, F13A1, CNDP1, and AFM, identified
as protective in the Cox regression, showed lower SHAP values for higher feature val-
ues. Interestingly, ALCAM was the only protein with conflicting directions between the
Cox regression and RF models, though its SHAP values clustered around zero, indicat-
ing uncertainty in its influence (Figure 3.10).
4.3.2
Feature differences of models
Importantly, the fully adjusted model includes EGFR, initially added to the Cox regression
to account for potential protein clearance via the kidneys. While EGFR declines with age,
the Pearson correlation between age and EGFR (Figure 3.4a) showed only a weak neg-
ative relationship. SHAP values (Figure 3.10) indicate that low EGFR increases the risk
of being classified as a case. This raises the question of whether EGFR predicts demen-
tia or reflects its correlation with age. Given that lower EGFR shifts predicted dementia
probability closer to 1, I argue this is likely an age-related knock-on effect.
Interestingly, ethnicity and education level showed high importance in the models, reflect-
ing broader socio-economic and health disparities. Higher education often entails better
health knowledge and access to care, especially in countries without universal health care
as the US. Likewise, ethnicity reflects the societal inequities in health. I excluded ethnic-
ity from the clinical models, as race should not matter in a clinical setting. Additionally,
the self-reported ethnicity data may not generalize across cultures, and using ethnicity in
ML models risks replicating societal biases (e.g., [62]). In conclusion, I argue ethnicity
is useful in the exploratory phase of a study but should not be used in clinical ML mod-
els. Education, on the other hand, can be used as it reflects other aspects of a person’s
general health and is a more objective ”measure” than ethnicity.
4.3.3
Predicting dementia
Class imbalance over time and the implications of model performance
All models showed an increase in performance when predicting dementia further into the
future, with an increase in accuracy, recall, and F1-score, though all with a cost in speci-
ficity, regardless of which of the discrimination thresholds were chosen for classification
(Figure 3.11). The gain in recall at the cost of specificity reflects the inherent feature
of ML models prioritizing classification of the majority class. Recoding the cases and
non-cases depending on the time horizon introduced an increasing case/non-case ratio
(Figure 3.7). The classes were balanced at year 4.5. Models predicting dementia within 4
years showed better specificity than recall, reflecting the majority of non-cases, and vice
versa when predicting cases beyond 4.5 years.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
59
==PAGE:68==
The model is, from a data science point of view, most useful at the 4.5-year mark. Addition-
ally, this is the point at which the lines for accuracy, precision, recall, F1, and specificity
intersect when determining the discrimination threshold, leading to the highest level of
accuracy. All measures achieved good performance.
Future analyses should consider using the balanced random forest algorithm [63]. This
method synthetically balances imbalanced datasets by bootstrapping samples from the
less represented cohort. It would be interesting to see if this balances the performance
measures over the years.
Furthermore, the decline in the total number of samples in the models over time has an
impact on statistical power. In statistics and ML, the more samples, the better. This is an
element not touched upon in this thesis and will need to be assessed in future work.
Choice of classification cut-off
The classification cut-off threshold tells you when to label a new sample as a case or
non-case, here also referred to as the discrimination threshold. It’s important to think
about the model, the illness, and the consequences of false positives and false negatives
in diagnosis when choosing the discrimination threshold. In this thesis, I present three
strategies for choosing such a threshold: the threshold resulting in the highest accuracy,
the threshold resulting in the highest F1-score, and the highest threshold resulting in a
recall of 1. The accuracy-based threshold seeks to balance true positives and true neg-
atives, but with moderate model discrimination (mean AUC of 0.7), this results in a high
number of false negatives and positives. The F1-score strategy finds a balance between
precision and recall, slightly favoring true positives while still penalizing false positives.
The max recall strategy eliminates false negatives, though at the cost of a higher number
of false positives.
The best metric is dependent on 1) the implications of false negatives and positives given
the disease progression and treatment, and 2) what the purpose of the model is.
The first example assumes the use of the model for screening in a clinical setting, as-
signing an individual a future risk of dementia. Here, we must consider the personal
implications for an individual and their family. A serious illness like dementia, which has
no known cure, is a terrible diagnosis to receive and can cause stress and anxiety in the
person receiving it. This suggests reducing false positives in order to lessen psychological
damage. However, compared to other serious illnesses like cancer or other neurological
conditions like Parkinson’s disease, dementia treatment and prevention is relatively minor.
This is a case for reducing false negatives at the expense of increasing false positives.
The latter is preferred, particularly if models are to be used for straightforward screening
of which patients to follow more closely than others rather than a conclusive diagnosis.
Additionally, the models could be used to stratify the participants in a clinical study. Al-
though the model could not be used directly for stratification, it illustrates that the identified
candidate biomarker proteins could be used for this purpose. In this case, the most ac-
curate discrimination threshold—that is, one that favors true negatives and true positives
equally—is preferable, as it ensures equal weight for both groups, and could help to im-
prove the study’s analytical performance and results.
60
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:69==
4.4
Interpretation of the biomarker candidates
With six biomarker candidates identified as potential predictors of future dementia in this
cohort, the next logical question is whether these biomarkers were previously linked to
dementia. Using CKG the known associations to dementia and dementia-related diseases
were extracted (based on disease ontology). It’s interesting to note that previous studies
have already linked four of the proteins to dementia.
Circling back to the importance of the protein biomarker candidates and adding the knowl-
edge of time reveals possible effects of the biomarkers. Notably, IGFBP2 with a HR>1
was more important in predicting cases closer to onset. Likewise, the SHAP values were
more distinguishable from 0 in the years closer to 0. To unpack this, it would be interest-
ing to run models with just one of the proteins to uncover if the proteins are predictable in
themselves or in tandem with the other proteins in the models.
IGFBP2 regulates the activity of Insulin-like Growth Factors (IGFs). IGFs bind to the IGF1
receptor (IGFR1) and the insulin receptor (IR). These are receptor tyrosine kinases that
are attached to the surface of cells and turn on the IGF pathway. This pathway helps
cells stay alive, maintain homeostasis, and repair damage. IGF type 1 (IGF1) is syn-
thesized in glial cells, neurons, and enthothelial cells and works as parakrine/autokrine
signaling in the CNS. Additionally, IGF1 is synthesized in peripheral tissues and can cross
the BBB and may work as endocrine signalling in the CNS. IGFBPs, including IGFBP2,
bind IGFs and inhibit their functioning, thus inhibiting cell maintenance. The pathway has
been linked to multiple neuronal illnesses, including AD, all-cause dementia, as well as
cognitive decline [64]. For instance, low serum IGF (which can be initiated by elevated
IGFBPs) has been associated with a decline in cognition [64][65]. Furthermore, IGFBP2
has been found to correlate with Tau levels in the CNS, which is already a marker of de-
mentia [66]. It is interesting to note that the IGF pathway performs in opposite directions
as well; a decrease in IGF was linked to the removal of the protein plaques seen in AD. In
this thesis, elevated IGFBP2 expression levels were associated with a higher risk of de-
mentia (HR > 1 in Cox, high IGFBP2-values having SHAP values > 0) in accordance with
the findings of IGF serving as protective to neuronal homeostasis and IGFBP2 correlating
to Tau. Using the CKG, we found associations to both all-cause dementia and vascular
dementia.
Afamin (AFM) is a member of the albumin gene family. The protein transports vitamin E
in the blood and over the BBB. It is mainly synthesized in the liver and is transported in the
blood stream via the lipoprotein system [67]. A study done using a chicken neuron model
showed neuroprotective properties of AFM when the neurons were subjected to stress
[68]. This result is consistent with the direction of AFM importance, which is found to have
a protective effect against dementia in this thesis. Furthermore, we know that some pro-
teins in the lipoprotein system, like APOE (with APOE2 being the most protective variant
in lipid clearance and APOE4 being the least protective), are linked to dementia. I argue
that more research should be done on the neuroprotective effects of AFM and vitamin E.
The CKG revealed associations to all-cause dementia and Lewy body dementia.
Beta-ala-his peptidase 1 (CNDP1) is a carnosinase, which is a group of enzymes which
hydrolyses alanine/histidine bonds.
Specifically, CNDP1 catalyzes the breakdown of
carnosine to β-alanine and L-histidine. Many studies have linked the protein to dementia.
However, the mecahinism behind is not clear. One study found that suppression of the
inflammatory chemokine CCL24 by use of CNDP1 associates with less deceline in verbal
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
61
==PAGE:70==
memory [69]. Interestingly, studies have found that CNDP1 is expressed less in AD cases
than in mixed dementia cases [70][71] and showed correlations with Tau levels [72].
The two fibrinogens F13A1 and F13B were similar in showing more importance for de-
mentia prediction when looking further into the future than closer (Figure 3.9). F13A1 has
been shown to associate with highly different diseases, from amyotroph lateral schlerosis
[73] to ovarian cancer [74]. One study found via the CKG found that F13A1 correlates
negatively with Aβ expression in a prospective study akin to this thesis. Used in a multi-
variate logistic regression classification with an additional 9 protein biomarker candidates
as features, the authors found AUCs similar to what has been found in this thesis [75].
On the other hand, fibrinogens are associated with neurodegeneration once they enter
CNS through a more permeable BBB in the ageing brain. Here, they enhance inflamma-
tion through microglia activation and recruitment of inflammatory macrophages [76]. In
contrast to the BBB-entering fibrinogens reported in the [76] study, F13A1 was found to
be protective in the plasma in this thesis. This descriptancy will be interesting to study.
F13B alone has not been found to associate with dementia to our knowledge.
Sample handling can significantly impact fibrinogens, so caution is necessary when eval-
uating them as blood-based biomarkers. Due to the little indication of blood clotting from
the quality control analysis of sample handling (Figure 3.1), I do however argue that they
are worthy of attention here.
Of the six candidates, ALCAM is the one with the highest expression levels in the brain
(Figure 3.14). However, we found no known associations with dementia using the CKG.
ALCAM is also known as CD166 antigen and functions in cell adhesion. They are located
in the external size of the plasma membrane in dendrites and axons on neurons. The
antigen binds immune cells, T-cells [53].
Given its novel discovery and its high expression in the CNS, I believe this protein holds
significant interest for future studies. The protein showed the biggest predictive abilities
further into the future. A plausible theory is that this protein, which is expressed in the
brain rather than the peripheral tissues, could be an early sign of BBB decline. The pro-
tein showed an association with an increase in risk for dementia when the levels were
elevated, which goes hand in hand with the theory that it is a sign of BBB damage. This,
in turn, could be a warning sign of neurological damage because having a more perme-
able BBB causes more contaminants in the brain. This may also explain why, if the protein
is indeed a marker of disease, the protein hasn’t been linked to dementia yet, given the
lack of prospective studies in dementia research.
This literature analysis is not exhaustive and should not be considered a comprehensive
review.
4.4.1
Protein-protein interaction networks
The protein biomarker candidates, which were identified using the entire STRING database,
did not exhibit any known interactions, except for two fibrinogens, F13A1 and F13B, which
also demonstrated a high Pearson’s correlation in the discovery dataset. Given the com-
plexity of dementia, it is reasonable to anticipate the involvement of numerous molecular
pathways. Conversely, this underlies the complexity of the disease. This provides nu-
merous avenues for investigation in the future.
62
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:71==
4.5
Reflections on the interdisciplinarity of bioinformatics and
epidemiology
Though written from a bioinformatics perspective, this thesis was heavily influenced by the
theory and thoughts from epidemiology. It is my belief that this thesis has shown synergy
between the fields, enhancing each other and filling in the gaps
The biggest discrepancy between the two fields I encountered during my work with this
thesis was by far the discussion of balanced versus unbalanced datasets.
Epidemiological studies rarely use biological specimens, and one cannot interpret the
results by default. For instance, the Cox regression quantifies the relative risk when in-
creasing a covariate by one unit. This is a common concept and easily interpretable when
it comes to, e.g., years of age (i.e., the hazard added every year). However, using mass
spectrometry data, with its arbitrary units of protein levels, the Cox regression inherits this
arbitrariness.
Despite these disparities, I believe that the two fields are deeply interconnected and hold
immense potential to inform and enhance each other.
4.6
Future prospects
4.6.1
Implementation in the clinic
In this section, I reflect upon the implementation of biomarkers, such as the ones shown
here, in the clinic.
Considerations for numbers of biomarker candidates
This thesis presents 6 candidate biomarkers. Generally, the clinic should implement these
biomarkers as simply as possible, ideally using as few as possible. Circulating back to
the C-reactive protein for inflammation measurement mentioned in the introduction (1.4),
new biomarkers should be fast, cost-effective, and minimally invasive. In general, the
more proteins needed, the more expensive the measurement. On the other hand, Geyer
et al. [26] and Hartl et al. [21] argue that biomarker panels rather than single biomarkers
are of preference, as they are more robust (i.e., show more resilience towards random
fluctuations). Thus, the task is to find only the most robust proteins to measure.
Current technological considerations
Mass spectrometry, with its promises of hypothesis-free testing and wide range of pro-
teins, is ideal for explorative analyses. The technique is slowly entering clinics, but I
believe that for proteins as the ones found in this thesis, a less complicated, targeted
protein quantification method, such as affinity-based methods (e.g., Olink), can be used.
These methods are more robust and replicable than MS. By only using affinity pearls for
the proteins of interest, we are sure to measure the proteins needed. These methods do
have disadvantages, but all in all, at the current state and time of proteomics, they may
be more cost- and time-effective for use in the clinic.
Any future diagnosis will most likely still rely on a range of factors and not only on the
biomarkers themselves. Quite possibly, they will be used in tandem with age and general
health.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
63
==PAGE:72==
4.6.2
Limitations of application
Epidemiology places a lot of emphasis on inclusion bias, which refers to the fact that un-
derprivileged groups in society have less access to care and frequently have less time
and money to devote themselves to study participation. This is especially the case in
countries without free health care, as is the case for this study group. The study’s partic-
ipants receiving free medical care may have mitigated some of the inclusion bias. Still,
we need to consider the fact that bias exists. The participants were selected based on
their risk for CVD. This suggests that the chosen group does not accurately represent the
entire population. They might, however, resemble those who would typically visit a doctor
with a dementia risk (i.e., elderly people). Having established that there is an inclusion
bias, I however argue that there is minimal diagnosis bias among the participants because
everyone received the same health care, irrespective of other factors.
The WHO requests dementia research on underrepresented groups within a society and
on low- and middle-income countries. This study does not meet the latter request, but it
does partially address the former unmet need. 41.9% of the participants had a college
degree or above (Table 3.2), but the majority had a high school degree as the highest
degree. The majority of the participants identified themselves as white (57.2%, Table
3.2), but this figure is substantially below the US-wide percentage of 72% according to
the United States Census Bureau [77]. As a result, the unmet need of including non-
majority participants was partially satisfied in this study.
Societal factors matter, but they can vary across different societies and settings, making
them less applicable elsewhere. Finding protein biomarkers aims to potentially identify an
objective marker that is somewhat universal. This thesis incorporates non-generalizable
parameters into its models to account for them, with the aim of discovering a marker that
is not dependent on them. The proteins were found using Cox regression adjusting for
the confounders believed to have an effect. This should, in theory, remove these effects
from the protein HR itself. There is therefore a good chance these proteins are widely
applicable. However, we should take into account the potential impact of an unaccounted-
for confounder, which could make the models and proteins too specific for the dataset on
which they are built and found.
These considerations highlight the need for a replication cohort. Such a cohort should be
completely independent of the one used here and preferably from a quite different group of
people. This could, for instance, mean choosing a cohort from another country. Given the
”replication crisis” in biomarker research with the numerous proposed biomarkers every
year (Section 1.5.2), it would greatly benefit this study to have a replication cohort. The
goal is to eventually find proteins which are associated with dementia regardless of cohort
and setting.
4.7
Implications for early biomarkers for dementia
I have, throughout the thesis, vouched for the biomarkers’ usefulness in both better diag-
nostics and better understanding of the pathology of dementia in tandem with the prospec-
tive study design of this thesis. As a final prospect, I will discuss the potential of this and
the subsequent implications.
64
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:73==
4.7.1
Public health implications
Early diagnosis
The prospective study design distinguishes itself from the cross-sectional study design,
which is conducted at disease onset. Evidently, this raises the idea of earlier disease
detection. This thesis presents protein biomarker candidates that could aid in earlier de-
tection, especially those showing high importance further into the future (ALCAM and
AFM). The ones more important to detection closer to the baseline are likely better for
at-onset diagnosis.
Importantly, the use of MS proteomics for this study entails non-meaningful qualification
of the proteins. Their LFQ intensities only make sense in relation to the other proteins’
intensities in this dataset. However, their association with dementia matters. Therefore,
these findings remain intriguing for future research.
Qualitative considerations of early diagnosis
An obvious idea could be to use biomark-
ers as screening tools in screening programs.
The benefits of getting an earlier diagnosis with dementia are primarily technical. First
of all, early diagnosis helps the individual and this person’s kin (e.g., family members)
prepare for disease onset as well as giving them longer time for legal and financial deci-
sions. Studies have shown that some drug treatments work better early in the disease.
Early detection will improve health care planning and help patients and families prepare
for disease. Lastly, studies from the field of medical sociology emphasize the moral con-
sideration of ’the right to know’ for patients and their families [78].
Medical sociology has also shown the drawbacks of early dementia detection and healthy
older adult screening. An early diagnosis can trigger stress reactions and even depres-
sion due to the overwhelming threat posed by a serious disease like dementia. On top
of this, there are the more technical and legal implications, such as loss of driver’s li-
cense, emplooyment and health insurance. Some patients report feelings of premature
loss of autonomy. Likewise, family members may be prematurely labelled as caregivers,
extrapolating the stress to the kin of the patient [78].
These points should be taken into account when considering early detection of dementia.
Importantly, once an effective cure is available, the benefits may significantly outweigh
the cons. But until then, we should be cautious of including early dementia detection in
medical surveillance.
4.7.2
Medical research implications
Starting point for future research in pathology
Another promise of the early protein biomarkers mentioned is the potential of using these
as a starting point for researching the pathology of dementia. This may include research-
ing causal relationships or direct effects of disease progression of the proteins. However,
it may also include research co-occurring biological changes in the body. Since IGF bind-
ing protein 2 (IGFBP2) is involved in pathways that protect neurons, it is reasonable to
think that it may be closer to having a causal relationship to at least neurodegeneration.
Conversely, a compromised BBB likely releases ALCAM into the bloodstream, making it
a potential marker of disease.
On top of this comes the idea of an open into treatment of the disease. This applies
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
65
==PAGE:74==
only to disease-causing proteins. For instance, if IGFBP2 is indeed causal, then a drug
targeting repression of this protein (as it showed an elevated risk of dementia) may be
worth researching.
Streamlined dianosis for cohort studies
Lastly, the promise of a more streamlined research cohort remains promising. The pro-
teins may be used for stratification of the participants into cases, non-cases, and soon-
cases. The long prodromal phase of dementia makes it hard to pinpoint a disease onset,
and diagnosis is heavily dependent on the practitioner seeing the patient. We can use
these proteins to categorize the population based on their dementia levels and where in
the prodromal phase they might be.
All in all, I believe the strongest promise of the markers found in this thesis is future re-
search into their relationships with other proteins and pathways.
66
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:75==
5
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to explore the potential of using mass spectrometry-based
plasma proteins as biomarkers for dementia risk. A prospective cohort study with approx-
imately 2,100 individuals identified six protein biomarker candidates (CNDP1, IGFBP2,
ALCAM, AFM, F13A1, and F13B) through Cox proportional hazards regression, adjusted
for relevant confounders. These proteins were subsequently tested in prospective ran-
dom forest models using non-overlapping data. The proteins were highly important in the
models, and SHAP values revealed the direction of which the proteins drive dementia
risk.
This thesis has shown the potential of doing population-based studies using MS pro-
teomics. The findings suggest that plasma-based proteomics can be used to uncover
novel insights into disease pathology long before clinical onset and risk stratification of
the general, older population. They may aid in better diagnostics, better knowledge of the
disease pathology, and even in treatment target research.
Interestingly, the predictive accuracy of some proteins varied depending on the time hori-
zon, with some proteins being more accurate predictors further into the future. This sug-
gests they may act as early indicators of disease progression, offering valuable insights
into the prodromal phase of dementia. Some proteins were more significant near the di-
agnosis and may act as objective, measurable, and non-invasive markers of dementia,
eventually in a panel of multiple protiens.
In conclusion, robust and interpretable biomarkers like those identified in this thesis are
crucial in addressing unmet needs in dementia research. I propose these markers as a
starting point for future research into dementia.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
NIH National Institute of Health. What Is Dementia? Symptoms, Types, and Di-
agnosis. en. Dec. 2022. URL: https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/alzheimers- and-
dementia/what-dementia-symptoms-types-and-diagnosis (visited on 08/26/2024).
[2]
World Health Organization. Dementia. en. URL: https://www.who.int/news-room/
fact-sheets/detail/dementia (visited on 08/08/2024).
[3]
Emma Nichols et al. “Estimation of the global prevalence of dementia in 2019 and
forecasted prevalence in 2050: an analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2019”. English. In: The Lancet Public Health 7.2 (Feb. 2022). Publisher: Elsevier,
e105–e125. ISSN: 2468-2667. DOI: 10.1016/S2468-2667(21)00249-8. URL: https:
//www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpub/article/PIIS2468-2667(21)00249-8/fulltext
(visited on 08/08/2024).
[4]
World Health Organization. A blueprint for dementia research. en. Section: viii, 61
p. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2022. ISBN: 9789240058248 (electronic
version). URL: https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/363341.
[5]
John A. Hardy and Gerald A. Higgins. “Alzheimer’s Disease: The Amyloid Cascade
Hypothesis”. In: Science 256.5054 (1992), pp. 184–185. DOI: 10 . 1126 / science .
1566067. eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1566067. URL:
https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1566067.
[6]
National Institute on Aging. Understanding Different Types of Dementia. https://
www.nia.nih.gov/health/alzheimers- and- dementia/understanding- different- types-
dementia. Last updated: September 25, 2023, Retrieved December 4, 2024. 2023.
[7]
R. A. Corriveau, F. Bosetti, M. Emr, et al. “The Science of Vascular Contributions
to Cognitive Impairment and Dementia (VCID): A Framework for Advancing Re-
search Priorities in the Cerebrovascular Biology of Cognitive Decline”. In: Cellular
and Molecular Neurobiology 36.2 (2016), pp. 281–288. DOI: 10.1007/s10571-016-
0334-7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10571-016-0334-7.
[8]
Melanie D. Sweeney et al. “Vascular dysfunction—The disregarded partner of Alzheimer’s
disease”. In: Alzheimer’s & Dementia 15.1 (2019), pp. 158–167. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jalz.2018.07.222. eprint: https://alz-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1016/j.jalz.2018.07.222. URL: https://alz-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1016/j.jalz.2018.07.222.
[9]
Lawrence S. Honig et al. “Trial of Solanezumab for Mild Dementia Due to Alzheimer’s
Disease”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 378.4 (2018), pp. 321–330. DOI:
10 . 1056 / NEJMoa1705971. eprint: https : / / www . nejm . org / doi / pdf / 10 . 1056 /
NEJMoa1705971. URL: https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1705971.
[10]
Stephen Salloway et al. “Two Phase 3 Trials of Bapineuzumab in Mild-to-Moderate
Alzheimer’s Disease”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 370.4 (2014), pp. 322–
333. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1304839. eprint: https://www.nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/
NEJMoa1304839. URL: https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1304839.
[11]
Gill Livingston et al. “Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2024 report of the
Lancet standing Commission”. en. In: The Lancet 404.10452 (Aug. 2024), pp. 572–
628. ISSN: 01406736. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736(24 ) 01296 - 0. URL: https : / /
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0140673624012960 (visited on 10/17/2024).
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
69
==PAGE:78==
[12]
E.G. Knox, M.R. Aburto, G. Clarke, et al. “The blood-brain barrier in aging and neu-
rodegeneration”. In: Molecular Psychiatry 27 (2022), pp. 2659–2673. DOI: 10.1038/
s41380-022-01511-z. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-022-01511-z.
[13]
Christoph B. Messner et al. “Mass spectrometry-based high-throughput proteomics
and its role in biomedical studies and systems biology”. en. In: PROTEOMICS 23.7-
8 (2023). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/pmic.202200013,
p. 2200013. ISSN: 1615-9861. DOI: 10 . 1002 / pmic . 202200013. URL: https : / /
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pmic.202200013 (visited on 08/08/2024).
[14]
Miao Cui, Chao Cheng, and Lanjing Zhang. “High-throughput proteomics: a method-
ological mini-review”. en. In: Laboratory Investigation 102.11 (Nov. 2022). Publisher:
Nature Publishing Group, pp. 1170–1181. ISSN: 1530-0307. DOI: 10.1038/s41374-
022-00830-7. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41374-022-00830-7 (visited on
08/23/2024).
[15]
Steven R. Shuken. “An Introduction to Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics”. In:
Journal of Proteome Research 22.7 (July 2023). Publisher: American Chemical So-
ciety, pp. 2151–2171. ISSN: 1535-3893. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00838. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00838 (visited on 08/19/2024).
[16]
Esther Y. Chen et al. “Chapter 3 - Understanding and utilizing the biomolecule/-
nanosystems interface”. In: Nanotechnologies in Preventive and Regenerative Medicine.
Ed. by Vuk Uskoković and Dragan P. Uskoković. Micro and Nano Technologies. El-
sevier, 2018, pp. 207–297. ISBN: 978-0-323-48063-5. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/B978-0-323-48063-5.00003-4. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780323480635000034.
[17]
Vadim Demichev et al. “DIA-NN: neural networks and interference correction enable
deep proteome coverage in high throughput”. en. In: Nature Methods 17.1 (Jan.
2020). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 41–44. ISSN: 1548-7105. DOI: 10.
1038/s41592-019-0638-x. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-019-0638-x
(visited on 11/08/2024).
[18]
Siegfried Gessulat et al. “Prosit: proteome-wide prediction of peptide tandem mass
spectra by deep learning”. en. In: Nature Methods 16.6 (June 2019). Publisher:
Nature Publishing Group, pp. 509–518. ISSN: 1548-7105. DOI: 10.1038/s41592-
019-0426-7. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-019-0426-7 (visited on
11/12/2024).
[19]
Arthur Declercq et al. “Updated MS²PIP web server supports cutting-edge pro-
teomics applications”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 51.W1 (July 2023), W338–W342.
ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad335. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkad335 (visited on 11/12/2024).
[20]
N. Hornung and L. Friis-Hansen. C-reaktivt protein (CRP). Retrieved November 29,
2024. Oct. 2021. URL: https://www.sundhed.dk/sundhedsfaglig/laegehaandbogen/
undersoegelser-og-proever/klinisk-biokemi/blodproever/c-reaktivt-protein-crp/.
[21]
Johannes Hartl et al. “Quantitative protein biomarker panels: a path to improved
clinical practice through proteomics”. en. In: EMBO Molecular Medicine 15.4 (Apr.
2023), e16061. ISSN: 1757-4676, 1757-4684. DOI: 10.15252/emmm.202216061.
URL: https: / / www . embopress . org / doi /10 . 15252 /emmm . 202216061 (visited on
02/21/2024).
[22]
Philipp E. Geyer et al. “Plasma Proteome Profiling to Assess Human Health and
Disease”. en. In: Cell Systems 2.3 (Mar. 2016), pp. 185–195. ISSN: 24054712. DOI:
70
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:79==
10.1016/j.cels.2016.02.015. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S2405471216300722 (visited on 08/02/2023).
[23]
Alicia L Richards, Anna E Merrill, and Joshua J Coon. “Proteome sequencing goes
deep”. en. In: Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 24 (Feb. 2015), pp. 11–17. ISSN:
13675931. DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2014.10.017. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S1367593114001586 (visited on 08/02/2023).
[24]
Vincent Albrecht et al. “Bridging the Gap from Proteomics Technology to Clinical
Application: Highlights from the 68th Benzon Foundation Symposium”. In: Molecular
& Cellular Proteomics (Nov. 2024), p. 100877. ISSN: 1535-9476. DOI: 10.1016/
j.mcpro.2024.100877. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1535947624001671 (visited on 11/28/2024).
[25]
Oliver M Bernhardt et al. “Spectronaut: a fast and efficient algorithm for MRM-like
processing of data independent acquisition (SWATH-MS) data”. In: Biognosys. ch
(2012).
[26]
Philipp E Geyer et al. “Plasma Proteome Profiling to detect and avoid sample￿related
biases in biomarker studies”. In: EMBO Molecular Medicine 11.11 (Nov. 2019).
Publisher: Springer Nature, e10427. ISSN: 1757-4676. DOI: 10 . 15252 / emmm .
201910427. URL: https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.15252/emmm.201910427
(visited on 11/23/2024).
[27]
Matthias Mann et al. “Artificial intelligence for proteomics and biomarker discovery”.
English. In: Cell Systems 12.8 (Aug. 2021). Publisher: Elsevier, pp. 759–770. ISSN:
2405-4712, 2405-4720. DOI: 10.1016/j.cels.2021.06.006. URL: https://www.cell.
com/cell-systems/abstract/S2405-4712(21)00250-7 (visited on 11/28/2024).
[28]
Anna Louise Swan et al. “Application of Machine Learning to Proteomics Data:
Classification and Biomarker Identification in Postgenomics Biology”. In: OMICS : a
Journal of Integrative Biology 17.12 (Dec. 2013), pp. 595–610. ISSN: 1536-2310.
DOI: 10.1089/omi.2013.0017. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC3837439/ (visited on 11/28/2024).
[29]
SPRINT Research Group et al. “A Randomized Trial of Intensive versus Standard
Blood-Pressure Control”. eng. In: The New England Journal of Medicine 373.22
(Nov. 2015), pp. 2103–2116. ISSN: 1533-4406. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1511939.
[30]
Z. McDonald et al. “Mass Spectrometry Provides a Highly Sensitive Noninvasive
Means of Sequencing and Tracking M-Protein in the Blood of Multiple Myeloma
Patients”. In: Journal of Proteome Research 20.8 (2021), pp. 4176–4185. DOI: 10.
1021/acs.jproteome.0c01022. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c01022.
[31]
Bruker. timsTOF. https : / / www . bruker . com / en / products - and - solutions / mass -
spectrometry/timstof.html. Accessed: December 4, 2024. n.d.
[32]
Jelena Čuklina et al. “Diagnostics and correction of batch effects in large￿scale
proteomic studies: a tutorial”. In: Molecular Systems Biology 17.8 (Aug. 2021). Pub-
lisher: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, e10240. ISSN: 1744-4292. DOI: 10.15252/msb.
202110240. URL: https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.15252/msb.202110240
(visited on 09/18/2024).
[33]
W. Evan Johnson, Cheng Li, and Ariel Rabinovic. “Adjusting batch effects in mi-
croarray expression data using empirical Bayes methods”. In: Biostatistics 8.1 (Apr.
2006), pp. 118–127. ISSN: 1465-4644. DOI: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxj037. eprint:
https://academic.oup.com/biostatistics/article- pdf/8/1/118/25435562/batch+
effect+supplementary+materials.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/
kxj037.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
71
==PAGE:80==
[34]
Henry Webel et al. “Imputation of label-free quantitative mass spectrometry-based
proteomics data using self-supervised deep learning”. en. In: Nature Communica-
tions 15.1 (June 2024). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, p. 5405. ISSN: 2041-
1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-48711-5. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41467-024-48711-5 (visited on 10/01/2024).
[35]
Yuming Jiang et al. Comprehensive Overview of Bottom-Up Proteomics using Mass
Spectrometry. en-US. Tech. rep. Publication Title: Manubot. Manubot, May 2024.
URL: https://jessegmeyerlab.github.io/proteomics-tutorial/ (visited on 10/01/2024).
[36]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[37]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learn-
ing and Data Mining. Lecture notes, Fall 2023. 1.0. Technical University of Denmark:
Polyteknisk boghandel og forlag, Sept. 2023.
[38]
Tom J Pollard et al. “tableone: An open source Python package for producing sum-
mary statistics for research papers”. In: JAMIA Open 1.1 (July 2018), pp. 26–31.
ISSN: 2574-2531. DOI: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooy012. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/
jamiaopen/ooy012 (visited on 11/11/2024).
[39]
Mayo Clinic. High blood pressure (hypertension): Controlling this common health
problem-High blood pressure (hypertension) - Symptoms & causes. en. URL: https:
//www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/high-blood-pressure/symptoms-causes/syc-
20373410 (visited on 10/16/2024).
[40]
CDC. Adult BMI Categories. en-us. July 2024. URL: https://www.cdc.gov/bmi/
adult-calculator/bmi-categories.html (visited on 10/16/2024).
[41]
Wes McKinney et al. “Data structures for statistical computing in python”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. Vol. 445. Austin, TX. 2010,
pp. 51–56.
[42]
Jesper Krogh et al. Biostatistik & Epidemiologi. 1.0. Polyteknisk boghandel og for-
lag, Sept. 2023.
[43]
J. D. Kalbfleisch and J. F. Lawless. “Likelihood analysis of multi-state models for
disease incidence and mortality”. en. In: Statistics in Medicine 7.1-2 (1988). _eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/sim.4780070116, pp. 149–160. ISSN:
1097-0258. DOI: 10.1002/sim.4780070116. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/sim.4780070116 (visited on 11/12/2024).
[44]
Cameron Davidson-Pilon. “lifelines: survival analysis in Python”. In: Journal of Open
Source Software 4.40 (2019), p. 1317. DOI: 10.21105/joss.01317. URL: https://doi.
org/10.21105/joss.01317.
[45]
Tejashree Ganesan. How to tune a Decision Tree in Hyperparameter tuning. en-US.
Section: AI-ML-DS. Apr. 2024. URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/how-to-tune-a-
decision-tree-in-hyperparameter-tuning/ (visited on 11/16/2024).
[46]
Mohtadi Ben Fraj. In Depth: Parameter tuning for Random Forest. en. Dec. 2017.
URL: https://medium.com/all-things-ai/in-depth-parameter-tuning-for-random-
forest-d67bb7e920d (visited on 11/16/2024).
[47]
Hestisholihah. Hyperparameter Tuning Showdown: Grid Search vs. Random Search
— Which is the Ultimate Winner? en. June 2023. URL: https : / / medium . com /
@hestisholihah01/hyperparameter-tuning-showdown-grid-search-vs-random-search-
which-is-the-ultimate-winner-5927b322e54d (visited on 11/18/2024).
72
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:81==
[48]
Seth Billiau. From Scratch: Permutation Feature Importance for ML Interpretability.
en. Aug. 2022. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/from- scratch- permutation-
feature-importance-for-ml-interpretability-b60f7d5d1fe9 (visited on 11/14/2024).
[49]
Félix Revert. Interpreting Random Forest and other black box models like XGBoost.
en. Feb. 2019. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/interpreting-random-forest-and-
other-black-box-models-like-xgboost-80f9cc4a3c38 (visited on 11/14/2024).
[50]
SciKit-Learn. 4.2. Permutation feature importance. en. URL: https://scikit-learn/
stable/modules/permutation_importance.html (visited on 11/14/2024).
[51]
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. “A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predic-
tions”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30. Ed. by I. Guyon
et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017, pp. 4765–4774. URL: http://papers.nips.cc/
paper/7062-a-unified-approach-to-interpreting-model-predictions.pdf.
[52]
Zhihao Chen. “The Principle of Tree Explainer and Its Associated Validation”. In:
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Computer Information and Big
Data Applications. CIBDA ’24. Wuhan, China: Association for Computing Machin-
ery, 2024, pp. 1155–1162. ISBN: 9798400718106. DOI: 10.1145/3671151.3671352.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3671151.3671352.
[53]
The UniProt Consortium. “UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase”. In: Nu-
cleic Acids Research 45.D1 (Nov. 2016), pp. D158–D169. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI:
10.1093/nar/gkw1099. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-pdf/45/D1/
D158/23819877/gkw1099.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw1099.
[54]
The Gene Ontology Consortium et al. “The Gene Ontology knowledgebase in 2023”.
In: Genetics 224.1 (Mar. 2023), iyad031. ISSN: 1943-2631. DOI: 10.1093/genetics/
iyad031. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/genetics/article- pdf/224/1/iyad031/
59147104/iyad031.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad031.
[55]
Michael Ashburner et al. “Gene Ontology: tool for the unification of biology”. In:
Nature Genetics 25.1 (May 2000), pp. 25–29. ISSN: 1546-1718. DOI: 10.1038/
75556. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/75556.
[56]
Damian Szklarczyk et al. “The STRING database in 2023: protein–protein associa-
tion networks and functional enrichment analyses for any sequenced genome of in-
terest”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 51.D1 (Nov. 2022). _eprint: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article
pdf/51/D1/D638/48440966/gkac1000.pdf, pp. D638–D646. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI:
10.1093/nar/gkac1000. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac1000.
[57]
Alberto Santos et al. “A knowledge graph to interpret clinical proteomics data”. In:
Nature Biotechnology 40.5 (May 2022), pp. 692–702. ISSN: 1546-1696. DOI: 10.
1038/s41587-021-01145-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-01145-6.
[58]
GTEx Portal. GTEx Portal. Accessed: 2024-12-05. 2024. URL: https://gtexportal.
org/home/multiGeneQueryPage.
[59]
Cell Guidance Systems. Serum vs Plasma: Do You Know the Difference? Accessed:
2024-12-05. May 2021. URL: https://www.cellgs.com/blog/serum-vs-plasma-do-
you-know-the-difference.html.
[60]
Julia Patricia Schessner, Eugenia Voytik, and Isabell Bludau. “A practical guide to
interpreting and generating bottom-up proteomics data visualizations”. en. In: PRO-
TEOMICS 22.8 (2022). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/pmic.202100103,
p. 2100103. ISSN: 1615-9861. DOI: 10 . 1002 / pmic . 202100103. URL: https : / /
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pmic.202100103 (visited on 07/05/2024).
[61]
OpenAI. ChatGPT: A Conversational AI Model. https://openai.com/chatgpt. Ac-
cessed on November 27, 2024. 2024.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
73
==PAGE:82==
[62]
Therese Moreau and Frederik Kulager. “Vi har skilt jobcentrenes algoritme ad. Og
kan se, hvor anderledes indvandrere og efterkommere bliver behandlet”. In: Zetland
(2021).
[63]
Guillaume Lemaître, Fernando Nogueira, and Christos K. Aridas. “Imbalanced-learn:
A Python Toolbox to Tackle the Curse of Imbalanced Datasets in Machine Learn-
ing”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 18.17 (2017), pp. 1–5. URL: http:
//jmlr.org/papers/v18/16-365.html.
[64]
Steven A Rosenzweig. “The Continuing Evolution of Insulin-like Growth Factor Sig-
naling”. In: F1000Research 9 (Mar. 2020), F1000 Faculty Rev–205. ISSN: 2046-
1402. DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.22198.1. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC7096212/ (visited on 12/02/2024).
[65]
Konrad Talbot et al. “Demonstrated brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease
patients is associated with IGF-1 resistance, IRS-1 dysregulation, and cognitive
decline”. en. In: The Journal of Clinical Investigation 122.4 (Apr. 2012). Publisher:
American Society for Clinical Investigation, pp. 1316–1338. ISSN: 0021-9738. DOI:
10 . 1172 / JCI59903. URL: https : / / www . jci . org / articles / view / 59903 (visited on
12/02/2024).
[66]
Sriram Gubbi et al. “40 YEARS of IGF1: IGF1: the Jekyll and Hyde of the aging
brain”. en. In: (July 2018). Section: Journal of Molecular Endocrinology. DOI: 10.
1530/JME-18-0093. URL: https://jme.bioscientifica.com/view/journals/jme/61/1/
JME-18-0093.xml (visited on 12/02/2024).
[67]
Hans Dieplinger and Benjamin Dieplinger. “Afamin — A pleiotropic glycoprotein in-
volved in various disease states”. In: Clinica Chimica Acta 446 (June 2015), pp. 105–
110. ISSN: 0009-8981. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . cca . 2015 . 04 . 010. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0009898115002016 (visited on 12/02/2024).
[68]
M. Heiser et al. “Vitamin E binding protein A famin Protects Neuronal Cells in vitro”.
en. In: Ageing and Dementia Current and Future Concepts. Ed. by Kurt A. Jellinger,
Reinhold Schmidt, and Manfred Windisch. Vienna: Springer, 2002, pp. 337–345.
ISBN: 978-3-7091-6139-5. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6139-5_32.
[69]
Y Katakura et al. “Anserine/Carnosine Supplementation Suppresses the Expression
of the Inflammatory Chemokine CCL24 in Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells from
Elderly People”. In: Nutrients 6 (Oct. 2017). DOI: 10.3390/nu9111199. URL: 10.3390/
nu9111199.
[70]
C.M. Balion et al. “Brain type carnosinase in dementia: a pilot study”. In: BMC Neu-
rology 7 (2007), p. 38. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-7-38. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2377-7-38.
[71]
Yan Hu et al. “Identification and validation of novel CSF biomarkers for early stages
of Alzheimer’s disease”. In: PROTEOMICS – Clinical Applications 1.11 (2007), pp. 1373–
1384. DOI: 10.1002/prca.200600999. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/prca.200600999.
[72]
W.E. Heywood et al. “Identification of novel CSF biomarkers for neurodegeneration
and their validation by a high-throughput multiplexed targeted proteomic assay”. In:
Molecular Neurodegeneration 10.1 (2015), p. 64. DOI: 10.1186/s13024-015-0059-y.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-015-0059-y.
[73]
A. Henriques, M. Huebecker, H. Blasco, et al. “Inhibition of β-Glucocerebrosidase
Activity Preserves Motor Unit Integrity in a Mouse Model of Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis”. In: Scientific Reports 7 (2017), p. 5235. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-05313-
0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-05313-0.
74
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:83==
[74]
J. Dufresne et al. “The plasma peptides of ovarian cancer”. In: Clinical Proteomics
15 (2018), p. 41. DOI: 10.1186/s12014-018-9215-z. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12014-018-9215-z.
[75]
Yeongshin Kim et al. “Plasma protein biomarker model for screening Alzheimer dis-
ease using multiple reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry”. en. In: Scientific Re-
ports 12.1 (Jan. 2022). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, p. 1282. ISSN: 2045-
2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-05384-8. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41598-022-05384-8 (visited on 12/02/2024).
[76]
Mark A. Petersen, Jae Kyu Ryu, and Katerina Akassoglou. “Fibrinogen in neuro-
logical diseases: mechanisms, imaging and therapeutics”. en. In: Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 19.5 (May 2018). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 283–301.
ISSN: 1471-0048. DOI: 10.1038/nrn.2018.13. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/nrn.2018.13 (visited on 12/02/2024).
[77]
United States Census Bureau. Quick Facts, United States. https://www.census.
gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US/RHI125223. Retrieved November 28, 2024. 2024.
[78]
Alisoun Milne. “Dementia screening and early diagnosis: The case for and against”.
In: Health, Risk & Society 12.1 (Feb. 2010). Publisher: Taylor & Francis _eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/13698570903509497, pp. 65–76. ISSN: 1369-8575. DOI:
10.1080/13698570903509497. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/13698570903509497
(visited on 12/05/2024).
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
75
==PAGE:84==
76
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:85==
Glossary
AD Alzheimer’s disease. 1, 51, 61, 62
AUC Area under the curve. 30, 46, 62
BBB Blood brain barrier. 4, 61, 62
CD Cognitive decline. 1
CKG Clinical Knowledge Graph. 32, 47, 51, 61, 62
CNS Central nervous system. 3, 4, 52, 61, 62
Cov Coefficient of variation. 34, 35, 37, 55, 56
CSF Cerebrospinal fluid. 2, 8
CV Cross validation. 26, 27, 56
CVD Cardiovascular disease. 13, 55, 64
DDA Data dependent acquisition. 7
DIA Data independent aquisition. 5, 7
FDR False discovery rate. 23, 43
GO Gene Ontology. 32, 47
HR Hazard ratio. 23, 43, 61
HT High throughput. 4
LC Liquid chromatography. 6, 8
LFQ Label free quantification. 7, 13, 15, 24, 34, 38, 44, 55, 65
LMIC Low and middle income country. 3
MAR Missing at random. 17
MCAR Missing completely at random. 17
MCI Mild Cognitive Impairment. 2, 14, 22, 27, 46
ML Machine learning. 9–11, 17, 18, 24, 26, 28, 30, 58–60
MNAR Missing not at random. 17
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging. 1, 8
MS Mass spectrometry. 5–9, 11, 15, 34, 35, 38, 39, 52, 55, 56, 65
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
77
==PAGE:86==
NIH National Institute for Health. 14
PCA Principal component analysis. 15, 18, 56
PFI Permutaion based feature importance. 30, 46
PPI Protein-protein interaction. 47, 51
PRI Proteomics Research Infrastructure. 14, 34, 38, 39, 55, 56
QC Quality control. 33
RF Random forest. 24, 27, 29–31, 45, 58, 59
ROC Receiver operating characteristics. 30
RT Retention time. 6
SBP Systolic blood pressure. 13
SHAP SHapley Additive exPlanation. 30, 31, 46, 48, 59, 61, 101–104
SPRINT Systolic blood PRessure INtervention Trial. 13, 14, 58
UMAP Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projections. 15, 18, 39, 56
VD Vascular dementia. 1, 51
WHO World Health Organization. 4, 64
78
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:87==
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
79
==PAGE:88==
A
Appendix
A.1
Expanded view of Cox results
On the following pages, the full overview of the Cox regressions are presented, including
HR and unadjusted p-values for the confounding factors.
80
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:89==
AFM
F13B
CNDP1
ALCAM
covariate
HR (95%CI)
p
HR (95%CI)
p
HR (95%CI)
p
HR (95%CI)
p
AGE
1.08 (1.06, 1.1)
0.000
1.08 (1.07, 1.1)
0.000
1.08 (1.06, 1.09)
0.000
1.08 (1.06, 1.1)
0.000
EDUCATION_college
0.53 (0.43, 0.67)
0.000
0.55 (0.44, 0.7)
0.000
0.55 (0.44, 0.69)
0.000
0.53 (0.42, 0.67)
0.000
EDUCATION_less_than_HS
2.6 (1.75, 3.86)
0.000
2.54 (1.68, 3.84)
0.000
2.55 (1.69, 3.84)
0.000
2.57 (1.71, 3.87)
0.000
RACE4_WHITE
0.69 (0.59, 0.82)
0.000
0.66 (0.56, 0.78)
0.000
0.67 (0.56, 0.79)
0.000
0.66 (0.56, 0.79)
0.000
protein
0.38 (0.24, 0.61)
0.000
0.3 (0.16, 0.55)
0.000
0.61 (0.47, 0.78)
0.000
2.17 (1.37, 3.45)
0.001
ACTIVITY_MODERATE
0.75 (0.62, 0.91)
0.003
0.75 (0.62, 0.91)
0.003
0.77 (0.63, 0.93)
0.006
0.75 (0.63, 0.91)
0.003
FEMALE
0.7 (0.53, 0.91)
0.009
0.71 (0.54, 0.94)
0.017
0.74 (0.56, 0.98)
0.037
0.7 (0.53, 0.92)
0.011
HEALTHYWEIGHT
1.43 (1.09, 1.88)
0.011
1.57 (1.19, 2.07)
0.001
1.59 (1.21, 2.08)
0.001
1.57 (1.2, 2.06)
0.001
RACE4_BLACK
1.31 (1.06, 1.63)
0.014
1.41 (1.13, 1.74)
0.002
1.38 (1.12, 1.72)
0.003
1.41 (1.13, 1.76)
0.002
EDUCATION_HS
0.76 (0.6, 0.95)
0.019
0.76 (0.59, 0.97)
0.027
0.75 (0.59, 0.94)
0.013
0.77 (0.61, 0.97)
0.029
SMOKE_FORMER
0.84 (0.71, 1.0)
0.054
0.82 (0.69, 0.98)
0.031
0.87 (0.73, 1.04)
0.128
0.84 (0.7, 1.01)
0.057
UNDERWEIGHT
0.42 (0.17, 1.07)
0.069
0.43 (0.17, 1.08)
0.073
0.45 (0.19, 1.1)
0.079
0.45 (0.18, 1.1)
0.078
OVERWEIGHT
0.82 (0.64, 1.04)
0.098
0.82 (0.64, 1.05)
0.115
0.82 (0.64, 1.05)
0.112
0.77 (0.61, 0.98)
0.036
RACE_HISPANIC
1.27 (0.94, 1.73)
0.122
1.29 (0.94, 1.77)
0.109
1.27 (0.92, 1.76)
0.141
1.24 (0.9, 1.71)
0.180
RACE4_OTHER
2.69 (0.66, 10.95)
0.167
1.88 (0.49, 7.14)
0.356
2.11 (0.57, 7.88)
0.266
2.16 (0.54, 8.62)
0.277
ACTIVITY_ALOT
1.23 (0.89, 1.69)
0.210
1.25 (0.91, 1.72)
0.163
1.26 (0.91, 1.74)
0.169
1.24 (0.9, 1.71)
0.194
SMOKE_NEVER
1.11 (0.94, 1.32)
0.211
1.08 (0.91, 1.28)
0.382
1.08 (0.9, 1.28)
0.405
1.08 (0.91, 1.28)
0.385
SMOKE_CURRENT
1.18 (0.81, 1.71)
0.397
1.36 (0.93, 1.99)
0.114
1.18 (0.8, 1.74)
0.392
1.28 (0.88, 1.87)
0.196
HYPERTENSION
0.89 (0.66, 1.19)
0.414
0.88 (0.66, 1.17)
0.386
0.88 (0.66, 1.18)
0.384
0.85 (0.63, 1.14)
0.282
ACTIVITY_LITTLE
1.07 (0.89, 1.29)
0.474
1.06 (0.88, 1.28)
0.513
1.04 (0.86, 1.26)
0.670
1.07 (0.89, 1.29)
0.468
EGFR
1.0 (0.99, 1.01)
0.962
1.0 (0.99, 1.0)
0.320
1.0 (0.99, 1.01)
0.768
1.0 (0.99, 1.01)
0.906
OBESE
1.0 (0.79, 1.28)
0.978
0.97 (0.76, 1.23)
0.775
0.96 (0.76, 1.23)
0.771
0.99 (0.78, 1.27)
0.945
Table A.1: Full Cox results, including confounders for ALCAM, F13B, CNDP1, and AFM. HS = high school.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
81
==PAGE:90==
F13A1
IGFBP2
Covariate
HR (95% CI)
p
HR (95% CI)
p
AGE
1.08 (1.07, 1.1)
0.000
1.08 (1.06, 1.09)
0.000
EDUCATION_college
0.55 (0.43, 0.69)
0.000
0.54 (0.43, 0.68)
0.000
EDUCATION_less_than_HS
2.52 (1.66, 3.82)
0.000
2.57 (1.71, 3.87)
0.000
RACE4_WHITE
0.66 (0.56, 0.78)
0.000
0.63 (0.53, 0.75)
0.000
protein
0.52 (0.35, 0.78)
0.002
1.39 (1.13, 1.7)
0.002
ACTIVITY_MODERATE
0.74 (0.62, 0.9)
0.002
0.75 (0.62, 0.91)
0.003
FEMALE
0.72 (0.55, 0.95)
0.019
0.7 (0.53, 0.92)
0.012
HEALTHYWEIGHT
1.62 (1.23, 2.13)
0.001
1.45 (1.1, 1.91)
0.008
RACE4_BLACK
1.46 (1.17, 1.81)
0.001
1.47 (1.18, 1.83)
0.000
EDUCATION_HS
0.76 (0.6, 0.96)
0.024
0.75 (0.59, 0.95)
0.015
SMOKE_FORMER
0.83 (0.7, 0.99)
0.038
0.84 (0.7, 1.0)
0.054
UNDERWEIGHT
0.43 (0.17, 1.08)
0.071
0.4 (0.15, 1.04)
0.061
OVERWEIGHT
0.81 (0.63, 1.03)
0.082
0.8 (0.63, 1.01)
0.064
RACE4_HISPANIC
1.22 (0.89, 1.68)
0.221
1.28 (0.93, 1.76)
0.126
RACE4_OTHER
1.92 (0.48, 7.62)
0.355
2.24 (0.58, 8.7)
0.243
ACTIVITY_ALOT
1.23 (0.9, 1.7)
0.196
1.22 (0.89, 1.69)
0.218
SMOKE_NEVER
1.09 (0.91, 1.29)
0.348
1.1 (0.93, 1.31)
0.264
SMOKE_CURRENT
1.31 (0.9, 1.92)
0.160
1.22 (0.83, 1.78)
0.310
HYPERTENSION
0.87 (0.65, 1.17)
0.370
0.89 (0.66, 1.19)
0.423
ACTIVITY_LITTLE
1.09 (0.9, 1.31)
0.381
1.07 (0.89, 1.3)
0.464
EGFR
1.0 (0.99, 1.0)
0.480
1.0 (0.99, 1.01)
0.900
OBESE
0.97 (0.76, 1.23)
0.793
0.99 (0.78, 1.27)
0.961
Table A.2: Full Cox results, including confounders for IGPBP2 and F13A1. HS = high school.
82
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:91==
A.2
Cox results susceptibility of alpha penalizer
Figure A.1: Cox coefficients
Figure A.2: Cox coefficients
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
83
==PAGE:92==
A.3
Cox proportional hazards assumption
A.3.1
Proportional hazards
The proportional hazards assumption was assessed using the proportional_hazard_test
function from the lifelines-package, which tests the null hypothesis that there are no
proportional hazards between the groups for each covariate. All covariates in all models
showed high p-values, and thus the assumption is met.
Table A.3: Statistical test for proportional hazards assumption for P43652
test statistic
p
-log2(p)
ACTIVITY_ALOT
0.32
0.57
0.81
ACTIVITY_LITTLE
1.10
0.29
1.77
ACTIVITY_MODERATE
0.14
0.71
0.49
AGE
0.22
0.64
0.64
EDUCATION_college
0.56
0.45
1.14
EDUCATION_high_school
0.19
0.67
0.59
EDUCATION_less_than_high_school
0.01
0.94
0.09
EGFR
0.08
0.78
0.37
FEMALE
0.05
0.83
0.28
HEALTHYWEIGHT
1.16
0.28
1.83
HYPERTENSION
0.01
0.92
0.12
OBESE
0.19
0.66
0.60
OVERWEIGHT
1.65
0.20
2.33
P43652
0.07
0.78
0.35
RACE4_BLACK
1.18
0.28
1.85
RACE4_HISPANIC
1.36
0.24
2.04
RACE4_OTHER
0.02
0.88
0.19
RACE4_WHITE
0.03
0.86
0.22
SMOKE_3CAT_CURRENT
1.01
0.31
1.67
SMOKE_3CAT_FORMER
0.80
0.37
1.43
SMOKE_3CAT_NEVER
0.01
0.94
0.09
UNDERWEIGHT
0.01
0.94
0.10
Table A.4: Statistical test for proportional hazards assumption for P05160
test statistic
p
-log2(p)
ACTIVITY_ALOT
0.28
0.60
0.74
ACTIVITY_LITTLE
1.17
0.28
1.84
ACTIVITY_MODERATE
0.22
0.64
0.65
AGE
0.26
0.61
0.72
EDUCATION_college
0.68
0.41
1.29
EDUCATION_high_school
0.11
0.74
0.43
EDUCATION_less_than_high_school
0.02
0.90
0.15
EGFR
0.22
0.64
0.65
FEMALE
0.07
0.80
0.33
HEALTHYWEIGHT
1.22
0.27
1.89
HYPERTENSION
0.00
0.95
0.08
OBESE
0.21
0.64
0.64
OVERWEIGHT
1.55
0.21
2.23
P05160
0.80
0.37
1.43
RACE4_BLACK
1.23
0.27
1.90
RACE4_HISPANIC
1.35
0.24
2.03
RACE4_OTHER
0.06
0.81
0.30
RACE4_WHITE
0.04
0.85
0.23
SMOKE_3CAT_CURRENT
0.68
0.41
1.29
SMOKE_3CAT_FORMER
0.73
0.39
1.35
SMOKE_3CAT_NEVER
0.03
0.85
0.23
UNDERWEIGHT
0.01
0.93
0.10
84
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:93==
Table A.5: Statistical test for proportional hazards assumption for Q96KN2
test statistic
p
-log2(p)
ACTIVITY_ALOT
0.24
0.62
0.68
ACTIVITY_LITTLE
0.96
0.33
1.61
ACTIVITY_MODERATE
0.14
0.70
0.51
AGE
0.27
0.60
0.73
EDUCATION_college
0.70
0.40
1.32
EDUCATION_high_school
0.23
0.63
0.67
EDUCATION_less_than_high_school
0.06
0.81
0.31
EGFR
0.08
0.78
0.35
FEMALE
0.20
0.66
0.61
HEALTHYWEIGHT
1.38
0.24
2.05
HYPERTENSION
0.05
0.83
0.27
OBESE
0.17
0.68
0.56
OVERWEIGHT
1.67
0.20
2.35
Q96KN2
0.30
0.58
0.78
RACE4_BLACK
1.22
0.27
1.90
RACE4_HISPANIC
1.37
0.24
2.05
RACE4_OTHER
0.01
0.92
0.12
RACE4_WHITE
0.01
0.91
0.14
SMOKE_3CAT_CURRENT
1.01
0.32
1.66
SMOKE_3CAT_FORMER
0.94
0.33
1.59
SMOKE_3CAT_NEVER
0.02
0.88
0.18
UNDERWEIGHT
0.00
0.96
0.05
Table A.6: Statistical test for proportional hazards assumption for Q13740-2
test statistic
p
-log2(p)
ACTIVITY_ALOT
0.24
0.62
0.69
ACTIVITY_LITTLE
1.01
0.31
1.67
ACTIVITY_MODERATE
0.18
0.67
0.58
AGE
0.35
0.55
0.86
EDUCATION_college
0.61
0.43
1.21
EDUCATION_high_school
0.23
0.63
0.66
EDUCATION_less_than_high_school
0.02
0.88
0.18
EGFR
0.10
0.75
0.41
FEMALE
0.08
0.78
0.35
HEALTHYWEIGHT
1.09
0.30
1.75
HYPERTENSION
0.05
0.82
0.29
OBESE
0.12
0.73
0.45
OVERWEIGHT
1.72
0.19
2.40
Q13740-2
0.06
0.81
0.31
RACE4_BLACK
1.04
0.31
1.70
RACE4_HISPANIC
1.15
0.28
1.82
RACE4_OTHER
0.03
0.87
0.20
RACE4_WHITE
0.02
0.88
0.19
SMOKE_3CAT_CURRENT
0.92
0.34
1.57
SMOKE_3CAT_FORMER
0.82
0.37
1.45
SMOKE_3CAT_NEVER
0.02
0.90
0.16
UNDERWEIGHT
0.00
0.96
0.06
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
85
==PAGE:94==
Table A.7: Statistical test for proportional hazards assumption for P00488
test statistic
p
-log2(p)
ACTIVITY_ALOT
0.30
0.58
0.78
ACTIVITY_LITTLE
1.38
0.24
2.05
ACTIVITY_MODERATE
0.31
0.58
0.79
AGE
0.25
0.62
0.70
EDUCATION_college
0.67
0.41
1.27
EDUCATION_high_school
0.11
0.74
0.44
EDUCATION_less_than_high_school
0.04
0.85
0.23
EGFR
0.23
0.63
0.67
FEMALE
0.07
0.80
0.33
HEALTHYWEIGHT
1.35
0.25
2.02
HYPERTENSION
0.01
0.92
0.13
OBESE
0.23
0.63
0.67
OVERWEIGHT
1.64
0.20
2.32
P00488
2.08
0.15
2.75
RACE4_BLACK
0.94
0.33
1.59
RACE4_HISPANIC
0.95
0.33
1.61
RACE4_OTHER
0.07
0.79
0.33
RACE4_WHITE
0.04
0.83
0.26
SMOKE_3CAT_CURRENT
0.77
0.38
1.39
SMOKE_3CAT_FORMER
0.83
0.36
1.47
SMOKE_3CAT_NEVER
0.04
0.84
0.25
UNDERWEIGHT
0.01
0.91
0.13
Table A.8: Statistical test for proportional hazards assumption for P18065
test statistic
p
-log2(p)
ACTIVITY_ALOT
0.29
0.59
0.76
ACTIVITY_LITTLE
1.18
0.28
1.85
ACTIVITY_MODERATE
0.19
0.66
0.60
AGE
0.38
0.54
0.90
EDUCATION_college
0.63
0.43
1.23
EDUCATION_high_school
0.16
0.69
0.55
EDUCATION_less_than_high_school
0.04
0.85
0.23
EGFR
0.03
0.86
0.21
FEMALE
0.08
0.78
0.36
HEALTHYWEIGHT
0.97
0.33
1.62
HYPERTENSION
0.01
0.94
0.10
OBESE
0.13
0.72
0.47
OVERWEIGHT
1.65
0.20
2.33
P18065
0.22
0.64
0.64
RACE4_BLACK
0.99
0.32
1.64
RACE4_HISPANIC
1.32
0.25
2.00
RACE4_OTHER
0.03
0.85
0.23
RACE4_WHITE
0.00
0.95
0.08
SMOKE_3CAT_CURRENT
1.20
0.27
1.87
SMOKE_3CAT_FORMER
0.92
0.34
1.57
SMOKE_3CAT_NEVER
0.01
0.94
0.09
UNDERWEIGHT
0.01
0.91
0.13
86
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:95==
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
87
==PAGE:96==
A.4
PRI log
DATE
Activity
Pos in
Queue
Comment
Possible
batch
effect
20221214
Calibration MS+IM
S729
(Plate8)
IM was at 126 vs 132
starting
YES
20221219
Calibration MS+IM
S1017
(Plate11)
IM was at 136 vs 132
starting.
Cal done af-
ter plate 10 and before
start plate 11
YES
20221222
Calibration MS+IM
S1190
(Plate13)
IM was at 128 vs 132
starting.
Cal done af-
ter plate 12 and before
start plate 13
YES
20221227
Column
Changed,
MS+IM
calibration,
Buffers Changed and
Solvent
Exchanged
script was run.
Before
plate 16
1st
Column
(up
to
S1425) was exchanged
because
BAD
sepa-
ration in the middle of
gradient.
YES
20230103
Column
Exchanged
again and Full CAL
Before
plate 16
After 10 DDA QCs runs,
the semi-new column
was tailing (1.25) and
exchanged for a new
one (GOOD)
YES
20230112
Calibration MS+IM
Before
plate 17
LC and TIMS were in
standby for 1 week so
DDA QCs were per-
formed
YES
20230118
Queue
stopped
be-
cause Pump Overheat
H3 of
Plate20
(S1965)
Fan of Rought pump
stopped
and
Vaccum
went very high, so we
exchanged the pump
Very
High
20230123
Original Rough Pump
exchanged
with
6th
floor
H3 of
Plate20
(S1965)
Exchange
was
per-
formed with No issue
and also TIMS6 pump
was turned 90 degree
Very
High
20230123
Replaced MilliQ of wa-
ter Chiller
H3 of
Plate20
(S1965)
Due to low level MilliQ
was
replaced
with
Fresh
MilliQ
+5%
2Propanol
to
avoid
growths
NO
88
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:97==
A.5
Dimensionality reduction of un-scaled data
(a) PCA
(b) PCA
(c) UMAP
(d) UMAP
Figure A.3: Dimensionality reduction of non-scaled data. Colored for plate and type (sam-
ple or pooled QC control).
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
89
==PAGE:98==
A.6
Dimensionality reduction of protein median scaled data
(a) PCA
(b) PCA
(c) UMAP
(d) UMAP
(e) tSNE
(f) tSNE
Figure A.4: Drift and dimensionality reduction of protein_median scaled data. Colored
for plate and type (sample or pooled QC control).
90
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:99==
A.7
Dimensionality reduction of pool scaled data
(a) PCA
(b) PCA
(c) UMAP
(d) UMAP
(e) tSNE
(f) tSNE
Figure A.5: Drift and dimensionality reduction of pool scaled data. Colored for plate and
type (sample or pooled QC control).
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
91
==PAGE:100==
A.8
Dimensionality reduction of median scales data
(a) PCA
(b) PCA
(c) UMAP
(d) UMAP
(e) tSNE
(f) tSNE
Figure A.6: Drift and dimensionality reduction of median scaled data. Colored for plate
and type (sample or pooled QC control).
92
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:101==
A.9
Expanded view of protein importances over time
Similar to Figure 3.9, this appendix shows the importance of the proteins on different time
horizons, though with a
A.9.1
Fully adjusted model, zoomed in on proteins
Figure A.7: Feature importance of proteins over time. Fully adjusted model.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
93
==PAGE:102==
A.9.2
Minimal model
Figure A.8: Feature importance of proteins over time. Minimal model.
94
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:103==
A.9.3
Clinical model
Figure A.9: Feature importance of proteins over time. Clinical model.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
95
==PAGE:104==
A.10
Evaluation quantities of different discrimination
thresholds over the years
A.10.1
Full model
Table A.9: Thresholds resulting in the highest accuracy per year
Year
Threshold
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F1
3
0.530
0.720
0.300
0.910
0.600
0.300
0.400
3.5
0.500
0.699
0.421
0.840
0.571
0.421
0.485
4
0.460
0.679
0.602
0.738
0.636
0.602
0.618
4.5
0.380
0.696
0.819
0.548
0.685
0.819
0.746
5
0.340
0.715
0.871
0.518
0.695
0.871
0.773
5.5
0.410
0.745
0.849
0.587
0.756
0.849
0.800
6
0.460
0.802
0.921
0.447
0.832
0.921
0.875
6.5
0.330
0.870
1.000
0.000
0.870
1.000
0.930
Table A.10: Thresholds resulting in the highest F1-score per year
Year
Threshold
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F1
3
0.270
0.624
0.718
0.582
0.436
0.718
0.543
3.5
0.310
0.664
0.711
0.640
0.500
0.711
0.587
4
0.340
0.662
0.797
0.560
0.580
0.797
0.671
4.5
0.340
0.696
0.870
0.487
0.670
0.870
0.757
5
0.340
0.715
0.871
0.518
0.695
0.871
0.773
5.5
0.370
0.745
0.892
0.522
0.738
0.892
0.808
6
0.460
0.802
0.921
0.447
0.832
0.921
0.875
6.5
0.330
0.870
1.000
0.000
0.870
1.000
0.930
Table A.11: Highest threshold where sensitivity = 1
Year
Threshold
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F1
3
0.030
0.328
1.000
0.025
0.316
1.000
0.480
3.5
0.020
0.342
1.000
0.009
0.338
1.000
0.506
4
0.040
0.453
1.000
0.036
0.441
1.000
0.612
4.5
0.090
0.585
1.000
0.087
0.568
1.000
0.724
5
0.080
0.582
1.000
0.055
0.572
1.000
0.728
5.5
0.110
0.632
1.000
0.076
0.621
1.000
0.766
6
0.200
0.754
1.000
0.021
0.753
1.000
0.859
6.5
0.330
0.870
1.000
0.000
0.870
1.000
0.930
96
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:105==
A.10.2
Minimal model
Table A.12: Thresholds resulting in the highest accuracy per year
Year
Threshold
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F1
3
0.570
0.718
0.264
0.922
0.604
0.264
0.367
3.5
0.470
0.708
0.482
0.822
0.579
0.482
0.526
4
0.470
0.669
0.539
0.768
0.639
0.539
0.585
4.5
0.530
0.664
0.623
0.713
0.723
0.623
0.669
5
0.550
0.671
0.619
0.736
0.748
0.619
0.677
5.5
0.600
0.680
0.612
0.783
0.810
0.612
0.697
6
0.200
0.749
0.993
0.021
0.751
0.993
0.855
6.5
0.380
0.870
1.000
0.000
0.870
1.000
0.930
Table A.13: Thresholds resulting in the highest F1 score per year
Year
Threshold
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F1
3
0.230
0.576
0.709
0.516
0.398
0.709
0.510
3.5
0.320
0.655
0.623
0.671
0.490
0.623
0.548
4
0.230
0.561
0.859
0.333
0.495
0.859
0.629
4.5
0.080
0.545
1.000
0.000
0.545
1.000
0.706
5
0.320
0.627
0.856
0.336
0.620
0.856
0.719
5.5
0.090
0.602
1.000
0.000
0.602
1.000
0.751
6
0.110
0.749
1.000
0.000
0.749
1.000
0.856
6.5
0.380
0.870
1.000
0.000
0.870
1.000
0.930
Table A.14: Highest threshold resulting in sensitivity 1￿
Year
Threshold
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F1
3
0.050
0.331
1.000
0.029
0.317
1.000
0.481
3.5
0.050
0.345
1.000
0.013
0.339
1.000
0.507
4
0.080
0.439
1.000
0.012
0.435
1.000
0.607
4.5
0.080
0.545
1.000
0.000
0.545
1.000
0.706
5
0.100
0.558
1.000
0.000
0.558
1.000
0.716
5.5
0.090
0.602
1.000
0.000
0.602
1.000
0.751
6
0.110
0.749
1.000
0.000
0.749
1.000
0.856
6.5
0.380
0.870
1.000
0.000
0.870
1.000
0.930
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
97
==PAGE:106==
(a) Highest accuracy
(b) Highest F1 score
(c) Highest threshold with sensitivity = 1
Figure A.10: Model performance over time for minimal model.
98
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:107==
A.10.3
Clinical model
Table A.15: Thresholds resulitng in the highest accuray per year
Year
Threshold
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F1
3
0.540
0.715
0.336
0.885
0.569
0.336
0.423
3.5
0.580
0.696
0.307
0.893
0.593
0.307
0.405
4
0.460
0.676
0.617
0.720
0.627
0.617
0.622
4.5
0.370
0.688
0.812
0.539
0.679
0.812
0.739
5
0.380
0.699
0.835
0.527
0.690
0.835
0.756
5.5
0.410
0.714
0.849
0.511
0.724
0.849
0.781
6
0.380
0.770
0.929
0.298
0.798
0.929
0.858
6.5
0.290
0.870
1.000
0.000
0.870
1.000
0.930
Table A.16: Thresholds resulting in the highest F1 score per year
Year
Threshold
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F1
3
0.300
0.638
0.645
0.635
0.444
0.645
0.526
3.5
0.300
0.634
0.702
0.600
0.471
0.702
0.563
4
0.360
0.652
0.758
0.571
0.574
0.758
0.653
4.5
0.380
0.688
0.819
0.530
0.677
0.819
0.741
5
0.310
0.691
0.878
0.455
0.670
0.878
0.760
5.5
0.270
0.680
0.928
0.304
0.668
0.928
0.777
6
0.340
0.765
0.943
0.234
0.786
0.943
0.857
6.5
0.290
0.870
1.000
0.000
0.870
1.000
0.930
Table A.17: Highest threshold resulting in Recall = 1
Year
Threshold
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F1
3
0.010
0.314
1.000
0.004
0.312
1.000
0.475
3.5
0.010
0.336
1.000
0.000
0.336
1.000
0.503
4
0.030
0.443
1.000
0.018
0.437
1.000
0.608
4.5
0.040
0.545
1.000
0.000
0.545
1.000
0.706
5
0.030
0.558
1.000
0.000
0.558
1.000
0.716
5.5
0.040
0.602
1.000
0.000
0.602
1.000
0.751
6
0.120
0.749
1.000
0.000
0.749
1.000
0.856
6.5
0.290
0.870
1.000
0.000
0.870
1.000
0.930
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
99
==PAGE:108==
(a) Highest accuracy
(b) Highest F1 score
(c) Highest threshold with sensitivity = 1
Figure A.11: Model performance over time for minimal model.
100
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:109==
A.11
SHAP values
In the following, all SHAP values for half years of the full model are displayed. Whole
years are presented in figure 3.10
(a) Year 3.5
(b) Year 4.5
(c) Year 5.5
(d) Year 6.5
Figure A.12: SHAP values for half year models (full model) over time.
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
101
==PAGE:110==
A.12
SHAP values, minimal model
(a) Year 3
(b) Year 3.5
(c) Year 4
(d) Year 4.5
(e) Year 5
(f) Year 5.5
(g) Year 6
(h) Year 6.5
Figure A.13: SHAP values for the minimal model continoued.
102
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:111==
A.13
SHAP values, clinical model
(a) Year 3
(b) Year 3.5
(c) Year 4
(d) Year 4.5
Figure A.14: SHAP values for the clinic model
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
103
==PAGE:112==
(a) Year 5
(b) Year 5.5
(c) Year 6
(d) Year 6.5
Figure A.15: SHAP values for the clinic model continoued.
104
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:113==
A.14
GO-term networks
Figure A.16: GO Molecular Function annotations
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
105
==PAGE:114==
Figure A.17: GO Biological Process annotations
Figure A.18: GO Cellular Component annotations
106
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
==PAGE:115==
Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Dementia Risk Prediction
107
==PAGE:116==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 220
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
