==PAGE:1==
D I S T R I B U T E D N E T W O R K F O R C O N T R O L L I N G E N E R G Y A S S E T S
william karlshøj lange mathiassen
Low Latency, Highly Scalable Network for Assets in Frequency Regulation
Operations
DTU Compute
Technical University of Denmark
January 2025
==PAGE:2==
William Karlshøj Lange Mathiassen: Distributed Network For Controlling
Energy Assets, Low Latency, Highly Scalable Network for Assets in
Frequency Regulation Operations, © January 20251
supervisors:
Razgar Ebrahimy, DTU
Mohsen Banaei, DTU
Vignesh Krishnamoorthy, Hybrid Greentech
location:
Kongens Lyngby
1 Front-page image generated using prompt seen in Appendix C
==PAGE:3==
D E C L A R AT I O N
This thesis was prepared between August 1st and January 16th at the
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science of the
Technical University of Denmark during the fall to spring semester of
2024-2025.
This thesis was supervised by Razgar Ebrahimy, Mohsen Banaei,
DTU Dynamical Systems, and Vignesh Krishnamoorthy Hybrid Green-
tech.
The work on this thesis constitutes 32.5 ECTS of the MSc programme
in Computer Science and Engineering at DTU.
Grammarly and Claude 3.5 Sonnet have been used for grammatical
corrections and inspiration. Furthermore, Claude 3.5 Sonnet has been
used as a sparring tool for some of the debugging and unit testing.
Kongens Lyngby, January 2025
William Karlshøj Lange
Mathiassen
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
A B S T R A C T
Modern Virtual Power Plants require secure communication channels
to handle diverse assets while maintaining low latency. Traditional
Virtual Private Network (VPN) solutions often introduce significant
overhead and complexity, making them unsuitable for an environment
where performance, scalability and reliability are crucial. This thesis
presents a novel integration of the WireGuard protocol within the
Gridweave ecosystem, achieving low latency and seamless scalability
while maintaining security and automation. The implementation pre-
sented demonstrates superior performance in real-world deployments,
handling many diverse client connections with minimal overhead com-
pared to traditional solutions. The Gridweave project is open-source
and can be found on Github[42].
R E S U M É
Moderne virtuelle kraftværker kræver sikre kommunikationskanaler,
der kan håndtere forskellige aktiver og samtidig opretholde en lav
latenstid. Traditionelle VPN-løsninger introducerer ofte betydeligt over-
head og kompleksitet, hvilket gør dem uegnede til et miljø, hvor
ydeevne, skalerbarhed og pålidelighed er afgørende. Denne afhandling
præsenterer en integration af WireGuard-protokollen i Gridweave-
økosystemet, der opnår lav latenstid og skalerbarhed, samtidig med
at sikkerhed og automatisering opretholdes. Den præsenterede imple-
mentering viser overlegen ydeevne i den virkelige verden og evenen til
at håndterer mange forskellige klientforbindelser med minimalt over-
head sammenlignet med traditionelle løsninger. Gridweave projektet
er open-source og kan findes på Github[42].
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
R E L AT E D W O R K
This section examines existing Virtual Private Network (VPN) solutions
and their relevance to distributed networks for controlling energy
assets, particularly in the context of frequency regulation operations.
Although these solutions are not specifically designed for energy
systems, their architecture and capabilities offer valuable insights.
openvpn
As one of the most established VPN solutions, Open Virtual Private
Network (OpenVPN) is an example of handling complex networking
scenarios while maintaining backwards compatibility. Its extensive
history offers insights into long-term maintenance and reliability. The
protocol’s flexible configuration options and comprehensive security
features result in a customisable and secure VPN.
However, OpenVPN’s architecture, designed before widespread mesh
networking, shows limitations in terms of latency and scaling. This is
Mesh networking is
a network topology,
where nodes connect
directly and
dynamically to each
other and as many
nodes as possible.
[63]
mainly due to its extensive security features, which significantly hinder
its connection establishment procedures, and encryption overhead,
which makes it less suitable for operations that require real-time
communication.
wireguard
WireGuard represents a modern approach to VPNs, introducing signif-
icant performance and simplicity improvements compared to tradi-
tional solutions. Its kernel-level implementation allows for its market-
leading performance, and its cryptographic foundations make it secure.
Specifically, WireGuard is very relevant to the work presented in this
thesis, as the work presented uses the open-source WireGuard compo-
nents as the foundation. The protocol’s emphasis on minimal latency
overhead - achieved through efficient cryptographic functions and a
lean codebase aligns with this thesis’s goals.
However, WireGuard is designed for point-to-point connections,
which increases the complexity when managing more extensive Peer
to Peer (P2P) mesh networks, making it less suitable as a complete
solution for distributed energy assets.
tailscale
Tailscale builds upon WireGuard’s foundation by adding crucial co-
ordination layers that address many of WireGuard’s limitations in
vii
==PAGE:8==
P2P mesh networking. Its approach to network coordination using a
control plane for peer discovery and connection management is the
main inspiration for the work presented in this thesis. The system’s
ability to handle Network Address Translation (NAT) traversal and es-
tablish peer-to-peer connections is particularly relevant for managing
distributed energy assets.
The coordination system employed by Tailscale is an excellent
demonstration of maintaining a scalable overlay network while min-
A overlay network is
a virtual network on
top of a physical one.
[32] In this case, the
Tailscale
coordination layer
acts as an overlay on
the WireGuard P2P
connections.
imizing central dependencies. However, its design priorities focus
on general-purpose networking rather than the specific requirements
defined and required by the energy industry.
netbird
Like Tailscale, NetBird is a more recent P2P mesh networking solution
that builds upon WireGuard’s foundation and emphasises simplified
deployment and management. Its approach to automating peer discov-
ery and connection management provides good examples for handling
large-scale dynamic networks. NetBird focuses heavily on zero-trust
networking principles, which can align well with the security require-
Zero-trust
networking is a
security model that
assumes no user
should automatically
be trusted.[7] It
operates on the
principle "never
trust, always
verify".[39]
ments in a critical sector such as the energy industry.
Like Tailscale, NetBird offers impressive performance and scalability,
but its general-purpose nature means it lacks efficient automation for
rapid deployment. The architecture uses Single Sign-On (SSO) keys that
require manual assigning when launching NetBird; while increasing
security, it makes automated large-scale deployment difficult.
zerotier
Unlike NetBird and Tailscale, ZeroTier does not use the WireGuard
protocol and instead implements its own communication protocol.
Its peer-to-peer architecture with centralised coordination shows that
while it differs from the other two, it still has a similar approach to
the overall architecture.
The systems approach to deterministic addressing and network
virtualization highlights its usefulness for managing many assets.
However, because the protocol does not use WireGuard, the latency
introduced is higher than that of the WireGuard-based offerings.
summary
While these existing solutions provide valuable insights into building
distributed networks, none fully address the specific requirements for
energy assets participating in frequency regulation operations. The
following are some of the key limitations:
viii
==PAGE:9==
• Non-WireGuard-based offerings have no guarantees for consis-
tent low-latency communication.
• Lack of specific optimisations for automated deployment to
rapidly scale.
• Mature solutions are not open-source.
The work presented in this thesis builds upon the strengths of
these existing solutions — particularly their approaches to peer coor-
dination and security — while addressing the specific requirements
defined by energy assets performing frequency regulation operations.
This thesis focuses on achieving the low latency, high scalability and
automation necessary for any actor with an extensive portfolio of
distributed energy assets seeking to coordinate and participate in
frequency regulation markets.
[1]
Donenfeld, Jason A. WireGuard: fast, modern, secure VPN tunnel.
en-US. 2024. url: https://www.wireguard.com/ (visited on
10/12/2024).
[2]
NetBird. NetBird - Connect and Secure Your IT Infrastructure in
Minutes. en-US. 2024. url: https://netbird.io/ (visited on
10/12/2024).
[3]
OpenVPN. OPENVPN Business VPN For Secure Networking. en-
US. 2024. url: https://openvpn.net/ (visited on 10/12/2024).
[4]
Tailscale. Tailscale Best VPN Service for Secure Networks. en-US.
2024. url: https://tailscale.com/ (visited on 10/12/2024).
[5]
Tailscale. Tailscale Understanding Mesh VPNs. en-US. 2024. url:
https : / / tailscale . com / learn / understanding - mesh - vpns
(visited on 10/12/2024).
[6]
ZeroTier. ZeroTier Global Networking Solution for IoT, SD-WAN,
and VPN. en-US. 2024. url: https://www.zerotier.com/ (vis-
ited on 10/12/2024).
ix
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
This transition towards full integration of DER through the
commercial and technical VPP activities will cause an
increase in system management complexity. In future,
system management will rely on support from a signifi-
cantly larger pool of resources across wider network
areas.
— Pudjianto et al. [49]
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
I want to give a special thanks to my daily supervisor, Vignesh Krish-
namoorthy, at Hybrid Greentech, for his guidance, encouragement,
help, and consistent availability throughout the preparation of this
thesis. I also thank Rasmus Rode Mosbæk and Simon Foss Børresen,
Hybrid Greentech, for their constant encouragement throughout this
period and for allowing me to use the resources that made this work
possible.
I want to thank Razgar Ebrahimy and Mohsen Banaei from DTU Dy-
namical Systems for their interest in my thesis and for being excellent
supervisors.
xi
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
C O N T E N T S
i
Introduction
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Background
3
1.2
Communication Protocol and Tools
5
1.2.1
WireGuard versus other protocols
5
1.2.2
Why WireGuard
6
1.2.3
Kernel-based approach versus userspace
6
1.3
Summary
9
ii
Design and Results
2
Design Targets
13
2.1
How to Measure and Validate
13
2.2
Summary
14
3
Technical Design
17
3.1
System Overview
17
3.2
Technology Stack
18
3.3
Component Interactions
19
3.4
Gridweave Client Application
20
3.4.1
Architecture
20
3.4.2
WireGuard Integration
23
3.4.3
Automated configuration management
23
3.4.4
Userspace WireGuard
23
3.4.5
NAT Traversal
24
3.4.6
Device Network Configuration
30
3.4.7
Cross-Platform Considerations
31
3.4.8
Contribution to the Targets
31
3.5
Gridweave Central Coordination Point
33
3.5.1
Architecture
33
3.5.2
gRPC API Interface
35
3.5.3
API Key Generation & Security
36
3.5.4
Gridweave Clusters
39
3.5.5
Database Integration
39
3.5.6
Future Improvements
40
3.5.7
Contribution to the Targets
41
3.6
Gridweave Control Center
42
3.6.1
Architecture
42
3.6.2
Relationship with Gridweave API
43
3.6.3
Future Improvements
44
3.6.4
Contribution to the Targets
44
3.7
Summary
45
4
Testing and Simulation
47
xiii
==PAGE:14==
xiv
contents
4.1
Test and Simulation Setup
47
4.2
Throughput and Latency Real World Testing
48
4.3
Scalability Simulation Test
57
4.4
Summary
58
5
Use Case
61
5.1
Setup
61
5.2
FCR-D Prequalification
61
5.3
FFR Prequalification
64
5.4
Summary
65
iii Discussions and Conclusions
6
Discussion and Conclusion
69
6.1
Discussions
69
6.1.1
Userspace WireGuard integration enables high-
performance client-to-client communications
69
6.1.2
Gridweave ecosystem demonstrates scalability
in distributed deployments
69
6.1.3
The Gridweave Client Application achieves low-
latency requirements in real-world conditions
70
6.1.4
Latency test does not represent real-world pro-
tocol communication
70
6.1.5
Below average networking conditions were not
covered
70
6.1.6
Prequalification use cases validate system relia-
bility and performance
71
6.1.7
Security and its importance in a critical infras-
tructure field such as the energy sector
71
6.2
Conclusion and Future Directions
72
6.2.1
Future Directions
72
iv Appendix
a
IPerf3 Test Results
77
a.1
T2.Micro
77
a.1.1
Short Duration Test
77
a.1.2
Long Duration Test
79
a.2
T3a.Small
81
a.3
T3.Small
84
a.4
M5n.xlarge
87
a.4.1
Short Duration Test
87
a.4.2
Long Duration Test
89
a.5
M5n.large
91
a.6
MacBook to RUTX09
93
b
Throughput and Latency Test Script
97
c
Front-page Image
99
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:15==
L I S T O F F I G U R E S
Figure 1.1
Energy Production in Denmark [20]. Legend
translated in order: Wind, Solar, Decentralised
Power Plants, Centralised Power Plants and
Power usage (incl. net loss).
3
Figure 1.2
Overview highlighting the difference between
WireGuard in userspace and kernel. The kernel
has direct access to hardware resources, while
userspace has to request them through the OS.
Dashed boxes represent potentially running ap-
plications.
7
Figure 1.3
Figure based on data provided by Tailscale [60].
Compares the improvements they have done to
WireGuard-Go with kernel WireGuard.
8
Figure 3.1
High-level Gridweave system overview.
17
Figure 3.2
Sequence diagram showing how the different
Gridweave components interact when a new
client tries to join the Gridweave network.
20
Figure 3.3
Architecture Diagram for the Gridweave Client
Application.
21
Figure 3.4
The OSI model is a conceptual framework to
describe the functionality of a networking sys-
tem. Highlighted in blue is the Network layer,
which is responsible for routing packets to their
correct places. [23].
22
Figure 3.5
Ideal communication between two clients with
static public IPs. Clients are trying to commu-
nicate with each other.
25
Figure 3.6
Example of stateful firewall.
26
Figure 3.7
How does a client behind a router with NAT
establish communication with another client
behind the same configuration?
27
Figure 3.8
Steps 1-3 of Gridweave Clients handling the
easy NAT problem.
28
Figure 3.9
Steps 4-6 of Gridweave Clients handling the
easy NAT problem.
29
Figure 3.10
Clients have exchanged public IPs through the
central coordination point and can now com-
municate. Only Client 2’s side is shown for
brevity.
30
Figure 3.11
Device network configuration, to allow for writ-
ing/reading of IP packets.
31
xv
==PAGE:16==
xvi
list of figures
Figure 3.12
Architecture Diagram for the Gridweave Cen-
tral Coordination Point. For brevity, not all
database tables are shown in the figure.
33
Figure 3.13
How the server handles HTTPS communication
with a reverse proxy.
34
Figure 3.14
Sequence diagram showing Register/Check-in
logic to generate an API key. Automatic pro-
cess used by clients to access the Gridweave
network.
38
Figure 3.15
Example of the default Gridweave cluster con-
figuration. VPP can communicate with each
cluster, but clients inside a cluster are isolated.
39
Figure 3.16
Architecture diagram of the Gridweave Control
Center consists of a frontend, backend and a
connection to the same database as the Grid-
weave Central Coordination Point.
42
Figure 3.17
Snapshot of the Gridweave Control Center home-
page.
43
Figure 3.18
Snapshot of the connected Gridweave clients
shown in the Gridweave Control Center.
44
Figure 4.1
T2.micro throughput and latency test. The total
test duration is 2 minutes and 10 seconds.
49
Figure 4.2
T2.micro throughput and latency test. The total
test duration is 20 minutes. Increased test du-
ration should show approximately the same as
the shorter test.
50
Figure 4.3
T3a.small throughput and latency test. The total
test duration is 2 minutes and 10 seconds. CPU
used is an AMD EPYC.
51
Figure 4.4
T3.small throughput and latency test. The total
test duration is 2 minutes and 10 seconds. CPU
used an Intel Skylake.
52
Figure 4.5
M5n.xlarge throughput and latency test. These
instances are made for high-throughput net-
working environments. The total test duration
is 2 minutes and 10 seconds.
53
Figure 4.6
M5n.xlarge throughput and latency test. These
instances are made for high-throughput net-
working environments. The total test duration
is 20 minutes.
54
Figure 4.7
M5n.large throughput and latency test. This in-
stance is weaker than m5n.xlarge in hardware.
The total test duration is 20 minutes.
55
==PAGE:17==
Figure 4.8
Throughput and latency test between a Mac-
Book Pro M2 Pro and a Teltonika RUTX09
router. MacBook is in a home network in Kon-
gens Lyngby, and the Teltonika router is on-site
and connected via Ethernet cable to a fibre in-
ternet connection. The total test duration is 2
minutes and 10 seconds.
56
Figure 4.9
Latency test while running 50 clients locally,
then scaling up to 70 clients afterwards. The
system is stable with 50 clients running locally,
but issues begin to occur when going above
50.
59
Figure 4.10
Scalability test with 30 unique clients running
on AWS EC2 instances. The test methodology
is the same as seen in Figure 4.9, but rather
than use Docker, it now uses unique devices.
Total clients is 29 because one of them is used
for pinging.
60
Figure 5.1
FCR-D Up prequalification as required by En-
erginet. Includes the test for FCR-N, which is the
25% power activation.
62
Figure 5.2
Zoomed in version of the first full activation
observed in Figure 5.1.
63
Figure 5.3
FCR-D Down prequalification as required by
Energinet. Includes the test for FCR-N.
63
Figure 5.4
FCR-D Sine response test, as defined by En-
erginet.
63
Figure 5.5
Zoomed in version of the first period observed
in Figure 5.4.
63
Figure 5.6
Zoomed in version of one of the later periods
observed in Figure 5.4.
63
Figure 5.7
FFR prequalification as required by Energinet.
Measurement interval is 10Hz.
64
Figure 5.8
Zoomed in version of the full power activa-
tion going from 50.0 to 49.5Hz observed in Fig-
ure 5.7.
64
Figure 5.9
Zoomed in version of the full power deacti-
vation going from 49.5 to 50.0Hz observed in
Figure 5.7.
64
L I S T O F TA B L E S
xvii
==PAGE:18==
Table 3.1
Table highlighting each component and its func-
tionality. The Gridweave client application can
be described as a VPN. Next.JS uses Typescript,
while Django is Python-based.
18
Table 3.2
gRPC API interface description. The first three
entries require a valid API key.
35
Table 4.1
EC2 Instances used for throughput and latency
testing. Instance data is retrieved from Amazon
[2].
48
Table 5.1
Prequalification test requirements for FCR-D and
FFR given by Energinet 2024 [19]. The market
region is DK2.
62
L I S T I N G S
3.1
Example of a generated production API key. . . . . . .
37
3.2
Example of a generated staging API key.
. . . . . . . .
37
A.1 IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running WireGuard
. . . .
77
A.2 IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running Gridweave
. . . .
77
A.3 IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running Tailscale . . . . . .
78
A.4 IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running WireGuard
. . . .
79
A.5 IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running Gridweave
. . . .
80
A.6 IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running Tailscale . . . . . .
80
A.7 IPerf3 Results for T3a.Small running WireGuard . . . .
81
A.8 IPerf3 Results for T3a.Small running Gridweave . . . .
82
A.9 IPerf3 Results for T3a.Small running Tailscale
. . . . .
83
A.10 IPerf3 Results for T3.Small running WireGuard
. . . .
84
A.11 IPerf3 Results for T3.Small running Gridweave . . . . .
84
A.12 IPerf3 Results for T3.Small running Tailscale . . . . . .
85
A.13 IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running WireGuard . . .
87
A.14 IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running Gridweave . . .
87
A.15 IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running Tailscale . . . . .
88
A.16 IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running WireGuard . . .
89
A.17 IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running Gridweave . . .
90
A.18 IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running Tailscale . . . . .
90
A.19 IPerf3 Results for M5n.large running WireGuard . . . .
91
A.20 IPerf3 Results for M5n.large running Gridweave . . . .
92
A.21 IPerf3 Results for M5n.large running Tailscale . . . . .
93
A.22 IPerf3 Results for communication between a MacBook
and a RUTX09 router on-site running Gridweave
. . .
93
A.23 IPerf3 Results for communication between a MacBook
and a RUTX09 router on-site running Tailscale . . . . .
94
B.1
Test script for testing throughput and latency.
. . . . .
97
xviii
==PAGE:19==
acronyms
xix
C.1
Prompt for generating front page image . . . . . . . . .
99
A C R O N Y M S
BESS
Battery Energy Storage System
DER
Distributed Energy Resource
FCR
Frequency Containment Reserve
FCR-D Frequency Containment Reserve for Disturbance
FCR-N Frequency Containment Reserve for Normal Operation
FFR
Fast Frequency Regulation
GCA
Gridweave Client Application
GCC
Gridweave Control Center
gRPC
Remote Procedure Calls
HMI
Human Machine Interface
HMAC Hash-based Message Authentication Code
HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTPS Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
ICMP
Internet Control Message Protocol
IEC104 IEC 60870 Part 5
IFconfig Inteface Configuration
IKEv2/IPSec Internet Key Exchange v2 / Internet Protocol Security
IPv6
Internet Protocol Version 6
JWT
JSON Web Token
MAC
Medium Access Control Address
Modbus TCP/IP Modbus over Ethernet
NAT
Network Address Translation
NIS2
Network and Information Security Directive 2
OpenVPN Open Virtual Private Network
OS
Operating System
P2P
Peer to Peer
SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SSO
Single Sign-On
STUN Simple Traversal of User Datagram Protocol
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
==PAGE:20==
xx
acronyms
TLS
Transport Layer Security
TUN
Network Tunnel
UDP
User Datagram Protocol
UpNp Universal Plug and Play
UI
User Interface
VPN
Virtual Private Network
VPP
Virtual Power Plant
==PAGE:21==
Part I
I N T R O D U C T I O N
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
1
I N T R O D U C T I O N
In an era of climate change and uncertainty regarding energy supply,
the world stands at a crossroads. The transition to using renewable
energy sources is no longer a choice but a necessity. This shift brings
many challenges, including effectively managing and integrating a
vast fleet of diverse and distributed energy assets into existing power
grids. The key to unlocking this potential lies in the energy assets and
the intelligent systems that control them. As we race against time to
create a sustainable energy future, the need for scalable, automated
solutions to correctly harness these resources has never been more
critical.
1.1
background
As we transition more of our coal power plants to green energy sources,
such as wind and solar, we lose the controllable production these old
plants give. Figure 1.1 highlights this rapid change to these intermittent
energy production assets. Wind and solar energy production fluctuates
Figure 1.1: Energy Production in Denmark [20]. Legend translated in order:
Wind, Solar, Decentralised Power Plants, Centralised Power Plants
and Power usage (incl. net loss).
due to the influence of weather conditions, time of day, and other
factors, unlike the consistent output of a coal plant. This results in
energy production that can be difficult to forecast and thus requires a
solution to account for this intermittent production, specifically when
the amount of energy produced by these sources is ever increasing
[20].
The most significant issue introduced by this intermittent produc-
tion problem is that it becomes difficult to stabilise the power grid’s
frequency, which is extremely important for anything plugged into the
3
==PAGE:24==
4
introduction
grid, whether house appliances or large factories. [46] For Denmark,
this frequency is around 50Hz. If the frequency increases or drops too
much, it increases the risk of blackouts and equipment damage.
Currently, Denmark has a very low grid downtime with a total
of around 20 minutes per year [22], but the challenges of achieving
this low downtime become more and more difficult as we rely more
and more on intermittent production sources. Not all countries in the
world are so lucky to achieve such a low grid downtime; take, for
example, the 2021 Texas Power crisis, which left millions of homes
without power, water and heat [61].
One of the solutions to this intermittent production problem is in-
troducing stable consumption and production systems. Specifically,
these are Battery Energy Storage System (BESS), which can provide
this flexibility by storing excess production during times of high wind
or sunny days and discharge when production is low [1]. Because
frequency deviation results from the power imbalance between pro-
duction and consumption in the grid, BESS are uniquely suited to solve
this problem, as they provide both.
Systems like BESS are essential for future grid stabilisation and
offer a promising solution; however, operating and managing these
systems on a larger scale provides its challenges. As the number
of Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) increases, the complexity of
DER is a term that
covers the different
types of energy
assets, such as heat
pumps, BESS, electric
vehicles and others.
coordinating these assets increases. This is where the concept of Virtual
Power Plants (VPPs) becomes crucial, as they are a vital component in
managing DERs.
VPPs are aggregated DERs that can be managed as a single entity,
allowing them to replicate the services provided by traditional power
plants [28, 43]. So by using a VPP, controlling multiple BESSs and
DERs becomes one of the leading ways to solve the intermittency is-
sues of renewable energy sources like solar and wind. A VPP allows
the aggregated portfolio to participate in the frequency regulation
markets such as Fast Frequency Regulation (FFR), Frequency Con-
tainment Reserve (FCR) and Frequency Containment Reserve for Dis-
turbance (FCR-D). Participation in these markets helps stabilise the
grid frequency at 50Hz while giving the trading party a monetary
reward [18]. However, despite their potential, VPPs face significant
scalability, observability and asset connectivity automation challenges.
As the number of assets grows, managing them becomes increasingly
complex, as different DERs have unique characteristics and control
requirements. Overall, this makes the seamless integration of new
assets difficult. Real-time coordination is another challenge that can
become difficult when assets are scattered all over Europe, with vary-
ing internet speeds and setups. It is vital that all assets can react fast
enough when frequency changes are registered, as every millisecond
counts. [21] All these challenges makes adding new assets to a VPP
time-conusming and labor-intensive, hindering rapid portfolio expan-
==PAGE:25==
1.2 communication protocol and tools
5
sion. Furthermore, handling the vast amount of data generated by the
numerous assets presents privacy and technical challenges.
this thesis
aims to address these critical issues by proposing a
distributed network architecture for controlling energy assets within
a VPP framework. Our approach focuses on improving automation,
observability and scalability while ensuring low latency, enhancing
the overall efficiency and effectiveness of VPPs in grid stabilisation and
frequency regulation.
By developing a more flexible and robust network for aggregating
assets in a VPP system, we become more prepared to harness the
potential of renewable energy sources while maintaining grid stability.
This research contributes to the ongoing efforts to create a more
sustainable and efficient energy infrastructure capable of meeting the
challenges of tomorrow’s power landscape.
1.2
communication protocol and tools
WireGuard is a modern Virtual Private Network (VPN) communi-
cation protocol released in 2015 [27]. Its main principle is to serve
as a lightweight, highly performant, and secure solution for virtual
networking. This section explores WireGuard’s advantages over tradi-
tional VPN protocols, such as Open Virtual Private Network (OpenVPN)
or Internet Key Exchange v2 / Internet Protocol Security (IKEv2/IPSec),
and examines the benefits of running it on a kernel level versus
userspace.
1.2.1
WireGuard versus other protocols
WireGuard is a relatively new protocol compared to long-standing
options like OpenVPN and IKEv2/IPSec, which have existed for over
20 years. However, WireGuard addresses numerous shortcomings
inherent in their older designs, both in terms of performance and
security and offers a sleeker approach to design that achieves a more
lightweight protocol.
Comparing WireGuard to OpenVPN in raw throughput, marginal
improvements are already observed, where WireGuard is approxi-
mately 3.2 times better with the possibility of 10Gbps throughput.
[41, 60] The speedup is possible due to the cryptographic functions
used in conjunction with the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) network
communication protocol, unlike IKEv2/IPSec and OpenVPN, which use
the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) protocol.[41] UDP has less
overhead because it does not guarantee the receipt of uncorrupted
communication, unlike TCP. This, in turn, means that it is possible
for the loss of communication when sending packets over a Wire-
Guard tunnel connection. [24] Specifically for frequency regulation,
==PAGE:26==
6
introduction
this tradeoff is acceptable as most VPP’s measure frequency at 10Hz,
reducing the effect of lost packets due to the number of updates per
second. OpenVPN now supports UDP and can achieve speeds close to
WireGuard. However, OpenVPN is packed with unnecessary features
compared to WireGuard; most features provide no benefit for the type
of assets used to participate in frequency regulation. Thus, the tradeoff
from these features makes it not worth using for a DER participating
in frequency regulation.
The main issue with IKEv2/IPSec is that it relies on static public IPs,
which can be a costly and challenging requirement for distributed
systems, especially those using 4/5G SIM cards for internet connec-
tivity. Since these systems inherently lack a static public IP, meeting
this requirement can quickly become expensive as the portfolio’s num-
ber of DERs grows. Both OpenVPN and WireGuard do not share this
requirement, which makes them more appropriate for distributed
systems.
1.2.2
Why WireGuard
The preceding subsection demonstrated several compelling advan-
tages of WireGuard while acknowledging its potential limitations.
The most significant benefit of WireGuard is its multiple implemen-
tation approach: a kernel-based solution and a Go-based userspace
implementation, both available as open-source. This allows for high
The kernel is the part
of the Operating
System (OS) that
serves as the
interface between the
computer’s physical
hardware and the
processes running on
the computer.[33]
flexibility in the implementation stage, as running it in userspace
provides inherent cross-platform support, increasing compatibility for
different setups.
WireGuard was chosen as the solution’s underlying VPN protocol for
these benefits. Most modern VPNs for private usage have also swapped
to WireGuard because of these benefits, such as NordVPN and Proton
VPN, to mention a few.
1.2.3
Kernel-based approach versus userspace
The implementation of WireGuard can broadly be categorised into
two approaches: the kernel-based module and the userspace applica-
tion. Each approach has distinct advantages and trade-offs in perfor-
mance, resource utilisation and compatibility. Observe Figure 1.2 for
an overview of the difference between the two layers.
The kernel-based approach can provide high performance because
it has direct access to the OS network stack through its kernel access.
It offers low latency and potentially higher throughput in ideal con-
ditions, characteristics generally desirable in network applications.
However, this approach presents significant limitations because many
routers and embedded systems connected to energy assets run on spe-
==PAGE:27==
1.2 communication protocol and tools
7
Figure 1.2: Overview highlighting the difference between WireGuard in
userspace and kernel. The kernel has direct access to hardware
resources, while userspace has to request them through the OS.
Dashed boxes represent potentially running applications.
cialised or lightweight OSs. Due to vendor-defined limitations, kernel
modifications can be challenging, restricted or even impossible.
In contrast, a userspace implementation offers significant advan-
tages directly for this purpose. Primarily, it provides more extensive
compatibility due to not relying directly on the OS running underneath,
allowing easier integration with different routers and embedded sys-
tems. Running a VPN in userspace allows for implementation without
having direct kernel-level access or the ability to do kernel modifica-
tions. This flexibility is crucial, as the project should not be limited
in scalability by factors such as these. Furthermore, the userspace
approach facilitates more accessible updates, maintenance, and fea-
ture rollouts, which is particularly important since most energy assets
require long-term stability and support. A key benefit of the userspace
implementation is that it allows for a more automatic operations
approach with minimal user intervention, unlike the kernel-based
approach, which typically requires explicit user confirmation. Fur-
thermore, this architecture enables seamless deployment of security
patches and feature updates with minimal interference in operation.
This kind of implementation requires no system reboots and does not
risk potential instability in the core OS. The latter has previously been
==PAGE:28==
8
introduction
observed in the Crowdstrike incident, which ultimately put all devices
running their cyber security kernel-access application on Windows 10
into a blue-screen of death loop [54]. This outage happened because a
bug was introduced into their application Falcon, which was running
at the kernel level, where the only correct response to a bug is to shut
down the computer to prevent potential damage. However, because
the devices running with this update were now stuck in an endless
loop, rolling back this update would present significant difficulties
that would not have been present had the application been running in
userspace.
While performance is the core identity of this project, recent optimi-
sations in the userspace implementation WireGuard-Go have narrowed
the gap and, in some instances, even outperformed kernel WireGuard.
Observe Figure 1.3, which shows data from tests by Tailscale [60],
where they compare kernel WireGuard with the newest version of
WireGuard-Go in terms of possible throughput from an AWS instance
to another AWS instance.
Figure 1.3: Figure based on data provided by Tailscale [60]. Compares the
improvements they have done to WireGuard-Go with kernel Wire-
Guard.
The amount of throughput needed for communication between a
VPP and a DER is not that large, and thus, even if the gap between
WireGuard and WireGuard-Go increases, this will not be the limit-
ing factor for this use case. Hence, having an optimised userspace
implementation will generally be sufficient.
In conclusion, while the kernel-based approach should deliver cer-
tain performance advantages in general networking scenarios, the
userspace implementation of WireGuard aligns more with the goals
of this thesis. This choice enables a more versatile, scalable, and main-
tainable solution better suited to energy assets infrastructure’s diverse
and constrained environment.
==PAGE:29==
1.3 summary
9
1.3
summary
This chapter presents the foundational framework for developing a
distributed network system to control energy assets and why it is
necessary. It further establishes the required knowledge to under-
stand why WireGuard was chosen as the underlying communication
protocol.
The background examination demonstrates why distributed net-
works are crucial in modern energy systems, particularly for coor-
dinating multiple DER using a VPP in real-time frequency regulation.
Building on this context, the chapter analyses various communication
protocols and tools, comparing their capabilities to meet the perfor-
mance demand of real-time frequency regulation. The evaluation of
kernel-based versus userspace implementation justifies the selected
design approach.
The technical foundations established in this chapter inform the
architectural decisions detailed in subsequent chapters, where Wire-
Guard serves as the cornerstone protocol of the whole system design.
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
Part II
D E S I G N A N D R E S U LT S
This part delves into realising the Distributed Network
for Controlling Energy Assets. It outlines the key targets
and the design decisions taken, architectural components
used and implementation that form the foundation for the
userspace WireGuard-based system. The following sections
will thus present an extensive overview of the theoretical
components and project requirements translated into a
functional and efficient design. This design will then be
validated against simulation tests and real-world prequali-
fication of energy assets.
==PAGE:32==
==PAGE:33==
2
D E S I G N TA R G E T S
The design of Gridweave is driven by the requirement of creating a
scalable, secure, and low-latency communication infrastructure for
VPP systems managing DERs. The targets of the implementation are as
follows:
I Ensure growth from tens to thousands of connected energy
assets while maintaining performance.
II Establish secure communication between energy assets, VPP and
other devices connected to the Gridweave network.
III Ensure low-latency communication between clients of the Grid-
weave network; only limited by their internet connection speed.
IV Provide secure control access and authentication of clients re-
questing access to the network.
Latency is defined as
the time it takes for
data to go from one
point to another. [9]
These goals, particularly horizontal scalability and low-latency com-
munication, are the primary targets for a communication application
designed for DERs participating in frequency regulation.
2.1
how to measure and validate
The following validation methodology for each design target ensures
that the final design meets all the specified requirements.
Target I
For Target I, validation will be conducted in a simulation environment
where multiple clients are systematically onboarded to the system.
The simulation will measure system stability and client communica-
tion performance metrics as the network grows. The simulation will
observe and quantify the system’s behaviour under varying loads by
incrementally increasing the number of connected clients.
Target II
The security requirement Target II is validated by implementing Wire-
Guard as the communication protocol between devices. WireGuard
has undergone a formal verification and security assessment [15].
While this verification does not constitute a comprehensive security
audit of WireGuard, its underlying cryptographic foundation has been
13
==PAGE:34==
14
design targets
thoroughly audited [36, 40], providing a secure foundation for the
Gridwave network.
Target III
To validate the low-latency requirement Target III, measurements will
be conducted using real-world devices to assess both throughput
and latency between clients. To provide comparative benchmarks, the
performance will be evaluated against existing solutions, including
kernel WireGuard and Tailscale. This comparison will help identify
potential areas for optimisation and validate the system’s ability to
satisfy the target. IKEv2/IPSec was not included in the comparison due
to the implementation challenges in the AWS environment. Specif-
ically, IKEv2/IPSec requires a static IP address, which conflicts with
how AWS dynamically reassigns public IP addresses when instance
types are modified. This limitation, combined with the complexity
of configuring IKEv2/IPSec through Terraform in AWS, made it too
cumbersome to include.
Target IV
The following testing procedure will validate the access control re-
quirement Target IV. First, verify the client onboarding process and
systematically ensure that only clients with permission can be on-
boarded. The validation will confirm that access controls are ade-
quately enforced and that only authenticated client communication is
established within the network.
These validation methods ensure that Gridweave meets its core
design targets while providing quantifiable performance and security
characteristics metrics.
2.2
summary
This chapter has covered the main design targets and detailed how to
measure the final design against these.
• Target I focuses on evaluating the scalability part of the design.
• Target II is covered by the WireGuard protocol and primarily
covers secure client communication.
• Target III is about ensuring that communication latency between
clients/VPP is as low as possible.
• Target IV ensures that unauthenticated devices and actors cannot
access the Gridweave network without explicit approval from a
trusted source.
==PAGE:35==
2.2 summary
15
These targets outline the foundation for the design approach taken
in the subsequent chapters. Furthermore, they are the primary means
of validating the final design, ensuring it achieves its intended pur-
pose.
The next chapter will highlight which targets they affect for each
component.
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
3
T E C H N I C A L D E S I G N
Having established the overall targets listed in Chapter 2 and the
methodology for validation, this chapter delves into the specific im-
plementation details of each component and how they contribute to
reaching the targets
3.1
system overview
The Gridweave ecosystem comprises three interconnected components,
The Gridweave
project can be found
on
github.com/s194050/gridweave
one of which implements a WireGuard-based VPN solution. This com-
ponent enables secure client-to-client communication for DERs in the
energy sector while maintaining scalability, security, and low latency.
Figure 3.1: High-level Gridweave system overview.
The system architecture consists of three main components:
• Gridweave Client Application: The core VPN application built
using the Go programming language. It handles secure connec-
tion to any device connected to the Gridweave network.
• Gridweave API: A Remote Procedure Calls (gRPC) API service
built using Rust that manages:
– Client authentication and authorisation.
– Client configuration sharing.
17
==PAGE:38==
18
technical design
– Cluster-based configuration control logic.
• Gridweave Control Center: A web-based interface built using
Next.JS and Django that provides:
– Real-time network visibility of clients.
– Client authentication and overview of authenticated clients.
– Cluster management and configuration.
– Control of clients’ access to the Gridweave network.
These components communicate through a strongly typed interface
gRPC, with the API as the central coordination point. Each element in
this architecture is loosely coupled, allowing individual maintenance
while ensuring system cohesion. This design introduces an architec-
tural compromise: while the centralised API enables fast and efficient
coordination, it represents a potential constraint in the system’s scala-
bility. A disruption in the central coordination point would specifically
impact onboarding new clients, which appears to conflict with dis-
tributed systems’ fundamental principle of resilience to individual
component failures [58]. However, the architecture mitigates this limi-
tation through its distributed client-to-client communication model.
When the central coordination point experiences downtime, existing
clients maintain their operational capabilities, and their communica-
tion remains unaffected, preserving the system’s core functionality
during partial failures.
3.2
technology stack
The software stack for Gridweave relies on a selected suite of program-
ming languages and packages, each chosen to support the project’s
goals. An overview of each component and its functions are observed
in Table 3.1.
Component
Language
Function
Gridweave Client VPN
Go
Network
Gridweave API
Rust
Coordination
Gridweave Control Center
Next.JS + Django
Human Interface
Table 3.1: Table highlighting each component and its functionality. The Grid-
weave client application can be described as a VPN. Next.JS uses
Typescript, while Django is Python-based.
At the system’s core, Go is the primary implementation language
for the Gridweave client application component. Part of this decision
is based on the choice made in Section 1.2, as Go is currently the
only language supporting userspace WireGuard. Another benefit of
There is interest in a
Rust version [14]
from the creator of
WireGuard.
Cloudflare has a
Rust userspace
implementation, but
it is currently stale.
[10]
Go is its strong concurrency model, simple cross-platform support
==PAGE:39==
3.3 component interactions
19
and efficient resource handling, making it ideal as a foundation for a
network service. Furthermore, it has robust libraries for implementing
cryptographic functions, low-level system configurations and gRPC.
The Gridweave API service is implemented in Rust, bringing systems-
level performance alongside memory safety guarantees — crucial for
scalable, secure and reliable network services. As previously men-
tioned, the service utilizes gRPC for client-server communication, pro-
viding an interface that is strongly typed and efficient compared to
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) based APIs [16, 35]. The com-
bination of Rust and gRPC creates the foundation for handling high-
throughput API requests while maintaining strict safety and reliability.
The Control Center follows a modern web architecture split into
a frontend and backend service. The frontend is built with Next.JS
[59], leveraging its built-in routing system and server-side rendering
capabilities to create a performant User Interface (UI). The backend
uses Django [13] as a proof-of-concept to prototype and validate core
functionalities rapidly. Django’s long history and widespread adop-
tion in enterprise environments, exemplified by its use as Instagram’s
backend [11], demonstrates its reliability at scale. While Django’s
Python-based architecture may not offer optimal performance on
resource-constrained servers compared to other backends, this limita-
tion is not significant for the current scope.
During development and prototyping, data persistence is covered
by SQLite [51], which serves as the database solution, chosen for its
simplicity, zero-configuration and file-based storage, which works
well with a development workflow. SQLite enables rapid iteration
and testing of database schemas and queries without the overhead of
managing a database server.
The system can use any database supported by the languages in a
production environment. Currently, SQLite is the database used, but it
could easily be substituted with a different database like PostgreSQL
[29].
This database approach allows for rapid development while allow-
ing the flexibility of changing it later. This is the intent behind using
SQLite, as PostgreSQL will allow for a more flexible database in a
production environment.
3.3
component interactions
Observe Figure 3.2, which outlines how each component interacts.
When Gridweave is initially run, these components work together in a
coordinated sequence. First, the client registers with the Gridweave
Central Coordination Point and awaits authentication. Once clients are
authenticated, they can access the Gridweave coordination-specific API
functions. These are used to create Gridweave peer configuration, the
core data object for establishing communication with other Gridweave
==PAGE:40==
20
technical design
Figure 3.2: Sequence diagram showing how the different Gridweave com-
ponents interact when a new client tries to join the Gridweave
network.
clients. Clients will regularly check in with the API to receive new
peer configurations.
Gridweave API stores all received information in the Gridweave
database, the interface between the API and Control Center.
3.4
gridweave client application
This section will review the most critical design and architectural
choices for the Gridweave VPN client application. These choices directly
correlated with Target I, Target II and Target III.
3.4.1
Architecture
The figure observed in Figure 3.3 defines the different components
of the Gridweave Client Application (GCA) and in what layer they
operate.
This subsection details how these building blocks interact to estab-
lish the foundation of a low-latency network connection. GCA employs
a three-layer architecture, each with a distinct function.
The data layer exists primarily to store two types of information:
configuration data, which stores each of the known Gridweave config-
==PAGE:41==
3.4 gridweave client application
21
Figure 3.3: Architecture Diagram for the Gridweave Client Application.
urations that it has received from the Gridweave API, and application
data. This storage layer maintains runtime information about this
client and its API key. This ensures that the application can recover
from unexpected crashes or other failures and does not cause informa-
tion loss.
The application layer houses the core networking and communication
components, enabling the VPN’s functionality. WireGuard is the com-
munication protocol used, as covered in section Section 1.2. WireGuard
establishes encrypted tunnels between network endpoints, ensuring
all traffic passing through these remains secure and private.
1. Working alongside WireGuard, the Simple Traversal of User Data-
gram Protocol (STUN) protocol is responsible for public network
address discovery. This protocol allows for discovering public
IP addresses assigned to clients behind routers using Network
Address Translation (NAT) [25]. Without this component, every
client would have to use static IP addresses.
==PAGE:42==
22
technical design
2. The gRPC component is the communication module between the
client application and the central coordination point. This coor-
dination is necessary for exchanging Griweave configurations
between the different clients. gRPC was selected because of its
efficient protocol and robust typing system, making it ideal for
machine-to-machine communication.
(1) will be covered in-depth in Section 3.4.5, as the STUN protocol is
integral in solving the NAT traversal problem.
The different interface components of (2) will be covered in Sec-
tion 3.5.2.
The kernel layer interfaces directly with the OS to configure network
settings. The Universal Plug and Play (UpNp) block is currently not
used but can be used in specific NAT setups.
The network interface block configures the Network Tunnel (TUN)
device, a virtual network interface that operates at the network layer
in the OSI model highlighted on Figure 3.4. This TUN device captures
and injects network packets, allowing the VPN to integrate with the
OS’s networking stack. In other words, this ensures that incoming and
outgoing data packets from the userspace client are received/sent
[37]. Further configuration of IP tables and routing is set up using this
custom TUN device.
Figure 3.4: The OSI model is a conceptual framework to describe the function-
ality of a networking system. Highlighted in blue is the Network
layer, which is responsible for routing packets to their correct
places. [23].
==PAGE:43==
3.4 gridweave client application
23
3.4.2
WireGuard Integration
While WireGuard provides efficient and secure communication, de-
ploying it at scale presents several operational challenges that must be
addressed:
1. Manual configuration overhead.
• Keypair generation.
• Creation and management of configurations.
• Complex setup procedures that are not user-friendly
2. Technical implementation challenges.
• Creating a userspace implementation.
• Configuring and linking local and virtual interfaces.
• Determining correct public IP addresses in varying network
environments.
3. NAT traversal considerations.
• Address different network configurations prevalent at DER
sites.
• Address NAT traversal to determine a correct public IP
address.
3.4.3
Automated configuration management
The problematic part of WireGuard is configuring the system and han-
dling it on a large scale. The challenge in configuration comes from the
requirement to write configuration files and generate unique keypairs.
However, the biggest issue with WireGuard is how cumbersome and
user-unfriendly it is. It isn’t easy to understand how to configure it,
and it is challenging to do at a larger scale due to manually having to
generate keypairs and write config files for each client.
Gridweave solves this issue by automating the keypair and config
generation. This allows for large-scale deployment of WireGuard,
requiring no manual input. The official WireGuard Go library [66]
provides the necessary functions and features to create an application
that can automatically create and configure WireGuard tunnels.
3.4.4
Userspace WireGuard
Implementing WireGuard in userspace effectively requires various
components from the library to establish a functional configuration.
This involves configuring and linking the local interface of the OS with
a virtual interface - due to the lack of direct kernel access. A critical re-
quirement is obtaining the device’s public IP address, as clients might
==PAGE:44==
24
technical design
operate across diverse network environments such as offices or homes.
Without this information, WireGuard cannot establish connections
to other clients. While these scenarios may represent edge cases, the
design must handle such network configurations to ensure scaleable
operation.
Most network environments can be narrowed down to three main
categories: the home network, small business network and medium
to large enterprise with managed networks. Most DER sites can be
considered home networks, as this is usually the default configuration
on most routers. However, a significant issue with these configurations
is that internal IPs on assets within that network are not the same as
the externally available IPs. This is because most home routers use NAT
to solve the issue of insufficient IP addresses in the IPv4 space in the
world to cover every device [31]. As such, every router has a single IP,
also known as a public IP, and then it internally translates the public
IP and port to an internal address. Finding this public IP address and
port that links to the correct internal device is a common problem
within networks with NAT, and it’s one of the main challenges to solve
when designing a scalable communication application.
3.4.5
NAT Traversal
NAT traversal is a complex subject and will not be fully covered in this
subsection. However, this subsection will describe what NAT is, how it
affects Target I, and how it is solved.
What is NAT?
WireGuard uses a client’s public IP address to determine where to send
packets. Without this knowledge, the protocol would have no idea
where to send packets. WireGuard’s design allows for establishing
asymmetric connections, where only one client needs to know the
other’s public IP address. This can be particularly advantageous if
one client has a static IP address; however, adding this requirement
can quickly become expensive if each client needs a static IP. The
other solution is to have a centralised server that routes the network
to each client, which increases latency. Neither are attractive solutions;
thus, the understanding of NAT traversal becomes essential. The ideal
example of NAT traversal - two clients with static public IPs observed
in Figure 3.5. In this configuration, both clients have static public IP
addresses, and they each know the IP address of the other. The clients
start by initiating a handshake; once successful, both clients can begin
communicating. Client 1 sends a packet to Client 2; it is received, and
Client 2 sends a response back. This is the ideal setup as there is no
NAT traversal since both clients have static public IPs; there is also the
assumption that each firewall is configured to accept communication
from the other client.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 gridweave client application
25
Figure 3.5: Ideal communication between two clients with static public IPs.
Clients are trying to communicate with each other.
In the real world, this ideal case rarely happens in terms of NAT
traversal and firewall configuration. Because it requires a static public
IP address on both devices, with preconfigured firewalls to allow
access. Luckily, the most common firewall configuration is stateful,
which means that if a client sends an outgoing packet to a specific
IP address, that IP address is remembered as trustworthy. This pro-
cess is observed in Figure 3.6, which shows two clients trying to
communicate.
Why is it an issue?
Observe Figure 3.7, which shows two clients in networks using NAT.
Both clients know each other’s local IP addresses, but that will not
allow them to establish communication. These IPs are as their name
describes them local, meaning if they try to communicate with these
addresses, they will not be the clients they expect to communicate with.
This is where NAT becomes important as all network configurations
with NAT will associate the local devices with a public IP address
that binds it to the local IP, much like the static public IP address
discussed. These IP addresses are, however, not static, and their device
association behaviour depends on NAT configuration.
While Figure 3.5 assumed ideal NAT conditions (there were no NAT),
which is a rare occurrence; the most common is the full cone NAT
(Endpoint-Independent NAT Mapping), or as Tailscale has named it
Easy NAT [3]. They call this the easy NAT because unlike the hard NAT,
it only allocates an IP plus port to an active, outgoing connection once,
whereas the hard NAT always allocates a new IP and port to every
==PAGE:46==
26
technical design
(a) Client 1 tries to transmit to Client 2.
(b) Client 2 transmits to Client 1. The packet is accepted
because of the stateful firewall.
(c) Client 1 now retransmits to Client 2. The packet is accepted
because of the stateful firewall.
Figure 3.6: Example of stateful firewall.
==PAGE:47==
3.4 gridweave client application
27
Figure 3.7: How does a client behind a router with NAT establish communi-
cation with another client behind the same configuration?
outgoing packet. Making the latter a much more difficult one to solve,
and it is one Gridweave does not solve and cannot handle. The hard
NAT is also known as a Symmetric NAT (Endpoint-Dependent NAT
mapping) [3].
How does this relate to Figure 3.7? Both easy and hard NAT are
possible configurations for that figure. Easy NAT would have a public
IP address and a port assigned to the initiator client, while hard NAT
would have a new public IP address and port for every outgoing
request.
How is it solved?
As shown in Figures 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10, Gridwave handles the easy
NAT case as follows. Gridweave clients establish connections to each
other by leveraging the behaviour of stateful firewalls (Observed in
Figure 3.6) and utilizing the STUN protocol for public endpoint discov-
The STUN protocol is
used to resolve the
public IP address of
a device running
behind a router with
NAT [25]. A STUN
server receives client
requests and returns
the public IP address
associated with this
request.
ery. In any NAT configuration, the system will attempt to coordinate
through the central coordination point. This process involves using
the STUN protocol to determine its allocated public IP address and
port from the outgoing STUN request. Keeping that port alive allows
Gridweave to relay the exact IP address and port for WireGuard com-
munication to the coordination point. This is directly associated with
Target I as the system’s deployment scale would be severely limited
without the easy NAT support.
As mentioned, because a hard NAT assigns a new public IP and
port to each outgoing request, the STUN protocol and the example
shown in Figure 3.8 and Figure 3.9 would not work. The only real
solution for this problem is to use relay servers that act as centralised
connection points; Tailscale has implemented this under the name
DERP [3]. Solving the hard NAT problem is outside this thesis’s scope.
==PAGE:48==
28
technical design
(a) Step 1. How does Client 1 figure out the public IP of Client 2?
(b) Step 2. Client 2 & 1 retrieves their public IP using STUN. Only Client 2
doing this process is shown for brevity.
(c) Step 3. The STUN server responds with the IP and port assigned to the
previous STUN request.
Figure 3.8: Steps 1-3 of Gridweave Clients handling the easy NAT problem.
==PAGE:49==
3.4 gridweave client application
29
(a) Step 4. Clients forward their assigned public IP to the coordination point.
(b) Step 5. Each client retrieves the other client’s IP by requesting the coordina-
tion point.
(c) Step 6. The coordination point responds with the public IP and port as-
signed to the other client’s WireGuard interface.
Figure 3.9: Steps 4-6 of Gridweave Clients handling the easy NAT problem.
==PAGE:50==
30
technical design
Figure 3.10: Clients have exchanged public IPs through the central coordi-
nation point and can now communicate. Only Client 2’s side is
shown for brevity.
3.4.6
Device Network Configuration
WireGuard is used to create tunnels for connecting to other clients;
the STUN protocol retrieves the public IP of any client behind a NAT;
the final part is how to route a client’s packets through the WireGuard
tunnel.
This is achieved by creating a TUN device, which links the OS’s net-
work stack and the Gridweave client application running in userspace.
This process consists of two steps; these can be observed in Figure 3.11.
• Step 1 is creating and configuring the TUN device and associating
an IP address to this virtual interface. This is done on Linux and
Unix-based OSs using the Inteface Configuration (IFconfig) com-
mand, allowing configuration and creation of network interfaces.
When the interface has been configured appropriately, the OS
needs to know which interface to route the packets to.
• Step 2 sets up the routes to the interface connected to the TUN
device. Specifically for Gridweave, any packet with destination
10.0.0.0/24 should be routed to the Gridweave interface. These
A subnet such as
10.0.0.0/24
describes a network
within a network [9].
This notation
represents addresses
in the range
10.0.0.0 through
10.0.0.255,
allowing for 256
unique clients in this
subnet.
steps require kernel access, as they are requesting the OS system
to change kernel services.
Once configured, the OS will correctly route to and from the Grid-
weave interface. This userspace implementation balances competing
targets: while it introduces additional latency compared to full kernel-
level implementations (Target III), it provides better scalability and
deployment flexibility (Target I).
==PAGE:51==
3.4 gridweave client application
31
Figure 3.11: Device network configuration, to allow for writing/reading of
IP packets.
3.4.7
Cross-Platform Considerations
Due to the inherent dynamic nature of DER setups, Gridweave should
be able to support different OS’ and platforms. The primary considera-
tions are UNIX-based systems, such as Linux, because routers with
direct connection to a DER are the preferred setup to achieve the low-
est latency. However, Windows is very commonly used on Human
Machine Interfaces (HMIs), but these setups do not usually have direct
connections to DERs.
Using Go as the programming language allows cross-platform sup-
port as binaries can be compiled for any OS and platform. This is
enforced by Gridweave only using native Go packages, even when
some C-based packages result in slightly better performance [65]. Us-
ing C-based libraries introduces complications in the cross-compilation
process and is thus avoided.
The main difference between OS’ is how each configures the net-
working devices and IP routing tables. Currently, Gridweave handles
most, if not all, Linux-based operating systems. Go-based binaries
provide information about what OS the application is running on,
thereby allowing the design to swap between the different configura-
tion methods.
3.4.8
Contribution to the Targets
The main targets addressed in the Gridweave client application design
have been Target I, Target II and Target III.
As mentioned in Chapter 2, Target II is inherently ensured by using
the WireGuard protocol. All client-to-client communication is done
through WireGuard, which is encrypted and secure. Furthermore,
using WireGuard also directly relates to Target III.
The architectural choice of having the application run in userspace
rather than at the kernel level comes with a tradeoff in latency, but
it gains ease of scalability. There will be an observable difference in
latency as kernel-level operation means directly interfacing with the
==PAGE:52==
32
technical design
hardware resources rather than requesting resources through the OS
interface between userspace and kernel level. However, running the
application in userspace allows for more extensive compatibility with
different devices and OS’.
Having a solution for the easy NAT case influences Target I, as it
allows for more extensive real-world compatibility. By handling the
most common NAT configuration, the Gridweave client application
can be deployed in almost every case where a DER could participate
in frequency regulation markets.
==PAGE:53==
3.5 gridweave central coordination point
33
3.5
gridweave central coordination point
This section will review and describe the design decisions made when
creating the Central Coordination Point containing the Gridweave
API application. These choices directly correlated with Target I and
Target IV.
3.5.1
Architecture
Figure 3.12: Architecture Diagram for the Gridweave Central Coordination
Point. For brevity, not all database tables are shown in the figure.
The Gridweave central coordination point consists of three main
elements: the reverse proxy, the API application and the database
containing all the relevant Gridweave client data.
The reverse proxy ensures that all incoming traffic is encrypted us-
ing the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol. The service used to
accomplish this is Caddy [55]. Observe Figure 3.13, which shows how
API requests/responses are routed in the central coordination point.
Gridweave API handles every Gridweave client registering, checking
in and receiving peer information. This is accomplished by a gRPC API
interface, as defined in Table 3.2.
Every peer in the Gridweave network uses the API multiple times
when registering and checking for new peers assigned to their cluster.
When a new Gridweave client joins the network, it creates a unique
identifier by hashing its Medium Access Control Address (MAC), de-
==PAGE:54==
34
technical design
Figure 3.13: How the server handles HTTPS communication with a reverse
proxy.
vice name and local IP address. This hashed data is then sent to the
API during the registration process. The main benefits of this hash-
based approach are (a) that it allows the API to match clients using
the hash value quickly and (b) the API to verify that the data it re-
ceived has not been altered. Combining Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Secure (HTTPS), hash verification, and encrypted information data
helps combat man-in-the-middle- and replay attacks. [12, 53]
After registration, clients enter a state pending manual authenti-
cation. This security measure prevents unauthenticated clients from
joining the Gridweave network without explicit approval. While this
process introduces delays in client onboarding, the tradeoff in security
aligns with the requirements for DERs’ participating in frequency reg-
ulation markets, where prequalification is mandatory. Therefore, the
additional time introduced in onboarding has minimal impact on the
overall deployment timeline.
When clients are authenticated and check in, they will be assigned
an API key to join the Gridweave network. Every new Grideweave
client will always start by requesting CreatePeer, which will assign
them a Gridweave IP address and default them to the Default clus-
ter. A successful request will return the assigned Gridweave IP. At
this point in the process, the client/peer is created in the Gridweave
In Gridweave, a
client and a peer
denote the same
thing. Clients
become peers when
registered; hence,
Gridweave can be
defined as a Peer to
Peer (P2P) mesh
network.
network and can communicate with peers using the Gridweave client
application.
The database tables contain all the information regarding the Grid-
weave clients, cluster configurations, and API keys. The separation
between tables is based on two principles: the first is to follow sound
database principles to ensure horizontal and vertical scaling. Second,
minimise the amount of information leakage possible; for example,
retrieving API keys when querying for cluster information should not
be possible etc.
==PAGE:55==
3.5 gridweave central coordination point
35
3.5.2
gRPC API Interface
This subsection will outline why the API interface has been designed
as observed in Table 3.2.
gRPC Proto Name
Function
CreatePeer
Save requesting peer information and as-
sign IP.
UpdatePeerEndpoint
Update internally saved the public IP of
the requesting peer.
CheckForNewPeers
For each peer, track and return new and
deleted entries since their last check-in.
Register
Save client information and add it as await-
ing authentication.
CheckIn
If the client is authenticated, generate an
API key and return it encrypted.
Table 3.2: gRPC API interface description. The first three entries require a
valid API key.
CreatePeer is the initial endpoint that newly registered and authenti-
cated clients will execute. Specifically, this endpoint creates a configu-
ration entry in the API database and assigns an unused Gridweave
IP to the requesting client. The request includes the client WireGuard
public key, public IP, and port designated as a Gridweave configu-
ration. The API returns the assigned Gridweave IP address for this
configuration.
UpdatePeerEndpoint is only used whenever a client detects a change
in the public IP and port discovered using the STUN protocol. Each
client can check in at two unique cases; the first is when the Gridweave
application is started, which will check whether or not the public
IP and port have changed since the application was running last.
The second is when CheckForNewPeers returns new configurations,
requiring a WireGuard tunnel restart, which is just enough time to do
an endpoint check without adding a marginal delay. Each execution of
this endpoint only updates the values stored for the requesting client
and returns nothing. This checking interval is acceptable because, in
most cases, once active, the public IP and port won’t change without
the connection being brought down.
CheckForNewPeers is the primary endpoint in the API and the one
executed the most. Every client will regularly call this endpoint at
1-minute intervals to check whether new peers have joined or left
their cluster or if public IPs have changed. Clients check in rather
than having the API call each client with peer updates. This choice
is again afforded by the slower onboarding speed that the frequency
regulation market allows, as new clients will likely always have to
==PAGE:56==
36
technical design
be prequalified. Thus, 1-5 minutes in onboarding is negligible in a
broader operational context. This design yields another advantage: the
API service can operate outside the Gridweave network, providing de-
ployment and system architecture flexibility. If there are new/changed
peer configurations, the response will be NEW_OR_UPDATED_PEERS and
the new/changed peer configurations will be a part of the response.
If NO_CHANGE, the response is only the status message and no config-
urations. When detecting a change in the client’s cluster since the
last check-in (CLUSTER_CHANGED), the client will discard its currently
known peers and save the ones returned with the request instead.
Register and CheckIn the main functionality of these endpoints have
been covered in Section 3.5.1. The internal workings of the cryptog-
raphy used will be described in the subsequent subsection. These
endpoints have been designed mainly to increase the security of the
Gridweave ecosystem, which is why onboarding new clients requires
human approval, as it reduces the likelihood of unauthorised access
with a trade-off in speed and automation.
gRPC directly aids in increasing scalability for Target I as it is made
to handle multiple incoming requests while maintaining high perfor-
mance. [64]. Furthermore, the API interface design should further aid
in accomplishing this target.
3.5.3
API Key Generation & Security
Observe Figure 3.14, which shows the registering flow between a client
and the Gridweave API. The API and the clients are shipped with pre-
shared secrets for encryption and hashing. The client is the initialiser
of the registering process, and it does this after first generating a
private/public keypair using Curve25519 [5], where it uses the private
key and the encryption secret to derive a unique secret. This secret
is then used to encrypt the locally gathered data about the device
the client is running on. This data is collected to generate a unique
Hash-based Message Authentication Code (HMAC) signature of the
device that should be nigh impossible to compute without this specific
configuration [30]. This will act as a unique identifier for the client and
allow the API to verify that the received data has not been tampered
with. The client data is encrypted using ChaCha20-Poly1305 [45], the
ChaCha20-Poly1305
is also used by
WireGuard for data
encryption through
its tunnels.
industry standard for data encryption.
Registering
Upon receiving a Register request from a client, the API first decrypts
the data included with the request using a derived encryption secret,
which is computed from the pre-shared encryption secret and the
client’s public key included in this request. Once decrypted, the API
will verify the contents by hashing the data received using the pre-
shared hashing secret and check with the received HMAC signature; if
==PAGE:57==
3.5 gridweave central coordination point
37
they are a match, the client will be added to the database as awaiting
authentication by a human.
After registering, clients will check in exponentially to a maximum
interval of 1 minute. This is done to reduce the requirement on stronger
server hardware [44], as the amount of requests gRPC can handle
depends on the hardware available.
Checking in
If a client checks in and is not authenticated, the API will immediately
reject it, which will continue until it is authenticated. When a client is
authenticated, the API will generate its API key, which will be used
to access Gridweave peer coordination functionality. The API key is
derived from the client’s device information shared during registration.
All API keys are 32 characters and have two possible prefixes: prod
and stag. The prefix is not included in the API key length. Examples
are observed in listings 3.1 and 3.2.
Listing 3.1: Example of a generated production API key.
prod_csfxPleI5lWcSi8z9kuRrvYBoVMbKB2f
Listing 3.2: Example of a generated staging API key.
stag_eMNt48qVrjiXlfx7v979WUdstdXYfdDM
API key exchange is done using the Diffie-Hellman protocol [38],
one of the most common ways to exchange encrypted data and decrypt
it without pre-sharing secrets. The following describes how it was
implemented for the Gridweave API:
Before returning the generated API key, the API generates an
ephemeral keypair (one-time use keypair) and derives a shared secret
based on the ephemeral private key and the client’s public key. The
API will then encrypt the API key using ChaCha20-Poly1305, and this
secret will only be derivable by the client, who generated the public
key in the initial keypair.
After decrypting its API key, the client gains access to the Gridweave
peer coordination API endpoints protected by API key authentication.
This security implementation directly addresses Target IV, ensuring
that only authorised clients can access the Gridweave network. The
requirement for human approval adds a manual verification layer to
the automated onboarding process.
==PAGE:58==
38
technical design
Figure 3.14: Sequence diagram showing Register/Check-in logic to generate
an API key. Automatic process used by clients to access the
Gridweave network.
==PAGE:59==
3.5 gridweave central coordination point
39
3.5.4
Gridweave Clusters
Clusters are the primary way to apply access control logic. Clients
within clusters are only allowed to fetch other clients’ Gridweave
configurations.
Clusters provide the following:
• Limit the security breach caused by a client becoming compro-
mised where rather than compromising the whole network, only
the cluster will be compromised.
• Reduce the amount of unnecessary traffic between clients.
• Create better observability of communication links.
A cluster is modelled as a site of clients where they can communicate
with the VPP and each other. This is observed in Figure 3.15, which
shows a VPP communicating with multiple clusters.
Figure 3.15: Example of the default Gridweave cluster configuration. VPP can
communicate with each cluster, but clients inside a cluster are
isolated.
The default configuration of Gridweave implements an asymmetric
access model: all clients can communicate with the VPP cluster while
remaining isolated within their respective clusters. The VPP cluster
will have access to all clients, including those located in the default
cluster. This communication structure can be customised through the
Gridweave Control Center, which offers complete flexibility in defining
cluster-to-cluster access permissions.
3.5.5
Database Integration
As described in Section 3.2, the primary database configuration used
is SQLite, as it stores databases locally, allowing easy schema iteration
without having to do database migrations. However, the system is
==PAGE:60==
40
technical design
designed so that swapping out SQLite with another database like
PostgreSQL only requires minor SQL query changes.
As observed in Figure 3.12, the information stored in the database
is separated into multiple tables. This is done to adhere to the nor-
malization process because it enhances data integrity by reducing
redundancy and ensuring that each piece of information is stored in
only one place. This minimises the risk of data inconsistencies and
makes it easier to maintain the whole database. [26] Furthermore, this
approach should increase the database’s scalability and adaptability
while allowing for more granular access control.
Currently, there is only a single database between the API and the
control center; this is not ideal, as if it fails, both services will stall and
cease functioning. This is a problem when an outage of the Gridweave
Coordination Point means no more onboarding of new Gridweave
clients. If implemented, the individual tables allow for separation into
different databases and redundancy through replication. Currently,
this is not within scope, but it should be implemented to create a
robust production environment.
3.5.6
Future Improvements
API keys are generated once and do not require refreshing after a
specific time. This is not ideal for security, but every API key can
be manually disabled. Ideally, the system should provide a way to
refresh these API keys, as it keeps access secure while allowing for
flexibility. In the current design, if a client encounters an invalid API
key, a complete reset and re-register are initiated, re-requiring manual
authentication.
Keypair exchange on initial communication; rather than use pre-
shared secrets for encryption and hashing, a full Diffie-Hellman key
exchange could be done. This would further increase security between
clients and the API, as there is an inherent risk in using pre-shared
secrets for multiple devices. If one device is breached, the intruder
can run a copy of the initial client request. This attack entry is already
diminished by having new clients having to be confirmed by a human,
but it is not foolproof.
Exponential backoff on client check-in requests might not be necessary
and could be replaced by a constant interval. However, this would
require testing and simulation with many clients to ensure the influx
of requests does not crash the API.
Better database design, as described in the preceding subsection, the
current database design is not nearly as robust as the API itself. It
can be improved by having multiple databases and backups running
replication on the primary databases. This should ensure that if one
fails, there will always be a backup, such that the Gridweave API will
==PAGE:61==
3.5 gridweave central coordination point
41
keep accepting new clients rather than reject them until the database
is running again.
3.5.7
Contribution to the Targets
The key elements of the Gridweave Central Coordination Point design
directly contribute to Target I and Target IV. Specifically, the gRPC
interface allows for a highly scalable, high-performant and robust API.
Implementing API keys into this API interface allows for regulating
which clients are allowed access to the Gridweave network.
While the Gridweave Central Coordination Point manages client
connections and enforces access control, it operates independently of
the latency and secure client-to-client communication requirements
specified in Target II and Target III. The system’s security aspects are
implemented through encrypted communications and a reverse proxy
that requires HTTPS, safeguarding all client-server communication.
Cluster control primarily exists to create a more customizable im-
plementation and does not contribute to any design targets listed in
Chapter 2.
==PAGE:62==
42
technical design
3.6
gridweave control center
This section will review the design of the Gridweave Control Center.
This component does not contribute to any listed targets in Chapter 2
but provides a graphical interface for the manual authentication of
clients in the system and gives visibility into the Gridweave network.
3.6.1
Architecture
Figure 3.16: Architecture diagram of the Gridweave Control Center consists
of a frontend, backend and a connection to the same database as
the Gridweave Central Coordination Point.
The Gridweave Control Center (GCC) was designed with modern
web application principles in mind.
• The frontend is merely a graphical representation of the data
gathered by the backend.
• This allows for easier scaling on the backend and enables the
current Django backend to be swapped out if needed.
As mentioned in Section 3.2, the current Django backend is meant
to be a proof-of-concept. It has the necessary basic security features
but is not fully developed; thus, all possible vulnerabilities are not
==PAGE:63==
3.6 gridweave control center
43
covered. It should be developed further for a production environment
to ensure it does not pose a security risk to the rest of the Gridweave
ecosystem.
GCC has three main components: the ability to apply access con-
trol, configure clusters, and get a graphical overview of all clients
connected and which are disconnected. Figure 3.17 shows the main
page, highlighting the different features; while Figure 3.18 shows the
connection status of five Gridweave clients.
Accessing GCC’s features requires a valid login and session provided
by the default Django Authentication module. Every successful login
attempt is given a JSON Web Token (JWT) session token that expires
after a given duration and requires either a refresh or a re-login. Fur-
thermore, each API call is specifically designed to reduce information
leakage, so even if compromised, the information leaked won’t allow
the intruder to pinpoint which client the data is from directly. For
example, only a randomly generated client name and its internal IP
are relayed for the overview - even if leaking the public key does
nothing.
The public key, as its
name implies, is
designed to be
publically available;
thus, leaking it poses
no real security risk.
[8]
Figure 3.17: Snapshot of the Gridweave Control Center homepage.
3.6.2
Relationship with Gridweave API
Gridweave Control Center is designed to work directly with the
database storing information from Gridweave API. Thus, this fea-
ture would not work without the API, but this point is moot since the
idea behind this component is to give a graphically interactive inter-
face. Both to increase the possible userbase that can use the Gridweave
ecosystem and make it easier for software developers who want an
easy way to monitor a VPP with many clients.
There is no direct connection between the API and GCC, as they
strictly interface through database tables. Each table is designed with
this in mind through read/write- and access restrictions. A direct
connection between API and GCC is avoided to allow for individual
==PAGE:64==
44
technical design
Figure 3.18: Snapshot of the connected Gridweave clients shown in the Grid-
weave Control Center.
scaling of the two components, as having it the other way would
require changes and maintenance to both.
3.6.3
Future Improvements
The current version is a proof-of-concept, and designing a frontend
and backend that is publically exposed would require more research
and a more thoroughly tested design. The current version only allows
access with a valid login, but it has not been tested for vulnerabilities
that would enable this validation to be bypassed. Thus, if meant to be
used at a larger scale, the current proof-of-concept would not suffice
as it could be a security risk.
The code for the frontend component is also very rough, and there
are undoubtedly optimisations that can be made to make it faster and
more stable. However, neither are currently experienced issues.
3.6.4
Contribution to the Targets
The Gridweave Control Center does not contribute to the design targets
in Chapter 2. This is because the inclusion of the control center is meant
to increase the usability of the Gridweave ecosystem. It does this by
having an easy-to-use interface that allows for quick authentication of
clients, observability of client connectivity and cluster configuration.
Without the control center, most of these features would have had
to be executed manually using API endpoint execution. Apps such as
==PAGE:65==
3.7 summary
45
Postman [48] help streamline this process, but it is still cumbersome
compared to a UI handling visualisation and control.
3.7
summary
This chapter details the technical architecture developed for a dis-
tributed network system designed to control DERs with high scalabil-
ity and low latency requirements. The technical design encompasses
three main components: the Gridweave Client Application, the Central
Coordination Point, and the Control Center, each serving distinct roles
in an ecosystem built for communication between a VPP and DERs.
The system implements a loosely coupled architecture based on the
defined technology stack.
The Gridweave Client Application provides secure communication
through WireGuard, automated configuration management and mainly
contributes to Target I, Target II, and Target III.
The Central Coordination Point implements a gRPC API interface for
clients with security measures, a cluster-based approach to access
control and an onboarding authentication process. It is the central
element for coordinating Gridweave clients and provides clients with
the means to communicate with each other. The Central Coordination
Point mainly contributes to Target I and Target IV.
The Gridweave Control Center provides an interface to the authentica-
tion process, cluster access control, and visibility into the system. This
component does not directly contribute to any targets but serves as a
quality-of-life improvement for the ecosystem.
Each architectural decision was made to support the requirements
for coordinating DERs participating in real-time frequency regulation.
Subsequent chapters will validate this design’s effectiveness through
testing, simulation, and prequalification. These tests will evaluate
the system’s performance against the target metrics for latency and
scalability.
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
4
T E S T I N G A N D S I M U L AT I O N
This chapter delves into how well the targets outlined in Chapter 2
were achieved. This will be validated through three tests: throughput,
latency, and scalability.
4.1
test and simulation setup
It is crucial to have a very controlled environment to test throughput
and latency, as many factors can affect network communication. A few
of these are harmonic disturbance, cable length, cable integrity, and
real-world distance from client to client.
As such, there are two main ways to approach a test setup that
reduces the volatility of the test environment:
1. The first is to construct the test setup through a manually con-
structed test environment, where the same hardware is used on
both clients. However, this setup allows for minimal variance in
test hardware as it is directly associated with a monetary cost.
2. The second approach can leverage compute hosting services
such as Amazon EC2, which provide a relatively controlled test
environment with access to diverse hardware configurations at
a cost-effective price.
The main trade-off between (1) and (2) is that Amazon is not very open
about how its cloud environment is designed, which allows for unseen
networking disturbances to be introduced into the test environment.
The latter was chosen for its low monetary cost and access to a wide
variety of hardware configurations. Even considering the trade-off, the
gains of testing with more hardware configurations are worthwhile.
In Table 4.1, the EC2 instances used for the tests and their hardware
are described.
These tests should show ideal performance as they are in a con-
trolled environment, but the real-world results can differ. As such, a
follow-up real-world test was also executed, which tested the com-
munication between a MacBook Pro M2 Pro and a Teltonika RUTX09
router placed on-site with an asset simulator connected via Ether-
net. The MacBook uses a 1 Gbps WIFI connection, and the router is
connected via an Ethernet cable to a 1 Gbps fibre internet connection.
Scalability was tested using a MacBook Pro M2 Pro running between
50-100 Gridweave clients locally using Docker containers; this script
can be found on Github [42]. The main shortcomings of this approach
47
==PAGE:68==
48
testing and simulation
are (1) that the device’s hardware will likely be the limit before Grid-
weave itself fails and (2) docker networking issues that can be difficult
to track.
Instance
vCPUs
Memory [GB]
Bandwidth [Gbps]
Architecture
t2.micro
1
1
Low
i386
t3.small
2
2
Up to 5
x86_64
t3a.small
2
2
Up to 5
AMD x86_64
m5n.large
2
8
Up to 25
x86_64
m5n.xlarge
4
16
Up to 25
x86_64
Table 4.1: EC2 Instances used for throughput and latency testing. Instance
data is retrieved from Amazon [2].
4.2
throughput and latency real world testing
The tests shown in Figure 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7 validate
the low-latency requirement specified in Target III. Additionally, exe-
cuting the tests across diverse hardware configurations addresses the
scalability requirement outlined in Target I. This hardware diversity
is especially relevant for DER deployments, where sites often contain
equipment of varying age and strength.
Throughput is tested using IPerf3, a tool designed to test the max-
Throughput is
defined as the rate of
message delivery
through a
communication
channel.[62]
imum available bandwidth [34]. It reports back bandwidth, loss,
throughput, and other parameters. The result of each IPerf3 test can
be found in Appendix A.
Latency is tested using the inbuilt OS program Ping, which measures
the time it takes for a packet to arrive and return. This will be the total
latency between the two devices pinging. However, it should be noted
that Ping uses a different protocol compared to standard DER com-
munication protocols, such as Modbus over Ethernet (Modbus TCP/IP)
and IEC 60870 Part 5 (IEC104), which are both TCP protocol-based. The
script used for testing can be found in Appendix B.
The same test has been run for kernel WireGuard, Tailscale, and
Gridweave for each EC2 instance. It should be noted that the long-
duration tests were not done on the same day as the short-duration
ones. This can affect latency and throughput depending on the net-
working conditions that day. In Figure 4.8, WireGuard is not present
because both devices are behind NAT networks, and kernel WireGuard
cannot handle this case, as it requires one public IP to be known and
non-changing.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 throughput and latency real world testing
49
(a) Throughput test using IPerf3 with a duration of 30 seconds. A higher number is
better.
(b) Ping latency distribution over 100 seconds. One ping per second. A lower number
is better.
Figure 4.1: T2.micro throughput and latency test. The total test duration is 2
minutes and 10 seconds.
==PAGE:70==
50
testing and simulation
(a) Throughput test using IPerf3 with a duration of 5 minutes. A higher number is
better
(b) Ping latency distribution over 15 minutes. One ping per second. A lower number is
better.
Figure 4.2: T2.micro throughput and latency test. The total test duration is
20 minutes. Increased test duration should show approximately
the same as the shorter test.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 throughput and latency real world testing
51
(a) Throughput test using IPerf3 with a duration of 30 seconds. A higher number is
better
(b) Ping latency distribution over 100 seconds. One ping per second. A lower number
is better.
Figure 4.3: T3a.small throughput and latency test. The total test duration is 2
minutes and 10 seconds. CPU used is an AMD EPYC.
==PAGE:72==
52
testing and simulation
(a) Throughput test using IPerf3 with a duration of 30 seconds. A higher number is
better
(b) Ping latency distribution over 100 seconds. One ping per second. A lower number
is better.
Figure 4.4: T3.small throughput and latency test. The total test duration is 2
minutes and 10 seconds. CPU used an Intel Skylake.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 throughput and latency real world testing
53
(a) Throughput test using IPerf3 with a duration of 30 seconds. A higher number is
better
(b) Ping latency distribution over 100 seconds. One ping per second. A lower number
is better.
Figure 4.5: M5n.xlarge throughput and latency test. These instances are made
for high-throughput networking environments. The total test
duration is 2 minutes and 10 seconds.
==PAGE:74==
54
testing and simulation
(a) Throughput test using IPerf3 with a duration of 5 minutes. A higher number is
better
(b) Ping latency distribution over 15 minutes. One ping per second. A lower number is
better.
Figure 4.6: M5n.xlarge throughput and latency test. These instances are made
for high-throughput networking environments. The total test
duration is 20 minutes.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 throughput and latency real world testing
55
(a) Throughput test using IPerf3 with a duration of 5 minutes. A higher number is
better
(b) Ping latency distribution over 15 minutes. One ping per second. A lower number is
better.
Figure 4.7: M5n.large throughput and latency test. This instance is weaker
than m5n.xlarge in hardware. The total test duration is 20 minutes.
==PAGE:76==
56
testing and simulation
(a) Throughput test using IPerf3 with a duration of 30 seconds. A higher number is
better
(b) Ping latency distribution over 100 seconds. One ping per second. A lower number
is better.
Figure 4.8: Throughput and latency test between a MacBook Pro M2 Pro and
a Teltonika RUTX09 router. MacBook is in a home network in
Kongens Lyngby, and the Teltonika router is on-site and connected
via Ethernet cable to a fibre internet connection. The total test
duration is 2 minutes and 10 seconds.
==PAGE:77==
4.3 scalability simulation test
57
4.3
scalability simulation test
The primary purpose of this test observed in Figure 4.9 is to evaluate
how well the Gridweave ecosystem scales with respect to Target I.
Specifically, this test has been designed to test how well the system
handles a scenario with many clients; by launching 50 to 100 Grid-
weave clients, the test not only evaluates how the Gridweave API
handles such an influx of requests in rapid succession. But also how
many in-going and out-going connections a single device can handle.
The virtual networking connecting each Docker container becomes
a bottleneck when clients maintain numerous connections. Testing
reveals that going beyond 5000 total ingoing and outgoing connec-
tions causes instability no matter what when using Docker. This is
demonstrated when scaling from 50 to 70 concurrent Docker client
containers, as observed in Figure 4.9b.
When the initial 50 clients are spawned, they register at the Grid-
weave API and await manual authentication. The latter uses the Grid-
weave Control Center to authenticate each client, allowing them to
begin their connection process. Afterwards, each client was allowed to
run for approximately five minutes to ensure no one lost connection.
This marks the point at which the latency test for each client was
run, and the result can be observed in Figure 4.9a. The MacBook that
performed this test was also connected to the Gridweave network, and
each client was pinged for 10 seconds. It is observed that the mean
latency is 12.16ms, which is approximately the same when the test is
only running with two clients.
Thus, most of this latency is natively introduced between the OS and
the Docker network. However, as observed in Figure 4.9b, some client
connections are lost when the number of running clients is scaled up
to 70.
Throughout the testing, the Gridweave API application running on
an EC2 instance never exceeded CPU usage above 2%, even initially
when all clients were registering.
Based on these results, the hypothesis would suggest that the system
could theoretically accommodate up to 5000 individual devices, as
opposed to the current test setup of a single device running 50 clients.
However, it should be noted that this hypothesis cannot be verified
with the present testing methodology. Moreover, this assumes a setup
where each client communicates with each other - a scenario that
differs from real-world deployments, where clusters isolate clients. In
practice, with cluster-based access logic, the theoretical client capacity
in Gridweave before hitting individual client hardware limitations
would likely exceed 5000 clients; however, this remains unverified
without a reworked test methodology.
Extended testing with this methodology has demonstrated that the
client-to-client communication failures observed in Figure 4.9b origi-
==PAGE:78==
58
testing and simulation
nate neither from Gridweave API nor the client application. Instead,
the connection loss occurs at the WireGuard tunnel level, likely due
to network congestion or Docker networking constraints caused by
the large amount of traffic due to the number of clients. These find-
ings support the preceding hypothesis and highlight the limitations
of the current testing methodology for effectively stress-testing the
Gridweave ecosystem.
To address these limitations, subsequent tests have replaced the
Docker containers with unique AWS EC2 instances, resulting in more
stable scalability testing as observed in Figure 4.10. Repeated tests
using AWS EC2 instances have demonstrated consistent results with
minimal variance, contrasting the high variability observed in the
same tests using Docker containers. While the Docker-based tests
experienced client connection losses at random points ranging from 10
to 70 clients, the AWS EC2-based methodology maintained stable client
connections throughout all tests, with no connection loss between
clients.
4.4
summary
This chapter presents the methodology and system performance evalu-
ation results through simulation and real-world testing. The test setup
established controlled conditions to measure key performance metrics,
mainly focusing on throughput and latency characteristics between
clients.
Real-world testing validated the system’s performance under or-
dinary operating conditions, measuring communication latency and
reliability and comparing them against competing technologies. The
scalability simulation test evaluated the ecosystem’s capacity to main-
tain performance as the number of connected clients increases, pro-
viding quantitative data on potential system limitations.
The testing results demonstrate the system’s ability to meet perfor-
mance requirements and compete with other technologies, such as
Tailscale and kernel WireGuard. These findings provide the founda-
tion for the subsequent use-case chapter, which examines the system’s
performance in real operational settings through prequalification tests.
==PAGE:79==
4.4 summary
59
(a) Scalability test with 50 clients running in their own Docker container on a single
MacBook and connected to the internet and each other through the Docker network
interface.
(b) Continuance from Figure 4.9a but scaled up to 70 clients. 12 clients have lost
connection to the client running on the MacBook outside the Docker containers.
Figure 4.9: Latency test while running 50 clients locally, then scaling up to
70 clients afterwards. The system is stable with 50 clients running
locally, but issues begin to occur when going above 50.
==PAGE:80==
60
testing and simulation
Figure 4.10: Scalability test with 30 unique clients running on AWS EC2
instances. The test methodology is the same as seen in Figure 4.9,
but rather than use Docker, it now uses unique devices. Total
clients is 29 because one of them is used for pinging.
==PAGE:81==
5
U S E C A S E
This chapter will cover the use case for which the Gridweave ecosystem
was designed. As outlined in Chapter 1, Gridweave is intended to be
the communication layer between a VPP and DERs, such as batteries,
boilers and heat pumps. Specifically for assets seeking to participate
in frequency regulation markets, as some of the rules can become
limiting for older assets.
Increasing the reaction speed for older assets can be nearly im-
possible or expensive; this improvement can be a bad business case
in most cases. However, by reducing the amount of external latency
introduced, some assets might pass the regulatory requirements set
by Eneginet [19] and serve a second life in frequency regulation.
The two most demanding frequency regulation markets are dynamic
FCR-D and FFR. Specifically, FFR is the most challenging as it requires
full power activation within 700ms of a given setpoint, while FCR-D
requires activation within 2 seconds.
5.1
setup
For both prequalifications, the same VPP with droop-control was used.
Droop control is a
method for
controlling power
plants in response to
frequency changes in
the grid [52]. A
frequency value
results in a
computed active
power setpoint.
The dynamic FCR-D prequalification uses IEC104 as the communication
profile between the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
system and VPP. The FFR prequalification uses Modbus TCP/IP. The
latter has a static interval of 100ms for each measurement, while
IEC104 uses spontaneous transmission, meaning it transmits a value
when it changes.
The chosen communication profile does not affect the test cases, but
the reactions observed on each test are different assets, which is the
reason for a change in profile. The asset doing the FCR-D prequalifica-
tion is a battery simulator. Thus, the active power response measured
does not include the physical delay caused by inverters. For FFR, a
BESS was used for the prequalification test. Power is measured using
a power meter on the AC side between the inverters and the trans-
former. As a result, this prequalification is done by communicating
with two devices: the battery’s PLC and the external power meter.
Power measurements are done every 100ms (10Hz).
5.2
fcr-d prequalification
Dynamic FCR-D has two main requirements: observable reaction within
2 seconds and fully achieved setpoint within 20 seconds. Along with
61
==PAGE:82==
62
use case
Market
Frequency Range [Hz]
Interval [Hz]
Reaction Time [s]
FCR-D
49.0 - 51.0
1
2
FFR
49.5 - 49.9
10
0.7
Table 5.1: Prequalification test requirements for FCR-D and FFR given by En-
erginet 2024 [19]. The market region is DK2.
these requirements, assets have two main tests: a ramp test and a sine
response test. The latter test is one of the most challenging tests assets
can do, as it requires fast and precise reactions.
The FCR-D ramp test has been split into two reaction types, Up and
Down. Up is specifically for bringing the grid frequency back to 50
Hz, while down is for bringing the frequency back down to 50 Hz. In
terms of power, Up means discharge, and Down means charging.
The test for FCR-D Up is observed in Figure 5.1 and the zoomed
version on the first full-power reaction is seen in Figure 5.2. This asset
is well within the requirements for FCR-D Up, as Figure 5.2 shows full
activation in about a second. Likewise, the same is valid for FCR-D
Down, as observed in Figure 5.3. The Up and Down prequalification
tests include the part needed for Frequency Containment Reserve for
Normal Operation (FCR-N) and FCR-D codelivery.
For the sine response part, only a single direction has to be shown,
and specifically for this test, the down direction was chosen due to
the state of charge at the test start. This test is observed in Figure 5.4;
initially, the periods are small, but they increase in duration through-
out the test. The initial periods are the most difficult, requiring rapid
active power change; this is seen in Figure 5.5, which shows the initial
period of the test. Figure 5.6 shows one of the later periods where the
active power change per second is much less.
Based on the responses in the FCR-D ramp and sine tests, this asset
would be prequalified as it is well within the requirements and is as
close to ideal as possible.
Gridweave has played a part in reducing external latency and cre-
ating a connection between the physically simulated SCADA system
and the VPP. See Figure 4.8 for the latency test between the computer
running the VPP and the router connected to the asset.
Figure 5.1: FCR-D Up prequalification as required by Energinet. Includes the
test for FCR-N, which is the 25% power activation.
==PAGE:83==
5.2 fcr-d prequalification
63
Figure 5.2: Zoomed in version of the first full activation observed in Fig-
ure 5.1.
Figure 5.3: FCR-D Down prequalification as required by Energinet. Includes
the test for FCR-N.
Figure 5.4: FCR-D Sine response test, as defined by Energinet.
Figure 5.5: Zoomed in version of the first period observed in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.6: Zoomed in version of one of the later periods observed in Fig-
ure 5.4.
==PAGE:84==
64
use case
5.3
ffr prequalification
There are two main requirements with FFR: achieve full activation
within 700ms for FFR Fast, the second is to hold the setpoint for at least
30 seconds. As of the time this thesis is written, there is no monetary
difference in market participation for an asset in FFR Fast or Slow [17],
where the latter is full activation with 1.2 seconds. However, this will
likely change as the markets mature further and the participation of
conventional power plants decreases in these services.
Observe Figure 5.7, which shows the full FFR prequalification test,
which is simply idle to full activation and then back to idle. The
critical parts of this test are how fast it achieves full activation and
also how fast it goes back to idle. Observing Figure 5.8 shows that the
battery achieves full activation approximately 400ms after sending the
setpoint. Figure 5.9 shows a slightly slower reaction back to idle, but
both are well within the FFR Fast requirements.
Figure 5.7: FFR prequalification as required by Energinet. Measurement inter-
val is 10Hz.
Figure 5.8: Zoomed in version of the full power activation going from 50.0 to
49.5Hz observed in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.9: Zoomed in version of the full power deactivation going from 49.5
to 50.0Hz observed in Figure 5.7.
==PAGE:85==
5.4 summary
65
5.4
summary
This chapter evaluates the Gridweave ecosystem’s practical implemen-
tation through frequency regulation market prequalification testing
with two unique assets. The prequalifications are for the DK2 market
region and follow the requirements defined by Energinet [19].
A simulation asset replicating real-world conditions was used for
FCR-D. For FFR, due to the shorter test duration, a BESS located in Den-
mark was used. Results from these tests provide concrete validation
of the system’s performance in real-world scenarios.
The findings confirm that the distributed network architecture
achieves the necessary latency and reliability metrics for frequency
regulation operations. These tests are the most challenging conditions
for such assets. These findings inform the broader discussion and
conclusions presented in the following chapter, which examines the
system as a whole and presents further development opportunities.
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
Part III
D I S C U S S I O N S A N D C O N C L U S I O N S
This final chapter of the thesis examines the implications
and outcomes of the Gridweave communication ecosys-
tem. The discussion begins with analysing performance
results from throughput and latency testing in ideal and
real-world scenarios, complemented by insights derived
from the scalability simulation. The practical applications
are demonstrated through the FCR-D and FFR prequalifica-
tion. The thesis concludes with a comprehensive discussion
of these findings and recommendations for future enhance-
ments.
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
6
D I S C U S S I O N A N D C O N C L U S I O N
6.1
discussions
6.1.1
Userspace WireGuard integration enables high-performance client-to-
client communications
Implementing WireGuard in userspace demonstrates significant ad-
vantages for low-latency and secure client-to-client communication.
Analysis of the performance in Chapter 4 & Chapter 5 reveals con-
sistent, scalable and secure communication while maintaining au-
tomation. Figure 4.5 highlights the ability to outperform Tailscale and
kernel WireGuard on high-end hardware, while Figure 4.1 highlights
the same but for low-end hardware. Generally, the performance anal-
ysis shows excellent performance across varied network conditions
with minimal additional latency overhead from the userspace imple-
mentation. The security architecture builds upon the solid WireGuard
cryptographic foundations and maintains security while enabling high
performance as needed by some frequency regulation markets.
6.1.2
Gridweave ecosystem demonstrates scalability in distributed deploy-
ments
An analysis of Gridweave’s ecosystem reveals robust scalability char-
acteristics in a demanding scenario as discussed in Section 4.3. The
central coordination architecture successfully coordinates connection
establishment for over 50 clients concurrently joining the network, pro-
viding evidence of the design’s capability to handle medium-scale sce-
narios. The Gridweave API’s gRPC-based communication layer demon-
strates particular effectiveness in handling high-volume requests with
clients only limited by their check-in interval. The implementation
of handling NAT traversal described in Section 3.4.5 shows reliable
operation across various common network topologies, confirming the
architecture’s suitability for real-world DERs to VPP communication.
These results validate Gridweave’s fundamental design decisions in
Chapter 2 and focus on creating a low-latency, scalable ecosystem for
DER communication.
69
==PAGE:90==
70
discussion and conclusion
6.1.3
The Gridweave Client Application achieves low-latency requirements
in real-world conditions
The performance observed in Figure 4.8 validates Gridweave’s capabil-
ity to maintain low-latency communication only limited by the internet
connection. This is further observed in Chapter 5 as Gridweave is the
application used for communication between a VPP and two different
assets.
Comparing Gridweave with Tailscale shows no significant perfor-
mance increase and only minimal differences in every test except for
raw throughput, which is not the most relevant for frequency regu-
lation asset participation. Both designs are built upon WireGuard, so
this result was expected. The main difference is that Gridweave is fully
open-source and self-hostable, removing the reliance on a third party.
6.1.4
Latency test does not represent real-world protocol communication
While the Ping program and protocol are handy for determining the
total latency between two devices, they do not accurately represent the
potential latency. This is because the communication protocol used is
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), which is different compared
to TCP and UDP [4]. As outlined in Chapter 5, both of the most common
DER communication protocols are TCP based, thus a latency test using
Ping does not represent the potential latency introduced when using
Modbus TCP/IP and IEC104.
However, the overall latency determined from this test is not use-
less, as any application like Gridweave, WireGuard, or Tailscale faces
the same inconsistency. Thus, it helps to compare tools but does not
accurately represent the latency between two devices using these com-
munication protocols. Ping can, however, be used as a good enough
approximation to establish the baseline latency, as neither protocol
can go below this.
Section 4.2 uses IPerf3 to determine throughput. This test is TCP
based and saves the amount of retries due to lost packets. This test
better represents the stability of real client-to-client communication
but does not cover latency. The results from each IPerf3 test can be
found in Appendix A.
6.1.5
Below average networking conditions were not covered
For the tests seen in Section 4.2, a controlled environment was used,
with ideal networking conditions in terms of connectivity. While the
hardware was varied, the connectivity was optimal because each
device was allocated in the same AWS cloud and region. The FCR-D
test seen in Section 5.2 was done with 1Gbps internet connections to
both the VPP and the on-site device. While the FFR test from Section 5.3
==PAGE:91==
6.1 discussions
71
used a real BESS, the internet connection was supplied using 4G and
above-average connectivity due to an antenna being on-site.
Depending on location, 4G connectivity can vary a lot, generally
resulting in higher baseline latency; it could be relevant to measure
the cut-off point in internet connectivity that still allows a DER to
prequalify for FFR. However, it should be noted that any 5G internet
connection will significantly reduce the latency compared to 4G, thus
reducing the impact of below-average networking conditions [57].
6.1.6
Prequalification use cases validate system reliability and performance
The FCR-D prequalification was done with a router and an asset simula-
tor emulating the response of a battery. The results seen in Section 5.2
show an ideal response pattern based on the setpoints given to it by
the VPP. This is expected, as discussed in Section 5.1, but it reinforces
that Gridweave provides a stable, low-latency communication link.
A BESS was used in the FFR prequalification to ensure that the same
was valid for a real-world scenario. The results seen in Section 5.3
show a very realistic response when on-site hardware latency also
affects the reaction. This confirms that Gridweave can be the primary
communication link between a VPP and a DER, ensuring stable, low-
latency communication.
6.1.7
Security and its importance in a critical infrastructure field such as
the energy sector
Security considerations have influenced many design decisions, as
highlighted by Target II in Chapter 2. This decision was mainly made
because the energy sector is classified as critical infrastructure and
given the Danish government’s recent legislation requiring Network
and Information Security Directive 2 (NIS2) compliance from most
companies in the industry [47].
The WireGuard protocol, as discussed in Section 3.4.8, Chapter 3,
serves as the primary security component, ensuring encrypted data
transmission through its use. While current cryptographic functions
offer robust security, the arrival of quantum computing represents
a potential security risk [56]. For WireGuard specifically, a solution
known as Rosenpass [50] offers a promising solution for post-quantum
cryptographic security.
The API key generation methodology outlined in Section 3.4.8,
Chapter 3, though based on established cryptographic functions and
key-sharing protocols, lacks formal security auditing. Furthermore,
the implemented cryptographic functions are not quantum-resistant,
making them theoretically vulnerable to decryption by quantum com-
puters.
==PAGE:92==
72
discussion and conclusion
6.2
conclusion and future directions
This work documents the effectiveness of a distributed network ar-
chitecture for controlling energy assets participating in frequency
regulation operations, focusing on achieving low latency and scal-
ability. The integration of WireGuard in userspace has facilitated
high-performance client-to-client communications, as evidenced by
real-world testing and simulations. The Gridweave ecosystem has
shown robust performance in distributed deployments, validating the
design approach.
The system architecture, built on a peer-to-peer mesh communica-
tion model for client communication, successfully met the require-
ments for latency in real-world conditions. While the Gridweave Cen-
tral Coordination Point facilitates network entry and peer discovery,
the direct peer-to-peer connections between Gridweave clients elim-
inate centralised bottlenecks and ensure minimal latency, creating a
fully distributed network. This decentralised approach proves particu-
larly useful for frequency regulation operations, where rapid response
times are essential for grid stability. The prequalification use cases
validate the system’s reliability and performance, demonstrating that a
distributed network architecture provides the necessary performance
characteristics for frequency regulation.
Key technical choices, including the NAT traversal approach and
cross-platform compatibility, address significant practical challenges
in covering a wide range of assets with varying setups. Implementing
a gRPC API interface and robust security measures through API key
generation demonstrates that the ecosystem can maintain performance
and security at scale.
This work contributes to the broader field of energy systems by
providing a practical, scalable solution for the increasingly complex
challenge of managing DERs participating in real-time grid regula-
tion operations. The successful validation through FCR-D and FFR
prequalification highlights the ecosystem’s readiness for real-world
implementation and its potential impact on the future of distributed
energy asset management systems.
6.2.1
Future Directions
While this work has shown a working ecosystem, several improve-
ments can be made to the different components:
• Develop an alternative testing methodology to evaluate system
scalability, as the current method using a Docker-based approach
introduces networking constraints that might artificially limit
the assessment of Gridweave’s proper scalability metrics.
==PAGE:93==
6.2 conclusion and future directions
73
• Ensure quantum resistance by increasing communication secu-
rity provided by WireGuard by implementing Rosenpass[50],
making every tunnel post-quantum secure.
• Enhance API security by implementing geolocation and geofenc-
ing to restrict API key usage. Each key would be assigned a
geographical area.
• Upgrade the backend for the Gridweave Control Center from
being a proof-of-concept to production-ready.
• Increase code coverage by creating more unique test scenarios to
find probable unknown bugs.
• Solve the hard NAT problem in an efficient way that does not
limit performance between assets in a significant way.
• Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) support, which eliminates NAT
traversal problems. Requires widespread adaptation of IPv6 to
be used.
In conclusion, this work has demonstrated a distributed network
architecture and ecosystem that successfully enhances automation,
observability and scalability in Virtual Power Plant operations. The
system achieves the low-latency communication essential for grid sta-
bilisation while maintaining scalability across different deployment
conditions. By validating the ecosystem’s performance in frequency
regulation prequalifications, it is shown that decentralised architec-
tures can effectively aggregate and create communication between
distributed energy assets, contributing to a more sustainable and
efficient energy infrastructure ready to meet future power system
challenges.
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
Part IV
A P P E N D I X
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
A
I P E R F 3 T E S T R E S U LT S
a.1
t2.micro
a.1.1
Short Duration Test
Listing A.1: IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running WireGuard
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 11:27:04 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 10 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 8869
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 11:27:05 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: bx564vo2gikvdpfgdc7tx5oldahziy7gqlnv
TCP MSS: 8869 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 58662 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 10 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-10.01
sec
173 MBytes
145 Mbits/sec
47
450
KBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-10.01
sec
173 MBytes
145 Mbits/sec
47
sender
[
5]
0.00-10.01
sec
172 MBytes
144 Mbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 0.3% (0.3%u/0.0%s), remote/receiver
3.4% (1.1%u/2.3%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.2: IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running Gridweave
77
==PAGE:98==
78
iperf3 test results
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 11:35:49 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.3
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.3 -t 10 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1368
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 11:35:50 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.3, port 5201
Cookie: rc5vozowgrbhhfhf2f3mqonqh2ixtj7kdc64
TCP MSS: 1368 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.4 port 53958 connected to 10.0.0.3 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 10 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-10.00
sec
298 MBytes
250 Mbits/sec
18
593
KBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-10.00
sec
298 MBytes
250 Mbits/sec
18
sender
[
5]
0.00-10.01
sec
295 MBytes
247 Mbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 0.5% (0.5%u/0.0%s), remote/receiver
11.1% (1.7%u/9.4%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.3: IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running Tailscale
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 11:45:12 UTC 2024
Server IP: 100.81.63.112
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 100.81.63.112 -t 10 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1228
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 11:45:14 GMT
Connecting to host 100.81.63.112, port 5201
==PAGE:99==
A.1 t2.micro
79
Cookie: r6h2biv4arcyp3gfdhhhbvbiui6gz3ztrmjb
TCP MSS: 1228 (default)
[
5] local 100.111.42.18 port 44484 connected to 100.81.63.112
port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 10 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-10.00
sec
247 MBytes
207 Mbits/sec
6
681
KBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-10.00
sec
247 MBytes
207 Mbits/sec
6
sender
[
5]
0.00-10.01
sec
244 MBytes
204 Mbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 0.4% (0.0%u/0.4%s), remote/receiver
13.1% (2.6%u/10.5%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
a.1.2
Long Duration Test
Listing A.4: IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running WireGuard
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Mon Nov 18 09:16:00 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 300 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal
6.1.109-118.189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue
Sep 10 08:59:12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 8869
Time: Mon, 18 Nov 2024 09:16:01 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: pcldievjgwbe4qhc54r7vw5tkdhgkfy2nmlj
TCP MSS: 8869 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 47160 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 300 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
4.10 GBytes
117 Mbits/sec
1527
294
KBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
==PAGE:100==
80
iperf3 test results
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
4.10 GBytes
117 Mbits/sec
1527
sender
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
4.09 GBytes
117 Mbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 0.2% (0.2%u/0.0%s), remote/receiver
2.5% (0.3%u/2.2%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.5: IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running Gridweave
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Mon Nov 18 08:46:15 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 300 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1368
Time: Mon, 18 Nov 2024 08:46:16 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: 5y4khsrsqbsrq4azpce3aj7ph3z5uttw3rcu
TCP MSS: 1368 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 46622 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 300 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
15.5 GBytes
445 Mbits/sec
534
1.19
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
15.5 GBytes
445 Mbits/sec
534
sender
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
15.5 GBytes
444 Mbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 0.7% (0.1%u/0.7%s), remote/receiver
2.7% (0.6%u/2.1%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.6: IPerf3 Results for T2.Micro running Tailscale
==PAGE:101==
A.2 t3a.small
81
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Mon Nov 18 09:53:20 UTC 2024
Server IP: 100.81.63.112
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 100.81.63.112 -t 300 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1228
Time: Mon, 18 Nov 2024 09:53:21 GMT
Connecting to host 100.81.63.112, port 5201
Cookie: ntc2viukrn2p3amipmxmp675jnenwgv46hrx
TCP MSS: 1228 (default)
[
5] local 100.111.42.18 port 58930 connected to 100.81.63.112
port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 300 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
12.8 GBytes
367 Mbits/sec
531
947
KBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
12.8 GBytes
367 Mbits/sec
531
sender
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
12.8 GBytes
367 Mbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 0.6% (0.1%u/0.6%s), remote/receiver
3.9% (0.7%u/3.1%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
a.2
t3a.small
Listing A.7: IPerf3 Results for T3a.Small running WireGuard
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 13:47:58 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 30 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
==PAGE:102==
82
iperf3 test results
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 8869
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 13:47:59 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: ve6v7h3mmcdakayjnggyppfmxsouyncumc5m
TCP MSS: 8869 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 51892 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
6.51 GBytes
1.86 Gbits/sec
447
1.29
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
6.51 GBytes
1.86 Gbits/sec
447
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
6.51 GBytes
1.86 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 6.1% (0.2%u/5.9%s), remote/receiver
21.7% (0.7%u/21.0%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.8: IPerf3 Results for T3a.Small running Gridweave
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 13:53:18 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 30 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1368
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 13:53:20 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: 3ct4te2t66lf53ibld5g6ukdjzu743w6ripc
TCP MSS: 1368 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 38888 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
4.98 GBytes
1.43 Gbits/sec
1530
1.90
MBytes
==PAGE:103==
A.2 t3a.small
83
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
4.98 GBytes
1.43 Gbits/sec
1530
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
4.98 GBytes
1.42 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 4.9% (0.1%u/4.8%s), remote/receiver
20.8% (1.3%u/19.5%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.9: IPerf3 Results for T3a.Small running Tailscale
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 13:56:47 UTC 2024
Server IP: 100.81.63.112
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 100.81.63.112 -t 30 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1228
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 13:56:49 GMT
Connecting to host 100.81.63.112, port 5201
Cookie: sqex5bpapvlvbndzbd3fvo57n4wjdiss52es
TCP MSS: 1228 (default)
[
5] local 100.111.42.18 port 33966 connected to 100.81.63.112
port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
4.32 GBytes
1.24 Gbits/sec
1112
3.00
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
4.32 GBytes
1.24 Gbits/sec
1112
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
4.32 GBytes
1.23 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 4.4% (0.1%u/4.3%s), remote/receiver
20.1% (1.0%u/19.0%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
==PAGE:104==
84
iperf3 test results
a.3
t3.small
Listing A.10: IPerf3 Results for T3.Small running WireGuard
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 14:28:29 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 30 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 8869
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 14:28:30 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: dlfbdesklyqj7vogweyj6nv6ahkhvcusfg3f
TCP MSS: 8869 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 56200 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
9.40 GBytes
2.69 Gbits/sec
1653
1.03
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
9.40 GBytes
2.69 Gbits/sec
1653
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
9.40 GBytes
2.69 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 10.1% (0.3%u/9.8%s), remote/
receiver 19.1% (1.3%u/17.8%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.11: IPerf3 Results for T3.Small running Gridweave
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 14:20:28 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 30 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
==PAGE:105==
A.3 t3.small
85
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1368
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 14:20:33 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: 3ftovwu6nlawzmsq32pnlejgltslyk2wa4di
TCP MSS: 1368 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 45484 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
4.72 GBytes
1.35 Gbits/sec
1614
1.20
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
4.72 GBytes
1.35 Gbits/sec
1614
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
4.72 GBytes
1.35 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 4.8% (0.2%u/4.6%s), remote/receiver
12.9% (1.3%u/11.6%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.12: IPerf3 Results for T3.Small running Tailscale
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 14:23:40 UTC 2024
Server IP: 100.81.63.112
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 100.81.63.112 -t 30 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1228
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 14:23:42 GMT
Connecting to host 100.81.63.112, port 5201
Cookie: uisj236nfkx4xtzszswxi6mbls56xkcsybat
TCP MSS: 1228 (default)
[
5] local 100.111.42.18 port 32942 connected to 100.81.63.112
port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
==PAGE:106==
86
iperf3 test results
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
3.98 GBytes
1.14 Gbits/sec
443
1.06
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
3.98 GBytes
1.14 Gbits/sec
443
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
3.98 GBytes
1.14 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 3.9% (0.1%u/3.8%s), remote/receiver
12.2% (1.4%u/10.7%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
==PAGE:107==
A.4 m5n.xlarge
87
a.4
m5n.xlarge
a.4.1
Short Duration Test
Listing A.13: IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running WireGuard
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Mon Nov 18 13:12:37 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 300 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 8869
Time: Mon, 18 Nov 2024 13:12:37 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: yrwojyov7gtgon276blrszorpyghf4sb4xdv
TCP MSS: 8869 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 47736 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 300 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
83.2 GBytes
2.38 Gbits/sec
139973
260 KBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
83.2 GBytes
2.38 Gbits/sec
139973
sender
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
83.2 GBytes
2.38 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 5.2% (0.2%u/5.0%s), remote/receiver
24.9% (2.0%u/22.9%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.14: IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running Gridweave
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Sat Oct
5 08:18:30 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 30 -C cubic -V
==PAGE:108==
88
iperf3 test results
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1368
Time: Sat, 05 Oct 2024 08:18:30 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: wjywfwrnb62d4jqohdspzew4rhtekery2lop
TCP MSS: 1368 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 39814 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
15.9 GBytes
4.55 Gbits/sec
0
3.15
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
15.9 GBytes
4.55 Gbits/sec
0
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
15.9 GBytes
4.55 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 11.3% (0.5%u/10.8%s), remote/
receiver 27.0% (3.5%u/23.5%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.15: IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running Tailscale
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Sat Oct
5 08:21:56 UTC 2024
Server IP: 100.81.63.112
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 100.81.63.112 -t 30 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1228
Time: Sat, 05 Oct 2024 08:21:57 GMT
Connecting to host 100.81.63.112, port 5201
Cookie: hsdp6mlmoubfb37ndw6xiitswievjjgtfxvw
TCP MSS: 1228 (default)
[
5] local 100.111.42.18 port 44688 connected to 100.81.63.112
port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
==PAGE:109==
A.4 m5n.xlarge
89
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
14.2 GBytes
4.07 Gbits/sec
1253
3.00
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
14.2 GBytes
4.07 Gbits/sec
1253
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.03
sec
14.2 GBytes
4.07 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 10.4% (0.1%u/10.3%s), remote/
receiver 25.2% (3.0%u/22.1%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
a.4.2
Long Duration Test
Listing A.16: IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running WireGuard
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Sat Oct
5 08:14:25 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 30 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 8869
Time: Sat, 05 Oct 2024 08:14:26 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: ttyrotqnmy6e47327yholtgig6cmtaekbvjb
TCP MSS: 8869 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 52718 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
8.91 GBytes
2.55 Gbits/sec
12892
217 KBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
8.91 GBytes
2.55 Gbits/sec
12892
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.02
sec
8.91 GBytes
2.55 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 5.9% (0.2%u/5.8%s), remote/receiver
28.6% (2.8%u/25.7%s)
==PAGE:110==
90
iperf3 test results
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.17: IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running Gridweave
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Mon Nov 18 12:17:20 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 300 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1368
Time: Mon, 18 Nov 2024 12:17:24 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: s2txpc2tvok3wti7bylkz6vy4z7j4av3aaah
TCP MSS: 1368 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 48862 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 300 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
92.5 GBytes
2.65 Gbits/sec
0
3.15
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
92.5 GBytes
2.65 Gbits/sec
0
sender
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
92.5 GBytes
2.65 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 6.7% (0.2%u/6.4%s), remote/receiver
16.3% (2.2%u/14.1%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.18: IPerf3 Results for M5n.xlarge running Tailscale
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Mon Nov 18 14:24:14 UTC 2024
Server IP: 100.81.63.112
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 100.81.63.112 -t 300 -C cubic -V
==PAGE:111==
A.5 m5n.large
91
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1228
Time: Mon, 18 Nov 2024 14:24:15 GMT
Connecting to host 100.81.63.112, port 5201
Cookie: j2ajczp5d2xsvjwqy4dzc4u6limtpf6ksqh6
TCP MSS: 1228 (default)
[
5] local 100.111.42.18 port 45494 connected to 100.81.63.112
port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 300 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
88.5 GBytes
2.53 Gbits/sec
34
4.49
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
88.5 GBytes
2.53 Gbits/sec
34
sender
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
88.5 GBytes
2.53 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 6.2% (0.2%u/6.1%s), remote/receiver
16.9% (2.2%u/14.7%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
a.5
m5n.large
Listing A.19: IPerf3 Results for M5n.large running WireGuard
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Mon Nov 18 13:12:37 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 300 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 8869
Time: Mon, 18 Nov 2024 13:12:37 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: yrwojyov7gtgon276blrszorpyghf4sb4xdv
TCP MSS: 8869 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 47736 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
==PAGE:112==
92
iperf3 test results
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 300 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
83.2 GBytes
2.38 Gbits/sec
139973
260 KBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
83.2 GBytes
2.38 Gbits/sec
139973
sender
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
83.2 GBytes
2.38 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 5.2% (0.2%u/5.0%s), remote/receiver
24.9% (2.0%u/22.9%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.20: IPerf3 Results for M5n.large running Gridweave
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Mon Nov 18 12:17:20 UTC 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 300 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1368
Time: Mon, 18 Nov 2024 12:17:24 GMT
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: s2txpc2tvok3wti7bylkz6vy4z7j4av3aaah
TCP MSS: 1368 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 48862 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 300 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
92.5 GBytes
2.65 Gbits/sec
0
3.15
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
92.5 GBytes
2.65 Gbits/sec
0
sender
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
92.5 GBytes
2.65 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 6.7% (0.2%u/6.4%s), remote/receiver
16.3% (2.2%u/14.1%s)
==PAGE:113==
A.6 macbook to rutx09
93
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.21: IPerf3 Results for M5n.large running Tailscale
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Mon Nov 18 14:24:14 UTC 2024
Server IP: 100.81.63.112
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 100.81.63.112 -t 300 -C cubic -V
iperf 3.16
Linux ip-172-30-2-101.eu-central-1.compute.internal 6.1.109-118.
189.amzn2023.x86_64 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Tue Sep 10 08:59:
12 UTC 2024 x86_64
Control connection MSS 1228
Time: Mon, 18 Nov 2024 14:24:15 GMT
Connecting to host 100.81.63.112, port 5201
Cookie: j2ajczp5d2xsvjwqy4dzc4u6limtpf6ksqh6
TCP MSS: 1228 (default)
[
5] local 100.111.42.18 port 45494 connected to 100.81.63.112
port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 300 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
Cwnd
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
88.5 GBytes
2.53 Gbits/sec
34
4.49
MBytes
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
Retr
[
5]
0.00-300.09 sec
88.5 GBytes
2.53 Gbits/sec
34
sender
[
5]
0.00-300.10 sec
88.5 GBytes
2.53 Gbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 6.2% (0.2%u/6.1%s), remote/receiver
16.9% (2.2%u/14.7%s)
snd_tcp_congestion cubic
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
a.6
macbook to rutx09
Listing A.22: IPerf3 Results for communication between a MacBook and a
RUTX09 router on-site running Gridweave
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
==PAGE:114==
94
iperf3 test results
Date: Tue Oct
1 17:03:41 CEST 2024
Server IP: 10.0.0.2
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 10.0.0.2 -t 30 -V
iperf 3.17.1
Darwin Mac 24.0.0 Darwin Kernel Version 24.0.0: Mon Aug 12 20:52:
12 PDT 2024; root:xnu-11215.1.10~2/RELEASE_ARM64_T6020 arm64
Control connection MSS 1368
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 15:03:42 UTC
Connecting to host 10.0.0.2, port 5201
Cookie: da73dk5oyjbb3gu4l4g3ex6fqzsm3rmmai4s
TCP MSS: 1368 (default)
[
5] local 10.0.0.1 port 55774 connected to 10.0.0.2 port 5201
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
[
5]
0.00-30.00
sec
277 MBytes
77.4 Mbits/sec
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
[
5]
0.00-30.00
sec
277 MBytes
77.4 Mbits/sec
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.04
sec
277 MBytes
77.3 Mbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 1.3% (0.0%u/1.3%s), remote/receiver
25.3% (2.9%u/22.4%s)
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
Listing A.23: IPerf3 Results for communication between a MacBook and a
RUTX09 router on-site running Tailscale
VPN UDP Performance Test Results
Date: Tue Oct
1 17:07:20 CEST 2024
Server IP: 100.69.75.98
==== UDP Throughput and Jitter Test ====
Command: iperf3 -i 0 -c 100.69.75.98 -t 30 -V
iperf 3.17.1
Darwin Mac 24.0.0 Darwin Kernel Version 24.0.0: Mon Aug 12 20:52:
12 PDT 2024; root:xnu-11215.1.10~2/RELEASE_ARM64_T6020 arm64
Control connection MSS 1228
Time: Tue, 01 Oct 2024 15:07:21 UTC
Connecting to host 100.69.75.98, port 5201
Cookie: 6imnf6h5tmoxugobzkyyao3ewjan4g5nvjgv
TCP MSS: 1228 (default)
[
5] local 100.87.128.29 port 55877 connected to 100.69.75.98
port 5201
==PAGE:115==
A.6 macbook to rutx09
95
Starting Test: protocol: TCP, 1 streams, 131072 byte blocks,
omitting 0 seconds, 30 second test, tos 0
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
[
5]
0.00-30.00
sec
212 MBytes
59.3 Mbits/sec
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Test Complete. Summary Results:
[ ID] Interval
Transfer
Bitrate
[
5]
0.00-30.00
sec
212 MBytes
59.3 Mbits/sec
sender
[
5]
0.00-30.04
sec
212 MBytes
59.1 Mbits/sec
receiver
CPU Utilization: local/sender 1.3% (0.0%u/1.3%s), remote/receiver
22.4% (2.9%u/19.5%s)
rcv_tcp_congestion cubic
iperf Done.
==PAGE:116==
==PAGE:117==
B
T H R O U G H P U T A N D L AT E N C Y T E S T S C R I P T
Listing B.1: Test script for testing throughput and latency.
#!/bin/bash
SERVER_IP=" 10.0.0.2 "
DURATION=300
OUTPUT_FILE="gridweave. txt "
run_and_log() {
echo "==== $1 ====" >> "$OUTPUT_FILE"
echo "Command: $2" >> "$OUTPUT_FILE"
eval $2 >> "$OUTPUT_FILE" 2>&1
echo -e "\n" >> "$OUTPUT_FILE"
}
# Initialize the output file
echo "VPN UDP Performance Test Results" > "$OUTPUT_FILE"
echo "Date: $(date) " >> "$OUTPUT_FILE"
echo "Server IP : $SERVER_IP" >> "$OUTPUT_FILE"
echo -e "\n" >> "$OUTPUT_FILE"
echo "Ensure iperf3 is running in server mode on the other client
with: iperf3 −s"
echo "Press enter when ready"
read
# UDP Throughput and Jitter Test
run_and_log "UDP Throughput and Jitter Test" "iperf3 −i 0 −c
$SERVER_IP −t $DURATION −C cubic −V"
# UDP Latency Test (using ping)
run_and_log "UDP Latency Test" "ping −c 900 $SERVER_IP"
# Traceroute (Compute latency between hops)
run_and_log "Traceroute (UDP) " "traceroute −U $SERVER_IP"
echo "Tests complete. Results saved in $OUTPUT_FILE"
echo "Summary of results : "
grep -E "sender|receiver|jitter|lost|rtt min/avg/max|traceroute
to" "$OUTPUT_FILE"
97
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
C
F R O N T- PA G E I M A G E
The front-page image was generated using the open-source artificial
intelligence image generator Flux1.1 by Black Forest Labs [6].
Listing C.1: Prompt for generating front page image
A dramatic environmental visualization showing how a Virtual
Power Plant system integrates with a sustainable landscape.
The digital VPP interface floats centrally, represented by
elegant data visualizations and power flow indicators,
against a backdrop of rolling hills covered with renewable
energy infrastructure.
Key Elements:
- Utility-scale battery containers (10MW+) nestled thoughtfully
into the landscape:
- Multiple white Megapack-style containers in organized rows
- Visible industrial cooling systems and power conversion
equipment
- Professional safety signage and technical markings
- Natural vegetation growing around the container foundations
Sustainable Integration:
- Wind turbines spinning gracefully on distant ridgelines
- Large solar panel arrays following the natural contours of the
land
- Native wildflowers and grasses growing between solar rows
- Tree-lined boundaries providing natural screening
- Green corridors for wildlife passage between infrastructure
Electric Vehicle Integration:
- Modern EV charging depot integrated with solar canopies
- Commercial electric trucks and buses charging under green roofs
- Visible charging infrastructure with living walls
- Small gardens and sustainable landscaping around charging areas
Environmental Details:
- Morning or late afternoon golden sunlight casting long shadows
- Natural water management systems with bioswales
- Butterflies and birds visible near native plantings
- Subtle morning mist in valleys highlighting depth
Connection Visualization:
99
==PAGE:120==
100
front-page image
- Elegant power flow lines connecting all components
- Digital overlay showing real-time energy distribution
- Subtle glow indicating active power management
- Clear visual hierarchy showing VPP control
Camera angle: Elevated dramatic perspective showing how the
industrial components blend harmoniously with the natural
environment
Style reference: National Geographic environmental photography
meets modern clean tech aesthetic. Focus on showing how
industrial-scale renewable infrastructure can enhance rather
than detract from natural landscapes.
Lighting: Golden hour natural lighting emphasizing the
environmental integration, with subtle highlights on the
technical equipment demonstrating the harmony between nature
and technology.
==PAGE:121==
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
[1]
ABB. Battery energy storage systems (BESS) basics | ABB US. url:
https : / / electrification . us . abb . com / battery - energy -
storage-systems-bess-basics (visited on 08/17/2024).
[2]
Amazon. Compute – Amazon EC2 Instance Types – AWS. en-US.
Nov. 2024. url: https : / / aws . amazon . com / ec2 / instance -
types/ (visited on 11/21/2024).
[3]
David Anderson. How NAT traversal works. Aug. 2020. url:
https : / / tailscale . com / blog / how - nat - traversal - works
(visited on 11/04/2024).
[4]
Harris Andrea. What Port Does Ping Work On? Understanding
ICMP Protocol Basics. en-US. Section: General Networking. Sept.
2024. url: https://www.networkstraining.com/what- port-
does-ping-use/ (visited on 12/09/2024).
[5]
Daniel J. Bernstein. “Curve25519: New Diffie-Hellman Speed
Records.” en. In: Public Key Cryptography - PKC 2006. Ed. by
Moti Yung, Yevgeniy Dodis, Aggelos Kiayias, and Tal Malkin.
Vol. 3958. Series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 207–228. isbn:
978-3-540-33851-2 978-3-540-33852-9. doi: 10.1007/11745853_
14. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/11745853_14
(visited on 11/13/2024).
[6]
Black Forest Labs. Black Forest Labs - Frontier AI Lab. en-US.
May 2025. url: https : / / blackforestlabs . ai/ (visited on
01/05/2025).
[7]
Cisco. What Is Zero-Trust Networking? en. Jan. 2025. url: https:
//www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/automation/what-is-
zero-trust-networking.html (visited on 01/15/2025).
[8]
CloudFlare. How does public key cryptography work? | Public key en-
cryption and SSL. en-us. Jan. 2025. url: https://www.cloudflare.
com/learning/ssl/how-does-public-key-encryption-work/
(visited on 01/15/2025).
[9]
CloudFlare. What is a subnet? | How subnetting works. en-us. Oct.
2025. url: https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/network-
layer/what-is-a-subnet/ (visited on 01/10/2025).
[10]
Cloudflare. cloudflare/boringtun. original-date: 2018-10-12T19:27:06Z.
Oct. 2024. url: https://github.com/cloudflare/boringtun
(visited on 10/30/2024).
101
==PAGE:122==
102
bibliography
[11]
Engineer’s Codex. How Instagram scaled to 14 million users with
only 3 engineers. en. Oct. 2023. url: https://read.engineerscodex.
com / p / how - instagram - scaled - to - 14 - million (visited on
12/05/2024).
[12]
Computronix. What Is Hashing in Cyber Security - Computronix
Managed IT Support - Cyber Security. en-US. Nov. 2024. url:
https://computronixusa.com/what- is- hashing- in- cyber-
security/ (visited on 11/11/2024).
[13]
Django Software Foundtation. Django. en. Oct. 2024. url: https:
//www.djangoproject.com/ (visited on 10/30/2024).
[14]
Jason A. Donenfeld. new rust implementation from cloudflare. Mar.
2019. url: https://lists.zx2c4.com/pipermail/wireguard/
2019-March/004048.html (visited on 10/30/2024).
[15]
Jason A. Donenfeld. Formal Verification - WireGuard. en. Nov.
2024. url: https://www.wireguard.com/formal-verification/
(visited on 11/18/2024).
[16]
Ian Douglas. How to choose HTTP or gRPC for your next API.
en-US. Sept. 2022. url: https : / / blog . postman . com / how -
to- choose- http- or- grpc- for- your- next- api/ (visited on
10/30/2024).
[17]
EAR. ÅRLIG STATISTIK FOR RESERVER OG MODHANDEL
2023. Danishy. May 2024. url: https://energinet.dk/media/
oudnwoql/aarlig- statistik- for- reserver- og- modhandel-
2023.pdf (visited on 12/05/2024).
[18]
Energinet. Oversigt over systemydelser. da. 2024. url: https://
energinet.dk/el/systemydelser/introduktion-til-systemydelser/
oversigt-over-systemydelser/ (visited on 08/19/2024).
[19]
Energinet. Prequalification of Units and aggregated portfolios. May
2024. url: https://energinet.dk/media/ox0gqmvw/gaeldende-
prequalification - of - units - and - aggregated - portfolios .
pdf (visited on 11/06/2024).
[20]
Energinet. miljøredegørelse-2023. Danish. June 2024. url: https://
energinet.dk/media/drikubl5/milj%C3%B8redeg%C3%B8relse-
2023.pdf (visited on 08/14/2024).
[21]
Energinet. prequalification-of-units-and-aggregated-portfolios. en. May
2024. url: https://energinet.dk/media/e04gke2o/prequalification-
of-units-and-aggregated-portfolios.pdf (visited on 08/19/2024).
[22]
Energistyrelsen. Elforsyningssikkerhed. da. Apr. 2016. url: https:
//ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/el/elforsyningssikkerhed (vis-
ited on 08/17/2024).
[23]
ForcePoint. What is the OSI Model? en. Aug. 2018. url: https:
/ / www . forcepoint . com / cyber - edu / osi - model (visited on
01/02/2025).
==PAGE:123==
bibliography
103
[24]
Fortinet. What is TCP/IP in Networking? en. 2024. url: https://
www.fortinet.com/resources/cyberglossary/tcp-ip (visited
on 08/21/2024).
[25]
Nick Galea. What is the STUN Protocol, Its Purpose and how it
Works. en-US. June 2015. url: https://www.3cx.com/blog/voip-
howto/stun/ (visited on 12/05/2024).
[26]
GeeksForGeeks. Advantages and Disadvantages of Normalization.
en-US. Section: DBMS. Dec. 2020. url: https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/advantages-and-disadvantages-of-normalization/ (vis-
ited on 12/05/2024).
[27]
Yael Grauer. How one hacker’s push to secure the internet became a
crucial part of Mac, Linux, and Windows operating systems. en-US.
Jan. 2021. url: https://www.businessinsider.com/wireguard-
jason-a-donenfeld-profile-secure-vpn-linux-mac-windows-
2021-1 (visited on 08/20/2024).
[28]
Nichola Groom. “Explainer: What is a virtual power plant?”
en. In: Reuters (Jan. 2023). url: https://www.reuters.com/
business/sustainable- business/what- is- virtual- power-
plant-2023-01-31/ (visited on 08/18/2024).
[29]
PostgreSQL Global Development Group. PostgreSQL. en. Oct.
2024. url: https://www.postgresql.org/ (visited on 10/30/2024).
[30]
HMAC. en. Page Version ID: 1251804772. Oct. 2024. url: https:
/ / en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = HMAC & oldid =
1251804772 (visited on 11/13/2024).
[31]
Katie Hanna and John Burke. What is Network Address Transla-
tion (NAT) and how does it work? en. Jan. 2021. url: https://
www.techtarget.com/searchnetworking/definition/Network-
Address-Translation-NAT (visited on 12/05/2024).
[32]
Ding Heng. What Is Overlay Network? Overlay Network vs. Under-
lay Network. en. Nov. 2021. url: https://info.support.huawei.
com/info- finder/encyclopedia/en/Overlay+network.html
(visited on 01/14/2025).
[33]
Jeanelle Horcasitas. What Is a Kernel? | DigitalOcean. en. July
2021. url: https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/
what-is-a-kernel (visited on 08/21/2024).
[34]
IPerf. iPerf - The TCP, UDP and SCTP network bandwidth mea-
surement tool. Nov. 2024. url: https://iperf.fr/ (visited on
11/21/2024).
[35]
JamesNK. Compare gRPC services with HTTP APIs. en-us. July
2024. url: https : / / learn . microsoft . com / en - us / aspnet /
core / grpc / comparison ? view = aspnetcore - 8 . 0 (visited on
10/30/2024).
==PAGE:124==
104
bibliography
[36]
Nadim Kobeissi, Georgio Nicolas, and Karthikeyan Bharga-
van. “Noise Explorer: Fully Automated Modeling and Verifi-
cation for Arbitrary Noise Protocols.” en. In: 2019 IEEE European
Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). Stockholm, Swe-
den: IEEE, June 2019, pp. 356–370. isbn: 978-1-7281-1148-3. doi:
10.1109/EuroSP.2019.00034. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/8806757/ (visited on 12/04/2024).
[37]
Maxim Krasnyansky. Universal TUN/TAP device driver — The
Linux Kernel documentation. 2000. url: https://docs.kernel.
org/networking/tuntap.html (visited on 11/04/2024).
[38]
Josh Lake. What is the Diffie–Hellman key exchange and how does
it work? en. Mar. 2019. url: https://www.comparitech.com/
blog/information-security/diffie-hellman-key-exchange/
(visited on 11/13/2024).
[39]
Gregg Lindemulder and Matthew Kosinski. What Is Zero Trust? |
IBM. en. June 2024. url: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/
zero-trust (visited on 01/15/2025).
[40]
Benjamin Lipp, Bruno Blanchet, and Karthikeyan Bhargavan.
“A Mechanised Cryptographic Proof of the WireGuard Virtual
Private Network Protocol.” en. In: 2019 IEEE European Symposium
on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). Stockholm, Sweden: IEEE,
June 2019, pp. 231–246. isbn: 978-1-7281-1148-3. doi: 10.1109/
EuroSP . 2019 . 00026. url: https : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org /
document/8806752/ (visited on 12/04/2024).
[41]
Heinrich Long. WireGuard vs OpenVPN: 7 Key Differences in 2024.
en-US. Oct. 2024. url: https : / / restoreprivacy . com / vpn /
wireguard/wireguard-vs-openvpn/ (visited on 08/20/2024).
[42]
William Mathiassen. s194050/Gridweave: WireGuard based network
designed for control of energy assets. en. Jan. 2025. url: https:
//github.com/s194050/Gridweave (visited on 11/27/2024).
[43]
Next Kraftwerke. What is a Virtual Power Plant? How does the VPP
work? We answer these and more questions about VPPs here. Read
now... en-US. 2024. url: https://www.next-kraftwerke.com/
vpp/virtual-power-plant (visited on 08/18/2024).
[44]
Nexthink. Comparing gRPC performance across different technolo-
gies. en. Oct. 2024. url: https://www.nexthink.com/blog/
comparing-grpc-performance (visited on 11/13/2024).
[45]
Yoav Nir and Adam Langley. ChaCha20 and Poly1305 for IETF
Protocols. Request for Comments RFC 7539. Num Pages: 45.
Internet Engineering Task Force, May 2015. doi: 10 . 17487 /
RFC7539. url: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc7539
(visited on 11/13/2024).
==PAGE:125==
bibliography
105
[46]
Auriane De Palma. Intermittent renewables and the threat of black-
outs, how to deal with it? en-GB. Oct. 2022. url: https://www.
encyclopedie - energie . org / en / intermittent - renewables -
threat - of - blackouts - how - to - deal - with - it/ (visited on
08/17/2024).
[47]
Rueskov Pedersen Tino. Lov om styrket beredskab i energisektoren
i høring | Energistyrelsen. da. June 2024. url: https://ens.dk/
presse/lov- om- styrket- beredskab- i- energisektoren- i-
hoering (visited on 01/07/2025).
[48]
Postman. Postman: The World’s Leading API Platform | Sign Up
for Free. en. Nov. 2024. url: https://www.postman.com/ (visited
on 11/21/2024).
[49]
D Pudjianto, C Ramsay, and G Strbac. Virtual power plant and
system integration of distributed energy resources. en. doi: 10.1049/
iet- rpg:20060023. url: https://digital- library- theiet-
org . proxy . findit . cvt . dk / doi / epdf / 10 . 1049 / iet - rpg %
3A20060023 (visited on 11/06/2024).
[50]
Rosenpass. Rosenpass. en. Nov. 2024. url: https://rosenpass.
eu/ (visited on 11/28/2024).
[51]
SQLite Consortium. SQLite Home Page. Oct. 2024. url: https:
//www.sqlite.org/index.html (visited on 10/30/2024).
[52]
Jamshed Saleem. Droop Control Mechanism in Power Generators.
en. Apr. 2023. url: https://energycentral.com/c/iu/droop-
control-mechanism-power-generators-%F0%9F%A4%96 (visited
on 11/25/2024).
[53]
Eva Sarafianou and Marius Mogyorosi. What’s the Difference Be-
tween Encryption, Hashing, Encoding and Obfuscation? en. Aug.
2019. url: https://auth0.com/blog/how-secure-are-encryption-
hashing-encoding-and-obfuscation/ (visited on 11/11/2024).
[54]
Alex Scroxton. CrowdStrike update chaos explained: What you need
to know | Computer Weekly. en. July 2024. url: https://www.
computerweekly . com / feature / CrowdStrike - update - chaos -
explained-What-you-need-to-know (visited on 10/02/2024).
[55]
Caddy Web Server. Caddy - The Ultimate Server with Automatic
HTTPS. July 2024. url: https://caddyserver.com/ (visited on
11/07/2024).
[56]
Stephanie Susnjara and Ian Smalley. What is Quantum-Safe Cryp-
tography? | IBM. en. Sept. 2024. url: https://www.ibm.com/
think/topics/quantum-safe-cryptography (visited on 01/07/2025).
[57]
Thales. 5G vs 4G: what’s the difference? | Thales Group. en. June
2022. url: https : / / www . thalesgroup . com / en / worldwide -
digital- identity- and- security/mobile/magazine/5g- vs-
4g-whats-difference (visited on 12/09/2024).
==PAGE:126==
106
bibliography
[58]
Vipin P Veetil. “Coordination in Centralized and Decentral-
ized Systems.” In: International Journal of Microsimulation 10.2
(2016), pp. 86–102. doi: 10.34196/ijm.00157. url: http://
www.microsimulation.org/IJM/V10_2/IJM_2017_10_2_2.pdf
(visited on 11/01/2024).
[59]
Vercel. Next.js by Vercel - The React Framework. en. Oct. 2024. url:
https://nextjs.org/ (visited on 10/30/2024).
[60]
Whited. Surpassing 10Gb/s over Tailscale. Apr. 2023. url: https://
tailscale.com/blog/more-throughput (visited on 08/20/2024).
[61]
Wikipedia. 2021 Texas power crisis. en. Page Version ID: 1238682641.
Aug. 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=2021_Texas_power_crisis&oldid=1238682641 (visited
on 08/17/2024).
[62]
ZenArmor. What is Network Throughput? - zenarmor.com. en. Sept.
2023. url: https://www.zenarmor.com/docs/network-basics/
what-is-network-throughput (visited on 01/15/2025).
[63]
ZenArmor. A Guide to Mesh Topology. Definition, Practices, and
Importance - zenarmor.com. en. June 2024. url: https : / / www .
zenarmor.com/docs/network-basics/what-is-mesh-topology
(visited on 01/10/2025).
[64]
byteSizeGo. Understanding gRPC vs. HTTP: Key Differences and
Use Cases. en. Oct. 2024. url: https://www.bytesizego.com/
blog/grpc-vs-http (visited on 11/19/2024).
[65]
glebarez. go-sqlite/benchmark at master · glebarez/go-sqlite. Jan. 2021.
url: https://github.com/glebarez/go-sqlite/tree/master/
benchmark (visited on 12/05/2024).
[66]
zx2c4. WireGuard/wireguard-go. original-date: 2018-05-16T21:33:26Z.
Nov. 2024. url: https://github.com/WireGuard/wireguard-go
(visited on 11/04/2024).
